TEAMFLY

Building the Knowledge
Management Network
Best Practices, Tools, and 
Techniques for Putting 
Conversation to Work
Cliff Figallo
Nancy Rhine
Wiley Technology Publishing


Building the Knowledge
Management Network
Best Practices, Tools, and 
Techniques for Putting 
Conversation to Work
Cliff Figallo
Nancy Rhine
Wiley Technology Publishing

Publisher: Robert Ipsen
Editor: Cary Sullivan
Assistant Editor: Scott Amerman
Managing Editor: Pamela Hanley
New Media Editor: Brian Snapp
Text Design & Composition: Benchmark Productions, Inc.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trade-
marks. In all instances where Wiley Publishing, Inc., is aware of a claim, the product names
appear in initial capital or all capital letters. Readers, however, should contact the appropri-
ate companies for more complete information regarding trademarks and registration.
This book is printed on acid-free paper.  
Copyright © 2002 by Cliff Figallo and Nancy Rhine. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning
or otherwise, except as permitted under Sections 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States
Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authoriza-
tion through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center,
222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 750-4744. Requests to
the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John
Wiley & Sons, Inc., 605 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10158-0012, (212) 850-6011, fax (212)
850-6008, E-Mail: PERMREQ@WILEY.COM.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their
best efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with
respect to the accuracy of completeness of the contents of this book and specifically dis-
claim any implied warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No
warranty may be created or extended by sales representatives or written sales materials.
The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for your situation. You
should consult with a professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author
shall be liable for any loss of profit or any other commercial damages, including but not
limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.
For general information on our other products and services please contact our Customer
Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United States at
(317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears
in print may not be available in electronic books.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
ISBN 0-471-21549-X (paper : alk. paper)
Printed in the United States of America.
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

iii
Acknowledgments
vii
Introduction
ix
Part One
Cave Walls to CRTs: 
The Landscape of Knowledge Networking
1
Chapter 1
Knowledge, History, and the Industrial Organization
3
Our Ancestral Heritage
3
Stories, Rituals, Trust, and Culture
9
The First Mass Medium
16
The Dawn of the Info Age
21
Summary
27
Chapter 2
Using the Net to Share What People Know
29
Managing Knowledge
29
Roots of the Knowledge Network
32
A Knowledge-Swapping Community
40
Organizational Knowledge Networking
45
Summary
59
Chapter 3
Strategy and Planning for the Knowledge Network
61
Strategy and Change
62
Planning and Cost Issues
74
Summary
81
Contents

Part Two
Matching Culture with Technology
83
Chapter 4
The Role of IT in the Effective Knowledge Network
85
IT and Knowledge Exchange
86
Technical Approaches to Managing Knowledge
97
Basic Tools of the Knowledge Network
103
Online Environments for Knowledge Sharing 
107
Summary
111
Chapter 5
Fostering a Knowledge-Sharing Culture
113
Creating the Ideal Conditions
114
Analyzing an Organization’s Culture
116
Tapping the Mind Pool
125
Leadership: Energy from the Top
127
Self-Organizing Subcultures
131
The Challenge of Change
134
Summary
135
Chapter 6
Taking Culture Online
137
The Medium Is Part of the Message
138
Tools and Their Configuration
146
Three Dimensions of Collaboration
153
Knowing the People and the Policies
159
External Collaborative Communities 
161
Summary
162
Chapter 7
Choosing and Using Technology
165
Tools for Every Purpose
166
Tools, Their Features, and Their Applications
176
Instant Messaging and Presence
191
Peer-to-Peer Knowledge Nets
192
Building Environments for Collaboration
195
Tools for Transitory Conversational Events
199
Summary
202
Part Three
Practical Applications of Knowledge Networking
205
Chapter 8
Initiating and Supporting Internal Conversation 
207
Cultural Preconditions
208
Where Consultants Come In
209
Selling the Idea
211
Engaging the Stakeholders
215
Incentives to Participate
216
Learning to Tell Stories
220
The Practice of Online Conversation
224
Organizing the Community
227
Spontaneous Conversational Communities
229
Transitory Conversation for Immediate Solutions
239
Planning to Reinforce Knowledge-Sharing Culture
242
Summary
244
iv
Contents

Contents
v
Chapter 9
Conversing with External Stakeholders
247
Building External Relationships
248
Learning about (and from) Your Customers
254
Customer-to-Customer Knowledge Exchange
262
Hosting the Customer Conversation
274
Where Customers Gather on Their Own
281
Summary
286
Chapter 10
The Path Ahead
287
Interdependence and Infoglut
288
Conversation Proliferation
290
The Sustainable Organization
294
The New Skill Set
312
Future Technical Paths
316
Summary
321
Appendix A Resources
323
Notes
327
Index
337


vii
Knowledge networks depend for their success on the right social environment.
We have worked within many such respectful, trusting, nurturing, and educa-
tional social environments, and those experiences have led us to write this book.
We both spent many years learning together with hundreds of others in building
a small, self-sufficient community in Tennessee. We applied what we learned in
that challenging social experiment to the work we did in the early days of our
first online communities at The WELL and Women.com. The members of those
communities showed us the value of lowering the communications boundaries
between management and customers. In those and in subsequent positions at
AOL, Digital City, Salon.com, and PlanetRX, we observed the value of informal
knowledge sharing through the Net. And so we thank the innumerable people
we worked with and did our best to serve for being our teachers in collaboration
in those virtual but still very personal environments.
We would not have traveled our respective paths toward community interac-
tion were it not for the support and example of our families. And so we each
acknowledge their parts in our development as leaders who look for the ways
in which people agree rather than ways in which they disagree.
Nancy: I want to thank my mother and father, Bill and Dorothy Gerard, who
have always exemplified the essential best practices of granting people the
benefit of the doubt regardless of age, race, gender, or social standing. I have
learned from them that 99 percent of the time people not only prove worthy of
Acknowledgments

that trust, but even rise admirably to the occasion. Thanks also to my three
daughters, Leah, Emmy, and Odessa, who are carrying this compassionate and
intelligent legacy of their grandparents into the new millennium. It is, indeed,
a fine way to live. 
Cliff: Thanks to my parents, Bruno and Gwen, and to my kids who have kept
my attention and care on people more than technology. Thanks to my cowork-
ers through the years—whether building houses, installing village water sys-
tems, or managing online communities—for teaching me how to listen and
work together for the common good. 
We’d like to acknowledge all of those who provided the information and sto-
ries that have made this book happen. Special thanks go to Tom Brailsford of
Hallmark for his generous insight into what may be the model of customer rela-
tionships for the future. And last, but not least, we express our appreciation for
the support of our development editor at John Wiley & Sons, Scott Amerman,
for gently leading us through the writing of this book.
viii
Acknowledgments
TEAMFLY

ix
With this book in your hand, you’re probably looking for ways to help your orga-
nization get smarter by making the most effective use of online conversations. In
these pages we write about a basic human drive to share what we know. We repo-
sition that age-old practice at the intersection of two social environments: the
modernizing organization and the expanding electronic network.
Your company should know what this book reveals, because in this competitive
and downsized economy, you are being forced to make the best use of your current
human resource assets. You can’t afford the high cost of replacing the knowledge
of people you’ve trained and lost. You must find, harvest, and distribute current and
relevant knowledge from a wide variety of trusted human sources in order to make
decisions and innovations in today’s hyperactive marketplace of things and ideas.
Organizations today must change intelligently and constantly to survive. Ongoing,
high-quality conversation is a key to making that kind of change possible.
Though online knowledge networks can involve sophisticated technology,
this book is not, at its core, about technology; it’s more about people and moti-
vation. Though terms like application integration are important to understand
in this context, you’ll likely find terms like cultural evolution and self-governing
systems to be more relevant to the successful adoption of useful online conver-
sation as a productive process within your organization.
Even companies that value their knowledge networks can run into problems
applying what they’ve learned to their business. There is a gap between knowing
and doing. Putting conversation to work means bringing the right people with
Introduction

the requisite knowledge together and having their online interaction solve real
and immediate problems. To reach that level of practical impact, there must be
trust and commitment among the participants in addition to software and con-
nectivity. For your organization, that means leading and fostering the kind of cul-
ture that motivates people to share what they know with their coworkers. 
If there’s a central theme to this book, it’s the importance of making the
appropriate match between the culture and the technology for any given situ-
ation. The cultural needs may pertain to your entire organization, specific
teams within your organization, or the constituents who are served by your
organization. In our approach, culture is in the driver’s seat for selecting and
configuring the technology, yet we also emphasize the inevitable influence of
technology on the culture that uses it. 
Twenty years ago, very few people had seen, much less used, a computer.
Now there are hundreds of millions of daily computer users. Today, relatively
few people use online conversation as an essential work tool, but we see a
future where the skills and practices we describe in this book are common
throughout organizations, and where workers are engaged in multiple discus-
sions from their desktops or laptops. In that future, workers will use the Net to
share the fresh ideas and experiences that will help guide their companies.
Why This Book Now?
During January and February 2002, the Pew Internet & American Life Project
conducted a survey to gauge the involvement of people in online communi-
ties.1 The survey found that 84 percent of Internet users have at one time or
another contacted an online group. Referring to these 90 million Americans as
Cyber Groupies, the study revealed that half of them claimed that the Internet
had helped them connect with people who shared their interests, and that the
average Cyber Groupie had contacted four different online groups.
Far from being a cold, lonely, and impersonal electronic medium, the Inter-
net described by the Pew survey is an inhabited communication environment
with a vibrant social life. People learn—through the simplicity of the Web inter-
face and from one another—how to find, explore, and sustain social activity on
the Net. Many Cyber Groupies engage with their online communities from the
workplace. Some of them find their communities within the workplace. Yet
these communities and the conversations that go on within them are invisible
to most of the companies providing the intranets on which they live. More sig-
nificantly, these communities are invisible to the leaders of those companies,
who need to know more about what their workers know and are doing.
We’ve seen the end of the first big Internet boom. The dot-com meltdown sig-
naled the end of only the first wave of commercial online innovation and exper-
imentation. But much learning has taken place since the Internet became a
commercial medium in 1993. Group communication through the Net is no
x
Introduction

Introduction
xi
longer the rare and esoteric practice that it was in the 1980s when we began
managing online communities. Thousands of Web sites have since provided
chat rooms and message boards. Email among groups of people has become
another common meeting place. Instant messaging has become the means
through which isolated keyboardists maintain a sense of immediate connection
with their online buddies.
Meanwhile organizations—after years of adopting expensive technologies to
keep meticulous track of operational numbers and statistics—have recognized
that numeric information alone is not sufficient to guide them in today’s fast-
changing marketplace. Last year’s sales figures don’t tell them how to change
production as new fads, technologies, and competitors suddenly crash into
their markets. Millions of records of customer transactions don’t inform them
of their consumers’ thinking after an event like the terrorist attacks on Septem-
ber 11 or a calamitous news story about their industry. Numbers about past per-
formance have fooled many enterprises into thinking they knew what the
future would bring.
The Net has speeded up both communication and change in attitudes, opin-
ions, and habits. To anticipate and prepare for the future, organizations must
learn more from their employees and from the people on whom they depend—
customers, partners, and constituents. Today we need dynamic knowledge—
current and constantly updated experience and thinking found only in the agile
minds of living human beings and revealed most naturally and completely
through human conversations. 
This book addresses the modern organization at a point in time when many
trial applications for the Net have been abandoned in favor of its powerful role
as a communication medium—the purpose for which it was originally
designed. We now have a significant percentage of consumers—both inside and
outside of the organization—using the Net to connect and converse with
others. Organizations are desperately seeking a competitive edge in a world
defined by unexpected change, increasingly decentralized leadership and the
instant interconnectivity of hundreds of millions. The consumer is far more
informed than in the pre-Web days, and now expects to be able to communicate
directly—and honestly—with the companies that make the products (s)he
buys. We wrote this book now to teach organizations how to engage in the con-
versations that can make them integral parts of this new, expanding, and uncon-
trollable marketplace.
Who Should Read This Book
Chief executives make and approve strategy, and knowledge networking is a
strategic tool. This book may be too instructional for executive reading matter,
but its practical lessons should make its conceptual message more palatable to
those who lead organizations. 

It used to be said that executives would be the last ones to begin using email
because they relied on secretaries to do all of their typing. They may have
learned to type since then, but it’s still true that the typical executive is the
most distanced employee from the online interaction that takes place among
the tiers of workers who long ago adopted email to help coordinate their pro-
jects and tasks. As remnants from the hierarchical model of organizations,
those tiers form impenetrable firewalls between the executives and the cre-
ative conversations that hold the potential of transforming their organizations.
The Net is the great equalizer. It undermines hierarchies because networks
don’t recognize artificial separations between organizational layers. This has
become common knowledge, but just as outdated legacy computer systems
prevent many companies from progressing to the next level of technical inte-
gration, legacy organization charts keep many companies from realizing their
networked potential. Executives should read this book to get a refresher on
the philosophy of the network revolution, but also to get a better understand-
ing of the different form of leadership that is necessary to keep their organi-
zations in sync with that ongoing revolution. Leaders must understand the
medium of online conversation to do a good job of leading people to use it
well. We suspect that most company leaders still lack that understanding.
Managers, like executives, are leaders, but in being closer to the workers and
their specific responsibilities, their role definitions are changing due to the self-
organizing influence of the Net. Because managers direct the activities of work-
ing groups, they, too, need to understand the capabilities of the technology to
support conversations so that they can begin to plan and lead their departments
and teams within the emerging online meeting place. Managers should be regu-
lar participants in online forums for planning, innovation and knowledge shar-
ing, and need to stay current with existing work-related online discussions
among the people they supervise. Managers who truly understand the strengths
and weaknesses of using online conversation as a working tool will get the
most out of it.
It’s more likely that workers and professionals have already begun to use
the available online communications media to exchange mission critical
information about their jobs or projects, but this book is for them, too. For
although leadership from the top of the organization is a necessity for chang-
ing a culture to one that values creative conversation, the best conversations
and best ideas are most likely to bubble up from the bottom of the organiza-
tional chart, where the actual work gets done and the company interfaces
most directly with its customers. We hope this book inspires the spontaneous
formation of online communities that can solve immediate problems and
inspire the widespread use of online knowledge networks within receptive
organizations.
xii
Introduction

Introduction
xiii
Self-Organizing Systems: 
What the Ants Know
We have spent a combined 30 years in the practice of online community—using
the technology of networks to help people locate and engage with groups that
bring them personal and professional support, useful ideas and trusted knowl-
edge. With keyboards and words as their main tools for communication, mem-
bers of these communities interact for mutual benefit; they get to know one
another, learn from one another, and collaborate to achieve shared goals. They
cannot be easily steered or controlled, for just as soon as you attempt to direct
their activities, they are likely to cease their activity.
We’ve observed that as people become more familiar with one another, trust
grows and the transfer of relevant knowledge between them becomes easier
and more efficient. Learning begets more learning; people not only learn who
knows what, they learn the most effective techniques for getting their fellow
members to reveal and share what they know. We have found ourselves observ-
ing the organic formation and change that happens when people are given
access to tools for building conversational relationships on the Net, and we’ve
often described the experience as like watching ant farms. 
In his new book, Emergence2, Steven Johnson—a leading innovator in the
use of the Web as a collaborative publishing medium—uses the behavior of ants
to illustrate the principle of self-organizing systems. Johnson describes ant
colonies as “having this miraculous ability to pull off complex engineering feats
or resource management feats without an actual leadership dictating what any
ants should be doing at any time.”3 Ants get all this done by following simple
local rules through which, Johnson says in an interview, “the intelligence of the
colony comes into being.” 
In our earliest experience with online community at the WELL, one of the
groundbreaking experiments in group conversation among home-based per-
sonal computer users, we imposed only a few very simple rules, otherwise pro-
viding the members with access to the discussion tools to make with them what
they would. Among other things, they built a knowledge-sharing community,
broken down into hundreds of separate topic areas formed around personali-
ties, expertise and relationships. We got to spend most of our time as system
managers keeping the technology functioning, providing support for new mem-
bers and paying the bills. The content and the database of conversations was
created and owned by the members—the knowledge sources and the knowl-
edge seekers who swapped roles constantly.
The traditional business world is gradually beginning to release control like we
did, allowing the emergence of new culture, new social practices and new ways
of organizing from the bottom up. Flattening the hierarchy and empowering the

collaborative workplace is threatening to the traditional role of leadership and it
presents a prospect of the future that is new and untried. Few executives, no mat-
ter how open-minded, want to follow the model of ant colonies in changing the
cultures of their companies. But the Net represents the new collaborative envi-
ronment, and in networks these ant-like organizing effects not only work well,
they are natural social behaviors and thus are difficult to suppress. 
The Net, looked at as a whole, is a demonstration of emergent behaviors.
Most of the content on the Web has been created outside of any overall plan or
leadership mandate. Most of the communities have been formed because there
was an opportunity and need, rather than a directive from on high. Literally bil-
lions of Web pages have been produced based on the simple rules of HTML and
Internet software. 
To the modern organization, the most valuable thing about emergent behav-
ior is its ability to quickly adapt to changing circumstances. A look back at the
previous decade—or even the past year—should provide sufficient evidence
that we live in times of ever-changing circumstances. The need to adapt con-
stantly is upon every organization that hopes to survive. The goal going into the
twenty-first century is not so much to be a dominant organization, but to be a
sustainable organization.
Ants don’t follow leaders, nor do they build and rely on projections for the
future. They communicate intensively, react to situations, and adapt constantly
as they build their colonies, gather and store their food and deal effectively with
local disasters like rain and having large critters stomp on their front doors. For
organizations to quickly adapt to sudden downturns in the market, terrorist
attacks and war, oil embargoes and transportation disruptions, their people must
develop the skills and habits to communicate fluently and effectively. Accom-
plishing that will take practice and cultural support as we describe in this book.
Knowledge and Management
The Oxford English Dictionary claims that the roots of the modern English
word knowledge are in Old English terms meaning “confession” and “to play,
give, move about.” Knowledge would seem to come from inside and to be rest-
less at the same time. This fits our experience with knowledge sharing, where
people reveal what they hold in their minds within a social atmosphere that is
informal, trusting, and generous. 
As we managed online communities and taught clients how to implement
them in business settings during the nineties, we repeatedly encountered refer-
ences to the term knowledge management. Businesses first practiced this con-
cept by keeping better records of their transactions and quantifiable operations
so that less “knowledge” was lost to the organization. As we looked into the
practice, we learned that what was originally called knowledge was more accu-
rately redefined as information because it had lost its association with any
xiv
Introduction

Introduction
xv
human experience. We also found that many had begun to question anyone’s
ability to manage knowledge, it being the experiential content of the human
mind. By the end of the year 2000, knowledge management had evolved into a
quest for more effective access to tacit knowledge—the experiential human
understanding that didn’t lend itself to quantification or to management. 
Organizations stand to lose tacit knowledge whenever an employee leaves
the company or when an employee has no means or motivation to reveal what
(s)he knows to others. We had seen years of voluntary and enthusiastic
exchange of tacit knowledge in the online communities we managed, and rec-
ognized the importance and relevance of what we had learned about groups in
conversation through the Net—that tacit knowledge is shared readily where
there is trust and the recognition of mutual benefit in the exchange. 
As millions of people have learned how to access and use the Web, they have
realized its power as a communications channel between them and their families,
associates, and fellow enthusiasts in a myriad of hobbies and interests. Such
communications account for more of their time online than any other pursuit,
including information searches and shopping. Interpersonal informal communi-
cation has proven to be the most compelling use—the “killer app”—of the Net.
In this book, we apply the best practices of online conversation to the needs
for effective knowledge exchange, which forward-looking organizations now
recognize as their most compelling application of electronic networking tools.
In the following chapters we describe how the mechanistic and hierarchical
models of business operation and organization are being transformed into more
decentralized and as some describe it, “messy” models composed of indepen-
dent links between individuals and their self-organizing groups. And as we lead
you through these descriptions, we provide you with proven ideas, suggestions,
and examples for transforming your team, your department, your organization
into one that is smart, alert, and ready to deal with the challenges of these excit-
ing and unpredictable times.
How This Book Is Organized
The drive to share what we know is as old as humankind itself, but using the
Net to share knowledge for the good of organizations is a new concept. On a
grassroots level it is happening now, and is just beginning to find support and
understanding from the leaders of organizations. The first two chapters of Part
1 provide historical and organizational background that may help you recognize
and deal with some of the most entrenched sources of resistance and hesitancy
to change in your company. Chapter 3 describes how the building of knowledge
networks should guide the formulation of appropriate business strategy for this
tumultuous age.
Part 2 explores the two legs of online knowledge networking: culture and
technology. Because technology is necessary to create the online environment,

its influence cannot be separated from the resulting culture. Chapter 4 looks at
the role of the information technology department (IT) in building and main-
taining the technical platform for the knowledge network, and the ideal work-
ing relationship between the network and the technicians who are counted on
to fix it, improve it and keep it available. We examine the needs of a knowledge
sharing culture—for trust, leadership, and mutual rewards—and then describe
the challenges you may face in bringing your established organizational culture
online. The final chapter in this section matches specific goals, styles, and mis-
sions of knowledge networks with the online communications technologies
that best fit them.
Part 3 provides true-life examples, best practices, and wise suggestions for
implementing knowledge networks to fit different circumstances, now and in
the near future. We begin by presenting a variety of solutions for initiating and
supporting conversations within the organization—from the spontaneous gath-
erings of fellow specialists to the broad-based provision of company-wide online
discussion systems. Then we move to the practice of conversing with external
stakeholders—customers, consumers, partners, and constituents. The increas-
ing sophistication of consumers is driving companies to catch up to them in
online conversation skills in order to engage with them in mutually meaningful
conversation. The relationship between empowered consumer and the attentive
company is leading the evolution of the marketplace. We wrap up the book with
educated musings on the future knowledge networks and online knowledge
sharing, noting that the future is already here, but is being practiced by very few
organizations.
The following paragraphs, moving from history toward the future, describe
the contents of the chapters of this book. 
Chapter 1: “Knowledge, History, and the Industrial Organization.”
Human history is filled with conversation and knowledge sharing. Though
communication was much slower in the past than it is today, we got to
where we are now in terms of technology, culture, economy, and govern-
ment through the exchange and distribution of new ideas. This chapter
establishes our heritage as natural collaborators where common goals are
recognized. It also illustrates how the medium—whether oral tales, clay
tablets, papyrus, or parchment sheets, or the wonder of the printed page—
affects the spread of knowledge and its influence on society. Until the
dawn of the industrial age, most people passed along their experiential
working knowledge personally, to apprentices and coworkers. The transi-
tion to the assembly line reduced the number of workers whose skills
could be defined as knowledge and introduced the idea of the worker as a
cog in a machine. We are still dealing with this mechanistic model of the
organization and its workers, which is why many companies have failed to
recognize the importance of worker knowledge.
xvi
Introduction

Introduction
xvii
Chapter 2: “Using the Net to Share What People Know.” This chap-
ter looks at the evolution of modern management theories, spanning the
transition from worker-as-cog to worker as holder of key knowledge. Mov-
ing from Industrial Age mentality to Information Age mentality, the accom-
panying transformation of management philosophy has been jolted by the
widespread adoption of the Internet and the Web. Information manage-
ment has become a necessity and, as the tools and connectivity have
advanced, the concept of knowledge networking has been born. Although
industrialization altered the definitions of “the worker” and of “the job,” it
could not extinguish the natural tendency to share with others what we
know. With the rise of mass markets, sellers became distanced from the
buyers, but the Net has reintroduced the ability for sellers and buyers to
connect and converse. It has also provided more convenient means than
was ever possible before for sharing knowledge among groups. 
Chapter 3: “Strategy and Planning for the Knowledge Network.” In
formulating strategies for the foreseeable future, organizations must
accept that change and surprise may be their most reliable guiding stars.
Planning must therefore include the distinct possibility of sudden stops
and abrupt changes in direction. Knowledge networks as adaptive social
systems are not only appropriate elements in today’s strategic planning,
they are valuable contributors to such planning because they support the
continuing exchanges of ideas, rumors, and circulating information that
helps organizations prepare and brace themselves for changes that might
otherwise blindside them. Incorporating knowledge networks into the
company’s strategic future requires leadership that understands how such
networks function, for any top-down design of what is basically a bottom-
up activity can render it dysfunctional. Likewise, in designing the platform
for knowledge networking, the actual users are the best judges of utility
and convenience. We revisit many of these points in the chapter about
internal knowledge exchange.
Chapter 4, “The Role of IT in the Effective Knowledge Network.” The
IT manager and the IT department have important roles in supporting
dynamic, self-guided knowledge networks though many people have
“rolled their own” using basic email. That fact points out the need for sim-
plicity in choosing and implementing technology. While it is tempting to
think in terms of choosing or designing software that will do more work
and thereby increase human productivity, there are important reasons for
at least beginning with the simplest tools that will enable measurable
improvement in knowledge exchange. One reason is cost. Another is in
facilitating the building of a good working relationship between the IT
department and the people looking to build the online knowledge net-
work. Such collaboration is crucial if the knowledge network is going to be

able to incrementally improve its working environment. The more people
converse, the more prone they are to discover new ideas for making their
conversations richer—whether those ideas demand the addition of new
technical features or whole new technical platforms. The role of IT should
be to aid in tool selection, initial installation, and maintenance and the
integration of relevant information applications within the company that
will support the cultivation of knowledge.
Chapter 5: “Fostering Knowledge-Sharing Culture.” Conversational
knowledge sharing can (and will) only take place in a supportive social
atmosphere. Such a persistent environment is what we call a “culture.”
The knowledge network exists, first, within the organization’s greater cul-
ture, yet it may grow out of a more local subculture—that of an area of
expertise or a functional division within the organization. It will probably
develop an even more unique subculture once it goes online. An online
knowledge sharing culture requires certain conditions and nutrients just
as an orchid can only grow within certain ranges of temperature, humidity,
and soil conditions. Yet, unlike an orchid, an online knowledge network
can adapt to changing conditions through its conversations and technol-
ogy. So we describe method that can be used to provide ideal conditions
for the germination and early growth of the knowledge network inside of
your organization. These conditions include tolerance for diversity, incen-
tives for sharing what people know and for learning the skills necessary to
do that sharing, and leadership that makes it clear, in no uncertain terms,
that the creative energy of employees is valued.
Chapter 6: “Taking Culture Online.” The online world is different from
the world of physical presence. People communicate differently and must
compensate for what the virtual meeting place cannot provide in the way of
contact and the subtleties of facial expression and tone of voice. Though
we have technologies through which people can meet via video, this is very
much the exception rather than the rule of online community activity. This
chapter introduces the relationship between people and the interfaces that
allow them to practice knowledge sharing in Cyberspace. Technical
choices and design are important to the flow of information between peo-
ple. They can block or inhibit that flow just as easily as they can make it
possible or even improve it. Unnecessary complexity is always to be
avoided. Change for the sake of change is often counterproductive. Inter-
faces with which a culture is already comfortable should be leveraged. This
chapter will be full of cautions and descriptions of technical pitfalls. 
Chapter 7: “Choosing and Using Technology.” The choice of technolo-
gies for supporting online conversation fall into several buckets: chat,
instant messaging, message boards and broadband voice and video. The
most important companion technologies involve content management and
publishing. The frameworks for presenting these tools and content are
xviii
Introduction
TEAMFLY

Introduction
xix
intranets and the more specifically purposed portals. Our approach for
recommending various combinations of these tools it to describe the
groups and purposes for which they will be used. Small teams with a sin-
gle project may be best served by simple email, while department-level col-
laboration may require the flexibility of a full-blown portal. Features that
permit each participant to customize their use of an interface can be an
attraction or a distraction, depending on the importance of the conversa-
tion and its longevity. There are many factors to consider in choosing tech-
nology, but initial simplicity, flexibility of design, and the ability to
incrementally expand in power and features are the characteristics that
describe every community’s ideal knowledge sharing environment.
Chapter 8: “Initiating and Supporting Internal Conversation.” This
how-to chapter describes a process of analyzing what you’ve got in terms
of knowledge needs, culture, and existing internal communities, and then
clearly stating your goals. From that point, you can choose from the avail-
able options to design the most appropriate social and technical structure.
We recommend practices based on our experience and those of other
experts in the fields of knowledge networking and online community. Our
recommendations will provide you with some shortcuts to effective inter-
nal conversation, but you may find the most value in our warnings against
certain social or technical pitfalls that can doom the knowledge network
before it can reach cruising speed. Some organizational prerequisites need
to be in place if your company is to have a chance of learning from its own
workers. And different techniques for sharing knowledge can be applied
under different social or work-related circumstances, storytelling, and
conversation facilitation being two of them. We describe three different
models of knowledge networking communities: spontaneous, strategic,
and transitory, each requiring different approaches to management and
technical support. 
Chapter 9: “Conversing with External Stakeholders.” Perhaps the
greatest difference between today’s organization and that of a few years
ago is the increased dependence on the external stakeholder that is the
result of the Net. Because those stakeholders—consumers, customers,
business partners, supporters, and investors—can now communicate so
easily and repeatedly through email and the Web, they are more informed
and willing to share what they know about your organization or your com-
petition. The conversations about you are probably already happening,
and your mission—should you decide to accept it—is to be a part of at
least some of those conversations. The choice of meeting ground is not
yours to make, though some pioneering companies have successfully
invited consumers to join them on their home sites to help them under-
stand the needs and preferences of customers. We describe the differences
in expectations between business-to-customer (B2C) conversations and

business-to-business (B2B) conversations, and how your organization can
best initiate and motivate them. Organizations are looking for cost-effec-
tive ways to gain access to the vital tacit knowledge contained in the inter-
ests, experiences and opinions of their Web-connected stakeholders.
Online conversation is an effective route to that knowledge.
Chapter 10, “The Path Ahead.” Trends are at work and taking hold in
large companies that can afford to experiment in new practices. Some of
these involve conversational knowledge networks and some of what they
discover and implement on a larger scale will be shared and adopted by
smaller companies as reports of their success, best practices and value
circulate. Some of the changes that will stimulate the formation of knowl-
edge-sharing communities are technical, but most are cultural. Technolo-
gies that allow smoother integration of software applications will provide
more powerful knowledge-sharing environments. The conversion of more
CEOs to belief in the less-controlled, decentralized organization will open
the doors to more creative participation by workers and consumers.
Changes and enhancements to traditional accounting practices will assign
value to collaboration and innovative conversation that is not there now.
Whatever your organization does today to make its knowledge sharing
more effective through the Net is only preparation for its reaching the sta-
tus of a sustainable organization.
About the Web Site
As all books must be, this is a snapshot of what the field of conversational
knowledge networking is like as of the beginning of the year 2002. This book is
accompanied by a companion Web site, where additional information and ideas
are being posted to update readers and interested Web surfers on this changing
field. To access this information, go to www.wiley.com/compbooks/figallo. 
Included on the site are templates for evaluating the support of knowledge
sharing in an organization, a survey for identifying the right starting point for a
knowledge networking initiative, a checklist for framing a strategy that
includes knowledge networking, a short training course for community man-
agers and facilitators, links to relevant software tools, and a discussion board
where readers can interact with us and with one another.
xx
Sair Linux and GNU Certification Level I: System Administration

Cave Walls to CRTs: 
The Landscape of
Knowledge Networking
The first three chapters of this book bring us up to date with the status of
knowledge networking as we enter the 21st century. Chapter 1, “Knowledge,
History, and the Industrial Organization,” is meant to remind us that sharing
what we know is an important part of our human heritage. Our current efforts
to rediscover and reactivate these ancestral skills have been complicated in
large part by the hierarchical management philosophies that grew out of indus-
trialization and its emphasis on feeding the demands of mass markets. Chapter
2, “Using the Net to Share What People Know,” takes us through the transition
from Industrial Age mentality to Information Age mentality and the accompa-
nying transformation of management philosophy that has come with the wide-
spread adoption of the Internet and the Web. Information management has
become a necessity, and as the tools and connectivity have advanced, the con-
cept of knowledge networking has been born. Chapter 3, “Strategy and Plan-
ning for the Knowledge Network,” considers the many challenges that
organizations face in changing their cultures, perspectives, and habits to sup-
port the smooth and efficient flow of knowledge and competence among their
workers using the new tools of the Net.
One
PART


3
In this first chapter, we review how the human species has pursued and handed
down knowledge through the ages as an integral function of society and how
modern organizations applied—and ignored—this ancestral heritage as they
faced the challenges of 20th-century management. Many of those challenges
during the past 150 years were being confronted for the first time in the vast
panorama of human history. Mass production, mass marketing, and the tremen-
dous advances in transportation and communication combined to force the
early leaders of industrialization to focus on improving production over
improving collaboration. Because those leaders put their attention on mecha-
nistic solutions to business problems, we now find our modern organizations
encountering the same hurdles—though in far different forms—that our ances-
tors had to overcome in the distant past.
Our Ancestral Heritage
As the velocity of commerce and its associated information increased with the
Industrial Age, organizations adopted command-and-control approaches to
save and catalogue as much descriptive data as they could. Both communica-
tion among the holders of knowledge and the verbal sharing of information
were deemphasized as business captains focused on worker specialization,
Knowledge, History, and the
Industrial Organization
C HAPTE R
1

even through most of the 20th century. Creating and meeting ever-growing
demand were regarded as marketing, production, and distribution problems,
not knowledge problems; hence, little was done to develop systems and cul-
tures that honored knowledge as the great movers and shakers among our
ancestors had done through many previous centuries.
Thus, we find ourselves in the present situation, where many organizations
must relearn not only the subtle skills of person-to-person knowledge sharing
but also the cultural norms and values necessary to make them effective. They
must learn to do this within a greater understanding of the Net and of how
social networking takes place within its virtual environment. Luckily, the social
part has been learned by our species through our collective history, and the
principles of knowledge networking have established some very deep roots.
Illuminating a Dark Space
Thirty-five thousand years ago, at the base of a cliff in what is now southeastern
France, members of a nomadic hunting tribe crawled through a dark, wet, and
narrow passage into a cavern. Holding crude torches before them, they groped
deeper into the damp gloom, past the evidence of bears that had made the cave
their home. They built a small fire to light the space, and after mixing clays and
water for their medium, they painted depictions of the creatures they often
encountered stalking the hills and river bottoms around them. Leopards, lions,
bison, rhinoceroses, and bears were not the animals they hunted, but the ani-
mals that threatened them.
These artists, in a chamber both frightening and barely accessible, were
recording what they knew, for what reasons we 21st-century humans can’t be
sure. But as humans, we attribute some purpose to their deeds: to appease their
gods, to appeal to the spirits of their predators, or maybe to initiate their young
men as hunters.
Clearly, those artists—possibly our direct ancestors—were intentionally
passing along experiential knowledge of value to their tribe and their appren-
tices at the dawn of human civilization. We can imagine the conversations that
took place around these pictures, in the cave itself, and around the tribal
campfire. In the process of creating their message pictures, they were unwit-
tingly leaving evidence for us, the future descendants they could never have
envisioned.
Knowledge sharing has become a natural part of our social behavior. Our
ability to communicate defines our humanity, and our tendency is to tell each
other what we know, especially when what we know is of interest to the other.
Humans are also toolmakers and tool users. This book is about using the tools
of the Internet to practice what we’ve always known how to do, but in the con-
text of the organization rather than the family or tribe.
4
Chapter 1

Knowledge, History, and the Industrial Organization
5
The Net as Today’s Cave Wall
This is not a history book, but it uses examples from history to remind you, its
readers, that knowledge sharing has defined our civilization. Communicating
abstract ideas to one another has distinguished our species from all other ani-
mals. We’ve been innovating, testing, and practicing knowledge transfer for a
long, long time, and much of what we’ll describe in these pages is more natural
to us than many organizations apparently realize.
In the context of present-day networked organizations, most managers are
challenged in adapting natural conversational behaviors, which people have
been refining at least since Paleolithic times, to communications media that, in
the timeline of human history, appeared only moments ago. Certainly some
adaptation is required, but resistance has become entrenched within the busi-
ness climate that developed during more than a century of industrial expansion
and technical advances. Fortunately, some of those technical advances are now
Figure 1.1
Lions and leopards and bears! Oh my! Recording wildlife sightings for the tribe
in 33,000 B.C.
Panel of the Panther Chauvet-Pont-d’Arc. Photo courtesy of French Ministry of Culture and Communication,
Régional Direction for Cultural Affairs—Rhône-Alpes region—Regional department of archeology 

able to foster a return to the “old ways” that proved themselves for all but the
last little smidgen of human progress.
The Internet is today’s cave wall where tens of millions of artists have now
recorded their observations, experiences, learnings, and—perhaps less nobly—
their sales pitches. The organization is still adjusting to its newfound ability to
provide open access to the Net’s information, entertainment, communication,
and ideas within the work environment. Many organizations are still reluctant
to provide that access because the excesses and abuses of the adolescent Inter-
net have been so well publicized for business leaders to see. 
Fear of the Unknown
No company wants its employees to spend their time at work surfing porno-
graphic Web sites or wasting hours rambling in chat rooms. Yet, on the other
side of the coin, examples that clearly demonstrate the benefits of allowing the
workforce to collaborate socially through the Net and to use the Internet for
valid research are often regarded as too anecdotal, too expensive, or too threat-
ening to internal order, accountability, and efficiency.
The exchange of organizational knowledge through personal interaction on
the Net has not yet been widely embraced because decision makers claim to
lack proof that it is cost-effective. We will provide evidence that it is, but the fol-
lowing examples from history suggest that organizational leaders must be
patient in adapting to this new global medium. After all, our ancestors learned
cooperatively—through the glacially slow invention of progressively stronger
media—for thousands of years. Now that media are developing so much faster
than before, it shouldn’t surprise us that change is outpacing our ability to keep
up and make the best use of the latest and greatest technologies. This struggle
to keep up applies on both the individual and organizational levels.
Adapting to Accelerating Change
The pace of cultural change through history has, for the most part, been slow
and incremental. But judging by the 1990s, we are now expected to adjust
almost yearly to tremendous advances in our ability to communicate around
the planet. Can organizations change their cultures to keep up with the torrid
pace of technology and information? 
Compared to any new medium before it, the Net has been adopted by the
overall population (at least in the developed world) at a lightning pace, maybe
too fast for most organizations to adapt their cultures to its peculiarities. Our
recommendations in this book will focus on careful, step-by-step approaches to
learning to use the Net as a meeting place for knowledge exchange. Most orga-
nizations must learn to crawl before they try to walk, or they’re likely to tumble
and assume, prematurely, that they’re just not meant to walk.
6
Chapter 1

Knowledge, History, and the Industrial Organization
7
We believe that all organizations are meant to walk and that they will benefit
by learning to share knowledge through networked conversation. But we also
believe that one can be too careful, too fearful of what might happen by taking
the plunge. The Net’s rewards often come through the unplanned magic of
serendipity, as many advances in human knowledge seem to have done. The
change in our ability to communicate as groups has happened, and it’s not likely
to be reversed. We should, therefore, make the best use possible of the techni-
cal advances we have created for ourselves and our world.
What’s New and What’s Not?
Many of today’s most successful organizations and businesses have become
humongous, hurried, and complex compared to any that we include in our brief
summary of human history. It used to take a despot to manage large human
forces and projects, but the old command-and-control hierarchical model is
yielding, slowly but steadily, to the networked organization in direct response to
the competitive (and collaborative) influence of today’s new media. Managing in
a networked environment is one of the skills we will describe in this book.
Given the size of organizations today and the tremendous reach of the Net,
history hints persuasively that there may be an optimum size for communities
that can effectively share knowledge and then have disproportionate influence.
Within huge organizations, these naturally scaled collaborative groups need to
be identified and leveraged. Groups small enough for all members to essentially
know one another are less likely to be held back by inhibitions brought by the
presence of strangers. The examples and guides we provide in this book will
therefore be based on effectively scaled knowledge communities.
Though our focus is on conversational knowledge sharing using the new
media of technical networks, we emphasize in this chapter that the purely social
GRADUAL SCHOOL AND SUDDEN SCHOOL
In Buddhism, there was once a split between those who believed that enlightenment
required study, meditation, and patience and those who believed that enlightenment could
be ignited through a flash of realization. These were referred to, respectively, as the “gradual
school” and the “sudden school.” Zen Buddhism is known for the insight-jolting stories and
questions called koans. You’re probably familiar with the classic riddle: What is the sound
of one hand clapping? Deep focus on such answerless riddles could instantly open new
doors in the mind, but not every Buddhist monk was ready to have those doors opened.
Adoption of Net culture can be reached by either the long, careful, systematic path or
by a sudden decision to revolutionize the company and its ways. The full conversion to
networked culture will take time, training, and patience by most organizations. For the
exceptional others, it will be intuited instantly, bringing a sudden and dramatic change in
outlook and practice.

8
Chapter 1
aspects of this practice are not new. Modern organizations don’t have to reinvent
knowledge networks; they’ve been under iterative development for countless
generations. The current challenge is to adapt knowledge networks to the needs
of the modern organization and to the new environment of Cyberspace.
Show and Tell in the 
Knowledge Space
When the paintings described earlier were discovered in Chauvet Cave near Avi-
gnon, France in 1994, they were hailed as some of the greatest early evidence of
communication by visual images and of the cerebral capacity for associative
thinking. As Robert Hughes explained, reporting on the discovery in Time mag-
azine, “Art, at its root, is association—the power to make one thing stand for and
symbolize another, to create the agreements by which some marks on a surface
denote, say, an animal, not just to the mark-maker but to others.”1 Making these
symbols recognizable to others illustrates one crucial principle of knowledge
networking: the use of a commonly understood language.
The choice of a cave as a location for displaying their art certainly had some
reasoning behind it. Of course, we can’t know for certain if caves were chosen
to protect the paintings from the weather or to demonstrate the bravery of the
warriors who had to enter the lair of the ferocious cave bear to paint and see
them. Maybe the difficult entry and the inhospitably dark environment lent
enough danger and mystery to the location to enhance its ritualistic purpose.
Whatever the reason, knowledge was recorded, stored, and passed along in a
dedicated space, another key element of good knowledge networking. The cave
itself lent special importance to what the community learned from its contents.
Surely these paintings were created and preserved for some purpose beyond
the quality of their art. Though we can recognize most of the animal forms, we
can’t understand the context of their creation. We may be the distant descendants
of the cave painters, but the best we can do is guess that these paintings had
meaning and solved problems for the clan. They could have created them to keep
clan members safe, to keep them fed, or simply to allay their fears. In the lingo of
modern knowledge management, the art in Chauvet Cave would be described as
HISTORY’S RELEVANT LESSONS
Knowledge transfer is a natural human behavior
Fully adapting group communication to any new medium takes time
Today’s organizations are bigger and more complex than ever
Networked management structure is a new concept
Communities for effective knowledge exchange have size limits
TEAMFLY

Knowledge, History, and the Industrial Organization
9
local knowledge—understood and appreciated by its immediate community but
of no clear relevance to the rest of us. The cave paintings are thus like many of the
facts and figures that corporations take care to preserve: of limited practical use
to people who discover them once the originators are gone.
Stories, Rituals, Trust, and Culture
Trust is the cornerstone of knowledge-sharing cultures. The one certain show-
stopper to revealing our knowledge to others is mistrust—the perception that The
Other is our competitor or enemy and might use what we tell them against us.
Historically, we have opened up to others when they were recognized as part
of our family or tribe. When The Other is unfamiliar, stories about them and their
background become the common foundations for building trust from the ground
up. Rituals renew and celebrate trust within a culture, and rituals are often
where new or old knowledge is exchanged and affirmed. Cave painting appears
to have been a ritual, and tribes probably performed other rituals around the
magical depictions that shamans painted and acted out in their presence.
Powerful stories such as creation myths, heroic legends, and battle sagas
have been passed along verbally as part of tribal ritual (as with the !Kung tribe
of the Kalahari; see Figure 1.2) for countless generations. More than mere
accounts of events and personalities, these stories carry and transmit the accu-
mulated history and wisdom of their ancestral societies, imparting the thinly
veiled instructions for living in what was (even millennia before the Internal
Revenue Service) a very complex world.
Oral tradition was the primary vehicle for spreading lore, learning, and myth
through society for tens of thousands of years, preceding the proliferation and
public interpretation of cave drawings and pictograms. In the marketplaces and
bazaars of early civilization, people traded more than goods and services. As in
CAVE PAINTINGS AND PRINCIPLES OF THE KNOWLEDGE NETWORK
1.
Common lexicon: The tribal community recognizes the animals and symbols on the
cave wall
2.
The knowledge space: The cave itself and its limited access make it a special place
for sharing knowledge
3.
Recordkeeping and access: Pictures are drawn to record what the artists knew for
others
4.
Context and purpose: The tribe understands the meaning and importance of the
animal figures on the cave wall
5.
Knowledge communities: The tribe itself shares and benefits from the special
meaning and purpose of the paintings

many ethnic marketplaces still active today, they also exchanged news, tales,
gossip, and helpful tips on where to find the best raw materials, which vendors
were reliable, and who overpriced goods or sold shoddy products.
A recent business bestseller, The Cluetrain Manifesto,2 is based on the idea
that “markets are conversations.” If you visit a living marketplace—your local
farmers’ market as opposed to a modern supermarket—you’ll see the truth in
that idea. People take the time to ask the tomato farmer about growing tech-
niques and microclimate. The local home baker learns from buyers about possi-
ble distribution outlets. The market is as much a social interaction as a
commercial one. Ancient peoples in a market much like the one shown in Figure
1.3 must have shared wondrous accounts of things seen over the horizon and of
new techniques and tools that would help them accomplish life’s arduous tasks.
The marketplace conversation was (and still is) ritualistic, not so much like a
religious ceremony but like a repeated behavior that defined cultural relation-
10
Chapter 1
Figure 1.2
Grandfather makes a big impression as experience, lore, and legend are
passed on to a new tribal generation.
!Kung family of the Kalahari, Courtesy of AOL Time-Warner, Inc.

Knowledge, History, and the Industrial Organization
11
ships and the flow of information and opinion. It was a ritual of cross-pollination
between the various cultures that met regularly at the crossroads or port towns
that naturally became centers of commerce.
People working within groups and organizations participate in similar rituals
today, of course. However, there is wide variation in the extent to which lead-
ership sanctions, allows, or encourages the creation and oral sharing of lore,
myth, tales, or anything that is not accountable as “official business.” The Inter-
net has become the virtual crossroads where different cultures intersect and
interact. Within the organization, these cultural crossroads also exist, but by
restricting social exchange and marketplace conversation, management policy
may stunt the growth and vitality of its organizational culture.
Ancient Media and Content
Our ancestors began writing some 5,000 years ago, recording events and trans-
actions that made it possible for people of succeeding eras, including our own,
to access some of what was known, understood, and believed about life and
Figure 1.3
Ye olde marketplace was as much a place to learn as it was a place to buy, sell,
and barter.
Chronicles of Ulrich de Richental: Open Market, Courtesy of CORBIS, Inc.

cosmology thousands of years in the past. Thus, we know about the flooding in
Mesopotamia and the handing over of The Laws to Hammurabi by the Sumer-
ian deity. Judeo-Christian-Islamic culture became most familiar with these sto-
ries through their Old Testament versions of Noah’s Ark and Moses receiving
the Ten Commandments.
The communications media of ancient times evolved slowly. First employing
fragile clay tablets and sturdy stone walls to hold their writings and drawings,
recordkeepers eventually began using animal hide parchment, which was the
writing surface of the Dead Sea Scrolls. The Egyptians used the stalks of
papyrus reeds, pounded together, to form the earliest version of paper—a
medium that was to serve the ancient Greeks well in spreading their heroic
poems and revolutionary philosophical theories.
The scribes of Sumeria and ancient Egypt left behind records like the one
shown in Figure 1.4 revealing certain aspects of events, accounting, and com-
merce in their times. But evidently, they did little to distribute how-to knowl-
edge among their contemporaries. (Most organizations began their use of
computer networks following similar priorities.) It was a long time before
efforts were made to deliberately save and make available recorded knowledge
on media other than temple walls, sculptures, and clay tablets—media that
were both lasting and portable.
Advanced knowledge—beyond what was required for day-to-day subsistence
agriculture and home life—was concentrated in the halls of royalty, the count-
ing rooms of merchants, and in the minds of priests and scribes who handed it
down, through direct teaching and demonstration, to their apprentices. The
rudimentary written languages of those early civilizations were limited in their
ability to do more than recount events and record transactions. One could only
tell limited stories through the use of different arrangements of wedge-shaped
impressions and pictures of people, animals, and implements.
12
Chapter 1
KEY ADVANCES IN ANCIENT KNOWLEDGE TRANSFER
1.
Pictograms on walls recorded achievements and events
2.
Clay tablets lent portability to written records
3.
Papyrus allowed more to be written, faster
4.
The Phoenician alphabet used a limited set of symbols for more flexible
communication
5.
The Library at Alexandria accumulated written knowledge and encouraged debate
and conversation
6.
Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle modeled the knowledge classroom and the practice
of formal argument

Knowledge, History, and the Industrial Organization
13
The Phoenicians developed the first standard alphabet around 1100 B.C. How-
ever, it wasn’t until the Greeks invented symbols for vowels in the middle of the
eighth century B.C. that humankind had a tool to express general knowledge in
addition to the recording of specific knowledge about commerce and events.
This was a tremendous breakthrough because it became possible to express
meaning using a total of only 26 symbols.
As Charles Van Doren writes in A History of Knowledge,3 “Perhaps the
human race is unable to think and know generally if individuals cannot write
down their thoughts so that others can clearly understand them.” This ability
made it much easier for local knowledge to be made useful beyond the origi-
nating communities. Alphabetical writing and paper extended early knowledge
networks beyond the closed and privileged confines of the royal court.
Figure 1.4
Pressing a stylus into soft clay in various configurations served the earliest
bookkeepers for recording transactions.
Courtesy of Gianni Dagli Orti/Corbis.

The First Knowledge Center
The Egyptian empire began around 3000 B.C., but because its Nile-based agri-
cultural civilization was so stable and protected by the surrounding desert, its
culture was conservative and reluctant to change and advance its knowledge.
Its leaders enjoyed the safety of their kingdom’s isolation, and it was not until
Egypt began interacting with the more intellectually aggressive Greeks that one
of its leaders was inspired to take an action that opened its ancient and imper-
turbable civilization to the influences of other advanced peoples.
At the beginning of the third century B.C., Egypt’s king, Ptolemy I Soter, built
the original Library of Alexandria. His purpose was to house a copy of every
known book, which was to serve as a center for knowledge exchange and
debate among scholars and scientists from all over the known world. Dialogue
in the knowledge space of Alexandria led to many significant advances in phi-
losophy and the sciences.
It was there that the scholar Eratosthenes devised the first accurate mea-
surement of the circumference of Earth. Euclid completed his Elements there,
detailing the study of geometry. Kallimachos of Kyrene, Alexandria’s most
famous librarian, created the first subject catalogue for 120,000 scrolls of the
library’s holdings, dividing all knowledge into eight major categories: oratory,
history, laws, philosophy, medicine, lyric poetry, tragedy, and miscellany. His
citations described something of each author’s life, his works, and the number
of lines in each work. Though it was by no means comprehensive, the library
was the first attempt at a grand index to knowledge and a precursor to the
Dewey decimal system and today’s online databases of books and information. 
Conversation as a Basis 
for New Learning
The oldest recorded stories are honored as classics in our literature, and to this
day, we look to many of them for guiding principles in our personal, religious,
political, and cultural lives. Universal truths demonstrated through accounts of
early human social interaction seem just as valid today, even after so many cen-
turies of progress and change. Homer’s Iliad and Odyssey, Greek mythology and
drama, and biblical histories and the Psalms all describe human situations and
express emotions to which we modern people can relate. These stories began as
oral accounts and were eventually translated and transcribed into written form.
But even after the standardization of writing, oral communication continued to
play an important part in developing new directions for knowledge.
The philosophers Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle recognized the importance of
creating and enabling social context—leading discourse in which new and con-
troversial ideas would flourish. Socrates encouraged his students to question
the conventional thinking of the times, an approach that led to his being forced
14
Chapter 1

Knowledge, History, and the Industrial Organization
15
to drink poisonous hemlock. Plato emphasized the value of nurturing spirited
dialogue in pursuit of an elusive truth and created a place to support that dia-
logue: the School of Athens, pictured in Figure 1.5. Aristotle, a student of Plato,
took his quest in a different direction, creating a school that he called the
Lyceum where he focused on the empirical (observable) nature of knowledge,
leading eventually to the development of the scientific method.
Plutarch, who lived centuries later, helped to revive these heroes of ancient
Greek thought in his biographical writings, and he hosted conversations at his
home near the Temple of Apollo. The roots of modern teaching institutions and
universities were thus set in Western society. Only through questioning the
known, these philosophical pioneers taught, could people arrive at the truth.
Figure 1.5
Plato’s School of Athens, a philosophical think tank where the teacher
surrounded himself with a “society of learner-companions.”
Courtesy of Archivo Iconografico, S.A./Corbis.

Leaders of Intellectual Ferment
What we know of Western history tells us that a very few individuals—such as
Plato and Aristotle in Classical Greek times and Petrarch and Boccaccio in the
pre-Renaissance period—led the introduction of new knowledge and new ways
of thinking to their respective cultures.
Francesco Petrarch almost single-handedly revived classical learning after
the Dark Ages. Many consider Giovanni Boccaccio, a contemporary of
Petrarch, to have been the first “Renaissance man,” studying the arts, science,
and philosophy and reconciling them in his writings. Together, these two stim-
ulated interest in old Greek and Roman literature and science and thus awak-
ened the long-dormant pursuit of new knowledge in Europe.
Western and Eastern cultures alike have always relied on both mythical and
real-life heroes to lead them in new directions and to model new values and
practices. After centuries of withdrawal into theocratic and feudal governance,
Western culture needed these maverick champions, though neither gained uni-
versal recognition or acceptance during his own time, to snap it out of its
inward-focused complacency.
Even as the bubonic plague wiped out much of the European population, the
new ideas adapted from ancient ones by Petrarch and Boccaccio found an avid
audience and a small but eager network of supporters. Thus, two curious, bril-
liant, and ambitious individuals sparked a revival of critical thinking that would
soon blossom into the Renaissance.
The First Mass Medium
Just as they served Petrarch and Boccaccio, handwritten accounts of knowledge
seekers’ works had fueled intellectual exploration for centuries, but access to
such documents remained difficult, even for the privileged classes. Illiteracy was
endemic in spite of the realizations and discoveries of classical philosophers.
The Dark Ages marked a long period in Western civilization when even the
expansive thinking of the Greeks was forgotten. The isolated pockets of liter-
acy in monasteries and courts of royalty lacked the means and motivation to
disseminate what had been discovered and revealed centuries in the past. An
exclusive priesthood still controlled the book medium. But a technical inven-
tion coupled improbably with a terrible disease brought a revolutionary solu-
tion to the problem of limited access to recorded knowledge.
Gutenberg and the Serendipity 
of the Black Death
In A History of Knowledge, Van Doren describes how one of the most horrific
scourges ever to afflict humankind helped create the conditions that launched
16
Chapter 1

Knowledge, History, and the Industrial Organization
17
one of the greatest surges in understanding and intellect ever to elevate human-
ity. Three situations converged to turn the first use of a clever invention into
one of the great events in human history.
In 1347, the bubonic plague was brought to Europe from the Crimea on a
boat that docked in Sicily. It quickly spread into an epidemic that wiped out
between a third and a half of the continent’s population. So many died that,
after the plague had run its course, the survivors inherited the property of the
deceased and found themselves owning more assets than they’d owned before.
Van Doren describes the last quarter of the plague-ravaged 14th century as “an
epoch of burgeoning prosperity.”
Among the goods left by the many who had died were clothing, bedding, and
other items made of cloth. Rag paper, manufactured from all of this discarded
cloth, had accumulated in surplus by the mid-1400s, at a time when interest in
the classical knowledge revived by the likes of Petrarch and Boccaccio was
reaching a state of genuine intellectual hunger.
These conditions—expendable wealth, surplus paper (the “bandwidth” of the
age), and demand for knowledge—were thus in place when Gutenberg invented
his printing press in 1450 (which mostly produced bibles; see Figure 1.6). Until
that time, few people knew how to read, but fewer still could afford to own
books, which were laboriously written, one-by-one, by scribes and monks. A
handwritten book could cost as much as a small farm, so most knowledge
resided in and flowed through the memories and hearsay of people, who passed
it on the best they could to their children and fellow villagers by word of mouth.
After Gutenberg’s contribution, the printing of books accelerated so rapidly
that by 1500 there were more than 1,000 print shops in Europe, and all of the
known handwritten books had already been put to print. As difficult as it might
be for us to imagine today, book-wild Europe found itself suddenly with a lack
BENEFITS OF THE PRINTING PRESS
The development of the printing press, as with the development of the Internet centuries
later, brought with it the following benefits:
■■
Provided a huge leap in available bandwidth 
■■
Delivered more new information faster to more people than before
■■
Allowed more individuals to reach each other with their ideas
■■
Introduced more people to stuff they’d never heard of
■■
Stimulated conversation, debate, protest, and even war
■■
Facilitated widespread and local cooperation
■■
Supported mass propaganda campaigns
■■
Catalyzed the formation of new communities around ideas
■■
Supported local organization
■■
Accelerated education and the spread of literacy
■■
Hugely expanded knowledge storage

of new content. In 1490, Van Doren reports, “publishers bemoaned the success
of the new enterprise, which seemed to have rapidly exhausted its product at
the same time that it had opened up an enormous, hungry new market.”
Many more people—the “knowing classes”—learned to read and write, but
for most “nonknowing” people, knowledge continued to be defined according
to what could be orally exchanged within their class and trade. There was little
crossover between the written literature of philosophy and science and the
practical skills that produced most of the goods and services for the majority of
the people. The new medium for knowledge transfer had not found its footing
as a practical means of sharing best practices in the industries that served the
vast majority of the population. Advanced knowledge was a very top-down
thing, whereas common knowledge continued to be a grass-roots thing.
18
Chapter 1
Figure 1.6
A page of the Bible printed on Gutenberg’s press. This new medium changed
the course of history.
Courtesy of Universitaetsbibliothek Goettingen.
TEAMFLY

Knowledge, History, and the Industrial Organization
19
New Ideas and the Challenge 
to the Hierarchy
Van Doren, citing numerous historical examples, observed that “any change, for
a tyrant, is for the worse.” This had been a truism of rule since the earliest of
civilizations, and it was still so as Europe passed through the Dark Ages and
headed toward the Enlightenment. The lack of a mass medium for spreading
knowledge had been a major handicap to changing society and thereby to chal-
lenging tyrannical rule. Once the printing press became a commonplace tech-
nology, absolute monarchs had to deal with many more well-informed and
well-educated subjects.
The spread of new ideas in Europe was also held back, even in the Renais-
sance, by the rising political authority of the Catholic Church, which regarded
the emergence of scientific theory and experimentation as a threat to its intel-
lectual hegemony. In the classic case of 1633, Galileo, under threat of death,
recanted his scientifically derived observation that the earth revolved around
the sun and that the heavens were not, as had been believed since Aristotle,
immutable and unchanging. Old beliefs, especially when espoused at the time
by the Church, were defended to the point of criminalizing any challenges
posed by the bold purveyors of young Science. As still happens in many modern
organizations, entrenched beliefs of Renaissance Italy rose up to squelch the
introduction and adoption of new ideas and knowledge.
The big headline of the Age of Exploration was Columbus’s discovery of the
Americas in 1492. Every European monarchy then entered the competition to
claim territory on other continents, conquer their native populations, and
abscond with their riches. Overseas exploration was the R&D (research and
development) of the monarchy, though once the way to the colonial land rush
was known, the research activities were given less attention than the develop-
ment projects. Laying claim to land and bringing home the loot were more
important to the ruling classes than learning from newly discovered cultures
because competition depended on accumulated wealth. And besides, all of the
new and exotic cultures were assumed to be inherently inferior.
Still, as sailors and missionaries returned, knowledge of the world and its
diversity flooded what had been Europe’s closed societies. Following and, in
many cases, accompanying the adventurers, populations of refugees migrated
to the colonies to escape religious persecution and poverty, draining Europe of
much of its own creative diversity. And as the wealth of the New World was
hauled back to Spain, Portugal, France, England, and the Netherlands, it trick-
led down to the growing middle class, which—being more educated and
informed than ever before—began to question the absolute powers of their
kings and queens, opening the Age of Enlightenment.
New ideas and knowledge of politics, religion, economics, and philosophy
were incorporated into the platforms of the French and American Revolutions.

And once these two very different countries declared their freedom and inde-
pendence from royal rule, it was only a matter of time before the rest of Europe
would follow. But with the invention of the steam engine, a force even more
powerful than political revolution was unleashed. Manual labor—a constant for
thousands of years and the backbone of every human population throughout
history—was about to undergo a revolution of its own.
Deskilling in the Industrial Age
In the preindustrial world, complex skills and trades were passed on from par-
ent to child and from master to apprentice by direct demonstration and hands-
on instruction. Schools and universities were attended by a relative few, even
after books began to be printed. As nations came into being, guilds of skilled
craftspeople drove the economies. Even the simplest farmer had to be a jack-of-
all-trades in a very hands-on world. Beasts of burden helped with the heavy lift-
ing, but few of them, beyond the horse and the hunting hound, could be
described as “skilled.” Human and animal power could only get so many units
manufactured during a workday.
With the invention of the steam engine and the advent of the Industrial Age in
the 19th century, people did more manufacturing with powered machinery.
With the energy available from turning fire into steam, many more units could
be manufactured by a given number of people. Steam and carbon-based power
was obviously the best way to get things done in the physical world.
The comprehensive sets of skills and knowledge that had driven the prein-
dustrial economy lost favor, in the eyes of business owners and managers, to
the ability (and willingness) to perform more specialized tasks requiring much
less subtlety, less training, less knowledge, and less creativity. “Repetition of
simple tasks” became the prevalent job description.
Led by American industrialists, this change in labor needs became known as
deskilling. Whereas a blacksmith required deep understanding of horses, met-
allurgy, and design, combined with hands-on expertise in the use of heat, iron,
and tools, a line worker needed only perform the assembly procedures of a few
premanufactured parts—a set of motions he or she would repeat all day long,
day after day, for years (see Figure 1.7). Once those procedures were learned,
there was little more knowledge to be acquired. Success lay in performing one’s
tasks as quickly and error-free as possible.
The goal of the company was to be superefficient, emulating the machinery
that drove the manufacture of its products. Specialization also carried over into
the bloated bureaucracies that supported the growing manufacturing compa-
nies. Governments expanded to provide services to the growing middle class
and to regulate the increasingly large and powerful corporations.
Mass production meant getting the most possible work accomplished each day
to serve growing mass markets. This became the driving goal of the organization,
20
Chapter 1

Knowledge, History, and the Industrial Organization
21
whether the end products were automobiles, shoes, or documents. To a great
extent, today’s organizations are still designed to seek efficiency above all. But
with the rise of industrialization came further expansion of the middle class and
the university system. Science extended into the social sphere, and people began
to study the effects of the treatment of workers on productivity and on society as
a whole. Social consciousness had, at long last, taken root in the workplace.
The Dawn of the Info Age
Beginning with our cave-painting ancestors, we arrived at the doorway to the
20th century with a considerable accumulation of human experience and
recorded history. We’d transferred knowledge through voice, pictures, hand-
drawn letters, parchment scrolls, and printed books. We’d shared knowledge
between prophets, philosophers, tribes, cultures, city-states, kingdoms,
empires, and nations. We’d recorded what we knew in numbers, murals, essays,
poems, songs, plays, novels, and libraries. We’d managed to span deserts, seas,
continents, and oceans with what our ancestors had learned.
Figure 1.7
Pass the auto frame, please! A factory worker tries to keep up with growing
demand.
Courtesy of the Detroit Institute of Arts.

With the dawn of the Information Age, we began to harness a technology that
moved at the speed of light. Sparked by electricity, the last 100 years have pro-
pelled us into the future at an astounding rate. In many ways, we’re still catch-
ing up to our technical miracles, discovering that the karma of wiring the planet
has included many events that we hadn’t planned on. Some of them have been
good surprises, but others have been bad.
Management Goes Scientific
While mechanized manufacturing altered the face of work life, advances in
transportation and communication set us on a path toward even faster change
in the way we interacted with the world and with each other. Railroads and
steam-powered ships shrunk the planet, and the invention of the telegraph and
telephone made it possible for people to move information back and forth at
relatively instantaneous speed. The ability to move goods and conduct business
correspondence so much faster than before spurred the growth of industry and
forced a reevaluation of the focus of management.
In the early 20th century, F. W. Taylor formalized the trends that began in the
preceding decades into an approach he called “management science.”4 Based
on “clearly defined laws and principles,” it aimed to increase the productivity of
modern industry by studying the tasks, the tools, and the incentives and then
tuning them for best performance.
Knowledge of performance was gained by such practices as putting a stop-
watch on workers and measuring the difference in output between those paid
at different rates. Recommending optimum shovel sizes for moving various
materials was a typical example of Taylor’s theory put into practice. Ford Motor
Company embraced his approach in making its assembly lines more efficient,
though one result was that many workers could only stand the pace of such effi-
cient production for a couple of years. This didn’t seem to matter, though, as
there were always many others willing to take their places on the line.
Management science was praised and criticized by conservatives and liberals
alike because while it objectified work and made it easier for workers to pro-
duce more in a given timeframe, it continued to treat workers as if they were
cogs in a machine, showing little consideration for their health, happiness,
opinions, or recommendations. Business was still very far from supporting con-
ditions that would foster conversational networking among workers. What col-
laboration did occur in the first half of the 1900s was among academics, who
found the work environment a fascinating object of study and experimentation.
Taylor’s pioneering work inspired others to elaborate on the science of man-
agement, putting more emphasis on planning, organizing, commanding, coordi-
nating, reporting, budgeting, directing, and leading in the workplace. The
concept of the bureaucracy flourished during the early 20th century to the
point where tending to the organization became even more important than
22
Chapter 1

Knowledge, History, and the Industrial Organization
23
achieving its purpose. The Italian government became so enamored of the sci-
entific management process that it had 20 bureaus studying how to cut out
much of its unnecessary bureaucracy.
Anticonversational Attitudes
As the structure of the organization got all the attention, little mind was paid to
the value of the individual worker. Informal conversation—spoken or written as
intraworkplace correspondence—was regarded as idle talk: a waste of time that
would distract the worker from performing the all-important assigned tasks and
reduce output. With the rise of labor unions, talk between workers on the job
was suppressed even more, being recognized as a threat to the company and a
means for workers to organize and challenge the power structure. No one was
ready to accept the possibility that conversation would lead to smarter, happier,
more cooperative workers. And no one was asking whether the worker might
have valuable contributions to offer to the usable knowledge of the company.
Executives and managers were hired specifically for the education and expe-
rience they brought in the door with them. The know-how they came with was
considered sufficient to run the organization for years. There was very little, if
any, emphasis on continuing education or new knowledge generation within
the work force. So naturally, there was little incentive to learn, to teach, to sup-
port conversation, or to bring up new ideas. But that was “just the way things
were” at the time, and few complained.
Workers as People Who Matter
Attitudes about management began to change when, in 1939, the Hawthorne
Studies led by Elton Mayo5showed that social factors in the work environment
influenced individuals and their performance. The studies also demonstrated
that change within the workplace was likely to stimulate more change. The
resulting new approach to workers and workplace led to improvements in
working conditions.
After World War II, studies revealed that no single management approach
was appropriate to all business situations and that the social and technological
elements within a company were interdependent. These “discoveries” might
seem self-evident to us today, but notice that they took quite a while to be
accepted and ingrained into what was taught in business schools. Relevant to
this book is the conclusion that the structure of an organization is closely tied
to the information systems it uses.
In the 1960s, Edgar Schein6 proposed that management theories that looked
at people from the economic, social, and self-actualizing perspectives were still
too simplistic. People are complex, he wrote, as are the organizations in which
they work. Schein recognized that no single management style can succeed in

improving the performance of all workers and that the motives of an individual
worker are liable to change over time. He also pointed out that high satisfaction
alone does not necessarily lead to higher productivity.
This increasing focus on the individual and the motivating factors that lead to
higher productivity was a distinct departure from the viewpoint of scientific
management. The worker could no longer be treated as a mere cog in the
machine if maximum productivity was desired. Consideration had to be given
to what would drive the worker to perform best over the long haul. In the 1980s,
the idea of collective decision making entered the picture as part of the new
school of Business Process Reengineering. More worker empowerment would
lead to a greater sense of responsibility, smoother workflow, and less load on
the management layer.
Fixing the Organization
Reengineering got its name from the very process that it recommended: reor-
ganizing the way that the organization functioned from top to bottom. In prin-
ciple, it appeared straightforward. Companies had to change their management
philosophies and restructure themselves to reflect that change. In practice, the
change process itself began to suck up the time and resources of the company
to the extent that the benefits of the change were often lost. As was true about
managing the growth of bureaucracies, the purpose of the organization was
sidetracked into the reengineering process. The individual worker ended up
even more confused than before, and productivity suffered.
The role of the individual within the organization was certainly evolving, but
knowledge networking activity remained limited in terms of who participated,
the consistency of its practice, the means of communication, and the availability
of information. Technology has since had an impact on all of those limitations.
The Emergence of 
Computer Networks
From here on, the history becomes more familiar to most of us. The advent of
the Information Age began rather ponderously with room-sized mainframe
computers like the one shown in Figure 1.8, accelerating decades later with the
introduction of desktop personal computers and computer-mediated networks.
These systems quickly evolved in sophistication and speed, penetrated the
office and the workplace; and people—thousands and then millions—began to
use them from their homes.
The earliest adopters of networking technologies were, naturally, the popu-
lations that designed the systems and had the systems designed for them. These
included engineers, programmers, scientists, the military, and academics. As
we track in more detail in Chapter 2, “Using the Net to Share What People
24
Chapter 1

Knowledge, History, and the Industrial Organization
25
Know,” they invented the first communications applications such as email and
conferencing, and they set the stage for what was to happen once networking
advanced beyond its initially limited accessibility. To a great extent, they mod-
eled the first online knowledge networks. The design of computers, software,
and the Internet were all collaborative efforts that piggybacked on existing
stages of technology to plot the improvements for the succeeding stages.
In the 1990s, as the Internet became accessible and user-friendly to regular
citizens outside the workplace, the inadequacy of the management science
approach and its derivative theories became very clear. Information could be
produced, transferred, and distributed to thousands. It could be stored and
retrieved not only by the specialized “data drones” and the upper echelons of
the organization’s hierarchy but also by everyone who had access to the tools
and the networks. The hierarchy was still essential for commanding the work
force and for dealing with peers in other similarly structured organizations.
However, it proved to be slower in moving valuable knowledge around than
allowing employees to directly network with one another and with the explod-
ing volume of information available on the Net.
Figure 1.8
Not a desktop model, ENIAC (Electronic Numerical Integrator and Computer)
was designed to help aim the big guns of World War II.
Courtesy of University of Pennsylvania.

As the Web opened to the world, information began zipping around from so
many sources to so many destinations in such volume and at such speed that
management was forced to admit its limitations in keeping up with it. Informa-
tion, which various pundits insisted “wanted to be” both free and expensive,
had escaped and was acquiring other qualities, mixing truth and fact with
rumor, error, and deliberate lies. Companies founded specifically to work
through the Web led the way in fitting its capabilities to their business needs,
while large established corporations sweated out the possibility that they’d
missed the boat and might be displaced by progressive new competitors.
Outside the organization, the old knowledge-sharing traditions of conversa-
tion, direct demonstration, and storytelling were being reborn through the Net.
The toolmakers and the tool users found a common communications ground
for enabling widespread distribution and discovery of fresh information and
ideas. Organizations were no longer leading the technological revolution.
Those organizations not formed around the Net were finding that their ability to
find and exchange information was simply too slow to keep up.
The Knowledge Explosion
Some businesses, especially new ones that could move without the leg irons of
legacy beliefs and practices holding them back, joined the technical subculture
to find the information they sought and to communicate with the people who
possessed it. Encyclopedias and libraries “went live” on the Web, forced to
evolve quickly in an environment that seemed perfectly suited to their core pur-
poses of storing, cataloguing, and retrieving information. Organizations—hand-
icapped by procedures and practices that had worked when employees had few
opportunities to communicate their ideas to each other—recognized the widen-
ing gap between their internal operations and this new network of free-flowing
information. They found themselves trapped in closed systems while, outside,
their customers were conversing, criticizing their products, lambasting their
services, trading ideas for improvements, and inventing new companies and
methods to outdo them.
The business world’s first reaction to these rapid changes was to better orga-
nize its operational information using the networking technologies of its closed
internal systems. To move faster—to counter the speed of the Internet—busi-
nesses attempted to improve the flow of information within the company by
identifying their most vital facts and figures, making sure they captured and
stored them, improving systems to retrieve them, and instructing their managers
and employees to contribute whatever they knew to a database of total company
know-how and experience. The totality of this practice became known by a term
that many now consider an oxymoron: knowledge management.
26
Chapter 1

Knowledge, History, and the Industrial Organization
27
Summary
Human history contains most of the lessons required to build successful online
knowledge networks. We have learned to be natural knowledge sharers, both as
individuals and as members of tribes, trading networks, and cultures. Our brief
historical review has demonstrated how the essential principles of knowledge
networking have been developed and preserved over thousands of years.
The natural knowledge-sharing behaviors of early civilizations were influ-
enced by the forms of governance and the media that developed through the
ages. Hierarchical structures felt threatened by the open flow of new ideas, but
powerful media such as writing, paper, and printing served to increase the flow
and distribution of ideas. As organizations formed to do business, managers
had to learn to deal with governance issues and the value of knowledge in the
workplace. Gradually, our natural tendencies to share knowledge have been
recognized as important to the organization. Just as innovation was vital to
early communities, it has become vital today in business competition and orga-
nizational readiness. Knowledge sharing is a key to that innovation.

TEAMFLY

29
Knowledge sharing is an ancient and adaptive behavior, but history cautions
that the emergence of new ideas—spread through new media—is often resisted
by The Powers That Be. That was the case in most organizational cultures until
the 20th century when industrialization generated the need for more scientific
management practices, which in turn led to more perceptive techniques for
internal analysis. Using those techniques, organizations over the past 50 years
have identified information handling as the great challenge heading into the
21st century. In this chapter, we describe how knowledge management theory
has responded to that challenge and how the subject of this book—online
knowledge networking—has developed, since the invention of the computer, as
a valuable practice for uncovering and applying knowledge. Throughout the
chapter, we provide examples of groundbreaking and current state-of-the-art
knowledge networking applications.
Managing Knowledge
As we mentioned at the end of Chapter 1, “Knowledge, History, and the Indus-
trial Organization,” some claim that knowledge management is an oxymoron,
which Dictionary.com defines as “a rhetorical figure in which incongruous or
contradictory terms are combined, as in a deafening silence and a mournful
optimist.” We’re not so sure that knowledge management fully qualifies under
Using the Net to Share 
What People Know
C HAPTE R
2

that definition, but we recognize the shortcomings of a term that implies that
knowledge can be managed. 
David Skyrme, a respected British consultant, calls the two words “uneasy
bedfellows.”1 He points out (and we agree) that real knowledge—based on
experience and practice—lives in the human mind and defies external manage-
ment. Indeed, some say management can kill knowledge, and the history we
reviewed in Chapter 1 includes some supporting evidence that kings, pharaohs,
and popes have often attempted to suppress the advances that come with new
ideas and intellectual exploration. 
New knowledge tends to incite change, and entrenched rulers (which include
many managers of successful companies) tend to steer clear of adventure, risk,
and surprise. Knowledge cannot thrive where its emergence is overcontrolled.
But as Skyrme also observes, “knowledge is increasingly recognized as a crucial
organizational resource that gives market leverage. Its management is therefore
too important to be left to chance.” So there must be a happy medium between
allowing the wild and random exchange of ideas and opinions and prohibiting
any crosstalk among people in the work place. This happy medium can be
attained by establishing clear goals and purposes for the exchange and identify-
ing the people who should (and must) be included in the conversation. 
A functioning knowledge network does not manage the knowledge. Rather, it
manages the structure and composition of the networks that exchange the
knowledge. This book provides instruction for building and populating effec-
tive online networks that fill an essential role under the broad conceptual
umbrella of knowledge management. 
Knowledge as an Object
The knowledge management approach was originally developed to meet two
looming challenges recognized by large businesses as they sought a competitive
edge in an expanding and information-intensive marketplace. One was to get a
better handle on the runaway growth of useful information by somehow taking
control of the sources of that information and not losing information that had
been located and captured. The other was to manipulate information to answer
vital business questions in an increasingly complex and fast-changing world.
This was the origin of what some call the knowledge as object path. Its goal is
to gather key data and configure them in ways that tell the organization how to
proceed toward whatever it defines as success. It starts with data collection,
storage, and management and applies the searching and parsing skills of virtual
librarians and economists to the various data streams associated with purchas-
ing, production, sales, marketing, and human resources. 
This path has led to the development of increasingly sophisticated and “intel-
ligent” software platforms—some are called expert systems—that can weave
the various data streams together into systems that bring more efficiency to
30
Chapter 2

Using the Net to Share What People Know
31
labor-intensive and complex business processes. Today, sophisticated plat-
forms exist for supply chain management, customer-relationship management,
hiring, sales forecasting, and resource location, all of which are based on cap-
turing and storing essential information for internal reporting. Suppliers and
service providers now employ systems that are compatible with their buyers
and clients so that, for example, UPS can interface its delivery system with its
customers’ supply chain management system, saving time for the customer
through greater convenience.
The first waves of knowledge management (KM) theory treated knowledge
as content, and the first technologies to implement the theory could best be
described as elaborate digital containers and decanters. But just as the cave
walls at Chauvet contained information that none of us today can interpret, the
information many organizations collect is often beyond the interpretation abil-
ities of their own employees. The tools that store and report the information
have to somehow provide (or be used within) a context that gives meaning to
the information. Information without context is not truly knowledge.
Knowledge as a Process
Treating knowledge as an object—to be captured, stored, and retrieved through
intelligent reporting—was (and still is) a powerful lever for organizations, but
the approach has practical limitations. It fails to take advantage of the commu-
nications capabilities of the Net, and it cannot uncover, store, or distribute the
human intelligence possessed by the people in the organization. This intellec-
tual capital is much more fluid and accessible through person-to-person inter-
action. The facilities of email and online conferencing systems, running on the
same digital networks that serve the knowledge-as-object software, allow
knowledge sharing to take place on a deeper and more customizable basis.
The management focus of knowledge as process is on people and how they
communicate rather than on information and how it is handled. People are
more complex and more difficult to manage than information, so it’s easy to
understand why most organizations have spent more money, time, and
resources on developing their capabilities for information handling than on
developing those for interpersonal collaboration. 
People may be natural knowledge sharers, but within organizations there are
competing motivations between loyalty to the organization, loyalty to the team,
and loyalty to one’s career. There are many different contexts for collaboration
depending on the structure of the organization and the task at hand. There are cul-
tural issues, professional issues, and when we’re considering online networking,
technical competence issues, all of which will be discussed throughout this book. 
The knowledge-as-process path is a continuation of the long history of human
knowledge sharing. Its leaders and proponents tend to be sociologists, organiza-
tional development experts, and anthropologists rather than programmers,

executives, and MBAs. Its most enthusiastic participants tend to be the people
who actually own the know-how within the organization and who resist the idea
that their intellectual assets can be controlled or condensed into pages of data.
Knowledge management was formalized to some degree in the early 1990s,
but the roots of both the as-object and as-process paths go back to the very
invention of computers and the networks that joined them. The problem recog-
nized then, at the end of World War II, was the same one that prompted the
focus on knowledge and information 50 years later.
Roots of the Knowledge Network
Only two generations ago the Digital Age was science fiction. The evolution of
hardware, software, communications technologies, and interactive techniques
is still in its infancy today, but we’ve come a long way since the idea of storing
information and connecting people electronically was conceived, half a century
ago. And though we make much of the fact that knowledge networking is an
underutilized practice within organizations, the natural tendency for people to
want to communicate inspired the earliest visions of what computers could be.
Blazing the Trails
The first description of the modern knowledge network was published on July
1945, at the end of World War II. Dr. Vannevar Bush, director of the U.S. gov-
ernment’s Office of Scientific Research and Development, wrote an article in
Atlantic Monthly titled “As We May Think.”2 He lamented a situation where, in
spite of the many great scientific advances that had been made, the organiza-
tions of his time were stuck using obsolete methods for dealing with their fast-
growing stores of information. 
“The summation of human experience is being expanded at a prodigious
rate,” he wrote, “and the means we use for threading through the consequent
maze to the momentarily important item is the same as was used in the days of
square-rigged ships.” His solution to this outmoded knowledge access situation
was an imagined device he called a memex “in which an individual stores all his
books, records, and communications, and which is mechanized so that it may
be consulted with exceeding speed and flexibility.” 
Inventing Tools for Collaboration
Bush was visualizing the desktop computer. After several generations of technical
evolution, the first computer-mediated networks appeared as ARPANET, built by
the Advanced Research Project Agency during the 1960s. Initially funded by the
Department of Defense, the distributed hub model of ARPANET, in which no sin-
32
Chapter 2

Using the Net to Share What People Know
33
gle communications node was essential to its operation, was intended to preserve
its functionality in case of a nuclear attack. The design proved to be valuable for
other reasons, too. It was easy to add nodes, and its nonhierarchical structure
encouraged innovation. But the incremental adoption of institutional and aca-
demic networking that followed over the next 20 years could only advance the
technology so far. These networks were not commercial, and the population using
them was very limited. The mainframe computers of the era, which filled large air-
conditioned rooms and were accessed through dumb terminals, were prohibi-
tively expensive and slow compared to even the first generation of desktop PCs.
The earliest networks allowed their users to share data files. An operating
system named UNIX, which allowed multiple users to share and work simulta-
neously on files located on a single computer, was invented in 1969. Email was
invented in 1971, and many-to-many conferencing through Usenet became a
reality in 1979. But these tools served only the relatively few professionals and
university-connected users who had access to mainframe computers at the
hubs of the various educational and government-sponsored networks that grew
out of the ARPANET model. The use of these networks—BITNET and EDUNET
were among the most active—served the purposes of scientists and academics
seeking to collaborate over a long distance.
Dr. Bush’s vision of a personal computer was finally realized in the late 1970s,
and with the introduction of the first Apple computers and IBM PCs, commer-
cial multiuser systems like CompuServe, the Source, Genie, and the WELL—all
of which relied on modems and telephone dialup connections—introduced
new populations of early adopters to the practice of what came to be called vir-
tual community.
The Birth of the Special 
Interest Group (SIG)
A plethora of bulletin board systems (BBSs), each with its own dialup num-
bers, served the wide range of hobbyists and special interest groups (SIGs)
operating from their homes. People paid good money for access to one
another’s knowledge, and by the late 1980s, the denizens of BBSs and those of
the commercial dialup communities discovered each other and began compar-
ing notes on their technologies and cultures.
Connecting people who shared the same interests was the central business
proposition of the pre-Web online world. During that time, computer networks
were rarely used to support central business processes and internal communi-
cations. With few exceptions, computer applications in business were limited
to calculating, accounting, and building customer databases, even after the per-
sonal computer became commonplace in the office. After all, the software pro-
gram that most stimulated sales of IBM’s first PC was not a communications
interface; it was the spreadsheet Lotus 1-2-3. 

34
Chapter 2
The Slow but Steady Adoption 
of Groupware
But almost a decade before the IBM PC, early computer programmers had rec-
ognized the possibilities for using their primitive networks to help them improve
the software they were writing for nonprogrammers. PLATO was created to share
knowledge,3 but in what we’d think of today as a customer-service application. 
Its features and foundation inspired the next generation of collaborative soft-
ware interfaces. Notes, in its PLATO and Lotus forms, was the idea framework
around which other software applications were designed to support teams
involved in projects, programming, and design. Peter and Trudy Johnson-Lenz
were two inventive researchers who had used and helped design special appli-
cations for such software, which they christened groupware.
Groupware was typically categorized along two dimensions:
1. Whether the members of the group worked together at the same time
(real-time or synchronous work)
2. Whether the members of the group worked together in the same place (col-
located or face-to-face) or in different places (noncollocated or distant)
The resulting 2 × 2 matrix described the kinds of software applications and col-
laboration that were appropriate to the various combinations of time and place.
PLATO TO NOTES: A LINEAGE OF DIGITAL KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE
True knowledge sharing software probably began with PLATO Notes, a creation of the
Computer-based Education Research Laboratory (CERL) in 1973. Originally created to help
users inform programmers of where they found bugs in software, it evolved for network
use into PLATO Group Notes in 1976. As Notes.Net describes, it allowed its users to:
1.
Create private notes files organized by subject 
2.
Create access lists 
3.
Read all notes and responses written since a certain date 
4.
Create anonymous notes 
5.
Create director message flags 
6.
Mark comments in a document 
7.
Link notes files with other Plato systems 
8.
Use multiplayer games 
Most of the team that developed PLATO Group Notes went on to design what became
Lotus Notes, first released in 1989 and still the most widely used internal corporate
messaging system. Now owned and marketed by IBM, Lotus Notes continues to evolve
with market needs. 

Using the Net to Share What People Know
35
To help design the software that would fit these various needs and situations,
a field of study called Computer-Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW) devel-
oped. The people working in this field represented many different aspects of
the work-place experience. According to the Usability First Web site: “The field
typically attracts those interested in software design and social and organiza-
tional behavior, including business people, computer scientists, organizational
psychologists, communications researchers, and anthropologists, among other
specialties.”4 The resulting design was more than a mechanistic set of tools to
meet the needs of cooperation and work; it was a carefully orchestrated suite
of capabilities and options that considered the importance of aspects like com-
petition, socialization, and play.
With the invention of the personal computer, the evolution of design toward
greater support of CSCW seemed to reverse itself, but within a short time, the
local area network (LAN) was invented to link mainframes, PCs, and computer
peripherals as shared resources. Groupware development moved to the local
Net. By the late 1980s, LANs could interconnect with the larger geographical
networks that were then merging to become what we know as the Internet. The
seemingly overnight emergence and adoption of the World Wide Web interface
made the Internet more useful, more user-friendly, and consequently, more
attractive to a generation raised using PCs.
The Web attracted a user base counted in the tens of millions, and many cor-
porations began to carefully integrate Web compatibility into their planning.
Lotus and IBM, the owners and developers of Notes—at one time the definitive
model of groupware—were conspicuously absent from the first wave of Web-
based collaborative software. Fully occupied as they were serving lucrative
standalone networks for their clients and enterprise-level customers, they
underestimated the degree to which the Web protocol would be adopted and
the influence it would have on internal system design. The Web had lifted off
without them, and its groupware vacuum had to be filled.
From its very beginning, the idea of groupware made perfect sense, but its
adoption by organizations had been slowed by bad experiences, typically
where design and implementation—the CSCW stage—had resulted in poor
matches between social and workplace realities. Workers didn’t use the tools,
or if they did initially, they were likely to abandon them. 
SAME TIME
DIFFERENT TIME
Same place
Voting, presentations
Shared computers
Different place
Chat, videophones
Email, conferencing, workflow

In retrospect, it’s not surprising that organizations still in the early stages of
companywide computer literacy found it difficult to be both laboratory guinea
pigs and end-user customers of experimental software. The Web altered the
game board of collaborative software design by providing designers with mil-
lions of eager guinea pigs and a gigantic test bed for online group interaction.
The Web Breakthrough
The Web’s explosive growth moved the question of Internet integration into the
corporate fast lane because new channels of contact had been opened with so
many of the right kinds of customers. And because millions of those potential
customers were interacting regularly with one another, interest in the adoption
of groupware was promoted from an esoteric curiosity to a mainstream busi-
ness consideration. Which is not to say that most companies then joined the
groupware revolution, but they at least gained a passing familiarity with chat,
message boards, and other manifestations of online group collaboration.
What is most important here is that the Web’s user-friendly technology and its
adoption by the masses drove its acceptance by business. The Web’s simple util-
ity generated a network effect, which the dictionary at Marketing Terms.com
describes as “the phenomenon whereby a service becomes more valuable as
more people use it, thereby encouraging ever-increasing numbers of adopters.” 5
If someone’s friend, business associate, or family was on the Web, that individ-
ual was more likely to get on the Web, too. This applied, likewise, to customers,
partners, and competitors.
Surely, if so many were jumping at the chance to buy the equipment and learn
the techniques required to connect to the Web, its methods deserved attention
within the company. But even in companies where the executives remained
ignorant of the Web’s growing influence, workers, who surfed the Web from
their home computers, launched guerilla marketing campaigns within their
companies. Years of effort had gone into spreading the groupware gospel, but it
took the Web, with its public demonstration of diverse and widespread group
interaction, to seize the attention of most organizational decision makers. 
Design for Attracting Users
The best of the Web-based collaboration tools were originally designed for use
by masses of individual consumers, not by the staffs of organizations. Web ven-
tures expected the industry’s primary source of revenue to come from advertis-
ing dollars. People hooked on online conversation—clicking daily to new pages
(and banner ads) with every new exchange of messages—offered the potential
of a user-powered perpetual money machine. The Globe was one of the Web’s
early examples of online communities centered around an easy build-it-yourself
homepage kit. It gained over 600 percent in share value on the day of its initial
36
Chapter 2

Using the Net to Share What People Know
37
public offering (IPO) because investors assumed that its sticky social content
and conversation would attract a captive, self-categorizing audience for high-
value advertisers.
People, relationships, prefab home pages: The rush of users signing up to
immerse themselves in the Web was described as doubling annually with no
end in sight. But in the Web’s stratospheric boom, overoptimistic marketers
failed to see that such rabid infatuation with the Web’s amusement park-like
novelty would eventually wear off. Investors didn’t realize that people would
tire of clicking on banner ads or that, in the midst of interesting online social
activity, they would simply ignore ads altogether. But that’s exactly what hap-
pened, and the dreams of ad-supported interactivity died along with many other
Web-based business models.
Today, The Globe is history, and the days of overblown expectations for com-
mercial online communities have passed, but the tools developed to support
group interaction on the Web are still widely used. Many chat room and mes-
sage board interfaces are being overhauled and upgraded by their developers to
serve a marketplace where organizations, rather than individual Web users, are
beginning to express demand for powerful, flexible, collaboration-supporting
online environments. 
The idea of groupware has merged with the battle-tested, practical design of
software meant to attract communities of special interest. But well-designed
and robust technology is only part of the knowledge networking formula. How
we behave as social creatures in electronic environments may be more impor-
tant than the technology, as some experimental communities discovered in the
pre-Web years.
Lessons of the Pioneers
A community is made up of people with common interests who communicate,
form relationships, and establish shared history. The community is a basic social
structure that we all recognize in our lives but often have a hard time describing.
Try to name the specific communities you are a part of. Try to describe their
boundaries and what defines them as communities. What does it take for some-
one to join your communities or to lose membership in them? Like us, you prob-
ably define them according to your feeling of membership. “If it feels like I’m
part of a community, then it must be a community.”
Communities have historically been defined by their geographical location
because people needed to be in the same place to communicate. This is no
longer the case. People can communicate very well using the Net, and since the
first email messages were passed over the early ARPANET, communities have
formed in its virtual space. Scientists working together on projects exchanged
messages regularly over long periods of time, extending their limited opportu-
nities to meet face to face through the use of electronic connections.

When the first publicly accessible electronic networks were launched in the
late 1970s, the founders and first customers were people who once had access
to the government-sponsored networks, usually as students or instructors on
university campuses. They’d had a taste of the Net’s utility and were willing to
pay hefty hourly fees to use similar technologies through private networks. As
the populations of these online gathering places grew, more people began to
practice the art of informal knowledge networking. Changes in societal pat-
terns, such as increased mobility and decreased involvement with local social
activities, were also making the advantages of online communication more
valuable as a means of staying in touch.
Computer-Mediated
Communications (CMC)
Howard Rheingold wrote The Virtual Community6 in 1993 and exposed his
readers not only to a new concept of social interaction but to the wide variety of
people, ideas, and types of interaction that had been mixing for years through,
around, and within the scattered experiments with computer-mediated commu-
nications. The stories in his book illustrate the overlap of friendship, intellectual
stimulation, and professional interaction that characterized the early research
and commercial networks. Rheingold states that people used CMC to “redis-
cover the power of cooperation,” describing how their interaction represented
“a merger of knowledge capital, social capital, and communion.”
Murray Turoff built what Rheingold calls the “great-great-grandmother of all
virtual communities” in 1976. Named Electronic Information Exchange System
(EIES), it was funded by the National Science Foundation as “an electronic
communication laboratory for use by geographically dispersed research com-
munities.” EIES served as a test bed for the use of online conferencing in prob-
lem-solving applications, and through people who spent time using the system,
EIES got the word out among many students of organizational development
about the useful potential of multiuser online conferencing.
On a separate track, Tom Truscott and James Ellis developed Usenet News in
1979 as a program to support ongoing stored-and-forwarded message-based
interaction among users of computers that ran the UNIX operating system.
Because it cost so much to connect to ARPANET, Usenet was created to be the
“poor man’s ARPANET.” Usenet newsgroups began circulating among college
campuses and other installations a year later, but distribution grew slowly. 
The newsgroups were originally meant to be a discussion platform for ques-
tions and answers about UNIX and its technical administration. There were
many UNIX enthusiasts and pioneers at AT&T Bell Labs, so the organization
helped Usenet however it could. AT&T benefited from participating in Usenet
newsgroups about improving the operation of internal email. Digital Equipment
Corporation (DEC) adopted Usenet and UNIX to help sell their UNIX-based
38
Chapter 2
TEAMFLY

Using the Net to Share What People Know
39
computer systems. Usenet became the central knowledge base for discussion
of the operating system that would eventually be the basis of the Internet and
the model for all other multiuser, multitasking operating systems.
No one owned Usenet, and no one was in charge of the system that expanded
faster and more widely than its creators had expected. It grew as much around
a culture as it did around a technology. The original intention had been to pro-
vide a forum for mutual self-help among people facing similar technical prob-
lems, but the subject matter of newsgroups diversified quickly as Usenet got
connected to ARPANET and, eventually, to the Internet. As Michael Hauben
writes in a chapter of Netizens: An Anthology:
The number of sites receiving Usenet continually increased, demonstrating its pop-
ularity. People were attracted to Usenet because of what it made possible. People
want to communicate and enjoy the thrill of finding others across the country (or
today across the world) who share a common interest or just to be in touch with.7
Its popularity forced its loyal users to develop a code of rules for posting mes-
sages to newsgroups, with an entire category or domain of newsgroups devoted
to orienting the newcomer to the virtual culture. The culture attempted to take
care of the commons by instilling itself in its new members. It accomplished this
through what Hauben calls the “contributed effort” of the people who donated
content and the site administrators who maintained the systems required to run,
maintain, and distribute news from their local Usenet installations. 
Through its first decade, Usenet was available only to those who, through
their school or workplace, had access to computers that could move news-
groups through modem connections or the ARPANET itself. But once habitu-
ated to Usenet, people who lost their access upon leaving a school or
workplace were quite willing to pay for a connection to the growing collection
of networked minds and ideas.
Paying to Participate
The first pay-for-access online discussion system was the Telecomputing Cor-
poration of America, which Reader’s Digest bought in 1980 and renamed “the
Source.” CompuServe was founded by H&R Block soon after. Joining either of
these systems required an initial membership fee and hourly fees that varied
with the time of day. An hour-a-day habit could easily cost hundreds of dollars
per month, but thousands of people joined, even when the fastest modems ran
at only .005 the speed of today’s 56-kilobit-per-second (Kbps) modems.
Communities on these text-based systems formed around professional inter-
ests, hobbies, humor, current events, general technology, and most significantly,
around the specific technologies of the systems that made the conversations pos-
sible. These self-tuning activities fascinated us at the WELL, and their practice is
one of the great underappreciated assets of online discussion communities.

Using a collaborative interface, a group can learn through experience how to
make its environment more conducive to achieving its needs and goals. Like
Usenet, the subscription-based online communities showed that where members
valued the online interaction they would, if allowed to, actively work to improve
the system’s design and operation.
A Knowledge-Swapping Community
People who describe themselves as “knowledge workers” are especially at
home in the environment of the Net. The authors were privileged to be associ-
ated with one of the prime examples of grass-roots knowledge networking: the
Whole Earth Lectronic Link, better known as the WELL.
The company was founded in 1985, and working as part of the WELL’s small
staff for 6 years convinced us that valued relationships could be developed and
maintained purely through online communication. WELL members, like those
of the Source and CompuServe, paid a significant amount to converse with a
diverse selection of learned people on a wide variety of subjects. 
There was always plenty of disagreement and some fairly spectacular feuds
to spice up life in the virtual village, but most people logged in to find friendship
and intellectual stimulation, not conflict. Many individuals separated by hun-
dreds or thousands of miles became loyal friends and even professional part-
ners exclusively through their online conversations and email. This took place
at a time before people could build graphical home pages to describe them-
selves and their interests in minute detail. Instead, they made themselves
known through their typed responses in online conversations.
Building Relationship Bandwidth
WELL members occasionally referred to the bandwidth of relationship, mean-
ing the amount of information that could be transmitted about each other’s per-
sonal qualities through the medium of slow PCs and slow modems. Having only
words on a screen to work with, and lacking pictures or sound to fill out one’s
description, we sought higher bandwidth through other means. One was the
sparing use of symbols to convey emotions—the so-called smileys that
employed punctuation marks to represent facial expressions. Another was the
development of a local style of writing that included jargon and shorthand for
adding personality and efficiency to messages. But the two most effective
means for getting to know people were parties and a far-ranging selection of
conversation topics.
Beginning in its second year, the WELL began holding monthly office parties
open to members and their friends. These Friday night gabfests served as an
excuse for in-person meetings with characters previously known only by their
40
Chapter 2

Using the Net to Share What People Know
41
written words. Face-to-face (F2F) encounters raised the reality level of rela-
tionships, providing vivid mental referents for future online interactions. 
Though many WELL members lived too far away from the San Francisco Bay
Area to attend the parties, it was important for the WELL’s overall community
stability that as many people as possible got to know each other F2F. The
WELLers who actually knew and trusted each other formed the core of the com-
munity, a social flywheel for interaction that could carry the soul of the com-
munity through difficult times.
The diversity of the WELL’s structured online social environment was an equally
important factor in establishing trust and familiarity between individual members.
Well-rounded relationships could be based on the varied interaction that members
shared around hobbies, family, personal life, entertainment, and world events. 
The structure of the WELL’s knowledge space was based on the conference:
a collection of conversation topics with a common focus. Like a newspaper, the
WELL had sections devoted to politics, sports, movies, and many of the area’s
local neighborhoods. It also had conferences for single people, married people,
parents, writers, journalists, and computer geeks. It had a jokes conference, a
future conference, and a sarcasm free-fire zone called Weird. The network of
conferences permitted WELLers to build multidimensional familiarity with
each other.
Joe might find Sue to be an obnoxious adversary in the politics conference
but a compassionate advocate in the parenting conference. They might give
each other helpful tips in the cooking conference and agree on the strengths of
the latest mouse design in the Macintosh conference. But Sue might find Joe’s
jokes in Weird to be very strange and troubling. They might never meet in per-
son, but they could at least know a lot about different aspects of each other’s
personality—enough to establish trust, if not to be the best of friends.
The Knowledge Pool
The WELL was founded on the groundbreaking publishing model of the Whole
Earth Catalog, which intentionally blurred the boundary between publisher/
writer and consumer/reader. The catalogs had, for over a decade, invited readers
to submit recommendations and reviews of products and articles about intrigu-
ing subjects. Such amateur authors were compensated modestly for their sub-
missions, but many proved to be competent experts in their fields.
The WELL took this model online in a conversational format where members
would submit the benefits of their experience and education to the curiosity of
others. The voluntary sharing of knowledge fed on itself over the years, per-
suading members that if they gave freely of what they knew, they would get
back at least equal value in kind. 
The rewards from fellow WELL members might come in the form of useful
facts, humor, moral support, advice, or opinion. They might come from some-

one for whom they’d provided help or from someone with whom they’d never
interacted at all. Rather than just being a space for person-to-person knowledge
barter, the WELL became a knowledge pool to which everyone gave and from
which everyone could draw. It was both a knowledge marketplace and knowl-
edge collective.
One of the community’s earliest topics was called “Experts on the WELL.”
Today, more than 16 years after it was first started, the Experts topic is still active
in its umpteenth incarnation. In Experts, a member posts a question and another
member posts an answer. There’s always a response and most of the time a defin-
itive answer, though it often comes from a combination of people and pointers. 
In Figure 2.1, a simple plumbing question elicits a straightforward suggestion
and then a pointer to a source for what could be the comprehensive remedy.
Experts is an informal and general resource. During the same period when this
question about plumbing was posed, other questions addressed the molecular
42
Chapter 2
Figure 2.1
Screen shot from the Experts on the WELL, where groupthink provides the answers.
Courtesy Salon.com

Using the Net to Share What People Know
43
properties of different types of alcohol, a problem with Microsoft software that
turned out to be a virus, the schedule of monarch butterfly migration to Big Sur,
tenants rights laws in Marin County, and how to relight the pilot light in an oven.
All were answered thoroughly and cooperatively. The catch on the WELL is that
each question is likely to trigger an entire conversation, which by its volume
makes the answers difficult to find later using the WELL’s rudimentary data
retrieval tools.
Familiarity and Trust
To reach such fluency in exchanging valuable and often hard-won knowledge, a
large majority of WELL members had to trust each other. Most never got the
chance to meet in person, and it took some time for interactions across a variety
of conferences to build the level of familiarity that would allow members to
“know” each other. Two years into its existence, Howard Rheingold and another
community leader founded a conference named “True Confessions.” Its purpose
was to be a space for people to describe themselves through autobiographical
stories. As it turned out, True accelerated the coalescence of WELL culture. 
In Chapter 6, we’ll include more about the effectiveness of stories in opening
people up to each other and to new ways of thinking and generating knowledge.
But suffice it to say that after people had posted true tales about their upbring-
ing, about their adventures growing up, about their parents and siblings, or
about how they found their life’s work, membership in the WELL began to
evoke feelings of living in a real-life village. When the Loma Prieta earthquake
struck the Bay Area in 1989, the postquake support and caring reached an
almost familial level.
It must be pointed out that the WELL’s purpose was not to get work done. It
was a small business that best described its mission as “selling its subscribers
access to each other.” It was in the relationship business more than the techni-
cal business, and to make the business work, the staff had to foster and maintain
an overall atmosphere of trust. There was no common allegiance to a company
to hold our members together, and many refused to trust certain other members
even after True Confessions, the earthquake, several deaths in the family, and
the passage of many years. But for the majority of people and the majority of
relationships, the WELL’s discussion space felt safe, open, and supportive. 
Rules, Customs, and Culture
Governance in the WELL’s community was based on some simple guidelines.
The first ground rule was “you own your own words,” which meant that as a
business the WELL would not be responsible for anything that any member
posted on its site. Another founding principle was the distribution of power to
responsible members who volunteered (or were appointed) to be conference

hosts. Hosts presided over the hundreds of interest-based discussion locales of
the WELL and qualified for their privileges through a combination of expertise
in the subject, reliable presence and participation in their conference, and—we
would always hope at the outset—responsible behavior as good representa-
tives of WELL culture. 
Hostship, with its power and responsibility, was awarded to almost as many
people as volunteered to accept it. Hosts were empowered through the soft-
ware to control and edit the content of their discussion areas, even to delete
messages and entire conversations posted by their participants. Their powers
to do harm through overcontrol were regulated by the cultural perception that
censorship was a last-resort evil. Good hosts were assets to the business
because they helped keep paying members interested and active, improving the
quality of the WELL’s content. 
Hosts were rewarded for their help with free access to the system—a custom
that was, for many years, the standard way that all online businesses managed
their communities. This arrangement worked as long as online communities
charged hourly membership fees, but when the business model changed to
monthly flat fees in the mid-nineties, the rewards of free access became much
more limited and AOL’s volunteers challenged the legal fairness of being com-
pensated with a mere $30 per month for many hours of valuable work. Good
online discussion hosts deserve fair compensation, and within organizations
good online hosts and facilitators are worth training and hiring for the differ-
ence they can make in knowledge-sharing discussion communities.
The WELL’s one rule concerning bad behavior was conceived in response to
actual experience. It outlawed intentional harassment and threatened any mem-
ber who persisted in bothering another member with expulsion from the com-
munity by denying them further login privileges. As much as possible, WELL
management encouraged self-governance and a sense of shared ownership and
pride in the system, a strategy that seems to have worked more than it didn’t. 
The WELL is still active, with many of its early members still participating,
even after 17 years. It has not grown steadily like AOL, which was founded
around the same time, but the WELL was not built on the same business model,
with the same motivations. It is a stable and persistent community, while there
are very few such social entities living on AOL. The WELL’s longevity has
demonstrated the value of history in an online culture that, while not created to
serve the knowledge needs of an organization, has enriched its members (and
overall Net culture) in many ways. 
Inside-Out Design
One of the WELL’s founders contributed its first central computer, six modems,
a hard disk loaded with the UNIX operating system, and a software program
called Picospan to support its online discussion. Picospan was a conferencing
44
Chapter 2

Using the Net to Share What People Know
45
system, which put it in the category of asynchronous message boards. Mem-
bers read the messages left on the system in its various boards or conferences
and, when motivated to do so, wrote responding messages for others to read.
Asychronicity means that WELL members didn’t have to be online at the same
time to converse. A response to a message might come in the next minute or the
next month. A conversation might be displayed on the WELL for years. In fact,
some historical conversations from 1986 can still be read today in the WELL’s
Archive conference.
Because members were permitted access to the operating system—the soft-
ware layer that supported Picospan—the WELL was considered an open instal-
lation, where members with programming skills could build features and
utilities for their own use or for the benefit of the community as a whole. Thus,
the more the system was used, the more its users were able to improve upon its
original features and operations. 
One member wrote and donated the first user’s manual. Another built the
equivalent of today’s instant messaging tools, allowing members who were
logged in at the same time to communicate in real time, lending a greater sense
of presence to their conversation. Another built a tool that allowed members to
blank out or ignore the messages posted by other members who irritated them
in some way. Called a bozo filter, its availability improved the perceived quality
of online life while having a deterrent effect on behaviors intended to be abra-
sive. Thus, the environment of the WELL could be customized to fit the needs
of its users, making it more useful, more appealing, and more consistent with
the ways they managed relationships in the F2F world. 
The WELL’s example of user-driven software improvement is significant from
a cost-management point of view. Any organization making decisions about
software to support a knowledge network should consider that a flexible and
easily customizable interface is better able to meet the evolving needs of the
communities that use it. Buying a platform with rigid features—custom config-
ured in advance of its actual use by “experts”—can freeze the community into
processes that it finds neither natural nor comfortable. In Chapter 5, “Fostering
a Knowledge-Sharing Culture,” we’ll describe some of the platforms that offer
the design flexibility required by new conversational knowledge communities.
Organizational Knowledge Networking
These early prototypes of knowledge-generating networks, pioneered by
research communities and commercial providers, were like petri dishes,
demonstrating the possibilities of using technical conversation interfaces for a
variety of purposes and populations. Though some aimed to make large profits,
many were satisfied with just breaking even or getting funded. All sought to
stimulate activity and involvement.

The managers of these systems were focused on learning how to make their
untried models work. They regarded their systems as full-time focus groups,
testing the process of group problem solving in virtual environments. They lis-
tened for direction in refining their online interfaces to fit the specific needs of
their communities. They involved themselves in conversations about gover-
nance and manners. They openly asked for advice and appreciated getting it.
The relationship between management and customer was symbiotic, and this
solid trust was needed going both ways.
The interaction on these systems resulted in many positive and surprising out-
comes. One of the most fruitful by-products was the cross-pollination effect of
different internal cultures brought together electronically. Groups whose physi-
cal paths might have never intersected were able to interface and integrate in a
new knowledge nexus. In the most classic example, when technical people and
nontechnical people communicated across the early networks, the alchemical
combination provided a steady driving force for better product design. 
The WELL was a tossed salad of professional writers, techno-geeks, counter-
culture veterans, journalists, Gen-Xers, futurists, scientists, musicians, artists,
and fans of the Grateful Dead. These different communities met through the
years under a variety of contexts: as cohorts, fellow parents, witnesses to dis-
aster, seekers of discourse, observers of the world, business associates, con-
cerned citizens, and attention seekers. Our conversations, at their best, were
far ranging, witty, and passionate. At their worst, they were infuriating, depress-
ing and passionate. All of this social and intellectual involvement made the
community an always-open marketplace for hard-earned knowledge, hearsay,
and opinion. 
The Learning Organization
Pioneering systems like the WELL learned that certain hassles came with the
human territory. Misunderstandings happened. Arguments and hurt feelings
happened. So did feuds and fits, social sabotage, accusations, and the occa-
sional rebellion or mutiny. People could be relied on to flip out from time to
time as individuals or as groups. In many ways, both good and bad, social real-
ity was plainly the same online as it was in the so-called real world. But some
social games proved easier to play in virtual space than sitting across the table
where one’s nose might get punched. 
Through using the tools of online group interaction, the community manager
was able to learn in actual practice how to do a better job and produce a better
product. But even that had to be learned. The immediate feedback that net-
worked communities generated was a revelation to organizations that had not
yet begun to use the technologies. The idea of the learning organization did
not arise directly out of online discourse, but it was yet another response of the
pressures of the Information Age. 
46
Chapter 2

Using the Net to Share What People Know
47
Royal Dutch Shell, the global oil company, was among the first businesses to
change emphasis from long-range planning to “the microcosm (the ‘mental
model’) of our decision makers.”8 Peter Senge soon became the lead proponent
of the idea of the learning organization, describing it as one “in which you can-
not not learn because learning is so insinuated into the fabric of life.” The peo-
ple who comprise a learning organization are, he wrote, “continually enhancing
their capacity to create what they want to create.”
For the most part, the early online knowledge networks were informal
exchanges among users with shared focus, compatible backgrounds, and enthusi-
asm for using the technology available to them. Their activities needed no official
approval by the boss or company. People took part either on their own time or in
pursuit of solutions for problems that they’d encountered in their workplace. 
The idea of bringing such collaborative learning interaction into the organi-
zation was being tried only by a few companies. The concept of the learning
organization was not originally framed around any technology at all. If the value
of the company centered on learning, then whatever practice or technology
could advance that value was likely to be pursued. Computer networks, as it
turned out, fit many of the needs of the learning organization.
Communities of Practice
Few of the early virtual communities were assigned to do the organization’s
work. Some did generate knowledge that was used internally by the companies
that sponsored them. But people didn’t participate with the boss looking over
their shoulders to see if they were affecting the bottom line. Informality was an
advantage because their members felt free to say what they thought and to float
new ideas even if they were off the wall. Informality took their collaboration
out of the box.
One thing these experiments showed was that the most productive commu-
nities, from a business or organizational point of view, are those made up of
people who communicate about what they do: their practice. Communities
formed around common skills and knowledge are perhaps the most natural of
associations and group identity beyond the family. One leading expert in apply-
ing the idea of communities of practice (CoPs) is Etienne Wenger, who got his
Ph.D. in artificial intelligence and now works full time developing intelligence
within groups of people with similar experience. 
Wenger’s definition of CoPs encompasses, “your local magician club, nurses
in a ward, a street gang or a group of software engineers meeting regularly in
the cafeteria to share tips.”9 Like workers in Japan and Korea, he equates know-
ing with doing. “Knowledge,” he writes, “is an act of participation.” Many of the
earliest uses of computer networks were by communities of practice—the pro-
grammers who were building on the very networks they used as their primary
meeting places. Now Wenger applies his principles to the situations of multina-

tional corporations. We’ll draw from his work in our discussion of the relation-
ship between culture and technology in Chapter 7, “Choosing and Using Tech-
nology,” and in some of our guides to knowledge network implementation in
Chapter 8, “Initiating and Supporting Internal Conversation,” and Chapter 9,
“Conversing with External Stakeholders.”
Not all virtual communities within the organization are CoPs, nor should they
all be. Homogeneous communities of practice are valuable for their members,
but cross-pollinated communities formed around diverse practices can create
different types and hybrids of knowledge for the organization that can break
new ground and discover novel solutions.
Tech Companies Take the Lead
After the programmers, academics, and researchers pioneered the virtual meet-
ing space, the next community of practice to blossom was that of customers—
notably customers of some of the first personal computer products. This was a
population of early adopters who found nothing more fascinating than the
potential uses of these new tools and their operating languages. As soon as it
became possible, they jumped on whatever manifestations of networked com-
munication they could reach, from dialup BBSs to Usenet News. A new kind of
relationship was being formed between companies and the people who used
their products, and it wasn’t the companies that initiated the relationship.
User Groups
Apple computer was one of the earliest examples of a company whose cus-
tomers used its products to communicate with each other and with the actual
product designers and developers. According to the lore found on the Apple-
fritter site,10 Joe Torzewski started an Apple I users’ group in 1977. Communi-
cation among fellow users and with Apple Computer initially took place
through letters sent through the mail. Once the Apple II was released, the still-
small company stopped supporting the Apple I and Joe, the customer, became
Apple’s main contact for supporting its first machine and its software. 
The development of the Macintosh, in combination with the availability of
modems and earlier Apple computers, spurred the growth of online user
groups. The Stanford University Library’s Macintosh history site11 reports that
user groups distributed software for the early Mac when commercial software
companies were still in their formative stages. The groups circulated news and
shared advice before Apple was ready to perform those duties. Enterprises for
supporting the Mac grew out of the interaction and incubation of the user
groups. The groups’ newsletters also served as records of members’ “dealings
with the Macintosh,” exposing bugs, tips, tricks, and shortcuts and reinforcing
the cult status of the revolutionary new computer.
48
Chapter 2
TEAMFLY

Using the Net to Share What People Know
49
User groups also sprang up for other early computers and operating systems
such as the Radio Shack TRS-80, the CP/M operating system, and the Atari. The
users themselves began developing software products that could be used with
these systems and made them available as “freeware” or at minimal prices as
“shareware.” Indeed, the customers were driving the knowledge marketplace
around the PC revolution just as hard as the companies that were producing
the hardware. 
But it took a while, even after modems became commonplace, before the
companies themselves joined the conversations directly. Of course, you were
liable to encounter key developers of products (from Apple, at least) on the
user group BBSs, but it wasn’t until the common connectivity and common
interface of the Web that the support function of the user communities had its
counterpart within the company.
Product Codevelopment
In late 1999, one of the authors of this book began a consulting engagement
with Cisco Systems, helping them prepare to open a Web-based conversation
with the networking professionals (NPs) who installed, configured, and main-
tained Cisco’s equipment on customer sites. Cisco realized that there was
plenty of room for improvement in its ability to support these thousands of
technicians in the field, even though it already had one of the most advanced
and sophisticated customer support operations anywhere. Cisco presented
itself to the world as the leader of the migration to the Net. Its marketing slogan
was, “Are you ready?” So it figured it needed to make itself readier by learning
and applying the practice of virtual community.
The original vision inside the company was to provide a space where NPs
could meet, share war stories, and suggest solutions for problems not covered
in Cisco’s extensive online documentation. Often, the problems encountered in
the field were unknown to the customer service representatives who answered
email and phone queries. The people using the equipment in unique situations
were the sole owners of knowledge about how to resolve those situations. The
NP community site would establish a space where those people could meet as
a last resort and find the elusive answers to their questions under Cisco’s URL. 
The NP community was not meant to be a place to ask Cisco support ques-
tions. But Cisco’s customer support staff, on hearing the idea, recognized it as a
potential learning resource for them. They could learn from conversations
between Cisco equipment users how to improve the company’s documentation
and support. The team working to develop the community interface and
processes began to see how the conversations among expert users of the prod-
ucts could serve as a valuable pipeline into the minds of the customers for all of
the company’s product developers and marketers.

The community launched in the summer of 2000 and within a year had grown
to such a level of activity that other divisions within Cisco asked to adapt the
community software, management training, and design template for their own
communities of practice and use. The evolution from a helpful service and a
branding enhancement to an integral part of the service design process had
taken root even as the company endured a brutal pounding in the marketplace. 
Other technical companies such as Sun Microsystems, Hewlett-Packard, and
Adobe had provided and supported online discussion communities with their
customers for years. They still do so, not only as add-on services to their core
products but also as a means of learning from some of the smartest and most rel-
evant people they know: the customers who use and depend on their products.
Building the Extranet Bridge
These communications and information resources—reaching through the com-
pany firewall, extending from the internal networks that had been there for
many years—were the first extranets made practical for many companies by
the Web protocol. Here, too, technical companies took the lead, putting to use
the very products they were developing. 
For a company like Cisco, every useful application of networking justifies the
purchase of their switches and routers. For Sun, every envelope-pushing idea
for connecting the company with its customers is another clear example of why
a network based on Sun servers and software would be worth buying. With
technical products, the reasoning was clear. It was not so clear, though, to com-
panies whose customers were behind the technical curve, without the connec-
tivity or skills to participate online with their suppliers. The standardization of
the Web interface has changed all that.
Extranets now connect organizations with the various communities defined by
the buyer/seller relationship, information technology managers from companies
seeking to make their systems compatible, and customers and their customer
support teams. Extranets are used not only to coordinate data flow for transact-
ing business, but they also provide meeting spaces for the kinds of knowledge
that should be shared between the different links in the business chain. The impli-
cations of extranet-supported knowledge communities will be considered further
in our chapters on culture (Chapter 6, “Taking Culture Online,” and Chapter 7,
“Choosing and Using Technology”) and on external knowledge networking solu-
tions (Chapter 9, “Conversing with External Stakeholders”).
Portals Simplify Navigation
In 1995, the term portal was first used to describe a Web site. One didn’t refer to
them as Web companies because they had yet to prove themselves as viable busi-
nesses. But at about the same time, Yahoo, Excite, and Lycos began developing
50
Chapter 2

Using the Net to Share What People Know
51
the idea of a single arrival page from which a user could find almost anything else
on the Web. The site wasn’t meant to be a final destination; it was designed to be
a pass-through—a portal. For almost 3 years, these three leaders in the Web por-
tal derby set the pace for stock valuation. 
They had earned the status of Web companies for sure, but once the adver-
tising model fell out of favor, their values deflated precipitously. But not before
enterprises saw, in the portal model, an answer to their problems with trying to
make complex information stashes more useful to their employees. The solu-
tion was a single starting point, with links to all the important people, forms,
and information—a gathering place for the essentials that even a technophobe
could deal with. 
Emulating the Web
By the mid-nineties, intranets had connected the desktops within most large
organizations, but in a slapdash manner. As new generations of software were
introduced and new applications were added to the organization’s internal sys-
tems, they were installed or upgraded and made available to the workers who
needed them. But each new addition required new training for the workers and
integration by IT. It seemed that the more powerful the company made its infor-
mation systems, the more useless they became to the people who needed the
information they contained. Email was available, but it was completely sepa-
rate from the information systems. Online tools for continuous group interac-
tion were rare or weakly supported, and few companies had the means for
groups to view information together and discuss it through the intranet.
The Web protocol and the portal model offered new options to eliminate the
chaos that intranet users had been experiencing. The challenge for IT, as the
nineties came to a close, was to migrate intranet tools to the Web protocol. As
we’ll explore in Chapter 4, “The Role of IT in the Effective Knowledge Net-
work,” IT knew that life for them and for the organizations they supported
would be easier if a common platform lay under all of the disparate internal
applications and under the applications shared through the extranet as well.
Once this conversion had taken place, the experience on the worker’s desktop
could be made more attractive and easier to use.
The New Intranet
The modern intranet is now almost seamless with the Web. Of course, there are
firewalls between it and the Web’s wide open spaces, restricting who can get in
and what can get out, but the user experience is consistent across the bound-
ary. Hyperlinks open other pages or launch programs. Files can be exchanged
and downloaded. Email can contain HTML. And conversation spaces can be
imbedded within or proximate to the information that is relevant to them. 

By bringing the Web into the organization, the possibilities for what can be
accomplished through the intranet expand tremendously. Once this stage has
been reached by IT, more than half the battle of knowledge networking has been
won because the knowledge-as-object and knowledge-as-process approaches can
be integrated. Content can be produced and moved around. Conversation can
refer directly to content. Conversation can also be converted into content. Infor-
mation can be put into context via discussion. People can be found by their skills
and the knowledge they bring to the table. Communities of practice can meet and
invite people with complementary skills to cross-pollinate their knowledge pools. 
Maybe the most significant improvement is that power and responsibility can
be easily distributed to the different realms of the intranet. Web-based inter-
faces allow department-level content production and interaction. New proto-
cols like XML allow Web pages to exchange data with non-Web applications.
And the flexibility of group conversation tools allows many configurations for
meetings and support for working relationships within and between depart-
ments in the company. The intranet is no longer a bothersome system to use but
has the potential of being a vital network for the entire organization.
The new intranet is presented as the primary foundation for building the
knowledge network through the remainder of this book. But it’s not the only
format for generating and exchanging knowledge over today’s Internet. Other
software solutions and social configurations are becoming more important as
organizations spread out geographically and simultaneously tighten the purse
strings of their travel budgets.
Online Events
Companies have more experience in producing face-to-face events than virtual
ones. Gatherings called “knowledge fairs” have become one increasingly popu-
lar way of bringing the various departments, divisions, and teams of the com-
pany together in a physical space to catch up on who’s doing what, which
practices are working, and which discoveries are worth sharing in the mutual
interest of the organization’s success. 
The time-and-place limitations of meeting face to face compared to meeting
online are clear, as are the relationship bandwidth advantages of meeting in
person. A consistent theme of this book is the trade-off of advantages between
physical copresence and virtual communications. It’s always important to com-
bine and balance these two approaches in optimum proportion to fit organiza-
tional needs and budgets and to optimize knowledge-sharing relationships. 
Events differ from ongoing conversations in that they are defined by begin-
nings and endings. Some events last only an hour; others go on for days or
weeks. They take place through the Web, intranets, extranets, or special inter-
faces that run over the Internet. Some require high bandwidth connections,
whereas others work over relatively slow modems. Events, like F2F confer-
52
Chapter 2

Using the Net to Share What People Know
53
ences and meetings, have purpose and a focus. The handy thing about conduct-
ing these get-togethers online, aside from saving the time and cost of travel, is
that they can be preserved, visited, and searched later through the wonders of
digital storage technology.
Virtual knowledge networks make good use of the event format as a comple-
ment to the day-to-day exchanges that go on in message boards, email, and
other more open-ended communications formats. Events provide opportunities
for introducing new products, colleagues, and strategies. They attract attention
and generate interest and enthusiasm around new knowledge networking com-
munities. We’ll describe the techniques for producing successful events in sev-
eral formats in Chapter 8, “Initiating and Supporting Internal Conversation,”
and Chapter 9, “Conversing with External Stakeholders.”
Virtual Meeting Interfaces
The current prospect of a slow economy combined with terror in the air has
forced companies to reduce their travel budgets for attending meetings and con-
ferences. Even staff located in different buildings on the corporate campus find it
time-consuming to get together in person. More companies than ever are trying
real-time video conferencing and groupware as the means for holding meetings. 
Companies, such as Webex and Placeware, “rent out” online meeting rooms
to organizations by the event, by the week, or by the year (see Figure 2.2). They
offer to provide online “facilitators” to manage the meetings, which can include
slide presentations to the group and comments exchanged through text or
simultaneous telephone conferencing. 
Participants must be present to participate in such meetings, though they are
usually recorded and can be played back when convenient for those who miss
them or need to review them. Because some of these presentations include
video feeds of the attendees, they provide the social bandwidth that many peo-
ple appreciate (and some people dread.)
Like F2F meetings, these require coordinating schedules and, as companies
become more international in scope, careful planning to include people across
many time zones and local cultures. They answer the need for group communi-
cations that are direct and immediate in spite of the distance between partici-
pants. But in their limited timeframe, they do not encourage or support the
kinds of thoughtful responses that can be composed in email or in asynchro-
nous discussion boards, which are kinder to those with more problematic
scheduling needs. 
Celebrity Access
AOL has hosted online “celebrity events” since the early 1990s to build traffic
and attract new members. Where else could one have a chance to ask Michael

Jackson a question without leaving one’s bedroom? Where else could 377,000
people simultaneously attend a live chat about the release of President Clin-
ton’s scandal-related tapes?
As soon as the first commercial chat interfaces were designed for popular
use on the Web, they were modified to include features—variously called audi-
toriums or forums—that allowed more than the usual number of chat atten-
dees, while shielding designated special guests from direct contact by audience
members. Questions and comments were sent through a moderator to be fil-
tered and then relayed to the guest, who then responded directly back to the
audience. Members of the audience could chat with others in their same virtual
row but not with people in other rows. The celebrity event worked very well as
a marketing technique, so naturally, companies that were not networking enter-
tainment giants like AOL also began to try it in different formats but with the
same intentions of attracting an audience.
54
Chapter 2
Figure 2.2
Webex allows a group of remote attendees to see and comment on the latest
case study.
Courtesy of Webex, Inc.

Using the Net to Share What People Know
55
The Corporate Showcase
The ability to hold virtual meetings—where audiences could be addressed by
and interact with special guests—fit into the marketing needs of wired corpo-
rations once enough of their customers, partners, and investors were found to
have access to the Internet. This became even more important and valuable
when SEC regulations began to require public companies to share information
equitably for all of their investors. The corporate “conference call” could now
include audiences numbered in the thousands.
Product rollouts, demonstrations, training sessions, and press conferences
can all take place now completely online, attracting people who never would
have gone out of their way to attend a live promotion event in a hotel ballroom
in their hometown, much less in another city on the other side of the continent.
The knowledge networking aspects lay in the ability to reach a wider audience
with current information and to gather feedback immediately or within a lim-
ited timespan. 
The quality of response when the audience is able to carry on a give-and-take
dialogue with an authority is much higher than what can be gleaned from polls and
surveys. But showcase events tend to be asymmetric in the amount of information
going out to the audience compared to the amount coming in. For real learning
over a limited timespan, more conversational formats can provide better results.
Virtual Seminars and Conferences
The online conference is another type of knowledge-sharing event. It employs
asynchronous tools—which, for clarity sake, we refer to generically as message
boards—and lasts longer than the real-time meetings just described: from a full
day to a month or more. These formats are used widely in the e-learning sphere,
where students tend to have full-time jobs and can only participate when their
busy schedules allow. Interaction takes place over time, and students are often
required to post messages and responses as evidence of their engagement in
the learning process. Where the context is not formal education but organiza-
tional learning and knowledge exchange, the format is similar, but one’s partic-
ipation is “graded” in other ways.
Lisa Kimball is a veteran in producing group events. Her company, Group
Jazz, combines the use of online tools and F2F interaction with the practical
skills of facilitation and virtual teamwork. Group Jazz produced Mathweb 2000,
a professional conference with sponsors such as PBS and the National Council
of Teachers of Mathematics. It also produced Online Social Networking 2001
(see Figure 2.3), which Kimball describes as “an online conference to help com-
panies understand why and how to organize, lead, manage, value, and sustain
internal online social networks for teams, communities of practice, learning
cohorts, and other mission-oriented groups.”

Such formats—where experts attend online and “speak” on their specialties
and where the ensuing discussions blur the lines between experts and people
seeking to learn new skills—are applicable to communities of practice, internal
training programs, and marketing-focused conferences. We’ll elaborate on the
techniques for producing virtual seminars in Chapter 8, “Initiating and Supporting
Internal Conversation,” and Chapter 9, “Conversing with External Stakeholders.”
IBM Learns from Its Work Force
In May 2001, IBM held an online brainstorming extravaganza that it called
WorldJam. Over the 3 days of the event, 52,000 of its 320,000 employees logged
in and contributed over 6,000 ideas and opinions about the operations,
processes, products, and organization of their employer. The end result of this
56
Chapter 2
Figure 2.3
Description of a weeklong virtual event on the subject of online social networking.
Courtesy of Group Jazz

Using the Net to Share What People Know
57
invitation for workplace input was an archive of comments that continued to be
visited heavily by employees in the days immediately after the event. It was, at
least, an occasion for global IBM visibility, but the internal analysis of the
shared knowledge and its application went on for months, reportedly yielding
enough useful information to justify its costs. 
Though it was certainly a large event in terms of intentional participation, its
perception as a success was tempered (for us at least) by the seemingly low
worker response, which in itself could be a valuable indicator of employee sen-
timent. IBM’s figures report that, given the advance invitation and opportunity
over 3 days, only one of six IBM employees bothered to log on. Those relative
few contributed only 6,000 proposals and comments. 
Does this mean that IBM is an organization whose workers feel no incentive
to take advantage of a risk-free opportunity to sound off or communicate with
fellow employees about improving the company? Or does it simply demon-
strate that over 80 percent of the employees think everything is as fine as it can
be? It’s hard to say, but it’s clear that a culture for using online communications
has not yet permeated IBM.
For comparison, we can look at a system that one of the authors managed for
over a year. The estimated 20,000 active members of the Table Talk online dis-
cussion community on Salon.com posted over 6,000 new messages almost every
weekday in 1999. These people had little, if any, stake in the success of Salon.com
as compared to the workers who most definitely had a stake in suggesting
improvements to IBM. Yet, WorldJam stood out at the time as the most visible and
spectacular demonstration to that date of the use of the Net as a channel for gath-
ering internal input to a large organization. Maybe many of IBM’s employees felt
it safer to refrain from posting their 2-cents worth, whereas Table Talk’s members
stood no risk of being fired or demoted no matter what they posted.
The greatest immeasurable benefit to IBM of WorldJam may have been a
boost in employee perception of the company. As distinguished from the usual
secrecy (or disdain) with which feedback from the workplace is treated by
management, the open nature of WorldJam’s forum may have demonstrated
something significant to IBM’s employees: that the company was willing to let
the world know that it welcomed widespread input and that it trusted the
medium of the Net as the channel for that input. Whether the company keeps
the communications channels open for continuing conversation and whether
the employees make greater use of those channels will determine, in our eyes,
the real and lasting impact and success of the event.
Generating External Knowledge
Much key knowledge is also held outside the organization in the minds and
opinions of customers and constituents. It’s still a sad fact that most Web sites
provide a contact us link to which no real person is assigned responsibility to

respond as the us. But customers on the Web—now accustomed to the immedi-
acy of online communication through email, chat, instant messaging, and online
discussion—are more eager than corporations are aware to offer their feedback
and suggestions as long as they believe it will have some effect on the company
to which it’s directed. Some businesses have begun to seek this input directly
from customers on the Web, with or without the customers’ prior knowledge.
Touring Customer Hangouts
IBM let the world know of its active listening through dedicated chat rooms,
message boards, and surveys. Other companies do their listening more surrep-
titiously—not in dedicated message systems and communities but in public dis-
cussion spaces across the Web, where people who are likely to fit their target
demographics tend to log on regularly and converse. Some companies train and
assign internal employees to this task, and others provide the service under
contract and send in regular reports of customer feedback and commentary to
their clients. 
A USA Today story12 told of a man, calling himself “the Starwood Lurker,”
who would troll the Internet, dipping into frequent-traveler electronic bulletin
boards to check the postings about his employer, Starwood Hotels & Resorts.
The lurker scanned for comments about big hotel chains operating under Star-
wood’s corporate umbrella, which included Westin, Sheraton, St. Regis, and W,
and when he found such comments, he’d respond to them, usually through
email. The reaction from frequent travelers (according to the company) was
almost always positive as travelers appreciated the concern and the customer
service outreach.
Most companies consider this kind of activity—whether they have an
employee do it or hire a specialty service to scan the Web for comments about
them—to be more in the realm of customer relationship management (CRM)
than knowledge gathering. But this is where the lines blur between the two
intentions. Learning about customer attitudes builds knowledge that can lead
to happier customers and better customer relationships. But the company
doesn’t have to go lurking around the Web or send a Web clipping service out on
its behalf. It can instead create a dedicated space for customers to gather and
interact, not as a focus group, but more like a customers’ think tank.
Providing Customer Hangouts
Hallmark greeting cards decided that it needed to know more about how its typ-
ical customers lived to understand the kinds of products they needed and were
willing to buy. Instead of asking customers directly about their preferences,
they invited a group of their female customers to join “Idea Exchange,” an
58
Chapter 2
TEAMFLY

Using the Net to Share What People Know
59
online discussion community where they would be encouraged to get to know
each other and interact informally over time. 
There was no schedule or set of topics to follow—just a group of women
talking online about their lives, their concerns, their joys, and their challenges.
Hallmark unobtrusively, and with the participants’ full knowledge, listened in
and learned. As Business Week reported: “Many say they love tuning into their
own soap opera every day. They sign on when they have a moment, chat among
themselves, post pictures of home decorations at Hallmark’s prompting, and
answer the company’s questions about products and ideas.”15
From the interaction, Hallmark discovered new opportunities for products
that stood a good chance of selling because they met consensus needs of these
200 women. It was relatively cheap to pull off, and it achieved a depth of mean-
ing that gave the input far more impact than that of a focus group or survey. 
Competitive pressures to provide better customer service and develop
improved customer products are forcing companies to use the Web as a
research tool for learning more about how their customers think, behave, and
make their buying decisions. It’s the kind of knowledge that can translate
directly into business success.
Summary
The Information Age brought new technologies and new needs to organiza-
tions. The technologies gave birth to new methods for bringing groups together
around common interests. People communicating through electronic networks
were able to collaborate on improving these networks and thus work more
effectively as communities in the new meeting space of the Net. Early pioneer-
ing systems established precedents and spread practical ideas for dealing with
social realities in environments where people were not physically together.
Now these ideas and practices are being integrated into the wired organization.
The vanguard in putting networks to social use was made up of early
adopters who were most ready to deal with the new technology. Similarly, the
leading groups in populating organizational networks are likely to be people
most familiar with communicating online and most motivated to go through the
adjustment and improvement period that comes with every new online applica-
tion. Groups that work together for mutual benefit, like the user groups in the
early days of personal computers, will push knowledge networks ahead.
There are now many options for creating and designing online group interac-
tion, and they all have different strengths. The organization today can talk to itself
through its workers; it can talk with its customers and with collaborating partner
organizations all through the uniformity of the Web protocol. There are software
solutions for use in intranets and extranets to share information and knowledge

in many formats, and the pioneers of the past years have been making use of the
ubiquitous Web interface to learn more about their customers and workers.
There are many solutions and promising new techniques, but there are still
many questions to be answered and predictable problems to be dealt with in
every attempt to form conversational communities for generating knowledge.
The next chapter describes these challenges and the solutions and attitudes
that can be applied to counter them.
60
Chapter 2

61
Three factors position today’s organization for building a strong and vibrant
knowledge network. First is our historical human predisposition to share
knowledge where it serves mutual interests. Second is the widespread
acknowledgment that access to the most current knowledge is now a require-
ment for success. And third is the diverse and sophisticated selection of tools
available for exchanging knowledge through electronic networks.
Organizations that naturally converse and share knowledge among their var-
ious cultures will find the migration to the online environment less difficult
than those that must adapt both their communications habits and their leader-
ship practices. Most of the companies cited in this book as good examples of
knowledge networking practice have already embraced the internal sharing 
of knowledge as a core value. Those that haven’t would be wise to prepare care-
fully before launching online networking efforts. This preparation takes place
on two dimensions:
■■Strategy, where the practice of knowledge sharing must be woven into the
long-range goals and cultural evolution of the organization
■■Planning, where answers to initial design and budgetary questions clear
the way to approval, funding, and implementation of the pilot phase of the
project
Strategy and Planning for the
Knowledge Network
C HAPTE R
3

Even organizations that emphasize the free exchange of knowledge among
their cultures may be disrupted by the movement of important conversations to
the online environment. But those that refuse to change because they fear the
impacts of such a movement will be less able to keep pace with the rapidly
changing global marketplace of ideas.
This chapter presents some common organizational challenges to starting
effective online knowledge networks. It also offers basic, experience-based
suggestions for meeting them. Subsequent chapters will provide guidance for
implementing strategies and plans, fostering knowledge-sharing cultures, and
integrating the technologies to make them work. 
Strategy and Change
Building an online knowledge network will have long-range impacts on the
organization at several levels: 
■■At the level of human resource management, it will impact job descrip-
tions and incentive structures. 
■■At the practice level, it will require new training, job evaluation, schedul-
ing, and day-to-day task-management processes. 
■■And at the cultural level, it may profoundly influence the way the com-
pany is organized and branded. 
Purposeful online conversation affects the company’s relationship with the
marketplace and with the online public. If the company prepares well, these
changes will work to the company’s advantage. The risks of taking no action to
improve the flow of knowledge and information within the organization and
with its customers are becoming too serious to ignore.
Change is a constant, but change today is more certain, swift, and unpre-
dictable than ever before. The most direct way for an organization to keep up
with external change is to use internal change to its advantage. It must increase
its intercommunication by putting out as many feelers as possible to bring a col-
lective view of the constantly shifting situation into the organization.
Reporting the Surprises 
A current and comprehensive perspective of the marketplace has become a
strategic necessity, but the means for gaining and maintaining such a perspec-
tive challenges old management models. The decentralized, self-organizing
social communication structures required to efficiently gather and circulate the
knowledge that individuals learn and develop don’t fit gracefully under the hier-
archical, centrally controlled structures that still rule most organizations. 
62
Chapter 3

Strategy and Planning for the Knowledge Network
63
Steven Johnson founded an online literary magazine called Feed that unfor-
tunately succumbed to the downturn in Web advertising. In that role, he pio-
neered some revolutionary improvements in collaborative Web publishing
interfaces. Based on his studies and experience, he recently wrote a book titled
Emergence: The Connected Lives of Ants, Brains, Cities, and Software.1 In an
interview on Salon.com,2 he commented on the phenomenon of self-organizing
systems that learn to take care of themselves without central control. He
pointed to ant colonies as the best examples of leaderless but extremely pro-
ductive organizations. “They look like they should be planned from above, but
in fact they are entirely organized by local rules and local interactions. The
catchphrase is that the whole is sometimes smarter than the sum of its parts.”
This, we believe, should be the strategic goal of the modern organization.
Most organizations are looking for ways to make their wholes smarter. They
are changing their information strategies to keep up with the velocity of the Net
and to keep up with, or preferably overtake, their competitors. A growing per-
centage of businesses now practice some form of e-commerce—whether it be
selling over the Web, communicating with customers online, or managing busi-
ness relationships with supply chain partners through compatible software—
and that, too, is having an unavoidable effect on their strategic thinking. 
Yogesh Malhotra is a recognized expert in the fields of knowledge manage-
ment and business innovation. In an article published in the online periodical,
Brint Institute’s Online Book on Knowledge Management,3 he describes orga-
nizations as moving their knowledge management focus “from information
processing to knowledge creation.” He also maintains that today’s organization
must recognize that its most limited resource is no longer information; it has
become human attention—the ability to deal effectively with the growing vol-
ume and speed of information. 
In Malhotra’s recommended knowledge strategy for today’s fast-changing 
e-business world, information manipulation is replaced by processes that
ANTHILL COMMUNICATION
Scientists used to believe that ants communicated through a kind of insect semaphore—
wiggling their antennae in an understood code to exchange information about danger,
food, or the need to protect, rebuild, or move the colony. Recent research indicates,
instead, that exploring ants bring back and share their experiences in the form of scents
that tell the colony of food found or enemy ants encountered. The stronger the scents, the
more wildly the communicating ants wiggle their antennae. 
Knowledge-sharing communities are similarly motivated by the strength and
significance of their members’ discoveries and contributions. The greater the impact of
the knowledge, the greater the resulting motivation and activity in the community.

emphasize the “renewal of archived knowledge, creation of new knowledge,
and innovative applications of knowledge in new products and services that
build market share.” The new is what matters most here, and the strategy must
seek to home in relentlessly on what is most emergent and relevant. 
Organizations no longer operate in a stable business environment where the
future can be predicted by what happened in the past. Business strategy, Mal-
hotra warns, must change from “prediction” to “anticipation of surprise”
because the emphasis of the 21st century organization has moved from “struc-
ture” to “the edge of chaos.”
Leading the Moving Target
In both skeet shooting and football passing, the shooter or passer must aim not
where the target is but where it is going. Strategy must anticipate where the
organization’s target goals will be by the time a product gets to market or a proj-
ect is completed. The trick today, Mr. Malhotra warns, is that the strategy must
also anticipate surprise. 
In skeet shooting and football, the clay pigeon and pass receiver are far more
predictable in the timeframes of their seconds-long trajectories than the mar-
ketplace is in the timeframe of the business cycle. A clay pigeon travels in a
smooth arc. A pass receiver runs an agreed-upon pattern. Only the exceptional
skeet shooter or quarterback can compensate for the sudden wind gust or
improvised pass pattern.
Rigid, top-down strategizing has always assumed fairly predictable futures,
but such an approach breaks down when the future is highly speculative. An
intensively communicative and flexible organization—like an ant colony—is
better able to detect sudden changes and to communicate appropriate adjust-
ments in preparation or reaction. Effective strategy today must account for sur-
prises in both the short and long terms.
Nimble Strategy for Short-Term Surprises
The emergence of the PC, the explosive growth and standardization of the Web,
the rise and fall of the dot-com business model, a volatile economy, and most
recently, the unpredictable tragedies and global repercussions of September 11
64
Chapter 3
THE NEW PURPOSE OF KM
Knowledge management caters to the critical issues of organizational adaptation, survival,
and competence in the face of increasingly discontinuous environmental change.
—Yogesh Malhotra

Strategy and Planning for the Knowledge Network
65
have forced organizations to adjust as quickly as possible to changing market
conditions, changing consumer moods, and changing knowledge needs. With
instability in world politics and potential environmental threats like global
warming looming on the not-so-distant horizon, there’s no reason to believe
that the accelerating forces of change will let up.
There’s no way that an organization can anticipate an event like September
11, but well-supported strategies from now on must assume that the outrageous
and unexpected could happen at any time. This is where the advantages gained
from functioning knowledge networks will be crucial. The ability to distribute
current knowledge, preserve relevant old knowledge, and generate new knowl-
edge as insurance against unforeseen events and trends is a strategic asset that
no organization can afford to be without.
Evolutionary Strategy for 
Long-Term Trends
Surprise and chaos make an active, well-organized, and responsive knowledge
network a critical asset. Certain demographic and technological trends provide
further justification for enabling fluid online conversation within the organiza-
tion. With every year, a greater percentage of Americans continue to use the
Internet. The dot-com bomb may have wiped out many businesses and their
revenue models, but it did not halt the trend of increasing presence on the Net
as the following statistics indicate:
■■A report published by the National Telecommunications and Information
Administration and the Economics and Statistics Administration found
that 143 million Americans (54 percent of the population) used the Inter-
net in September 2001. That’s a 26 percent increase over August 2000.5
LITTLE DID THEY KNOW …
Surely the following facts and figures, compiled in a Business Week article in December
2000,4 were not considered in the strategic planning of the dot-com business leaders or
their suppliers:
■■
Ventro, once one of the leading “online exchange” builders, had traded at $244 a
share in March. It was trading at $1.09 a share in December.
■■
By December, 35 percent of the publicly traded Web companies were worth less
than $2 per share.
■■
By December, 31,000 dot-com workers had been laid off.
■■
Web advertising rates per 1,000 page views had plummeted from $2.50 to 50 cents.
The good news? The pundits quoted in the article didn’t think it could get much worse.
Surprise! It did.

66
Chapter 3
■■According to eMarketer, there were 445 million people online worldwide
at the end of 2001, of which 119 million, or 27 percent, were located in the
United States. By 2004, there will be 165.5 million U.S. Internet users,
accounting for 23 percent of the global total.6
■■Nielsen/NetRatings reports that in the fourth quarter of 2001, 24 million
people worldwide gained Internet access at home. The rate of growth of
the global Internet population in the fourth quarter was nearly double the
third quarter’s 15 million new at-home users.7
■■Projections by Commerce Net show Internet usage in the United States
rising to 75 percent of the population by the year 2005.8
Those numbers represent a steady increase in the number of Net-literate
workers, consumers, and customers, many of whom will be conversing through
online channels. Any intelligent business strategy must come to terms with the
trend that more people and more of their communications will be moving online. 
The use of networked communication tools in the workplace also continues
to rise as more workers are given access to the Net from their desktops and as
their home-use experiences influence their workplace activities. Companies
must mold their strategies around the reality that their workers will tend to
innovate on their own when they have access to the Net.
As Jupiter Media Metrix reported in November 2001, “the number of unique
users of instant-messaging applications at work increased 34 percent, from 10.0
million in September 2000 to 13.4 million in September 2001.”10 The total
amount of time spent using instant-messaging (IM) applications at work
increased by 110 percent! 
Such adoption and use of Net-based communications tools like IM are often
done independently, without the support or leadership of management or infor-
mation management or IT departments. They clearly demonstrate the network
effect described earlier—where people begin to use a tool because it provides
them instant access to valued associates who already use it. These trends of
increasing use of the Internet and the tools that allow groups to communicate will
prepare more people to become knowledge networkers within the organization.
GROUP CONTACT THROUGH THE INTERNET
The Pew Internet & American Life Project9 found the following facts about U.S. Internet life: 
■■
84 percent of Internet users have contacted an online group 
■■
More than half of those said they’d become active in a group after connecting with
it through the Internet 
■■
60 percent email their group and 43 percent do so several times a week

Strategy and Planning for the Knowledge Network
67
The Agile Culture
A company’s extended strategy must also take into account the sometimes
stressful cultural migration it will go through as it moves from its information-
based past to its knowledge-based future. This transformation will deeply
affect its core values, image, and identity and will influence its incentive struc-
tures and job definitions. Companies tend to avoid disruption, preferring more
graceful and controlled change, but the realities today are forcing organizations
to accept disruption and to learn how to change both quickly and gracefully.
Cross-pollination—the exchange of knowledge between different departments
and divisions within the company and with different organizational cultures out-
side the company—is not only possible, but it is an asset of growing importance
for competition and intelligent decision making. The broader the conversational
matrix, the wider will be the organization’s vision and pool of options.
Within the definition of its strategy, the company must recognize whose
knowledge is (and will be) of critical value and worth deeper tapping. In plan-
ning for the future, company leadership should anticipate the synergies that
will be realized through fostering conversations among specific people with
high-value knowledge and how those synergies will help the company achieve
its strategic goals.
The Change-Embracing Organization
Strategy for a knowledge-sharing company assumes that change itself will
become an internalized value all up and down the work force. The company, as
a collective organism, will become adaptive and toward that end will invite
contrary viewpoints and criticism rather than ignore or deflect them. It will
encourage the generation of ideas that lead to intelligent change rather than
resist it. Stability will be found in its core values and mission statement rather
than in the predictable comfort of routine practices.
The new strategy will accept the growing likelihood that the company will be
working out of multiple locations or will need to work with partners located in
different places. The connectivity and communication needs of the offsite or
traveling worker will become more important. The wired workplace will be
pumping current news and information to the desktop at faster speeds, and
CROSSING THE ORGANIZATIONAL BORDERS
As Stephen Denning puts it in The Springboard, changing to a knowledge-sharing
strategy “entails a shift from an organization that has operated vertically and
hierarchically to one that will operate horizontally and collaboratively across
organizational borders.”11

competition will increasingly depend on converting that news and information
into immediate action and redesigned products. 
What the Company Wants to Know
In their book, Working Knowledge, Thomas Davenport and Laurence Prusak
emphasize that “intentions are important: a firm needs to know what it wants to
have a good chance of getting it.”12 The key to assigning a strategic purpose to
a knowledge network is the clear description of its goals; the company must
know the kinds of knowledge its network is meant to discover and how that
knowledge will advance its overall strategy. 
As an example, in 1999 Cisco Systems specified a list of strategic purposes for
its online community-building initiative. (Cisco resists using knowledge manage-
ment terminology, but in fact their online communities serve as meeting places for
knowledge exchange.) The Internet equipment giant had decided to enable online
conversations among a segment of its customers—the networking professionals
who install and maintain Cisco equipment for its clients and partner companies. 
It undertook this effort primarily to enhance its Internet leadership position:
to meet the public expectations set by an advertising campaign that asked the
world, “Are you ready?” Cisco sought to demonstrate that as the leading equip-
ment provider, it was making full use of the Internet’s communications power. 
As the initiative moved toward the design of an appropriate Web infrastruc-
ture, the importance of responding to competition and building what they called
“an ecosystem” for diverse knowledge exchange came to the fore. The internal
business units collaborating on the project began to recognize that the strategic
value of knowledge-sharing conversations could prove even more crucial in a
shifting marketplace than branding, customer relationship management, and
sales enhancement. 
Cisco needed to know what its networking professionals were learning. In the
community space Cisco provided, they would exchange their homebrew solu-
tions to operational or compatibility problems. They would complain to each
other about shortcomings in equipment design or documentation. Occasionally,
68
Chapter 3
CISCO’S ORIGINAL STRATEGIC GOALS FOR ITS KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGES
■■
Strengthen partner relationships and capture information
■■
Maintain Cisco brand integrity
■■
Maintain Internet leadership
■■
Respond to competitive threats
■■
Build an ecosystem of partners and solutions
■■
Drive increased sales for both Cisco and Cisco partners
TEAMFLY

Strategy and Planning for the Knowledge Network
69
they would expose unsolved problems that only Cisco could address. They
would share their wish lists for new features or products. They would reveal, in
their conversations with each other, ways that Cisco could earn their continued
business and respect. These were the nuggets of reality that Cisco desperately
needed to know to maintain a dominant position in the industry.
Different types of organizations and businesses will naturally have different
knowledge needs. Companies whose businesses revolve around the introduction
of new products and services will require knowledge related to research and prod-
uct development. Those that rely on marketing will need knowledge that helps set
pricing, design effective promotion, and locate their products in the marketplace.
Some companies will need more knowledge from and about their customers,
whereas others will seek knowledge about cutting-edge consulting techniques or
about specific client behaviors and habits. The key is in identifying the knowledge
needs that will make the most difference in the organization’s success.
Knowledge of Maximum Leverage
Once an organization begins seeking the knowledge held by its employees or
customers, it may find that there’s more knowledge than it can deal with.
Knowledge glut can be as much of a problem as knowledge starvation, so needs
must be prioritized and some means of filtering must be put in place. This is a
strategy-level problem in that procedural and cultural practices should be
ingrained early to set the filtering strategy on the right course.
Questions must be asked at the outset of strategy formulation. What specific
types of knowledge will be of most benefit? What essential knowledge is miss-
ing today, and what essential knowledge will be consistently necessary? What
kinds of human resources will be in demand now and in the future? How will
the organization use conversation—online and F2F—to augment its ability to
find answers to specific critical questions?
An organization’s strategy is like a map into unknown territory. Historical
knowledge and scientific theory combine with best guesses (and some prayer) to
plot a route toward a destination, but there are plenty of blank stretches on the
map that can only be filled in with newly acquired knowledge. Somehow, the strat-
egy must take into account these unknowns and transform them into knowns as
soon, and as reliably, as possible. To do this, the company needs to focus on dis-
covering the current and future knowledge that will make the most difference.
Setting and Maintaining a Focus
Success in motivating people to engage in online conversation can be counter-
productive in a knowledge network if certain natural human tendencies are
allowed free rein. Once the goals of participation, trust, sharing, and relationship
building have been met, people become more willing to explore and wander into

subject areas that are further and further removed from the organization’s
intended focus. This can be both good and bad. Good because it is evidence that
the group has become comfortable with conversing through the medium. Good
because it raises the possibility of serendipitous discoveries and out-of-the-box
thinking. Bad because it can result in too much extraneous information and too
much time spent in activities that are not helpful to the organization.
Informal conversation is often the source of key knowledge nuggets that
don’t come to the surface when the conversation is tightly controlled. But a
strategic plan for knowledge networking must include provisions for prioritiz-
ing activities that answer the organization’s most pressing needs. The design of
the interface and the organization of its content, combined with the training
and assignments of knowledge community leaders and editors, should provide
sufficient guidance to prevent the knowledge network from becoming a home
for trivial chat and wasted time in the workplace.
The original focus for the networking activity should be set on knowledge
that provides maximum leverage for the sponsoring organization. As the net-
work generates the desired knowledge, the focus can be expanded, and other
related networks, with their own focused priorities, can be spun off or initiated. 
A knowledge network without a clear strategic purpose and overall guiding
hand can become an aimless liability in terms of infrastructure investment,
human resources, and technical maintenance. There can be value in unstruc-
tured and unfocused brainstorming activity, as we described in the WELL’s
70
Chapter 3
CUTTING THROUGH THE FOG
Mark Monmonier, a distinguished geographer, wrote the following: “Not only is it easy to
lie with maps, it is essential … . To avoid hiding critical information in a fog of detail, the
map must offer a selective, incomplete view of reality.”13
Gathering knowledge for strategic purposes can result in a “fog of detail” that hides
the critical information from the organization. The strategic knowledge map must be
selective, if incomplete, to be a useful guide to smart, responsive decision making.
STAYING ON POINT
Software features can help an organization maintain focus in its knowledge network. A
World Bank-sponsored partnership of organizations called the Global Knowledge Portal
(GKP) uses an interface called Simplify as an exchange space for its communities of practice. 
A case study of GKP14 notes that “quality control and content management are of
critical importance,” and it describes how subject matter editors are empowered, through
the software, to filter incoming content for relevance and to reroute it to editors of other
subject areas to prevent the dilution of valuable content.

Strategy and Planning for the Knowledge Network
71
aggregating a diverse knowledge pool. But especially in the startup phase of an
online knowledge network, it is vitally important that a focused strategic defi-
nition of the knowledge needs of the organization guides the conversations that
ensue. You’ll find a guide to formulating such a definition in Chapter 8, “Initiat-
ing and Supporting Internal Conversation.”
The Right Leadership
A purposeful knowledge exchange community depends on reliable and exem-
plary leaders for its unity and trust. These leaders may be the founders and ini-
tiators of the activity, or they may emerge from the activity once it has started.
If an organization expects active participation by the people who hold (and will
generate) the knowledge it requires, its leaders at all levels must themselves
support and practice online conversation.
These company leaders don’t necessarily have to demonstrate expertise, but
they should strive to demonstrate proficiency in the use of the technologies and
should devote themselves to improving their mastery of the knowledge net-
working practice. If company leadership doesn’t set a good example, it can’t
expect the work force to lead the charge on its own. Most people rely on guid-
ance, clarity of mission, and good role modeling in deciding how much and how
deeply they will commit themselves to adopting new practices. 
The value to the organization of a knowledge-based community will increase
with its longevity and continuity. Although leaders will naturally rise up from
within the community ranks as it learns about itself, ongoing strategic guidance
will be necessary to achieve long-range goals. Strategic leadership originates at
the executive level and can be reinforced by expert consultants brought in to
provide the organization with objective assessment of its evolving knowledge
resources, performance, and needs. 
Executive Wisdom
If a knowledge network is functioning within an organization—even if it is an
informal one, originating in grass-roots interaction among the workers—the
CEO should know that it exists. If the network is productive in generating orig-
inal ideas or solving problems that otherwise might go unsolved, the CEO
should at least be familiar with its focus, its participants, and its product. If the
network has become productive enough to affect the decision-making
processes of the organization, the CEO should be directly involved with it, even
to the point of being part of its conversation.
Effective knowledge management systems depend on total buy-in from the top
level of the organization. The communication that makes knowledge networking
effective requires more than simple approval and support; it requires involvement
and understanding that engender trust among the network’s participants.

Trust building must be integral to the company’s overall knowledge strategy.
Top-level management bears the responsibility for fostering the cultural values
and practices that will encourage workers immediately and in the future to par-
ticipate in the exchange of what they know and think. Since many companies
are still catching up to the New Economy, their managers—still accustomed to
old models of management practice—may find it especially difficult to make the
jump to leading roles in the flattened hierarchy of a knowledge-sharing culture.
As Davenport and Prusak describe in Working Knowledge, the organization
must strive to build a knowledge market where individuals and teams can shop
for the know-how and information they need and where any individual might
possess high-value knowledge to sell. Management must help define and sanc-
tion this perspective of interaction and content management, and to do that,
management must, more than other levels within the organization, understand
how the social dynamics work in a knowledge marketplace.
Executives, especially, must understand at the gut level that the interaction
among workers, customers, and partners in today’s economy has become a
much greater factor in strategic planning. Quality interaction through the Inter-
net and the intranet has become an asset. Understanding how people behave in
a knowledge marketplace is now a prerequisite to leading them into strategi-
cally productive modes of behavior. But even the executive, surveying the activ-
ity in this new marketplace from a lofty perch, can lose the objective
perspective required to keep a knowledge-networking strategy on track. 
The Role of Consultants
One of the risks of implementing a knowledge network is that the executive will
lose control over its organic and decentralized development by focusing more
on the process of extracting knowledge than on the type of knowledge that is
being distilled. In the executive’s effort to collect and manage as much as possi-
ble of what people have learned from the past, the high-leverage knowledge can
easily be missed—lost in the “fog of detail.” The company depletes its knowl-
edge management resources in the act of enthusiastic gathering, leaving too few
resources for filtering out the critical information and putting it to work. 
The consultant, who remains uninvolved in the social interaction that stirs up
wild knowledge from within the work force or customer base, provides the
fresh and objective viewpoint that can help internal leadership regain its rele-
72
Chapter 3
WALKING THE WALK
Management that pays lip service to the value it attaches to knowledge sharing but
rewards employees who hoard knowledge will not create the level of trust needed to make
the knowledge market effective.
—Thomas Davenport and Laurence Prusak15

Strategy and Planning for the Knowledge Network
73
vance bearings. In a knowledge-networking context, consultants need to main-
tain distance from the organization to be most useful. A good consultant is a
leadership asset not only as a distanced observer of the organization’s attempts
to maintain focus but in other roles as well. 
An experienced online facilitator, for example, can help the company discover
(or rediscover) its knowledge-sharing personality by guiding online conversa-
tions that stay on point and reach satisfactory resolution. Outside viewpoints are
especially valuable when the organization is in the midst of confusing cultural
change. Good consultants also bring in external knowledge gained from their
engagements with other client companies that may have gone through similar
processes and situations. Competent outside consultants help the company
regain its perspective of the knowledge forest by overlooking the trees. 
Leadership Culture
Leadership culture is more style than substance within the organization. People
tend to follow leaders they respect, regardless of title. All companies have lead-
ership cultures based on a combination of their organizational chart, company
values and mission, and the role-modeling standards that guide behavioral and
hiring practices. This culture is established primarily through communications
in the workplace. In the strategic sense, leadership culture will change signifi-
cantly as the company moves more of its communications online because the
online environment is a very different space than the meeting room, office
building, or telephone call.
In the online communications space, both the boss and the frontline cus-
tomer support representative have user names that appear in identical form on
the screen. You can’t see, from these names, how fancy or simple their respec-
tive offices are or whether they’re wearing power ties or T-shirts at their desks.
You can, of course, find a descriptive profile of each of them (and you should
know the boss by name when you see her online), but in the interactive arena,
HERDING THE KNOWLEDGE CATS
Knowledge is wild, but wild knowledge is a necessity. Here are five principles for leading a
wild knowledge network to success:
■■
Participate. Be an active member; stay in touch; help guide its development.
■■
Maintain a knowledge market perspective. Provide incentives for high-quality content.
■■
Bring in the consultants. Do regular “sanity checks” on where the network and its
attention are headed.
■■
Drive iterative improvement. Direct the network’s wild energy to debugging its own
design.
■■
Adapt leadership culture to the online meeting space. Look for emergent leaders in
the virtual communities.

the effective leaders are those individuals who are reliable in showing up regu-
larly in the online space. They are the ones who use the technology well to orga-
nize and prepare conversation and content for the rest. They are the clear
communicators and sensitive conversationalists who set good examples of effi-
cient writing and editing. They are the social facilitators who help guide the
online interaction to its most productive end.
Strategy involving online knowledge networking will take into account the
changes in how leadership will emerge and be demonstrated in the workplace.
The more reliant the company is on its virtual meeting place, the more impor-
tant this new leadership culture will become to the organization. Leadership in
Cyberspace is earned through online performance rather than through position
on the org chart. The organization must anticipate the change of having its new
leaders emerge based on their demonstrated skills and mastery of online com-
munication and content management. 
Planning and Cost Issues
Strategy is the big picture. Planning brings things closer to home; this is where
the organization finds its starting point and, with a strategic eye to the future,
decides how to build the knowledge network and the supporting culture that
will achieve its goals. In this section, we cover the two major challenges of the
planning process: 
■■Designing an integrated technical platform and social practice that will
serve the network in both its startup and expansion modes 
■■Justifying the costs of implementing the pilot stage of the design
Proposals to build a knowledge network also require planning for growth.
Fortunately, online knowledge networks do best when allowed to grow organi-
cally and incrementally. Members of the network will collaborate to identify the
best direction and pace of expansion and how to improve their systems. Good
planning at the outset will produce networks that can perform their own
growth planning as they gain experience and group intelligence.
Designing the Network
The challenges of knowledge network design do not, as you might expect, revolve
around technology. That comes later and will be dealt with in our chapters on
information technology (Chapter 4, “The Role of IT in the Effective Knowledge
Network”) and on the relationship between the technology and the knowledge
culture (Chapter 7, “Choosing and Using Technology”). Once the knowledge com-
munity and its needs are specified, the appropriate technology can be chosen and
74
Chapter 3

Strategy and Planning for the Knowledge Network
75
configured. The initial design revolves instead around some issues that have
already been mentioned: identifying the knowledge that the organization needs
the most and identifying the people who should be included in the network to
develop that knowledge.
A knowledge network requires phased implementation, and phase 1 is the
pilot project where best guesses are tested with live participants on a scale that
minimizes risk of failure. A knowledge network is also more than simply a
means for online conversation. It is an integrated platform for conversation and
managed content that can be used not only as a space for group process but
also for individual research. Thus, it requires people skilled in both discussion
facilitation and online content editing. The software tools that support these
coordinated activities will be presented in later chapters.
Although the initial network coming out of the pilot phase may be provided
for a single team or department, the design process should be inclusive and
contain representatives from different parts of the company as potential users
of the knowledge-sharing system. Chances are that after the top priority knowl-
edge community has blazed the trail, other divisions and business units within
the organization will want to form online communities of their own, adapting
the existing design to their own needs. Thus, the overall organizational culture
should be involved in specifying the capabilities and extensibility of the system.
Planning will include this projection of possible expansion and scaling.
And finally, design must take into account the organization’s need to define
parameters for assessing the success of the networking activity. How will man-
agers decide when change is necessary? How (and to whom) will they report
the gains realized through use of the network?
Seeding the Knowledge Community
Ideally, the starting point of the knowledge network is like a seed that will send
down roots, grow, and spread like a rhizome to extend the network throughout
the organization. Thus, it’s important where and how this seed is planted. Just
as you would in trying to get a garden started on unfamiliar ground, you choose
a place and time that give the seed its greatest chance to thrive. And to take the
THE INTRANET AS A COLLABORATION TOOL
Interface guru Jakob Nielsen comments on trends in his “The10 Best Intranet Designs of 2001”:
We saw a greatly increased emphasis on the intranet as a collaboration tool that lets
employees exchange information through discussion groups and other features. The
intranets also emphasize communication by encouraging departments to post news and
other information of interest to different groups.16

seed metaphor one step further, it should be planted where it is most likely to
germinate quickly, send up its shoots, and start using the soil and sunshine that
make up its immediate environment.
In knowledge terms, this means providing the resources to the people who
will be able to make the best use of it in the shortest amount of time, signifi-
cantly improving their effectiveness and job performance by sharing knowledge.
Based on this early success, participation will increase, and the organization will
see good results that feed back into greater support within the organization for
the young, sprouting knowledge network.
Often, the people most ready to use online conversation as a knowledge tool
are those who have already begun doing so on their own. They may have dis-
covered the utility of the practice in their home-based connections to the Inter-
net or in their day-to-day email correspondence over the company’s intranet.
Maybe a relatively unimportant project in the office became a startling success
because it was coordinated through use of AOL’s Instant Messager tool. 
If a business unit or project team has figured out on its own how to marshal its
knowledge resources toward accomplishing a task, it has eliminated the barrier
that often slows adoption of new technologies, practices, and communications
concepts. Often, when a company has identified a gap between what it knows
and what it needs to know, the holders of that key knowledge have already been
identified within the organization but have not been introduced to the tools and
means of getting that knowledge to where it can make the most difference.
The company’s business strategy should make clear the areas where knowl-
edge networking is most needed. As we said earlier, companies that rely on the
introduction of new products and services will need to develop their knowl-
edge around managing research and product development. Companies that rely
on strong marketing will focus more on knowledge about pricing, promotion,
and product location. These define the most appropriate starting points for
seeding the network.
Cultural Influence
The knowledge network should fit as gracefully as possible into the existing
organizational culture if it’s going to be attractive to employees and accepted by
the leadership structure. The design should ideally be a coproduct of many
stakeholders from different locations within the organization so that it will ulti-
mately serve them all when they are ready to use it. 
Groups within the organization that already practice some form of knowl-
edge networking should be identified. This can usually be accomplished by
issuing an invitation to all parties who are interested in discussing the subject
of improving knowledge exchange. Expect a large turnout because most people
feel an acute need to know more and to improve the flow of (and access to)
missing knowledge.
76
Chapter 3

Strategy and Planning for the Knowledge Network
77
An assessment of the existing culture’s flexibility—its willingness to change—
will help locate points of resistance. Understanding resistance and the reasoning
behind it is necessary in designing systems that can respond to and neutralize
the fears and habits that are incompatible to knowledge exchange over the Net. 
If the company is unwilling to change because of entrenched belief systems
or hierarchical rigidity, it may not be a good candidate for building a knowledge
network. The same level of assessment must be applied to leadership in the
organization. Unless the top people are supportive of the idea and are willing to
accept the changes likely to come through open knowledge exchange, the ini-
tiative won’t get off the ground.
The Pilot Phase and Network Expansion
Cisco’s Community Business Organization provides a good example of a com-
pany that identified a starting point, got most of its business units involved in
the design, and was patient enough to wait for the pilot program to succeed
before expanding the network in other directions. Initial design can’t be a slave
to future planning, but it should consider—in its choice of tools and organiza-
tion—the need for flexibility and reconfiguration that will become apparent as
it is used and critiqued.
Pilot projects are an important design specification wherever computer-human
interfaces are being developed. They are even more important when those inter-
faces are interwoven with complex knowledge relationships within the company.
The knowledge network should be planned for phased implementation, providing
plenty of time for testing, evaluation, debugging, tweaking, and redesign.
As the network goes through its early stages, the rest of the organization
should be kept abreast of its progress—including the good, the bad, and the
ugly of its early attempts to reach its goals—and invited to observe, if not par-
ticipate in, its activities. Setbacks as well as triumphs should be reported
CISCO’S COMMUNITY BUSINESS ORGANIZATION
Five separate vertical businesses were operating within Cisco Systems in 1999, with
numerous lines of business (LOBs) working under them. When several of these LOBs found
that they were separately investigating the idea of online communities, they joined forces
to form what they called the Community Business Organization, or CBO. 
Through meetings of the CBO, they formulated enough of a shared vision of needs to
hire consultants, first to help write a strategy document and then to begin implementing a
pilot program that would serve the community deemed most ready to make use of an
online discussion system. 
As this pilot, the Networking Professionals Community, launched under the Enterprise
Marketing LOB, the rest of the CBO was kept informed of its progress and learning. Once
initial bugs had been eliminated and key processes had proven themselves, other LOBs
and communities of practice within Cisco began adapting the design to their own needs.

through an ongoing internal educational program carried in email bulletins
and/or Web pages so that other groups, teams, and business units can prepare
themselves to develop their own knowledge networks when the technology and
business processes have proven reliable.
Defining Success
Planning should include the scheduling of regular periodic health checkups that
include evaluations based on participation, satisfaction with the interface,
assessment of technical performance, and comparison with set mileposts for
progress and deliverables. Original goal setting is important but should not be
used alone to determine success or failure because unanticipated benefits may
emerge under actual use that make those goals less meaningful. 
The fresh, outside perspectives of consultants are especially valuable in
these early evaluations. Positive evaluations are, of course, more encouraging
to other potential knowledge-sharing communities within the organizations,
but negative evaluations done in a timely manner catch bugs while the design is
still young and malleable.
The ultimate goal of a knowledge network is to make the jobs of its users
simpler, easier, and more effective. This will inevitably show up in productivity,
but the most immediate evidence will be in the amount of usage it gets and the
satisfaction expressed by its users. It’s important for those in charge of its
design and feature set to listen to those users constantly and to incrementally
improve the network interface in response to their comments. That listening
and responsive action, in itself, will be regarded as success by the users who
recognize their role as codesigners of their own tools.
Cost Justification
Proposing any new practice within the organization—especially when it
involves the installation, expansion, or reconfiguration of a technology—brings
78
Chapter 3
SELF-IMPROVEMENT PLANNING FOR THE INTRANET
Jakob Nielsen emphasizes that in intranet design, management of user input is a key
element to successful results. 
Firstly, they must consider the usability of an intranet because if people can’t use it to
support their tasks the project has failed. Secondly, they must remember that an intranet
project never stops. It is a process of continuous improvement. Humans are very creative
creatures and if they get the chance they can easily upset an intranet project, but if you
manage them carefully, that creativity can add further benefits to the intranet and it will
continue to adapt and grow to meet the organisation’s requirements.17
TEAMFLY

Strategy and Planning for the Knowledge Network
79
with it the challenge of funding. Evidence is required that the new idea will pay
for itself either by bringing in more money faster or by slowing down the loss of
money without reducing the effectiveness of the organization. 
We’ve emphasized the importance of having the CEO on board for a knowl-
edge network to succeed. The funding proposal is a first step in convincing the
CEO that the network has been designed with the organization’s ultimate suc-
cess in mind. 
Many of the flashy, enterprise-level knowledge management software solu-
tions have promised a lot but have failed to deliver the kinds of return on invest-
ment that companies hoped for. The knowledge network doesn’t have to be so
ambitious in its design or in its costs. Investment in infrastructure develop-
ment, training, and job redefinition can be justified because a well-designed
knowledge network will start small and grow incrementally. Though there will
most certainly be more costs per participant in the beginning than at later
stages in the network’s development and expansion, the incremental costs
should be manageable.
The Cost Savings of Doing Smarter Business
If there hadn’t been success stories from applying knowledge networking tech-
niques, we would not have been persuaded to write this book. In fact, there is
enough buzz around the idea to excite business leaders at all levels. Some of the
better known examples of large companies that have begun utilizing their
human intellectual capital are referred to on the AskMe site,19 one of the Web’s
most creative knowledge-sharing oases. Here are some of these companies, the
description of their knowledge networking activities, and the bottom-line
results they reported from those activities:
Xerox
Access to technicians’ lessons learned
5–10% savings on labor and parts
costs
Ford
Access to best practices
$1.25 billion in savings
WHY ROI ON KM IS OFTEN SO POOR
The KM technologies are suffering from poor return on investment (ROI), simply because
the KM decision has been made by a CKO, who’s a brand new individual, or an IT
individual, and neither of them have ever consulted with human resources (HR), which
knows how to motivate and compensate employees.18
—Nick Bontis, Ph.D., 
Director of the Institute for Intellectual Capital Research Inc., 
assistant professor of strategic management at the Michael G. DeGroote 
School of Business at McMaster University in Hamilton, Ontario, 
and chief knowledge officer (CKO) of Knexa.com Enterprises Inc. 

Buckman Labs
Allows employees to find colleagues 
New product sales up 50%; 
with expertise and ask them questions
response to customer inquiries
down to hours from days
Texas Instruments
Access to best practices
$500 million gained in “free” fabri-
cation capacity in 1 year
Hoffman-LaRoche
Capture and access approval-
FDA approval time reduced from 
related knowledge
3 years to 9 months
Honeywell
Create, capture, share, and use 
46% increase in proposal win rate; 
organizational knowledge
costs cut by 35%
Most of these companies developed their techniques in house and expanded
them gradually and experimentally. Today, most companies are just becoming
aware of their knowledge deficits and may not have the luxury of allowing
knowledge networks to develop spontaneously from grass-roots initiative, but
the basic principles we describe in this book still apply. Look for the most
promising starting points and seed the network wisely.
Typical indirect paybacks for transitioning to a knowledge-sharing culture
will be measured in factors like employee loyalty and longevity, customer satis-
faction, product development cycles, travel expenses, and overall productivity
per employee. These improvements will be increasingly visible as the cultural
transformation permeates the organization.
Minimizing Financial Risk
Many vendors are now marketing fully integrated knowledge management sys-
tems that claim to simplify the sharing of vital information across the organiza-
tion. (This subject will be discussed more fully in Chapter 5, “Fostering a
Knowledge-Sharing Culture.”) Some of these offer obvious improvement in
usability to large corporations whose various information-gathering applica-
tions—purchased from different vendors, installed at different times, and each
treating similar data differently—have confused the unfortunate users of
80
Chapter 3
BY-PRODUCTS OF THE KNOWLEDGE NETWORK
Though it’s difficult to assign a dollar value to these benefits, they do eventually show up
on the balance sheet. A knowledge network does the following:
■■
Preserves and uses existing assets
■■
Creates intellectual synergies
■■
Leads to smarter decisions and reduced losses
■■
Teaches the company more about its market
■■
Increases trust and loyalty
■■
Saves time 

Strategy and Planning for the Knowledge Network
81
intranets built to tie the applications together. But such integrated solutions
don’t necessarily fulfill the needs of a conversational knowledge network.
The technical costs of starting a productive knowledge network can be quite
modest. Message boards can be purchased or run on the vendor’s servers
cheaply, with small installation or setup expenses and incremental pricing
based on the number of users and traffic that run through them. Email can be
customized and used creatively to support group interaction. Even the plat-
forms required for real-time event production, which were mentioned in Chap-
ter 2, “Using the Net to Share What People Know,” can be rented out by the
event or for affordable periods of time.
Indeed, the initial investment for technology should be small during the test-
ing and pilot phases of knowledge networking. The phased approach to imple-
mentation is most appropriate to building the practice and culture of
knowledge sharing. Organic growth allows the organization to assess the suc-
cess of the activities and make funding decisions based on observed success.
Jakob Nielsen, quoted earlier in this chapter, is a widely respected expert on
interface design. In his evaluation of “The 10 Best Intranet Designs of 2001,”20
he pointed to “iterative design” as one of the chief factors leading to designs
that were deemed most useful, even at relatively low cost. One of the intranets
chosen for his top 10 was built by graduate students at the Luleå University of
Technology in Sweden. About it, Nielsen wrote, “Though small and lacking a lot
of resources, this design team focused relentlessly on users needs and on sim-
plifying their design through many fast iterations.” 
The costs of designing and starting the knowledge networking activities
should be centered more on overseeing this iterative design process than on
purchasing software that supposedly offers “all the features you’ll ever need.”
The students at Luleå University took some of their features through 50 itera-
tions before arriving at a design of optimal usability. This requires commitment
and participation by a population of users and interface programmers that is
aimed at arriving at a design that people will use because it is simple, straight-
forward, efficient, and well-mapped to their needs, habits, and culture. 
In the following section, we will describe some of the software platforms that
lend themselves to such an iterative, collaborative design approach.
Summary
Building a successful knowledge network begins with careful strategic prepa-
ration and planning. Strategic thinking is not only a reason for fostering a
knowledge-sharing culture; it benefits from the internalization of knowledge-
sharing values in the organization. 
Trends toward more widespread use of the Internet and its group communi-
cations tools are making knowledge-sharing activities more commonplace both

inside and outside the workplace. Companies should take advantage of these
trends and form their strategies around them. And as the description of the
worker and the typical company change, so must the strategies for collabora-
tion and communication. 
To increase the probability of success and to decrease the cost of the knowl-
edge network, an appropriate high-leverage starting point must be identified.
This point is defined by the highest priority knowledge needs of the organiza-
tion and by the location of skills and existing groups of knowledge exchange
within the company. Using this as a focal point, the knowledge network can be
seeded to grow incrementally, finding its way to success and steadily improving
design through the interaction and input of its founding members.
82
Chapter 3

Matching Culture 
with Technology
Among organizations, no two cultures are identical and neither are the technolo-
gies that best support their knowledge networks. There’s a large and growing
selection of platforms and interfaces claiming to meet the special needs of knowl-
edge management, and existing software applications continue to be refined to
better fit the way people actually work and interact with each other. The four
chapters in Part Two aim to help executives, managers, and IT professionals
understand the important and evolving relationship between technical infrastruc-
ture and workplace culture and, more specifically, how nurturing that relationship
leads to efficient, well-utilized, and productive online knowledge networking. 
Chapter 4, “The Role of IT in the Effective Knowledge Network,” describes
the role of the information technology (IT) manager and the IT department in
supporting dynamic, self-guided knowledge networks. Chapter 5, “Fostering a
Knowledge-Sharing Culture,” is a survey of both the standard tools and the cut-
ting-edge software products that enable the coordination of online conversation
and relevant content publishing. Chapter 6, “Taking Culture Online,” describes
the vital characteristics of a knowledge-sharing culture and how relationships
formed and maintained online can color the overall cultural values and strategic
choices of the organization. In Chapter 7, “Choosing and Using Technology,” we
bring the technology and culture together and, using actual examples, demon-
strate the productive interplay between the design of the networked interface
and the values of the organizational culture. This is, in essence, how the organi-
zation learns to improve itself—constantly and efficiently.
Two
PART


85
The theme of this chapter is the need for simplicity in choosing and imple-
menting technology. It is tempting to think in terms of choosing or designing
software that will do more work and thereby increase human productivity.
However, there are important reasons for at least beginning with the simplest
tools that will enable measurable improvement in knowledge exchange. One
reason is cost. Another is in facilitating the building of a good working relation-
ship between the IT department and the people looking to build the online
knowledge network.
The overarching purpose of information technology (IT) is to increase pro-
ductivity in the workplace. To that end, as we’ve mentioned in previous chap-
ters, IT departments now assemble complex systems of specialized hardware
and software applications to serve the varied and distinct information needs
within the company. Some of these applications are designed to work together
or to share standard interfaces, but many are not.
Once adopted, these applications and their software structures become
indispensable to the company or business unit in direct proportion to the
amount of information they hold. So in a busy business, as the information and
knowledge needs of the company change, its rigid legacy systems become the
weak links in the coevolutionary chain that would ideally evolve software in
coordination with changing needs. Outdated and limiting features hold back
The Role of IT in the Effective
Knowledge Network
C HAPTE R
4

the company’s ability to adapt its technology to important aspects of its evolv-
ing business values and culture. 
The twin preoccupations of the chief technology officer (CTO) today are
overcoming the inertia of legacy systems and attaining greater interface flexi-
bility, where the technology is able to adapt to meet the needs of the organiza-
tion in flux. Knowledge networks, by their nature, seek change and discovery
and are likely to bring demands for more change to the technical environment.
This makes the relationship between IT and the concept and culture of knowl-
edge sharing a critical one.
Until the technology in place can coevolve with the organization’s changing
business models and cultures, companies will go through periods where the
design of the information interface is out of sync with operational needs. The
use of information systems then becomes so cumbersome, nonintuitive, and
inefficient that people refuse to use them, settling instead for less technical
means to accomplish their tasks. This may be fine but for the fact that it sacri-
fices the potential efficiencies that well-designed technology can bring. For the
technology of an online knowledge network to succeed, its members must
choose to use it regularly as an essential part of their jobs. 
This chapter focuses on the importance of the IT department’s collaborative
role in building the knowledge network. This role centers on its cooperation in the
overall design of the networking environment, including tool selection and config-
uration, and the integration of features and functions appropriate to meet the
needs of each distinct knowledge-based community. The role extends beyond the
provision of tools to an active part in an ongoing relationship with the social net-
work as it strives to improve its knowledge-sharing environment incrementally.
The professional and social relationship between the people implementing
the knowledge network and the people in the IT department, which comprises
a powerful knowledge network in its own right, is crucial. A close working rela-
tionship between IT and those leading the development of knowledge exchange
systems will, in the end, benefit both groups.
IT and Knowledge Exchange
How do the people responsible for the information technology in an organiza-
tion relate to the needs of those seeking to improve knowledge exchange and
transfer through computer technologies? What issues consume IT’s attention
today, and how do those issues affect its ability and willingness to work with
knowledge-networking advocates? It’s important that we understand some
practical and cultural realities about the people charged with IT responsibilities
before we assume that the implementation of the right technologies is simply a
matter of asking that they be done. IT is a busy place, and the technologies
required by an effective knowledge network can be complex.
86
Chapter 4

The Role of IT in the Effective Knowledge Network
87
Our historical account of the tools and management models that heralded the
arrival of the Information Age described email as one of the first applications
created after the hardware, software, and networking protocols were made
available to support it. The information technology community became the first
working online knowledge network.
As technology was subsequently adopted and embraced by large businesses
and organizations—and then customized to meet their growing information-
handling needs—emphasis switched from group communication to more
sophisticated ways of inputting, organizing, storing, and retrieving the bur-
geoning mountains of data. And as these information-processing organizations
eventually connected to the Internet, the challenges and problems faced by the
person in the role of CTO multiplied. 
Now emphasis is swinging back from data storage and manipulation toward
interpersonal communication as the most effective means of exchanging knowl-
edge. How do the priorities, activities, and culture of IT—with its information-
based worldview built in the 1990s—relate to the needs and culture of the
interactive knowledge network? There are many ways in which IT inherently
understands the model of the knowledge network and may be able to save itself
some work in the long run by helping to establish strong technical bases for them.
The CTO’s Growing To-Do List
In most companies, the work of the IT department is forever a work in progress
and never without crisis. Consider just some of the department’s responsibili-
ties. Most IT departments must do many, if not all, of the following: 
■■Provide the most up-to-date tools and connectivity for internal system
access to every desktop
■■Configure, maintain, and upgrade the software used by every employee
■■Select, secure, install, and fix all of the company’s computer technology
■■Provide system security, backups, Internet access, firewall configuration,
and virus protection
■■Evaluate and approve the selection of new technical tools for new needs
■■Program in-house solutions to business problems
■■Work with outside technical consultants on a wide variety of projects
This is, of course, only the tip of a very complex iceberg. When all of this has
been systematized or accomplished, IT is expected to integrate all of these
components and requirements into a seamless system that can serve a long list
of different and changing needs throughout the organization.

This would be a full plate under any circumstances, but the emergence of and
connectivity with the Web have added yet another dense layer of complexity to
IT’s tasks. Among the many facets of that layer, IT must now account for a much
greater volume of independent and collaborative online activity by the average
worker. No longer is the individual at the PC simply the destination point of an
information query’s response or the source point of input for a page or stream of
information. Now, every individual, both local and remote, is a potential corre-
spondent, contributor, and editor in an interactive network of ad hoc publishers
and readers. There is an ever-increasing volume of information passing back and
forth across the last bastion of internal company security: the corporate firewall.
Since 1997, the Web interface has become the lingua franca of commerce
over electronic networks. This level of standardization has simplified many
interface challenges. However, IT managers still face an imposing array of
incompatible software platforms with no accepted standard for integrating the
many different applications now accessible through this global Web protocol.
Such standards, now referred to under the umbrella label Web services, are
under feverish development (and are described more fully later in this chapter).
Yet there remains the question of whether the Web-using world, so accustomed
to incremental grass-roots innovation, is ready to accept standardization and
thereby change a culture with roots going far back to the original days of col-
laborative technology hacking in the sixties. Until that question is resolved, the
major challenge to IT, especially from the knowledge management point of
view, will remain the integration of disparate sources of information and knowl-
edge through the shared interface of the Web.
The Daunting Task of Integration
Referring to software as a legacy system makes it sound as if it’s been around for
a long time. But these days, any system that has been installed and has become
essential for a core function in the company is, de facto, the legacy system. The
costs of replacing it can be prohibitive, so other upgrades or links between it and
new applications adopted by the company must be designed to work with it. The
products provided to build bridges between noncompatible applications are
88
Chapter 4
IT AND THE ENEMIES WITHIN
As if there weren’t enough threats to IT from outside the firewall, the results of a study by
KPMG show how even internal relationship building can impact security:
79 percent of senior management executives polled by KPMG in 12 countries wrongly
believe that the biggest threat to their e-commerce system security is external. . . . In
reality, disgruntled or former employees, or external service providers who have a long-
term relationship with the company, are most likely to commit an attack, or cause a
security breach.1
TEAMFLY

The Role of IT in the Effective Knowledge Network
89
sometimes referred to as middleware. However, the more applications needing
to be made data compatible with each other, the more geometrically complex
becomes the integration, and the less reliable the final results. In Chapter 5,
“Fostering a Knowledge-Sharing Culture,” we’ll describe some middleware
products and products that attempt to remove the need for middleware by inte-
grating applications directly through the top-level user interface.
Application integration directly addresses knowledge management problems.
The purpose for taking on this daunting task is to make the knowledge con-
tained in various legacy information troves more accessible and useful across
the company. Customer relationship management should be able to use infor-
mation from the order control system. Stock control systems should be inte-
grated with accounting. The software designed for these different applications
has, historically, been provided by different vendors, so merging or integrating
their formats into one that made sense for the end user has required translation.
Such data translations have been done in the past by programmers, who
wrote the code that glued the applications together. The more applications
requiring translation, the more consultants and programmers needed to be
hired or assigned to work on the task. Return on investment often became the
determining factor as costs rose, and for that reason, the relatively new genre
of enterprise application integration (EAI) products has appeared to reduce
the need for expensive programming. But EAI brings its own unintended con-
sequences of complexity and expense. 
The CTO has huge problems to solve, even as interoperability standards like
XML (Extensible Markup Language) attempt to fill the solutions gap. The
knowledge network is made smarter by the availability of information from the
many applications at work in the company, and it has its own needs for appli-
cation integration in the technologies of online conversation and content man-
agement. But the promise of integration standards and of new middleware
solutions that can automatically standardize the input and output of a variety of
software applications has yet to be fully realized. Companies are finding that
the work involved in installing and applying these solutions can be unexpect-
edly difficult and expensive. This is a chief reason for our recommending a
phased approach to implementing knowledge-networking systems.
GETTING REAL ABOUT THE PROMISE OF EAI
So everyone has come back to earth in terms of their expectations and what the technology
can do. It doesn’t promise everything, and it doesn’t cost three million bucks.2
—Erik Swan, CTO of CommerceFlow, referring to the promise of a “nirvana,” 
where enterprise application integration (EAI) products would solve 
every company’s information problems

90
Chapter 4
The technical fixes needed to improve knowledge management (KM) which
relies on the manipulation and integration of information-handling applica-
tions, is more complex and expensive than the technologies required for inter-
active knowledge networking (KN) which provides online facilities for
managed conversation and the sharing of relevant content. In that respect, KN
should be simpler to implement than KM, but the more socially driven aspects
of the knowledge network and its technical needs make it important that some
intercultural issues between IT and KN be examined. 
IT Culture in the Organization
Although we, the authors, work with technology and information, we don’t
think of ourselves as “IT people.” Yet having worked cooperatively with them
over many years, we’ve come to understand how IT professionals work, how
they think, and the language they use. In our roles as online community
builders, we have served as bridges between the users of the community-sup-
porting interfaces and our associates in IT who managed the servers, operating
systems, and software applications. We recognize a distinct difference in cul-
ture between the tool makers and the tool users—between the technicians who
build and maintain the digital and hardware infrastructure and the people who
use it as one of their primary social communications channels and thereby dis-
cover flaws that they can’t fix. One culture is dependent on the other, and that
asymmetry can lead to less than optimum collaboration.
Most information technicians learn their science first in the classroom,
removed from the realities of organizations that must react to opportunity and
competition. Once on the job, technicians follow learned standards in building
systems that have been proven over time to work. They face constant demands
to expand and modify those systems to meet new and unique needs presented
to them by the CEO in response to the often-competing needs of various depart-
ments. Two key goals of their work today are integration (making all of the
internal systems compatible with each other) and scaling (configuring techni-
cal systems to expand to meet growing demands). 
The population of users in most organizations is unsophisticated in its under-
standing of technology to an extent not fully appreciated by the technical cul-
ture. Often, the highly trained people of IT incorrectly assume that the
technology, as provided and configured, is easy for untrained people to use
when in fact it is not. Often, IT will assume that the applications are delivering
the required solutions when they are not. And often, IT will overlook the impor-
tance of and need for training in the use of the tools they provide.
Still, as we’ve pointed out, IT has strong knowledge-sharing roots. Its culture
has formed over the years around attention to detail, faith that there is a tech-
nical solution for every problem, the shared assumption that a technical system
is never truly complete, and a united feeling that, were it not for the soldiers of

The Role of IT in the Effective Knowledge Network
91
IT, the company would grind to a sorry halt. IT is the original digital knowledge
culture because it has traditionally depended on the free exchange of ideas, dis-
coveries, and credible rumors for its collective learning and advancement. To
the extent that proprietary standards and technologies are now becoming more
prevalent, IT as an open, knowledge-sharing culture that traditionally spanned
the loyalty boundaries of competing companies is changing. But within each
organization large enough to support an IT department, the local IT culture usu-
ally remains a microcosm of the knowledge-sharing tradition.
People who work day in and day out with network technologies develop
their own viewpoints of best approaches to system design and development.
But we know many IT managers and departments that have worked coopera-
tively and collegially with their internal colleagues, building close consultant-
client relationships. The best keep an open mind and go out of their way to
understand the needs, values, and strategies of the departments that depend on
them for making optimal use of the technical platforms and facilities. These
managers serve as the communications liaison between the technicians and the
nontechnicians in the company, helping to translate needs into tasks and reduc-
ing misunderstandings and communication disconnects. This level of coopera-
tion is critical to the implementation of knowledge-sharing technologies and to
meeting the unique challenges they bring.
IT Culture and Knowledge-
Sharing Culture
Knowledge sharing is about dynamic information exchange and communica-
tion. Its technical challenges have to do with interaction, the retrieval of stored
information, and the constant gathering of new information. The key players,
who may range from specialized teams to cross-discipline experts to entire
departments, must be enabled to interact through the network with one
another and with information resources. As part of that process, these knowl-
edge-sharing communities must be able to produce new collections of informa-
tion—based on their interaction, conversation, and the content they create and
gather—that can be categorized, searched, and retrieved.
For IT managers, knowledge networkers are a special class of client. People
who rely on the availability and regular maintenance of online meeting places
will have different relationships with IT than those who deal only episodically
with the software and the data it carries. The direct conversational involvement
of knowledge networkers with their supporting technology can lead to frustra-
tion with IT, or it can serve to build unique working relationships with individ-
uals in IT. The social nature of the knowledge-networking community should
ideally become an asset in forging strong alliances with the IT community by
building active and well-nurtured communication links between the two.

Unlike most user populations served by IT, knowledge-sharing communities
spend time “living in” the company’s technical environment. They treat it as a
malleable resource just as they would a physical meeting room where the furni-
ture can be rearranged to facilitate conversation and where various audiovisual
tools can be requisitioned and operated to present information to the group. 
Self-determined local control over incremental improvement to the interface is
important for both the knowledge community and IT. The ability of community
managers to respond to needs and suggestions of their members without having
to get approval from IT is both convenient and empowering. And with the right
software setup, IT can be relieved of the responsibility of making every minor (in
terms of system resources) interface-level change in software configuration.
Knowledge sharers converse through the technology and about the technol-
ogy because they recognize together how improvements in interface design and
content delivery can help them discover, exchange, and use information and
conversation more effectively. More than with other technical clients, IT can
expect the members of a knowledge culture to be well informed and involved
in identifying needs for their own changes and modifications. When those expe-
rience-based changes are specified directly by the tool users, as shown in Fig-
ure 4.1, they are more likely to be appreciated and used productively when
implemented. The rising quality curve in Figure 4.1 shows how suggestions
made by the community to improve the interface are followed by small jumps
in the quality of the online interaction. As the community adapts to the inter-
face changes, the quality curve flattens until the next suggested improvement
brings another jump in quality.
What IT managers most need to know about knowledge culture is that, like
programmers and system administrators, people conversing through the Net
about their special interests are likely to be experimenters and explorers. They
fill disk space with their discourse, their writings, relevant documents, and with
the information they gather and collect as the basis of their shared work.
Through their activity, they discover the needs for new software features,
changes in the design of their online work environment, and the composition of
their online teams. The idea is to put knowledge directly to work, and the best
way to do that through the Net is to establish a trusted communications loop
between the knowledge network and the IT resources that support it. Figure 4.2
92
Chapter 4
TOP IT NEEDS OF A KNOWLEDGE-SHARING CULTURE
1.
A distinct virtual space for knowledge exchange 
2.
Content publishing tools that can be managed locally
3.
Group communications tools appropriate to the culture
4.
Gateways to control access to the space
5.
Technical support and tools for local reconfiguration of the interface
6.
Application integration for ease of use

The Role of IT in the Effective Knowledge Network
93
illustrates how the members of the knowledge network discover what is lack-
ing in the technical interface, pass that information along to IT or the parties
qualified to improve the interface, and then receive the benefits of those
improvements. These improvements often serve to make use of the interface
more convenient or more specific to the knowledge network’s needs.
To establish an ongoing relationship between the knowledge exchange com-
munity and IT, a phased approach to implementation is most economical and
productive. With each phase of technical improvement, as shown in Figure 4.3,
Suggested improvements
made by IT to conversation
interface
QUALITY
TIME
Improve
Login
procedure
Change rules
for access to 
network
Simplify
message
editing
Allow
importing
of content
Link cash
incentives for
participation
Figure 4.1
Incremental advances in conversation quality with technical improvements.
Online Knowledge Exchange
Discovered
Needs
and
Ideas
Improvements in Interface and Information Access
Convenience
and
Specificity
KN
IT
Figure 4.2
The ongoing feedback loop between IT and the knowledge network.

the communications between the two communities can be refined and made
more efficient. IT can assess its practical capabilities, assign resources, and
work with the knowledge community to define the goals of each phase of
implementation. The feedback process of technical design and actual use of the
technical changes can be made smoother, with time set aside between phases
for reevaluation of needs and capabilities.
The knowledge-sharing community, for its part, must be sensitive to the prac-
tical capabilities and limitations of the IT department and thereby minimize
inappropriate demand. Communication between the two communities should
be defined by an agreed-upon process, with identified liaisons on either end. IT
departments prefer trouble ticket systems that keep complaints and bug
reports in order and track responses to them. IT should provide training to the
knowledge exchange community in how to obtain its services most effectively.
Teams representing the expressed needs of the knowledge community
should meet, between build-out phases, with teams representing the relevant
skills and responsibilities in the IT department. As Figure 4.4 shows, an unco-
ordinated barrage of individual requests and trouble reports from an active
knowledge community can force a busy IT support team to shut down its
intake. Orderly systems for reporting technical bugs and suggested improve-
ments help preserve good relationships between an IT department and its
clients. Uncoordinated communications can confuse technical fixers and cause
them to avoid responding to a deluge of redundant or conflicting requests. 
The mutual interests of knowledge exchange and IT serve to (1) keep solutions
as simple as possible, (2) arrange efficient and steady communications about
94
Chapter 4
Knowledge Needs
IT Capabilities
Time
The learning network
Information technology development
Figure 4.3
The relationship between the knowledge network and its technical resources
should be active and ongoing.

The Role of IT in the Effective Knowledge Network
95
needs and capabilities, and (3) make the most positive difference for the company
for the least cost in terms of time and technology. With so many software integra-
tion solutions reportedly running way over already high budgets, the knowledge
network should be technically managed to make the company smarter through
the collaborative creativity of the knowledge sharers and the technicians.
IT and the ROI of Knowledge
Networks
A constant drumbeat in the technical press today is the heightened need for
CTOs to work within ever-tightening budgets. Return on IT investment has
become more important than at any time in the past decade, and the need to
justify every dollar spent has forced CTOs to find better ways to evaluate in
advance the return that can be expected from every purchase. So many intan-
gibles affect those returns that accuracy and certainty are impossible. Costs
may be easy enough to estimate, but returns can be affected by a range of
unknowns such as the strategic fit of the technology, levels of customization
required, and the possibility that a competitor’s change in strategy will some-
how devalue the investment. 
Knowledge networks don’t necessarily require the scale of expenditure that
many other IT projects do because their objective ROI assessments can be based
more on the cost and resulting revenue impact of basic online communications
Figure 4.4
Coordinated and orderly communication with a busy IT department brings
better results and relationships.

tools and integrated interface design. However, improvements in online knowl-
edge sharing tend to lead more indirectly to greater revenue returns. Thus, the
ROI assessment of those improvements must be done more subjectively than in
situations where changes directly affect costs of production or net profit on
sales. Some experts have confronted this situation and have devised several
useful approaches.
Jakob Nielsen, the widely respected user interface guru, in considering how
ROI assessment could be achieved for improvements in the interface design of a
company intranet, recommends “measuring the productivity gains and seeing
how it improves the employee’s ability to undertake their tasks.”3 He looks for
objective criteria for assessment, achieved (in the specific case of intranets) by
having “study groups of ten, twenty people being monitored in their tasks to see
the gains they are making.” Organizations, he says, should “list a number of key
metrics right at the start of the project” and work toward defined goals to realize
the cost savings that technical interface improvements can and should bring. But
for many technical improvements, objective measurements of ROI are tricky.
A joint study by Intel and the Wharton School of Business5 recommended
more subjective evaluation of IT investment as one way to avoid purchases
based only on objective (but speculative) revenue numbers. The study also
emphasized the concept of revenue distance: how far the software or hardware
proposed for purchase is from the collection of actual revenue. 
Unlike technology acquisitions that can be used immediately and directly by
buyers of the company’s products, most knowledge-related applications have
large revenue distance. Their use leads to clearer thinking in strategic planning
more often than to immediate effects such as higher sales. But combined with
subjective evaluation, an investment in improving knowledge transfer can bring
greater overall long-term benefits to the company. Further combining these
evaluative approaches with the objective observation of actual changes in
employees’ efficiency in work patterns recommended by Jakob Nielsen can
provide reliable metrics for ROI assessment.
Another approach to economizing through the technologies and practices of
knowledge networking is in improving “management leverage metrics.”
96
Chapter 4
HOW CULTURE AFFECTS ROI
People are often looking for a panacea, some magic computer program. The answer is
usually inside their organization. They have to have a clear process for decision making and
a clear articulation of how we account for certain costs and benefits.4
—Pat Harker, professor of operations and information management at the 
Wharton School of Business, commenting on the relative value of finding and 
using hard numbers in determining the return value of technology investments

The Role of IT in the Effective Knowledge Network
97
Through the wise use of online communications, the number of employees
reporting to a manager can be increased. Even a slight increase in this metric,
multiplied across a company with thousands of employees, can pay for the
investment in technology in a short time.
Of course, for the knowledge network, this level of analysis should be part of
the initial strategic planning. Combined with phased implementations that
employ basic and economical software solutions rather than elaborate and
expensive ones, the CTO should be able to justify the initial phases of the knowl-
edge network’s technical infrastructure. The solutions we recommend in Chap-
ter 8, “Initiating and Supporting Internal Culture,” and Chapter 9, “Conversing
with External Stakeholders,” will provide further ideas for ROI assessment.
Technical Approaches to 
Managing Knowledge
As we emphasize throughout this book, a knowledge network is a technosocial
entity requiring a good match between the tools supporting conversation and
the organization of the conversationalists. Without the involvement of humans
and their social concerns at all stages of strategy, planning, design, implemen-
tation, management, and development, the technological components can do
little to advance the spread and use of knowledge in the organization. And
without the correct technology, selected and implemented with the wisdom of
IT, many opportunities and conveniences for sharing knowledge and generating
new knowledge will be lost. 
Technology can only do so much, and it can be deviously simple to provide
what look like the right solutions only to find that they don’t fit the process
needs, work habits, or social culture of the people meant to use them. However,
there are several areas where technology can provide tremendous leverage,
and IT, in collaboration with the planners of the knowledge network, should
prioritize the fulfillment of needs in the following areas: 
1. Integrating knowledge resources 
2. Organizing relevant information 
3. Providing the most appropriate basic tools to support the knowledge
exchange conversation
Limitations of Technical Solutions
Knowledge is not like inventory items that can be stored by description in dis-
tinct bins on assigned shelves. A 6-millimeter hexagonal brass nut with standard

threads, for example, is not subject to different interpretations. In contrast, a
story about how a salesperson learned to understand the needs of a customer
might be stored, presented, and understood in many different ways by different
people because it has many subjective characteristics.
Knowledge is so dependent on human perception and context that one can’t
depend on a purely technical, automated solution to meet the learning needs of
a group or a company. The group must involve itself in the design process of its
technical knowledge-sharing environment. That effort is, in itself, a knowledge-
sharing activity. The ideal role of IT in that process would be as the group’s
technical advisor and consultant. 
This collaborative design process for knowledge-networking technologies
distinguishes it from the more top-down implementation of many knowledge
management technologies. Knowledge networks, by definition, are to be used
as part of the daily work process. They require the participation of their mem-
bers in their strategies and design. As the big consulting firm KPMG con-
cluded, after a large-scale analysis of the realized benefits of knowledge
management systems reported by 400 companies: “These responses confirm
the fundamental flaw in viewing KM as a technology issue: It is not the tech-
nology that is holding organizations back but a lack of strategy and a failure to
build KM in the organization’s day-to-day operations and its culture in order to
encourage end-user buy-in.”7
What good is technology if it is not used? An online knowledge network does
not exist without its technical tools, but it must wisely choose tools and design
interfaces that are appropriate and will actually be used because they answer
real needs. The base-level tools that one knowledge group requires will almost
surely differ from those required by other groups. Some kind of technology will
certainly be necessary for online knowledge exchange, but unlike KM systems,
the most important exchange activity will not be in the retrieval of well-orga-
nized information. It will be in the active give-and-take between people through
the communication and content delivery systems provided by IT.
98
Chapter 4
JUST BECAUSE THEY CAN DOESN’T MEAN THEY WILL
Companies install e-mail or collaborative software and expect knowledge to flow freely
through the electronic pipeline. When it doesn’t happen, they are more likely to blame the
software or inadequate training than to face a fact of life: people rarely give away valuable
possessions (including knowledge) without expecting something in return.6
—Thomas Davenport and Laurence Prusak
TEAMFLY

The Role of IT in the Effective Knowledge Network
99
Integrating Knowledge Resources
According to the technical dictionary site WhatIs.com, “a kludge is an awkward
or clumsy (but at least temporarily effective) solution to a programming or
hardware design or implementation problem.”9 In the pursuit of higher produc-
tivity per worker, many IT departments, lacking sophisticated solutions or
strategies to guide them, have built kludges to provide access to different appli-
cations from a single location on an intranet. Although usable, the resulting
online gateways have not really solved the interface compatibility problem, and
the resulting confusion with incompatible interfaces presented in a common
window has often eroded or reversed the very gains they were meant to
achieve. Users refuse to use the confounding gateways, and their productivity
is not improved. Thus the emphasis in IT on improved integration: the technical
conversion or reconfiguration of data and interfaces from different software
applications into single, unified, comprehensible “consoles” that users are
more likely both to understand and employ on a regular basis.
The conversion of business theory to the knowledge management approach
brought greater focus on two things: (1) delivering specific information to spe-
cialists who needed it and (2) avoiding the unnecessary duplication of the same
FAILURE TO DELIVER: PROBLEMS WITH KM TECHNOLOGY
KPMG analyzed 400 firms and their use of knowledge management systems. In answer to
the question, “Why do you think the benefits failed to meet expectations?” they got these
responses:
1.
Lack of user uptake due to insufficient communication: 20 percent
2.
Everyday use did not integrate into normal working practice: 19 percent
3.
Lack of time to learn or system too complicated: 18 percent
4.
Lack of training: 15 percent
5.
User could not see personal benefits: 13 percent
6.
Senior management was not behind it: 7 percent
7.
Unsuccessful due to technical problems: 7 percent
Of the firms whose systems were fully set up, 85 percent reported that the KM system
failed to meet their expectations.8
ALL-IN-ONE OR KNIT-TOGETHER SOLUTIONS
The predominant goal of software vendors is unifying and automating the entire 
e-business operation. There are, roughly speaking, two ways to achieve that goal:
deploying a suite of products that offer ”all-in-one” e-business functionality or knitting
together ”best-of-breed” digital tools into a unified platform.10
—Katherine C. Adams

tasks within the organization. To those ends, specialists defined the knowledge
resources that needed to be made more conveniently available to them. Depend-
ing on the business unit or department being served, these may have included
records of client transactions, stored proposals and project histories, and loca-
tors for expertise and current related activities within and outside the organiza-
tion. Different applications created and stored these resources, and IT provided
kludges to tie those different applications and their databases together. Recog-
nizing a clear opportunity for improvement, software providers began offering
packaged products that claimed to serve the same purpose, saving time for IT
and providing solutions that were more elegant and intentionally designed. 
Whether or not the company’s integration solution consisted of knitting
together best-of-breed software applications or purchasing these ready-made
all-in-one applications, one great obstacle to utility remained: the inappropriate
manner in which the content of the databases was selected and stored. IT
would create and set up the information storage process, but without the essen-
tial advice and consent of non-IT experts, who represented the knowledge
needs and perspectives of the end users and internal clients. Thus, the stored
information did not go through the essential processes of editorial selection,
categorization, and filtering provided by the people most familiar with the con-
tent and how it would ultimately be used. The results of providing application
integration without the involvement of the end users of the information can be
something like granny’s attic, where piles of articles related to the family his-
tory have been stashed expediently over the years. There they sit, gathering
dust in their random heaps, until a family member with a desire to do genealog-
ical research (and plenty of spare time) finally comes along to make sense of
the chaos. Without including some systematic and meaningful ordering of con-
tent as application integration takes place, the knowledge held by the organiza-
tion becomes, for all practical purposes, useless.
Web Services: A New Approach 
to Integration
In the pursuit of simpler application integration, the latest trend as we write
this book is toward the creation of standardized “Web services.” It’s too early to
be sure that these will fulfill their early promise, but there is no doubt that com-
panies desire what Web services claim to deliver: the ability to mix and match
utilities from different providers to build full Web applications for use in both
internal and public networks. Web services would eliminate the shortcomings
of both kludged integration and all-in-one solutions because they could neatly
bring together the best-of-breed solutions for various functions in customized,
internally consistent Web interfaces.
The software standards being bandied about go under different acronyms such
as UDDI, WDSL, and SOAP. Through widespread adoption of a Web service stan-
100
Chapter 4

The Role of IT in the Effective Knowledge Network
101
dard, programmers hope be able to assign “agents” that can go to specific Web
sites to accomplish specific functions such as integrating various programs. For
a knowledge network, this opens the possibility of selecting a variety of applica-
tions from different Application Service Providers (ASPs)—message boards from
one, news feeds from another, supply chain management from yet another—and
integrating them into one seamless Web site. Here all of the required applications
follow the same formatting and functionality rules, thus eliminating the need for
cutting and pasting data from one application to another.
The greatest barrier to the widespread adoption of any one Web service stan-
dard, as we noted earlier, is the Internet’s history of incremental grass-roots
innovation and its tendency to resist the freezing-in-place effects of standard-
ization. Microsoft (no surprise) is one of the leaders in bucking the resistance,
offering its “Net” standard for Web services. Through its alliances with eBay,
CNBC, and its own Carpoint site, Microsoft has been able to demonstrate its
protocol in action. Its allied companies can, through the Web, send custom
alerts to their customers containing auction updates, stock prices, and real-
time auto-related news tidbits. Customers can receive these alerts by way of
email, cell phone, and personal digital assistants (PDAs). 
Because of Microsoft’s huge installed base of PCs and servers, there would
be widespread compatibility with its standard. That would be a good thing for
many companies, but the groups advocating competing standards maintain that
there would be unacceptable interoperability problems with systems based on
other operating systems, notably the very popular UNIX. UDDI also provides a
list of applications that, under its UNIX-based standard, could be linked
together into integrated products. 
As of year end 2001, the Web service standards issue remains unresolved. IT
managers not concerned about compatibility with external systems managed
by other companies might be persuaded to adopt any one of the standards inter-
nally to gain its application integration benefits for building out their intranets.
But should they make a decision now, they might regret it later if an important
partner or market turns out to be using a different Web service.
Besides compatibility problems, a secondary hurdle in the adoption of Web
services across applications could be the assignment of responsibility for prob-
lems encountered in integrated systems. Suppose a company employs Web ser-
vices to deliver an online product to customers or clients through integrated
applications provided by five different companies. If a customer encounters
problems with output from the system, who takes the blame and provides the
support? The application provider or the application integrator? 
Internal knowledge networks can benefit greatly by adopting Web service
solutions. It’s only when the networks extend to outside the organization—as in
applications where customers on the Internet are involved or where partnering
companies become members of a knowledge-sharing extranet community—
that the hard questions about choosing a standard must be answered.

Knowledge Organization
Knowledge networks rely on the organization and contextual availability of
content to support their conversations and their work. Likewise, they need to
quickly store the content they produce with the same quality of order and with
the same level of availability. IT must provide the tools that allow this cus-
tomized information flow.
The need to assign order to knowledge resources led to the development of
taxonomies and categories as far back as the Library at Alexandria in Egypt. In
today’s world of knowledge, categorization helps match information with the
tasks, projects, and departments that create and need to retrieve it. Editors and
archivists, representing the focus of the knowledge community, are essential in
making the best use of static and dynamic information as it flows between con-
versations, new content, and stored databases. IT provides the technical facili-
ties, and the knowledge network provides appropriate human intervention for
using them. As Figure 4.5 illustrates, a librarian or archivist fills an important
role in any online knowledge-based community. Categorization must address
the special needs of business units, teams, and communities where new infor-
mation is being generated constantly. 
To meet this need, automatic taxonomic software programs, which file infor-
mation according to embedded or assigned keywords or by the context of its
102
Chapter 4
Librarian/
Archivist
Discussion
Manager
Topic A
Content A
Topic B
Content B
Topic C
Content C
Content
Editor
IT LAYER
Integrated: Message board / Publishing platform / Database / Search engine
Knowledge Network
Discussion / Content creation / Info categorization & filtering / Info retrieval
C
o
m
m
u
n
i
t
y
D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
Category
        A
Category 
        B
Content
Portal
Figure 4.5
Essential elements for online integration of discussion and content resources.

The Role of IT in the Effective Knowledge Network
103
creation, are becoming more common. IT may recommend these as solutions
for the knowledge community, but they are only as effective as the active
involvement of their human users makes them. Automation of knowledge orga-
nization may help prevent the granny’s attic scenario, but human involvement
and evaluation are necessary to determine what knowledge is truly worth sav-
ing and in what context it should be saved.
The categorizing functions of a knowledge network should have an online
home that, through its location, provides some context and access to the people
most likely to use it. This is an important integration point for IT, where it can
bring such services to users in immediate online proximity to the conversations
that will make use of, and contribute to, the contained subject knowledge. Such
an online location would be the knowledge portal. In our discussion of portals
later in this chapter (see The Knowledge Portal), we describe how knowledge
communities can perform taxonomic functions through the portal interface.
Basic Tools of the Knowledge Network
Conversation and content are the basic building blocks of knowledge
exchange. Putting the process online creates the need for basic tools to support
the wide range of conversation styles and structures and the wide variety of
content formats and shelf life. We emphasize the wisdom of starting small, fol-
lowing a phased implementation, and basing that implementation on an overall
strategy. Thus, in this brief overview of the basic tools, we focus on technical
products that are inexpensive to install, easy to scale, and simple to customize
and manage. Chapter 5, “Fostering a Knowledge-Sharing Culture,” provides a
view of knowledge-networking software that expands beyond the basics.
The IT department’s involvement in these tools will begin with evaluation
and approval and can extend from integration into the company’s intranet inter-
face to full administration of the platform on company servers. In most cases,
some level of support will be required for ongoing improvement and evolution
BASIC RULES FOR APPLYING TECHNOLOGY
David Snowden, of IBM and the Institute for Knowledge Management, says that three
assumptions about humans and what they know determine whether a technology will
work to help spread knowledge.11
1.
Knowledge can only be volunteered; it can’t be conscripted.
2.
People always know more than they can tell and can tell more than they can write.
3.
People only know what they need to know when they need to know it.
He also advises, “Use the simplest technology you can for the purpose at hand.”

of server-side integration and for support of the Common Gateway Interfaces
(CGIs) and Java applications now a part of most software. 
Email
This oldest, most basic, and most ubiquitous software application is recognized
as the one “killer app” that, more than any other, justifies the existence of the
Internet. It is also the most abused of applications, as everyone who must
delete junk email constantly or who has received misdirected messages (or
sent them) understands.
Email was, and is, the channel of most communication between individuals
and groups. As a means of participating in mail lists, Usenet newsgroups, and
now, many commercially designed online message boards, it serves as the inter-
face to group communications. Through its many user interfaces, it permits the
sharing of files, links, and graphics. 
For IT, the existence and maintenance of mail servers are some of the most
basic elements of their installation. Their involvement is necessary in configur-
ing special mail lists and aliases that allow defined groups to circulate
announcements and participate in conversations. Where email is used as a
means of participation in online message boards, they may need to be brought
in or at least consulted about the configuration of the program and its interac-
tion with the company’s mail servers.
The most vexing problems of email (besides the unending task of filtering
junk) are user overload and the security risks of transmitting viruses to internal
systems. The more groups or lists people subscribe to and the more alerts and
updates they ask to receive, the more likely they are to begin ignoring those
messages as time goes by. IT can only do so much to help relieve the email bur-
dens that people put on themselves in their pursuit of the right knowledge and
information. As to security, most competent IT departments have active virus-
filtering programs in place and use firewalls and policies to minimize risk.
Instant Messaging
Email is asynchronous; two people corresponding don’t have to be online, writ-
ing and reading at the same time, to carry on a conversation. But there is a dif-
ferent quality to communication when the medium is synchronous, like the
telephone or instant messaging (IM), as America Online calls their Instant Mes-
sager technology. The immediacy of response when people communicate in
real time is much closer to the experience of talking face to face or on the tele-
phone. For many people, that immediacy makes the communication more inti-
mate, more exciting, or more social. It’s a very popular way of communicating,
as was demonstrated when a company called ICQ offered its instant messaging
client over the Web several years ago and, without any marketing, had 14 mil-
lion people download it over the course of a year.
104
Chapter 4

The Role of IT in the Effective Knowledge Network
105
Today, IM software is available primarily from two sources: AOL (even for
non-AOL members) and Microsoft (and the many distributors and servers of its
technology). Although compatibility problems still exist between the two main
standards used by AOL and Microsoft, the use of IMs within businesses has
been skyrocketing because of its convenience for supporting teamwork. 
The problem for IT is one of IM security, as noted in a report by the Gartner
Group.12 With up to 70 percent of enterprises expected to be using IM for vari-
ous purposes such as customer support and workplace collaboration, the use
of what Gartner calls “free” instant messaging clients opens the door to the
interception of messages, transmission of computer viruses, and intrusion
through nonstandard system ports. New enterprise-level secure instant mes-
saging applications are now on the market.
Discussion, Conversation, 
and Conferencing
Online message boards and conferencing interfaces allow groups to engage in
organized, moderated conversations that serve as both a means of meeting in vir-
tual space and a content-generating activity. The main strengths of these plat-
forms are that they offer the opportunity for participation and involvement at the
convenience of people whose schedules may not allow them to attend real-time
online meetings, and their interfaces allow conversations to be built on planned
structures as an aid to organizing knowledge communities and their projects.
These systems are available to support conversations in two main formats:
linear and threaded. Linear conversations begin with a title and topic header
and proceed with messages that are added one after the other in a linear pro-
gression. As each participant reads through the list of messages and adds his or
her own, it becomes the last message in the list. Threaded messages permit a
participant to respond directly to any message posted after the topic header
instead of only to the last one. Thus, any message responding to the topic
header can, itself, become a topic header for a new conversation or thread.
Which is best for a given knowledge community depends on the preferred for-
mat of conversation, the amount of participation, and the purpose of the indi-
vidual conversation. Some products permit the use of both formats, with the
participants able to choose their preferred view and use of the interface.
Message boards can run as licensed applications on the company’s own
servers or can be used for activity-determined fees as run on ASPs. The prefer-
ence of the IT department and its need for security or to customize the interface
will determine a given company’s approach. Different products provide differ-
ent levels of control over customized interfaces, degree of organizational
options, and the extent to which different users can be assigned permissions
and powers for administrative control over levels of interaction. 

For example, a system may be used to conduct ongoing meetings for four
related work teams. Each would need its own set of conversation topics, and
each would want to have its own conversation manager with powers to start, end,
edit, and organize topics. An overall community manager would be empowered,
under the software’s tools, to set up these lower level administrative capabilities.
The best of these products also permit the integration of content through their
Web interfaces, making them hybrid platforms for conversation and relevant con-
tent publication. They may also permit the integration of other software applica-
tions such as email (for posting messages or for receiving new messages posted
to selected conversations), real-time chat or IMs, and groupware tools such as
collaborative white boards and copublishing interfaces such as wiki, which we’ll
describe in detail in Chapter 5, “Fostering a Knowledge-Sharing Culture.”
The Peer-to-Peer World
Peer-to-peer, or P2P, applications are the rebellious youth of the organizational
software world. They permit peers (that is, individual computer users) to col-
laborate directly over the Internet without the direct use of intermediating
servers, which are the domain of control of IT. In fact, one of the reasons P2P
applications are being developed is to circumvent the limitations and rules
imposed by IT on users of its systems. Many people would prefer to configure
their working interactions according to the needs of the moment rather than
wait for approval, clearance, and possibly unsatisfactory results coming from
the requirements of IT’s involvement in the process.
P2P is truly the ultimate vision of the Web in that it gives equal power to
every individual with a connection and a computer. Yet, as Eric Woods states in
KM World,13 “it has yet to make a significant impact on the corporate IT world.”
The reason he gives is that the prospect of people in the corporate workplace
all doing their own technical thing “is the stuff of nightmares for most IT man-
agers. Their systems—and their lives—are complex enough without adding
new layers of connectivity and interaction.”
That said, there’s not much more for us to write about it in this chapter about
IT, but we’ll write more about the exciting possibilities of P2P in the knowledge-
networking realm in Chapter 5, “Fostering a Knowledge-Sharing Culture”. 
Content Management and Publishing
Providing timely and relevant content through the Web to working knowledge
communities is just as important as supporting their conversations. In fact, as
we’ve pointed out repeatedly, those conversations often become the stuff of
content—as edited transcripts of the actual interaction, as quotes extracted
from dialogues, and as stimulators for new writings and documents that
become available to the group.
106
Chapter 4

The Role of IT in the Effective Knowledge Network
107
There are many products available for enterprise-level content management,
and most enterprise-level companies now have at least one installed for pub-
lishing to their intranets, extranets, or customer-facing Web sites. Many of them
can be adapted for use in combination with the interactive interfaces described
earlier. And as we mentioned, some message board interfaces provide at least
limited content management capabilities. 
All of these tools, of course, need to be integrated into a common, useful
online space where the knowledge community can gather and share what it
knows in the context of specific projects, goals, and practices. In the next sec-
tion, we describe two approaches to bringing it all together into knowledge-
sharing environments on the Net.
Online Environments for 
Knowledge Sharing 
Though any of the foregoing Web-based tools can serve the needs of a knowl-
edge-sharing community, they are more likely to be used and to make a differ-
ence in the productivity of that community if provided through an online
facility meant to serve the entire organization. Such facilities have been avail-
able in many organizations since the late 1980s, yet they are still in their infancy
in terms of design and utility. Application integration is only one of their short-
comings, and IT is usually given most of the responsibility for designing and
creating them. However, it would be unfair to expect IT to understand the
human engineering dimensions necessary to fit them to all of the possible uses
that different groups within the organization will have for such resources.
The first attempt to bring useful services and resources to the desktop of
employees was called the intranet because, unlike the Internet, it was meant
only to network within organizations rather than between them. Intranets, as
we’ve pointed out, suffered in their acceptance from poor design and limited
integration and standardization. Only the most skilled or curious employees
made good use of them. And though much has been written about them as
knowledge management resources, their most telling limitation was in their
lack of actual use. People simply chose not to devote the time necessary to
learning how to penetrate their confusing interfaces and formats.
GIVING UP THE SEARCH
IBM reports, “white-collar professionals spend a rather consistent 20%–25% of their time
information seeking.”14 Independent of the apparent information intensity of the job
domain, when the amount of their time devoted to seeking required information
approaches 20%, knowledge workers appear to satisfice—to consider the solution they’ve
found in that time satisfactory if not optimal.

Knowledge networking depends for its success on participation. When the
members of such a network find that they must devote too much of their time
to searching for information, learning to use the tools, or establishing a con-
nection between the conversation and its supporting content, they will give up
and make decisions based on whatever information they can find before frus-
tration sets in.
Thus, good design in the online environments that support employees and, in
our case, knowledge communities is important. Companies are learning from
their failures in early intranet design, and the examples set by Web pioneers like
Yahoo! have demonstrated the value of building sites that provide access to
many complementary resources, the so-called Web portals.
These can be key resources for knowledge exchange, so we will devote some
pages to them in this chapter, where we’ll concentrate on the IT department’s
role in providing good ones. In Chapter 8, “Initiating and Supporting Internal
Content,” and Chapter 9, “Conversing with External Stakeholders,” we’ll pro-
vide design and management tips for making these environments a good fit
with the needs and goals of knowledge networks.
The Productive Intranet
In the 1990s, corporations began building intranets to give their employees
access to commonly used information resources. These included directories of
personnel, information from human resources about benefits, 401(k)s and stock
option plans, online forms (also used by HR), and general news about the com-
pany. Some companies used their intranets as gateways to different databases of
business-related information maintained by the company. These were accessible
in their raw data formats and were not presented through user-friendly inter-
faces. As Jakob Nielsen described most intranets through the 1990s, they were
“lacking interface design standards, unified information architecture, and task
support for collaboration and other activities.”15 Employees weren’t motivated
to use them because their designs were confusing and difficult.
As the Web became more widely used and as its technology and more stan-
dardized interface features penetrated the internal design sensibilities of these
organizations, the options for what could be provided through the intranet
expanded, as did the capabilities for more integrated interfaces. Their original
purpose—to enhance employee productivity through convenient access to
often-needed information and resources—hadn’t changed, but the ability to
motivate their use by making them simpler and more attractive to use had.
People who study intranet utility now regard simplicity and adequate training
as the best ways to entice employees to use them. Once the work force has
become accustomed to intranet use as a normal part of the daily routine—
checking shared calendars, company bulletin boards, paycheck stubs, and daily
management announcements—its use for purposes beyond those administra-
108
Chapter 4
TEAMFLY

The Role of IT in the Effective Knowledge Network
109
tive and HR-related tasks is more likely to be adopted. Groups seeking to share
knowledge will begin to recognize the utility of taking their activities online
and, following the design examples of simplicity and utility, will drive the build-
ing of their knowledge networking environments.
Figure 4.6 shows the design of an intranet page chosen by interface guru
Jakob Nielsen as one of the best of 2001. Simple design and navigation with
emphasis on a “community” feel and intracompany communication are among
its strengths. But intranet design must address the needs of the communities
using them. This one, assembled by an intranet specialty company called sil-
verorange (www.silverorange.com), meets Nielsen’s design criteria and implic-
itly supports the values of knowledge sharing. However, it does not provide the
specific utility required by a specialized knowledge network. Instead, it serves
as an informative bulletin board for an organization. 
Figure 4.6
The silverorange intranet design was judged by Jakob Nielsen to be among the
best of 2001. 

Good and useful intranets should be designed by the people who will actually
use them. Following the theme of this chapter, IT should serve in the role of
consultant to the client design team to make sure that the end product is some-
thing that will answer real needs. The resulting product should make it easy for
people to innovate: to create new pages, post new content, and collaborate with
colleagues. The people who would use the intranet to find information should
be able to find what they’re looking for without satisficing—making do with
unsatisfactory results. Eric Hards, a senior designer for Lockheed Martin’s
intranet, recommends redundancy: “You need to give users as many ways as
possible to find something.”16
To ensure that the design will work, IT must implement and then go through
testing phases with the design team as focus groups and beta groups use the ini-
tial design and evaluate its usability, navigability, and searching capability. Subse-
quent improvement will need to be made, and where needed, training resources
will need to be provided. Once the intranet is launched, IT will maintain the basic
structure while providing an interface that is under direct control of the various
groups, including knowledge-exchange communities, who make use of it.
The Knowledge Portal
Portals are like intranets in that they provide online interfaces that bring a vari-
ety of resources together in one place. One difference in definition between
intranets and portals is that the intranet is a system provided to all employees
of the company, whereas the portal interface is a Web page devoted to serving
the needs of more specific interest groups. Portals are often accessed through
the company intranet.
Sometimes referred to as enterprise information portals (EIPs), portals have
the same purpose as the intranet: to improve the productivity of employees.
The best of them provide access to a range of services from company history
and policy to training resources and detailed product information. They bring
together all of the tools we’ve described in this chapter—conversation inter-
faces, content management, access to information databases—and they can be
administered locally by leaders of the teams that use them. 
110
Chapter 4
IT’S PART IN THE INTRANET
In an article in Fast Company magazine, Phil Sandoz of Anadarko Petroleum describes
how their successful intranet works: “Think of it this way,” says Sandoz. “Our IT team
maintains the trunk of the tree. But each department is in charge of maintaining its own
branch.”17

The Role of IT in the Effective Knowledge Network
111
Well-designed portals can reduce IT costs by distributing administrative
responsibilities to the people who are most likely to understand the changes
needed in them and are most able to respond promptly to the expressed needs
of portal users. That effectively removes a time-consuming task from the sup-
port loop and spares IT the responsibility of making technical changes that are
within the expertise of less skilled (and often, less expensive) people.
Not all portals are limited to internal access, as are, by definition, intranets.
The broad definition of portals applies to Web interfaces that invite access and
participation by customers and partners, fitting within the definition of extranets.
In their support of knowledge exchange among customers and between cus-
tomers and the sponsoring company, they serve as knowledge networks. 
All of the divisions of responsibility and design we described for intranets
apply equally to portals, the difference being that organizations that support por-
tals are likely to have more than one of them, with corresponding teams design-
ing and managing them. This creates the need for some restructuring within the
IT department to serve what may be a whole new category of support under the
IT umbrella rather than a single point of contact for intranet administration.
As with intranets, we will explore best practice solutions for portals as a
powerful tool in the knowledge-networking process in Chapter 8, “Initiating
and Supporting Internal Conversation.” We’ll revisit portals as an extension of
the knowledge network into the realm of customers and interbusiness collabo-
ration in Chapter 9, “Conversing with External Stakeholders.”
Summary
An online knowledge network depends on the active support of the IT depart-
ment for the creation and basic maintenance of its working environment. For
that reason, it’s important that a well-understood working relationship be
established between the leadership of the knowledge community and the
appropriate people in IT. The knowledge network is a dynamic entity that dis-
covers better solutions for its needs through its internal conversations and
exchanges. It requires an attentive ear in IT just as it needs software tools that
it can modify at its own discretion.
Simplicity is the primary criterion for technical solutions both because of
costs and the need for members of a knowledge network to adopt and use them.
Beginning with the most basic of interface tools for conversation and content
management will bring greater participation and a smoother path to incremental
improvement of the interface. The role of IT should be to aid in tool selection,
initial installation, and the maintenance and integration of relevant information
applications within the company that will support the pursuit of knowledge.
Knowledge-exchange communities are most productive when provided with
complete online environments that include current relevant content, appropriate

conversation tools, and the ability to customize their virtual workspace as
needed. Intranets are one approach to building these environments, but portals
fit more of the criteria of meeting spaces specialized to the focus of distinct
knowledge networks. 
112
Chapter 4

113
Conversational knowledge sharing can (and will) only take place in a support-
ive social atmosphere. Such an ongoing environment is what we have come to
call “culture.” An organization’s culture should be aligned with its values, mis-
sion, goals, and strategy, but the culture doesn’t have to be defined by them. Dif-
ferent subcultures can exist in alignment with each other within one
organization or even across different organizations. 
The knowledge network exists first within the organization’s greater culture.
It may grow out of a more local subculture such as an area of expertise or a
functional division within the organization. And it will probably develop its own
unique subculture once it goes online. An online knowledge-sharing culture
requires certain conditions and nutrients just as an orchid can grow only within
certain ranges of temperature, humidity, and soil conditions. Yet unlike an
orchid, an online knowledge network can adapt to changing conditions through
its conversations and technology.
In this chapter, we describe these ideal cultural conditions. We discuss how
how to create or migrate to them. We also elaborate on the nutrients that are
necessary to start and grow a healthy knowledge-sharing culture within an
organization: the analysis, the motivation, the leadership, and the trust. For
most organizations, deliberate knowledge sharing is a new direction, and sup-
porting it will entail some cultural change. So we also spend some pages on the
change process and what it entails. 
Fostering a Knowledge-
Sharing Culture
C HAPTE R
5

Creating the Ideal Conditions
If a knowledge-sharing community is like an orchid, how do we create the right
temperature, humidity, and soil conditions for its healthy growth and spectacu-
lar bloom? Some cultures might already offer the ideal conditions. Specifically,
consulting firms—created for the express purpose of sharing internal knowl-
edge, findings, and generating new knowledge, and packaging and selling that
synthesized knowledge—are natural knowledge networks. Most organizations
are not, though. This is especially true where individual specialization has
always been rewarded and collaboration has not. 
Taking the knowledge sharing online, which is the focus of this book, adds
yet another cultural hurdle in the way of providing the best conditions for ger-
mination and growth. There is no prescription for an ideal culture that can fit all
organizations, but there are certain values that must be honored in a culture if
its members are going to feel free and motivated to share what they know and
to collaborate around their shared knowledge.
Trust, as we’ve mentioned numerous times, is essential. If people think that,
by telling others what they know, someone else will take credit for that knowl-
edge or that an expressed opinion will somehow get them in trouble, they will
not participate. Trust in an organization means that the stated rules and policies
for using the network are clear and fair. It means that any incentives for con-
tributing to the network provided by the organization will be real.
Tolerance is important as people begin to use new systems to take part in
new formats of interaction. The online knowledge network is an arena where
people bring their ideas, feedback, opinions, experiences, and questions. Its
members must sometimes walk the fine line between being frank and being
rude. In a virtual environment where facial expressions and tones of voice are
lost, that line becomes even finer. The organization must be receptive to criti-
cism and encouraging to truth. Knowledge does not always come neatly pack-
aged, and in an active and open knowledge network, it may sometimes be
presented in unsettling forms.
An assumption of mutual reward answers the key question, “What’s in it for
me?” Communities are places of exchange, where members expect to get things
(not necessarily material things) of value from each other. They are not places
of one-way contribution where members give to some greater entity in return
114
Chapter 5
THREE ESSENTIALS OF A SHARING CULTURE
Trust: What I share will not be exploited or used against me
Tolerance: What I contribute will not be criticized unfairly or bring personal attack
Reward: I will benefit from the exchange if I contribute to it

Fostering a Knowledge-Sharing Culture
115
for nothing. There must be satisfaction in participation, or people—even if they
are being paid for it—will not contribute knowledge of value.
The Sense of Place
A characteristic of every enduring virtual community we’ve ever heard of has
been a sense of place. It was vivid to us after our first months of participating in
the Whole Earth ‘Lectronic Link, better known as the WELL. Even though we
were in the office or at home, sitting in front of our computer, we had a sense—
as we read people’s words and typed our responses to them—that we were
actually somewhere else, where these other people were, in a space that was
really nowhere specific. Our minds reacted as if we were “talking” to people in
a room rather than typing in a “topic” in a “conference” on a “system.” 
In an ideal online knowledge-sharing culture, people will be able to find that
sense of place. It is a product of trust and openness because the members of
such a culture need to drop some of their defenses to participate at the level
where they will tell each other the essence of what they know in a spirit of help-
fulness and collaboration. A conversation requires that its participants return
regularly to follow up. It requires engagement, which in turn requires a per-
spective of “going back to the place where conversation happens.”
Informality is an important aspect, especially when moving social relation-
ships online. The difference in format between face-to-face and virtual commu-
nication is enough of a challenge, but if interaction is kept rigid and
businesslike without offering the opportunity to hang out and schmooze in the
same environment, the trust, tolerance, and rewards will be hard to come by. 
In his book The Great Good Place (Paragon House, 1989), Ray Oldenburg
emphasized the importance of the third place, apart from home and work,
where people feel free to socialize and relax outside their usual roles. Through-
out human history, people have created such informal places to fill an important
niche in their lives—the tavern, the town center, the bowling league, the church.
The knowledge network is definitely part of the workplace, but within each
organizational culture, there should be an opportunity to get to know one’s co-
workers and to interact in trust-building ways separate from the business
process. Later in the chapter, we’ll touch again on the subject of communities of
practice and how they fit within the cultural framework of the organization.
The Thirst for Knowledge
The motivation to learn is the most powerful force driving participation in a
knowledge network. Although all organizations have needs for knowledge and
for the social networks that share, acquire, and generate it, few of them do a
good job of recognizing and describing those needs in a motivational way. On

the contrary, many organizations have cultures that inhibit knowledge sharing
in one way or another. 
Part of the motivation to learn must exist within the individual, and part must
be motivated by the organization just as schools are meant to motivate their
students. Schools motivate students for the good of the students, whereas orga-
nizations motivate employees for the good of the organization, but the cultural
approach is similar; ultimately, the individual learner stands to benefit. 
If the employees in an organization are looking to learn something important
for the overall good of the organization, a knowledge-networking culture will
serve them well. Their practical needs will help to build that culture. But the
organization must take a role in supporting it, even where the employees are
self-motivated. It must be okay for people to communicate and exchange what
they know. The section on leadership later in this chapter will revisit this idea.
Analyzing an Organization’s Culture
If one can “sense” a culture, how does one describe or evaluate it? How does an
organization know what it’s got, even when it thinks it has described its culture
in a list of values or in a mission statement? An organization that aspires to have
a knowledge-sharing culture might need to make some significant changes, or
it may only need some minor adjusting. How does it know how far it needs to
go to expect knowledge sharing to have an effect on the bottom line? 
The Elements of Culture
In their book, Built to Last,1 James Collins and Jerry Porras examined 18 of
what they called “visionary” companies to find out what made them successful
and enduring. It turned out that exceptional leadership and business plans were
not a common characteristic. Instead, they identified core values, clear pur-
pose, and internal alignment as the elements that kept their exemplary com-
panies steady as they adapted to a changing world. 
“Those who built the visionary companies,” they write in the introduction to
their paperback edition, “wisely understood that it is better to know who you
are than where you are going—for where you are going will almost certainly
change.” So an organization’s understanding of its own core values and purpose
is important in establishing a strong foundation from which the organization
can move. If values, purpose, and internal alignment are unstable—changing
with the winds of each new business trend that comes along—the organiza-
tion’s culture has little integrity.
Culture is a complex social characteristic of human groups. In addition to
those values, purposes, and internal alignments, it includes structured rela-
tionships, language, etiquette, and history. Culture is built over time, through
116
Chapter 5

Fostering a Knowledge-Sharing Culture
117
both deliberate and unconscious practices, and must be learned by newcomers
to the organization if they are going to work effectively within it. Although cul-
ture is difficult to describe, its presence in an organization is undeniable and
powerful, influencing—and in many cases, determining—behaviors and deci-
sions as well as power structures and role definitions. 
As we mentioned in Chapter 1, “Knowledge, History, and the Industrial Organi-
zation,” Edgar Schein studied people and management in the workplace, observing
that, since people are complex beings, no single management approach aimed at
increasing productivity will succeed for all workers. Schein, as a social psycholo-
gist, also has done extensive study of organizational culture and cultural change.
Two of his conclusions in this area are particularly relevant to us in this chapter: 
■■Organizational culture exists on three levels
■■Within an organization, there are likely to be conflicting cultures
In Figure 5.1, the three levels of culture are represented. An organization’s
culture manifests on a visible, material level as artifacts. How it is taught to its
employees represents a less visible level as espoused values. And it works to
influence employees and their behaviors on an ingrained, unconscious level.
These levels, though closely related, are not always consistent with each other.
What you see on the visible layers of a culture may not reflect what’s happening
on the attitude and assumption layers.
Cultural Conflict
Poor leadership and external forces can cause change and slippage in uncon-
scious values even when the outward evidence of company culture remains con-
stant and the values written into the company’s charter go unedited. The
Artifacts
Espoused Values
Basic Underlying
Assumptions
Seen, heard, felt. 
Style, language, decor, myths, stories.
Original values begin with
founders, prevailing leaders, 
evolve into shared assumptions
Learned behaviors, attitudes.
Source of stability of beliefs.
Defines reactions.
Figure 5.1
Culture exists on three distinct levels.

118
Chapter 5
Internet has imposed a challenge on all organizations based on rigid hierarchical
management by exposing their employees and customers to the nonhierarchical
natural communications flow of the Net. This exposure puts pressure on estab-
lished chain-of-command cultures because people begin to use their electronic
networks to communicate in ways that ignore the existence of the hierarchy.
Underlying assumptions about “how things work” change before espoused val-
ues in the company can catch up.
As to conflicting cultures within the organization, the culture of a sales
department, where commission-based incentives motivate internal competi-
tion, is going to be very different from the culture of an engineering department,
where collaboration leads to higher productivity and better products. A sales
culture may promise customers high levels of support that engineering can’t
afford to provide. A service culture that is open to conversing with customers
may be at odds with a legal culture that fears company liability and the escape
of proprietary information.
In some large organizations, entire departments compete with each other to
serve the same customers, sometimes without even being aware of it. Cisco
Systems sells its products through certified partners but also does direct sales
to customers, often in direct competition with its partners. Sales and service
teams have been known to stumble over each other in their attempts to com-
municate with customers. These situations indicate not only a lack of coordi-
nation but also the kind of misalignment in values that could be eliminated
through more effective knowledge sharing.
The Importance of Values
When you work within a culture, much of it eventually becomes invisible to
you, shoved into the area of unconscious assumption. An outsider often is more
able to sense the deeper, unconscious aspects of an organization’s culture than
someone who has been immersed in it. A new employee may find the estab-
lished ways of relating within the workplace to be wonderful, strange, or a baf-
fling mixture of the two. Of course, certain of the espoused values will be made
highly visible, or part of the company’s mantra. 
At Hewlett-Packard, the “HP Way” has been described and applied to
employee behaviors since the early days when the founders still ran the com-
pany. Hewlett and Packard began a tradition they called “management by walk-
ing around” in which managers spend time having informal chats with
employees in the workplace to get feedback and develop close ties. These are
artifacts that help maintain the visibility of a culture—from managers walking
around, to the company logo, to local jargon, to the décor of its offices, and to
the dress codes that determine how people present themselves.
In the end, though, it’s how the company—through its executive officers and
managers—treats its workers and customers that is the most powerful mani-
TEAMFLY

Fostering a Knowledge-Sharing Culture
119
festation of its culture. Practice, far more than ideals and values, slogans, and
furnishings, describes the explicit culture of the organization. The criteria for
hiring, compensating, and promoting people demonstrate the real-life priorities
of ownership and executives. 
So it’s critical, when considering a change to (or an increased emphasis
toward) a culture of knowledge sharing, that the changes go beyond the level of
words and intentions. There must be real incentives and demonstrations of
faith in the new cultural direction. The espoused core values must be made
appropriate, and the culture must become aligned in the knowledge-sharing ori-
entation across the entire organization.
To change an organization’s culture so that it can, and will, effectively
exchange knowledge as a regular part of its operations, the organization’s lead-
ers need to understand where its culture stands in the present. To reach that
level of understanding, it should undertake two studies: a cultural assessment
and a knowledge audit.
DAVID PACKARD’S 11 SIMPLE RULES
Hewlett-Packard’s culture is a legacy of its founders. The following list (slightly altered here for
today’s standards of gender equity) was part of a speech delivered by David Packard in 1958.2
1.
Think first of the other person. This is the foundation of getting along with others. 
2.
Build up the other person’s sense of importance. When we make people seem less
important, we frustrate their deepest urges. 
3.
Respect the other person’s personality rights. Respect as something sacred the
other person’s right to be different from you. 
4.
Give sincere appreciations. If we think someone has done a thing well, we should
never hesitate to say so. 
5.
Eliminate the negative. Criticism seldom does what its user intends, for it
invariably causes resentment which will rankle, to your disadvantage, for years. 
6.
Avoid openly trying to reform people. Every person knows he or she is imperfect,
but they don’t want someone else trying to correct their faults. 
7.
Try to understand the other person. When you begin to see the whys of another
person, you can’t help but get along. 
8.
Check first impressions. We are especially prone to dislike some people on first
sight because of some vague resemblance to someone else whom we have reason
to dislike. Follow Abraham Lincoln’s advice: “I do not like that man … therefore, I
shall get to know him better.” 
9.
Take care of little details. Watch your smile, your tone of voice, how you use your
eyes, the way you greet people, the use of nicknames and remembering faces,
names, and dates. 
10. Develop genuine interest in people. You cannot successfully apply the foregoing
suggestions unless you have a sincere desire to like, respect, and be helpful to
others.
11. Keep it up. That’s all, just keep it up.

Cultural Assessment
An organization should understand its current culture and the culture it aspires to
before it begins the deliberate change process. A cultural assessment provides
that understanding. This book doesn’t pretend to be a definitive work on organi-
zational culture, but we will cite here some widely recognized techniques used by
specialists in the area of change management. Three popular and complementary
approaches are gap analysis, goal alignment, and individual-organization fit.
Gap analysis is a term widely applied to environmental conservation. In that
context, it identifies species that are not represented in current plans as “gaps”
in conservation coverage. In the context of cultural assessment, gap analysis
compares an organization’s current cultural practices and assumptions with
ideal practices in a desired culture, highlighting gaps between the two. The pur-
pose of the analysis is to identify where the greatest gaps exist as well as where
little or no gap exists. Thus, change efforts can be concentrated on where they
are most needed, reducing the perceived task from one of total revolution to
incremental or focused change. This saves cost and minimizes disruption
within the organization. 
Gaps can be measured along parameters associated with the three levels of
organizational culture we discussed earlier in this chapter:
■■The visible evidence of the culture
■■The espoused values of the culture
■■The unconscious assumptions of the culture
Surveys administered to employees and analyzed according to their depart-
ments and positions can provide a good overview of what the people recognize
as their culture or of their distinct microcultures. The ideal might describe the
attitudes and assumptions that would be expected to exist in a knowledge-shar-
ing version of the organization. It could be that the company already believes in
open exchange of what people know but that it doesn’t buy in to the value of
taking its conversations online. Maybe its reliance on the decision making of a
single leader or management team has made employees apathetic about collab-
orating to find new solutions. If the ideal is a culture that values open conver-
sation, and analysis reveals a culture in which people feel intimidated when
they speak openly about company issues, a critical gap has been identified. 
Goal alignment addresses the problem of conflicting internal cultures. It
first identifies different microcultures within the organization—whether they
are defined by divisions, management levels, project-oriented teams, or geo-
graphically separate offices—and finds discrepancies in assumed goals
between them. By understanding these different perspectives of the organiza-
tion and its goals, efforts can be made to bring them closer together so that
cross-company change can be smoother. 
120
Chapter 5

Fostering a Knowledge-Sharing Culture
121
Goal alignment may not be as critical where the organization has chosen to
lead its change efforts with a pilot subcommunity, beginning with the team or
division that is most ready to adopt the new technologies and practices of
knowledge exchange. In such cases, the vanguard group serves as the test case
or as the cultural change role model for succeeding subcommunities, and the
realignment happens incrementally as the new model proves its success. In any
case, if the ultimate common goal is a knowledge-sharing organization, there
will eventually be social pressure for distinct internal microcultures to come
into goal alignment so that the knowledge exchange can take place not only
within them but also among them. 
Individual-organization fit looks primarily at placement and hiring prac-
tices and affirms that as the organization reorients itself toward its ideal cul-
ture, it is putting people in place who fit with its new direction rather than with
its old one. In this way, new values can be imported to help push the transition
from old, entrenched assumptions. For example, bringing in new people who
are comfortable with using online media in group communications situations
can break the ice in companies just beginning to move their interaction to the
Net. In addition, recognizing where valuable individuals are being challenged in
migrating their communications to message boards or email helps define the
need for new training programs. 
Objective cultural self-assessment is difficult for organizations because it
exposes inbred subconscious attitudes and often unearths unpleasant forma-
tive histories. Some people, particularly in leadership positions, don’t like to be
reminded of failures and errors made in the past that remain embedded in cur-
rent operations and culture. But if a company is to make itself amenable to
change—as all companies should be in this fast-changing age—then it must
begin by understanding what keeps it from changing. Bringing in a qualified
organizational change consultant at this stage is a good idea.
The Knowledge Audit
Carl Frappaolo, executive vice president of the Delphi Group Inc. in Boston,
says that for what he calls “knowledge harvesting” to be productive, there must
be an environment where people are comfortable with sharing knowledge. To
find out what defines such an environment for a given organization, a knowl-
edge audit needs to be done. This, Frappaolo explains, is “a benchmark of
where the organization is from a technical standpoint, a leadership standpoint,
a work habits standpoint, a cultural standpoint, a communication pattern
standpoint and a team structure standpoint.” [italics ours] The results of the
audit “will give insight as to whether the whole process of knowledge harvest-
ing is going to be perceived as beneficial.”3 In other words, if people don’t rec-
ognize any gains from knowledge exchange and harvesting in their jobs, they
simply won’t use the systems provided.

From a technical standpoint, the organization may not be providing the tools
necessary to exchange knowledge effectively. As we emphasize throughout this
book, the ability to converse and to share information through electronic net-
works broadens the possibilities for people who are not physically able to meet
but who have access to the Net. The selection of online tools, as we’ll describe
in Chapter 7, “Choosing and Using Technology,” also determines to a great
degree the amount of knowledge exchange that can take place.
Company leadership (which we’ve covered before and will cover again later in
this chapter) is another powerful determinant in the organization’s willingness
and motivation to adopt knowledge-sharing practices. Though many “bottom-up”
initiatives instigate change, they require their own styles of local leadership—
and ultimately, the support from the top—to be truly effective.
Work habits and communications patterns can be difficult to change. Where
the mindset is such that an employee sees “knowledge” as only being of inter-
est to the “intellectuals” in the organization, that employee is likely to resist
working or communicating in ways that more openly share what he or she
knows. This resistance may be rooted in a reluctance to expose one’s intellec-
tual property or from an inability to use the available means to describe one’s
knowledge eloquently. Either way, it’s helpful for the organization to under-
stand that these habits and patterns exist so that it can address them, on a case-
by-case basis if necessary.
Because so much of an organization’s culture, especially if it has a long his-
tory, is below the surface level and unconscious, assessment and auditing
should be done with the aid of consultants who don’t share that history. Fresh
viewpoints—unsullied by skeletons in the closet and old axes to grind—are
valuable here, as is an understanding of the special needs of knowledge-sharing
cultures. Companies such as Denison Consulting (www.denisonculture.com)
and the Hagberg Consulting Group (www.hcgnet.com) specialize in this field of
assessment and evaluation.
Denison invented what it calls The Denison Organizational Culture Survey,
which measures an organization’s culture according to four traits: adaptability,
mission, involvement, and consistency. Surveys administered to employees
build scores on the evaluative tool that can be compared to benchmarks of other
companies and correlated to other measures of company performance such as
customer loyalty and sales. This is a kind of gap analysis. The tool also highlights
conflicting tendencies within an organization, such as values for consistency of
practice that may limit the organization’s adaptability to changing circumstances.
Conversational Tendencies
An organization’s overall culture influences the behaviors of all of its employ-
ees regardless of the microcultures in which they work, but most employees
are more aware of their membership and allegiance to smaller communities
122
Chapter 5

Fostering a Knowledge-Sharing Culture
123
within the larger one. Different motivations drive those smaller groups, and
some—defined by their interests and practices—are much more likely to
engage in conversation than others. 
Online communities demonstrate these different tendencies very clearly.
Communities come together around the common interests of their members,
but the Web has provided a continuum of examples. At one end of that contin-
uum, communities of people are comfortable convening around one-way con-
tent. They flock to the sites of celebrities or of products or news, and though
they don’t interact with each other, they direct their attention toward the same
content. At the other end of the continuum, people are driven by a need to inter-
act about their shared interests. People, and the varying degree of focus they
bring to their communities, are represented in Figure 5.2. The degree of focus,
represented by the variation from big ball to little ball, depends on the per-
ceived importance and relevance to the group of its core interest.
For a project team, the focus will be large because the team members must
devote their time and attention to achieving a common purpose within a given
length of time. For a department in the organization, there may be many scat-
tered foci, from attention to ongoing projects to the routines of departmental
administration to the social planning for staff birthday celebrations. Because
the attention of workers is split among them, none of these interests will be as
important as the product is to an engineering design team or as raising cus-
tomer satisfaction numbers are to the CRM team.
Many intranets serve communities of people who share interest in the infor-
mation provided but feel little need to converse with each other about it.
Instead, they may contribute to the content of the intranet by submitting ideas
and suggestions to IT, the Webmaster, or to the intranet administrator. The com-
munication flow is like a one-way broadcast with a contributing but silent audi-
ence. Figure 5.3 shows members of an organizational community all paying
attention to the huge ball of relevant and essential content—company news,
employee directories, policy statements, and HR forms—with some of them
bringing their own offerings in the form of announcements and updates from
the workplace. Conversation is not a priority when the content provides the
sought-after knowledge.
Figure 5.2
The varying importance of core interest (or focus) in community relationships.

In an organizational culture, the content of the intranet is important as a
shared database of information available to everyone. It is an important organ
for imparting cultural values and communicating knowledge about the com-
pany itself. Separate areas of the intranet may serve the informational needs of
the different divisions of the organization. Documentation of important cultural
artifacts, such as the mission statement and company values can be referenced
there along with profiles of fellow employees and their specialties. 
On the opposite end of the continuum are communities with little in the way
of shared interest but with a desire to socialize. Many of these formed sponta-
neously on the Web as chat rooms and message boards proliferated beginning
in the mid-1990s. They are likely to form internally if the organization provides
open, unrestricted opportunities for employees to communicate with each
other through its intranet or if employees start their own internal email groups.
Think of these as the third places in the knowledge network.
Conversations in such situations (see Figure 5.4) happen around topics, but
the topics themselves are not as important to the participants as the contact and
interaction itself. Though there is certainly some time-wasting potential in seiz-
ing these opportunities, they can effectively introduce people to the concept and
practice of online conversation and allow people to get comfortable with new
interfaces without the additional stress of forcing their conversations to be goal-
oriented. However, even in a goal-oriented online community, it’s important to
provide some “free space” where informal conversation can take place.
124
Chapter 5
Figure 5.3
A community focused on content of common interest such as a corporate
intranet or Web site. 
Figure 5.4
The social interaction itself, rather than the knowledge gained from the
conversation, may be the prime focus.

Fostering a Knowledge-Sharing Culture
125
Most online conversations that take place within organizations happen in the
context of some shared interest or purpose, with relevant content being at the cen-
ter of discussion, as in Figure 5.5. This is the realm of project teams and com-
munities of practice, which we discuss in more depth later in the chapter.
Communities that form around shared interest in a subject—and have the means
to interact—can reenergize their central focus with new collaborative ideas.
People in these arrangements discuss what is important to them in the work-
place: their shared goals and the work that is at hand. The balance between
interaction and content creates a kind of equilibrium, and both of our previous
examples—where content was everything and where conversation was every-
thing—will tend to gravitate toward this more balanced dynamic. Where people
point their common attention toward content, they will want to discuss it more,
and where people simply talk, they will tend to form communities of shared
interests—requiring supportive content—as they discover commonalities.
Along the continuum from content-focused communities to interaction-
focused communities, the middle ground, where content and interaction feed
each other, is the most stable and rewarding, especially given the flexible toolset
of the Web. Cultural migration can be leveraged by developing the organization’s
intranet to move employee participation from wherever it is along the contin-
uum to this more balanced state of involvement, communication, and focus.
Tapping the Mind Pool
As we’ve pointed out, understanding its current culture can be an imposing
task for an organization, but our main concern in this book is in describing the
destination cultures that will value (and participate in) online knowledge shar-
ing. From wherever a company is, it needs to arrive at a culture that encourages
the smooth flow of knowledge and experience from where it exists to where it
is needed. And as always, the most fluid, current, relevant, and usable knowl-
edge resides in the minds of people both within and outside the company.
Figure 5.5
The big ball of context stimulates conversation and serves as its focus. 

To get that mind flow going, some companies are proactive in developing
practices and compatible technical systems that attract and support participa-
tion. Others are more reactive, following the spontaneous leadership examples
of entrepreneurial employees who make use of whatever technologies are
available to exchange knowledge and make their jobs more productive. The
two sidebars describe these very different approaches.
Tacit knowledge is held in the mind of every employee. But not every
employee is able to put that knowledge into words. As they address their work-
place responsibilities, they develop skills and expertise that, through repetition,
become almost instinctive. They become more productive but may not be able
to describe the subconscious elements of their skills. 
The company relies on tapping into this deep experience to more quickly bring
other workers up to the same level of productivity. Often, the only method for
doing so is visible demonstration, which can be a time-consuming approach. Yet,
through the give-and-take of conversation—online or face-to-face—such
ingrained techniques can usually be explained, coached, and transferred to others.
The key to unlocking such tacit knowledge is in motivating employees to par-
ticipate in transferring their experiential knowledge to others. A companywide
value in openness and sharing is more likely to motivate an individual than a
culture that rewards workers for hoarding their experience to enhance their
individual prospects. If workers are rewarded for revealing the secrets of their
productivity rather than keeping those secrets, the benefits can accrue to the
company’s bottom line as well as to the individual’s.
If a practice of knowledge harvesting is put in place, then everyone within
the organization must be open to having his or her individual knowledge
126
Chapter 5
MONSANTO’S KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT ARCHITECTURE
Led by CEO Robert Shapiro, Monsanto Company modified its culture by reorganizing. The
company made itself “small and connected,” subdividing its 4 business units into 14. Its
Knowledge Management Architecture (KMA) allows the units to communicate and build
maps for learning, information, and knowledge, leveraging employees’ human abilities to
“make sense” of available information that computers could only store and organize.
Director of Knowledge Management Bipin Junnarkar says, “we’re attempting to change
organizational culture by sharing and learning from each other so that the core values of
individuals and organizations overlap … .” 
Using clearly defined roles in self-directed teams, Monsanto is attempting to
understand and optimize the interactions between people so that its workers can become
“analysts and thinkers,” providing the company with “tremendous competitive leverage.”4
(Monsanto’s KMA will be described in more detail in Chapter 8, “Initiating and
Supporting Internal Conversation.”)

Fostering a Knowledge-Sharing Culture
127
sources tapped. Everyone must be able to benefit in some way from the shar-
ing, and everyone should have access to the resulting bounty of explicit knowl-
edge or conversation. These and more concrete incentives are important
because when the most generous are rewarded, the least generous will eventu-
ally get the point and follow.
Often, leadership from the top levels of the organization is hesitant to upset the
delicate balance of the status quo by initiating new cultural practices or marshal-
ing change within the organization. In such cases, individuals who understand
their own needs and the capabilities of the technology available to them are likely
to take some leadership into their own hands and tap into the minds of colleagues
who can serve as their personal knowledge resources. This was the original
“hackers’ model” of innovation, dating from the early days of computer network-
ing. We see more and more evidence of cultural change being initiated in this
manner, where grass-roots models are built and executed before top-down cul-
tural initiatives are able to get off the ground. But top-down leadership and exam-
ple are crucial if core values are to change across the breadth of the organization.
Leadership: Energy from the Top
For emphasis, we repeat: Unless the top tiers of the leadership hierarchy rec-
ognize the importance of knowledge exchange in the culture, there is little hope
that grass-roots efforts will transform the entire organization. Some individuals
in the company may pursue learning from each other, but knowledge as a driver
of success and change throughout the organization will not be significant.
GUERRILLA KNOWLEDGE SHARING
David Weinberger is a consultant, analyst, and coauthor of The Cluetrain Manifesto. He
observes what really goes on in the business world and emphasizes that groups are
making effective use of technical capabilities in ways that the so-called leaders of their
companies don’t always “get.” 
In an interview with CIO magazine,5 he pointed out how spontaneous, task-focused
subcultures develop through internal networks, often in spite of established protocols.
“Businesses are taking on the structure of the web—decentralized, messy, self-
organizing.” 
“ … motivated, intelligent, committed hyperlinked teams keep the business closer to the
customer.”
“ … many businesses are devoted to maintaining the org chart through everything from
disciplinary action to body language, so hyperlinked teams route around org charts.” 
“ … these teams constitute a second life of the organization and the place where the
most valuable work is getting done.” 

The CEO, of all people, should understand and represent the purpose and
goals of the organization and how its culture relates to achieving them. This is
more than a managerial relationship; it is a social leadership role that directly
transfers to the behaviors and communications that happen all across the com-
pany. If the success of the company relies as much on generating and exchang-
ing knowledge as it does on product development, production, marketing, and
sales, then it is essential that the CEO make sure that its culture, at all levels,
remains aligned with knowledge sharing, even if it has to change to do so.
Buckman Labs, a medium-sized chemical business in Memphis, is recognized as
one of the leading examples of the knowledge-sharing organization. Its vice presi-
dent of knowledge transfer, Victor Baillargeon, emphasizes the necessity of having
buy-in by the “top brass.” As he stated in an interview, “It takes clear leadership to
set the culture and change it, and the leadership must remain involved. It’s an
ongoing battle. The challenge is to make it so that there is value in participating.”6
Titles and Terminology
We use the word knowledge endlessly in this book, but in the real world of the
workplace, knowledge is less used and widely misinterpreted. Few people con-
sciously seek knowledge in their daily jobs. Instead, they seek answers; they try
to learn from each others’ experiences; they look for records and histories that
tell them what has been tried and what has succeeded. They attempt to contact
people who understand the goals they are pursuing and the difficulties they are
encountering. They hunt for experts and advisors. Rarely do they think in terms
of knowledge gathering per se. 
We use the term to represent all of the foregoing, but within the organiza-
tion’s culture, there may be other terms that are more appropriate and better
understood. Cisco, which has for years deliberately shared know-how through
its Web site, intranet, and extranet, rarely uses the word knowledge on any of
these sites. Instead, you see many references to solutions, training, e-learn-
ing, and guidance.
The CEO may also think in general terms of improving knowledge manage-
ment throughout the company or in specific business units, but his or her direc-
tives must describe the actual needs that must be fulfilled, whether they are to
increase the speed of innovation or to generate more new ideas. It is up to the
CEO to understand the organization well enough to know whether or not a
senior manager needs to be assigned or hired to oversee the development of
knowledge-sharing resources and practices and whether that person should
bear a title such as chief knowledge officer (CKO) or, as we just described, VP
of knowledge transfer.
Some cultures may need that titled person to oversee the cultural transforma-
tion, leading the organization from the assessment stage to the software design
stage, through the implementation of new knowledge-sharing practices, and into
128
Chapter 5
TEAMFLY

Fostering a Knowledge-Sharing Culture
129
the production phase where operations are monitored for success. Other cul-
tures may find it more appropriate (and the change smoother) to allow workers
to develop their own systems for sharing knowledge and, as Dave Weinberger
suggests, to have the VPs and senior managers get out of the way. “It’s not your
job to create conversations, to create voices,” he says to those titled leaders. “It’s
your job to listen to the conversations and voices already there.”7
Patience, Patience
In leading transformation to a knowledge-sharing culture, it’s unwise to expect
change to happen overnight or even over the span of a year. For many people
accustomed to other ways of doing things in the workplace, it may require sev-
eral business cycles to recognize the improvement and get used to the new
tools and techniques. That sense of place and culture may not arrive until some
time has been logged actually exchanging knowledge.
As Victor Baillargeon described his experience leading change at Buckman
Labs, “The first year they think you’re crazy. By the second year, they begin to
think it can work, and in the third year, they buy in.”8 You can get more buy-in
by demonstrating incremental success, even if it’s only in one small sector of
the organization, than by promising that success will come for everyone at the
same pace. The cultural assessment and knowledge audit should have identi-
fied the divisions or teams within the company with the most promise of
improving through use of knowledge exchange. It is through watching the
development of those high-leverage seed communities that new cultural values
will gain a credible foothold within the organization.
The danger, as we’ve seen over the years in our own initiation of online com-
munities, is that the CEO and board of directors will demand to see direct
improvement on the bottom line in the short term rather than allowing the new
practice to mature and catch hold. Social practices, especially those taking
place virtually, rarely work that quickly. They must be permitted to find their
way through some trial and error before they “click” and build a critical mass of
participation and exchange. But leadership can and should define goals toward
which teams can strive as motivators for advancing the use of their knowledge-
sharing systems.
Performance as a Motivator
The building of a knowledge network begins with a perceived need to know
more and to know it sooner. That need not only justifies the expense of reorga-
nization, technology, and new leadership positions, but it drives the buy-in by
employees who must participate in the network to make it a success. 
A study by the consulting group McKinsey and Company9 identified perfor-
mance as a prime motivating factor in knowledge cultures. By setting goals and

mileposts to measure improved performance in teams and business units, the
need for attaining and circulating new information—for learning—becomes
more valuable and urgent. Workers see the importance of extracting from each
other all relevant knowledge and experience and of seeking the same from
other people within the organization and outside the organization. Thus moti-
vated, they innovate new practices using the communications tools available to
them and look for ways to improve those tools to better fit their needs. Motiva-
tion and purpose, stimulated and set by senior management, spur innovation
and collaboration. Where a relationship with IT has been established, that inno-
vation moves smoothly into the area of creative interface configuration to
shorten the time between stating the purpose and achieving it. Members of the
motivated working group become conscious of any inefficiencies in their
process and seek whatever means are available to streamline their activities,
thus learning and implementing as one fluid and collaborative activity.
Organizations that define themselves as performance-oriented cultures push
the development of the networking tools that enhance that performance. The
role of knowledge network leaders (including the CKO and senior managers
who may be closer to the specific projects or lines of business) is to provide the
perspective and overview that spots inefficiencies and facilitates connections
between people and the resources they need to eliminate those inefficiencies.
This focused leadership serves as the liaison with IT and with the CEO whose
purview must remain broad and long range.
Listening as a Motivator
Some leaders emphasize that workers should be careful with what they say and
to whom. Thus, fear dominates the message that they send into the workplace.
The result is an underground communications culture that protects itself and
its conversations from the prying eyes and ears of management. If management
gives the impression that it would rather not hear what workers have to say,
even in the form of constructive criticism, then the idea of a knowledge-sharing
culture has little hope of reaching fruition.
Former Intel CEO Andy Grove wrote a book titled Only the Paranoid Sur-
vive.10 As the leader of one of the world’s largest and most successful compa-
nies, he was not meaning to write a prescription for survival in the workplace
but was describing his perspective from a key position in a company that was
subject to the crises and sudden changes that occur in the modern world and,
subsequently, in the marketplace. The aftereffects of 9/11 are only our latest
example, but Grove’s book was written 5 years before that event and puts para-
noia to work recognizing the subtle evidence of approaching change that allows
good leaders to avoid the industry-shattering changes that may follow. 
Grove is considered by many to have been a great business leader. He writes
of how leadership must relieve workers of the fear of change by recognizing the
130
Chapter 5

Fostering a Knowledge-Sharing Culture
131
need for change far in advance, before it reaches the crisis stage. He describes
the dangerously narcotic effect of the “inertia of success” and welcomes “Cas-
sandras” who announce rumors of potential cataclysms. He also praises “free
flowing discussion” and “constructive confrontation” as important to keeping
management appraised of employee attitudes and concerns. Though his para-
noid mindset is rumored to have trickled down into the engineering layers of
Intel, he does at least talk a good game and describe what would be a good role
model for a knowledge-focused leader.
Such a leader is a good listener, both inside and outside the organization. By
doing that knowledge-gathering task on behalf of the workers, an attentive
leader can steer the company along a successful path, motivating workers to
contribute what they know and think by demonstrating to them that their
knowledge and opinions are being put to use for their benefit.
The ideal results of good leadership and effective motivation are what Jun-
narkar at Monsanto describes as “an ongoing upward spiral” of converting
information into insight and formalizing new roles for people who make sense
of information. And as we described in earlier chapters, the people active in the
knowledge network will continue to refine its tools and techniques to make the
exchange process all the more natural and productive for them.
Self-Organizing Subcultures
Another key motivator for circulating knowledge among employees is intellec-
tual stimulation. By engaging in conversation with people who have experience
and information about topics of shared interest, one is exposed to new ideas, dif-
ferent perspectives, and the personal enhancements that people give to the things
they know. When an organization gives its blessing to—and provides opportuni-
ties for—such interaction, people are likely to participate with enthusiasm.
Where the topics of their conversations have some relationship to business goals,
these communities of practice (CoPs) can actually help advance one’s career.
As Etienne Wenger11describes them, CoPs are conversational communities
convened around passionate interests. Participation in them is voluntary,
driven by personal motivations, and they are completely self-organizing, requir-
ing nothing from the organization except the access to online meeting tools or
F2F meeting places. CoPs don’t exist without motivation, for motivation is
what creates them in the first place. 
Organizations are just beginning to understand that by sponsoring and sup-
porting CoPs in the workplace, they get to harness the most creative energies
of groups of workers without having to devote management resources to orga-
nize and oversee them. When the focus of the CoP is related to that of the busi-
ness, the business stands to benefit in ways that are unpredictable but
potentially profitable. 

An article about CoPson the Intelligent KM site12 suggests examples of these
extracurricular but relevant communities, such as “multimedia application
development at a software company, herbal remedies found in the Amazon rain
forest at the National Institutes of Health (NIH), or aerodynamic automobile
design at a car manufacturer.” In all of these cases, hobbyists would come
together to share resources and attempt to answer each other’s questions while
advancing collective knowledge. Often, a CoP coalesces around an acknowl-
edged leader in the field: an expert or master who helps train eager appren-
tices. Members of the community bring new knowledge to it and, through
cultural osmosis, into the sponsoring organization.
Because CoPs are more concerned with learning and innovation than execu-
tion and productivity, they may seem to run counter to the priorities of the busi-
nesses that sanction them. Yet they can add value to those businesses by
serving social and research functions that the business may not feel at liberty to
perform. And being relatively cheap to administer—requiring only the use of
email, message boards, or simple group communication tools—they aren’t a lia-
bility to management.
Members of CoPs must be aware that their time spent in the community is
not company time or, if it is, that the community must give back to the company
in some form. The most successful CoPs seem to be those that exist specifically
outside the work environment, where their members are free to explore and
experiment without concerns about the value or cost of their explorations to
the company. Only under those conditions can their passions truly run free.
The most important side benefit of CoPs is that they allow employees to
experience the potential of open collaboration and innovation. Having gotten a
taste of that kind of interaction, many will be motivated to bring the same kind
of energy, relationship, and collaboration into the organizational culture. And
by being allowed to participate in CoPs under the company’s approval, they
may be less likely to leave (with their knowledge) for greener pastures.
A more centralized approach to motivating innovation in knowledge
exchange has been practiced by the aforementioned Buckman Labs. By foster-
ing communication and collaboration among people across the entire company,
the scientists and technicians at Buckman are able to realize serendipitous ben-
efits. They describe an example where scientists in their microbiological control
division were stumped in trying to control the growth of an organism and were
given the solution by an employee in another division who had learned to con-
trol the growth of a similar organism while practicing his hobby of brewing beer.
Self-organizing conversational communities are not inherently about control;
in fact, most managers would find them frustrating to oversee. But as Dave
Weinberger says, “You have to learn to love messiness—although messiness has
been the sworn enemy of information management professionals.” He gives the
example of the employee database that tells all of the essential facts about the
person but leaves out personal observations such as “that Sally is wickedly
132
Chapter 5

Fostering a Knowledge-Sharing Culture
133
funny, that Fred is really creative but many of his ideas are bad, that Carlos is a
great initiator but is weak on follow-through, and that Wanda is a great person
to travel with.”13
Roles within the Network
At the WELL, we learned through trial and error. The role of host was created at
first to provide a level of autonomy to the WELL’s members, allowing them to
apply their interest and expertise to managing a diverse selection of conversa-
tion topics. Over time, though, certain individuals added other qualities to the
host’s definition. They not only brought some subject matter expertise to their
conferences, but they also began practicing facilitation and social counseling,
keeping conversations on-topic and resolving arguments and disputes among
participants. Some provided information resources and organized “field trips”
for members of their interest groups into the physical world. The best hosts
attracted loyal communities who showed up daily almost as if they were volun-
tarily instructing classes at school.
In a conversational knowledge network, there are similar roles that need to be
filled. And just as hosts became an essential part of WELL culture, these knowl-
edge facilitation roles will become identified with the knowledge culture in an
organization. At Monsanto, Bipin Junnarkar emphasizes the importance that
roles play in the successful conversion of information into insight in self-directed
teams. Because these teams work within the context of an organization, their
level of performance is more important than in the less formal interaction of the
WELL. Thus, the team leader must keep an overview of how the team is achiev-
ing the goals of knowledge creation and exchange. The leader must keep track of
what lessons have been learned and feed those lessons back to the team.
It’s not an easy role to fill, as Junnarkar admits. “It is a very new concept for
the entire organization. We look at creating value at the level of the individual,
to improve the capability of each person. And we’re attempting to change orga-
nizational culture by sharing and learning from each other so that the core val-
ues of individuals and organizations overlap, which represents a change from
the classical way of interacting.”14
Across the Firewall
Another self-organizing subculture is that of the customer. Increasingly with
the availability of the Internet, the public is able to get a more detailed impres-
sion of corporate culture. Web sites, more than most advertising, provide
insight into the values and purpose of organizations. Customer service and sup-
port—all of the elements of customer relationship management—are now
being provided through the Web. Hence, whatever the company’s internal cul-
ture, it must take into account the public’s exposure to it.

Customers now “talk” to one another online about the companies they buy
from—what some have called “word of mouse.” They want to connect with peo-
ple inside of the companies they buy from, too. As Dave Weinberger says, “Cus-
tomers want to talk with the crazy woman in your back room who actually comes
up with all the good ideas as well as tons of bad ideas. They want to talk with the
designers of the interface or of the controls. They want to talk with everybody
who’s involved with the product.”15 Those customers share a passion for the
product with the company’s employees, especially with the product’s designers. 
The knowledge community should extend beyond the firewall to the cus-
tomers who care enough to provide feedback and try to connect with the com-
pany. This inevitably requires some cultural adjustment because the assumption
in most companies for decades has been that there would be minimal interac-
tion between the workplace and the customer. Today, through sophisticated
customer relationship management (CRM) interfaces and innovative customer
contact practices, the boundary between company and customer is becoming
more and more transparent. But if the company wants to do a good job of con-
versing with its customers, it had better learn to converse internally first. 
The Challenge of Change
For many organizations, the change to a knowledge-sharing culture will be slow
and at times difficult. It will cause disorientation and disruption because people
are used to working in a certain way, within a certain organization, using cer-
tain tools. New skills will need to be developed and, as we’ve pointed out, dif-
ferent skills will be valued. Good writers and explainers will gain prominence;
fluent users of technical interfaces will excel. Those accustomed to developing
their specialized skills and to being treated as high-prestige local gurus will find
themselves being asked to share their expertise openly with many others. Peo-
ple who have the social skills to entice others to reveal their knowledge through
artful conversation will be recognized in new roles in the company.
The organization as a whole will need to emphasize values that may long
have taken a back seat to profit and market share. As Victor Baillargeon said of
Buckman Laboratories, “We have a code of ethics that is the firm’s cornerstone
and that contributes to building a climate of trust and respect.” Shareholders
may have to understand that to build for profits over the long haul, the organi-
zation has to adapt to the realities of the knowledge economy of the future
where profit may only come to companies that understand the importance of
trust and respect.
Buckman Labs’ status as a leader in companywide knowledge sharing was
not gained easily or quickly even though it concentrated on deliberate cultural
transformation. It took 3 years for its employees to “buy in,” Baillargeon admits.
“I advise companies contemplating it to take a bite and get started. As you
134
Chapter 5

Fostering a Knowledge-Sharing Culture
135
prove it works, you can grow it and migrate it into other parts of the company.
You need a unifying technology that will be a good tool for your people.”16 And
with that admonition, we move on to discuss some of those good tools in the
context of the cultures that may be using them.
Summary
An organization that wants to share, exchange, and generate knowledge must
have a culture that is aligned with the values that make such open transfer pos-
sible. Building or migrating to such a culture requires deliberate analysis of the
starting point and the desired end point of the culture-changing process. 
Different parts of the organization may have different cultures and ingrained
habits that make them easier or harder to move toward the ideal knowledge-
sharing culture. The company’s leadership must clearly describe that ideal and
make the call as to which of its diverse subcultures will lead the way in moving
toward that ideal. This change can be accomplished by planned companywide
reorganization and technical revolution or by allowing small, self-motivated,
self-organizing communities of practice to serve as role models for the more
formal divisions of the company.
A company’s culture is increasingly transparent to customers, so it’s even more
important today that the company align its culture with the needs and expecta-
tions of those customers. The knowledge sharing can extend through the corpo-
rate firewall into the Internet where mutual learning can take place. The
intersection of interests between the company and its customers is in the shared
passion for products and in the use of common communications technologies.


137
People and their cultures are adaptive; that has been the story of the human
race, and we constantly see evidence of it all around us. The personal com-
puter, the Internet, and the Web have made us invent new ways of seeing and
interacting with the physical world through our new virtual world. 
We humans have proven over time that we can adapt to almost any condition
or situation, and we use technology to make our adaptation easier. We’ve devel-
oped clothing to keep us comfortable in hostile environments. Our cars have
eight-way adjustable seats and smart climate controls. We devise ways of inter-
acting with technical gizmos as if they were human. Now we can design online
environments that allow groups to communicate in Cyberspace in ways similar
to those they use in the physical office space. 
Our first five chapters were mostly about people, organizations, and culture
because they are in fact the most important factors in the success of a knowl-
edge network. This chapter introduces the relationship between those human
entities and the interfaces that allow them to practice knowledge sharing in
Cyberspace. We follow this chapter with one focused on the technology tools
that work best as components in a knowledge exchange interface. The techni-
cal choices and design are important to the flow of information between peo-
ple. They can block or inhibit that flow just as easily as they can make it
possible or even improve it. But we begin by emphasizing a point we’ve hinted
at in previous chapters: Keep the interface as simple as possible. 
Taking Culture Online
C HAPTE R
6

Unnecessary complexity should always be avoided. Change for the sake of
change is often counterproductive. Interfaces with which a culture is already
comfortable should be leveraged. This chapter is full of cautions and descriptions
of pitfalls. There are many choices for online conversation tools available, and
software producers are constantly hawking new “knowledge management solu-
tions.” If we have anything to recommend beyond keeping it simple, it is to avoid
dead-end solutions. Use tools that can be adapted to new needs as they arise.
Cultures and the environments in which they function evolve together. Peo-
ple adapt to their environments while modifying them, where they can, to fit
their needs. The human-computer interface is a special case because humans
have created it for humans to be further changed by humans. Knowledge
exchange is a special case of this special case because people who use virtual
interfaces to learn are more likely to notice how the interface helps or hinders
their learning. The interface, the culture, and the learning are tightly linked.
This chapter describes those links and how an organization can smooth the
adaptation of a knowledge-sharing culture to its online meeting place.
The Medium Is Part of the Message
When Marshall McLuhan wrote “the medium is the message,” he was exagger-
ating somewhat to make a point. The medium is certainly not the entire mes-
sage, but it can be a major component of the total impression made by the
message being transmitted. 
The medium does, indeed, make a significant difference in communication. A
stage performance of A Few Good Men does not impart the same experience as
the movie version. Seeing a football game in person is qualitatively different
from seeing it on television. And a conversation that takes place in a conference
room does not leave the same impression as one that takes place through an
online message board. The difference between any two media conveying the
same content is experienced not only by the recipient but also by the sender.
Compare, for example, standing up and speaking at a meeting with sending an
email message to the same audience.
This medium-message effect applies just as powerfully to cultures as it does
to individuals, which is important to keep in mind when selecting and designing
the interface through which a community will converse. An online interface will
force its users to alter their customary ways of communicating. Replacing face-
to-face interaction with online interaction requires a period of adaptation dur-
ing which individuals adjust their work habits and, in some sense, the way they
project their personalities. 
As individuals adjust to communicating online, their group culture also
adapts. Most organizations and their cultures tend to resist change, so the end
results of any change to social expectations must be justified. The key incentives
138
Chapter 6
TEAMFLY

Taking Culture Online
139
to a group’s going through adaptation to the online social environment are the
need for effectively exchanging and generating knowledge and the faith that
the new approach will deliver more knowledge faster and more efficiently
than the face-to-face technique.
Another element that must be preserved in any transition to a new conversa-
tion environment is trust. If use of the interface erodes the participants’ will-
ingness to trust one another, which is a risk in any virtual communication, the
credibility of the knowledge being exchanged will likewise be eroded.
The Postocracy
Effective use of an online interface requires technical skills and social skills
that are not emphasized in face-to-face conversation. Table 6.1 lists some of the
differences in valued personal qualifications between the two meeting con-
texts. The differences may affect the membership, values, and productivity of
the group. When a culture first goes online, part of the apparent medium-
message is that certain members have suddenly become more visible, more
active, more persuasive, and more competent than they ever have been in per-
son. People with no prior experience conversing online find themselves lagging
behind the veteran users in their ability to communicate clearly and convinc-
ingly or in the amount of their presence in the conversations.
An online discussion community is what we call a postocracy, where those who
post their messages and opinions have more de facto influence than those who
don’t. A cultural hierarchy originally based on good in-person conversation and
presentation skills may be turned on its head when taken online. People who have
logged time on Web communities demonstrate their fluency in this new environ-
mental language and assume the leadership roles in the digital conversations.
The more complex the new conversation environment, the greater this cul-
tural disruption is likely to be. But even in the most basic online conversation
environment (email), the change from standard office interaction is significant.
Email affects the velocity of group communications. People expect immediate
response to their email messages. They also feel increasingly overloaded by the
volume of email they receive. Email, when used regularly, seems to try to force
more communication into a day than is possible to deal with. At least in person,
one is able to engage in only one conversation at a time. Email asks that we be
engaged in dozens of exchanges simultaneously. 
This hurry-up effect is even more pronounced when using the aptly named
instant messaging tools, where real-time interaction is assumed and a failure to
get an instant response from someone may be interpreted as a deliberate snub.
People who structure their workday around checking email and keeping an
instant messaging window open on their screen are more prompt in respond-
ing; thus, they are more visible—and probably more influential—in the online
communities of which they are members.

John Suler, a clinical psychologist who studies online group behaviors at Rider
University in New Jersey, affirms that different genres of networked communica-
tion media enhance different aspects of our social experience. Being online and
communicating with people who are online at the same time, he says, creates a
sense of “presence” that conveys commitment to the group. Showing up regu-
larly for a scheduled chat reinforces cohesion in the group. And he emphasizes
that no matter how sophisticated the interface, there is no substitute for in-per-
son encounters, which “help seal the relationship and make it seem more ‘real’.”1
The message conveyed as the by-product of any chosen medium must be
considered in the context of its purpose and the culture it is meant to support.
The tradeoffs of any virtual medium—for example, more convenience for less
intimacy—must be taken into account. Rarely will the fit between technology
and culture be perfect, and where it is not, the adjustments that will need to be
made, either in the technology or the culture, should be acknowledged from
the beginning.
140
Chapter 6
IN-PERSON SKILLS
ONLINE SKILLS
Different:
Eye contact
Typing accuracy
Tone of voice
Spelling
Handshake
Formatting
Posture
Description
Timing
Responsiveness
Facial feedback
Choice of words
Similar:
Sense of agreement
Sense of agreement
Manners
Manners
Brevity
Brevity
Eloquence
Eloquence
Persuasiveness
Persuasiveness
Insight
Insight
Synthesis
Synthesis
Originality
Originality
Tact
Tact
Table 6.1
Comparison of Technical and Social Skills in Online Communication vs. Those
in Face-to-Face Conversation

Taking Culture Online
141
Matching Environment and Culture
The online world is an environment just as surely as are one’s physical surround-
ings. It has different characteristics from the world of trees, sky, walls, windows,
and air conditioning, but its features and rules are just as influential on the human
activity that takes place within it. In the online world, software defines the virtual
environment, and our human faculties interpret what we experience. 
Some virtual places may “feel” like library stacks, others like auditoriums, and
others like classrooms. The software, the site design, and the culture of the users
are components of these electronic social environments. Many factors, includ-
ing the following, help define the social experience when a group goes online:
1. Availability: how simple it is to access and navigate
2. Appearance: its colors, layout, design, and clarity of purpose
3. Complexity: the number of choices the user has to make
4. Synchronicity: the degree of immediacy in the communications 
5. Richness: the amount of information contained in the communication
6. Population: the number of people who can and do use it
7. Depth: its number of layers of content and activity and their searchability
8. Rule structure: the policies in place for using the system
9. Interactivity: the extent to which users can affect its content
10. Privacy: the extent to which access is limited and secured
The results of a cultural assessment and knowledge audit—two evaluative
approaches described in Chapter 5, “Fostering a Knowledge-Sharing Culture”—
can identify traits that indicate how important these factors are to the people
who use the interface. The artifacts of a culture—its symbols, language, and
stories—can be represented, employed, and conveyed through the tools and
design. The espoused values of the culture can be supported in the implemen-
tation of the technology and in the rules and policies put in place to regulate
participation. Even cultural assumptions at the unconscious level will be
reflected (and affected) as people adapt to working and communicating in the
virtual environment. 
In Chapter 5, we described the three main aspects of a cultural assessment: gap
analysis, cultural alignment, and the fit of individuals to the organization. Here
are some simple examples of how the interface might relate to each of these:
Gap analysis. Many gaps in knowledge-sharing values can be closed through the
choice of appropriate software and design of the environment. If people are

142
Chapter 6
unaccustomed to logging on to a virtual meeting room to engage in conver-
sation with colleagues, an interface that regularly delivers the latest conver-
sational updates to them via email will engage them in a more convenient
way and motivate them to gradually increase their participation. 
Cultural alignment. Subcultures within the organization can become better
aligned through the use of common interfaces and access to shared con-
tent. Each subculture may have its distinct conversation area, but some
conversations may be shared between groups or across the entire organi-
zation so that differences can be aired and the useful cross-pollination of
ideas can take place.
Fit of individuals to the organization. This can be improved as the culture
goes online by hiring and training people for competence in the use of
conversational interfaces. The introduction of new environments for con-
versation can, in effect, give a culture a fresh start by providing a new con-
text for gathering and interacting where new histories of interaction and
new relationships can be built.
Organizations often attempt to replicate established cultural practices when
choosing their technologies, but this is not always the best idea. For example,
many businesses that before 9/11 were accustomed to holding regular face-to-
face meetings among people from geographically distant offices now save on
travel time and expense by arranging virtual meetings using videoconferencing
interfaces to provide a rich face-to-face experience. Instead of flying across the
country, spending the night in a hotel, and sitting together around a conference
table, the attendees assemble in special conference rooms in their home offices
and converse with one another’s video images.
Michael Schrage, of MIT’s Media Lab, says such decisions respond to a “sub-
stitution imperative” and warns that in these cases simply “throwing band-
width” at a problem to minimize change in social convention may not be the
most effective solution.2 Though it’s cheaper than actual travel, it’s still far more
expensive than the lower bandwidth solutions of text communication, and the
technique used in most cases does not address the real purpose of the meet-
ings. Most video projections focus on the participants’ faces yet surveys about
the use of videoconferencing reveal that participants would prefer to see more
of the information that the meeting is about. 
Many management surveys through the years have shown that meetings,
regardless of their format or environment, are considered by most workers to
be the biggest wastes of company time. We’ve all spent too much time sitting in
rooms and waiting for every person to finish talking about subjects that may or
may not be relevant to the work we need to get done. Spending money on a
video hookup to reproduce the same result seems to be not only inefficient but
also unwise, except for the fact that it provides an opportunity for people to
make brief (but virtual) eye contact with one another.

Taking Culture Online
143
We recommend that rather than select technologies based on their ability to
replicate in-person work practices, leadership should encourage the culture to
adapt to technologies that bring maximum efficiency and effectiveness, even if
they force some change in cultural habits. It is important to design the interface
to serve established cultural traits and needs. However, it is equally important
that the design exceeds what is possible in person and provides the culture with
a meeting environment that can be customized to its new needs as they arise,
which they most certainly will.
Collaborative Design
The best way to select software and design an interface for online collaboration
is to get thoughtful input from the culture that will be using it, involving key
members early in the process. Including actual users in the initial discussions of
the knowledge network allows them to identify and prioritize their knowledge
needs while describing their customary communications processes and the
structure of their working groups, project teams, or communities of practice. 
No one knows better what will work in an online environment than the peo-
ple who are meant to use it for a purpose. As we’ve pointed out in previous
chapters, the relationships of the user community to IT and to the interface
designers are very important to the success of the technology. This involvement
should begin early and should be maintained.
If a new interface needs to be designed, interviewing members of the user
groups through use-case surveys should be part of the predesign process.
Through these surveys, individuals describe the tools and capabilities they
require and how they will use the interface in a variety of situations. Members’
responses are analyzed by interface designers, Web masters, and IT profession-
als to compile a list of required features, assemble a blueprint for configuring the
various software programs, and draw a map showing how various resources—
such as the discussion space, information library, and member profiles—will be
organized in the knowledge-sharing environment. As iterations of the design are
built and made available for testing, the target group then serves as the guinea
pigs, trying out the new design and providing input for tuning the interface.
The next stage of user involvement comes when the design is final enough to
create training programs for its use. Input from future users at this stage identi-
fies gaps in skills and experience that must be addressed through training. This
is also the time to bring in representatives of other key areas of expertise within
the organization, notably IT and Legal. Their involvement is essential to answer
critical questions about security, technical feasibility, and policy considerations
for the upcoming online interaction. 
Early involvement of a community in the design of its future virtual meeting
environment helps ensure that it will be used actively and effectively. The right
features will be there, and the members will be prepared. But more important
is the fact that such involvement motivates the community to make its project

succeed. By helping to build the interface, members have a sense of ownership
in it. That buy-in will carry forward as the group continues to innovate and cus-
tomize its knowledge-sharing environment.
Bringing Simple Conversation Online
In the early days of computer networking, email was invented to answer the
needs for sending and receiving messages. By 1980, groups were able to
exchange similar messages and read them in the stored format of online conver-
sations. These were the Usenet newsgroups. New and unique social conventions
grew up around these interfaces because they were so simple and because peo-
ple used only the most basic of the available commands. One could correctly say
that a culture formed around the use of the Usenet interface. It was one of the
first examples of the computer interface and the culture becoming intertwined.
Leadership and Human Intervention
Before the Web, people coming online for the first time had to adapt their activ-
ities to the limited available features rather than expect the interfaces to serve
all of their interactive needs. The conferencing interface used at the WELL
beginning in 1985 was only slightly more advanced than Usenet’s. But the sim-
plicity of a primitive interface is not necessarily a weakness. Simplicity is often
the key to adoption of a technology because by presenting the user with fewer
choices it requires less learning. Indeed, the people who lead the social use of
any technology are more influential in the adoption of an interface than the fea-
tures that are missing or included.
The WELL provided a simple tree-structured environment of conferences—
grouped-by-topic, text-based collections of conversations, each administered by
a so-called host. These hosts were entrusted with privileged access to technical
tools that allowed them to manage the conduct and content of their conferences.
They could freeze a conversation if they decided that everything that could be
said had been said. They could remove a conversation from visibility if they
thought it had served its purpose. And they could remove the contents of a
posted message if it violated their local ground rules for participation. The capa-
bilities of the software determined, in part, the social structure and ethics of the
WELL culture. No host, for example, could remove a member’s message without
a notice appearing that the erasure had taken place. That feature guarded
against a host surreptitiously censoring someone’s message without any notice
or explanation—a clear abuse of power in our freedom-of-speech culture.
Writer Thomas A. Stewart tells a story of how a consultant in the firm Price
Waterhouse (before its 1998 merger with Coopers and Lybrand) joined with
some colleagues to create a network where they could, in their words, “collab-
orate so as to be more innovative.”3 To that end, they set up an email list on
144
Chapter 6

Taking Culture Online
145
Lotus Notes with “no rules, no moderator, and no agenda except the messages
people send.” Though the list was originally set up to serve a small group, it was
open to any other employee. As of the writing date of the article, it had grown
to 500 members and was considered the premier forum for knowledge sharing
in the company. Lotus Notes has no advanced features for administering large
email lists or for searching their contents. It’s not an “ideal” platform in terms of
design. Yet, the simple email list works because the right people use it, its use
requires no training, and as the article points out, it’s demand-driven.
The WELL’s user community collaborated with its management in making
improvements in the interface, but it was never the software that determined the
culture. The social interaction and collaborative debugging of the conversational
process made the WELL distinctive and attractive. There’s no doubt that the
PricewaterhouseCoopers group could benefit from some additional features for
managing its growing volume of messages and participants. There is a place for
appropriate technology if the users have a part in its selection and design.
The WELL had a slogan: “Tools, not rules.” Wherever possible, the company
would respond to customers’ suggestions by creating a technical feature (or
accepting an already created one from a technically adept customer) that
would add to convenience or serve as a form of social mediation. Some of these
tools allowed customers to configure their use of the WELL according to their
social preferences.  These tools also relieved management of some onerous and
time-consuming responsibilities as social mediators and enforcers. 
We tried hard to keep written rules to the absolute minimum, believing that
fewer rules meant less inhibition and more creativity. In fact, our most effective
methods for regulating the community turned out to be neither tools nor rules;
they were setting good examples, selecting good hosts, and using public diplo-
macy. But personalization—the ability for the individual to tailor his or her online
experience—can definitely eliminate some irritants from the use of an interface
and can encourage people to participate more fully in online communities.
Conversation Filtering
Tools that allow the user to personalize the online experience do eliminate the
need for some rules. For example, most interactive group discussion interfaces
now include a feature that allows individual users to filter the content pre-
sented to them. In some cases, they can choose to filter out messages posted by
specific people. At the WELL, we called such a tool a bozo filter while other
interfaces refer to it as the Ignore feature. In many interfaces, users can rate
messages based on their helpfulness or quality and can choose to be shown
only messages rated higher than a selected level. Still another filtering feature
allows users to subscribe only to the conversations they want to be shown each
time they visit.

These are all, in some sense, time-saving conveniences, but they also serve to
improve the user’s overall qualitative experience of the environment. If the
quality of the perceived experience can be improved in terms of convenience,
relevance, utility, and interpersonal compatibility, the user is more likely to be
a regular participant. Such filters map to the social techniques people com-
monly employ for in-person interaction, where they selectively pay attention to
some people (and some conversations) and ignore others. Some cultures may
choose not to have filters because it’s important to them that every member be
exposed to everything and to everyone else.
As we’ll describe in the next chapter, there are many different products avail-
able to support online conversation. Many different aspects of a culture may
determine the features that are most appropriate and effective. These include
the size of the population, the duration of its task, the kind of work that needs
to be done, and the physical locations of its members. But the style and proto-
col of its interaction and conversation are the most important criteria for choos-
ing the software that it will find most useful.
Tools and Their Configuration
When computers and software were used only to crunch numbers, interface
design was simply a matter of making input and output as simple as possible. Once
networked computers became broad-based environments for communication and
information sharing, their inadequacies for replicating in-person or even tele-
phone interaction became obvious. The virtual social experience, though always
advancing, will probably never be indistinguishable from physical presence.
Yet, as computers have improved at a rapid rate, the software that exploits
their increased power and speed has brought us closer to providing options for
reproducing the different ways we naturally communicate as humans. Not all of
our conversations are the same. Some are one-on-one, others take place in a
group, some are brief, and others are extended. Some are all business, and others
are casual. So how do these translate to the capabilities of software? Consider the
following choices, many of which overlap in their capabilities with each other.
The Genres of Online Conversation
In Chapter 7, we will provide some detailed descriptions of specific software
programs and interfaces that support knowledge-sharing conversation. But in
the context of their effect on social interaction and culture, we present the fol-
lowing descriptions of the main categories of those technical tools:
Email is, well, like mail: written correspondence, except it doesn’t take days
or weeks for an exchange to take place. It was the original online commu-
nications tool and is still the most widely used. One can send a message to
146
Chapter 6

Taking Culture Online
147
an individual or a group that can be received almost instantly. A message
can contain text, graphics, Web pages, animation, video, audio, or soft-
ware. One can easily respond to any or all of the other recipients of a
received message. Email client programs can be configured to filter and
organize one’s email to prioritize and keep track of numerous ongoing con-
versations. Email lists can serve as newsletters or as ongoing focused dis-
cussions. They can be moderated to reduce the noise-to-signal ratio, or
their contents can be sent out in daily or weekly digests to reduce the clut-
ter of individual messages. 
Discussion is like meetings conducted through text. Discussion is our
umbrella term for any asynchronous interface where multiple separate
conversations can take place. Just as with email, the participants don’t
have to be using the system at the same time, but if they are, their
exchange with each other can be almost instantaneous. Again, one can be
involved in multiple conversations simultaneously, but in this case, all of
the conversations are available in the same form to all of the participants,
and those conversations—accessible through the same Web address—are
easier to navigate than a collection of email folders. 
Discussions can be open to all members of a community or privately
accessible to only a few. Most discussion environments provide descrip-
tive profiles of participants and tools for managing the contents of the dis-
cussion space. Old conversations can be retired and archived, and
duplicate conversations can be merged. Completed conversations can be
closed to new responses, and profiles can be searched at least by names.
Chat is conversation with time-based presence. Participating in a chat
exchange is analogous to sticking one’s head into a coworker’s cubicle and
asking a quick question or just making social contact. Chat (and instant
messaging) happen in real time, unlike email and discussion where one
can leave a message that might not be seen for hours or days. 
In chat, there is a sensation of immediate engagement. Two people or a
small group can carry on a very productive public or private conversation
in a real-time environment. The conversation can be archived and
reviewed, just as in email and discussion. But the immediacy of the inter-
action doesn’t encourage deep thinking and the composition of long, care-
ful responses, as do the asynchronous interfaces.
P2P, or peer-to-peer interfaces, are decentralized in that they are meant for
communicating and sharing information between the personal computers
of two or more correspondents without going through a hub or server.
Instant messaging (IM) programs are similar to P2P programs because
they connect individual peers using the same client software programs,
but most IMs depend on central servers to coordinate communications. 

True P2P programs directly connect client programs on individual per-
sonal computers to share documents, send and receive messages, and
maintain shared schedules. They replicate the ad hoc arrangements that
people make to collaborate as small groups on projects or interests with-
out being slowed down by the central bureaucracy of the organization. 
Video transmits the animated true-life faces and voices of participants. In its
high bandwidth, most natural looking mode, videoconferencing is expen-
sive. There’s some question that, after the introductions, what people
really want to see in such meetings is the faces rather than the information
being exchanged. If the content of the meeting is better portrayed as num-
bers, charts, or Power Point slides, a phone call combined with some sim-
ple file transfers or email attachments will serve just as well for much
lower expense.
Document sharing media are included in some groupware solutions that
will be described in the next chapter. These may include coedited docu-
ments and virtual whiteboards or Web pages that can be worked on col-
laboratively by remote team members. These usually augment voice or
text conversations and may be included in the Event genre that follows.
Software is also available that allows groups to follow a leader’s tour
through Web pages, a sort of “guided Web surfing.”
Event environments seem to fit better into most organizations’ needs and
budgets these days with their increased restrictions on business travel.
They permit the presence and immediacy of a true meeting format, includ-
ing slide presentations, shared documents, and virtual whiteboards, while
concentrating on synchronizing voice communications with those trans-
mitted presentations. Chat conversation also can be coordinated with the
information displays.
A powerful intranet can provide access to most or all of the foregoing com-
munications options through specialized portals. Only P2P solutions stand
alone, outside the context of the intranet. But each of these media, if used
exclusively as the sole communications method for a knowledge commu-
nity, will shape the format of the community in some way. Again, this can
be beneficial; forcing change in communications practices often can bring
out more of a group’s communication potential. But if the wrong tools are
chosen, or if adoption is rushed, the group may resist and become even
less communicative as a result.
Fitting Diverse Subcultures 
The challenge of matching interface with culture is simplified if there is a sin-
gle, homogeneous culture in the organization. If communications methods and
social networks are well established and stable, choosing the appropriate tools
148
Chapter 6
TEAMFLY

Taking Culture Online
149
from the preceding list may not be so complex, especially given the flexible,
multigenre nature of many products (which will be described in Chapter 7).
On the other hand, if an organization is large and diverse enough that distinct
subcultures exist, each with different needs and habits, then the selection of tools
and overall interface design must account for those differences. In the interest of
economy and efficiency, the organization will want to avoid building completely
different interfaces for each subculture but will still want to serve their differing
styles of communication. If at all possible, a base or platform should be assem-
bled that can be adapted, through custom formatting, to the unique needs and
preferences of the various subcultures within the organization.
Building a replicable platform was the approach in designing for the initial
customer community at Cisco Systems. The technical and business teams
assembled tools and features—for conversation, content production, event cal-
endars, and event presentations—at the portal level for the pilot project: the
Networking Professionals Community. All of the components of that portal
could be replicated to build other portals, and anyone in the company, regard-
less of their line of business, would be able to navigate to any specific knowl-
edge portal on Cisco’s intranet or extranet. There, they would find tools that
were familiar though distinctive in their presentation. 
Such an arrangement offers economies of scale in terms of software, engi-
neering, design, and employee training because the one platform, with slight
modification, can be used across all of the different internal or customer-facing
communities. One training program can be adapted to serve all community
staffs and stakeholders. A database and searching tool can gather and find
knowledge that crosses business disciplines and departments. These original
goals were realized in the creation of new knowledge-sharing community por-
tals a year after the original community was launched. Yet there were important
lessons learned in the design and implementation stages.
The Impact of Format 
on Conversation
How a communications tool is formatted can significantly affect culture by
restricting the way people are able to interact. Here is one common example
with a long history where a discussion interface offers two different options for
configuring conversation: linear and threading. Though they both support
group interaction using text, these two very distinct structures determine the
order, continuity, and responsive style of a conversation and can strongly influ-
ence the direction a conversation takes and who will participate in it.
Linear Discussion Format
As Figure 6.1 illustrates, a conversation in a linear format is simply a series of
responses following from the topic header, which serves as the title and intro-

ductory message for the ensuing conversation. The order of responses reflects
the order in which people log on and post them. Sometimes the central topic of
the conversation is interrupted (Response #3). This can lead to topic drift
(Response #4) unless an attentive moderator (Response #6) brings the discus-
sion back on topic by suggesting that the drift initiator start a new topic about
his or her tangential interest. Using linear structure, this would be the most
appropriate method for accommodating new linear topics. 
A linear conversation is most useful when the reader can scroll up and down
on the computer screen, navigating to different responses or conversational
passages to get the context of the discussion. This is a more natural way of fol-
lowing a coherent conversation as opposed to the alternative approach of view-
ing only one response per screen. The best software gives the user the option of
having the entire conversation displayed as one scrolling document or of break-
ing it up into page-sized chunks.
Threading Discussion Format
A similar conversation portrayed in a threading format is illustrated in Figure
6.2. Note the difference in terminology. The ability to respond directly, and sep-
arately, to a message (A) means that there is no need for a moderator to bring
the discussion back on topic: Each thread becomes its own topic, which read-
ers are free to follow or ignore as they wish. The main spine of the topic (B)
continues on where participants respond directly to the header. But with no
150
Chapter 6
THE USE-CASE PITFALL
Although use-case surveys are meant to describe all of the possible features and choices
the eventual users will want to have in an online environment, experience in designing
Cisco’s initial customer community showed how bad surveys and insufficient research can
lead to poor results.
A technical consulting company was contracted to build the interface in conjunction
with a business process team. The company selected a well-known and widely used
software program for supporting online discussion. Their responsibility was to conduct
use-case surveys of prospective users to determine the configuration and feature set
required in the discussion interface. Unfortunately, they had no experience using such
software and did not appreciate the importance of certain features.
As a result, they did not include certain essential options in the use-case surveys. People
taking the surveys, not being offered those options, did not ask for them, so they were not
included in the first iteration of the discussion interface. The first usability tests rejected
the interface as clumsy and confusing.
The lesson: When installing new interface tools, bring in experts with experience in the
use of the tools to make sure all of the configuration options are understood and
included in use-case surveys. 

Taking Culture Online
151
moderator present, a thread’s subject may wander far from the original intent of
the topic (C), confusing readers who depend on the topic header to inform
them of its contents. 
Topic 5  Best practices for resolving CRM cases
Jack Jones  ...  January 15, 2002  
What have you found that works to resolve these 
customer care problems?
Response #1 Mary Smith ... Jan 15
Quick response seems to be the most effective way of soothing the disgruntled customer.
---------------------------------
Response #2 Bob Brown ... Jan 15
Having a list of previous interactions with the customer helps provide you with some 
history, so you sound prepared.
---------------------------------
Response #3 Judy Johnson ... Jan 16
Does anyone here resort to phone calls? Or do you just respond to email? I wonder 
if we should use the phone more.
---------------------------------
Response #4 Chuck Foster ... Jan 16
Does anyone here know how to program those new phones we just got? They’re driving me crazy.
---------------------------------
Response #5 Mary Smith ... Jan 16
Do you have the 4-line model or the 6-line model, Chuck?
---------------------------------
Response #6 Moderator Bill ... Jan 17
Chuck and Mary, I’m starting a new Topic called “Programming the new phones” for you 
to pursue this subject. We’ll continue on here with best practices.
---------------------------------
Response #7 Linda Harris ... Jan 17
Re: #3   I only make phone calls if the first two rounds of email don’t seem to be resolving 
the problem to their satisfaction.
---------------------------------
Response #8 Chuck Foster ... Jan 17
Thanks, Bill. We’ll go talk in the new topic.
---------------------------------
Response #9 Bob Brown ... Jan 17
I try to avoid resorting to the phone. It takes a lot more time and the customer comes 
to expect that from then on, you’ll always call.
---------------------------------
Response #10 Judy Johnson ... Jan 18
Well I’m going to start a new topic about phone etiquette.  I want to talk about how to do 
a good job when you have to.
Figure 6.1
A linear discussion reads like the script of a play.

For coherence, each person who posts in a threading topic should first
understand how to use messages as opposed to responses. If a user posts a mes-
152
Chapter 6
Topic 5  Best practices for resolving CRM cases
Jack Jones  ...  January 15, 2002  
What have you found that works to resolve these 
customer care problems?
Message #1 Mary Smith ... Jan 15
Quick response seems to be the most effective way of soothing the disgruntled customer.
---------------------------------
Message #2 Bob Brown ... Jan 15
Having a list of previous interactions with the customer helps provide you with some 
history, so you sound prepared.
---------------------------------
Message #3 Judy Johnson ... Jan 16
Does anyone here resort to phone calls? Or do you just respond to email? I wonder if we 
should use the phone more.
--Response #1 Linda Harris ... Jan 17
I only make phone calls if the first two rounds of email don't 
seem to be resolving the problem to their satisfaction.
--Response #2 Bob Brown ... Jan 17
I try to avoid resorting to the phone. It takes a lot more time 
and the customer comes to expect that from then on, you'll 
always call.
---------------------------------
Message #4 Chuck Foster ... Jan 16
Does anyone here know how to program those new phones we just got? They're driving 
me crazy!
--Response #1 Mary Smith ... Jan 16
Do you have the 4-line model or the 6-line model, Chuck?
--Response #1 Chuck Foster ... Jan 17
I think they work the same, Mary.
--Reponse #2 Judy Johnson ... Jan 17
I liked the old phones. At least they were easy to use.
---------------------------------
Message #5 Linda Harris  ...  Jan 17
I keep a contact list of people in engineering, inventory and shipping to help me answer 
questions and get replacement authorizations quickly.
--Response #1 Bob Brown ... Jan 18
How did you find someone in engineering who would talk
to you?
A
B
C
Figure 6.2
A threading conversation invites interruption and the branching off of threads
from the main spine of the topic. 

Taking Culture Online
153
sage in response to another message, the conversational pattern breaks down
and confusion results.
Note also that in threading software interfaces, there is often no scrolling dis-
play for conversations. Readers must click separately to open and read each
message. Reading such a fragmented conversation is distracting, like listening
to people talking over CB radio where every comment is followed by “Over” or
“Back to you.” For busy people, screen-by-screen participation in a conversa-
tion can seem laborious and inefficient.
Certainly not all groups are drawn to the long and extended conversations
that are best supported by linear formats. When people are more interested in
getting direct answers to specific questions—often provided by one experi-
enced person rather than a group—the threading interface is considered easier
to use and quicker to enter and exit. However, when people are more interested
in posting their opinions rather than engaging in discussion, a threading format
is more appropriate.
Regardless of the format, the members of an online conversational culture
need to be considerate in the way they use their interface. Clarity, brevity,
proper use of the conversational structure, and attention to staying on topic all
make for more productive and effective communication. 
Appropriate format is important, but the selection of appropriate tools should
also consider the social characteristics of the groups that will use them. These
aspects are especially relevant when the participants are new to meeting online,
which is why some analysis of these cultural tendencies should take place before
designing and formatting the platform for the group’s virtual meeting place. 
Through our years of working with online communities, we’ve developed a
methodology for analysis that helps us to frame the interface needs of a con-
versational group. Such groups differ in ways that can be described along three
overlapping dimensions, which describe their tendencies to converse, define
common interests, and identify with each other.
Three Dimensions of Collaboration
In the previous chapter, we described three different relationships between
people and content. These ranged from groups that interacted without concern
for other content to groups focused entirely on content of common interest.
Between the two extremes were groups that interacted about shared content.
Now we’ll describe three dimensions along which groups can be distinguished
from each other in terms of their style of collaboration. These dimensions help
picture the balance of conversation and information that needs to be served in
a group’s ideal online environment. We refer to these dimensions as interactiv-
ity, focus, and cohesion, and each of them is considered along a continuum
ranging from high to low.

The Tendency to Interact
Some groups thrive on interaction. It is required as part of their community def-
inition. We described these groups in Chapter 5, “Fostering a Knowledge-Sharing
Environment,” and showed them yakking away with their small bubbles of
focus floating about. Members of these groups are driven to check in often with
their fellow conversationalists to discover and share the subtle tacit knowledge
that they hold. Their purpose may be professional or social, but in either case,
they exchange a lot of information and are constantly building trust and rela-
tionships as they converse. In a normal online session, they will spend 80 per-
cent of their time in email, chat, or discussion rather than searching for
information or viewing content.
Groups at the other end of the continuum couldn’t care less about interac-
tion. They are interested only in the information that will quickly answer their
immediate questions, be it in documents, statistics, news, or graphic files. Mem-
bers of these groups spend a minimal amount of time answering the obligatory
email about the subjects that tie them together.
Most groups depend on a combination of interaction and content, with one
complementing the other. They may converse intensively for a week, put
together a research plan, then spend the next week assembling a library of doc-
uments and reading them. They may divide their online time constantly
between interaction and content, or they may go through cycles of intense
interaction and relative inactivity.
Serving High Interaction
How a group naturally behaves along this continuum can define which genres
and feature sets of the online interfaces will best serve its purposes. For a
highly interactive community, feature-rich conversation tools are essential. For
a barely interactive community, a good online publishing system and database
combined with email may suffice. 
The immediacy of the communication required also determines the kind of
tools that are needed. Teams hard at work on a project may require secure
instant messaging to share knowledge that can be put to use in the moment.
Groups that are learning collaboratively without hard deadlines will be served
well by message boards or email lists.
Where interactivity needs are high, a group may require a structured inter-
face (for organizing and preserving their conversations) and tools for moderat-
ing conversation (to guide and facilitate efficient discussion). Hosts require
software tools to fulfill their online social leadership activities. 
The technical interface, in communities of high interactivity, must also pro-
vide searchable, descriptive member profiles to inform people of each other’s
skills, backgrounds, and interests. In a social network, such personal context is
154
Chapter 6

Taking Culture Online
155
just as important as the information that fills the core of the group’s common
interest. In a knowledge network, all participants will have a credibility factor
associated with the experience and know-how they bring to the conversation.
A community’s tendencies toward interactivity and conversation may evolve, of
course, once they have access to the means for conducting online conversation.
For a group that is geographically scattered, shared access to a message board
may be its first opportunity to initiate discussion and continue communicating day
after day. The online discussion space may provide the first chance for natural
group leadership to emerge and motivate wider participation in the dialogue. That
leadership can be at least as important as the interface in stimulating interaction,
but poor interface design can frustrate attempts to conduct effective discussion.
The Degree of Focus
Communities naturally come together around common interests. For some,
those interests are vital and concentrated, but for others, they are more casual
and diffuse. Most of us identify with many different communities, with our
focus ranging from intense involvement (raising kids, immediate health con-
cerns, a current job) to amused curiosity (the football rankings, lawn care tech-
niques, Hollywood gossip). 
A highly focused knowledge community, such as a project team with a hard
deadline, will have agreed-upon goals, acknowledged experts, concentrated
information needs, and aligned motivation. In an office setting, these people
would talk to each other frequently, hold a standing reservation on a confer-
ence room, schedule regular meetings, map out and follow a work process, and
set mileposts for establishing their progress. 
Focused communities are the best populations for leading online pilot pro-
jects because their inherent motivation to solve common problems helps them
clearly recognize and agree on their communication needs. Their members par-
ticipate with enthusiasm and are aware of how the interface slows them down
or inhibits their collaboration. They help debug initial attempts at platform
design so that subsequent communities, which may not be so unified and
focused, will have a smoother time using their versions of the platform.
Groups with no common focus don’t really qualify as groups at all. But a real-
istic other end of the focus continuum would be people in the organization who
primarily work on their own but share interest in company news and resources
provided through the intranet. Their interface needs are no more special than
any other member of the organization.
Serving High Focus
In the context of serving high focus through online interfaces, the main differ-
ences between groups are in how much of their time is spent in the online envi-

ronment pursuing their focused activities. Those activities probably include lots
of conversation and access to common libraries of information. Access to their
online area may be restricted to maintain high levels of expertise and continuity.
High focus also adds to the list of requirements a higher level of expert lead-
ership. Knowledge sharing and learning usually put a group’s focus into the
higher range because of the specificity and immediacy of the knowledge being
sought. But focus, as we all know, is difficult to maintain.
The longer a focused community remains intact, the less focused it may
become. It won’t look that way from the outside, but within even the most nar-
rowly focused group, the diversification process is at work. A project to design
a single product soon breaks into many subprojects for organizing the many
pieces of design and production. A team brought together to plan an event is
soon involved in many different conversations about the various aspects of
planning, security, lighting, sound, parking, publicity, and so forth.
A population with little in common, provided with the ability to meet and
converse, will tend to organize and form many different communities of focus.
Most public community sites on the Web began by attracting random Web
surfers and evolved into collections of small online neighborhoods formed
around a wide variety of subjects: people from California, libertarians,
NASCAR fans, singles looking for dates, people with diabetes, and so on.
The previous two paragraphs illustrate that group focus at either end of the
continuum seems not to be a stable situation. In our experience, the focus of
most groups tends to oscillate around a middle point, being more intense at
times about some subjects and less intense at other times about different sub-
jects. This leads us to believe that the tools for serving knowledge communities
should be able to support a wide range and that designing for the high-focus
needs is the best practice for most groups.
The Effects of Group Cohesion
Very loyal groups—those with a high level of internal identification, commit-
ment, and significant history—behave differently from those that have only
recently come together or that recognize few common interests. Cohesion is
different from focus in that it is based more on trust, whereas focus is based
more on topic. The interpersonal relationships in cohesive groups are strong.
They can endure difficulties, even inadequate interfaces and the technical prob-
lems that periodically prevent members from connecting. 
Cohesion doesn’t drive communities to learn or meet deadlines. High cohe-
sion builds familiarity and shared knowledge over time. Cohesive groups under-
stand which members know what and have established practices for interaction
and collaboration. They may have formed before they had access to an online
meeting space, but their social ties are solid and serve as incentives to bring all
members into whatever meeting environment is agreed upon. 
156
Chapter 6

Taking Culture Online
157
Less cohesive communities might fall apart because of such problems as
interface difficulties, internal disagreements, miscommunication, absence of
strong leadership, and the occasional breakdown in group connectivity. They
require much more technical reliability and better custom interface design to
keep them together. 
Interactivity, Focus, Cohesion, and
Interface Design
The three dimensions for evaluating a group’s collaborative tendencies are
closely related. We can imagine groups that are very interactive, very focused,
and very cohesive, yet few actual communities fit that description all of the
time. Most groups that can benefit by conversational knowledge exchange are
high in only one or two dimensions and then only some of the time. A highly
interactive community may not be very focused. A newly formed community
won’t have much cohesion, though it may be very interactive. A community
with intense focus may not feel compelled to interact at all, preferring to have
common access to content that is kept current and detailed.
In Figure 6.3, we show four examples of communities with different profiles
along the three continuums of interactivity, focus, and cohesion. Each profile
describes different interface needs. 
Profile A, a short-term project team, calls for an interface that all members
can access and use quickly, with minimum need for training or technical inte-
gration. With no group history and a short group lifetime, simplicity of use is the
most important factor. Email may be sufficient if there is no need for organizing
numerous parallel conversations. A basic message board with access limited to
team members would permit some helpful organization of project-related dis-
cussions. A content publishing component would permit team members to post
documents and to share project management timelines.
Profile B, a stable department within an organization, needs an online meeting
place for certain administrative conversations and content but is driven more by
routine than deadlines. It has the time to learn how to use and manage its space
on the intranet. It can benefit by preserving certain conversations as a record of
interaction. A basic message board that can send out the latest postings in email
will serve to involve employees who don’t voluntarily log on to the site. Such
staffers receive digests of online conversations on a regular basis, inviting them
to participate but not forcing them to spend much of their time in the virtual
meeting environment. The environment serves as a gathering place for shared
knowledge and a conversation space for sharing knowledge when it is required.
Profile C is a group of workers who lack the time to get online regularly but who
hold valuable knowledge about their hands-on skills and experience. Regular daily
or weekly reports or involvement in periodic online debriefings may serve as the
means to harvest their knowledge and allow them to tap into the knowledge of

158
Chapter 6
High level
Low level
Profiling Group Relationship
Interactivity
Focus
Cohesion
A
B
C
D
D
D
D
C
C
C
B
B
B
A
A
A
A short-term project team with a hard deadline will need an 
interface that supports constant conversation, and the ability to 
find and display relevant content. The resulting conversations 
don't have to serve the group after it disbands, but should be 
archived for future reference.
An internal department, such as CRM, will have ongoing needs
for conversation, but only sporadically will it be intensive. The 
topics for conversation will be diverse within the broad definition 
of CRM, but the department will benefit from the recorded online
discussions as it learns how to improve its performance.
Line workers at a manufacturing operation, where each has a
specialized duty, don't need to interact often, but they depend 
on each other to put out a good product, so they are very cohesive.
They can enter reports weekly or whenever they encounter 
problems that need to be addressed.
A community of practice, where employees communicate about 
a shared interest outside of the work environment, is focused and 
interactive,driven by personal motivation. Yet, since it is not 
strictly work-related, it is only as cohesive as its members spare 
time allows.
Figure 6.3
Four group profiles and the implications for their most appropriate interface
design features.
TEAMFLY

Taking Culture Online
159
other resources in the company. Because they spend so little time online, their
interface to the Net should be as simple and quick to use as possible. Online sur-
veys and email might be the most appropriate way to gain their participation.
Profile D is an ongoing, focused population that interacts for enjoyment. The
knowledge generated in their conversations may or may not be of direct value to
the company, but their relationships do offer the potential of releasing valuable
knowledge and experience indirectly available to the company. Communities of
practice are cohesive as long as their members work for the organization and
have time to participate, but their motivations are powerful for making the best
use of whatever tools are available for group communication. As we’ll describe
in Chapters 7 and 8, communities of practice differ greatly in their needs for
technology. Their motivating focus makes them more adaptive than communi-
ties that are formed more artificially to accomplish work-related tasks. 
Initial group tendencies, as we’ve pointed out, are not deterministic; they are
likely to change and fluctuate. But as a group takes its first steps into the online
meeting space, it’s worthwhile to address these natural tendencies for collabo-
ration with the intention of making its early experience as nondisruptive as pos-
sible. Forcing cultural change by trying to fit square-peg cultures into
round-hole interfaces has a low probability of success. But once accustomed to
working through an online interface, the square pegs can change their shape
and adapt to interfaces that they find more helpful to their reaching goals.
Knowing the People and the Policies
Besides the software that enables conversation and content publishing, there
are two other key elements that can make or break an online knowledge-sharing
network. One has to do with the people who are considered members of the
network, and the other has to do with the rules that apply to use of the network.
Both must be available through the interface if effective communication is
going to take place. 
The Power of Personal Profiles 
Most intranets provide space for their users to describe themselves to vary-
ing degrees of depth and detail. Some companies provide only name, title, and
contact information, but others permit users to post more elaborate descrip-
tions including personal histories, information about hobbies and family, and
even entire Web-based home pages. 
In a knowledge-sharing community, it’s important to know with whom you’re
communicating, and to be able to find people with whom you need to commu-
nicate. Such professional and experiential information is often posted in what

are called yellow pages directories, searchable from within the intranet or spe-
cific portal used by the community. Many discussion software programs also
provide fields to be filled in by each registered user that can be accessed by
other users from within the interface. Ideally, though, the profile page should be
customized to the needs of the specific knowledge community, with access to
some field restricted to that community.
Detailed personal profiles, even with photos and other graphics, can fill the
same need for rich content that some believe can be obtained only through in-
person presence or high-bandwidth videoconferencing. Appropriate profile
design can elicit well-rounded descriptions of community members that engen-
der trust—the gold standard in knowledge exchange.
Policies and Guidelines
A knowledge-sharing community’s culture combined with the features of its
online interface describe most of its style and process, but policies and guide-
lines clarify its boundaries, manners, and ideal behaviors. Just as appropriate
tools and interfaces are important to implement on the technical side, appro-
priate use is important to define on the social side. 
Policies generally align with an organization’s internal values and legal limi-
tations. Examples of policies relevant to online conversation are to not share
company secrets with outsiders and to be courteous with customers contacted
through the Net. There may also be policies describing who in the company has
access to which portals and information directories. 
And by now, every company should have a very visible and comprehensible pri-
vacy policy on both its internal and public-facing Web sites. Where the population
has any questions about personal privacy in an online community, a policy should
be spelled out for that purpose. Information entered in one’s professional profile
should not, for example, be distributed publicly without the owner’s consent.
In some companies and situations, people with ideas, suggestions, or com-
plaints to offer for the benefit of the company are reluctant to post them online
under their true names. A company must decide whether or not to allow anony-
mous participation in online exchange or how such anonymous contributions
can be made. Of course, the ideal is to have sufficient trust in the organization
that fear of reprisal is not a factor, but few organizations of any size engender
such openness. 
Policies regarding entitlement—who has access to what portal or conversation
space—can have a great effect on culture. Restricting access to conversations
can keep them more focused, increase trust, build cohesion, and make them both
more effective and more efficient. But restricting access also can block valuable
complementary or critical voices from being heard or prevent the cross-fertiliza-
tion of useful ideas from diverse viewpoints and other communities.
160
Chapter 6

Taking Culture Online
161
Guidelines, as distinguished from policies, are more proscriptive, suggesting
interactive habits that are supportive of interaction and would be good for com-
munity members to develop. One useful guideline for posting messages in almost
any online conversation is to divide messages into small paragraphs for easier
reading. Another reliable guideline is to keep messages as short and concise as
possible. And of course, welcoming newcomers to an online meeting place is not
only good manners, but it leads to greater overall trust and participation. 
An online community’s policies and guidelines should provide a pretty accu-
rate reflection of its culture. Guidelines may differ among an organization’s sub-
cultures. Policies generally come from the top level of the organization, though
a cohesive community of practice may have its own policies for membership or
submission of new content. In the interest of preventing too much irrelevant
conversation, a focused knowledge community might also have its own policies
limiting the range of topics that can be addressed in its online forum.
It’s often through guidelines, which gradually grow into a compendium of
good practices discovered in actual interaction, that online cultures become
established and evolve. Guidelines, in some sense, reflect the folk history of the
community and incorporate its distinct jargon. Guidelines should be open to
expansion and modification by the members of the community and should be
made prominently available to prospective and new members as they join.
External Collaborative Communities 
So far, we’ve been looking at culture almost exclusively in the context of inter-
nal communities and knowledge-sharing activities. But increasingly, organiza-
tions are communicating with external communities for a variety of reasons.
Carrying on knowledge-sharing and knowledge-seeking conversations with
customers, vendors, partners, and consultants requires a cultural interface
between that of the organization and that of the group on the other end of the
communication.
Companies increasingly use the Web to learn about the people they do busi-
ness with. Marketplaces are increasingly showing themselves to be conversa-
tions. The terms of those conversations are increasingly escaping control by the
company, even when it provides the conversational interface. The customer is
often more seasoned in use of the Web than the company providing the service.
The customer is in the driver’s seat.
The implications of these truths to this chapter are that the company must
learn to be as sophisticated in its use of interactive technologies as the people
it is trying to serve. Instant messaging may not be the most compatible commu-
nications format for an organization’s culture to use internally, but it may be the
necessary format for responding to requests for support from customers push-

ing its online shopping carts through a confusing Web-based catalogue. An
online discussion community provided for users of the company’s products
cannot become a forum for argument about the company’s sales return policies.
The company’s presence in the public forum of the Internet marketplace must
be as a member of this new relationship, this new culture where the common
interest is high-quality product and service. We’ll focus on some best practices
in knowledge sharing with external communities in Chapter 9, “Conversing
with External Stakeholders.”
Summary
There is an undeniable link between the elements of a culture and the environ-
ment in which the culture exists. When the environment is Cyberspace, that
link is even more significant because the technical world lends itself to rela-
tively simple customization. Communication in a virtual space requires new
skills and rewards different aptitudes from those that work in the face-to-face
world. And each different medium and format for conversation in the virtual
world adds its own distinct context to the communication that takes place
through it. For those reasons, it’s important to understand those contexts and
to understand the elements of a group’s culture before choosing and designing
its online meeting place. Simplicity of design and minimal disruption in routine
communications methods are often more effective for encouraging knowledge
exchange than elaborate software solutions.
Cultural assessment and knowledge auditing help match groups to compati-
ble technical features as a culture takes its interaction online. Evaluating a
group’s propensities for interaction, focus, and cohesion is important in select-
ing appropriate software and designing the knowledge exchange space. Soft-
ware and portal designs have identifiable strengths and weaknesses that can
make the transition from in-person to virtual communication smoother or, if
choices are made carelessly, disastrous. It pays to design the virtual destination
right the first time because bad experiences become disincentives for making
second efforts.
Well-designed online environments are malleable and likely to be changed
once a culture begins using them. The environment affects the culture just as
the culture should be able to affect its environment. An organization must
decide, as it begins building a virtual space for knowledge sharing, whether that
space is dedicated to only one of its subcultures or is meant to serve as a tem-
plate for use by others of its subcultures. Tools that can be formatted to meet
diverse needs and cultural habits provide the economy and flexibility that allow
the organization and each distinct subculture to customize them and adapt
them to fit different purposes and styles of communication.
162
Chapter 6

Taking Culture Online
163
It’s important to remember that a culture’s tendencies can and will change
with time, after the transition to the virtual meeting space. Carry QueRY to
pages]Initial design for that space should not be set in stone but should be com-
patible enough with the group’s current habits to motivate its members to use it
with as smooth a transition as possible. Appropriate policies and guidelines will
further smooth the transition.
Where the virtual meeting space is to be shared between internal and exter-
nal cultures, design needs of the external groups should have top priority. They
are, after all, the guests in the conversation. Only if they are satisfied enough to
participate can the company learn what it needs to know from them.


165
Physically scattered groups that need to converse have many options today. This
chapter describes some of the networked technologies that can be used to fit the
descriptions and serve the purposes of different teams, business units, and pop-
ulations. These technologies are, indeed, tools that must answer the needs of the
groups and their individual members if they’re going to be used by them. Knowl-
edge networks exist to get things done, and once they have set their goals and
agreed on their common motivation, they need the conversation-enabling tools
that will best fit their particular needs.
The tools that support group conversation on the Net fall into familiar genres:
email, chat, instant messaging, message boards, and the more recent arrivals of
real-time meeting interfaces and peer-to-peer (P2P) applications. Intranets and
portals are the underlying technical structures through which these communi-
cations tools are often provided within the organization. It’s through intranets
and portals that access to relevant information is also provided. The tools we
describe in this chapter will be used in combinations. They will be configured
differently for different groups. They will be customized by individuals, and as
more power comes to portals and P2P applications, they will be adapted con-
stantly to the changing needs of their user populations. Our descriptions here
are but snapshots of a fast-evolving marketplace of communications software.
Any one of these genres of conversation-supporting interfaces can serve a wide
range of circumstances. Our experience tells us that the dynamics and interface
needs of conversational groups vary most according to their size and the duration
Choosing and Using Technology
C HAPTE R
7

of their conversations. You may be seeking technical solutions for an entire com-
pany or for a small project team. The duration of your needs may be only until the
project is completed or lasting well into the foreseeable future. Customers may be
directly involved in the conversations, or the members may be participating as stu-
dents, learning new skills. There are many dimensions for evaluating the technical
needs of your group, and we’ve considered several different approaches to orga-
nizing this chapter. We’ve chosen to order it by the genre of the technology, in each
case commenting on the effects of the size and duration of the knowledge-sharing
group on the implementation and configuration of the specific online interface.
We mention specific products here, but not necessarily because we know
them to be the best of their breed. There is a large market for online communi-
cation and knowledge networking tools, and some are better in a given situa-
tion than others. We include specific products because they help us illustrate
features that serve various knowledge-related purposes. Our descriptions of
these tools focus on their ability, in combination with good management and
social practices, to achieve the purposes of the knowledge networks that
employ them. Our goal in this chapter is to help you in your search for the right
tools for the right job.
Tools for Every Purpose
First a caution: When all is said and done, knowledge networking is not really
about the technology. A poor choice of tools for conversing online is less likely
to undermine the success of your efforts than your lack of a common purpose
and a clear reason for conversing online. If your group agrees on its purpose
and is motivated to get something useful out of its knowledge-sharing conver-
sation, even the most rudimentary online interface will be sufficient at least for
starting your conversations. 
Getting a good start is, after all, the best you can do. If the conversation hap-
pens and the community is actively learning, it will begin to figure out its own
best way of interacting. That is almost certain to drive changes in the technol-
ogy that supports the conversation. So, as we emphasize throughout this book,
it’s important to select technology that can be modified as simply and inex-
pensively as possible—software that comes with an assortment of potential
features that can be implemented or withheld by the group’s software adminis-
trator based on the group’s changing needs. 
Simplicity and Power
Of course, no online interface will ever provide the experience of sitting in a
room together. There will always be room for improvement in the virtual meet-
ing place, but an amazing amount of knowledge can be exchanged through the
166
Chapter 7

Choosing and Using Technology
167
use of even the simplest level of email. Texaco’s knowledge management guru,
John Olds, said, “Use the simplest technology you can for the purpose at hand.”1
We would say complex technology is fine as long as the complexity provides
power for experienced users, but make the basic user interface as simple as it
can be to get the knowledge flowing.
Simplicity is good primarily because it lowers the barriers to adoption. Email
is a fine starting place for knowledge networking because it’s a familiar and fre-
quently used technology. But the purpose of your knowledge network may be
hindered by the limitations of a simple email list. For example, it’s difficult for
even as few as 20 people to be actively engaged in coherent conversation in a
single email list. When the single conversation thread of the email list is forced
to accommodate several different conversational threads, each one identified
by a different Subject line, the labor of following all or even a selection of the
threads can overwhelm the participants. People frequently drop out as the
interwoven conversations become confusing. Email has proven to be a less
productive interface as the number of correspondents and the intensity of the
conversations increase.
Each of the technologies we describe has a simplest configuration. To the
extent that they are new technologies and don’t behave just like email, even
simple programs can present challenges to new users adapting. People are
understandably averse to having to learn a new computer program unless
they’re sure it’s going to help them in their jobs. So always offer “the simplest
technology” to people just beginning to converse with others online. And wher-
ever possible, provide upgrade paths to more features, more convenience, and
more power once people have become accustomed to the entry-level interface.
Choosing Tools to Fit Circumstances
The following graphic depicts the two major variables of time and place and the
kinds of communications that fit the four possible combinations. It’s a 2 × 2
matrix, but its message is really too simple. Yes, people will work together
online because they are in different places, but just because they are in the
same place at the same time does not mean that they will be communicating by
making presentations. Nor does it mean that two people sitting in cubicles 20
feet apart don’t communicate with email. 
SAME TIME
DIFFERENT TIME
Same place
Voting, presentations
Shared computers
Different place
Chat, videophones
Email, conferencing, workflow
People working in the same location generally collaborate online because it’s a
shared, orderly, and manageable way to get work done together. Information can
be found and shared faster online. Records of interaction can be kept. Contact

lists and shared calendars can be maintained and accessed. And one can engage
in multiple conversations, with time to think about one’s responses, more grace-
fully in Cyberspace than in most in-person meetings.
The choice of tools for your knowledge network is definitely affected by the
time and distance variables. The greater the time difference, the more difficult
real-time communication can be. The less opportunity there is for physical meet-
ings, the more work must be done on building familiarity and trust. If the entire
group is located in the same office, tool selection will be influenced by the
amount of time spent in face-to-face interaction. Your network may consist of
scattered individuals, each working in a separate office but forming a virtual team
through the technical interface. Their only shared office space may exist online. 
So in describing and evaluating these tools, we will address their suitability
for different circumstances, with suggestions about how they should be config-
ured or matched with other technologies to fit the needs of groups in those cir-
cumstances. Such information also can be culled from our chapters on culture
(Chapter 5, “Fostering a Knowledge-Sharing Culture,” and Chapter 6, “Taking
Culture Online”) and from both Chapter 8, “Initiating and Supporting Internal
Conversation,” and Chapter 9, “Conversing with External Stakeholders.”
Every computer-human interface and technology has its limitations. Some
have too few features, others have too many, and some have features that don’t
meet the needs of the group using them. The first duty of the person selecting
technology for a group or organization is to understand the people who make
up the knowledge network: their culture, their experience with technology, the
time they can devote to participation, and their commitment to helping adapt
and improve the interface they use for knowledge sharing.
Matching Technology with Purpose
Circumstances define the choice of technology as the knowledge network
begins and gets up to speed. The longer range considerations of the technology
are tied to the purpose of the knowledge network. What must it accomplish and
over what time period? What tools will be required for it to achieve its goals?
Knowledge networks exist primarily for learning, but they have many other
purposes. They are formed to manage and complete projects, to generate new
ideas and innovations, and by educating and inspiring their members, to stimu-
late more productive activity in the workplace. Software design is becoming
increasingly specialized to serve a wide variety of specific interactive and col-
laborative purposes, and though many companies include their products under
the broad banner of “online community tools,” they all lean toward serving cer-
tain types of group needs over others. 
Etienne Wenger, introduced in Chapter 5, devised his own categorization
scheme to describe how a variety of platforms relate to the varied needs of
communities of practice (CoPs). Although we don’t equate all knowledge 
168
Chapter 7
TEAMFLY

Choosing and Using Technology
169
networks with CoPs, his approach to matching software purposes with group
purposes is useful. 
As our adaptation of his scheme in Table 7.1 shows, he identifies four contin-
uums along which these purposes vary.2 The emphases of groups and technol-
ogy differ along these four dimensions: conversation versus content (A), serving
social structures versus exchanging knowledge (B), getting work done versus
learning (C), and ongoing versus fleeting interaction (D). Of course, these are
fuzzy categories—continuums that don’t have hard boundaries between one
another—but as such, they accurately reflect human social behavior. 
Wenger is concerned with the needs of the ideal community of practice, which
lie at the convergence of these various purposes, where all purposes are served
equally well. Our approach in this book is a bit different in that our purposes are
more focused on conversation—specifically on supporting the most productive
online conversation for sharing knowledge. Although we recognize the distinc-
tions Wenger describes, CoPs as social groups define only one corner of the
world of knowledge networking. Groups form around many other interests
beyond those of common practice and profession—such as project manage-
ment, strategic brainstorming, customer relationships. Wenger’s categorization,
though insightful, is of limited use to us here because the success of online con-
versation for effective knowledge exchange depends on social dynamics: how
much knowledge can be passed and absorbed among a group of people. 
COMMUNITY PURPOSE 
CATEGORY OF 
TO BE SERVED
TECHNOLOGY
A
Enabling conversation
Discussion groups
Storing and providing documents
Knowledge bases
B
Supporting social structures
Web site communities
Facilitating knowledge exchange
Access to expertise
C
Getting work done
Project spaces
Providing structured instruction
E-learning spaces
Supporting ongoing integration 
Knowledge worker’s desktop
D
of work and knowledge
Making best use of fleeting 
Synchronous online communication 
interactions
platforms
Table 7.1
Etienne Wenger’s Categories of Community-Oriented Technologies

170
Chapter 7
Technology, Group Size, 
and Duration of Activity
Differences in size and social composition of a knowledge network are more
significant differentiators for us, with our focus on conversation, than the pur-
poses listed by Wenger. Many specialized technologies for supporting collabo-
ration come bundled with interfaces for online conversation. All of the major
portal providers include message boards. Many include chat and some are even
bundling IM capabilities. Yet those interfaces aren’t necessarily the best ones,
or even suitable, for every group’s conversational needs. 
We’ve been involved in online communities of all shapes and sizes for many
years. We’ve observed that the size of a group in conversation and the accepted
duration of the conversation are the two factors that most influence the choice
of appropriate technology. We provide a simple depiction of how this works in
Table 7.2. 
How Many Participants?
Email will be used by individuals within groups regardless of the group’s effec-
tive online size. But when looking for the best technology for a knowledge net-
work, the scale of its usage makes a difference. A conversation can contain only
a certain number of participants. When an organization expects hundreds or
thousands of conversations to be going on among hundreds or thousands of
people around many different subjects, the choice of platform and its configu-
ration options become even more critical.
We define small knowledge networks as having from 2 to 20 people. That’s
about the maximum number of participants that online community managers
have discovered are able to converse effectively and coherently in a single
thread of online conversation. A chat room’s size limit is usually set to 20 active
COMMUNITY SIZE, DURATION 
MOST USEFUL TECHNOLOGY GENRES 
Small, spontaneous
Email, IM, chat, message board, P2P
Small, project focused
Email, IM, message board, P2P
Department level, ongoing
Email, message board, portal
Department level, transitory
Message board, portal, real-time event
Cross-organizational, transitory
Message board, real-time event
Cross-organizational, ongoing
Email, IM, message boards, portals
Table 7.2
Appropriate Conversation Technologies for Knowledge Networks

Choosing and Using Technology
171
participants or less for the sake of order and coherence. This also applies to
email lists and conversations in message boards. Active small networks easily
can outgrow the entry level of technology and often will move to message
boards where they can “cluster” around a wider diversity of discussion topics. 
What we call department-level knowledge networks are defined more by a
common culture than by numbers, for at this level, there will be many simulta-
neous conversations happening. The fact that the group has some boundaries
around it and commonalities within it means that its members will benefit from
using a common conversational interface. There may be tens, hundreds, or thou-
sands of people in these loosely tied communities, but the technologies they use
allow them to support many effective knowledge networks at the same time.
Email and the portal tie the overall population together by informing members
of current projects and directing them to the various subgroups operating within
its network. The scope of the conversation is widened by the ability of individu-
als to circulate among the various specialized knowledge networks.
What we refer to as cross-organizational communities are really networks of
knowledge networks that span the breadth of a company. These federations of
networks are united more by the shared organizational strategy than by any spe-
cific common practice or interest. On this level of numbers—with perhaps thou-
sands of people conversing in hundreds of separate knowledge networks—the
greatest need is for good portal design and scalable online discussion boards. 
Cross-organizational groups encompass departmental-level groups and the
small groups as well as cross-departmental and multigroup knowledge net-
works. The organization’s purpose in providing online conversational technolo-
gies is to stimulate knowledge exchange and cross-fertilize ideas from one side
of the company to the other. The key to success is integration because, depend-
ing on the size and location of the company and its offices, the technology
needs to be able to distribute knowledge from a wide variety of sources avail-
able to a wide variety of internal stakeholders. 
How Long Will the Conversation Last?
Some knowledge-sharing conversations may last only an hour or two or a day
or two. Others may last a week to a month. They are opportunities for people to
gather online and exchange what they know with people who aren’t part of
their usual knowledge network. They may be called classes, conferences,
online knowledge fairs, or seminars. They can take place through asynchro-
nous communications interfaces like message boards or even email. In their
shorter formats, they are conducted through synchronous interfaces like chat
and real-time event facilities.
The shorter the duration of the conversation, the more appropriate are the
real-time interfaces. Once you get beyond several hours, the scheduling
dynamic changes. Rather than set aside two specific hours to meet online with

live voice, messaging, and possibly video interaction, attendees are more likely
to prefer participation over the course of several days in a message board,
scheduling their participation time according to their own convenience.
When message boards are used for what we call time-bound events, they
function identically to their usage in ongoing community discussion. The dif-
ference is more in how they are administered and hosted and in how their con-
tent is organized and rolled out. The technology for real-time events is hosted
on remote servers, managed by the vendors in coordination with administra-
tors from the organization or knowledge community. The most important crite-
rion in choosing the configuration of these tools is the amount of bandwidth
available to all of the participants. Even the fastest modem connection through
a basic phone line won’t provide a satisfactory experience if audio or video
streaming is involved.
The Importance of Familiarity 
and Participation
Besides size and duration, another community variable, not included in Table
7.2, is cohesion, which in some cases describes the level of familiarity among
participants. Communities of practice have inherent cohesion in the common-
ality of their members’ skills, but not all CoPs begin with people who know
each other well. When starting a knowledge-sharing community, certain techni-
cal features can speed and smooth social mixing. For example, online profile
pages that describe members in the context of the common interest of the com-
munity are helpful in striking up conversations and relationships. 
When people are familiar, initial communications problems due to faulty or
inappropriate interface design can be transcended and solved more smoothly.
People who don’t know each other and encounter technical problems before
they’ve established working relationships have less social incentive to make the
learning curve worth climbing. If reaching the social incentives requires first
overcoming the technical barriers, the best approach is simply to lower the
technical barriers. Either keep the interface simple where unfamiliar partici-
pants are involved, or you’ll need to motivate them to participate in other ways.
Your primary goal in providing conversation-supporting technology must be
to build early and then regular participation. We’ve seen some very sophisti-
cated interfaces go to waste because no one showed up to use them. Motivation
and a sense that something important will get done are powerful attractors to a
working group. With motivated participants, the interface receives plenty of
practical critique toward improvement in design and function. If the interface
gets in the way of productive interaction, the motivated group will detect imme-
diately what needs to be changed. This is where, as we described in previous
chapters, a good relationship between the leaders of the knowledge network
and their IT liaison can be called on for promptly making the required changes. 
172
Chapter 7

Choosing and Using Technology
173
Who Forms the Group?
Another tool selection criterion and differentiating dimension of online conver-
sation is the origin of the group itself. It matters whether the group was formed
by its members in direct response to a commonly recognized need or if the
group is an already existing business group moving its activities online because
the organization has just provided it with the interface to do so. The first case is
an example of a bottom-up network, and the second is an example of a top-
down network. 
Say Group A decides to begin sharing what each member knows about a par-
ticular problem their company faces. They work in different parts of the com-
pany but have a common interest in finding a solution based on their
complementary skills and experiences. They look at their communications
options and find an appropriate medium—email or instant messaging or one of
the new generation of P2P clients—and form their own ad hoc knowledge net-
work. They have formed what we call a spontaneous community.
At the opposite end of the continuum, Group B is put together by a middle
manager and assigned to use the company’s message boards, found through the
corporate portal, to coordinate online conversation among product designers
to speed innovation. We call such communities, initiated by executives and
managers to serve the growing needs for better knowledge distribution in the
company, strategic communities.
The third type of conversational group, transitory communities, are similar
to the conversations of short duration we described earlier. They may be
formed spontaneously or produced with strategic purposes, but once they have
served their purpose, they are usually disbanded. 
All of the factors that affect the choice of technology for supporting knowl-
edge networks and their conversations—the immediate circumstances, the
purpose of the group, the number of participants, the duration of their interac-
tion, their familiarity and roots—should be considered. We know from experi-
ence and largely from hindsight how these factors influence the social activity
that is at the core of knowledge sharing. The tools must serve the people, not
the other way around.
We always recommend that you seek input from some of the users and poten-
tial users before selecting the technology you will provide for them. Allow them
to test the technology and make their own suggestions for what will work best.
Regardless of which technology you choose, make sure it has enough flexibil-
ity, expandability, and customization options to adapt to the changing needs
and growing populations of the knowledge networks that use it. Pay attention
to those spontaneous groups who already are engaged in online knowledge-
sharing conversation in your organization before you dare to change the tech-
nology they are using. They may have discovered valuable knowledge about
what actually works with the tools they are using.

Technical Autonomy
One important factor in selecting technology for your knowledge network is
the amount of autonomy you will have in managing the application and your
group’s use of it. As we described in previous chapters, it’s important that a
community formed around learning and sharing knowledge be able to keep its
communication environment evolving at the same rate as its communication
needs. A close tie with IT is the minimum requirement for ensuring fast turn-
around of requested changes in the conversation interface.
When you need (or are provided with) an application that must be run on
your organization’s servers, your IT friends must be relied on for most of the
changes and fixes related to that application. Even with your cooperative
arrangement with IT, there are going to be delays as your important interface
tweak sits at the bottom of the priority list behind much larger scale projects. 
Local Interface Control
Fortunately, the trend in groupware is toward providing customers and clients
with more power to self-configure their own interfaces. Most of the platforms
we describe here can be modified and adapted to meet changing group needs
without the direct involvement of IT. Most community-oriented applications
now come with built-in customization tools that can be manipulated by admin-
istrators with minimal technical skills. 
Figure 7.1 shows part of the “sysop control panel” that comes with the widely
used community interaction platform called Web Crossing (www.webcross-
ing.com). The screen shot shows a small part of the control panel where the
“sysop” can change the appearance of the interface—the header and footer at
the top and bottom of each Web page in this case—using simple text windows.
The sysop (whoever has the password as the site’s Web Crossing administrator)
also can modify the text that greets new members, format the messages people
post, control the process for member registration, set the options provided to
members, and manage both the membership and content of the community. In
the increasingly rare case that Web Crossing is installed on your company’s
server, IT’s responsibilities for maintaining it may be limited to running back-
ups, making sure you’re provided with sufficient disk space, and setting up its
email-related functions. 
The ASP Way
Most of Web Crossing’s customers “rent” the application, paying to use it as it is
run and maintained on Web Crossing’s remote servers. Like many modern soft-
ware companies, Web Crossing is an application service provider (ASP). More
organizations choose to run more applications in this mode because it reduces
the installation, configuration, and maintenance loads on their IT departments
174
Chapter 7

Choosing and Using Technology
175
and raises the quality of maintenance of the applications. The system adminis-
trators at an ASP do one thing and they do it well: maintain their application
servers. An IT department with perhaps dozens of different applications to man-
age won’t have the application-specific expertise of the technicians at the ASPs. 
As we explained in Chapter 4, “The Role of IT in the Effective Knowledge
Network,” some organizations, especially the largest companies, will continue
to install applications on centralized systems managed entirely by their IT
departments. They will do this because they feel it gives them more control
over their software environment and because there are still complexities
involved in integrating ASP-provided services with their centralized systems.
But it’s also a simple matter of efficiency, standardization, and economics. A
standard companywide interface reduces the “per seat” cost of the collabora-
tive platform, minimizes the complexity of supporting multiple platforms, and
Figure 7.1
Part of the sysop control panel. 
Screen shot of the authors’ message board using WebCrossing ©SociAlchemy

cuts training costs. The downside of installing one online conversation plat-
form for use by the entire organization is that a one-size-fits-all solution won’t
provide the most appropriate and productive tools for all of the organization’s
diverse internal groups.
The Peer-to-Peer Wave
The groups frustrated by the inadequacy of available online collaborative
options are most likely to look for better solutions to their unique communica-
tions problems. This motivation to bypass the centrally controlled servers and
put the choice of appropriate communications interface in the hands of the end
user is what inspired Ray Ozzie to develop Groove, the most widely known of
the new wave of peer-to-peer (P2P) applications. Ozzie had noticed the trend in
organizations to more decentralized decision making, a change indicated by
more workers communicating and collaborating with each other through email
and Lotus Notes, his original contribution to software design.
Peer-to-peer communication eliminates the need for the third party, namely
IT. A population of workers equipped with a program like Groove quickly can
assemble interconnected teams and virtual workplaces without having to wait
for approval, implementation, or the clearance of backlogged work on the
server. Knowledge networks operating through Groove clients can work
together across the corporate firewall, communicating PC to PC. Groove,
which we’ll describe in more detail later in the chapter, is the most high-profile
example of what may be the most appropriate knowledge-sharing solution for
our networked future.
Tools, Their Features, and Their Applications
The rest of this chapter is a guide to the selection of conversational interfaces
for knowledge-sharing networks. We introduced the general features of these
interfaces in Chapter 4, and here we present more detailed descriptions. We not
only suggest appropriate interfaces for specific groups and circumstances, as
we described in the previous section on Tools for Every Purpose, but we also
provide suggestions for appropriate configurations of tools to meet some of the
more common needs of knowledge networks. 
We don’t attempt to address every possible situation, and we stick to the
focus of this book: online conversation. Every group has its own unique needs
for handling information and content, for dealing with collaborative utilities
like shared calendars and coauthored documents, but in terms of media for
supporting their conversations, the choices we present are limited but infinitely
configurable. Message boards can be integrated with a myriad of features and
176
Chapter 7

Choosing and Using Technology
177
other applications for enhancing their knowledge-sharing power. So can email
and the latest P2P clients. Even instant messaging is being beefed up to trans-
fer files and behave like a cross between email and asynchronous discussion.
The tools we describe in this chapter range from those that provide only a
single interface and format for online group conversation to those that provide
multiple formats for conversation—asynchronous message boards and syn-
chronous chat—plus capabilities for sharing files, managing content, and col-
laborating on activities like project management and calendars. 
Our descriptions begin with the simplest application, email, and move
through chat and instant message to message boards. We devote a section to
Groove as the representative P2P application in the knowledge-sharing world
and finish with a description of portal software and how it can contribute to the
effectiveness of knowledge networks and online conversation.
The Dimensions of Email
We assume that you have used email for many different reasons and purposes.
You have learned through experience of the strengths and weaknesses of basic
email. You’ve probably been involved in lengthy conversations and innumer-
able short exchanges. You love its convenience and you hate its spam. You’ve
probably lost many an important message and mistakenly sent a few embar-
rassing messages to unintended destinations. Email is far from a perfect,
secure, and orderly conversational medium. But it’s ubiquitous and you can
reach almost anyone through it.
Over half of all Americans use email, spending almost half an hour per day
tending to it, according to a 2001 report by Forrester Research.3 Practically
everyone who uses the Net understands the basics of email, which is the main
reason it’s such a powerful piece of the knowledge-sharing toolkit. There’s a lot
you can do with email besides send text. Today’s email can contain Web pages
and hyperlinks to Web content. It can carry attached documents and graphics.
It can be used for one-to-one conversation or many-to-many communication.
But as powerful as it is, basic email was never meant to do all of the tasks it
is now used for in such a populous and commercial environment. People work-
ing in organizations now use it routinely to send proprietary information across
the Internet, where a simple mistake in forwarding a message can result in a
competitor or journalist receiving information that can be more than embar-
rassing; it can be quite damaging. As people’s use of email grows, ongoing
threads of conversation grow to be hundreds or even thousands of messages
long. Important work-related contents get lost in stuffed email folders and force
users to engage in desperate searches. 
It still may be the killer application of the Internet and a wonderful conve-
nience for people looking to share knowledge with minimal muss and fuss, but
it is far from the ideal tool around which to build a robust and expanding

knowledge network. Nevertheless, it serves an important role in getting new
knowledge-sharing communities off the ground and can serve as the basic
foundation for new applications that take advantage of its global familiarity
and status as the one application that every Internet-connected person uses.
The Email List
Email lists, also called listservs, are powerful group communications tools.
They are easy to set up, involve simple, reliable technology, require minimum
bandwidth, and can reach large populations quickly. They can be run in broad-
cast mode as electronic newsletters or in interactive mode as ongoing conver-
sations. They can be moderated by human editors who trim extraneous or
off-topic information from the content they then pass on to list members. 
Members of an email list can choose between receiving all individual mes-
sages submitted by others and receiving digests of messages bundled together
on a daily or weekly basis. Many people prefer to get the digest to reduce the
clutter of many separate messages. Others find messages in the digest more dif-
ficult to respond to than those received separately. 
Again, email lists work best when no more than about 20 people are engaged
in ongoing conversations. Even with that number, the interaction can be hard to
follow if more than two or three different topics are being discussed at the
same time. A good facilitator can help keep a busy email list coherent, but when
the traffic in the list grows beyond the ability of members to keep up, dropouts
are inevitable. Filtering messages requires manual perusal of Subject lines and
many people find that to be too labor intensive. 
If your group is small and focused, your members can’t meet in person, and
prefer to have the messages come to them rather than having to remember to
log on to message board, an email list may be an appropriate and sufficient plat-
form for your conversations. An exemplary mail list that serves members of the
online learning community is Learning-org, which has been running since 1994.
Richard Karash, host of the mail list, describes its function as “a flow of mes-
sages over the internet. There is a list of subscribers and all subscribers receive
all the messages. Our robot keeps track of subscribers and distributes the mes-
sages. To add your contribution to the flow, you send a simple e-mail message
to our address and the robot takes care of everything else.”4
Etiquette Makes Email Effective
Because email list hosts like Karash have paid attention to the social amenities
of groups using the medium for online conversation, they have been the
sources of written guidelines for the considerate use of email. These guidelines
are part of the overall online social code known as netiquette, and their prac-
tice makes a positive difference in conducting productive email conversation.
178
Chapter 7
TEAMFLY

Choosing and Using Technology
179
Consideration of others helps build trust and brings mutual respect to online
discussions that might descend into divisive argument and debate. A conversa-
tion carried on through email requires a lot of manual involvement, from open-
ing each message (or the digest) to the act of sending each response. It’s not a
lot of work, but email conversation relies more on the responsible participation
of each individual than does the next step up in technical organization of asyn-
chronous conversation, the message board.
The importance of the Subject line in an email message is too often over-
looked. It tells the reader what the message is about without forcing the reader
to open it. The tendency of many is to put more value in the Subject line when
receiving a message than when responding to it. A message may arrive with the
Subject line reading, “Linux expertise needed,” and as people respond in turn to
the subsequent interaction, the Subject line is left as is. Meanwhile, the actual
content of the messages evolves from Linux expertise to the Linux operating
system and then to the cost of Linux boxes. The final messages in the thread
rant about the flaws of Windows XP and the cost of Bill Gates’s house. List
members coming in late expect to see a deep conversation about Linux and feel
cheated to have opened nine messages about something else. It’s not a lot of
wasted time, but these little inconsiderate actions add up in the frustration they
cause when people are looking for helpful knowledge in their email. 
As a responsible email correspondent, you should be clear about whom you
are addressing and what specific parts of the message you are responding to.
An email list is but one thread of messages that can only be kept coherent by
judicious use of the Subject line and by the conscientious use of its members.
It’s considerate to “sign” your messages with your name at the end, and includ-
ing your email address allows other people on the list to respond directly to
you, rather than through the list if they want to pursue a side conversation.
Annotation and the use of embedded correspondence are also important in
email-mediated conversations. When people reply to a message and the con-
tents of that message are included in the reply, it serves as context for the
response. As the correspondence continues, its entire history may be carried in
each message. This soon becomes unwieldy for readers and, where messages
are saved, can occupy significant disk space. Good etiquette is to copy only the
part of the message being responded to that is relevant to your response. 
Social etiquette varies between mail lists, but it usually recommends that peo-
ple introduce themselves in the list when they join. It’s a way of saying, “I’m
here” because most people don’t check the member list very often. Introducing
yourself is also a way of telling others why you’ve joined, what you know, and
what you hope to learn. Your position in the organization and any projects you’re
working on will be helpful, as will a little story about your relevant experience. 
Every list needs some policies, though the associations may be so loose within
your organization that internal communications policies are understood to trans-
fer to the list. But members should know, for example, if the list is moderated or

not. They should be informed clearly of who holds responsibility for words
posted to the list (each member should, but in some cases, the sponsor of the list
claims copyrights on all contents). There should be emphasis on mutual respect
and avoidance of personal attacks as useful ground rules for interaction.
A mail list also needs clear instructions to its subscribers as to how to get on
and off the list. Every list has an “owner” who serves as administrator and
intermediary between members and the software that controls the list’s auto-
mated functions. Figure 7.2 shows some typical instructions for an imaginary
mail list for fans of koalas. Those shown here are for joining a list run on the
widely used (and free) Majordomo list management software.
Email on Steroids
Because email is the most widely used Internet application—the one most people
open first when they get to work and close last before they leave—it should be
180
Chapter 7
Our list is run by a program called Majordomo. 
No humans are involved in list maintenance, 
but Majordomo only understands certain commands.
Follow these instructions carefully:
1) To subscribe to receive individual messages, 
send an email to:
majordomo@hypothetical.com
The Subject line is ignored. Begin your message 
with two lines:
subscribe koalabears
end
2) To subscribe to a daily digest of messages,
send an email to:
majordomo@hypothetical.com
The Subject line is ignored. Begin your message
with two lines:
subscribe koalabears-digest
end
Any additional text in the msg body 
(e.g. your sig) will be ignored. You 
will be added to the list and will 
receive a Welcome message including 
this info file. 
Please, please, please...
keep the Welcome message 
for future reference!!
Figure 7.2
Clear instructions for joining an email list.
Based on documentation for Learning-org email list. © SociAlchemy

Choosing and Using Technology
181
leveraged to do as much work as possible. After all, so many people know how to
use it. Most people don’t need additional training or motivation to check their
email, and they are comfortable with tending to their regular email work habits.
A company called Zaplet (www.zaplet.com), founded in 1999, provides an appli-
cation called Appmail that turns the normal email message into a dynamic group
workspace. The company aims its products at Fortune 1000 companies where it
hopes its buyers will install it on all desktops as a new way to get people to inter-
act and work together online. Basically, Appmail integrates collaborative tools
into email messages and turns those messages into ongoing shared workspaces. 
Arriving in your Inbox looking like a normal email message, an Appmail mes-
sage acts like a window into data stored on the Appmail server. Once the win-
dow is opened, the recipient is invited to use any of the applications that are
involved in the message. There may be a document to open and fill in or a live
feed of data from an accounting application. When recipients reply to an App-
mail or update any information on the server, the existing message gets “recy-
cled” and pops back to the top of your unread messages list. An active Appmail
does not sink to the bottom of your constantly growing Inbox list. The Appmail
server also keeps an audit trail of every message. 
Appmail messages don’t contain proprietary data that are at risk of getting
into unintended hands; those data sit on the secure servers. Business rules can
be applied to Appmail correspondence, assuring that messages and requests
flow to the right people at the right time. Different applications can be integrated
into an Appmail network so that members can use the system like a miniportal.
Like Groove and several other products we describe in this chapter, Appmail
is an example of the kind of software hybridization that takes advantage of the
Web’s ability to adapt to existing and changing work habits and business models.
Though Appmail is expensive to purchase and implement (costing up to seven
figures for a site license”), it shows how an application that is used habitually by
millions can be transformed into a much more powerful tool for collaboration.
Real-Time Communications: 
Chat and Instant Messaging
The most distinguishing characteristic of real-time online communication is
nowness. Chat enables people to send messages to each other in group settings,
and IM is used primarily for two people to connect. Real-time communications
on their own have limited value for ongoing knowledge exchange, but they are
important to knowledge networks for two main reasons:
■■They are valuable tools for maintaining social ties
■■Once a social tie has been made with a knowledge source, questions can
be asked instantly

Chats take place in chat rooms, where groups of virtual attendees can
gather and exchange responses that roll up and out of the chat window as they
are added. Although any number of people can be in a chat room, the live inter-
action can become difficult to follow if more than about 10 people are
responding to one another immediately. As happens in conference calls, peo-
ple tend to talk to one another, and the messages—who is talking to whom
about what—can get confused. 
Chat is often included in live online events, where content and live interac-
tion (typically between a moderator and guests) are broadcast to an audience
over the Web. The audience is invited to submit questions and comments to the
moderator and to the special guest or the panel of experts who are the focus of
the event. Some working teams use chat for quickie meetings when getting
together in person is not possible but the entire team is available online. Chat is
often bundled with message board software or included in portals. 
Instant messaging, which gained its initial popularity on America Online and
then became the rage on the Web when over 11 million copies of the ICQ mes-
saging client were downloaded, is both a convenience and comforting online
social companion. With an IM window open in the corner of your monitor, you
are alerted whenever any of the people you keep in your buddy list are online
182
Chapter 7
PROS AND CONS OF CHAT
Pros
■■
Its use is intuitive, and most chat platforms on the Web are similar enough in look,
feel, and operation that newcomers adapt to them quickly.
■■
Navigation to a chat room is usually quite simple if you are in the online
community environment. You either get an “invitation” and click on it, or you
create the chat room yourself and send the invitations to others.
■■
There’s a sense of presence, spontaneity, and actual conversation in chats.
Responses to your comments appear as you watch. 
■■
Transcripts allow review of interaction by participants and those who could not
participate but are interested in what was discussed.
Cons
■■
The interwoven conversations of a busy chat room can be confusing to follow.
■■
Serious or sustained discussion can be difficult if people are constantly
interrupting one another.
■■
Long posts, stories, and explanations don’t lend themselves to the short response
format.
■■
If you and your friends are online at different times, forget chatting with one another.
■■
The same is true of live online events; if they don’t fit into your schedule, you can’t
participate.

Choosing and Using Technology
183
with their compatible IM client active. You may choose to send them a message
or just be aware that they are available in case you have a question or some-
thing to tell them. Your IM client gives you a sense of presence—a feeling that
you’re not completely alone at your keyboard or on the Net. IMs can support
group conversation, allowing their users to open chat rooms windows and
invite fellow IMers to join a conversation.
Some software platforms include a feature that Web Crossing calls the Web
Tour. When you join a Web Tour, you enter a chat room that features a framed
window that the host of the chat can use to move from Web page to Web page
as the tourists post their comments. The potential uses of such a tool include
pushing content, classrooms, and staging conference events. It’s an alternative
to the more prevalent slide shows that are presented in most live online events. 
Chat Tools
The technology of chat has become almost a commodity except for the new field
of secure chat. Chat requires a server-side installation but no longer requires a
client permanently installed on the PC side. Most chat is run today using Java
applets that download and fire up quickly, although these can be a problem if run
across firewalls. Secure chat applications require that client software be installed
on the PCs of participants. Chat comes bundled with most asynchronous mes-
sage board software and can be enabled at the discretion of the community. 
Some platforms display a listing of existing, open chat rooms that can be vis-
ited or of chat rooms that are currently active. Chat can also be integrated into
company portals. There are many sources for chat software, including secure
chat for business networks. A good site for finding an updated list of sources and
resources is Messaging Software Solutions at www.messaging-software.com. 
Options available in chat applications include:
■■Ability to participate in HTML rather than Java mode to avoid compatibil-
ity or firewall problems
■■Private chat rooms that don’t show up on the public menu of open rooms
■■The ability of individual chatters to send private real-time messages to
one another
■■Support of anonymous users
■■Validation of logons to restrict access
■■Icons or colors for identifying roles of participants: chat host, special
guest, staff, and so on
■■Single logon: participants are not required to log on to chat separately
once they are logged on to the portal or community environment

Chat Etiquette
Like email lists, chat is a single-threaded conversation interface. As such, it
requires cooperation on the parts of its users if conversations are to be useful.
Chats usually begin with the participants greeting each other and, if they are
not familiar, introducing themselves. When leaving the chat before its sched-
uled ending time, it’s good to announce that you are logging out. Don’t try to
enter long messages in chat. Take a breath between parts of your message by
ending them with ellipses (three dots … ), waiting to see if there are responses
or comments, and then continuing with another chunk of your message.
The role of chat facilitator, like that of email list moderator, is important
when there are more than a few participants in the discussion. Restraint in
posting messages allows all participants to read and respond to each other in an
orderly and logical fashion. A facilitator can recognize and call on people who
signify that they have questions or comments to submit. One protocol is for par-
ticipants to post a question mark if they have questions and an exclamation
point if they have comments. The facilitator keeps a queue list and invites peo-
ple, in order, to post their questions or comments.
The more a group uses chat, the more effective it will be in conducting pro-
ductive meetings. When entering a chat in progress, it’s recommended that you
scroll back to see what has been said before jumping in and repeating a previ-
ously made point. The use of abbreviations can make the real-time interaction
move along more smoothly. The following are some typical and frequently used
chat abbreviations:
■■BTW = By the way
■■IMHO = In my humble opinion
■■BRB = Be right back
■■LPFN = Last post for now
Chat can be a powerful tool for knowledge sharing, but it works best as a
complement to other communications tools and interfaces for sharing informa-
tion. Some people aren’t comfortable using chat; they feel hurried in the inter-
action and prefer the more relaxed interaction of asynchronous technologies
like email and message boards. If possible, provide a variety of alternative com-
munication venues to accommodate people’s different styles.
Asynchronous Discussion: 
Message Boards
In asynchronous discussion platforms, participants read and post responses
that remain on the system when they exit. Variously called message boards,
184
Chapter 7

Choosing and Using Technology
185
conferencing systems, and forum environments, these conversation interfaces
do not require participants to be logged on simultaneously. That can be a great
advantage when people have busy schedules that don’t allow them to attend
scheduled conversations. And because there is no short time limit on the dura-
tion of the conversation, they can spend more time reading what others have
written and composing their own messages.
Message board interfaces differ in their structure and in the options they
offer to administrators and participants. Later, we describe some of the more
important features relevant to knowledge networks. We consider message
boards to be the most useful platforms for knowledge networks because they
combine conversation with the Web’s presentation of content. An online con-
versational thread in a message board is not only a social interaction, but it is
also a document containing valuable information in context. The content can
be searched, and with some platforms, it can be integrated into the organiza-
tion’s companywide database. This is not possible if the platform comes with its
own proprietary database product, as does Web Crossing. 
Message boards are also multithreaded. While email lists and chat rooms
only permit one thread of conversation to go on among the group, a message
board interface allows members of the group to participate in many different
conversations that may or may not be related. Social activity can be segregated
from work-focused activity or discussions dedicated to knowledge sharing.
And because the conversations take place along a more extended timeframe,
there is more time for a facilitator or discussion manager to intervene and keep
the conversations well ordered and on track. Content can be provided to
accompany or stimulate conversation in a knowledge-sharing environment,
and many message board platforms can be extended toward portal-like func-
tionality, integrating both content and other specialized tools into and around
the actual discussion space.
PROS AND CONS OF MESSAGE BOARDS
Pros
■■
Convenient for people to participate according to their own schedules and free time
■■
Require no clients or Java applications to be downloaded and run
■■
Responses remain available for a while; each discussion has some history
■■
Variety of available conversation topics
■■
Responses can include Web links, HTML, and file insertions
■■
Participants have time to think about and compose their contributions
Cons
■■
Navigation becomes complex as discussions accumulate and diversify
■■
Less sense of presence than real-time communication

The Organization of Discussion
Environments
Most message board products organize their conversations according to the
nested folder metaphor. Thus, when entering the environment, the participant
will find folders or discussion areas dedicated to different groups, topics, or
interests. Within those areas may be another layer of folders or even a combi-
nation of conversations and folders that allows a deeper level of distinction
between conversations. 
The interaction within different folders may be formatted differently. As we
will describe, some may be formatted as threaded conversations and others
may be in linear conversational format. Some folders may contain chat rooms
and collaborative tools, whereas others are pure asynchronous conversation.
You may choose to segregate different teams and special interest groups while
providing a common area for all members of the knowledge network to mix
and converse. 
To Thread or Not to Thread
In Chapter 4, we described the differences between threaded and linear discus-
sion structures, noting that threaded structures—where participants can
respond directly to a message rather than to a general discussion topic—are
best for situations in which quick question-and-answer interactions are most
valued. Linear structures support more conversational interaction where the
participants address a specific topic or area of interest. Some message board
interfaces provide only one of these structures, but many allow the group or
even individual participants to choose threading or nonthreading according to
their preferences and needs. 
Web Crossing permits its users to choose the format in which they view a dis-
cussion as either threaded or linear (which they call chronological). The group
using the platform can choose to enable or disable the threaded option, and
users may have the option to use or not use the threaded option. This flexibility
can lead to some confusion. To better illustrate this, we provide Figures 7.3, 7.4,
and 7.5—three different views of the same online conversation. 
In Figure 7.3, we see what looks to be a linear conversation, with the header
introducing the topic and the responses following one after another as the
reader scrolls down the page. Note the time signatures on the responses; they
are in chronological order. This viewpoint is from the perspective of a user, Joe,
who does not have the threaded view enabled. Often, even when the option of
threaded structure is not available, linear online conversations get scrambled
as different people drift from the main topic into side conversations. The reader
is forced to decipher which messages are responding to which side conversa-
tion, and writers must learn to include references in their messages to indicate
which side conversation they are responding to. 
186
Chapter 7

Choosing and Using Technology
187
In Figure 7.4, we show a schematic view of the actual threaded structure of
the conversation. Although the participants are all talking about the same
topic—building Golden Wazoos—there is actually more than one conversa-
tional thread happening. This view can be seen by users who have activated the
threaded view in their personal configuration option. Indents show the parent-
child relationship of messages and the responses made to them. The layout por-
trays the actual interaction that has been prompted by the topic header. This
user can click on any response and respond directly to it rather than to the main
header. But in this view, though navigation is simplified, you can’t tell what the
content of each post is. It serves as an overview of the conversations that have
begun based on Cliff’s search for the secret of the Golden Wazoo.
For participants who have the threaded option enabled, the view shown in Fig-
ure 7.5 reveals not only the content of each message—displayed in what appears
Figure 7.3
A discussion viewed in linear (also called “chronological”) format. 
Screen shot of the authors’ message board using WebCrossing ©SociAlchemy

to be the more readable linear format—but also the context of the threaded con-
versation. Note that the time stamps on the posts are not in chronological order
and that the symbols to the left of each message show which are responding to
the conversation header (small rectangles) and which are responding to mes-
sages (arrowheads). The reader can see that there are subconversations happen-
ing about knowledge of Golden Wazoos, but the overall conversation is made
readable by the linear, scrolling arrangement of the messages. 
We should add here that we don’t recommend that this particular option be
made available in all situations because, as Figure 7.3 showed, when some peo-
ple are responding to messages and some are responding to the overall topic
header, the results may be less coherent for both groups. It’s better if every par-
ticipant in a conversation treats it in the same way, as either threaded or linear.
188
Chapter 7
Figure 7.4
The outline view of the same conversation in threaded format. 
Screen shot of the authors’ message board using WebCrossing ©SociAlchemy
TEAMFLY

Choosing and Using Technology
189
Features That Affect Participation
People participate in message boards based not only on their interests in the
subjects of conversation and the other participants but because their participa-
tion helps them to be more productive in their work. That feeling of productivity
can be lost if the use of the message board is too complicated or tedious. As the
content of a discussion environment grows, it forces participants to make more
choices about their use of time. It’s easy to begin with involvement in a few con-
versations that soon branch off into a few more conversations that include more
people, more comments, and yet more conversations until a daily allocation of 1
hour in the message boards grows into a daily obligation of 2 or 3 hours just to
keep up. This is where interface options for filtering and prioritizing content
Figure 7.5
The threaded structure of the conversation is portrayed in this view by the
symbols to the left of each message. 
Screen shot of the authors’ message board using WebCrossing ©SociAlchemy

become important in retaining the interest of valuable members of the knowl-
edge network.
The personalized view of a message board allows the user to configure the use
of the platform to his or her needs. The first thing that the user must contend
with after logging on is navigation; which conversations are of interest and how
to get to them most directly? The user finds those with titles that look attractive
and joins them. For most message board products, to join a conversation is sim-
ply to open it, read through it, and maybe post a response in it. For some prod-
ucts, to join a conversation means listing it on your member preferences list as
one of the conversations you are engaged in. All of the best message board sys-
tems allow members to keep a list of preferred conversations—we’ll call them
Favorites here—that can be visited conveniently each time the member returns.
Web Crossing calls this the subscription function.
Web Crossing users can click the Subscribe button at the bottom of the con-
versation screen to add that conversation to their Subscription List. Users who
are subscribed to five specific conversations can log on, click a Check Messages
button, and see a list of new responses that have been added to those confer-
ences since their last visit. They can then proceed directly to those conversa-
tions and, when done reading and posting, leave the discussion area without
having to search through all of the conversations that are of less or zero interest
to them. This is a quick and convenient way for users to participate only in the
conversations that fit their immediate interests. It’s a way to avoid the common
syndrome of online community membership: the sudden disappearance of time.
Online conversations among interesting people make interesting reading, but in
spending hours following them, they don’t always help you get your work done.
Another feature that aids many people in staying involved in message board
interaction is the ability to be notified by email when a new message has been
posted in a Favorites conversation. Figure 7.6 shows an example of an email noti-
fication of a new post in the conversation about Golden Wazoos. When I get a
message like this, it first of all reminds me that I am engaged in this conversation.
It may give me an incentive for logging on to the message board and responding.
But unless I follow that incentive and visit the conversation, the automatic
emailer won’t send me any more notifications about this particular conversation. 
Some platforms send every new post to members who choose to receive
them. Others send accumulated digests of posts on a schedule set by the user.
Some permit the user to send messages and responses to be posted in the con-
versations. Email notification of new messages draws participants back into
the message board and reminds busy people of their engagement in the ongoing
conversations. Email posting allows members who are not able to log on to the
message board to continue participating. When more people are participating
via email than directly through the message board, the resulting conversations
can begin to resemble unwieldy email lists as messages come in out of chrono-
logical order. 
190
Chapter 7

Choosing and Using Technology
191
Instant Messaging and Presence
If the Net is our workspace, we should know who else is sharing the workspace
with us. The notion of presence—that the Net is a populated space rather than
just miles of wires and silicon pulsing with electrons—may affect your motiva-
tion and the way you interact online. Notification of presence can have a direct
effect on your productivity. If you know your partner on a project is on the Net
when you are, you can connect and communicate. When people are logged on
to a network, the network knows they are all there. When the network informs
the users of who else is logged on at the same time, people know who they can
contact for live conversation. 
We see more applications all the time that provide presence notification. For
us, it began with the UNIX operating system which could, through the WELL,
provide a list of members currently logged on for anyone who typed the com-
mand who. Early in the WELL’s history, a friendly programmer made a tool that
let logged-on members send real-time messages back and forth. He called it
send and later created the add-on huh to repeat back to you the sends you
missed the first time.
Figure 7.6
This email notification tells me that a message has been added to the
discussion I started. 
Screen shot of the authors’ message board using WebCrossing ©SociAlchemy

We saw presence notification next on AOL, when it implemented its first
instant messaging tool. The IM had a feature called the Buddy List in which you
could put the screen names of other people on AOL you might want to IM with
if they were logged on. IMs and an endless supply of open chat rooms were
responsible for much of AOL’s phenomenal early growth. 
It was teenagers who really made instant messaging popular—teenagers
working on their homework, with IM windows open, gossiping with friends,
and collaborating on their assignments at the same time. That’s multitasking
productivity, and it’s productivity that has brought IM into the workplace. 
Since Web-based messaging clients became freely available, enterprising
workers have been downloading them from AOL.com or MSN or Yahoo! so that
they could stay in more immediate contact with important coworkers. There
has been so much demand for them within businesses, and so many of these
free clients are now in use behind firewalls, that some serious security con-
cerns were raised. Messages sent through these consumer-level clients could be
intercepted. Messages coming in over the firewall could carry viruses. The
demand shifted to the need for industrial-level secure messaging systems that
would operate within virtual private networks.
Jabber (www.jabber.com) is one of the leaders in developing the new genera-
tion of business-ready instant messaging and what it calls presence management
systems. Instead of a Buddy List, Jabber provides a Roster. But Jabber is more
than a secure IM client. The company claims that Jabber’s advantage is “its abil-
ity to embed streaming XML data into other applications, devices, and services.”6
Jabber, in the same vein as Zaplet’s Appmail, aims to make a popular personal
communications interface into a virtual workspace. It’s but one of the competi-
tors in this new market niche.
Peer-to-Peer Knowledge Nets
Immediacy and local control are increasingly valuable to the wired worker.
Even the delay of sending messages through intermediating servers can be an
irritant in the era of the instant message. When Ray Ozzie conceived of Groove,
he wanted to give more autonomy not only to the individual worker but also to
the collaborative team. He wanted to connect workers and their computers as
directly as possible, which meant removing the applications they used from the
centralized servers and putting them instead on the actual machines that
needed to communicate. Groove connects people like email does and like mes-
saging systems do, but unlike them it does not rely on a server to transfer and
relay the messages.
John Udell, an expert consultant in the field of groupware writing at
OpenP2P.com, says of Groove: “Presence, in Groove, is exquisitely granular.
You know when your message is delivered, when it is received, and in some
192
Chapter 7

Choosing and Using Technology
193
cases, even when it is read.”7 Given the uncertainty of receptivity in spam-
stuffed email inboxes, such surety is worth a lot to many people. And again,
there is the need to provide the shared virtual workspace, but with P2P, there is
also the flexibility to rearrange the workplace as the nature of the work and
working team change. One arrangement is shown in Figure 7.7. A brainstorm-
ing application dominates the main window, but surrounding are communica-
tions tools including IM, chat, conferencing (message boards), and voice
options. Tools can be added when needed by the group. Different configura-
tions can be created on the same Groove installation for working with different
groups. In the peer-to-peer network environment, the peers serve as their own
network administrators. 
The members of a Groove network, like those of any P2P network, are the
designers, administrators, and users at the same time. They can build very
responsive knowledge-sharing systems to support very communicative rela-
tionships. Figure 7.8 shows what might be Figure 7.7 five minutes later, with the
MindManager chart displayed and the fellow peers present in a group brain-
storming chat. Interactive Groove sessions and communications don’t have to
go through a central server, but the program provides a high level of security,
even when crossing the company firewall. John Udell understands how the
rigidity of centrally designed systems can stall creativity. Using a system like
Figure 7.7
One of many possible configurations of a shared workspace using Groove. 
©Groove Networks Inc.

Groove, the casual IM exchange with a coworker that leads to a full-blown proj-
ect can be accommodated quickly by the flexibility and control of the client
software. In such situations, Udell writes, “you can capture the exchange in a
shared space and bring other tools to bear—a browser, a threaded discussion,
a file archive. This effortless transition from casual to more formal interaction
is the singular genius of Groove.”
Our main focus is online conversation, and almost all of it happens through
either the asynchronous platforms of email and message boards or the synchro-
nous platforms of chat and instant messaging. Even in Groove, the descriptions
we’ve provided about the use of tools in this chapter apply. But the prospect of
knowledge networks operating through direct connections between individuals
and their personal computers or digital devices is different enough from the
server-centered communications environment that we are fascinated by the
capabilities of this new approach to collaboration. 
This may be the future of online knowledge networking, but the current
drawback of P2P software like Groove is the need for the individual user to
install and learn to implement its capabilities. Today, the priority of IT is to
install and support applications that go through the central server. That will
have to change if Groove and other helpful P2P clients are to be used to build
collaborative networks on a widespread basis within organizations.
194
Chapter 7
Figure 7.8
An abruptly called conference in the chat window. 
©Groove Networks Inc.

Choosing and Using Technology
195
Building Environments for Collaboration
An effective online environment is more than the sum of a few complementary
tools. It’s a combination of design, tools, and features carefully assembled to
serve a community or culture. Most organizations are just beginning to recog-
nize this but are hampered in their efforts by the challenges of application inte-
gration and their own lack of understanding of how an online community works.
In our study of Hallmark’s use of consumer communities, which you’ll read
more about in Chapter 9, “Conversing with External Shareholders,” and Chap-
ter 10, “The Path Ahead,” we got to see the work of Communispace (www.com-
munispace.com), a company that combines its software design with
community insight to provide appropriate solutions to businesses. Its installa-
tion at Hallmark provides a home to groups of consumers who interact with
each other and with Hallmark’s product design and marketing people in an
online community that is more fun than work. And though, as we explain later,
the interface is helping the community become a major knowledge resource for
Hallmark, we are using Communispace here to illustrate some of the smarter
approaches we’ve seen to matching technology to purpose and culture.
Making Members Feel at Home
The community environment is a combination of personalization and consider-
ation. It greets the returning member on the home page as shown in Figure 7.9.
In the most visible spot on the page, the Idea Exchange—an online community
of mothers with young children—lets the member know what has happened in
the community since the member’s last visit. Other announcements are prefaced
with the triple asterisks (***) telling members that they come from Hallmark
rather than from fellow community members. Members of the community are
able to post their own announcements on the home page. It’s their community,
after all. Helping staff members from the Resource Center are identified by pho-
tographs, and the menus in the left column are clearly identified by function. 
Lower on the home page, shown in Figure 7.10, is the presence notification
of Who’s Online. Community facilitators are also identified by photographs, and
members are invited to check out their profiles. Getting familiar is a big part of
building the trust necessary to get consumers to open up to each other and to
Hallmark. Yet Hallmark takes care not to be overbearing. The members them-
selves are empowered to post the links to timely message board conversa-
tions—in this case, on Easter-related topics. 
Learning from the Conversation
The purpose of the Idea Exchange is to generate ideas for Hallmark, but as you
can see in Figure 7.11, the conversations in its message boards don’t look like

196
Chapter 7
Figure 7.9
The home page of Hallmark’s Idea Exchange community.
©Hallmark & Communispace
Figure 7.10
Who else is online at the Idea Exchange and the members’ highlighted
conversations.
©Hallmark & Communispace

Choosing and Using Technology
197
those of a product design brainstorming team. Members are encouraged to use
the community informally, creating relationships and conversing about their
daily lives, challenges, and joys. In this community of moms with young chil-
dren, they talk a lot about their children and home life. In the process, they not
only bond with the community and the site, but they also provide insight into
the values of a huge part of Hallmark’s market. And again, we see in Figure 7.11
that members are invited to start their own discussions. In fact, most of the con-
versations are initiated by the members, not by Hallmark. What members
choose to talk about is also useful knowledge for Hallmark’s creative staff.
The message board for the Idea Exchange has been customized by Commu-
nispace for Hallmark’s needs. In responding, members designate their mes-
sages according to the type symbolized by the icons in Figure 7.12. Knowing
whether a message is a question, answer, idea, experience, or opinion not only
helps Hallmark track the reasons that people post messages, but it also helps
the members themselves quickly recognize the nature of each post. Note that
agreements and disagreements are also included in the options. Using them,
Hallmark can run quick polls using the message board interface where mem-
bers hang out rather than ask them to use a different tool. Members are also
allowed to make anonymous posts, an important option to offer if you want
people to speak out on issues even when they’d rather not identify themselves.
Figure 7.11
Topics from the Idea Exchange message board. 
©Hallmark & Communispace

The interface also offers members a list of keywords they can associate with
their posts. A dropdown menu lists keywords entered by Hallmark and com-
munity members. Associating keywords with messages can help in the analysis
of the community’s interests.
Hallmark and Communispace, which are learning as much from this project
as their client, monitor the activity in the community through a measurement
they call climate. Whatever members do in the Idea Exchange, the software tal-
lies it. Figure 7.13 shows a 6-week record of participation and contribution by
members. Participation counts the number of individual logons by members in
a week, and contributions measures the total of messages posted on the
boards, surveys taken, and visits to chat rooms. In this case, the higher the ratio
of contributions to visits, the better. 
This is but one instance of the Communispace software and design consult-
ing put to work. On other sites with other companies, it may look and function
very differently. But in this case, they provide us with a valuable teaching tool
for applying a good balance of technology and social insight. To achieve the
purpose of your knowledge network, you need more than powerful tools. Yes,
we keep saying that, but it’s worth repeating.
198
Chapter 7
Figure 7.12
Icons describe the nature and purpose of messages posted to the Idea Exchange. 
©Hallmark & Communispace
TEAMFLY

Choosing and Using Technology
199
Tools for Transitory Conversational Events
There are many situations and occasions when a permanent and ongoing conver-
sational environment is neither required nor appropriate. Many of these fit under
the heading of education and instruction, but increasingly, coworkers who are
geographically separate simply need a way to meet, collaborate, and share knowl-
edge. These time-bound meeting opportunities can be conducted either asynchro-
nously over a period of days or synchronously over the span of an hour or two.
Asynchronous conferences use message boards for their conversations, with
chat an option for allowing attendees and experts to connect or maybe to hold
classes or Q&A sessions in real time. When the event is better served by bring-
ing people together in live interaction, many organizations and groups now use
the technical services of companies like Placeware (www.placeware.com),
Centra (www.centra.com), and Webex (www.webex.com) to produce their
online meetings.
Figure 7.13
A 6-week record of activity and involvement in the Idea Exchange. 
©Hallmark & Communispace

Asynchronous Conferences
We’ve participated in and managed asynchronous online conferences and semi-
nars that have lasted for a week to 10 days using message boards and content
posted on a Web site. People have paid to participate in some cases and have been
invited to participate for free in others. These formats are useful for engaging com-
munities of interest in conversation around a topic, issue, or event. They require
meticulous preparation and comprehensive hosting, which includes marketing
the event in advance, handling signups, creating original content, recruiting
thought leaders and experts, managing the interaction once it begins, and provid-
ing transcripts or digital copies of the interaction to attendees after the event. 
To provide rich experience, the online conference needs the same amount of
attention that one would put into planning a face-to-face conference. Instead of
renting rooms, preparing nametags, arranging furniture, and providing audiovi-
sual equipment, the virtual conference planner must provide an online meeting
area with access restrictions, a clear Web layout of content and community
links, informative online profiles of attendees, and technical facilities for pre-
senting a changing menu of interesting content.
Although the conversational platforms used are the same as those used in
permanent conversational communities, they must be managed with the pace
of the meeting in mind. Conferencing managers must be agile in recognizing the
need to wrap up online conversations that have run their course, and in starting
new conversations that serve the fast-changing focus of attendees. 
In place of keynote speeches, featured experts provide written essays that
lead into open online discussion. Attendees are directed to Web pages that also
serve as a focus for conversation. And perhaps most important, the “hallway
conversations” that serve as the most productive opportunities for knowledge
exchange in nonvirtual conferences must be provided in the virtual conference,
too. Forums for informal interaction and searchable directories of attendees
and their specialties are a requisite feature of the asynchronous seminar.
In 1997, we coproduced a 14-day conversational community around IBM’s
staging of the chess match between then-world champion Garry Kasparov and
IBM’s most powerful thinking machine, Deep Blue. We recruited chess grand-
masters, chess teachers, chess historians, and programmers of chess-playing
computers to serve as our experts and play-by-play commentators for the six
chess matches of the contest. We provided a phalanx of experienced online
facilitators to be present around the clock in serving the global audience. Host-
ing activities were coordinated in a private “backstage” conversation area, with
one crew shift updating the next as the event proceeded. IBM provided the con-
tent—about technology, chess, and the human brain versus silicon intelli-
gence—on their part of the site. 
What was evident from Kasparov versus Deep Blue was that an interesting
topic can be made even more interesting by providing a wide range of relevant
200
Chapter 7

Choosing and Using Technology
201
expertise and by active hosting that keeps the conversations lively and encour-
ages attendees to jump in and participate. Knowledge flows best where it is fed
and stimulated in the online environment. The chess match was a win-win
event: a great marketing success for IBM that provided the thousands of people
who signed up and participated in the online conversations with an educational
and exciting experience.
Producing Live Events
AOL, which first popularized instant messaging, also pioneered the production
of large audience online events with their auditorium interface. Inviting
celebrities and providing typists to transcribe their responses, AOL allowed
thousands of members to attend and submit questions to a moderator who
would choose and pass along approved questions to the special guest. The
experience of at least having the chance of interacting online with a Michael
Jackson or a Billy Graham was compelling enough to the public that AOL real-
ized huge gains in membership and online usage from their presentations. Now
the Web has technologies that allow small-to-large groups to meet and
exchange questions and answers in much the same way, but with an expanded
selection of interactive tools.
Most companies don’t have their own internal systems for providing the level
of service they can get through specialized companies like Webex. Their need
for such services isn’t great enough (yet) to make it worthwhile to develop their
own in-house system. Thus, they pay companies like Webex to provide the tools
and connectivity through which their company can conduct its meetings to
serve whatever its immediate needs happen to be. Because of the cost and
inconvenience of post-9/11 travel, more companies are making use of these
options to conduct business meetings between people in distant offices. Some
companies use these real-time events for marketing or to address investors.
Some use them to connect professionals around projects, problem solving, or
product development. They may be expensive to use, but long-term contracts
can be arranged that reduce the cost of a single event to a reasonable level. As
the technology matures, costs also should come down.
With all events, planning and orchestration are important. Content must be
prepared and submitted to the service provider, and because these events are
usually planned with hard schedules, even rehearsal may be necessary when
the purpose is addressing a given amount of information to an audience. When
these technologies are used for collaboration within teams and knowledge net-
works, the combination of tools they provide can be quite powerful. In Figure
7.14, Webex is being used by salespeople and product managers to discuss sales
strategies. A slide is presented, a chat window is provided, and a list of atten-
dees is displayed. Using the platform’s collaborative tools, attendees can draw
on the slide. 

As organizations use event interfaces like Webex more frequently, they will
become more familiar, routine, and affordable. We believe they also will justify
their expense. As we described, a group of people connected peer-to-peer using
Groove can accomplish much the same thing as groups using a platform like
Webex. When such meetings can take place spontaneously, without the need
for making arrangements ahead of time and scripting the interaction, the online
knowledge network will be much closer to matching our natural human social
tendencies and behaviors. 
Summary
There are many new, powerful but complex technologies available for
improved knowledge management, but online knowledge networks rely on the
basic technologies that support conversation. These have not changed much in
their functional formats for years. You still read what others have posted, and
you post your message in a text window. Message boards and chat, though now
wrapped in nicer designs and including new features, still work in much the
same way as they always have. The same can be said for email, though even that
old reliable technology has been expanded to become a carrier of files, data,
and even other applications. Our descriptions in this chapter have been about
202
Chapter 7
Figure 7.14
A collaborative meeting taking place through Webex. 
©Webex

Choosing and Using Technology
203
the increased convenience and integration of conversational interfaces and
how each interface has its own social characteristics. 
Organizations and the knowledge-focused groups that exist within them
must make their technology decisions according to the purposes they need to
achieve. The aim should be to create an online environment that, through
insightful application of technologies and management, motivates the users of
the environment to behave in ways that fulfill the organization’s purposes. 
Though conversational interfaces are key to building the knowledge-sharing
relationships, supporting technologies like content management, document
coauthoring, and shared whiteboards must be provided to stimulate and sup-
port conversation. Software that measures participation and helps participants
achieve their individual goals supplies incentives to the organization providing
the conversational opportunity and also to the participants who spend their
time making use of it. There is no one best solution, even within a single orga-
nization. Every organization’s needs are unique as are those of every group
within every organization. By starting simply and incrementally adding new
technologies or changing technologies as the group’s online needs become
clear, the migration toward a best solution can be smooth and steady.


Practical Applications of
Knowledge Networking
In this final section, we provide examples, best practices, and suggested appli-
cations for the ideas, tools, and techniques we’ve described in the previous two
parts. We also provide some projections of where online conversation will take
the practice of knowledge sharing in the future. Chapter 8, “Initiating and Sup-
porting Internal Conversation,” focuses on the use of networked technologies
to support communities of practice and working teams in their efforts to make
the organization smarter and more efficient. Chapter 9, “Conversing with Exter-
nal Stakeholders,” describes how companies are engaging customers and con-
sumers in conversations that reveal the thinking and preferences that drive
product development and successful customer service. Chapter 10, “The Path
Ahead,” features cutting-edge ideas, technologies, and techniques being put to
use by pioneering companies today that we believe demonstrate the direction
of knowledge networking in the future.
Three
PART


207
In this how-to chapter, we apply the cultural and technical elements of the first
seven chapters combined with best practice recommendations to describe a
framework for devising, designing, and implementing knowledge networks.
This is not a list of quick and easy recipes but a process of analyzing what
you’ve got, clearly stating what you want to accomplish, and choosing from the
available options to design the most appropriate social and technical structure.
Our technique is to present recommendations—based on our experience and
the experiences of other experts in the fields of knowledge management and online
community—for mobilizing and supporting internal communities that will benefit
significantly by conversing through the Net. Our instructions will provide some
shortcuts, but their main value will be in helping to avoid subtle pitfalls—the mis-
calculations in social assumptions or interface design that can significantly reduce
the enthusiasm, participation, or creativity of a group. Participation is vital to suc-
cessful knowledge sharing.
We preface our recommendations by reemphasizing that the culture must
encourage people to converse with each other online. Our advice alone can’t over-
come internal resistance to taking conversation to the Net. Some groups working
within rigidly hierarchical cultures are satisfied with creating isolated pockets of
free knowledge exchange. That may be revolutionary, but it’s not guaranteed to
inspire a revolution in a resisting company. Fortunately, the trends are swinging in
our direction, and more executives are recognizing that it’s in their own and their
companies’ self-interests to support internal group interaction on their intranets.
Initiating and Supporting
Internal Conversation 
C HAPTE R
8

Cultural Preconditions
We’re about to describe the best ways to grow productive knowledge networks
on a company’s internal network. If we were growing productive tomato plants,
we’d begin by making sure the ground—the growing medium—was well pre-
pared for planting the seeds or seedlings. The ground in which a social network
is planted is the culture in which it must take root. The manager of an online
social network is like a gardener who must get the plants off to a healthy start
and then nurture them to maturity and a fruitful harvest. A gardener, though,
has more control over the soil conditions of the garden than a knowledge net-
work manager has over the culture of the organization. And though knowledge
networking will influence the culture of the organization once it’s under way, its
interaction will become productive much more quickly if the leaders of the
organization assume part of the gardener’s role. 
In this case, we refer you back to Chapters 4, 5, and 6 where we explored the
relationships of culture to organization and technology. Having those relation-
ships in order is the preparation required for getting the most from this chapter.
Four optimum conditions highlighted in those earlier chapters are described in
Table 8.1.
With these four conditions fulfilled, the recommendations offered in this
chapter stand a much greater chances of success.
208
Chapter 8
CONDITION
WHAT IT MEANS
Supportive leadership 
High-level support removes the resistance to online
conversation that stifles participation. Patient support
allows time for conversation skills to develop and
knowledge benefits to be delivered.
A thirst for knowledge
Demand for online conversational opportunities and
motivation for refining knowledge-sharing practices
must be strong to bring together and launch an
effective knowledge network.
Internet-savvy throughout 
To take full advantage of the available tools for online 
the organization
conversation, the organizational culture must be
aligned with the realities of Internet communication
and an increasingly innovative marketplace. 
Collaborative IT department
Building effective online communities for knowledge
exchange requires involved technical support that will
collaborate with and respond to groups that are
constantly learning how their conversation
environment can be improved.
Table 8.1
Four Optimum Conditions to Have in Place before an Organization’s Knowledge
Network Can Be Successful
TEAMFLY

Initiating and Supporting Internal Conversation
209
Where Consultants Come In
In certain situations during the planning, launch, and maintenance of knowl-
edge-sharing communities, the advice and guidance of outside experts are well
worth their cost. On these occasions, consultants can save the organizations
time and expense and make significant differences in achieving goals and high
productivity. Table 8.2 summarizes the authors’ recommendations on this topic. 
A consultant with broad experience in social networking, online community,
and organizational development can help your company prepare for successful
knowledge networking by providing expertise in the following areas:
1. Cultural assessment and knowledge auditing. Chapters 5 and 6
explained the impact of certain traits of internal culture on the choice of
STAGE OF 
NEED FOR 
DEVELOPMENT
CONSULTING
TO DO WHAT?
Cultural assessment
High
Provide objective perspective drawn
from experience with previous client
organizations and groups. Point out
traits that will help or hinder adaptation
to online conversation.
Proposal
High
Align design of knowledge-sharing
project with goals of company and
culture of community. Advise on cost
justification.
Pilot project
Medium
Identify existing conversational groups
that would make the most effective
pilot communities.
Prelaunch
Medium
Train and coach leadership and
facilitation skills, especially where
accelerated learning is mission critical. 
Design
High
Match traits and goals of the group with
appropriate software, features, and
environmental design. 
Early conversation
High
Coach conversation leaders and content
providers to achieve early success and
identify potential core members of
community. 
Marketing
Medium
Advise on leveraging early activity to
attract more members and expand
concept within organization.
Table 8.2
Degrees of Necessity for Consulting in Various Situations

appropriate technology and the design of online meeting spaces. Cultural
assessment and knowledge auditing are valuable techniques for identify-
ing those traits and determining the formats of interaction that work best
with them. A consultant with extensive experience working with diverse
organizations with different cultural traits and knowledge needs, and who
understands the shifting social dynamics that take place when taking a
culture online, will have relevant advice to offer a company going through
that transition for the first time. 
2. Identify potential pilot groups. An experienced consultant can help
identify potential pilot groups whose natural tendencies to collaborate
toward company goals through conversation qualify them to lead the way
into the new knowledge-sharing environment. The consultant also can
help the organization find existing internal networks or communities of
practice that can serve as guides and prototypes for replication within the
organization. Not all existing groups are appropriate pilots or models.
Some use technologies not adaptable for use by other groups; others have
membership requirements too restrictive for other groups to emulate;
some are too informal, making them poor models for networks meant to
get work done. A qualified consultant can recognize existing opportuni-
ties for leverage within the company that may be invisible to managers
and executives.
3. Provide training and coaching. A consultant who has worked with
groups adjusting to conversational interfaces can provide valuable train-
ing and coaching in community management and facilitation techniques.
Although many workers now connect to a local network from their desk-
top, and a great number of them can reach the Internet, their interface
with the company may only take them as far as information access and
the basic necessities of email correspondence. Stimulating active knowl-
edge exchange through conversation and taking those conversations
online require new skills and new practices that may take time to discover
without guidance. 
4. Assist in appropriate interface design. Appropriate interface design
for the size, style, structure, and goals of a knowledge-sharing group or an
entire organization’s needs is an art. Subtle features of the online inter-
face can have a disproportionate affect on the behaviors and reactions of
the people using it. Navigational clues (for example, the absence of links
to “discussion” on the top-level page of the portal) and wording (inviting
people to “join the community” when “join the conversation” is what
they’d rather do) can encourage or discourage people from participating.
Confusion can result from poor labeling or bad placement of navigational
buttons within a discussion environment. The best practice elements of
210
Chapter 8

Initiating and Supporting Internal Conversation
211
Web design are inadequate to cover the design of an online meeting envi-
ronment. Most enterprise-level software products come bundled with lim-
ited consulting services or provide customer support through their
corporate sites. But not even the software vendor has the cross-discipline
expertise to make the conversation environment compatible with the
community that a good consultant has studied and analyzed.
5. Advise on internal marketing. The best marketing method for attract-
ing more people to an online community is the word of mouth of commu-
nity members and exposure to the actual interaction of the community.
Even the early stages of an organization’s online conversations provide a
foundation to build on. Someone who has experienced all of the life stages
of virtual communities can help the organization identify social assets in
the young online community. An experienced eye can identify participants
who fill vital roles in social ecologies: leaders, facilitators, mediators,
provocateurs, and initiators. A qualified consultant can help the organiza-
tion respond to the suggestions and complaints that will inevitably come
from the community as it gets used to its new virtual home. 
Selling the Idea
If upper management hasn’t initiated the idea of knowledge networking, it will
probably need to be convinced that it’s a good idea for the company. The job of
convincing them is getting easier every day now that knowledge management is
being accepted as an essential practice in most organizations. But there may
still be resistance, especially to the more self-governing aspects and “out-of-
control” perceptions of the conversational knowledge network.
In these days of tightened budgets, every proposal is likely to get microscopic
scrutiny. New concepts, such as that of a knowledge network, will encounter
even more skepticism because they haven’t had the time to generate a lot of suc-
cessful case studies. Even the cases where intentional, purposeful online discus-
sion has demonstrably helped a company become more innovative or respond
better to customers might be regarded as “not applicable to our situation.”
In any organization contemplating a knowledge network for sharing infor-
mation, one of two basic circumstances is true about the level of knowledge
sharing in online conversations:
1. No organized online conversation is happening for the purpose of sharing
knowledge. Whatever the company does, it will be breaking new ground
for itself both culturally and in building new skills. It has no internal
guides or “scouts” from whom it can learn.

212
Chapter 8
2. Such conversations have existed historically or are currently going on. An
organization has a base of experience from which it can learn and possi-
bly some internal leaders for the expansion of the practice within the
organization.
Which one of these is truer affects the process of selling the idea to decision
makers.
Where the Practice Is 
New to the Company
Let’s look at circumstance 1, where no employees are using online technologies
in any organized way to share knowledge with each other. Email is available to
employees; there may or may not be an intranet or portal with online discussion
space. A team or work group has discovered (and agrees) that a more effective
environment and process for exchanging knowledge would help them and the
company excel.
In such a circumstance, we recommend minimizing the time required to pro-
pose and sell the idea and maximizing the use of available technologies and
existing social agreements to begin the online knowledge-sharing process. Learn
by doing. Demonstrate incremental success. Follow the recommendations made
later in this chapter under Spontaneous Conversational Communities, and
once the network has proven its value, point to that success in a more ambitious
Figure 8.1
Leveraging experience to increase the chances of funding the knowledge network. 
©SociAlchemy

Initiating and Supporting Internal Conversation
213
proposal. By that time, the group will understand the technical improvements it
actually needs for more productive mutual learning and for putting its shared
knowledge to work.
Your organization might be open to the idea of skipping these learning steps
and diving right in to redefining itself as a knowledge-sharing company. This is a
challenge, and we know of at least one company (Buckman Labs, cited in Chap-
ter 5, “Fostering a Knowledge-Sharing Culture”) that has pulled it off success-
fully and become a good example, but full acceptance and adoption of its new
system and practices took 3 years. Two conditions must be satisfied for the strat-
egy of skipping the incremental grass-roots learning phase to be a good bet. 
1. The CEO must be receptive to the idea. This is most likely if there are
problems in the organization that she attributes to slow or inefficient
knowledge flow. The proposal for a system that increases knowledge
exchange may be just the thing she’s waiting for. In such a case, the CEO
sees the knowledge network as being in perfect alignment with the com-
pany’s strategy and as a good means for achieving that strategy. We
describe such strategic communities later in the chapter. 
2. There is a base of experience in online conversation in the work-
place. People who have spent enough time engaged in online knowledge-
sharing activities outside the organization and understand its utility can
lead the organization to implementing internal communities without hav-
ing to discover how it works through slow, incremental experimentation. 
The cost of the interface does not have to be a major obstacle in getting
approval or starting the network conversation. In fact, simplicity sometimes
works in favor of the social interaction rather than against it. In our experience,
we’ve witnessed higher cohesion and interactivity in online communities where
the interface was not ideal and presented users with some challenges. In groups
such as the early WELL, the early incarnation of Women.com, and in many
email discussion groups we’ve managed and participated in, lack of features
and sophistication in the discussion software and online environment forced
people to try harder to communicate. They had to solve problems as groups to
make the interface work. They were forced to collaborate to invent solutions
and raise the quality of the communication. 
In taking the cheap and simple route, there are trade-offs, of course; some peo-
ple won’t participate if the interface lacks certain features. Some of the creative
energy of the group is used up in figuring out its online conversational processes.
But there is something Darwinian at work when the interface selects for the most
committed and innovative users. The filtering effect of what amounts to an inter-
face boot camp is actually a good way to select participants for the startup stages
for an online community when what you want are some willing pioneers to settle
the new environment and civilize it for the later arrivals.

In sum, where the organization has not yet invested in leveraging online con-
versation, make the best possible use of tools and internal resources that are
already available. Build a pilot network using email or available message
boards and take the interaction as far as possible using technology that doesn’t
cost the company anything. Set reasonable goals, provide good leadership, doc-
ument achievements, and demonstrate improvements over previous methods
of collaboration in the performance of network members or of the group as a
whole. The best way to sell an unfamiliar concept is to demonstrate its poten-
tial to change the organization in alignment with its strategy.
Where the Company Is Familiar 
with the Practice
Once an online conversational community has demonstrated its effectiveness
within an organization, circumstance 1 is instantly transformed into circum-
stance 2, with experiential evidence to support the proposal. A track record and
a functioning prototype will increase the chances of the proposal being approved.
The leap in effectiveness from conversations using email to conversations
using a well-designed message board with content management can be signifi-
cant depending on the group and the nature of its knowledge exchange. The
proposal must outline how the current technology is holding the community
back from achieving its potential. The specific gains that can be realized
through better supported conversation must be detailed.
As described in Chapter 7, “Choosing and Using Technology,” there is a wide
range of software and platforms appropriate for knowledge networks. The scale
of the conversational community must be large enough to justify the most
expensive platforms by spreading out the costs over more users. There may be
substantial costs for integrating the platform into the existing technology. There
will be costs in training and refining the design once the platform is in use. 
A joint proposal representing the needs of other groups within the organization
stands a better chance of approval. There may be many other groups expressing
the same needs to engage online through better software and wanting more train-
ing or more time to spend in online collaboration. The more groups that are allied
behind the proposal, the more leverage there is for getting necessary funding. Be
willing to compromise and accept software solutions that are less than perfect, at
least as an interim concession. Different groups will have different visions of the
ideal platform, but if the major features can be agreed on, all groups may benefit
to a greater extent than any one of them could on its own.
Remember above all that it’s the motivation and focus of the group, not the
interface it uses, that is most responsible for the effectiveness of its knowledge
exchange. It can be a blessing in disguise to be forced to bootstrap the commu-
nity conversation from the ground up. If motivation and focus can carry the
load in the beginning, the community will eventually earn itself access to better
tools, and selling the idea will be relatively easy.
214
Chapter 8

Initiating and Supporting Internal Conversation
215
In summary, a group, community, team, or line of business that recognizes a
need for more powerful online knowledge sharing should approach the appro-
priate decision maker with the following:
1. A proposal describing the needs and goals of the group that can be satis-
fied through online conversation
2. An explanation of the return on investment that the group will provide
after it is empowered to converse online
3. A well-researched description, with pricing, of the ideal interface or plat-
form that will fit the group’s specific needs
4. Agreement with other groups with similar needs within the organization
around a request for a shared platform that will serve them all for less
cost than their respective ideal platforms.
Engaging the Stakeholders
Groups that seek to share knowledge may not be aware of how important their
eventual success will be to other entities within the organization. These entities—
individuals, other groups. or entire departments-—are potential allies in all stages
of development of the knowledge-sharing community; their knowledge needs
intersect and overlap. They should be identified, contacted, and recruited to sup-
port the development of the network. As Figure 8.2 shows, there can be a variety
of tight and loose ties between a knowledge network and established units and
teams within an organization. In this case, we picture a product-related knowledge
network that can gather and surface relevant knowledge to serve these relation-
ships. The power of the online knowledge network is largely in its ability to easily
involve people who have the knowledge it needs or who need the knowledge it
has. These are what we call stakeholders in the knowledge conversation.
At Cisco, the original community of networking professionals was envisioned
as a closed knowledge loop where individual users of Cisco equipment would
meet with each other and share discoveries, experiences, and knowledge. Cisco
employees would be involved only as discussion facilitators, encouraging people
to participate and contribute but not serving as information providers. However,
it was not long before it became obvious how important these conversations
might be to other internal knowledge centers within Cisco’s organization. Cus-
tomer service could learn tips and solutions that only the actual users of its equip-
ment had developed. Marketing could learn the strengths and weaknesses of
Cisco’s and its competitors’ products in the language of actual users. Product
design and engineering could learn what customers wished for in the way of new
products or improvements in existing products.

When assembling the community, cast a wide net and consider who else in
the company might be valuable members or associates, with interest in the
knowledge being generated and with valuable knowledge to contribute. Con-
sider who might stand to gain from the community’s success. These groups not
only help deliver the value of the knowledge network to the different arms of
the organization, but they can also bring more leverage to proposals for upgrad-
ing systems and platforms. Engaging other stakeholders helps narrow the
knowing-doing gap by providing more practical outlets for the knowledge being
generated and exchanged.
Incentives to Participate
Return on investment in a platform to support online conversation requires par-
ticipation by the people it is intended to serve. The conversation must not only
offer knowledge and information that people will log on to receive; it must stim-
ulate people to contribute that knowledge and refine it through discussion,
debate, and collaboration. Many people have experience in online conversation,
but it’s safe to assume that most have yet to try. What kinds of incentives work to
attract them to become productive members of an online knowledge network?
There are four main categories of incentives to join: personal, cultural, goal-
oriented, and compensatory. Table 8.3 summarizes the motivating forces that
characterize them. Note that there is plenty of overlap. A personal incentive
216
Chapter 8
Figure 8.2
Linking in the stakeholders. 
©SociAlchemy

Initiating and Supporting Internal Conversation
217
may also have to do with compensation. Cultural incentives also have their
goals in the company strategy and mission. A personal goal may be to get a pro-
motion or land a job managing the online communities.
The thirst for faster access to solutions is a powerful force and can attract
many people to a conversation where answers are revealed, traded, and created
through collaboration. That thirst often is enough incentive for the people who
commonly form the core groups in knowledge-sharing communities. No exter-
nal motivations, carrots, or sticks are required to bring them in. In fact, they
probably initiated the community. 
But most online conversations initiated to develop knowledge must draw in
other people from outside the core group who also hold essential bits, chunks,
and piles of knowledge that are difficult to access in any form other than con-
versation. If they don’t show up at the party, the party can’t satisfy its attendees.
The knowledge development loop remains small and limited in scope.
TYPE OF INCENTIVE
EXAMPLES
Personal
I want learn from others.
I want to help others.
I’m curious about the topic or practice.
I love participating in online conversation.
I want to display my skills in online conversation.
I want to be recognized as an expert in my field.
Cultural
Conversation is part of the company “way.”
Collaboration is the best way to get things done.
Prestige comes with regular participation.
To not participate is to be out of the loop.
If you give, you’ll get in return.
Goal-oriented
Online collaboration is the best way to get things done.
The project team is meeting online, and that’s that!
The knowledge network is the most direct way to
locate and contact experts.
Conversing online saves money in our department’s
budget.
Compensatory
The company pays bonuses based on new ideas
brought to the conversation.
The company pays bonuses based on efficiency of
operation.
Promotions are partially based on regular participation
in knowledge networks.
New paid positions are being created for managing
knowledge networks.
Table 8.3
Four Main Categories of Incentives to Join a Knowledge Network

Eliminating Disincentives
Knowledge exchange won’t happen online or off if there are cultural disincen-
tives to telling others what one knows. If people feel that they will somehow lose
opportunities, status, safety, power, prestige, or value in the company by sharing
their expertise, their part in a knowledge-sharing conversation will be pretty
quiet. A company may take pains to remove disincentives for contributing knowl-
edge, but rather than rest at a neutral attitude toward sharing knowledge, there
should be clear positive incentives for workers to join the online conversation.
Time constraints are a disincentive for many busy workers. One of the main
reasons people refuse to adopt any new practice in an organization is the com-
plaint of too little time. Their schedules are full, and asking them to learn and
then participate in an activity that may cause them to fall behind in their other
work is only going to anger them. Eventually, participation in the knowledge
conversation will prove to be a time-saving activity, but there will be a transition
period during which the employee has to make a choice: Should I drop what I’m
doing and try this new thing or play it safe and keep delivering on my current
responsibilities? Only management can make this decision easier and less risky
for the employee. Some HR departments have begun allocating extra time for
employees to spend seeking knowledge rather than reinventing wheels.
As we’ve described, an interface that puts barriers in the way of participation
or that requires training and practice that consume valuable time can cause
potential participants to lose interest early in the process. Using interfaces with
which the population is comfortable, even if they lack key features for knowl-
edge exchange, removes these early stage disincentives.
Rewards and Compensation
Financial incentives can be structured to reward individuals or to reward work
groups, teams, and divisions. They can be offered as bonuses based on amount
of participation in conversation, significant contributions to the knowledge
pool, or effectiveness of leadership in a knowledge-generating community.
There is little experiential evidence by which to judge the long-term effective-
ness of such compensatory incentives. 
Davenport and Prusak report that a large consulting firm “revamped its per-
formance appraisal system to include contributions to the firm’s knowledge
database as an important part of compensation decisions.”2 This may work well
in companies that sell knowledge but may not be as practical where knowledge
is less central to the business strategy. 
New software products record employee activities in ways that can be used
to construct incentive reward systems. A product called “Clerity for Enterprise
Knowledge Sharing” advertises that its “software and methodologies can create
customized, automated incentive systems for your organization that can
218
Chapter 8
TEAMFLY

Initiating and Supporting Internal Conversation
219
include points, recognition awards, linkages to human resource and employee
review systems or other special programs.”3
Reputation Enhancement
One of the most powerful and effective incentives is recognition by one’s peers
as an expert or holder of key knowledge in the group. Being invited to contribute
to a conversation is like being invited to speak at a conference; even if you don’t
get paid, it feels good to be on stage as the center of attention. It feels good to tell
people things that you know and they don’t. Even being distinguished in the
knowledge community’s yellow pages directories can be satisfying. 
For some, participation in a new or cutting-edge activity such as a knowledge
network is reward in itself. The opportunity to be a big fish in a little pond or a
pioneer in the company’s newest project can be a great attraction. The oppor-
tunity to contribute to a community in a tangible way is refreshing to many peo-
ple whose work seems to disappear into the ether with no response or feedback
from its destination. In a conversational community, the likelihood of response
is much greater.
Members of a community notice who contributes and whose contributions
are most helpful. Reputations can be built in the online social context that may
not be accessible in any other form to desk-bound workers. But reputations
work in both directions. Those who exhibit selfish or impatient behaviors in a
collaborative group can earn themselves social demerits. Redemption is fairly
simple, though, because interaction is ongoing, and apologies and reparations
are just as visible as offenses and insults. As we pointed out in Chapter 7, soft-
ware that allows members of the group to rank each other’s performance can
inhibit participation in the early growth stages of the community. Use such fea-
tures with discretion because they work best when people can’t or don’t take
the time to form personal relationships.
Reciprocity
The nature of a knowledge-sharing conversation is that helpful information and
ideas move in both directions: from the participant to the community and from
other members of the community back to the participant. Once the reliability of
the exchange has been established, contributors of knowledge are likely to
return because they expect that they will be enriched in equal measure to what
they have given. Reciprocity does not necessarily work throughout the organi-
zation. People don’t have agreements to reciprocate, and they have limited
opportunities to do so in their irregular encounters with each other.
In an online environment dedicated to the exchange of knowledge, it’s easier to
keep one’s books straight on who has contributed and who has not. Because the
transactional record is there for everyone to read, a sense of balance and fairness

is apparent, at least to regular participants. Once the knowledge marketplace has
begun working, members know that they can offer what they’ve learned and that
they can learn from what others offer. The incentive to participate becomes part
of the marketplace mentality. Marketplaces are conversations.
The Membership Effect
The most basic incentive to participate in any community is the sense of com-
munity that comes with it: the feeling of being part of something bigger than
one’s self. The social rewards of membership in a group can be compelling, espe-
cially if the group has a purpose and an agreement to collaborate civilly toward
achieving common goals. Leadership and role modeling are important in estab-
lishing such cultural agreements, and mastering challenges together reinforces
the bonds that make teams and conversational communities more efficient. 
Thus, the founding members or central interest of a knowledge-sharing com-
munity may be the most effective incentives for participation by others. Commu-
nities of practice form around common interests, and their motivation to pursue
those interests can overcome even powerful disincentives like lack of time and
primitive conversational environments.
Learning to Tell Stories
Storytelling is as old as spoken language. As we related in Chapter 1, “Knowl-
edge, History, and the Industrial Organization,” it’s the bedrock of knowledge
transfer. In Chapter 2, “Using the Net to Share What People Know,” we
described how the WELL’s True Confessions conference, with its autobiograph-
ical stories, was so influential in building trust within the community. Some
people are natural storytellers, whereas others prefer to be on the receiving end
of a good story. As a means of generating new ideas and explaining one’s expe-
rience, stories are the ultimate knowledge transfer medium.
Story Power
To take it one step further, we recommend without qualification that people use
the Net to tell stories to each other. This is no longer a belief held by an intellec-
tual fringe; stories are now being adopted as the format for everything from orga-
nizational change to product branding. Storytelling is a skill worth learning and
could become a distinguishing feature of leadership in a knowledge-oriented cul-
ture. People react to stories; we seem to be wired internally to follow from
beginnings to middles to ends and to interpret deeper meaning from the tales
we hear. Stories elicit emotional responses in us and awaken the human part
that wants to connect with others. And some stories make us think.
220
Chapter 8

Initiating and Supporting Internal Conversation
221
Within an organization, especially one driven by business values and profit,
the humanizing effect of sharing experiential stories builds trust. Trust, as
we’ve emphasized throughout this book, is powerful stuff. A knowledge net-
work can be effective without fancy software, but it can’t be effective without
trust. People must feel safe to pour out what they know and believe to be true.
Stories not only provide an easily interpreted explanation of knowledge, but
they also reveal the storytellers as fellow humans, making them more real and
trustworthy to the virtual audience. 
The storytelling style should be modeled and encouraged in all online con-
versations aimed at sharing knowledge. Elements of effective storytelling
should be part of the organization’s training for knowledge community leaders
and facilitators.
Describing how one learned something not only imparts the knowledge, it
wraps that knowledge in an applicable lesson. True knowledge sharing is not
the simplistic activity of asking and answering questions; it’s a process of rais-
ing the collective intelligence and problem-solving capacity of the group or
organization and providing the group with better handles for putting knowledge
to work and implementing new ideas. 
Stories also are more interesting to read and write than dry facts and infor-
mation; they make participation in an online conversation more enjoyable and
engaging, retaining more participants. In the pursuit of practical knowledge,
stories provide context. They serve as a framework for delivering one’s experi-
ence to others in ways that teach and inspire as well as inform and entertain. 
Springboard Stories Go Online 
Stephen Denning has a special view and purpose for telling stories. In The
Springboard,1 he describes the story as “a launching device aimed at enabling a
SHARING KNOWLEDGE THROUGH STORIES
The story format is a teaching tool. A good story for imparting knowledge drawn from
personal experience includes the following:
1.
Background: How you learned what you know
2.
Context: Why it was important
3.
Beginning: What you did or tried first
4.
Middle: The failure or breakthrough that was the lesson
5.
End: How you confirmed your success or failure
6.
Reflection: What you’ve learned about it since
Stories told online work best when kept brief and concise. As they say, “Brevity is the
soul of wit.” Most busy readers would agree.

whole group of people to leap—mentally—higher than they otherwise might, to
get beyond mere common sense.” This is more than a teaching function or sim-
ple knowledge exchange. It is more akin to intellectual stimulation or a call to
action. Denning’s stories are short and tend to describe possibilities based on
actual events. They are carefully assembled and delivered. The springboard
story is meant to catalyze organizational change.
Springboard stories share some common elements. They generally begin
with a protagonist and what he calls “the predicament” that describes a prob-
lem the audience can relate to. They then move on to “the resolution of the
predicament, embodying the change idea.” This is meant to stimulate audience
thinking, where they apply the change idea to their organization. The story
wraps up either with “extrapolating the story to complete the picture” or with
“drawing out the implications.” Sometimes both elements are included. They
help the audience connect the change idea with practical implications for their
specific situations. 
Denning’s book assumes its readers will use his lessons in face-to-face situa-
tions. Drawing from his recommendations, we’ve adapted them to the virtual
meeting place and present those adapted recommendations as follows:
1. Study and understand your audience. As Denning says, “You implicitly
reflect the inner cravings of your audience.” Your understanding will
come across in your story.
2. In preparing a story for online presentation, emphasize qualities such as
conviction, readiness, and a sense of ownership of the content of the
222
Chapter 8
HOW A STORY CHANGED THE WORLD BANK
It takes one page in Stephen Denning’s The Springboard to tell the story that he claims led
to “an explosion of new energy and momentum” at the huge international organization.
The story was a simple one, relating how email contacts brought the right expertise and
appropriate solutions to fix rapidly deteriorating roads in Pakistan.
What made the story so powerful was its relevance to what was then a growing concern
in the World Bank: that the global financial crisis was looking more and more unmanageable. 
The rapid response and marshaling of road repair experience from around the world—
as related in the short springboard story—changed perceptions and raised hopes that new
solutions were at hand and that some of its people knew how to use them. Maybe there
was light at the end of the tunnel after all. 
The story inspired Denning’s World Bank colleagues to recognize a solution that it could
adapt to many of its international situations.
The potential power of a springboard story is proportional to the need for knowledge
that must be satisfied. The right story, delivered at the right time, can mobilize people to
adopt new practices and to effect change in the organization.

Initiating and Supporting Internal Conversation
223
story. Unlike stories told face-to-face, online stories are not usually pre-
sented repeatedly to different audiences. But once an online story is
posted, it may be distributed to many different groups and individuals. 
3. Unlike Denning’s in-person situation, posting a story online allows the
author to continue interacting with his or her audience, expanding on the
story’s theme, or using it as a starting point for developing innovative
ideas. Remaining available for follow-up discussion is appropriate in con-
versational communities.
4. Take care in composing stories to be presented as text. Be economical in
the use of words. Tell the story as briefly and concisely as possible. Break
up the story into small paragraphs for easier reading. Use proper punctu-
ation and check your spelling. Select a readable typeface such as Times
New Roman and double space the lines.Your presentation is important. 
5. Do not complement your story with visual aids (such as Web graphics,
Power Point slides, attached documents with charts) unless it’s neces-
sary. Don’t distract the audience from the essence of the message,
whether it’s a lesson, relevant experience, or a moral meant to mobilize
the audience to action.
6. Emphasize key points in the story through whatever conventions are
available in the medium being used. Embolden or italicize words, or in
plain-text email, use punctuation marks to *emphasize* specific words or
phrases. Isolate key sentences or paragraphs to ensure that they stand out
for readers.
7. Denning advises springboard storytellers, “As a presenter, you must
above all believe in your presentation.” In the impersonal environment of
the Net, where each participant in a conversation sits alone in front of a
keyboard, it’s tempting to treat what one posts to the screen lightly. Yet,
when the discussion environment is defined by a collective hunger for
useful knowledge, a story told with deep belief is likely to be read with
correspondingly deep attention and respect. 
Stories fit well within all three of the community types we are about to
describe. One story may be the seed that launches a conversational community,
or storytelling may be the preferred style for a knowledge exchange community. 
Change is a dire need in many organizations and an aspired-to value in
others. The springboard story—brief, illustrative, relevant, sometimes inspir-
ing, sometimes unsettling—is a valuable instrument for catalyzing and directing
change. It can be used by managers and team leaders but can just as easily be
applied by frontline workers. As an igniter of innovative conversation or as an
initiator of a new knowledge-sharing community, a springboard story can be
quite effective.

The Practice of Online Conversation
We described what we did on the WELL as “talking through typing.” Although
the physical act of pressing keys and constructing words and sentences was
identical to that used in composing a letter or writing a book, the sense we had
as we typed those words was one of responding to something that someone had
just said to us. And in the course of an hour, we would find ourselves feeling as
if we’d been in 10 or 20 different discussions covering that many topics and
involving perhaps dozens of people.
Talking through typing takes some getting used to. It takes some suspension
of disbelief that the participants in the virtual conversation are actually as
remote from each other as they physically are. The fact that the other partici-
pants might be down the hall, on another floor, in another building, or in
another country is not so important in the exchange of ideas. But that remote-
ness—along with the lack of visual and auditory clues that transmit mood,
meaning, and style—must be compensated for in the online relationship. The
style and quality of writing and reading can make a virtual conversation feel
more sincere, detailed, trustworthy, and human.
As an aid to those engaging in continuing online conversation for the first
time, we have compiled a list of basic competencies in effective online conver-
sation (see Table 8.4). They begin with the practice of leading and initiating con-
versations, move into recommendations for composing messages and
responses in a conversation, and gradually pull back in focus to describe ways
of envisioning the conversational landscape.
224
Chapter 8
KEY PRACTICES FOR 
EFFECTIVE ONLINE 
CONVERSATION
WHY THEY ARE IMPORTANT
Create a tone of invitation 
Leaders are recognized by the attention they pay to 
and openness
motivating people to participate. Welcome
newcomers and thank contributors.
State the purpose and goals 
Make it clear what the discussion is about and what 
of the conversation
it is supposed to achieve. Be attentive to titles of
discussions and subject lines of messages.
Manage time constraints
Lead conversations to reasonable resolution,
especially if there are time limits and deadlines.
Open-ended discussions can become time wasters.
Avoid unproductive argument
Argument is good, up to a point. When an argument
cannot be resolved in the conversational forum,
redirect it to email or “offline resolution” to avoid
distracting the community.
Table 8.4
Basic Competencies in Continuing Online Conversation

Initiating and Supporting Internal Conversation
225
Leading Online Conversation
The tone and wording of the first content in a new online discussion are very
influential on the subsequent interaction. When the words and tone are inviting
KEY PRACTICES FOR 
EFFECTIVE ONLINE 
CONVERSATION
WHY THEY ARE IMPORTANT
Facilitate disagreement
When two members are at odds, attempt to mediate
their disagreement within the community’s value in
civility. Use backchannels to help resolve spats
outside the conversation space.
Partition formal and informal 
Provide conversation areas for informal interaction 
conversation
that serve to build trust and strengthen relationships.
Keep these areas distinct from those used for work,
knowledge sharing, and problem solving.
Avoid opening excess 
Given the number of participants, only a certain 
conversations
number of active conversations can be supported.
Open new conversations only when there is demand. 
Identify people in official roles
Make it plain which members are in leadership
positions or who have control over conversation
management tools. Use special user names or
symbols to designate them in the space.
Remember: It’s a postocracy
Those who post the most words command the most
attention, but they don’t necessarily contribute the
most useful knowledge. Make sure prolific posters
leave room for others.
Follow up on your 
Don’t post messages guaranteed to elicit strong 
controversial posts
reactions and then fail to show up to respond. It’s a
conversation, and it’s rude to stir things up and leave.
Be accountable for your 
Be ready to back up information that is challenged. 
contributions
Again, in a conversation focused on knowledge, all
parties should be fully engaged as information
providers and experts.
Communicate clearly
Take pains to compose messages carefully. Use
uppercase and lowercase appropriately. Check
spelling and grammar. Break up messages into small
paragraphs and be concise.
Be honest
Don’t play a role different from who you really are
unless the conversation manager has declared it to
be virtual Halloween.
Table 8.4
(Continued)

and communicate openness and enthusiasm, they are more likely to elicit
response than dry, businesslike remarks. It’s okay to overdo the emotional con-
tent somewhat to offset the impersonal nature of the medium.
A conversation space for knowledge exchange has a purpose. The question is:
How specific is the purpose? This should be clarified at the outset of every new
conversation or collection of conversations. A reminder on the entry screen to
the discussion space is a good idea, and attention to the labeling of topics helps
remind participants of their focus of interaction. If there is a deadline or time
limit on the conversation, a facilitator should be minding the clock (or calendar)
and leading discussion toward resolution in advance of the deadline. 
Facilitation may also entail regularly summarizing lessons learned, points
made, and issues still left unresolved. A facilitator, if there is one, has specific
responsibilities that also should be made clear to participants. In some cases, a
facilitator will serve in the role of debate moderator or even referee, charged with
helping to resolve or settle arguments. The classic role of a facilitator is to help
meetings and discussions stay on track toward a goal by getting people involved
and clarifying their contributions to the conversation. If there are disagreements
of substance, the facilitator points out the relevance of the disagreement to the
group and attempts to lead it to consensus or resolution.
If some people hold special roles in the community, as moderators, facilitators,
hosts, or leaders, their identities should be made clear to the rest of the commu-
nity. New joiners won’t necessarily recognize which members hold positions of
authority, and for the sake of convenience and orderliness, they should have spe-
cial user names or other obvious designations in the online environment.
As important to smooth knowledge flow as any other factor is the building of
trust and relationship. These may happen offline already, but if there are no oppor-
tunities for community members to meet in person and spend time with each
other informally, the opportunities must be provided in the online meeting space.
The kind of interaction that builds trust and relationship is not the same as knowl-
edge sharing, so it’s wise to make a clear partition between knowledge exchange
areas and social hangout areas as the site is designed and organized. In a simple
email conversation list, participants should take the time to correspond with each
other individually rather than overload list recipients with social chitchat.
Participating in Online Conversation
Some veterans of the activity believe that online communities are good for
extending conversations but bad for resolving them. Because in most cases the
conversations happen without moderation or facilitation, they are subject to an
effect that could be called the last word obsession. Everyone wants to get in the
last word, and if the conversation has been left open to additional posts, the issue
being discussed may never be settled. The cure for this is to include a moderator
or facilitator in any discussion that must be resolved or in any community that
226
Chapter 8

Initiating and Supporting Internal Conversation
227
shows tendencies to argue rather than reach agreement. Responsible partici-
pants can control their urges to get in the last word by simply paying attention to
the sense of the conversation. Every conversation has a natural ending, and learn-
ing what that means is part of learning to be a good online conversationalist.
In the same vein, a knowledge-sharing community should learn the value of
avoiding unproductive arguments. These not only distract other members from
pursuing the knowledge they need, but they can poison the social well, eroding
trust and making participation unpleasant enough to overcome whatever incen-
tives drew people to the community in the first place. As the old Western sher-
iffs used to say, “Check your guns at the door.” The purpose of the community
is to get smarter, not dumber. 
Some people avoid argument by posting something controversial and then
logging out, without returning to deal with the responses they have provoked.
This, too, can be deadly to a culture based on goodwill and trust. Accountabil-
ity is important in professional communities, unlike some consumer-based
forums where anonymous participation is invited. If you post something, take
responsibility for it and be around for follow-up discussion. Be yourself; don’t
assume roles that will confuse people about your true identity, what you really
think, and how you really behave. If the purpose is to exchange knowledge,
don’t mix fact with fantasy.
All participants in an ongoing online knowledge-sharing community have
equal responsibility to be clear in their communication. This means being a
good reader (the text-based analog to being a good listener) and taking part in
coherent discourse. Good writing skills should be developed for the sake of the
reading audience, and attention should be paid to details of spelling, grammar,
composition, and the organization of thoughts. It all makes a big difference, not
only in the regard in which the person will be held but also in the overall qual-
ity of the knowledge exchange. You’ll appreciate good writers when you’ve
been subjected to enough bad ones.
Remember that an online discussion community is a postocracy where those
who post their comments and responses get more attention than those who
don’t. As Woody Allen said, 80 percent of success is showing up, and in an
online community, that’s how recognition works. If you make your presence
known, you’re part of the conversation. If you don’t, then you aren’t. And where
reciprocity is a big incentive for participation, it’s important that every member
contributes his or her share to the knowledge pool.
Organizing the Community
In the simplest online communities for knowledge exchange, there is likely to
be one focus, one purpose, and one fairly stable group of participants. Aside
from the occasional scheduling intervention by leaders or initiators in the

group, there are few organizational concerns. The main questions about mem-
bership are how many should there be and who should be invited.
As the community grows and diversifies—attending to wider ranges of
knowledge and serving different groups and needs—organizational issues
arise. These have to do with leadership, responsibility, and access rights. How
will the discussion space be partitioned and controlled? Who will have access
to the tools for managing the interface and the database of conversations? Will
policies for participation be the same across all communities, or will there be
different ground rules in different forums?
Each group must consider, for example, how it will determine membership. Will
a certain amount of participation be necessary to retain access rights? Will mem-
bers be allowed to read without contributing their own posts? Will lurking (read-
ing the contents of online conversations without even logging on to the discussion
space) be allowed or encouraged? In some cases, this can be a good thing; it
allows people who are considering joining an online community to look through a
virtual window and decide if it’s the kind of interaction they’d like to be part of.
An original knowledge-sharing community has to decide if it wants to divide
into subcommunities, and if so, how to arrange it socially and technically. It
may also have to decide, once the original focus begins to break down, if those
daughter communities should be spun off into their own separate conversa-
tional forums.
We described some best practices for leading online communities, but in
terms of leadership, there are other roles to consider beyond moderator and
facilitator. When there are many conversations going on in parallel, a coordina-
tor or administrator may be needed to take care of the content and to do
housekeeping through the discussion interface. This involves archiving or
deleting old conversations, retitling conversations whose original titles don’t
match their content, and scheduling intentional conversations when specific
knowledge needs arise in the organization.
The ideal situation in an online community is to achieve a level of self-gover-
nance that minimizes the need for oversight, leadership, and external control.
Self-governance must be learned collectively; early attempts are prone to
power struggles between people with differing views of what self-governance
entails. The presence of what we call a benevolent dictator can quell small civil
wars before they threaten the community and maintain control of the tools for
removing damaging content and restricting access. A determined disruptor can
ruin a community before it has a chance to grow, and it’s sometimes necessary
to ban such people until they understand the necessity of civil discourse.
Community health is of interest not only to the members but should be of inter-
est to other people in the organization who depend on the knowledge generated
and shared in its conversations. Social breakdowns do occur, and although there
are no objective measurements to indicate the health or sickness of a community,
there are ways to assess it that have meaning. A community leader should, for
228
Chapter 8
TEAMFLY

Initiating and Supporting Internal Conversation
229
example, keep a conversation open for discussion of meta issues—the social and
behavioral aspects (as opposed to the knowledge-sharing aspects) of the com-
munity as a whole. Meta conversations occur when the community talks about
itself and how it’s doing. They provide clues pointing to potential threats to trust
and openness that can short-circuit knowledge exchange. They bring up warn-
ings about dissatisfaction of key participants or problems with the interface that
need to be remedied. Meta discussions are also important in establishing the
community’s sense of itself as a distinct social entity, which is an important
aspect of the identification of its members with the group.
Spontaneous Conversational Communities
“Let’s get together and talk about it.” 
That’s the spontaneous beginning of a dialogue in which two people exchange
their unanswered questions, their viewpoints, and their stories. Or that’s the
beginning of a discussion in which a group of people with a shared interest does
the same. The stimulus for these conversations may be a pending deadline, a
potential project, a crisis in the organization, or mutual curiosity. The only
requirements for making the conversations possible are agreed-upon time and
place—a time when the participants can communicate and a place where they
can gather. The Net simplifies those requirements. People can now get together
without synchronizing their schedules and without meeting physically.
The Organization’s Stake
Spontaneous communities that provide value to the organization are more
likely to be approved, supported, and promoted. How do they provide value?
Here are several ways:
1. They discover useful knowledge and solutions that more formal groups
often miss
2. They learn on their own how to manage collaborative online conversation
and group process
3. They incubate new ideas and develop prototypes that can then be put to
use by others in the organization
4. They develop teachers and leaders for more widespread practice of
online conversation and knowledge exchange
Spontaneous communities form (and dissolve) constantly within organiza-
tions whether the management is aware of them or not. Many of them make use

of the internal resources such as paid time, office space, and bandwidth on the
intranet. It’s in the organization’s interest to get some value out of them. 
Some grass-roots groups come together spontaneously to form true commu-
nities of practice. We’ll describe their special case later in this chapter. Other
groups are less focused on pursuing common interests and more interested in
having convenient access to an online forum where they can get reliable and
expert answers to their questions. Such forums may form spontaneously, using
whatever communications tools are available. Or they may be provided by an
organization on its intranet as part of its knowledge management strategy.
Often, though, spontaneous communities appear to fill a vacuum, becoming the
organization’s first experiments in online community.
Spontaneous communities may be the explorers and pioneers in an organi-
zation’s migration to new cultural practices and new customer relationships.
Working behind the scenes, they take chances and occasionally suffer setbacks,
but at minimal cost to the organization. They gain experience in managing the
social processes of online conversation and relationship building. They learn to
230
Chapter 8
ENCOURAGING AND INHIBITING SPONTANEITY
The organization can provide the following support and training aids to foster the
emergence, survival, and effectiveness of spontaneous conversational groups:
1.
Quick and easy access to an online meeting medium
2.
A purpose recognized as important and interesting
3.
Unwavering focus on that purpose
4.
A founding core group of participants
5.
Agreement about presence or absence of a leader
6.
Regular input by the core group
7.
Room for informal relationship building
8.
Internal critique of the process and content
9.
Consideration for the convenience of fellow participants
10. Attention to keeping messages as brief as possible
11. Agreement about whether or not to include copies of previous messages in all
responses
Factors such as the following inhibit spontaneous groups from forming or surviving:
1.
Red tape that slows initiation of the group
2.
Lack of agreement on what the conversation is about
3.
Rules too strict to attract participation
4.
Too many participants
5.
No sense of ownership by participants
6.
Failure to affect the organization
7.
Poor email management by participants
8.
Disregard for the convenience or feelings of others

Initiating and Supporting Internal Conversation
231
deal with the shifting dynamics of group interaction over time. They become
the organization’s local experts in virtual community. Their accumulated expe-
rience is an asset that the sponsoring organization should both realize it has and
put to good use.
Knowledge-sharing networks initiated by workers are fertile incubators for
new ideas and practices that can enhance the organization in many ways. Col-
laborative networks build intellectual and social capital for the company. The
initiators and leaders of productive spontaneous communities may help the
organization to expand knowledge-sharing practices as internal consultants.
Experienced knowledge networkers can author training programs to dissemi-
nate new collaborative skills throughout the organization.
Who Is Responsible?
Where do grass-roots efforts fit within an organization’s hierarchy and manage-
ment processes? Who owns these bottom-up projects and who makes use of their
output? Who harvests the knowledge they generate through their conversations
and the social techniques they invent? Who decides whether they are a valid and
productive use of resources? How involved should a company be in providing
and maintaining the technical means for their formation and operation?
Peer-to-peer networks link individuals and offer perhaps the optimum in per-
sonalization through the network. They encourage and support each user’s
decisions about who is included in their personal network and how to interact
with each member of that network. The individuality of the interface in a pro-
gram such as Groove may work both for and against fluid collaboration. The
exclusivity that each individual can enforce can eliminate extraneous commu-
nications, but it can also block what could be valuable input. In practice, a P2P
knowledge-sharing network should be managed in much the same way as an
email list. If used as the operational base for a spontaneous knowledge net-
work, the members of the network must pay attention not only to the focus of
their interest but to what they might be missing by using an interface separated
from the intranet.
There’s a romanticized idea that cabals of workers, meeting in secret and
independently developing projects below the radar of the organization—so-
called skunk-works teams—are good things for the organization. Because of a
few notable successes, legend has it that skunk-works teams are made up of
geniuses, and their inventions invariably revolutionize the company, which
looks dumb for having forced its best employees into secrecy. 
In fact, skunk-works teams are not commonly composed of geniuses and do
not often invent successful products. We don’t hear much about their failures, of
course. And because of their invisibility, whatever good things they do discover
in the way of new knowledge and process are not made available to the organi-
zation. So although spontaneous communities might warrant some protection

from the effects of overexposure and overpopulation, they should remain visible
and active contributors to the organization.
That said, here are five recommendations for realizing value from sponta-
neous knowledge-sharing communities:
1. Appoint or hire someone to serve in the role of knowledge coordinator, or
KC. The KC, in this case, is the recipient and distributor of things learned
in spontaneous groups.
2. Announce to all employees that the company will support any sponta-
neous group conversation on its intranet or email system that identifies a
representative who will stay in regular contact with the KC. 
3. Make it clear that the company management will not interfere with the
natural formation and development of these groups and their interactions
unless it is specifically invited to participate. If appropriate, such groups
can operate with restricted access. Groups that wish to remain private
should be respected as long as they communicate with the KC.
4. Create a means by which knowledge of use to other groups or to the orga-
nization as a whole can be extracted from the spontaneous communities.
These may be discoveries about the company, its products or services,
suggested interface improvements, or the process of managing group
interaction toward goals. A periodic community made up of community
representatives and the KC may convene to build more knowledge about
knowledge-sharing practices.
5. Report to the organization as a whole valuable lessons learned in sponta-
neous communities. If appropriate, evangelize discovered practices that
improve on current practices. As spontaneous groups build histories,
have their leaders, representatives, and active participants report on their
experiences and best practices in meetings and online Q&A sessions. 
In objective and dollar terms, the returns from spontaneous networks are dif-
ficult to measure. Anecdotal evidence is useful, though, because it’s also diffi-
cult to measure the time lost and frustration experienced in seeking vital
knowledge through database searching and not finding relevant answers. Spon-
taneous networks don’t cost the company much to support and administer, but
to make them as productive and useful to the company as possible, there are
things the company can do to bring out the best in them.
Fostering Spontaneity
Self-starting, self-governing, self-sustaining innovative teams that provide new
knowledge to the organization are valuable assets. The same can be said about
employees who communicate and collaborate productively without the need
232
Chapter 8

Initiating and Supporting Internal Conversation
233
for micromanagement or IT handholding. A company can build these assets for
the relatively cheap price of some meaningful cultural support. Creative people
aren’t as likely to initiate spontaneous networks if they suspect the company
doesn’t approve of such activities. They’re much more likely to start networks
if they know it’s not only okay but appreciated by the company. So an unam-
biguous statement by the leadership of the organization, as we described a few
paragraphs earlier, is important. 
As we all know from our office lives, most people are satisfied to use what-
ever means are convenient and available to meet with and learn from each
other. We meet in the company’s cafeteria, in hallways and lobbies, or in tem-
porarily vacant offices. It’s not the environment that matters; it’s the contact,
the content, and the effectiveness of the communication.
In the online realm, people who simply want effective communication with a
small group may be satisfied using email or the commercial messaging clients
they download from Microsoft or AOL. They don’t think in terms of asking the
company to provide them with a new software platform. People intent on spon-
taneous group communication don’t look for elegant solutions; they tend to
adopt what is familiar to group members. 
If the organization is aware that such groups are forming and recognizes
potential benefits from their collaboration, it can provide support to help them
succeed. It may be in the form of technical help in setting up email lists or cus-
tom configuring a private discussion space on the company intranet. It may be
in providing authorization and entitlement for restricted access to the group’s
PROJECTS AS KNOWLEDGE TRAPS
Spontaneous online communities are often formed to implement projects, but these teams
and their activities, like skunk works, may not enhance the organization’s overall
knowledge-sharing culture. As Davenport and Prusak write in the updated preface to
Working Knowledge, “projects are by definition peripheral to the rest of the business.
Projects ‘bottle up’ knowledge and treat it as something separate.” 2 What the project team
learns in the course of its work is not recorded or communicated to the rest of the
organization in a helpful way.
This problem of “lost project knowledge” can be overcome if the project team
communicates and records its activities through online conversation. Although slower than
voice and in-person meetings, online collaboration provides a medium through which
lessons learned can be referenced by others. 
A knowledge strategy must tap into gold mines like project teams to learn from its
most able and active teachers—the focused, time-pressed, coordinated, collaborative, and
organized members of project teams. Online debriefings by team members, participating
in Q&A sessions with other interested parties in the organization, are an alternative
method for capturing project-generated tacit knowledge.

online home. It’s important that the culture make people feel safe in proposing
new knowledge-sharing groups and in selectively supporting them when they
come forward with their ideas. 
One characteristic of participants in spontaneous knowledge networks is their
sense of independence and freewheeling exchange. As organic entities, they may
invent or adopt styles of interaction unique to their groups and very different
from the visible artifact level of the organization’s overall culture. In an online
environment, a very strong sense of unity is possible. That sense may be creative
but also rebellious, confident but also vulnerable and wary of any management
attempt to control or interfere with its self-governance. The relationship between
an organization and the spontaneous knowledge networks it supports should
resemble patron and artist: The sponsor supports the artist from a distance with
faith that the creative spark will pay the patron back, and then some.
This is not to say that the organization must support every group that wants
to use its network infrastructure as a regular meeting place; resources do have
limits. But given limited resources, the organization should first support the
aspiring communities that are most important to (and aligned with) its strategy.
In Chapter 3, “Strategy and Planning for the Knowledge Network,” we
described “knowledge of maximum leverage,” explaining how groups that seek,
share, and generate such knowledge should get priority treatment and support. 
Successful spontaneous communities advance strategy and cultural change
most effectively if their work is transparent to the organization. They should
serve as prototypes and learning models to bring maximum value to their spon-
sors. As Davenport and Prusak write: “it’s not terribly difficult to envision ways
of using knowledge more effectively in business strategy. The difficulty, of
course, is in making changes to strategic programs and adopting the necessary
behaviors throughout your organization.” Spontaneous knowledge sharing
helps push those changes along while modeling those necessary behaviors.
Life Cycles of Spontaneous Communities
Communities that form spontaneously are just as likely to dissolve sponta-
neously. Because they are powered by passions and interest, they are subject to
the periodic fading of those power sources or to the loss of key participants and
leaders. The sponsoring organization should stay aware of the various seg-
ments of its knowledge network, not only to learn from them but also to know
which of them are vigorous, which are dying, and which are going through peri-
ods of activity and quiet.
Networks formed by special project teams fire up quickly at birth and burn
brightly, fueled by high focus and motivation until the project is done or the
problem is solved. The knowledge sharing required to meet the deadline is
intense. After that, their members disband and the activity fades out. Their rea-
son for being has disappeared, and their purpose has been fulfilled. 
234
Chapter 8

Initiating and Supporting Internal Conversation
235
Other networks form for a purpose that remains vital; the problem doesn’t
ever get completely solved but changes shape and requires the group con-
stantly to adapt. These groups may show cyclical ebbs and flows in their activ-
ity and creative spirit. The organization should be aware of these dynamics in
its management of the communications platform and support of the groups that
are using it. There should be regular communications between the leaders of
spontaneous networks and a clearly identified administrator of the communi-
cations platform being used so that communities going through lulls in activity
are not mistaken for communities that have ceased to be. 
Though we recommend that they serve as prototypes for the company, the
success of a spontaneous conversational community can be its worst enemy.
When such a group is regarded as a best practice example, labeled by the com-
pany with a gold star, it may gain prestige but lose the anonymity that was part
of its appeal. Suddenly, waves of people want to join the community or observe
what makes it tick. Executives in the organization want to analyze it and break
it down for replication. Tech magazines may even want to write an article about
it. Its world is changed into a fishbowl, and the uninhibited spirit that was
responsible for its initial success is threatened. Most people stop feeling so
open and creative when thrust into the roles of cast members in a dramatized
online demo community. 
External forces can shut down free-flowing conversation, but equally dam-
aging to the creative spirit can be the inflated sense of self-importance that
cohesive communities often develop, especially after being recognized as
exceptional and successful. Such communities may become isolated from the
rest of the organization, too exclusive to accept input from nonmembers. The
WELL became that way after it began getting mentioned in the national press in
the late 1980s. As new members appeared, they were challenged. Members
began to be preoccupied with the value of their words and of the WELL’s con-
versations to the detriment of the quality of the discourse that had attracted the
press attention in the first place.
So how can the organization make the best use of a successful community’s
example without “killing the goose that laid the golden egg”? First, don’t allow the
online meeting places of such groups to become tourist attractions; keep them
closed to all but their natural community members. If the community has some-
thing to teach the organization, arrange an online forum, event, or in-person
meeting where its members can answer questions and describe their techniques.
In general, use discretion when heaping praise on grass-roots conversational
groups or on any productive collaborative groups, regardless of their sources.
Learn from their success and provide a repository for lessons learned about their
techniques, mix of talents, and style of communication, but don’t turn the glare of
the spotlight on them and distract them from their good work.
Beyond the realm of organizational values, missions, and policies, though, there
must be an online medium available to people in the workplace through which

they can participate in such communities. One medium remains, after almost 40
years, the most ubiquitous and understood means of group communication
over the Net: email.
Enabling Email Groups
The founding participants of the Kraken at Price Waterhouse saw themselves as
a group of “self-selected creatives” looking for a way to collaborate more inno-
vatively than they could within the established structure of the large consul-
tancy. To that end, they made use of their Lotus Notes email, a tool that was
accessible to all employees and could be configured appropriately without hav-
ing to submit a formal proposal, wait for funding, or explain their needs to IT. 
Their technique was simple: Make a list of email recipients that was shared
by all of the original members. Every message reached everyone on the list.
Every response to every message reached the same list. Any individual was free
to read or ignore each message. Success relied only on regular participation
and the perceived value of new knowledge (or of appreciation) that each mem-
ber realized by participating. 
They named their interactive email list after a mythological sea creature of
great power (the Kraken) that lived largely out of sight. Word soon got around
about this low-profile but exceptionally productive knowledge exchange, and
others were allowed to join—to have their names added to the email list. Even
after the merger of Price Waterhouse with Coopers & Lybrand (another large
accounting and consultancy firm), the Kraken continued to exist and grow to
about 500 members. Its success has since spawned new internal email lists for
knowledge exchange within the firm, serving different purposes and including
different categories of expertise. 
The Kraken is notable as an example of spontaneous knowledge exchange
for several reasons:
1. It formed around recognition of common needs 
2. It used a familiar and readily available communications interface 
3. It followed no company-dictated agenda or schedule of deliverables 
4. It cost practically nothing to create and to maintain 
5. Its members saw it as an effective means for innovative collaboration 
This last reason is especially telling because following the merger, PriceWater-
houseCoopers put in place an elaborately designed interface called Knowl-
edgeCurve to expand its knowledge management activities. KnowledgeCurve
was not used as often or with as much enthusiasm as the email-mediated com-
munities. It was not considered by employees to be as effective in disseminat-
ing usable knowledge.
236
Chapter 8

Initiating and Supporting Internal Conversation
237
The strength of email is that it is so basic and adaptable. Every employee
with a networked computer on the desktop now has an email account and
knows how to send and receive messages. No new software is required; the IT
department doesn’t need to install or integrate new software into its systems.
People are free to adjust their participation according to their available time.
The tool does not drive the worker, so there is less resentment of its use.
Nevertheless, some practices should be learned and adopted to make email
productive for knowledge sharing. Because there is so little structure—for exam-
ple, an email conversation does not live on a specific Web page and cannot be
seen as a scrolling list of responses on a series of Web pages—motivation and
incentive serve as the only bonding agents to initiate the conversation and keep it
going. New messages to the group must be circulating almost constantly or peo-
ple tend to pull their heads out of the conversation and forget it’s even going on. 
Because most ongoing email conversations happen without leadership or mod-
eration, it’s contingent on the participants to maintain the focus, to make the list
readable and worthwhile, and to occasionally reflect on what has been discussed,
decided, and accomplished through the interaction. The original sense of purpose
must be reconfirmed regularly to keep incentives for active participation alive.
An email list should be set up by having IT provide the initiator with owner-
ship of a listserv run through the organization’s mail server. Listservs offer
options for managing the correspondence that personal email clients don’t have.
They offer convenient means for registration and joining the list and allow the
owner to control access through the member list. A company portal can even
provide the means for individuals to start listservs without help from IT.
One of email’s main assets is also one of its main liabilities: the lack of a dis-
tinct home on the computer screen. Except for when new messages arrive,
there is no location where the conversation can be found and revisited. There is
less to keep track of, but when one wants to review the messages that made up
a recent conversation, the medium makes such a task clumsy and time-con-
suming. For many people, an identifiable location on the Net where conversa-
tions can happen and be stored for reference makes more sense.
Providing a Place for Discussion
If the organization’s culture is friendly to it, spontaneous knowledge sharing will
happen when virtual meeting rooms are easily available. Many, if not most, corpo-
rate portals feature links to “community” or “collaboration” where discussion
boards can be found. These are often dedicated to the business line associated
with the employee, but some companies provide discussion space for general use
and access, permitting conversation across business lines. As we pointed out in
Chapter 7, “Choosing and Using Technology,” commercial portal products vary 
in their ability to integrate applications from different vendors. Many portals 
bundle the eRooms message board, whereas others allow standalone discussion

interfaces such as Web Crossing to be integrated. For spontaneous communities,
the feature set is not as important as the easy availability. The motivation of the
spontaneous group can overcome many shortcomings in the interface.
Email, as a home for ongoing focused discussion, has many limitations for scal-
ing, expanding, and diversifying the conversation. In Chapter 6, Taking Culture
Online, we described the differences between linear and threading discussion
interfaces and their effects on social interaction. Either one of these offer advan-
tages over an email list in that they both provide a clear, graphic depiction of the
conversational landscape. Coherent conversation in email relies on the conscien-
tious use of the Subject line to distinguish one thread from another amidst the
flow of messages, but discussion interfaces display conversations and related
threads in stable formats that can be navigated easily by new members of the
community. Discussion systems provide a history of the conversations and how
they developed. They include member profiles that can be referenced to add con-
text and credibility to the opinions and knowledge expressed. Some of them
include the ability to search the content of their discussion databases.
Discussion interfaces offer more options and flexibility than email lists, so
spontaneous interaction can take different forms. It may include separate top-
ics for new member introductions or the identification of a core problem to
tackle or interest to explore. The initiator may want to conduct one conversa-
tion as an interview of an expert while creating a related conversation for open
discussion of the expert’s specialty. 
Thus, open access to a discussion board located on the company intranet
may be an improvement over the email approach. The board could provide an
area for innovation where any member of the organization could start a collec-
tion of conversations, or a site administrator could answer requests by opening
new private discussion areas for specific communities of knowledge exchange.
Leaders of these areas could be granted the power to invite and provide access
to members of a group, or the areas could require new joiners to go through a
registration process. Either way, a discrete meeting place would be provided
that would hold a record of all conversations and would be available for partic-
ipation at any time of day.
Within certain populations, moderation or facilitation of the conversation is
appropriate. This entails selection of which submitted messages will be passed
on to the recipient group in the case of a moderator. Or it may entail regular
guidance, clarification, summarization, and direction of the conversation in the
case of the facilitator. The group as a whole must decide how much interven-
tion is helpful or how much is distracting. More creative populations will opt to
manage the conversation on their own, allowing the topic to drift in exploratory
directions at times and then pulling it back on topic when required. Groups that
are more interested in finding the missing knowledge held by its members and
using it to solve ongoing problems may not care as much about having the free-
dom to widen the conversation.
238
Chapter 8
TEAMFLY

Initiating and Supporting Internal Conversation
239
Transitory Conversation for 
Immediate Solutions
Bringing people together online for the purposes of instruction, education, or
inspiration certainly falls under the description of knowledge transfer. So does
crisis management, and for many organizations not yet ready to support ongoing
online conversation, the occasional time-bound event is a good way of getting the
attention of many people at the same time and of persuading them to use online
group communication tools that they don’t normally use in their daily work lives.
Transitory networks aren’t constantly active, but they benefit from the ready
availability of a software platform that key participants can use without train-
ing or lengthy preparation. Unambiguous leadership, intense focus, clear goals,
and hard deadlines usually define such task-based communities. They have lit-
tle time to build trust and no guarantee of a future once they have achieved
their purpose. They are convened for a limited time for learning activity, after
which there may or may not be any follow-up interaction.
We refer to these as transitory networks because they are created tem-
porarily to serve a special purpose as simply as possible. They may not be the
ultimate solution to the organization’s knowledge paralysis, but they don’t
require the planning and maintenance of continuous strategic online interac-
tion or the motivated self-governance of spontaneous knowledge sharing. 
What transitory solutions do require is a technical solution that can be pre-
pared and put to use quickly and economically. If the production of each online
event must start from scratch,-, with no technology in place or integrated into
the local network and with no leaders and moderators trained in its use, the
expense in terms of technology and labor will rival that required to build a per-
manent online community space.
In this section of the chapter, we describe some of the more useful applica-
tions of time-bound knowledge conversation and how to use them for different
purposes, including the following:
1. To expose an audience to special expertise about a shared interest
2. To mobilize involvement in a special project or discipline
3. To gather input from a specific population
Jump-Starting Knowledge Transfer
When IBM produced its WorldJam event, inviting all of its 320,000 employees to
log on to a site that it had spent multimillions of dollars to design and build, it
had no guarantee that the results would pay for themselves. It was meant to be

a wide-open brainstorming and knowledge transfer opportunity, but its greatest
value to the company may have been in the publicity it attracted. The scale of
an online event has a lot to do with its success, as does the focus. In IBM’s case,
both of these parameters were unbounded. It came up with a technical solution
that could handle a larger real-time participating audience than had existed up
to that point, and it committed itself to months of follow-up analysis of employ-
ees’ suggestions, opinions, and reactions to the event. This is not the route we
would recommend that any organization take to learn what its employees think.
But it did illustrate some useful principles.
First of all, WorldJam got the attention of 320,000 people who shared an interest
in their company’s success. An invitation to submit feedback and ideas is difficult
to ignore, even if one has nothing new to offer or believes that their contributions
would be lost amidst such an avalanche of feedback. In fact, only 52,600 employ-
ees logged on (to the reported delight of event managers), and only 6,000 propos-
als and comments were posted during the 3-day duration of the site. So one of six
IBM employees thought enough of the idea to check it out. If that caused most of
them to feel better about their employer or gave them hope that IBM was inter-
ested in what its employees—from top to bottom of the hierarchy—had to say,
then it may have paid for itself in worker loyalty and goodwill.
Second, WorldJam was probably the first experience in online conversation
for thousands, if not tens of thousands, of IBM employees. For them, the idea of
online conversation is now a new option, another potential solution, for collab-
oration in the workplace. It’s difficult to get people to try new methods, and by
putting on such a widely publicized event, the individual risks were reduced.
More people were willing to give it a try because it was not targeted at an elite
or advanced group within the company.
And finally, many of those 52,600 people who logged on to WorldJam certainly
got their eyes opened by reading opinions from others that either matched their
own, conflicted strongly with their own, or exposed them to ideas they’d never
seen expressed within the company. To those people, the possibilities of knowl-
edge exchange through online channels became much more significant. 
Training and Education
On a more practical scale, Cisco Systems has, for several years, been escalating
its use of Webcasts to leverage its expertise around the world. Claiming cost
savings of 80 percent over its previous techniques of sending speakers and
trainers to hundreds of geographic locations, the company now works with
Yahoo! Broadcasts (http://business.broadcast.com) to produce seminars and
individual training events to update global employees and business partners
and to build a larger population of Cisco-certified technicians.
These events pair graphic presentations with streaming audio, video, and chat
windows to broadcast information while allowing audience interaction. These are
usually asymmetrical knowledge exchanges, with knowledge sources doing the
240
Chapter 8

Initiating and Supporting Internal Conversation
241
broadcasting and the knowledge recipients attending and submitting their ques-
tions through chat, email, or even voice via conference calls. Yet they offer the pos-
sibility, like WorldJam, of stimulating audiences to be involved and contribute
ideas and suggestions to the forum based on their own experiences or expertise. 
Transitory broadband events are too expensive to produce to be used as a
company’s main format for conversation. They are appropriate for episodic
communications, between which their audiences can study on their own or fol-
low up with new practices learned from the latest event. They are also useful
for kicking off the opening of new, more persistent online communities.
Because they bring broadband communications to the desktop in the form of
voices, they are more attractive to many people than having to read comments
and interpret their emotional component.
But transitory networks don’t have to use broadband media to be effective.
Special purpose meetings and symposia can also be staged using asynchronous
platforms. They are more attractive to people who want to get deeper into sub-
jects and who don’t have the flexibility of schedule to allow them to participate
in real-time events. For the same reason, they may be able to attract experts
and instructors whose schedules don’t match up.
Group Jazz (www.groupjazz.com) is a small consulting company that, among
its other services, produces asynchronous “time-bound” meetings for organiza-
tions. The viewpoint of its founder, Lisa Kimball, is that virtual meetings that
have beginnings, middles, and ends can be more productive than open-ended
online conversations that don’t feel the need to resolve and wrap up their ideas
by a certain time. A time-bound meeting can have many of the features of a
face-to-face conference or seminar, with keynote addresses, slide shows,
break-out sessions, papers to download, and even the all-important “hallway
conversations” where most of the valuable knowledge transfer takes place.
Sponsors can advertise their wares, and people can trade business cards.
By working with client companies on the design of online environments for
virtual meetings and helping to train their employees in the skills of virtual facil-
itation, Group Jazz provides comprehensive support and enables the client to
manage most, if not all, of its events. It may introduce technologies appropriate
to specific events that the client will want to purchase or contract on its own
once it has learned how to use them productively. And for organizations that
would prefer to enable knowledge-sharing conversations on an as-needed basis
rather than support them all of the time, it’s cost effective to have these techni-
cal platforms and the people who know how to implement them on standby for
whenever they are needed.
Maintaining Resources for 
Transitory Networks
Transitory networks are purposeful networks that lend themselves to success
because of the focus their audiences bring. Once the production and user expe-

rience has been mastered (and the technologies themselves have also been
learning steadily over the past few years), subsequent events are cheaper to
produce and bring more predictable success. The technologies—whether
broadband subcontracted services, such as Yahoo!, Broadcast, Placeware, and
Webex, or asynchronous platforms, such as Web Crossing and Caucus—can be
formatted for future use and modified cheaply for each new event. The skills
gained in moderating and facilitating the initial events become assets that can
be smoothly put back into action when required. Ideally, a production team—
either contracted from consultants or trained in-house—should be kept intact
and available for whenever needed. The real cost in convening transitory net-
works is in the original design, production, and staff training. Once a successful
formula has been arrived at in terms of design, promotion, implementation,
management, and follow-up, additional costs per event become minimal.
Transitory events can become such regular occurrences that they are no
longer transitory but become part of the organization’s strategy. Just as Cisco’s
use of real-time interactive broadcasts have become integral to the training pro-
grams that enhance the value of its technologies, a company may find that reg-
ular production of online meetings is an important aspect of its branding and
product identification. 
Planning to Reinforce 
Knowledge-Sharing Culture
Strategic knowledge networks are meant to help weave the fabric of an organi-
zation. They are the social embodiment of the value the company puts into con-
stant learning and optimum use of its intellectual capital. Once an organization
accepts the fact that it will never know enough, and that the Net can be a very
efficient environment for learning collaboratively, it can effectively incorporate
the process of online knowledge networking into its long-range strategy. 
Spontaneous and transitory knowledge networks are both good learning
bases for planning and designing more permanent environments and practices
for companywide knowledge exchange. Strategic networks may be inspired by
collaboration born in the company’s divisions and lines of business, but they
are initiated higher up in the management structure. 
Compared to spontaneous and transitory networks, strategic ones take longer
to design and launch and take longer still to reach their optimum conversation
flow. But if they incrementally incorporate the feedback and input from their
users to improve their design and operation, these long-range networks will ulti-
mately reach more people and result in more widespread adoption of new prac-
tices. They can indeed bring about change in the organizational culture.
Spontaneous networks bring together expertise, focus, motivation, and ini-
tiative to begin online conversations that are likely to survive their early and
242
Chapter 8

Initiating and Supporting Internal Conversation
243
inevitable technical problems, social problems, and difficulties in translating
knowledge into getting things done. They make robust prototypes, with enough
resilience to correct their errors and model successful practices. 
Transitory networks attract novice audiences and expose them to the possi-
bilities of online knowledge sharing. They don’t ask for a long-term commit-
ment from participants and are therefore viewed as “safe” personal
experiments using new formats for conversation. They open the minds of peo-
ple who might otherwise resist joining anything called a “community” on the
company intranet.
The organization should use all that it learns from its experiences in online
social networking in designing more permanent strategic knowledge networks
both on the technical and social management sides. It may have its intranet
already in place. It also may have portals designed specifically for its distinct lines
of business or departments. And its portal software already may include group
communications interfaces such as email, message boards, and instant messaging.
But in designing for effective conversation for sharing knowledge, it must be pre-
pared to introduce different software and, more important, structure its culture
and human assets to serve the needs of people and their open interaction.
A strategic design for knowledge sharing is more likely to succeed if its
authors have learned from the spontaneous exchange that goes on among the
company’s employees. When actual workers, rather than executives, initiate
conversation to share the knowledge that helps them do their jobs, the
prospects for their success are high. The greatest risk in starting strategic
knowledge networks is that executives identify knowledge needs that the rank-
and-file members of the network don’t see as crucial to their job performance.
Strategies must be translated into the practical language that working groups
use in their job-focused conversations. 
Fostering Roles and Culture
We’ve written an awful lot about culture in these pages, and we don’t intend to
repeat it all here. But in the context of actually implementing strategic knowl-
edge conversation, it must be emphasized that unless the culture is aligned with
the overall strategy, the benefits of a technical infrastructure will be severely
limited. Design for knowledge networking that will serve an organization’s
strategic goals begins with an admission that, even at the top of the hierarchy,
the organization is starving to learn more. 
The motivation to learn and to recognize the value of each person’s contribu-
tion to mutual learning must be strong throughout the company. The impor-
tance of skills such as online community leadership, online meeting facilitation,
and online meeting production must be elevated. The idea that an individual’s
knowledge is more valuable when hoarded than when shared must be
debunked through new incentive programs and attitudes. The positive results

of a group’s collaboration around shared knowledge must be publicized and
praised. Training to help all employees understand how to represent their work
skills and experiences should be easily available. 
A strategic approach means that the entire company must be included in the
new knowledge-sharing attitude. Communities may be broken down by project,
department, or profession, but all aspects of the organization should be invited
and encouraged to engage in the online conversations that will enhance their
performance and productivity.
Summary
Online conversation can serve to effectively share and spread practical knowledge
within the organization if and only if the conversation advances strategy. The par-
ticipants must be sufficiently motivated to reveal what they know and sustain the
interaction that keeps new knowledge flowing. There is much that an organization
can do to promote online knowledge sharing among its employees. It should fos-
ter a culture that encourages knowledge exchange and provide appropriately
designed online environments, training, and staffing that enable groups to make
the best use of their skills, experience, and information resources.
Technology is less responsible for success than social factors such as agree-
ment on common focus, motivation to accomplish goals, competent group lead-
ership, group skills in effective online conversation, and procedures for
constantly transferring lessons learned in conversations to other parts of the
organization that can use them. People learn in the course of their work and
interaction, and the use of online discussion provides a means for recording
that interaction as part of the knowledge database.
Spontaneous conversation groups are formed out of commonly recognized
needs. They make use of whatever communications opportunities or media are
most readily available and accessible to all of their members. Their high moti-
vation and cohesion may compensate for inadequacies in communications
technologies chosen out of expediency. The organization that recognizes their
potential for generating valuable knowledge will support them with improved
technology but will avoid disrupting or attempting to steer their self-governed
knowledge-sharing activities. Spontaneous groups form and grow organically
around their acknowledged purpose and may need to be asked to share what
they have learned with the rest of the organization.
Transitory conversations have intentionally limited life spans and serve
immediate, short-lived purposes such as training, education, group alignment,
or the attraction of target audiences for marketing. They usually feature expert
presenters and an audience of people coming to learn something. They may last
through an hour-long Webcast or through a week-long asynchronous discus-
sion. Transitory conversations generate knowledge in the interactions of their
244
Chapter 8

Initiating and Supporting Internal Conversation
245
members and in the behaviors and demographics of their attendees. They may
serve as teasers to upcoming, more permanent online conversations.
Strategic conversations are started at the behest of upper management to
further the goals of the company. They are usually provided with specialized
interfaces, including message boards and content management. They tend to be
built in the order of strategy-technology-community, whereas spontaneous con-
versations grow in the order of strategy-community-technology. For success,
their conversational communities will require the same grass-roots motivation
and focus that drive spontaneous communities. Therefore, management should
tap into the experiential knowledge of existing communities that began their
conversations spontaneously within the organization to learn and apply their
best practices to the design of the communities it wishes to initiate. 


247
To paraphrase the poet John Donne, no company is an island. Businesses rely
on their customers, suppliers, shippers, and investors. Nonprofit organizations
rely on funders, donors, constituents, and supporters. All of these groups are
stakeholders in the organization’s success. The easier it is to communicate with
people in these external (but integral) parts of the organization, the more effec-
tive they can be in their relationships to it. To continue—just as in any online
community—the communication must be perceived as mutually beneficial by
both sides.
Donors want to know how their giving is being put to use. Supporters want
to volunteer their advice or influence. Customers look to companies to sup-
port the products they sell. Some customers even want to be involved in the
product design process. To win (and keep) their involvement, the company
needs to understand how these stakeholders think, plan, and make their deci-
sions. The company needs the insight that stakeholders can provide to help it
make its decisions.
These vital communications can take place in several ways: The company
can open channels and invite its customers to talk to it directly; the company
can share what it knows with its stakeholders; and the company can help its
stakeholders share what they know with each other. All of these actions can
benefit the company by forging stronger relationships with customers and con-
stituents. External conversations can take place in the context of business-to-
customer (B2C) relationships and business-to-business (B2B) relationships. 
Conversing with 
External Stakeholders
C HAPTE R
9

In this chapter, we cover the why and how of conversing online with exter-
nal groups. The technical means are now available for organizations to
become better listeners to their constituents and to respond more promptly
and informatively to them. For most organizations, there is ample room for
improvement in both of these areas, and relevant to the subject of this book,
there is great potential for using enriched external knowledge to drive twenty-
first century organizations. 
Just as internal conversations require a thirst for knowledge to initiate and
sustain them, external conversations require a need for engagement, commonly
recognized by the organization and the members of the external group. The
relationship defined by that need is likely to be asymmetrical; the contact is
more important to the organization than it is to its stakeholders. In a free and
competitive market, the business will always need the customer more than the
customer needs the business. For that reason, everything the company does in
its online conversations with external stakeholders must be done to please the
stakeholders. That begins with internal attitude and extends to the communi-
cation technology and design. 
In this chapter, we provide a variety of best practice examples. We’ve included
screen shots with many of them to illustrate the importance of clear presentation
on the Web page as an incentive for external groups to engage. Organizations are
looking for cost-effective ways to gain access to the vital tacit knowledge con-
tained in the interests, experiences, and opinions of their Web-connected stake-
holders. Online conversation is an effective route to that knowledge.
Building External Relationships
Through the Internet, organizations can open ongoing conversations with thou-
sands of customers. They can, but why should they? The most compelling rea-
son is that, if they don’t and their competitors do, those crafty competitors will
have some big advantages. They will be building closer relationships with a
very communicative and influential segment of customers. They will be gaining
loyalty and access to viral marketing channels. But more important, they will be
learning from their customers, in a more engaged manner, about how to make
their products and services even better. External conversations build more
informative relationships with more customers.
There is still resistance in many organizations to opening “that can of
worms,” which is how some people describe public, uncontrolled conversation
opportunities with customers. They see more potential for trouble than upside
in a forum that puts powerful companies and their customers on equal footing.
The examples in this chapter demonstrate how some companies conquered this
fear and resistance and moved ahead to realize solid benefits. 
248
Chapter 9
TEAMFLY

Conversing with External Stakeholders
249
The Importance of Innovation
Using the Internet to converse with customers is still a pretty innovative idea.
It’s new enough to still be questioned within companies, often because people
fear the public criticism that could appear in those conversations. That mindset
fails to appreciate the reality of today’s networked world. That criticism is prob-
ably already happening somewhere on the Net, if not on the company’s site. To
not move forward and engage in those conversations is to remove the company
from an increasingly important aisle of the marketplace.
Seth Godin is one of the pioneers of Web marketing. He is also author of Per-
mission Marketing and Unleashing the Idea Virus, two of the more creative
books about attracting customers through the Internet. In a column in Fast
Company,1 he takes the reader through an analysis of how criticism stifles
innovation. It may apply to your company. We think it applies aptly to the inno-
vation of online customer conversation.
Companies that are market leaders are often the most afraid of innovating.
Godin cites the following examples:
■■The fall of many retail giants to Wal-Mart 
■■The lag in producing organic, nonengineered food products by Kraft
■■The lack of much content on cable or on the Net from CBS
Microsoft is an example of a company that forges ahead with innovation in
spite of almost constant, scathing public criticism, he points out.
The stakes get higher, he explains, when companies have been successful
because they feel that they have more to lose—that all they have built might
come crashing down if they take a risk and change something. The fear often
lies within the top-level executives who might have been the original innovators
in the company but have become conservative behind the success of their orig-
inal ideas.
Godin believes the main sources of criticism are the people who staff the
company. Companies, he writes, “are far more likely to hire people to do jobs,
as opposed to hiring people who figure out how to change their jobs for the bet-
ter.” Those do job people are more likely to support the status quo that brought
them there. Why rock the boat with new ideas that may affect your job status?
The result of these combined tendencies to stand pat are that when a new idea
comes along, such as creating a forum where customers can talk to each other
about the company and its products, that idea and its worst possible outcomes
are compared to the status quo and its best possible outcomes. It’s an unfair
comparison, of course. To get approval for such an innovation, it must promise
to be vastly superior to the current methods for relating with customers. 

Opening an online dialogue with customers does involve some risk. Your
company may do a poor job of designing the interface. It may drop the ball on
responding promptly and candidly to questions posed in public forums. The
forums may be poorly managed. But these negative possibilities must be com-
pared with the new reality—that your company, if it’s known at all, already is
being talked about somewhere on the Net. 
If you’re not involved in that conversation on the Net, you’ve already lost
control over your public relations. You don’t get to respond to your critics. You
don’t get a chance to win the loyalty of skeptical customers. You don’t learn
from their experience, opinions, and viewpoints. Do you have to be everywhere
on the Net, responding to everyone? No, and you don’t have to try to be every-
where. There are plenty of more practical options. 
Lessons from the Dot Coms
The first wave of business presence on the Web was a very expensive and very
visible experiment. Some people made a lot of money and more people lost a lot
of money, but there was much to be learned in this first venture into such an
interactive and public environment. One lesson was that the companies that
took the best advantage of the Web’s interactive properties to build relation-
ships with customers stood the best chance of surviving the experimental
stage. Two well-known survivors have included conversations among their cus-
tomers as vital elements of their online presence and branding identities.
While most of the new pure play Internet companies were burning through
their venture capital building name recognition, the established brick-and-
mortar companies were learning and adapting. They were leveraging their
brands and the loyalty of their customers as they tried to figure out their place
in relationship to the Web and how to change their strategies to make the best
use of it. Some sooner than others, they began to buy domain names, build
home pages, and establish a presence on the Web. The smartest of them
observed and learned from the waves of new companies as they spent gobs of
money attempting to use the Web to provide better service to retail markets,
selling everything from pet food to software to automobiles. 
250
Chapter 9
ESSENTIAL TEACHINGS OF THE DOT-COM EXPERIENCE
■■
Relationships established through online interaction are compelling
■■
It takes time to establish and prove the value of relationships
■■
Advertising alone does not bring loyal customers
■■
Customer input is inexpensive but valuable content
■■
Trust is important to the buying decision
■■
People trust the advice of their peers
■■
Companies need to use the Internet to get closer to their customers

Conversing with External Stakeholders
251
The lesson these observers learned is that customers and their loyalty can’t
be bought through advertising; they must be earned through service. Relation-
ships grow out of trust, and a customer’s relationship with a business grows
largely out of the perception that the business is sincere in its efforts to please.
If customers see steady improvement in the way they are treated (and spoken
to) by the business, they are likely to remain customers. The Web provides a
convenient way for many companies to speak to and listen to many customers.
It’s not a very complex formula, yet so many first-wave companies failed to
connect with their user-customers that the exceptions stand out. Companies
that relied on advertising, for both revenue and for branding purposes, did not
attract large enough loyal followings to make a profit. Companies that empha-
sized customer relations as essential to their business models tended to build
loyal markets that carried them through as they trimmed expenses.
If you ask consumers today which dot coms have survived the great downfall
of 2000–2001, most—even those who have never shopped on the Web—will
probably include eBay (www.ebay.com) and Amazon.com. Those two compa-
nies stand out not only for their name recognition but because they have pro-
vided two of the most successful models for businesses relating with customers
through the Web. We’ll describe how they each use conversational techniques
later in this chapter, but both of these companies illustrate a third lesson of the
dot-com experiment: Act on what customers tell you and make it easy for them
to reach you with their input.
Unlike the B2C models of eBay and Amazon.com, the early B2B models for
the Web looked to eliminate inefficiencies in how companies dealt with suppli-
ers, buyers, and partners. The idea of online business exchanges grew out of
the recognition that old processes had become more and more inefficient over
time; they had failed to adapt. Customer tastes were changing faster than new
products could be designed, assembled, and provided. By the time products
came to market, tastes had changed and competitors had altered the market.
Companies found themselves stuck with large inventories; they had too little
time to get competitive bids on supplies; competition was fierce to innovate
faster and cut costs. 
The relationship between businesses is different in quality and purpose from
that between businesses and their customers. However, there is still a need for
communication and trust that the software interfaces of most online exchanges
do not support. Lessons have been learned here, too, in the wreckage of many
first-wave ventures.
The Online Business Exchange
Exchanges were envisioned as open marketplaces on the Web where multiple
buyers and sellers could find one another through a common interface and where
the bidding, ordering, procurement, and shipping processes could be made more

252
Chapter 9
efficient to fit just-in-time manufacturing models. Parts could be bought more
cheaply and quickly, inventories could be kept low, and shipping could be tracked
more accurately; business, legal, and transactional standards could be followed.
Exchanges were meant to be online shortcuts in the normal flow of business.
Facilitating Business Transactions
Companies such as Ariba (www.ariba.com) and Commerce One (www.com-
merceone.com) were among the first to provide specially designed software to
build exchange sites. Features to optimize routine procedures were incremen-
tally added to what were primarily procurement-focused platforms; these
included credit checking, financing, real-time order fulfillment, and invoicing.
Yet although their platforms supported what they referred to as collaboration
and interaction, they did not provide interfaces for buyers and sellers to meet
online and converse. Those communications were still left to email, the tele-
phone, and fax, which for most people meant switching from one medium to
another to complete a transaction and service a relationship.
Many business exchanges were formed to attract and serve both horizontal
and vertical industries, and many of them failed. A research article about B2B
exchanges2 blames most of the failures on there being too many of them, with
too little quality control over the performance of vendors who sold on them and
a reluctance of many companies to change their practices to fit the exchange
model. Because vendors joined exchanges but didn’t follow through on orders
placed through them, buyers stopped relying on them. It doesn’t take many neg-
ative experiences to extinguish a willingness to try something new. 
The exchange model, says the article, needs to be refined, and many analysts
agree that, in time, online exchanges will be successful. The main caution
voiced by some analysts is that powerful exchanges, by bringing about the con-
solidation of vertical markets, might violate antitrust laws. But the article goes
on to say, “One of the potentially most interesting effects of exchanges is their
impact on supplier relations, customer loyalty, and customer retention.” Fur-
thermore, “customer/supplier intimacy is increasingly critical to a company’s
ability to differentiate itself from the competition.” Intimacy comes through
better communication, and a well-designed online exchange should provide the
means for that communication.
VerticalNet and the Community Theme 
VerticalNet (www.verticalnet.com) was founded and designed to provide a soft-
ware platform to build portals to serve any vertical marketplace. Besides tools
for all of the processes involved in procurement and selling, its interface
included features to support conversation and relationship building among par-
ticipants. An editor would be hired to manage content for each vertical market-

Conversing with External Stakeholders
253
place, and a message board was provided for use as a knowledge-sharing
forum. VerticalNet almost got it right by providing a framework that could be
used by many different markets, but its timing and execution haven’t yet brought
the success its founders had hoped for. It has upgraded its process-oriented fea-
tures to include what it calls “Strategic Sourcing, Collaborative Planning and
Order Management,” but most of its clients have yet to make optimum use of
the site’s message boards. 
In VerticalNet’s portal for aerospace buyers and sellers, shown in Figure 9.1,
the community forum appears to be a quiet place in spite of the good selection
of resources. Note the few discussions and old dates of last responses. A
perusal of other VerticalNet exchanges shows this lack of participation to be
pretty typical. One possible reason for the slow adoption of VerticalNet’s mes-
sage board could be gleaned from a study done by IDC, discussed in Cahners-
Interstat,3 of the acceptance of knowledge management practices across many
vertical industries. 
Figure 9.1
VerticalNet’s exchange portal for aerospace buyers and sellers.
Reprinted by permission 2002 Vert Tech LLC. All rights reserved.

In an industry survey of companies serving 13 specific vertical market seg-
ments plus a category for “other,” it was found that 10 of the 14 groups named
“nonsupportive culture” as one of the two top challenges to implementing KM.
Participation in the parts of the business exchange that involve person-to-person
learning, as opposed to those that lead to closing deals and simplifying supply
chain management, may not be deemed culturally important. 
The study also concluded, “KM customers want to establish best practices to
retain expertise, particularly related to customer support.” So it may be that a
platform such as VerticalNet can overcome cultural resistance to using its dis-
cussion boards by providing forums where users of the vertical portal discuss
best practices discovered in putting the business tools to use. 
Like many Web-based ventures from the 1990s, VerticalNet was early for its
market, and in attempting to serve dozens of vertical marketplaces with one ser-
vice, it may have overreached. But its founders understood the importance of
social interaction in establishing a trusted trading environment. Vertical market-
places define communities of interest. Those communities gather at conferences
and trading conventions all the time. The challenge is not in proving to them that
conversation is a valuable part of doing business; it’s in convincing them that con-
versation in the online business exchange will work for them.
As the research paper cited earlier indicates, providers of business exchange
sites need to be more selective in providing access to the exchange. Vendors and
buyers must be committed to responding to transactions and interaction once
they are members. And users—the buyers and sellers—need to learn how to
maximize the potential benefits of their membership by understanding how the
exchange can make a positive difference in their bottom lines.
Many people regard eBay as a consumer’s business exchange. In our descrip-
tion of eBay later in this chapter, we point out the importance of building a cul-
ture of trust and open interaction among traders and between traders and site
management. Marketplaces have their own cultures that define the rules of
transaction and sustain their activity. Until business exchanges attract enough
traffic and begin establishing social networks, most companies will continue to
rely on traditional means of dealing with buyers and sellers, communicating
through phone, fax, and email.
Learning about (and from) Your Customers
Organizations are still getting accustomed to the new and continually evolving
capabilities provided by the Internet, the Web interface, and other new tech-
nologies for communication. The people outside organizations, whose only
options for connecting with them used to be letters and telephones, now have
many new formats for airing their views, providing their feedback, and issuing
their complaints.
254
Chapter 9

Conversing with External Stakeholders
255
Markets are conversations that can lead to insight on both sides. The buyer
and seller learn about each other and, if they so choose, work toward win-win
situations. Conversations build the relationships that companies must nurture
to excel. Conversations can help organizations and stakeholders work their
way toward win-win solutions. 
By conversing with your customers online, you can tap into all of this and
give them another reason to stay in the relationship: You care enough about
what they think to make it easy for them to talk to you. Indeed, they are likely
to refer their friends. Any organization whose stakeholders establish lasting,
mutually beneficial relationships with it has gained a powerful asset.
Customer Research Goes Online
Businesses (and increasingly nonprofit organizations) spend tons of money
learning about their customers’ preferences and habits. For years, they’ve spent
it on marketing studies, surveys, and focus groups. They once believed that
conducting such research through the Net would yield invalid results; the pop-
ulation would be skewed toward the demographic groups who were more
likely to be online. But now the online population is far more representative of
the population as a whole than it was then. Online market research has arrived
and is here to stay.
Recipio (www.recipio.com) provides what it describes as “the only Web-
based customer relationship intelligence solution that allows leading compa-
nies to aggregate customer dialogue and turn the voice of their customers,
employees and partners into a strategic asset.” It may not be the “only” such
solution, but in an article about the impact of online research,4 John Ellis
described how Procter & Gamble—“the biggest buyer of market-research ser-
vices in the world”—uses Recipio’s software to support online surveys and cus-
tomer participation in discussion, advisory boards, focus groups, and
collaborative product design. 
STAKEHOLDER TRANSACTIONS IN ONLINE CONVERSATION
Here are four widely recognized transactions that can happen in conversations between
your organization and its external stakeholders:
1.
Customers can tell you why they buy your products and why they stopped buying 
2.
Stakeholders can inform you how to fix your business and improve your service 
3.
They can help you design your next product and warn you if your competitor is
making a better one 
4.
Customers can save you money by helping their fellow customers make the best
use of your product

Procter & Gamble and Its 
Customer Advisors
Who knows how many people use Tide detergent or Ivory soap or who eat
Pringles or brush their teeth with Crest or take Nyquil for a cold? P&G, it would
be safe to say, has products in just about every American household and in tens
of millions of households elsewhere in the world. With dozens of brand names
to support, it’s no wonder that it spends so much on market research. And it’s
no surprise that it figured out how to use the Web to reinforce and advance its
market research.
Anyone can register at www.pg.com, where—in addition to tips and resources
about family, household, and personal care—they invite visitors to “help us cre-
ate.” To that end, they provide a variety of formats for submitting feedback to,
and for interacting with, Procter & Gamble. Once registered, a customer of
P&G can, as Figure 9.2 shows, “talk to us about our products.” Depending on
the customer’s preferences and available time, this can mean becoming an
“advisor” or joining “Consumer Corner” where surveys are offered and one can
be part of a customer panel. And beyond gathering advice and feedback from
customers, P&G even offers to acquire new inventions or ideas for new prod-
ucts from visitors to its site. Given the high penetration of their products, as
word gets around about such opportunities for customer involvement, odds are
good that they’ll attract a significant enough population to make the effort and
the cost of Recipio’s software and the staff to host the resulting communities of
customers well worth the expense.
Hallmark’s Community of Ideas
Hallmark, of greeting card fame, is another pioneer in using online conversa-
tion among customers as a strategic tool. To collect customer insights, Hall-
mark developed the Idea Exchange. In an interview provided for its software
provider, Communispace,5 Tom Brailsford, head of Hallmark’s Knowledge
Leadership Team, explains the genesis of Idea Exchange. 
Brailsford had long been involved in consumer research and “the voice of the
marketplace” and had observed how technology developed for doing surveys
on the Internet. He wondered if there was a way to use technology to get closer
to consumers and to change the interaction from the episodic process of
repeatedly asking a question, then doing a study, and then getting an answer, to
a more ongoing conversation with the marketplace.
Hallmark understood that consumers are a constituency that companies sell
to but not a group that companies actively involve on an ongoing basis with
product development or other internal knowledge-based processes. Hallmark
decided to allow its customers to become involved, and it set up the consumer
communities of Idea Exchange to use as an experimental research tool.
256
Chapter 9

Conversing with External Stakeholders
257
At first, Brailsford wanted to recruit volunteers to participate in this experi-
ment and call them Honorary Hallmark Employees, but the company finally set-
tled on calling them Consumer Consultants. Tom’s group recruited the first 100
volunteers by contacting some people who had made purchases on the Hall-
mark Web site and calling some on the telephone. The volunteers were asked if
they would like to participate—to answer questions and share their thoughts,
feelings, and opinions about Hallmark products and ideas. 
It was originally assumed that Hallmark would have to provide incentives for
people to participate, and an elaborate incentive system was devised. They
were surprised to find that people would have participated with no incentives
at all because they were so happy—in fact, they were “starved”—to get the
chance to have an active voice in a company they liked. The Idea Exchange is
managed as a facilitated community. The facilitator, who helps guide discus-
sion, is known to members of the community, and the members have become
Figure 9.2
Procter & Gamble’s variety of customer feedback formats.
© Procter & Gamble

familiar with one another. The Exchange, as of the interview, had 200 members
and would not be allowed to grow beyond that size in order to maintain that
familiar atmosphere, but other communities were being planned.
Tom Brailsford is a member of the Conference Board Council on Knowledge
Management and Learning Organizations and is a member of the advisory
board of the “Mind of the Market Lab” at Harvard Business School. As he
explains it, online consumer communities are appropriate for all companies
because consumers these days feel a disenfranchisement from companies. He
points out that consumers say they have a lot of information and ideas to con-
tribute, and they emphasize to companies, “we’re not dummies.”
Brailsford believes that companies tend to see themselves in a sort of parent-
child relationship with their customers, which does not motivate the customer
to share knowledge with the company. Hallmark sees the relationship as more
of a triangular system, consisting of feedback from the consumers to the com-
pany, news updates and information from the company to the consumers, and
an ongoing relationship among the consumers themselves. This latter compo-
nent has proven to be a big selling point in convincing consumers to participate
and has resulted in participants telling their friends and family about the con-
sumer communities. Now there are waiting lists of customers who want to sign
up to be Consumer Consultants in Hallmark’s expansion of new communities in
the Idea Exchange.
The Revenue Connection
The original impetus for setting up Hallmark’s online consumer communities
was a straightforward business goal: to increase revenue. The company had
come to recognize ideas as the new capital of growth. Thus, the Idea Exchange
was created to tap into a wealth of good ideas that Hallmark was convinced
already existed in the marketplace, ideas for everything from new products to
completely new businesses. 
Originally, many of the Hallmark questions for the Consumer Consultants
came from the editorial side of the company. The creative staff asked people
what specific words they used to describe certain situations and also paid
attention to the casual language used by the consumers in their informal con-
versations with one another. Today, Hallmark proactively explores themes with
the community by asking them to brainstorm about certain questions: “What if
we did this?” “What if we called it this?” “What idea or feeling would come up
for you if we did this?”
In response to traditional marketing people objecting to this type of feedback
as “statistically insignificantly valid,” Brailsford responds that the Idea
Exchange is not a substitute for quantitative tools but an adjunct to them.
Unlike quantitative analyses, the Idea Exchange is not used for predictions but
for insights and insight generation. Customer Consultants are asked for input
258
Chapter 9
TEAMFLY

Conversing with External Stakeholders
259
on internal strategic business unit discussions and help with diagnoses. Tom
considers their advice and input to be “way upstream” from quantitative
research tools. In fact, the Idea Exchange members have even designed ques-
tionnaires, which Hallmark uses in more traditional consumer polling.
The results after the first 6 months of the project showed that the Consumer
Consultants were more positive toward Hallmark. Those who had never bought
Hallmark products bought some. Those who already had bought products
bought more. They are grateful to Hallmark for giving them a voice and a way
to contribute and are telling their friends about it. They are recruiting people
for the next communities. 
In sum, the Idea Exchange has proven to be not only a rich source for insight
and idea generation but also an effective viral or social network-based market-
ing tool. Since Hallmark believes that communities need to be small to be
actual communities, the plan is to open more communities of 200. The question
then becomes: What if you want to have thousands of people involved in one
large knowledge network? We begin with the basics of customer relations.
Customer Relationships 
in Cyberspace
The field (let’s call it an industry) of customer relationship management (CRM)
has focused company attention on using network capabilities to learn more
about customers. As one of the first special applications to branch off from
knowledge management, CRM seeks to use all available information about cus-
tomer behaviors and interaction with the company to build better profiles of
typical and (especially) high-value customers. Using those profiles, the com-
pany can better predict customer behaviors and, by improving its customer ser-
vice, increase high-value customer loyalty. 
The Rising Cost of Customer Service
The continued rise in the use of the Internet is forcing advances in the technol-
ogy and practice of CRM, and the cost to companies of new CRM technologies
for gathering and analyzing customer data has been increasing steadily. A
report by Cahners-Interstat projected increases in total worldwide CRM soft-
ware application revenues from $9.4 billion in 2001 to approximately $30.6 bil-
lion in 2005. Yet many executives and experts are challenging the perception
that technology is the real answer to the question of attracting and keeping cus-
tomers. In fact, if the goal of CRM is to deliver better customer service, tech-
nology may be part of the problem by making customer service more complex. 
Charles Fishman, in an article in Fast Company,6 describes how Sprint PCS,
the phone service, trains its customer service representatives for 6 weeks to pro-
vide support to people who are able to buy a phone and get on the service in 15

minutes. The increasing complexity of products and services available to non-
expert customers makes this support correspondingly more expensive to pro-
vide. Customer satisfaction numbers for services is declining across all
industries. Whether support is delivered over the phone or through online inter-
action, companies often find themselves unable to please customers no matter
how much they spend on call center technology, CRM applications, and training.
In 1993, Don Peppers and Martha Rogers published the first edition of The One
to One Future: Building Relationships One Customer at a Time.7 The title suc-
cinctly describes their approach, which was prescient because the Internet had
not yet become the marketplace that would position the customer as a powerful
and informed shopper. By surfing the Web, the customer now can study compa-
nies and decide, based on how the company represents itself online, which are
most worthy of a relationship. This expanded capability to compare vendors has
reinforced a consumer trend toward demanding more personalized service. 
Personalized service means that the company, through its Web site, treats each
customer differently based on past buying behaviors and expressed preferences.
If you’ve bought products through Amazon.com, you know how it greets you on
subsequent visits and presents you with products it thinks you might like based
on your past purchases. Personalized service also can work through customer
support call centers by allowing support representatives quickly to look up your
transactions with the company and remedy problems efficiently.
Peppers and Rogers rode the wave of these marketplace realities and now
manage a very influential consulting company (www.1to1.com) that empha-
sizes changes in strategy and process as well as in software. But although per-
sonalization of software interfaces is important in their approach, conversation
is not emphasized as much as we believe it should be. Indeed, it’s becoming
more and more difficult to deliver custom service to one customer at a time.
Leveraging technology to provide personalized service through company Web
sites is one solution. Enabling online conversation that will distribute service-
oriented knowledge is another.
Consumers in Conversation
The Internet empowers consumers to make choices and to converse with each
other about products, services, politics, and the marketplace. Word gets around
fast in its constantly connected environment. When companies first began to
get feedback through the Net from people who might never have taken the time
to call their 800 numbers or write them letters, they took notice. They began to
hear that customers and potential customers “out there” on the Web were
exchanging opinions about their products and businesses. Customers were get-
ting some one-to-one service, but it was from fellow customers, often sharing
gripes and complaints. It was a public relations front companies hadn’t recog-
nized, and they have scrambled—with widely varying success—to deal with it.
260
Chapter 9

Conversing with External Stakeholders
261
As we mentioned in Chapter 2, “Using the Net to Share What People Know,”
some pioneering technology-based companies early in the Web’s history provided
places on their corporate sites for customers to connect with each other. Leaders
of these companies figured that if customers were willing to communicate with
each other (and with the company) within the relatively neutral environment of
the Web, maybe there was less need to fabricate more contrived and less personal
opportunities for customers to submit their opinions and preferences. 
Market research, focus groups, and scientifically sampled surveys are, after
all, contrived and truncated conversations, limited in what they can deliver in
the way of customer insight. They don’t convey detail and subtlety, and focus
groups are known for eliciting views more representative of the participants’
desire to please each other than of their true feelings. Plus, an online survey
isn’t likely to raise levels of customer loyalty.
But though the early practice of engaging customers in conversation worked
for some companies, most others had (and still have) many questions about
how to do it effectively and economically. Most still see CRM as the practice of
identifying and aggregating all of the right numbers and statistics rather than
one of establishing channels for trusted communication.
CRM, as understood by most companies, is not the same as customer rela-
tionship development. The Web provides technology to support relationship
development through series communications with customers—what, in
essence, are online conversations. Relationships now can be established and
maintained that bring the design and marketing of products and services much
closer to the people who will purchase and use them. Those relationships build
trust and loyalty with Web-enabled buyers and donors. Relatively few compa-
nies, such as Hallmark, have realized the potential of putting online customer
conversations to work, and their experiences serve as valuable lessons for
doing business in a networked world.
Listening First to Many Voices
Enterprise-level companies with huge populations of customers must be selec-
tive in opening their online conversations. That’s why Hallmark limited its first
Idea Exchange community to 200 members. But large businesses already have
input streams of feedback, complaints, and queries from customers. Analysis of
that input can help them decide which conversations, with which customers,
will be most effective for them. 
The same software provided on the Web site of Ask Jeeves (www.ask.com) is
used internally by more than 65 companies, including Nike, Office Depot, and
Dell. The companies pay an average of $250,000 per year to accept queries from
customers and then generate daily, weekly, or monthly reports analyzing the
questions and sorting them by content, date, time, and geography. The input
received has been put to use by client companies to change and add new prac-
tices and products. 

An article in Forbes magazine8 describes how the online securities trading
company Datek Online was motivated by input through its Ask Jeeves interface
to add an options trading component to its site. And Daimler-Chrysler, respond-
ing to a stream of “how-to” queries about specific vehicle models, embraced the
idea of “owner sites” that allowed owners of its vehicles to log on and get
model-specific maintenance, warranty, and service information.
By providing a means through which customers can ask questions and make
suggestions that can then be analyzed and sorted, a business can identify dif-
ferent categories of customers and needs, which in some cases can be
addressed by appropriate online conversations. The closer the company can
get to understanding the mentality of its customers, the better prepared it will
be to opening online dialogue. If customers come to a company’s site and find
conversational opportunities that speak to their needs, they are much more
likely to dive in and participate. The company will have shown that it has done
its homework.
Customer-to-Customer
Knowledge Exchange
Knowledge networks form spontaneously on the Internet, just as they do on
company intranets. Where there’s a need for shared knowledge, there are now
tools to support the communication and exchange. Consumers don’t need the
initiation or even the participation of a company to build an online community
around the company’s product or service. If the company is too slow to respond
to this need, customers somewhere will begin a conversation on a message
board or through email to find what they’re looking for. 
It’s important for organizations to understand that people may be talking
about them online and that those conversations could hold value. The knowl-
edge shared among customers is richer than that owned by a single customer. A
kind of informal collaboration happens when people talk about a product they
all use, and the resulting shared insights often contain an elusive understanding
that the company’s product development and market research people would pay
dearly to have. A discussion that takes place on a neutral site—not under the
sponsorship of the company—is likely to be more candid and creative than a
focus group or a discussion initiated by the company. We say “likely” because
the example of Hallmark demonstrates that a company doesn’t have to sacrifice
the candor of its customers for control over the discussion space.
The Net-Savvy Marketplace
The rise of e-commerce exposed organizations to the new phenomenon of a Net-
savvy marketplace. Consumers, on their own, gathered on publicly accessible
262
Chapter 9

Conversing with External Stakeholders
263
community sites to discuss topics of common interest. Many of those discus-
sions contained veins of pure marketing gold in conversations, observations,
and opinions that would have been of interest to almost every business, cause,
and profession that cared to know what its customers, constituents, and col-
leagues valued. Yet for years, public online discussions went unnoticed by busi-
nesses preoccupied with figuring out how to effectively market themselves
through the Web environment. Those were the years of blind faith in banner ads.
Citizen-consumers found each other online to converse about health and med-
ical frustrations; they swapped opinions about cars, fashion, music, technology,
current events, and celebrities. They emailed each other links to recommended
Web sites. A microbudget movie, The Blair Witch Project, rode a tsunami of bril-
liant guerilla-marketed Internet buzz to a record profit margin. Viral marketing
enlisted interpersonal relationships to spread the word about notable products
such as Napster, the peer-to-peer software that enabled millions of music fans to
download from one another’s PCs. Relationships built entirely through online
conversation formed the bases of networked, interrelated online communities.
Through the Web, people were telling each other what they liked, what they did-
n’t like, and why. The Web has become the world’s biggest ever word-of-mouth
network, where keyboards rather than mouths spread the word.
Before the Web came to prominence, companies accepted surveys, focus
groups, and polls as “good enough” means for assessing consumer preferences.
But those measuring tools missed not only the passion and analysis that many
consumers devote to products; they missed the reciprocal relationship that
more conversational formats could provide. The nature of an ongoing conver-
sation is to lead what might be a single idea and a single response into a deeper,
more detailed interaction. A few intrepid companies and entrepreneurs recog-
nized this kind of conversation happening in public chat rooms and message
boards and decided to help facilitate it.
Pioneering companies, including those we mentioned earlier, found it quite nat-
ural to engage with their customers online because many of them shared the same
skills and professions as the engineers or programmers who designed the com-
pany’s products. So, as we describe later in the chapter, Sun Microsystems was
one of the first examples of a business supporting a strategic online customer
community. But people by the thousands already had begun engaging with each
other around products of common interest in spontaneous communities not
related to any specific companies.
eBay’s Secret Ingredient
If any pure play Web business model stands as an example of perfect adaptation
to the networked environment, it is eBay. Employing the Web’s speed and abil-
ity to organize information and to support a product display and bidding
process, it provides a virtual flea market interface, where anyone can register

and sell goods for the highest offer. The main technological features of eBay are
its categorized auction interface and the tools it provides for personalization
and reporting the trustworthiness of participants in its marketplace. One per-
sonalization feature, illustrated in Figure 9.3, is the eBay member’s My eBay
page. The one pictured is of the author’s personal page, showing how it keeps
track of auction items of interest, items being bid on, and items on which the
member has made winning bids. The tracking tools encourage involvement by
active traders. The power of the individual member is enhanced by such fea-
tures, but as its CEO, Meg Whitman testifies, the not-so-secret secret of eBay’s
success is in its support of community.
Community drives eBay’s word-of-mouth marketing and its rapid adaptation to
customer needs and preferences. It has built its reputation and its base of regular
members through grass-roots selling and buying, and it’s in the interest of mem-
bers to attract new members and expand the marketplace in which they trade.
Many other auction sites, including Yahoo!Auctions, have been launched on the
Web, and software platforms for supporting the auction model have been pro-
duced and sold, but eBay distinguished itself early in its history by deciding to
steer many of its decisions based on the input of its members. Mary Lou Song was
264
Chapter 9
Figure 9.3
The author’s My eBay page 
Reproduced with the permission of eBay Inc. © eBay Inc. All rights reserved.

Conversing with External Stakeholders
265
the third employee at eBay, and when she joined the company in 1996, it had
15,000 members; it now claims over 16 million. Song helped develop its young
community, building the cooperative relationship between the community and the
company through combining traditional product marketing—to attract the right
people, with online community marketing to win their loyalty once they had
joined. Her goal was, and still is, to make membership a fun and safe experience.
For the designers of both the interface and the business process (a company
spared of the obligations to handle merchandise or shipping), eBay was an ongo-
ing learning experience based on conscientious customer listening. And for the
community managers like Song, the community was a source of essential feed-
back and an audience that needed to be kept informed. Even policy questions—
an area usually dealt with by companies in locations far beyond the reach of
customers—have been brought into the public forum as shown in Figure 9.4. 
Figure 9.4
Members discuss policies and agreements on eBay.
Reproduced with the permission of eBay Inc. © eBay Inc. All rights reserved.

Through experience and attention, eBay has learned the following important
lessons about including their members in decisions that affect their buying and
selling activities: 
Lesson 1: Make your policies clear and bring discussion of policies out into
the open. Where customers depend on policies to put their trust in a busi-
ness or social process, and where the company depends on customers
for its success, it’s smart to invite the customers into the policymaking
discussion.
Lesson 2: Be proactive. Note the security reassurance about not asking for
sensitive personal information in email.
Because of the open nature of its auction activity, eBay is frequently in the
news for the items that some people attempt to sell—from bogus famous paint-
ings to human organs. At one point, the company instituted a policy of not per-
mitting the sale of firearms. It did this for its own ethical reasons but failed to
include its members in the deliberative process before making the announce-
ment. It learned from indignant customer reactions that, even in cases where its
corporate mind was made up, it needs at least to confer with its member popu-
lation before implementing a policy change. 
The auctions on eBay also have been subject to occasional fraudulent behav-
ior over the years such as sellers taking the money and not delivering the goods
and buyers receiving the goods and not sending the money. At times, goods sold
were not delivered as described. The software, in combination with the partici-
pation of members, has attempted to address these betrayals of trust by pro-
viding a means for members to assign other members a feedback rating based
on the total of positive, negative, and neutral reviews of their transactions. 
A prospective buyer will want to see the feedback profile of the person sell-
ing an item. The rating page will show the number of positive, negative, and
neutral ratings given to the seller over the past 6 months and will display any
comments written about the seller by people who have bought from him. Still,
there is the possibility of fraud, as shills—associates of the seller or phony
members created by the seller—might be providing the positive ratings. So
eBay has devised more comprehensive fraud protection: insurance that will
reimburse members a portion of the money they lose in a bad transaction (see
Figure 9.5). Fraud had been perpetrated on eBay members on several very pub-
licly visible occasions, so the company chose to address it head-on in discus-
sions with members and in this policy.
Though eBay began as what would be considered a trading site, where indi-
viduals sold items to each other as if it were a virtual yard sale, it has adapted
its technology and its culture to include retail sales, where companies offer
goods for sale beginning at set prices. The trust-enhancing qualities of its com-
266
Chapter 9

Conversing with External Stakeholders
267
munity approach have been extended to cover small to large businesses, and
many of the original individuals who once sold the occasional item now make
their livings by selling through eBay. The culture has evolved, but the focus has
continued to be on maintaining a trusted marketplace through encouraging
conversation among members and between members and the eBay staff.
Cisco Attracts a Technical Community
We’ve used Cisco’s NetPro community as a case study in previous chapters.
Here we use it as an example of a company creating a place on its Web site to
attract a specific group that already has an established, unaffiliated meeting
place. In Cisco’s case, the group consists of the networking professionals that
install, configure, and maintain the kind of technology Cisco provides. 
Figure 9.5
Fraud protection: another important trust reinforcement feature of eBay.
Reproduced with the permission of eBay Inc. © eBay Inc. All rights reserved..

As we’ve noted previously, technical communities were the first ones to form
on computer-mediated networks. Technicians just happened to be the people
designing and building the networks, so it’s natural that they were the first ones
to inhabit them. To this day, technical people naturally form online communi-
ties to share knowledge, mostly using email or the conventions of Usenet. One
newsgroup, comp.dcom.vpn, is all about virtual private networking (VPN), the
technology that allows employees to connect to the corporate intranet through
a secure remote modem connection. In this newsgroup, networking profes-
sionals exchange knowledge about VPN, and it doesn’t matter what company
they work for.
Cisco produces and sells VPN technology and equipment for many other
aspects of Internet and intranet functionality. The company wanted to attract
the same professionals who were using comp.dcom.vpn and other online com-
munities to discuss networking hardware. They had to offer incentives to get
them to change their behavior; most workers don’t have the time or social band-
width to be members of more than one community addressing a single interest.
Cisco’s main appeal was its status as the largest producer of networking equip-
ment in the world. Since some of that equipment was regarded as the global
standard for Internet connectivity, the promise of learning more about Cisco
equipment and having a closer relationship to Cisco was important, career-
wise, to many of the targeted professionals.
Similar situations can be found today among companies and professionals
whose products and interest lie outside the technical realm. Users of products—
cars, bikes, gardening equipment, stereo equipment—gather spontaneously on
the Web, and the makers of the products they’re talking about invite them to
gather on their product support sites. If the conversation switches venue from
the nonaffiliated message board to the company-sponsored message board, the
context changes. The meeting place is no longer spontaneous and independent
but is created, owned, managed, and maintained by the company. 
A professional community, once it convenes on the company site, stands to
lose some of its autonomy and ability to self-govern. The company, meanwhile,
takes on a new obligation: to provide the meeting space while keeping the pro-
fessionals happy with the trade-off they have made. Both the company and the
professional community are seeking an arrangement of mutual benefit. 
Cisco was cautious in its approach to the networking professionals. It first
attempted to attract attention and stir interest by staging online events: slide
presentations with live audio featuring product managers and engineers repre-
senting its VPN team. These experts answered questions from a moderator and
from the online audience. Out of those events, Cisco identified professionals
who registered and posed questions and then contacted them about becoming
founding members of its planned discussion community. 
As the initial online interface was designed and the back end of the system
was assembled, the decision was made to begin the community with a narrow
268
Chapter 9
TEAMFLY

Conversing with External Stakeholders
269
focus, VPN, but to be ready to expand into other technical topics likely to be of
interest. IP telephony was one alternative and security was another. The system
was launched with a small population that helped Cisco’s community team iron
out the bugs in the interface. As the design was tuned, more participants arrived
and the community began to grow, driven by word of mouth. Cisco learned to
manage the community to the satisfaction of its members.
Now the Networking Professionals Connection is a lively knowledge
exchange where the professionals learn from one another and Cisco learns
from their conversations. Members can choose from a variety of activities and
information resources (see Figure 9.6) and are invited to submit input to Cisco
about the community, its design, and its administration. The NetPro commu-
nity, as it’s called, began with one main topic: virtual private networking. As the
community expresses its interest in other topics, the focus of the community is
expanded. As Figure 9.6 shows, there are now topics on emerging technologies. 
Figure 9.6
Cisco’s Networking Professionals Connection home page 
© Cisco Systems

How to Learn from Customers
Michael Ruettgers, president and CEO of EMC Corporation, a $4-billion
provider of intelligent enterprise storage systems, software, and services,
claims to be “relentless” in keeping up to date with what his customers want
and value. The challenge, as he describes it in an article on the Chief Executive
Web site,9 is in implementing practices to learn from customers “consistently
and methodically.” In answer to that challenge, his company follows four prin-
ciples, which he claims “not only look outward to our customers, but also bring
customers into the heart of our product development process.”
The first principle is that customer closeness should start in the boardroom.
At EMC, the chairman and founder, even though retired from management
activities, spends considerable time meeting with customers one-on-one and in
“chairman’s dinners.” By getting customers—from the easy-to-please variety to
the most demanding—to confide in him, he learns about what they really need
and care about. His obsession with knowing the customer has rubbed off on
upper management and the entire organization. The need to get closer with all
of the company’s customers has led to the development of IT systems and
online means for finding out what they want.
The second principle is to create a customer trust loop, which involves “listen-
ing, responding, validating, refining, revalidating, delivering, fine-tuning” and then
repeating the process. Only through constantly going through this loop will the
organization know that its perspective of what the customer wants is, indeed, the
customer’s perspective. In our experiences managing online communities, we
have kept this trust loop going continually, listening and then validating, acting on
suggestions and then asking customers, “Is this what you meant?” Just as you
would with your employees, you keep the communications channels open and
respond promptly to input. Only by staying responsive and delivering on the sug-
gestions you are hearing from customers can you win and maintain their trust and
valuable feedback.
As eBay does, EMC invites customers that it identifies as highly motivated to
come to its headquarters and meet intensively with EMC executives and man-
agers, who listen to what they have to say and then go through the response-
validation-refinement loop to make sure the customers’ needs are truly
270
Chapter 9
FOUR PRINCIPLES FOR LEARNING FROM CUSTOMERS
EMC Corporation recognizes these as the keys to delivering what its customers want:
1.
Customer closeness should start in the boardroom
2.
Create a customer trust loop
3.
Strike a balance between leading the customer and following their lead
4.
Invest for customer activism

Conversing with External Stakeholders
271
understood. This is face-to-face stuff, where relationships are built that will
remain strong when the communication reverts to virtual channels. A core of
loyal customers who understand the sincerity and motivations of the company
can be a strong influence on the majority of online customers, who may only
know the company through conversation on the Net.
The third principle followed at EMC is to strike a balance between leading
the customers and following their leads. As Ruettgers points out, it was not cus-
tomer leadership that brought the invention of the electric light, the laser, inter-
mittent wipers, and the minivan. The same could be said for the World Wide
Web. Customers tend to ask for refinement and improvement in what they
already have. They want things to be faster, cheaper, easier to use. But innova-
tors within companies need the input of customers to know if the products they
are developing are on the right track for usability, convenience, and design.
Likewise, companies need to be able to collaborate with their suppliers in
designing parts and components as new products are created.
Investing for customer activism is EMC’s fourth principle. The investment is in
terms of executive involvement, primarily, for the CEO can create a tone in the
organization that is welcoming to customer input and fosters strong relationships
between the company and its customers. The investment also includes making it
as easy as possible for customers to provide input into the product design
process. The company invests in quick turnaround of product improvements that
are suggested by customers. And it invests in providing products that have been
well thought-out concerning the customer’s life cycle with their products, simpli-
fying their purchase, use, and upgrading. EMC believes in reinforcing the innova-
tive intelligence of its customers and investing to tap into that resource.
Self-Organized Communities 
of Consumers
Observant pundits and analysts recognized the rise of spontaneous consumer
communities as soon as they began forming on the Web. One of the first attempts
to aggregate communities and content according to special interest was called
The Mining Company. It provided a template for building focused Web sites and
invited people with experience and expertise in a subject area to become a com-
bination online community leader and editor, organizing the sites, linking to rele-
vant information, providing original content, and managing online conversation.
These so-called guides were paid a percentage of the company’s advertising rev-
enue, and the best sites became known as expert knowledge-sharing communi-
ties where users exchanged techniques and opinions about various products. The
company later changed its name to About.com (www.about.com) and still stands
as a good example of what user-driven portals can be.
Topic-focused communities on About.com cover hundreds of hobbies, inter-
ests, skills, and fields of knowledge. Included in the site’s contents and discussions

are thousands of products and services that serve these subject areas and attract
people with varying amounts of expertise. A visit to the Fresh Water Aquarium
community reveals product reviews and online discussions about different types
of fish, tanks, water conditioning, and diseases. The experience represented by
participants is much broader than could be found on any one product provider’s
site. But product review is not the main mission of About.com. Other Web sites
have been created to specialize in that area.
In 1998, Consumer Review magazine brought its professional product testing
and evaluation services online as ConsumerREVIEW.com. Through the Web, it
began accepting input from paying subscribers to complement its own objec-
tive studies and ratings. In 1999, Epinions.com (see Figure 9.7) was launched to
provide a specially designed gathering place for people to submit their own
reviews and ratings of products and to research what others thought about
those and other products or services. The Epinions interface allows every reg-
istered member to build a personal Web of Trust made up of credible reviewers
and the people who also find them credible. Trust is important to offset any mis-
272
Chapter 9
Figure 9.7
Epinions lets consumers comparison shop and advise each other 
© epinions

Conversing with External Stakeholders
273
leading ratings and reviews that might be posted by corporate shills—unidenti-
fied company reps posting good reviews of their own products.
Consumers began using these review sites as important shopping guides,
reporting the results to each other. Eventually, companies whose products
were critiqued positively or negatively began to get wind of the feedback. Some
began regularly monitoring Web sites where their products were being dis-
cussed. In the case of strictly ad-supported review sites, there is no guarantee
of survival, but Epinions now earns revenue by generating leads for retailers to
whom it provides links from its product review pages. ConsumerREVIEW.com,
on the other hand, has two steady revenue sources: subscription fees for both
their print magazine and their Web site. Together, this income supports its pub-
lishing activities and its product evaluation work.
In the difficulty encountered by companies searching for feedback about their
products and services in the vastness of the Web, another business opportunity
was recognized. New ventures were created to perform the searching and mon-
itoring of the Web for companies hungry for knowledge of consumer thinking
and journalistic mentions. Going by names such as Cyveillance, E-Watch,
CyberAlert, WebClipping, or NetCurrent, they provided a kind of digital clipping
service, sending their clients daily electronic reports of quoted conversations
and mentions in the online press. 
An online service called PlanetFeedback (see Figure 9.8) makes most of its
revenue by providing these services. Its Web site also provides a single point of
access for consumers to send complaints and suggestions to businesses. As the
company’s CEO, Pete Blackshaw, explained as financial justification for com-
panies making use of its services, “If you totaled the money the Krafts,
Unilevers, P&Gs and [Johnson & Johnsons] spend listening to consumers tell
them how to improve a product, you’re going to be in the hundreds of millions
of dollars.”10 Subscribing businesses get to see the feedback but don’t neces-
sarily respond to any of it. And as we described earlier in the chapter, P&G has
its own online methods for soliciting customer input.
PlanetFeedback recently merged with another technology firm called Intel-
liseek, which originally provided a service for dealing with two problems facing
companies: the overabundance of information and the variable reliability,
importance, and impact of that information on the company. Intelliseek not
only found relevant information, but it filtered out the “noise” from the truly
useful stuff. Now the merged service can deliver relevant and meaningful
reports from online conversations and publications to its clients. 
Services like PlanetFeedback are useful when there are active conversations
happening on the Web about your company. But they don’t provide you with a
convenient opportunity to respond—to make amends for a customer’s dissatis-
faction, to assure customers that a problem has been corrected, or to invite the
customer to describe how your company could improve itself. And with the col-
lapse of the business models that have supported many of the public discussion

sites, there’s no guarantee that those useful conversations will continue to be
available for harvesting by these special purpose search engines. Yet the value
of that feedback is such that forward-looking companies must provide their
own channels for it. 
Hosting the Customer Conversation
The online conversations among customers and those between customers and
representatives of the company have many similarities to the online conversa-
tions among employees we described in Chapter 8, “Initiating and Supporting
Internal Conversation.” Trust among participants is necessary for most people
to reveal what they know and think. Leadership is important in building that
trust and in setting the focus for knowledge sharing. Facilitation is often useful
to help people express themselves and to stimulate the social interaction. Site
274
Figure 9.8
PlanetFeedback, where consumers talk and companies listen 
© PlanetFeedback Division of Intelliseek, Inc.

Conversing with External Stakeholders
275
design and organization must be appropriate to the needs of the community not
only to reduce barriers to participation but also to allow participants to find
what they need with minimal hassle. But there are some significant differences,
too, between communities composed of employees of an organization and
those composed of external stakeholders.
An organization is limited to exerting less control over the content and direc-
tion of online conversations among customers or constituents. It can set no
goals or deadlines or deliverables as it can for an internal project team. The
policies it imposes cannot be too restrictive or people will refuse to participate.
It must spend more of its time listening and helping participants explain what
they are trying to tell the organization rather than keeping the conversation
aligned with its strategy. The incentives it offers for participation must be
stronger because there is no compensation structure or prestige attached to a
customer’s input to a business. The position of the company with respect to its
customers is a supplicant asking humbly for contributions. Yet, if invited in the
right way, many stakeholders will be excited by the opportunity to help make a
company’s products or services better. 
Inviting Customer Input 
and Collaboration
The social aspects of initiating and supporting conversation across the fire-
wall—between representatives of the organization and external groups—are
trickier than they are on the intranet. There is less room for error in relation-
ships between a business and its customers or between an organization and its
constituents. In effect, they are the guests and the organization is the host to the
interaction. The host is obliged to extend courtesy and to be tolerant of trans-
gressions. With internal conversation, there is room for conflict, multilateral
disagreement, debate, and even the occasional insult. Vigorous debate may, in
fact, be encouraged. Try any of that with a customer and the ripples of bad PR
will spread far and wide, with the speed of email.
Interface design is more important in supporting external relationships for
the same reason: There is less room for mistakes like downtime and clumsy
navigation. The company can’t be constantly tweaking the interface when the
users are guests; that would be considered inconsiderate at best and incompe-
tent at worst. The interface must be designed with the convenience and needs
of the customer or constituent in mind rather than the needs of the internal
groups doing the listening and outreach. Staff members don’t quit their jobs
because the discussion board is tricky to use, but customers will abandon a
Web site that forces them to go through a tricky learning process.
You can invite people to give you feedback and help you to satisfy them, but
there are costs and preparations associated with acquiring their deep input and
ongoing collaboration: 

■■People who provide your company with valuable input will expect some
valuable takeaways in return. You must know what those expectations are.
■■People expect you to provide an intuitive and comfortable interface for
their participation and input.
■■Appropriate and timely content combined with a prompt, courteous
response from staff will keep people coming back.
With a wise investment of time, research, and training, combined with good
execution, a company can turn the initial trickle of curious and hopeful partici-
pants into a population of loyal and regular collaborators. Building the rela-
tionships that anchor that loyalty takes commitment and purpose. 
A Business School and 
Its MBA Candidates
The Wharton School not only studies businesses; as a prestigious academic
institution, it is itself a business. In an article on its Web site11(knowledge.whar-
ton.upenn.edu), it describes how companies learn from online customer dia-
logue and how it uses message boards as a recruiting tool. 
One of the school’s marketing professors says, “even if negative comments
come up in the online discussions, companies seem willing to live with that for
what they feel is a positive overall experience of talking about products and ser-
vices.” (That occurs if they overcome the initial internal resistance to the idea.)
Another marketing professor is not so optimistic, venturing the opinion that
online word-of-mouth is nothing special. Of course, that’s not to say that online
interaction doesn’t work; it just may not be more effective than offline talk.
We’ll grant that, except that companies can talk to far fewer people offline.
The Wharton School itself provides message boards for students and
prospective students. Alex Brown, associate director of MBA admissions, says
these have proven to be a great way to help market the school and its programs.
MBA candidates are no longer captive of dialogue controlled by the business
schools and their admissions departments. Candidates, he says, “are talking to
each other about what we offer and how it compares to other schools.” 
After setting up their discussion boards, Wharton wondered if it should “take
the next step and host those discussions or ignore them.” They decided to partic-
ipate in them and embrace them “rather than let the rumor mill take over.” Stu-
dents and prospective students interact and answer questions for one another.
Those who are looking for a place to continue their studies get a taste of the cul-
ture of the student body and staff. They get beyond the surface promotion of
brochures and the superficial physical impressions of buildings and classrooms.
The debate between the professor who favors organizations hosting online
dialogue with stakeholders and the professor who is skeptical of the value of
276
Chapter 9

Conversing with External Stakeholders
277
such dialogue revolves around the trustworthiness of the input. As the skeptic
expressed his doubts, “I would hesitate to draw any conclusions about chat on
a company-based Web site. Those are squeaky wheels seeking grease on those
sites. And who knows if the company is monitoring the discussion or steering it
in a direction that the company desires?” Of course, when done right, the com-
pany fosters candid relationships and is monitoring discussions and responding
truthfully when appropriate. The squeaky wheels may not represent all cus-
tomers, but they do represent a motivated portion of them. And motivated cus-
tomers provide especially valuable input.
A Gathering Place for Creative Users
In Chapter 2, we described the early users groups of Apple computers and how
they exchanged rare information first in face-to-face meetings and then through
computer BBSs. Technical populations, enthusiastic about using technology to
communicate, led the way in giving advice to each other and to product vendors
about innovation and improvement. 
Sun Microsystems (www.sun.com) has long relied on the ability of program-
mers and computer engineers to communicate through the Net. It was one of the
first companies to provide space on a Web site for users of its products to con-
verse with one another. Today, it continues to host a variety of what it calls “devel-
opers forums” for discussion of different products and their applications. These
range from communities for system administrators of Sun-powered installations
to software developers using Sun technologies like Java and Jini. Figure 9.9
shows the Java Developer Connection, a kind of peer-to-peer knowledge
exchange similar in purpose to Cisco’s Networking Professionals community. 
As Sun describes another of their forums, “Dot-Com Builder Discussion
Forums are an interactive area where Sun’s Web developer community can
share knowledge by posting messages to a message board. Messages on the
message board are organized by topic, cover all aspects of server-side architec-
ture and Web development, and include community member comments, opin-
ions, questions, answers, and technical tips.” Of course, Sun also benefits
greatly by having access to the creative conversations that go on among experts
in using its products.
For one of its software technologies, Sun has provided a community site
away from its home site. Jini allows dissimilar processes and devices to com-
municate and work together. Its potential uses are so numerous that Sun initi-
ated a special development community, complete with a constitution, for
sharing new solutions. The community (at www.jini.org) was begun with sev-
eral high-level Sun engineers serving as facilitators. The goal was to make the
community self-governing, and to that end, a community constitution was com-
posed by its members to state the agreed-upon procedures for sharing solutions
and setting standards. The participants in the Jini community preferred to stick

with email as their platform for interaction. They were comfortable with it, and
combined with the ability to create Web pages that could be shared with other
members, it was the most appropriate technology for their collaborative needs.
Only a cohesive group with a goal of mutual benefit can reach this level of
agreement. However, there are many products that would lend themselves to
such an arrangement if only the companies that produce them would recognize
the potential. Clearly, the more solutions that are devised by the Jini community
for applying the technology, the more Sun has to gain.
278
Chapter 9
Figure 9.9
Sun Microsystems’ Java software language has relied on collaborative
innovation by its users.
©Sun Microsystems
TEAMFLY

Conversing with External Stakeholders
279
Providing the Basic 
Support Community
At one time, online community was envisioned as an ad-supported revenue cen-
ter. When this failed to pan out, the focus shifted to view online community as
part of customer relations—a cost of doing business like marketing and PR. But
some companies see it as a cost-cutting activity, replacing some of the expense
of customer support. If done well, customers not only provide each other with
advice that the company was once liable for, but customers provide better
advice because it is experientially based and the customers are professionals.
Click on the Technical Support link on Hewlett-Packard’s home page
(www.hp.com) and then on the link to Forums for IT Professionals and Busi-
nesses. You reach the IT Resource Center (ITRC), a Web page that leads you to
what HP identifies as its four main categories of customers: IT professionals,
business professionals, developers and solutions partners, and home and home
office customers. And as HP states on this page, “Different forums may have
different rules and guidelines.”
It’s significant that home and home office customers aren’t provided with actual
discussion forums in ITRC, whereas the other groups are. Managing a discussion
community composed of tens of thousands of owners of hundreds of models of
HP PCs and printers would be a daunting and expensive task. All of the customer
communities get indexed troubleshooting menus, search tools for solutions, and
company support provided through email. The forums aimed at professionals in
the other three support areas do encourage interaction and knowledge exchange.
HP recognizes the potential bottom line benefits of users helping other users
to the extent that it set up a points system to recognize users who answer a lot
of questions. The leaders in accumulating points are recognized on the forum’s
home page and by symbols displayed by their posts in the discussion space. By
accumulating points as valued knowledge resources, they can rise in rank from
Pro (symbolized by a baseball cap icon) to Graduate (a mortarboard icon) to
Wizard (magician’s hat) to ITRC Royalty (a crown). HP claims that it may (but
is not obligated to) award gifts to such participants.
In its terms of use, HP describes, in part, its relationship to the Communica-
tions—the content of user discussion in its forums. The terms say, “HP may, but
is not obligated to, monitor or review any areas on the Site where users trans-
mit or post Communications or communicate solely with each other.” This
relieves it of responsibility for inaccurate or offensive posts written by users,
but it’s very likely that Communications containing information of value to HP
will be noticed and made use of. Indeed, as on most corporate sites, the com-
pany claims the right to make use of whatever information its users post. “HP
and its designees will be free to copy, disclose, distribute, incorporate and
otherwise use the Communications and all data, images, sounds, text, and other
things . . .” in any way it chooses. 

Designing to Support Health Needs
One of the Web’s most effective uses is as a reference resource for people with
questions about health and medicine. With the rising cost of health care, people
are using the Web to research their own conditions and treatments. The more
serious the health problem, the more vital the information. The motivation to
collaborate with others around different conditions is very high compared to
almost any other topic, whether business-related or personal. The trick is in
providing reliable information and managing helpful online conversation.
The American Cancer Society (ACS) recognized the importance of fostering
a sense of community among cancer patients, survivors, their families, and
ACS’s donors and volunteers. Coping and survival are at the core of these
groups’ overlapping missions. So, in redesigning their Web site at cancer.org,
they studied their users, especially cancer patients, to find out how best to pro-
vide them with connections to their most relevant support communities. They
wanted to know how visitors to their site moved through it and where they
would need links to community-enhancing features.
Most Web sites that include message boards segregate them under a “com-
munity” link that, if followed, leads the visitor to an environment quite different
from that found elsewhere on the site. There is likely to be no information other
than the topics and responses of the participants—a discussion ghetto. ACS
wanted to weave the idea and the access to community throughout its site so
that visitors, no matter where they were on the site, would have easy access to
chat rooms or message boards. As Figure 9.10 shows, the site also links to com-
pelling stories and an invitation to donate. ACS hopes to convert eager volun-
teers into eager donors.
In redesigning its site, ACS provided a good example of how to go about iden-
tifying the needs and tendencies of the user community. It hired a consulting
company, Sapient, to help it with the analysis. As an article in CIO magazine12
described, Sapient “had clinical psychologists and cultural anthropologists
spend time with cancer patients at various stages to develop an ‘experiential
model’.” Based on that model, they imagined scenarios that would describe
how different hypothetical individuals would move through the Web site. 
Someone recently diagnosed with breast cancer would, for example, come to
cancer.org looking for information about the disease, its prognosis, and its
treatment. So links directing that person to that information should be promi-
nent on the home page. Once informed, the patient would be interested in find-
ing local support groups (see Figure 9.11) of breast cancer patients and
survivors. A place for the patient to enter her zip code also would be located on
the home page, as would links to general information about breast cancer. The
patient, at this point, would be looking for an opportunity to ask questions, so
links to chat rooms and message boards also would be posted on the home
page. The invitation to join a network also offers the option of connecting by
telephone for those who prefer that medium to online conversation.
280
Chapter 9

Conversing with External Stakeholders
281
ACS is devoted to supporting patients and families in their dealings with the
disease and its aftermath, so its design keeps evolving to better support that
purpose. The organization also expects to reap some bottom-line benefits from
helping people share knowledge and caring. They hope to grow relationships
with people that will lead them to donate to the organization, if not in money
then in volunteer time. If the Web site and its communities can build a sense of
loyalty among members, ACS can expect some of them to be regular supporters
of the organization. And as James Miller, ACS’s director of Internet strategy, put
it, “that means you’re always going to be at the top of a person’s mind when they
start thinking about donations.”
Where Customers Gather on Their Own
The days may be past of the Cybercities—vast so-called online community sites
like Geocities and The Globe that provided ad-supported, easy-to-build per-
sonal home pages and online discussion spaces. But it’s relatively cheap to set
up a site to support the content and discussion needs of a focused community.
Figure 9.10
The American Cancer Society’s site directs visitors to appropriate conversations
in its message boards. 
Reprinted with the permission of The American Cancer Society, Inc.

There still are countless gathering places on the Web where consumers con-
verse about their hobbies, their professions, and their opinions of what compa-
nies should be doing with their products.
Today, when a company fails to address its customers’ needs through the Web,
there’s a good chance that its customers will take things into their own hands.
This can make the company look all the worse for its negligence; customers are
almost sure to refer to the company in negative or derisive terms. But such neu-
tral sites offer a chance for redemption; the company can listen in and learn how
to satisfy customers who have gone to the trouble of getting together on their
own to deal with an important company and its products or services.
Here are two examples of motivated customers creating communities of inter-
est and support that the companies themselves should be providing. In one case,
the initial cause was to amplify complaints that the company seemed to be ignor-
ing. In the other case, the cause was to share enthusiasm for a product and, in
the process, share knowledge that the company was reluctant to provide.
282
Chapter 9
Figure 9.11
A community page within cancer.org shows where members can search for
local support groups by zip code. 
Reprinted with the permission of The American Cancer Society, Inc.

Conversing with External Stakeholders
283
A Customer-Run 
Complaint Department
The following story may not address the post-9/11 state of affairs in air travel,
but it does illustrate what can happen through the Web to companies that don’t
do a good enough job of communicating with their customers.
In June 1996, Jeremy Cooperstock had some terrible traveling experiences on
United Airlines. Over the next 2 months, his unsuccessful attempts to get a
response from the airline through two polite letters of complaint led him to create
what he called a “poor show” Web site that soon began attracting support from
other disappointed United customers. In April 1997, after almost a year of trying to
get the airline to improve its customer service policies, Cooperstock launched the-
Untied Airlines site (www.untied.com), unabashedly mocking the logo and style of
the airline’s own site and providing a forum for people sharing his frustrations.
Months after the new site went online and after some legal threats, Cooper-
stock received an apology from United. Then, with donations received from
other dissatisfied customers, he built a complaints page (see Figure 9.12) that
forwards messages to the director of United’s customer relations department.
An insider at United later admitted that the company was circulating com-
plaints received from Untied’s site. As “evidence,” Untied.com keeps a database
of both customer complaints and United Airline’s responses to them.
Today, a visit to the United Airlines site at www.aul.com reveals a heightened
attention to customer service including a Statement of Customer Commitment
and services ranging from baggage liability to ticket refunds to information
about dealing with delayed flights. Maybe these improvements in service would
have happened without the nagging of Cooperstock’s community, but the prob-
ability that disgruntled customers on the Web will find a way to raise their
voices in unison should be a sobering reality to all businesses.
The lesson: Customers can and will demonstrate creatively what they need
from businesses. If not supported in demonstrating this on the company’s own
site, they are likely to build or make use of another venue on the Web to “get
things off their chests.” 
Customer-Provided Order Tracking
In the spring of 2000, Daimler-Chrysler released a new car model called the PT
Cruiser. We were among the people who loved the design as much as many
others hated it. There was such great advance demand for the car that dealers
were told to take orders with thousand-dollar deposits. On an impulse, we put
down our money in May and were told not to expect delivery for about 6
months. We were so enthusiastic that when we got home we went to the Daim-
ler-Chrysler site and looked for some current information on supply, demand,
and projected delivery dates. We found nothing but a glorified advertisement. 

So we did a search on “PT Cruiser,” found the PT Cruiser Club (www
.ptcruiserclub.org), and began monitoring its public discussion boards. We found
a spontaneous gathering of PT Cruiser owners and people like us who had made
deposits on vehicles. There we learned about the confusing practice of “dealer
allocation,” which could result in people who ordered their cars after us getting
delivery before us. We learned how to track orders using a special sheet that deal-
ers might or might not share with us. We learned from people who had gotten their
new Cruisers that the automatics were sluggish accelerators and the five-speed
versions weren’t much better, but that the attention people on the street paid to
your car made up for the poor performance. They looked faster than they actually
were. We found people sharing tips on boosting the performance of their Cruisers
(see Figure 9.13). We also learned that some dealers had raised the guaranteed
MSRP sticker price once the car arrived on their lot.
284
Chapter 9
Figure 9.12
You won’t find a form like this on the United Airline’s site, but on the Untied
site, your complaints will be forwarded to the airline with its agreement. 
©Untied.com

Conversing with External Stakeholders
285
As it turned out, the company ran out of the 2000 model year cars before they
built ours, and we canceled our order, angry at the dealer, angry at the car com-
pany for not being more open and honest with people who were—as Daimler-
Chrysler had hoped—passionate about the vehicle. The company did hold
several public chat events, responding to customers and prospective customers,
but did not provide a clear way—displayed on their Web site—for people with
cars on order to check on the status of their orders. The PT Cruiser Club invited
representatives of the company to visit their forums or to listen to their com-
ments, but without success. Daimler-Chrysler so far has missed this chance to
learn from the customers who truly care about their products and make efforts
on their own to customize and improve them.
The lesson: Especially if your new product is expected to attract a passionate
community of buyers, provide a place and invite them to get together on your
Figure 9.13
Where to get advice the company will never tell you: a forum about after-
market exhaust systems for the PT Cruiser. 
©PTCruiserClub.org. Used with permission.

Web site. Daimler-Chrysler could have won a lot of customer loyalty by doing so
with the PT Cruiser, but instead, it failed to leverage the enthusiasm for its new
vehicle and thus earned a lot of new enemies.
Summary
The essential social elements for productive conversation outside the company
firewall are much the same as those for conversation on the company intranet:
trust, leadership, and ease of use. Each company must decide on the most
appropriate venue and format for these conversations, and every company
must realize that it may be the topic of conversation somewhere on the Inter-
net. Understanding the needs and habits of stakeholders is necessary to design-
ing an interface that they will use. This may involve initiating or inviting
conversation with a representative group of stakeholders.
The most successful examples of the use of online conversation with external
stakeholders demonstrate the importance of incremental design and growth—
building an initial interface for contact and activity, listening closely to what users
say about it, and then adapting to their expressed needs. The bond between com-
pany and stakeholder is strengthened through mutually beneficial collaboration.
The Web with its many tools lends itself to such cooperative work.
286
Chapter 9

287
Changes came fast enough in the eighties and nineties, but the year 2001 really
lit the afterburners. The collapse of the dot-com bubble was followed in turn by
the ripple effects from September 11 and the extremely upsetting collapse of
Enron. As businesses scramble to respond, these three very different but pow-
erful events have created challenges for organizations on three fronts: 
1. They must reposition the Internet in their business plans
2. They must plan for wildly unforeseen world events 
3. And they must conduct complete reviews, if not complete restructuring,
of their financial reporting 
This is all for the good, of course. These seemingly unrelated but cascading
events have forced issues that needed to be reformed. They are issues that call
for change and increased communication within the organization and beyond it.
In this chapter, we explore trends that already are taking hold in large compa-
nies and will trickle down to smaller companies as reports of their success, best
practices, and value circulate. We’ve alluded to some of these trends already. We
point out the need for changes in accounting practices for businesses to quantify
the value of their knowledge networking assets. Return on investments made to
The Path Ahead
C HAPTE R
10

foster productive online conversation must be demonstrated to justify further
investment in building both social capital and knowledge flow.
We can see much of the future forming in the present. To help put these trends
into words, we call on some of our favorite technical observers and social philoso-
phers, including Thomas Davenport, David Weinberger, and Etienne Wenger. 
Davenport, coauthor of Working Knowledge, is a systematic investigator of
organizational behavior who combines the knowledge of an insider with the
analysis of an academic. Weinberger, coauthor of The Cluetrain Manifesto, is a
“big picture” guy who views the human adoption of the Net in terms of the cul-
tural climate of our era. To him, the Net is underhyped; is radically changing
society, and businesses are still very much in denial about the depth of change
that the Net is making in the marketplace. Wenger, visionary leader of what
could be called the communities of practice movement, understands how
focused groups work and is helping organizations learn to lead by following the
natural human tendencies of their most creative workers. His work is less con-
ceptual and more “just do it”: Knowledge-sharing conversations want to hap-
pen, so put them to work. Whatever organizations do right now to make
knowledge sharing more effective through the Net is the necessary preparation
for future sustainability.
Interdependence and Infoglut
The rapid expansion of the global Internet and the explosive growth in the num-
ber of people and organizations using it have radically transformed communi-
cations and the ways by which we relate to one another. This transformation
presents us with a double-edged sword. The vast improvement in our ability to
interconnect has invited many more people to send messages and allowed
many more people and organizations to produce, provide, and send informa-
tion. The challenge and reason for forming effective knowledge networks are to
balance the advantages of connectivity with the overwhelming amount of infor-
mation there is to sort through.
Global Connectivity
Humanity is now almost totally interconnected, not in terms of people with
access to the Internet—where with 6 billion still lacking access we’re just get-
ting started—but in terms of news being able to reach most locations around
the globe in a matter of minutes. When 19 terrorists crashed four airliners on
9/11, the immediate effects of destruction, death, and horror proved to be only
pebbles dropping into the pond. As the ripples radiated outward around the
world, the travel industry lurched to a halt, jobs associated with travel disap-
peared, and then whole regional economies reliant on tourism went into a
288
Chapter 10
TEAMFLY

The Path Ahead
289
swoon. Many companies not directly related to the events of 9/11 were affected
severely by its repercussions. With the ever-increasing amount of interdepen-
dence in the world today, all organizations going into the future will stand a
higher chance of being affected by events in the world. Surprises are likely to
come at any time, so the rising challenge is to be ready and adaptable.
As the effects of the 9/11 attack spread around the world, lower Manhattan,
still covered in the dust of the World Trade Center, saw the stock market return
to activity amazingly quickly. The interconnectedness and redundancy of its
networked systems and the survival of key personnel brought the system back
online while other parts of the New York City infrastructure were just beginning
to dig themselves out. Networks—of computers and of people—are good insur-
ance against sudden disaster and instability. Networks help organizations adapt
to changing circumstances.
Conversational knowledge sharing is a natural way for people to distribute rel-
evant information and experience as they deal with rapid change. Using the Net as
the conversation environment allows a broader population of participants, bring-
ing in viewpoints and expertise from more locations. Through the Net, organiza-
tions can get closer to their customers, and workers from different parts of the
organization can connect and form closer working relationships with one another. 
Ongoing conversation is an adaptive group behavior in which participants share
observations, ideas, and their diversity of information sources. When it goes on
within an organization, it can expand the thinking and problem solving of senior
executives whose perspectives may be limited in scope due to their isolation from
the workplace and the consumer. Wide-ranging conversation is the organization’s
equivalent of ants waving their antennae about, reading the environment for
scents indicating potential threats and opportunities. Those antennae will become
required equipment for organizations in the future, but to develop them, they have
to align their cultures with the values that make knowledge sharing happen. 
More Voices, Faster and Louder
Tom Davenport’s latest book, written with John C. Beck, is titled The Attention
Economy1and describes the workplace and the marketplace that have been
transformed by the Internet and the accelerating flow of information. In the
book, Davenport describes the world most of us have gotten to know only too
well. It’s a world where the competition for our attention has become so great
that organizations must now figure out how to (1) focus their workers on the
information and tasks that matter most to the company and (2) distinguish
themselves, in the minds of consumers, from the blizzard of ideas, products,
and other organizations that compete for their attention.
The Internet continues to grow in importance as the number of people using it
increases and as it sees improvements in speed, interface design, and software.
Access to the Net has brought changes in business process, communication, and

the distribution of knowledge. But as its rapid growth continues, we are all chal-
lenged in our attempts to adapt and deal with the unprecedented volume of infor-
mation the Net brings to us.
As technology advances and broadband connections increase the speed of
information, how will we pull the important and timely information we depend
on out of the nonstop avalanche of data, polling results, queries, opinions,
ideas, suggestions, invitations, and junk mail that floods our monitors and
inboxes? There’s a crying need for the foolproof, personal searching-filtering-
archiving system, but systems don’t think like people do.
As individuals, our most insightful and understanding filters are other people.
A community of trusted sources, each networked with other trusted sources, can
not only understand what you want to know, but it can also respond to the reason
you want to know it. Information filtered through an active knowledge-sharing
community will have a much higher hit rate than an advanced Google search.
Selective engagement in online conversation is a very effective (and elemen-
tally human) method for directing one’s limited time and focus. As the practice
of online communication becomes more prevalent and normal, people will
have more choices in where they spend their time looking for vital information
and with whom they converse in their searches. In a future filled with bigger
pipes and faster delivery, information overload will continue to balloon to
absurd levels, and people will seek the most meaningful and productive ways to
spend their limited attention on the Net.
Conversation Proliferation
With too much information to process already, why would organizations want
to foster more conversation among their workers? Why would they expect
workers to participate if it might overload them? The answers are that organi-
zations have some critical problems to solve, and the wise use of group inter-
action may be the best and most economical way to find solutions. Workers will
participate if they know it will help them do their jobs. But improvements must
be made in technology, in the way technology is applied, and in the methods
organizations use to calculate the value of their online conversations.
In a recent interview with Agilebrain.com, Tom Davenport was asked, in
light of the dot-com meltdown, where he thought we were along the path to
making optimum use of the Internet. He answered: “The Internet is still there,
and companies are still quite interested in how to take advantage of it more
effectively. We’re just at the beginning of thinking about how we change our
processes and our cultures and our governance structures to do anything dif-
ferently with it.”2 In other words, the impact of the Net has yet to reach the parts
of business that most need to change to keep up with the very changes the Net
is bringing to other parts of the business universe.
290
Chapter 10

The Path Ahead
291
The processes, cultures, and governance that Davenport refers to are social
rather than technical in nature and more internal to the company than external.
Yet the ultimate aim of changing them is to deal better with the external online
marketplace, which continues to grow in significance, although it still receives
a small portion of most companies’ attention.
The previous decade has shown that as more people join the Net, there is
more information to choose from and there are more conversations taking
place. Organizations that change their processes, cultures, and governance to
better use the Internet to know and understand their external stakeholders will
gain a competitive advantage.
Incentives to Engage
Adaptation within organizations to the increasing speed and information flow
of the Net must happen on both the technical and social levels if they expect
their workers to engage in the practice of online conversation. In previous
chapters, we’ve described what we’ve found to be state-of-the-art approaches
for supporting that practice both technically and socially. In our search for pio-
neering role models, only a select few organizations are blazing new trails. But
as more organizations (and communities of interest and practice) discover
incentives to adopt online conversation as a business tool, interface refinement
will follow and the online conversation process will “learn itself” into being a
more productive form of knowledge generation.
As more organizations implement knowledge-sharing technologies and prac-
tices, there will be more need, interest in, and accumulated track records of
positive returns. When enough studies and analyses have been done to make a
convincing case for the return on investment from the wide variety of internal
and external online conversations, the incentives will be there for more wide-
spread adoption.
More Efficiency through Technology
People already loaded with responsibilities, swamped by information, and
working in companies that have reduced their staffs don’t have the time or
mental bandwidth to learn new skills and engage in new knowledge-sharing
activities. To persuade such overloaded workers to change their habits, incen-
tives are required, one of which is greater convenience through improved
design of technologies. If the interface and the tools made available can help
workers solve problems and do their jobs more efficiently (without falling
behind while learning a new, untried process), they will be adopted and used.
Technology must be a big part of the solution to the info-glut problem it has
made possible. Social reorganization alone won’t make knowledge sharing as
effective as it needs to be. Aside from lack of understanding and compelling

need, usability is the main barrier to the adoption of new technologies. As new
handheld devices with wireless Web access multiply, designs for customizing
our interface with the Net—to bring us only the information we want, just when
we need it—will have to improve.
Peer-to-peer models allow the more ambitious and technically adept to move
ahead of the pack (and the intranet), unfettered by centralized systems that can
only be improved at the pace of an often overburdened IT department. By using
basic email, instant messaging, or more sophisticated software like Groove,
spontaneous knowledge networks, virtual teams, and CoPs may be supported,
but P2P is not an ideal solution for the majority of workers as we explained in
Chapter 7, “Choosing and Using Technology.” Most workers don’t want to go it
alone without the handholding of IT. They simply need more useful interfaces
provided through the company intranet.
Portal design is developing rapidly in a competitive market. Eventually, as
application integration meets personalization, workers will be able to create and
easily configure their own personal dashboards to increase their efficiency and
effectiveness. A dashboard may contain links to prioritized and custom-sorted
information and contacts, with gateways to (and automatic updates from) con-
versations in which the worker is engaged. In effect, the worker will choose to
engage in numerous simultaneous conversations—some with people, some with
database servers—and will be able to filter the input from all of them to fit time
and attention constraints and to get just the right knowledge at the right time.
Recognizing the Value of Knowledge Flow
If intellectual capital is like cash in the bank, then knowledge flow must be like
cash flow. Intellectual capital (IC) is gradually being recognized as a true asset
to organizations, though there are many theories on how to measure it. Like IC,
knowledge flow will become recognized in the future as a strong indicator of
the organization’s capacity to adapt, to innovate, and to survive.
Many businesses are now learning from knowledge already contained in their
databases and in the minds of their workers and customers. To that end, they
have spent considerable money on advanced software and systems integration to
move data around and turn it into information that can be learned from. That
doesn’t necessarily mean that they actively promote knowledge exchange among
their employees or with their customers. Some, as we’ve described, are beginning
to do that, and many enterprise-level companies now recognize the value of com-
munities of practice. There are now enough success stories to at least provide
best practice examples that can be adapted to current business models.
But business models will have to adapt continuously as the rules and growth of
the Internet press harder on large organizations still held back by tradition and
older technology. Though some of these large companies are beginning to lever-
292
Chapter 10

The Path Ahead
293
age the potential of online CoPs, most of them still have a long way to go before
they can tap into the full value of the Net. When a valid and widely accepted
means for measuring the knowledge flow in an organization is available, the
results may persuade large companies to make the changes necessary to be com-
petitive with companies that already are putting online conversation to work.
As businesses get wired, both technically and socially, the overall business envi-
ronment evolves, and online communication skills become more important in job
descriptions. Computers will continue to take over more of the tasks they do best,
and humans will be spending more time in what they do best: collaborating, con-
versing creatively, and innovating for the benefit of the organization. Innovation is
even more important to the survival of organizations today because world events
may preclude long stretches of stability in the economy. Organizations today must
become more communicative and lighter on their feet.
Mapping Social Networks
A school of study has been developing over the past decade that will become
increasingly relevant as organizations make use of knowledge-sharing net-
works. Social networks, as we’ve mentioned in previous chapters, are made up
of connections between people and connections between people and content.
These connections range from the close and important ties of cohesive com-
munities to the loose and episodic ties that characterize most relationships
within organizations and between businesses and their customers. But as more
people are given the opportunity to join online knowledge networks, the map-
ping methods of social networking analysis (SNA) will be put to greater use.
In his book The Tipping Point,3 Malcolm Gladwell wrote of Connectors (peo-
ple who know everyone) and Mavens (experts who love to teach) as catalysts of
social epidemics. In social networks, these are the kinds of visible and influen-
tial people who attract and nurture communities. Identifying and empowering
such people in an organization can jump-start knowledge networks. It’s likely
that the natural teachers and facilitators in organizations have spontaneously
begun to do that already. Social networking analysis is a valuable technique for
understanding how knowledge flows within communicating groups. 
The principles of SNA are described well in a paper titled “Researching Orga-
nizational Systems Using Social Network Analysis,”4 by Michael Zack. We’ve
included many of these principles in our descriptions of the various roles in
knowledge-sharing networks. Emergent leaders, who have the skills, experi-
ence, and confidence to step forward in new online meeting places, are key
actors in SNA. The degrees of reluctance and enthusiasm that surround the
introduction of new social technologies are measured by SNA techniques based
on the ties that people have with other people. The influence of those ties can
be affected by how close the people are located physically in the workplace,

how close they are in their working relationships, and how dependent they are
on each other.
As your company pays more attention to the social techniques of fostering
productive communities of practice, you’ll want to learn more about SNA. It
may help you choose and configure technologies to support your online social
interaction. One of the leaders in the development of SNA is Valdis Krebs,
whose paper, “An Introduction to Social Network Analysis,”5 can be found at
www.orgnet.com/sna.html. It’s a starting point for further study and is worth
reading to gain a different perspective of the workings of your organization and
its various overlapping and interwoven internal communities.
The Sustainable Organization
The challenge for organizations in the future is to adapt and sustain their mean-
ingfulness in a fast-changing world. To meet that challenge, they will need to
accept and embrace some different ways of operating and relating with people
inside and outside the organization. Rigid structures and hierarchies will have
to give way to more distributed ways of managing that provide less control but
more flexibility. Human knowledge will need to be identified and used more
effectively as the limitations of software are reached. Companies that are slow
to adapt will be pushed to speed up the change process as smaller, quicker, less
encumbered competitors seize opportunities. Companies will need to get
closer to their customers to understand where the market is heading as early as
possible. Faster learning, increased collaboration, and greater emphasis on
building trust within the organization and with its stakeholders will be the driv-
ers of organizational success in the future.
More than ever before, organizations are recognizing knowledge as an asset—
not only the knowledge held by their company officers and well-educated pro-
fessionals, but also the knowledge of every worker who understands his or her
job. For strictly bottom-line reasons, companies need to preserve the knowl-
edge of all workers because it costs more to replace them and retrain their
replacements than it does to keep them and help them share what they know.
This is especially true as organizations seek to “go lean” and cut staff numbers
to the minimum. 
Every bit of experience, know-how, competence, and individual learning
counts now. Good workers need to share what they know and be rewarded for
both knowing and sharing. It’s in the self-interest of the organization to help
workers collaborate and understand the value to the company of what they
know about their jobs. This is true today, but the future will see the most suc-
cessful organizations changing their cultures and values radically to become
adaptable and sustainable entities.
294
Chapter 10

The Path Ahead
295
Messiness Is In
The knowledge held by workers is not just valuable to their workmates; it is also
increasingly of value to customers. Workers in positions that historically have
been out of sight and out of reach of customers now find that they represent key
links to customer loyalty and involvement. Product designers, systems engineers,
and sales and shipping clerks all hold keys to the positive customer experience.
When they do their jobs well, the company prospers because customers are
pleased. Some companies have chosen to expose these previously anonymous
servers of customer needs. The designer of the Daimler-Chrysler PT Cruiser, for
example, became a star and a celebrity to owners and fans of the vehicle.
In the future, there will be more direct links from customers to the desktops
of “back room” workers and innovators. They will be invited to respond directly
to customers because the knowledge that can be shared between a customer
and the designer of his tool, or the person who sends that tool to him, will
become a competitive advantage. In the eyes of the consumer, the hierarchy of
the business looks increasingly flat. People can track the packages they send
through UPS on their home PCs. The shipping clerk who gets the product to the
customer promptly is becoming a more meaningful contact to the consumer
than the CEO ever was. To most company leaders, accustomed to keeping cus-
tomer communications compartmentalized, this view of the future looks threat-
eningly chaotic and filled with risk, but some see it as an inevitable reality.
Dave Weinberger, in an interview with CIO magazine said, “Businesses are
taking on the structure of the web-—decentralized, messy, self-organizing.”6 In
the same interview, he also gave this warning to companies determined not to
loosen their hierarchical ways: “Many businesses are devoted to maintaining
the org chart through everything from disciplinary action to body language, so
hyperlinked teams route around org charts.” People are able to contact whom
they want and need to contact, and they will do so if it means they can get their
jobs done more easily or if it can bring them better service. The Net has
changed the playing field to one with its own built-in rules that are not neces-
sarily compatible with those of old-style organizations. Resistance to the messy
ad hoc efficiency of hyperlinking is futile. Organizations must change proac-
tively rather than adapt reactively to the changing marketplace and to the
changing character and growing independence of their workers and customers.
But a reactive change is still better than no change at all.
Speaking the Customer’s Language
Weinberger also strongly promotes the need for companies to communicate
with their customers in normal conversational language. The voice of the con-
sumer is all over the Web, interpreting the marketing and sales messages of

business that don’t seem to be emanating from fellow human beings. Conversa-
tions among consumers are becoming more sophisticated at sorting the wheat
from the chaff and the truth from the BS. 
Weinberger, in his CIO interview, notes this ongoing translation of obscure
business-speak into the natural language of the Web-enabled marketplace: “Busi-
ness information now is wrapped in human voices, and that’s an essential part of
our ability to make sense of this information.” More consumers are demanding an
open dialogue with companies, but companies insist on obscuring their message,
talking at their customers instead of with them. Consumers confront a smoke-
screen of marketing jargon and are finding ways to penetrate it. They are also
choosing which companies to do business with based on the companies’ willing-
ness to address them as peers rather than as submissive customers.
Along with the adoption of the Net as a conversational environment, busi-
nesses need to realize that consumers are more willing to converse with them
if they speak back in voices not scripted through the marketing or PR depart-
ments. Customers are tired of being spoken to like children. They just want to
connect as fellow consumers (since even those who sell products must also
buy products) and get the respect they deserve.
Learning about Learning
The idea of the learning organization has caught on, but how much of what has
been learned has turned into increased productivity and profit? As the economy
struggles to rise out of recession, early attempts to implement knowledge man-
agement solutions are being evaluated, and some truths about online knowl-
edge sharing are becoming clear as indications for the future. Organizations in
the future will do a better job of finding relevant knowledge, distributing it, and
putting it to use because some pioneering companies and analysts are discov-
ering today what works and does not work.
Smart People Trump Smart Software
In an interview after publication of The Attention Economy, Tom Davenport
was asked, “What’s going on in knowledge management these days?” He
responded that the greatest treasure to be found in KM is the insight that it
brings to companies, but that business intelligence, rather than the sharing of
best practices, was the area currently seeing the greatest advances. He also said,
“The smart companies realize it takes a lot of very bright human beings around
in addition to the software, and that’s sort of a knowledge management-oriented
insight.”7 Software meant to mine data for information can only take a company
so far. Unless it has smart people around who can convert data and information
into usable knowledge, the output of software brings limited improvement. 
296
Chapter 10

The Path Ahead
297
Those “very bright human beings” are often the ones starting and participating
in spontaneous knowledge-sharing communities. These communities use a vari-
ety of technologies, often simple and often in applications different from the
purposes for which the company provided them. When communities of practice
build email lists to collaborate and share, they are adapting social intellect rather
than trying to invent or design new technologies. When workers independently
download and install popular IM clients like ICQ so that they can stay in more
immediate contact on project development, they are choosing simple techno-
logical solutions instead of elaborate and expensive software structures. 
As Deloitte Research reported in a paper describing collaborative communi-
ties, “virtual communities defy many hierarchical practices.”8 Members of these
communities are smart people seeking the most efficient ways to get their jobs
done using whatever technologies are available, from their Web-enabled desk-
tops to Blackberry mobile devices. The companies within which these commu-
nities operate must first of all know that they are present and identify them.
Company leaders must get to understand them and what they are about and
then carefully go about connecting them with each other so that knowledge can
be shared among them appropriately. The Deloitte paper concludes, “Compa-
nies that learn to manage and leverage these networks effectively will be more
agile, more efficient, and more innovative than those that do not.” 
Empowering Creative Thinking
Company leaders also must understand that their smartest employees may
bring more value than expensive technologies, but appropriate technologies
can raise the effectiveness of those employees and of their spontaneous com-
munities of practice. Though many productive CoPs use email as their meeting
environments, that original choice of platform is often made based on the lack
of available Web-based discussion environments that allow multithreaded con-
versations and more accessible records of those conversations. The Web, with
its ability to hyperlink between resources and its capacity to weave content
MONITORING AND FACILITATING NETWORKS OF SMART PEOPLE
Deloitte Research concluded that company leaders “must understand that one of their jobs
is to monitor and facilitate the linkage of communities of practice to form collaborative
knowledge networks.”
To accomplish this without ruining the creative spark that makes these communities
so valuable, company leadership “must also understand that effective communities are
about trust—trust by employees that their participation will be valued, and trust by
companies that workers will make responsible decisions.”9

with conversation and personal profiles, offers significant improvements over
email in terms of the effectiveness of its support for knowledge sharing.
A study by Forrester Research,10 surveying 50 Fortune 1000 companies,
showed that although the great majority use email in collaborative product
development, only a small percentage use Web-based tools. Executives
responding to the survey projected that without a Web-based approach to col-
laboration, in-house best practices would take an average of 27 months to be
conveyed from one part of the organization to another, even in the best of firms.
That time represents money lost. If the easy linking capabilities of a Web-based
environment can cut the time of best practice dissemination in half or even bet-
ter, the conversion from email is almost certain to have a positive impact on the
company’s bottom line.
It’s not just the creative people inside the company who need to be empow-
ered and leveraged; the helpful customers outside the company need to be
hooked into the network, too. The Deloitte paper recommended that compa-
nies wishing to get full value out of their spending on CRM projects begin treat-
ing customers “as partners in anticipating, designing and delivering on their
current and future needs.” To build that partnership around customer-centric
strategies, companies must create “an environment that allows for ongoing,
consistent dialogue.”11 Again, this calls for simultaneous change in organiza-
tional culture and in improved access between knowledge-sharing groups both
inside and outside the organization.
Adjusting to the Changing
Marketplace
As markets are conversations, the marketplace is changing fast in part because
the number of conversations is rapidly increasing. Companies that relate to
their customers understand that the question no longer is simply “what do they
want?” but “how do they want it?” The first generation dot coms may have been
unrealistic in their visions of how fast their new business models could be
established, but they were very practical when it came to serving consumers
through a commonly available interface. In that respect, at least, they set the
new direction of the changing marketplace.
The Net Waits for No Company
Change has occurred much faster and on a wider scale than has the adaptation
of many enterprise-level businesses. Large companies, even those that take
action to modernize their technology, change slowly. In Tom Davenport’s inter-
view, he says, “We’ve had ERP [enterprise resource planning] for 20 years, and
only a small fraction of companies have started to change the way they manage
using the systems. I think that will be true of the Internet.”12 If it takes 20 years
298
Chapter 10
TEAMFLY

The Path Ahead
299
for some companies to adapt their management to the changes in the Internet-
powered marketplace, there’s enough time for a second generation of dot-com
frenzy to take place between now and then that could still grab business oppor-
tunities from slow-to-change competitors.
There is evidence, though, that large companies are continuing to try to keep
up, at least on the technological end. In a paper titled “Communities: Sociology
Meets Technology,”13 the Gartner Group made some high-probability (Gartner-
rated at 70 percent chance or higher) predictions for the year 2002. We list them
in Table 10.1.
GARTNER PREDICTION FOR 2002
IMPLICATIONS
The market for Web conferencing 
A lot of that expense will go for expensive 
will exceed $500 million, doubling 
virtual meetings through interfaces like 
by year’s end.
Placeware and Webex. The more budget-
minded companies will be installing
discussion boards and instant messaging
applications.
A wide range of “smart mobile 
These include wireless technologies for 
devices” will begin to proliferate 
virtual team collaboration. Some other 
through the year.
examples of their use: media content
management, voice portals, geospatial
information management, and personal
knowledge management.
Six or more companies will offer 
These will integrate the functions of the 
packaged “smart enterprise 
portal with content and document 
portfolios.”
management, KM, and collaboration
products. Gartner believes many of these
will include e-learning features. Such
platforms can support self-managing
knowledge communities in the same way
that the software platform (described in
Chapter 7, “Choosing and Using
Technology”) is designed to do. 
Technology for locating experts in 
More than half a million workers will have 
the workplace and for managing 
access to such tools by year’s end. People 
the searching and profiling functions 
look for other human resources—as 
will grow the fastest in terms of 
mentors, as sources of experience, for fact 
expanding its user base.
checking, and for inviting into collaborative
relationships. Once these resources are
found, conversations can begin.
Table 10.1
High-Probability Predictions by the Gartner Group for 2002

Proving the Return on Investment
Purchasing new technologies that promise to solve knowledge-related prob-
lems is slowed, for the most part, by lack of proof that they will be worth their
expense. An article in Infoworld14 highlighted the continuing concern over new
communication technology’s ability to pay for itself. ROI continues to be relied
on as the main justification for adopting collaborative practices and technolo-
gies, and if the ROI case cannot be proven using traditional metrics, the adop-
tion of new practices and technologies doesn’t happen. 
In the Infoworld article, George Paolini, the chief marketing officer of the email-
on-steroids application Zaplet (see Chapter 7), claimed that businesses still see
collaboration as a “nice-to-have, not a must-have” system. The must-have status
will only be recognized, he said, when current practices prove to be costing the
company instead of saving it money. It’s still easy to picture thousands of workers,
perfectly happy with their simple email and scheduling application and the routine
exchange of attached documents. Why pay for an upgrade if they are satisfied with
what they have now? As Paolini explains, the ROI from software-mediated collab-
oration can only be demonstrated after a company has adopted and developed the
new practice. Thus, companies relying on proof of ROI to trigger change are likely
to adopt the new practice only when the current system’s costs in inefficiency
prove to be intolerable. 
The article also acknowledges that the benefits of collaborative software,
although not easily quantifiable, contribute indirectly to ROI through increased
efficiencies such as “opening up communication bottlenecks, improving infor-
mation redundancies, and combining disparate knowledge.” As investments in
collaborative technologies grow, it will be interesting to see how traditional
measures of ROI evolve to include their contributions to the business.
Most cases of failed ROI from collaborative technologies reflect two basic
management errors: an overinfatuation with cutting-edge software as the solu-
tion and the inappropriate application of software solutions to socially based
networking situations. In fact, only a small part of the genre referred to by
industry and the press as “collaborative technologies” is software to support
online conversation; much of the attributed costs for that genre go for very
expensive system-level technologies, systems integration, and middleware
rather than for tools meant for interpersonal interaction. 
Return on investment is more easily achieved if initial investments are kept
small and increased incrementally only as paths for successful use are discov-
ered. For conversational technologies, companies that follow a path that
includes leveraging spontaneous communities, keeping the technology as sim-
ple as possible, starting small, learning and following a phased growth plan—
with the users of the system leading the expansion—will prove effective in
keeping initial costs low and seeing direct benefits more clearly.
Changes in organizational culture that make collaborative tools effective are
happening, but slowly. Likewise, the proof of ROI is gradually emerging from
300
Chapter 10

The Path Ahead
301
the use of those tools. Soon, we believe, companies that have invented and
implemented collaborative solutions over the past few years will have abun-
dant proof to justify those investments. In the future, we believe that the period
for proving the ROI of technologies that enable knowledge sharing will be
extended beyond the traditional single-year timeframe. Investments that
require social as well as technical integration and are meant to build the sus-
tainability of the company must be given more time to become ingrained in
organizational culture and practice.
Truly Knowing the Customer
Organizations whose products and purposes relate to lifestyle communities will
gain both loyalty and knowledge by providing opportunities for customers and
constituents to converse on the Net. As attractions to these natural communities,
organizations like REI—the outdoor equipment store that began as a cooperative
and now manages one of the more effective online shopping sites—become hubs
of customer interaction and sources of valuable market intelligence.
The key functions of these community opportunities are described clearly by
REI in its “Learn & Share” area, pictured in Figure 10.1. Customers, who originally
come to the site to shop for outdoor gear and clothing, can learn from fellow
backpackers, skiers, and canoeists how to select the right equipment for their
conditions or fitness. They can offer their advice to those coming to the online
forums to learn. They can find partners for their adventures and suggest favorite
hiking routes. By facilitating the contact between people with interest in outdoor
activities, REI helps to build a loyal and informative market for its products. 
Because of experience gained in its brick-and-mortar stores, REI understood
its customers before it built its Web site. Many companies, though, have fallen
behind their customers in learning how to communicate. They have to catch up.
Dave Weinberger says, “The web is enabling markets to become much smarter,
much faster than businesses can hope to—at least businesses along the old
model.”15 The market becomes as smart as its smartest person because “the
web enables global conversations in which people speak the truth to one
another in their own distinctive voices.” Again, the issues of trust and genuine
voice arise. This is not about the technology as much as it is about the company
providing the interface and the words that customers understand as they look
for solutions. REI is a good example for the future because its employees and
the editors of its Web site are outdoors enthusiasts just like its customers. It
speaks the language of its customers.
Consumers as Consultants
In Chapter 9, “Conversing with External Stakeholders,” we described Hallmark’s
Idea Exchange, an online community composed of Hallmark customers and

consumers invited to participate through phone calls and email. We believe that
more companies will adopt the Hallmark model of close consumer involvement
with product design and service feedback in the future, so in February 2002, we
conducted an interview with the initiator of the Idea Exchange, Tom Brailsford.
Since the report that informed our initial description of the consumer-as-
consultants project, Hallmark has started two more online communities: one
for grandparents and one for Hispanics. As with the original community, made
up of mothers with young children, the company plans to limit the populations
to about 200 members at a time. Additional communities—specifically, their
composition—are under discussion within the company. Brailsford says that
one way consumer communities save his company money is by enabling faster
research. “There’s a financial value associated with time too.”
302
Chapter 10
Figure 10.1
Learning and sharing opportunities help REI win customers and sell products.

The Path Ahead
303
Brailsford set up the original Idea Exchange so the company could have an
ongoing dialogue with its customers rather than just “point in time” focus
groups or surveys. Part of customer loyalty, he maintains, involves the cus-
tomer thinking of the company as a partner. He recognizes that for these com-
munities to work the participants must also have a compelling reason to want
to talk with one another, such as exchanging child-raising tips or having a voice
about issues that are deeply important to them.
The communities, Brailsford says, are always “morphing”; that is, they are liv-
ing, organic, works in progress. Members regularly leave and new ones are
recruited (or join voluntarily) to replace them. At first, the company’s goal for
the Idea Exchange was to come up with one good new product idea a year from
the insights generated there. Last year he believes they came up with at least
two ideas for entirely new businesses.
Hallmark’s employees don’t participate as regular members of the Idea
Exchange communities but can visit and observe by using guest passes. The
availability of these passes is made known within the company by word of
mouth; they have not been advertised or promoted. So far, more than 400 peo-
ple have used the guest passes, and although the members of the consumer
communities are aware when a guest is present, the guests themselves are
asked not to interfere or disturb the normal interactions of the consumer mem-
bers. Hallmark tries to be very careful to preserve its trusted relationship with
the consumer community participants. It is aware that if the communities are
overly influenced by Hallmark, the Idea Exchange(s) may no longer be a valid
market research tool.
Members of the communities are empowered to start their own discussion top-
ics and to launch their own surveys. Hallmark’s creative writers take special note
of the language that consumers use to describe day-to-day life events and feel-
ings. Brailsford projects that in the future they may allow the consumers to do
their own recruiting for their communities and become even more self-governing
than they are today. He considers what Hallmark is doing with consumer com-
munities to be a kind of online anthropology where the company can observe
consumers interacting in a relatively controlled but uninfluenced environment. 
The New Shape of Organizations
“Many companies are moving toward decentralized and team-based work envi-
ronments to improve their responsiveness.” So says the Deloitte Research
paper on knowledge networks.16 Such companies have realized how far the
marketplace has pulled ahead of them. Their old, rigid, hierarchical structures
could not respond fast enough. Now they need to go faster and grow leaner to
save money and learn from where they’ve been. This defines a clear need for
the efficiencies and adaptability of conversational knowledge sharing.

Speeding Up the Learning Process
Tom Peters wrote In Search of Excellence, a book that years ago helped bring
attention to exemplary companies that had recognized and were adapting to the
changing marketplace. In an article in Fast Company, he says that companies
“need to achieve liberation. Today, it’s all about the freedom to try new things.”17
He compares this to the days when he wrote his groundbreaking book, way back
in 1982, when he concentrated on “people, customers, and action.” Today, he
says, “it’s about ideas, liberation, speed … the power of good ideas that passion-
ate, motivated, fully engaged people can generate.” The speed that Peters is talk-
ing about today is “speed to learning,” and it’s a kind of speed that doesn’t waste
time worrying about what just happened. It’s a forward-looking speed, eager to
anticipate and adjust to the future. 
Similarly, Tom Davenport sees companies today not worrying about what just
happened, but trying to gather their wits and move ahead as smartly as possible.
Speaking at the end of year 2001, he said, “Right now, we’re sort of in a period
where there’s no really big new ideas, and a lot of managers, employees and orga-
nizations just want to take all the ideas that have come along for the past several
years and put them together, integrate them, simplify them and get some value
out of them. They’re all looking to extract some value from their existing infra-
structures and, at this moment, cut costs from their existing infrastructures.”18
How much time they have to do such analysis will depend on the patience of
their markets. What Davenport describes is a characteristic of the new lean
company model, where only the essentials to success are retained and where no
extraneous infrastructure or staff is carried that will slow the company down
and cut into its profitability. The companies he describes are gearing down for
their anticipated acceleration into the fast-learning lane described by Peters.
The Rising Emphasis on Collaboration
A study done by consulting giant Accenture indicated that more than 70 percent
of surveyed executives from Fortune 1000 companies see the Internet as one of
the most important factors in fostering greater collaboration with key business
partners because of the visibility it provides in the supply chain.19 Collabora-
tion, in this context, is a necessary result of executives outsourcing more of
their business functions like transportation, logistics, and procurement and
working harder to eliminate supply chain inefficiencies. Although this doesn’t
mean that they are fostering more online conversation, the results of partner
collaboration—sharing or integrating software so that data are compatible with
partnering organizations—are certainly a form of collaboration that is likely to
require more direct online communication.
Other clues point to increased emphasis on conversational collaboration in
the workplace. The previously cited study by the Gartner Group also included
304
Chapter 10

The Path Ahead
305
interesting projections about online communities and interaction. Companies
will implement more online business communities from now through 2004, and
Gartner predicts that employee-focused communities (B2E) will appear in the
greatest numbers. This makes sense because employees have established rea-
sons to communicate and share common communication technologies. Inter-
est, though, will be highest in building customer communities (B2C) because
companies are being asked increasingly by their customers to provide better
channels for support. Leading the way in measured ROI will be partner com-
munities (B2B), probably because they are closer to actual business transac-
tions than the others. We believe that by 2004 more valid and accepted ROI
measurement techniques for the B2E and B2C communities will drive their
adoption by more companies.
Gartner believes, based on its research, that by 2007, “the time spent interact-
ing with others in the virtual world will exceed the physical connections by a fac-
tor of 10-to-1.” And by the same year, “more than 60 percent of the European
Union and U.S. population will carry or wear a wireless computing and commu-
nications device at least six hours a day.” These numbers, if they prove even close
to accurate, will certainly have an impact within business practice and culture.
These projections describe a very communicative and collaborative work-
place—one that organizations should be preparing for today in their strategic
planning and in their changing operations. As communication among workers
increases, the productive value of specific technologies, online leadership, and
online conversation skills will stand out. Innovation spurred by interaction
between customers and companies will become more important, and the
amount of tolerance and flexibility ingrained in an organization’s culture will
prove to be either a lubricant or a source of friction on its path to sustainability.
Yet the increase in interpersonal interaction in the virtual world must be
metered carefully so as not to become another form of information glut.
Making Collaboration More Effective
Not surprisingly, as one senior executive says, “Nobody in reality wants to col-
laborate for the sake of collaboration.” Darren Lee, senior VP of NextPage,
admits, “We’re finding [collaboration] only has significant value when it’s com-
bined … with mission-critical information, attached to a business-processing
context.”20 That’s a fancy way of saying that working people need to get things
done and that online collaboration needs to be made as efficient as possible.
We agree that “collaboration for the sake of collaboration” can be wasteful of
valuable time, but we also warn against holding too high a standard for what
“mission-critical” means, at least when the collaboration involves online con-
versation. Informal practice of online communication skills is important; it
leads to learning and allows people to develop the new skills, habits, and trust
required for productive interaction. 

But besides practice, productive online collaboration also requires appropri-
ate software environments and interfaces for the specific community and task.
Often, the community finds an available environment for online meetings—for
example, email combined with content on Web pages—and settles in with it
rather than seeking more powerful software that might actually be more useful
for its purposes. The end users can’t be relied on to be the ones pushing for
change in the collaborative interface. End users are often the most conservative
forces in terms of pushing for change and new things to learn.
As Andrew Mahon, senior director of product marketing at Groove Networks,
notes, “Collaboration usually is aimed at the long-term efficiency and effective-
ness of a group, but that’s not how people behave—they behave in their short-
term best interest.”21 Mr. Mahon is referring to the lack of demand in the
workplace for tools like Groove. He can’t be blamed for wanting businesses to
buy Groove, just as Mr. Paolini wants them to convert to Zaplet Appmail. But
workers aren’t yet demanding change on the level that would drive institutional
demand for their products. 
Email and instant messaging may be the platforms of choice and may indeed
work well in the short term. But when collaboration is adopted as a long-term
solution in the company, software that can make every collaboration more effi-
cient—providing document sharing, calendars, and project management time-
lines—will be more appropriate and effective for the company as a whole.
A Return to Community Values
As innovative thinking and action become more important to organizations, so
will inspirational leadership and stimulating culture. Businesses must learn to
be less mechanical and more social because people communicating can create
and adapt for situations better than computers and machines. And as the Net
brings people outside organizations closer to people inside them, the human
side of the organization must be nurtured. Tom Davenport was asked in an
interview about the importance in workplace culture of “how you manage peo-
ple’s spirits.” He responded, “If you want employees to think creatively and
share their ideas and so on, you have to work on that kind of stuff.”22
Managing people’s spirits is not the stuff of traditional business, but
increased internal communication is changing the way organizations see them-
selves. Referring to his latest book about the scarcity of attention, the inter-
viewer asked Davenport about online communities, pointing out that they get
attention, sustain attention with user participation, and encourage knowledge
sharing where novices learn from experts. Did Davenport see companies
embracing the idea of internal and external online communities? 
“I think online communities are great and they have a number of positive
attributes,” he said, “but I think a lot of companies try to do them on the cheap,
and they don’t really take experts and put them in roles to facilitate communi-
306
Chapter 10

The Path Ahead
307
ties.” Because they can be so difficult and expensive to facilitate, he sees online
communities evolving into what he described as “kind of another unit of orga-
nizational structure.” Employees will work within a specific department of the
organization, such as accounting, but they may actually be active in communi-
ties that cross the boundaries of departments. Community structures will
define a constantly changing organizational network within the organization.
Tearing Down the Walls
We see online communities in the future spanning not only internal boundaries
but boundaries between the company and its customers. The people who design
and market products share a common interest with the customers who buy and
use those products, and together they comprise a community of focus and pur-
pose: to end up with the highest quality product. The Internet now provides the
FOSTERING INNOVATION
Margaret Wheatley is president of The Berkana Institute, a charitable global foundation.
She has been an organizational consultant and a professor of management in two graduate
programs. These ideas for managers, which call for a lot of communication between
people, are from her writing in the book Leading for Innovation:23
■■
“Meaning engages our creativity.” Find out what is meaningful to people by paying
attention to them, being around them, communicating with them. Things don’t
become meaningful to people just because you tell them they should be. Stay
open and listen actively.
■■
“Depend on diversity.” Just as it is with crops, monoculture can be dangerous in
organizations. Diversity and deviance raise the possibility that new solutions will
be devised quickly when new problems arise. Invite unique personal perspectives
because that reflects the complexity of the real world.
■■
“Involve everybody who cares.” Participation is necessary, so leaders must invite
everyone who will be affected by a change into the creation process. Organizations
are complex, so “engage the whole system so we can harvest the invisible
intelligence that exists throughout the organization.”
■■
“Diversity is the path to unity.” By airing and discussing their differing viewpoints,
perspectives, and predispositions, groups can build trust and discover common
interests and goals and shared meaning for the work they do together. 
■■
“People will always surprise us.” We have to take the time to hear each other’s
stories and get to know people. Applying stereotypes and labels to people only
serves to reduce the number of people who are invited to help create new solutions.
■■
“Rely on human goodness.” People need each other to make work worthwhile and
to figure out the solutions that will make their organizations sustainable. There is
cynicism among workers, but inviting them to be part of the meaningful
conversation and listening to them can win back their trust.

potential meeting place for these potential collaborators. To open the conversa-
tion between them, companies must change themselves from within.
Michael Hammer wrote Reengineering the Corporation, a book that helped
set off waves of reorganization and change in the way businesses were man-
aged. That was 1993, and today his viewpoint has evolved with the marketplace.
He now believes that the equation has changed “from scarce goods to scarce
customers.” Customers are more educated today and have become more par-
ticular, so companies must reengineer in this age to “face the customer, to serve
the customer, and to make life easier for the customer.”24
The Net makes this obvious to those of us who have been online steadily for
years, but as more people log on and become more comfortable doing busi-
ness through the Web, the pressure for companies to open up to the market
through the Net will become irresistible. The customer will be more and more
defined by what happens through the Net, where the marketplace expects
there to be a conversation. 
Deviance as the Source of Solutions
The innovative company of the future will need to find sparks of creativity in
places it has never looked before. Organizations can learn from customers, con-
sultants, and other external sources, but when looking for solutions to internal
problems, ideas drawn from outside the company often hit cultural roadblocks.
Solutions developed within the framework of a culture, rather than introduced
from outside it, are more likely to be adopted and sustained. This is human
nature. But an organization looking inward for solutions may wonder where to
begin its search. 
Recognizing internal deviants in the culture as innovators (rather than crack-
pots, eccentrics, or rebels) is one approach to finding fresh new solutions. Peo-
ple deviate from the norm for different reasons, but one is that the norm is not
effective enough for them; they feel it is holding them back. So they try differ-
ent ways of doing things. Sometimes they break rules or ignore protocol. Some-
times they download and install software not provided or approved by IT.
Sometimes they create their own discussion groups just to learn something
new about their job or profession. Their behavior may go against corporate
norms of playing it safe and submitting to the organization, but deviation can be
recognized as leadership rather than rebellion. 
Resisting Solutions from Outside
Jerry Sternin’s job with Save the Children was to help save starving children in
a specific region in Vietnam. Faced with an impossible timeframe for figuring
308
Chapter 10
TEAMFLY

The Path Ahead
309
out and implementing lasting solutions, he decided to look for the rare exam-
ples of children that were not starving in the region. Compared to the vast
majority of families whose children were suffering, these deviant cases might
provide workable solutions for everyone. But that was only part of the chal-
lenge. The most important challenge was in getting these solutions adopted by
many families and in changing entrenched cultural behaviors.
Sternin knew from experience with businesses that when outside consul-
tants come into an organizational culture and introduce new practices, they
may be adopted for a while, but once the consultants leave, the tendency is to
revert to old practices. Cultural trust is a powerful thing. Foreign intervention,
no matter how helpful, is still foreign. As Sternin said: “The traditional model
for social and organizational change doesn’t work. It never has. You can’t bring
permanent solutions in from outside.”
Sternin knew that the most effective way of introducing new ideas was to
find successful but unusual practices that were working for some people, in
some circumstances, in the organization and “amplify them.” People sometimes
unwittingly discover paths to success that can benefit the entire organization.
They need to be discovered and to have their ideas disseminated. But accep-
tance by others in the organization can be tricky. People like to think that they
have discovered the ideas they adopt. They tend to resist having new ideas
imposed on them, even if they are improvements over their current practices.
When people feel that they have a part in discovering a solution, they “own” it,
trust it, and are more likely to continue using it.
Adopting Solutions from Inside
In Viet Nam, Sternin found families whose children were not malnourished and
studied the differences in their diets from the norm. He and his wife introduced
other families to the foods in these deviant diets, but they did so casually, with-
out proselytizing. This let the families feel that they were discovering the new
foods on their own rather than having them introduced as part of a “nutritional
program.”
Applying the deviant solution approach to organizations, the incremental
successes of deviant groups (like spontaneous communities of practice) can be
publicized in a low-key manner through the intranet, where other groups can
appreciate the new ideas and adopt them as they choose to fit their situations.
To overhype the specific deviant group (“Everybody go look at what the widget
team is doing!”) could endanger its effectiveness. To force all groups to form
communities of practice is sure to breed resentment and awkwardness. But
spreading exceptional practices by seeding them as ideas through the organi-
zational culture introduces the elements of choice and creative collaboration—
elements that contribute to group trust, creativity, and loyalty.

Redefining Success
The dot coms pioneered some novel ways of measuring success. Page views
were as good as money for several years. In 1999, click-throughs were going to
be the standard for setting ad rates. Eyeballs—the number of unique visits or
unique visitors—drove share prices. Being first to market was an automatic
symbol of success, and winning dominant market share was seen by the stock
market as worthy of huge investment. Revenue and profit would come in their
natural course, eventually.
310
Chapter 10
EIGHT STEPS TO USING POSITIVE DEVIANCE
Jerry Sternin has some dos and don’ts drawn from his experiences in organizations and in
other cultures:26
1.
Discover solutions within the existing culture. Don’t bring solutions from outside of
it. Identify deviants who have found solutions on their own.
2.
Solve for a distinct group culture. Don’t try to solve across cultures. Everyone in the
group must identify with the others, must face the same challenges and rely on the
same set of resources to come up with answers.
3.
Let them do it themselves. Set up a situation in which people—including those who
need to change the way that they operate—can discover, on their own, a better way
to do things.
4.
Identify and clarify the conventional wisdom of the average and of the majority.
What is accepted behavior? What do most group members do?
5.
Identify and analyze the deviants. As you track how all people in the group go
about their tasks, and as you begin to list the behaviors that they all have in
common, the positive deviants will naturally emerge. 
6.
Let the deviants adopt deviations on their own. Once you find deviant behaviors,
don’t tell people about them. It’s not a transfer of knowledge. It’s not about
importing best practices from somewhere else. It’s about changing behavior. Let
the people who have discovered the deviations spread the word in their group.
Don’t require adherence to the new practices, but do offer incentives for it.
7.
Track results and publicize them. Post the results, show how they were achieved,
and let other groups develop their own curiosity about them. Celebrate success
when you achieve it. Go back on a periodic basis and observe how different groups
have changed, and track the results quantitatively to show how positive deviance
works. Chip away at conventional wisdom, and gradually alter low expectations by
showing, in indisputable terms, the results that come with doing things differently.
8.
Repeat steps one through seven. Make the whole process cyclical. Once people
discover effective ways to deviate from the norm, and once those methods have
become common practice, it’s time to do another study to find out how the best
performers in the group are operating now. Chances are that they’ve discovered new
deviations from the new norm. The bell curve of performance keeps moving up, as
long as you disseminate the best deviations across the curve and continue to discover
new examples of positive deviance among the next group of best performers.

The Path Ahead
311
But page views didn’t sell product. Click-throughs stopped happening, and eye-
balls did not reliably translate into revenue for anyone. Profit and ROI were
reclaimed as the bedrock measures of business success. But the Net, in speeding
up the flow of information and introducing many new ways of relating people and
information, did create some new benchmarks for performance measurement.
These will be refined, adopted, and used in the future, led by the most innovative
companies who understand the importance of monitoring their real-time perfor-
mance as they constantly try new ideas and react to shifting markets.
Performance Measurement
Michael Hammer is one of those who believes conventional business measures
have fallen behind the marketplace and must be changed. In a September 2001
interview,27 he calls most conventional measures “worthless” and charitably
labels the others as only “dangerous.” What measures is he referring to and
what’s his complaint? “Financial measures—profitability, return on investment,
discounted cash flow, or any of the technically complex measures used by finan-
cial engineers—tell you little, if anything, of what you need to know about your
business.” He calls the basic profit-and-loss statement “an autopsy.” Hammer
does accept, though, the importance of a strong balance sheet and healthy P&L
but only as outcomes, not as the most useful measurements of business health. 
Hammer believes businesses should be tracking more measurements of their
actual performance: how much they are getting done and how well they are
doing it. “The fundamental language of business is about things like customer
satisfaction, speed, and error rates,” Hammer says. He wants “[real] operating
measures, metrics that matter not to the accounting department, but to the all-
powerful customer.” Customers don’t care and can’t tell if your company made
a profit last month, but they do care and can tell if your delivery came on time
and if the invoice you sent them was correct. Customers can be lost if service is
bad, even though the company’s balance sheet looks healthy. In a fast-changing
marketplace, service and performance must be monitored constantly. 
Knowledge Generation as Performance
Performance measures as described by Hammer help describe a company’s
effectiveness as tied to its customer satisfaction. We believe that knowledge
exchange also must be measured as a kind of intellectual performance that can
be tied to cost savings and to revenue-generating ideas and relationships. Con-
ventional measures of business success must be expanded in the future to rec-
ognize the effects of communication through the Net on efficiency, innovation,
knowledge generation, and the overall health and prospects of companies. In a
more communicative wired marketplace, companies will be valued in part by
how well adapted they are to that environment.

Thus, in addition to ideas like those suggested by Michael Hammer, we would
add other measuring criteria such as: 
■■How many new product or business ideas have been stimulated by direct
interaction with customers? 
■■How many employees are involved on a daily basis in knowledge-sharing
communities?
■■How many customers are participating in company-sponsored online
conversation?
■■How fast do best practices disseminate through the company? 
Conventional accounting doesn’t include any means for recognizing the value
of a company using the Net to engage in conversation with its customers and
partners. As Tom Brailsford of Hallmark’s Idea Exchange asked in our phone
interview with him, “What is the value of thinking?” Conversations in which
knowledge is shared amount to collective thinking. The fact that it is happening
within an organization identifies the potential for generating useful as well as
mission-critical knowledge and ideas. Correlating conversations with the value
of their creative results—new products, more efficient processes, faster time to
market, improved customer and employee satisfaction—should be considered
the new frontier of accounting in the knowledge-focused marketplace. 
Business has been paying attention to the brainpower within organizations
for many years. Measuring intellectual capital is not a new idea by any means,
but the Internet continues to spawn new examples of group intelligence that
don’t yet fit into recognized categories for measuring intangible assets.
Dynamic knowledge generation and its positive by-products need to be inte-
grated with parameters like competency models, balanced scorecard, bench-
marking, and business process auditing.16 If a company invests in using the
Net to harness the power of consumer input and feedback, if it grows commu-
nities of reliable consumer consultants, then those assets should be repre-
sented somewhere on the balance sheet.
The New Skill Set
Online knowledge sharing is a new way of doing business and will require the
learning and adoption of a new set of skills. Depending on a person’s role and
the nature of the conversation, these skills can be as natural as starting and
maintaining an interesting conversation or as challenging as herding cats. The
personal assets that make a productive online conversationalist can be as mun-
dane as good typing skills and as elusive as inspirational leadership. 
312
Chapter 10

The Path Ahead
313
Every organization and every culture will need its own special skills to man-
age this virtual social activity. We describe only general categories here because
skills such as effective message writing, operating in a flattened hierarchy,
applying online etiquette, and conversational leadership are important to any
wired organization, but to different degrees. Every cultural unit, whether a dis-
tinct company or a line of business within a company, needs to discover on its
own how these skills should be tailored to its particular needs.
For his book on the scarce resource of human attention in the information-
flooded workplace, Tom Davenport studied what business leaders pay atten-
tion to. This is important to know because wherever executives spend their
limited attention is more likely to influence the strategies they implement. In
his interviews at Agilebrain.com,28 Davenport described what executives chose
to zoom in on. It turns out that, at least in the case of online communication,
executives behave a lot like the rest of us.
Getting Attention
Davenport and his coauthor asked executives which medium they paid the
most attention to. They responded: email. The executives were then asked
which attributes of an email message were most important to them in deciding
whether it was worth further attention. Their responses ranked the attributes in
the following order, beginning with most important:
Personalization of the message. Executives looked first at messages writ-
ten specifically to them rather than to a group.
Brevity. Keeping the message “short and concise” was likely to convince
them to spend time reading it.
Emotion. If the message evoked either a positive or negative emotion, it was
more likely to draw their interest than if it did not.
A trustworthy source. Even long, dry, impersonal messages from someone
known and trusted would get a look.
Over the years, we’ve found the same attributes of online interpersonal com-
munication to be important for most people. When the number of messages—
whether email, message board, or IM—becomes too great, people apply their own
sorting and prioritization systems. First to get ignored always seem to be the least
personal messages, followed by the long time-consuming ones. Boring messages
are a labor to read, and those coming from unknown sources probably don’t have
as much relevance as those coming from friends, associates, and workmates.
People (and businesses) have to work hard to become known as trustworthy
sources and thereby to attract attention. Businesses and business leaders who

need to contact many people at once also must work hard to make their messages
seem personal. These factors apply to messages posted in message boards or any-
where in the online environment. The new skill set of the knowledge-sharing
future includes an understanding of how to attract attention when the audience,
not just executives, is learning to filter its input and aim its attention based on
factors such as personalization, brevity, emotional impact, and trust.
Future Leadership Skills
In the flattened hierarchy of the Net, leaders are recognized more by their com-
munication skills than by the number of people who report to them. In compa-
nies where executives spend most of their attention on email, they may not
spend any time in group conversation environments such as discussion boards
or as member/participants in ongoing email lists. But as online conversations
become more popular as meeting places and collaborative environments, exec-
utives will find it more difficult to keep a finger on the pulse of the organization
without spending time involved in some of those conversations. Leadership
must become accustomed to proving its mettle in Cyberspace. 
Peer-to-Peer Management
Dave Weinberger, who campaigns constantly for businesses to express them-
selves like normal people, also thinks that business leaders need to learn the
importance of addressing the marketplace with substance rather than spin. “An
important new skill is being required of our best communicators,” Weinberger
says. “They need to stand for something, to care about what they’re talking
about, to be able to talk from the heart in their own words.”29 Michael Hammer
strikes a similar theme when he says, “You’re not going to get passion in your
organization by talking about shareholder value. You have to give people a
sense of transcendent purpose.”30
Millions of people have now used the Net as a medium for serious, heartfelt,
passionate communication. They understand that it is not a toy and is not a
broadcast medium like television where they can simply mute the commercials
if they offend. The Net is a two-way medium among virtual peers. People expect
to get back in truth and sincerity what they put out. They expect leaders to be
able to use the medium to communicate from the heart and to inspire people
behind common causes.
Weinberger recognizes that in a communications-rich marketplace, leaders
must be more than managers of people in offices. They must, as he says, “earn
respect by being out in the fray, by being able to laugh … especially at their own
mistakes.” Respect is earned, he says, “by being a participant just like everybody
else. That’s pure democracy.”31 That’s also consistent with the very real flattening
314
Chapter 10

The Path Ahead
315
of the hierarchy in the modern organization. The Net makes it so. Networks need
competent and trusted coordinators more than they need commanders.
Hammer says, “The old leader was a guy who sat on the 59th floor and made
financial decisions. The new leader must be a charismatic persuader, someone
to whom others can relate, a person who can set sights higher than the next
quarter’s earnings report.”32 The next era of reengineering, he says, will depend
on “on qualities that emanate from the right side of the brain: devotion, trust,
empathy, and all of their touchy-feely cousins.” We may be 30+ years beyond
the end of the sixties, but Hammer sees management entering an age of
“empathic identification.” The Net makes us all more exposed to each other,
businesses and consumers alike. It’s time to accept that fact and learn how to
take best advantage of it.
Effective Facilitation
Facilitation means to make something easier. The leaders of sustainable organi-
zations will be responsible for making it easier for workers and knowledge-ori-
ented communities to communicate and learn. Those leaders will have to
understand how online conversation works. And to do that, they will have to use
the tools their workers use so that they can experience and join online conver-
sations. Leaders of sustainable communities will be active members of knowl-
edge networks and will therefore understand their needs.
Facilitation also means making productive conversation easier for partici-
pants. There are specialists who do this for a living or who fill this role in online
discussions, but we believe online facilitation skills will become common to
knowledge workers in the future. Good facilitators maintain focus, help people
understand one another, and bring the group to resolution within set time lim-
its. They pay attention to every individual and to the conversation as a whole.
Good facilitators understand the practical attention limits and capabilities of
people conversing online. They manage meetings according to the time and
attention people are most able to give. They perform helpful tasks like clarify-
ing points people attempt to make. They provide summaries of past meetings
and agendas for future meetings.
The more people in any online meeting who are participating with a facilita-
tor’s level of attention, the more productive the meeting can be. Not every
online conversation needs a facilitator, but where efficiency and time are
involved, every online knowledge-sharing conversation should be managed as a
facilitated meeting. In a knowledge-sharing environment, we expect group
communications skills will become more important as a requisite skill. We fore-
see companies providing training and practice to get all of their workers up to
a much higher level of sophistication than exists today. 

Future Technical Paths
In Chapter 7, we described a range of technical genres, platforms, interfaces, and
approaches that can serve the needs for knowledge exchange within and across
the firewall. We included some products and ideas that we believe represent the
future, or at least the next step of technology for the virtual knowledge-sharing
organization. In this last part of the final chapter, we’ll touch again on some of the
technical themes we believe will support the expansion of online conversation in
the workplace and marketplace.
Decentralization is one theme. Application integration is another. But as
we’ve emphasized many times in this book, self-motivated knowledge-sharing
communities are not limited by the shortcomings of centralized systems or the
slow pace of integration. They find tools that work in the present because they
need to converse and learn now, not later. 
The recognition of businesses as communities and of communities within
businesses also will affect the direction of technical development for and
within organizations. Communities of practice are catching on in corporations,
and some of the best practices for tapping into customer knowledge are now
known to involve online conversation. The future of knowledge networking
will feature more personalization and more ongoing collaboration between IT,
Web designers, and portal builders. Workers dependent on their knowledge-
sharing communities will need the technical means to stay engaged remotely
through different devices. But beyond these few assumptions, the technical
future of knowledge sharing will depend on where the actual practice of knowl-
edge sharing leads it.
Next-Generation Portals
Portal design today is a very competitive business, with many companies trying
to serve widely varying corporate needs by including just the right mix of infor-
mation searching, application integration, employee profiling, and collabora-
tion tools. The portal market is being driven by increasing dissatisfaction with
existing intranet deployments and the recognized need to move toward Web-
based interfaces as the standard for information delivery and knowledge shar-
ing. All of the major business infrastructure providers such as SAP, Oracle, and
PeopleSoft have rewritten their programs for operation as Web applications.
We expect knowledge sharing to be one of the more sought after functional-
ities in future designs because portals will be where more employees spend
their time and get their information. Portals will become the means through
which more enterprises tap into what their employees know and provide the
means for employees to share with each other what they know.
The ability to provide mobile, remote, and distributed workers with orga-
nized access to the applications, knowledge, and information they need for
316
Chapter 10

The Path Ahead
317
sound decision making has become vitally important for businesses striving to
be productive, agile, and profitable. The attractiveness of Web-based comput-
ing combined with the need to expedite information access and skills training
has led to the design of what are called e-learning portals.
Centra (www.centra.com) is, like Placeware, a provider of real-time Web-
based communications. Through integrating its services into the local portal,
companies can bring virtual classrooms into the organization. The importance
of bringing an entire staff up to speed on new skills is crucial to organizations
needing to keep pace with the fast-changing marketplace, and portals will be
the primary channel through which the necessary training will be delivered. 
E-learning portals will connect directly and seamlessly with enterprise
resource planning (ERP), business intelligence, customer relationship manage-
ment (CRM), and other mission-critical enterprise systems so that workers can
learn within the actual information environments that define their jobs.
Open source technologies allow programmers to build new platform-inde-
pendent applications for virtually any device, including wireless and handheld
communication devices and information appliances. Mobile users will be able
to move seamlessly from one device to another and receive consistent, person-
alized learning and knowledge. These applications will be integrated into por-
tals where all information and personalization options will be located—where
individual workers will configure and maintain their personal dashboards.
Integration Technologies
Three main approaches to integrating technologies are developing today that
will open the doors to wider collaboration in the B2B, B2E, and B2C arenas:
Web services, application service providers (ASPs), and virtual network orga-
nizations. Many businesses are unable to collaborate with each other because
of incompatibilities among the applications they use. Two different ERP sys-
tems may not be able to exchange information, for example, preventing the
time-saving efficiencies that could be realized if data could be smoothly
exchanged. Because such relationships are blocked by incompatibilities, the
need and opportunity for conversations among potential collaborators do not
exist. Integration solutions will allow different applications to be shared by dif-
ferent organizations under different technical arrangements, thus allowing
many more collaborative relationships to form in the future. 
Web Services
We’ve mentioned Web services previously in the book, noting that they still
face some problems in standardization and cross-company implementation.
They represent the next natural evolutionary step in the development of tools
for the distributed network of the Internet. Using current industry standards

like XML to build them, they are software tools that can be used by other soft-
ware applications.
Web services rapidly can interconnect existing applications and information.
Their use can wean end users from the complexity of incompatible legacy sys-
tems. And in the words of Dirk Spiers, describing the consensus expressed at
Infoworld’s Next-Generation Web Services Conference in January 2002,33 they
will “cause the Internet to become a big, programmable software soup, with vir-
tually unlimited components that can mix and match themselves.” 
At the conference, the cofounder of one Web services provider admitted, “We
tend to underestimate the speed at which we do simple things and overestimate
the speed at which we do hard things.” For even as Web services are being
developed and deployed at a rapid rate, the perception of many speakers at the
conference was, as Spiers described, that the industry “remains some distance
from a solid set of services upon which real businesses can be built.” What
“some distance” means is anybody’s guess, but the need is indeed there for
what Web services can do. Locally—integrating the applications used within a
single organization—the implementation of Web services is less problematic
than it is between different companies with different software and cultures. So
in the short term, we will see Web services used internally, in combination with
portals to provide consistent interfaces for workers to what would otherwise
be incompatible applications. 
This internal integration will aid knowledge-sharing communities by provid-
ing them with more flexible access to the information coming from different
processes in the organization. Cross-company knowledge communities—
involving both CRM and marketing, for example—will be able to learn better
from each other when the information provided by their distinct software appli-
cations is delivered through more standardized interfaces. The CRM staff will
be able to access and interpret marketing data and marketing will be able to do
the same with CRM data, providing context for more productive conversation.
Application Service Providers
When a company runs part of its technology through an ASP, it spares the IT
department of certain responsibilities and expenses. It allows the company to
concentrate on its core competencies rather than manage peripheral applica-
tions, and it reduces pressures to hire the professionals it would need to run the
applications internally. For an ASP solution to work, there must be sufficient
secure bandwidth connecting the company with the ASP. So far, this has been
one of the bottlenecks in adoption of these solutions, and it is where ASPs inter-
sect with the virtual network organizations to be described. 
System integration is not necessarily smooth in the use of ASPs. The applica-
tion may be run and managed remotely, but it still must fit smoothly into the over-
all business system so that it can be used most effectively. This applies in
318
Chapter 10
TEAMFLY

The Path Ahead
319
arrangements like B2B exchanges where different companies using the exchange
will come with their own different applications. Integration might mean building
interoperability for many vendors and buyers with a single ERP system. This is
where Web services intersect with ASPs. And there are still problems in matching
the design assumptions of the ASP with the organizational realities of the ASP
client. As Tom Davenport opined, “I think it’s fair to say that few companies or
industries have solved [ASP integration] yet. What you’re getting into is inter-
organizational reengineering, and it’s very time-consuming and very expensive.”34
Virtual Network Organizations
One expected voice of optimism is John Chambers, CEO of Cisco Systems. He
was asked in an interview if the Internet had lived up to his expectations. His
response was interesting, especially in light of the tremendous slide his com-
pany had taken over the prior 18 months as demand fell for the boxes that his
company supplies for Internet expansion.
“The Internet has overachieved my expectations,” he said. There is too
much pessimism about the role of the Internet and its capability, he argued.
“We’ll see wave after wave of applications of the Internet. One will be a virtual
network organization,”35 which happened to be his company’s message at the
2002 Comdex. He’s probably right, though, in spite of his marketing spin, for
the model of the virtual organization is one in which the company uses a net-
work to tie together all of its functions—outsourcing to ASPs the functions that
other companies are better at, continuing to do the functions that the company
excels at, and creating what Chambers calls, “the ultimate killer application.”
But there still seems to be the hanging problem of Web services at the software
integration level.
The Collaborative Future
All organizations recognize the need to solve integration problems to move for-
ward with collaboration, both internally and with other companies. The current
challenges will eventually be solved, led by companies that are most willing to
change established practices and legacy systems. The efficiencies of collabora-
tion are too great to ignore or to delay, and as leading companies solve the tech-
nical and social puzzles that block their ability to exchange information and
share knowledge efficiently, the competitive map will be altered to their favor.
But this still seems all too mechanical as a description of the future of con-
versational knowledge sharing. Where are the people and the personal rela-
tionships, the trust and the familiarity, in all of this system integration? What if
organizations chose to concentrate on building environments where the
emphasis was on creative interaction in virtual meeting places rather than on
information and data exchange? 

We thought a good ending for this book would be to envision a future that went
beyond the limitations of text on a screen and relationships built entirely around
words. What if the future of online knowledge sharing looked more like a game? 
Collaborating in Simulated Communities
Some years ago, we had a computer game called SimCity, produced by Maxis
Software. Players could design and build a city from scratch, including facto-
ries, power stations, water systems, roads, businesses, and homes. The trick
was not to run out of money and not to allow the city to burn down or wash
away because there was insufficient investment made in public safety or envi-
ronmental safeguards. It was a fascinating game, and millions of people got
hooked on it. SimCity had hired some very good urban planners to advise them
on the structure and content of the game.
Now years later, the concept of the player building a virtual environment is
offered on the Web as The Sims.36 The scale has changed from SimCity’s god-
like (or at least, mogul-like) viewpoint—operating from an aerial view of the
town—to a more human viewpoint, from which the player lives on screen as a
character in a household. The Sims’ characters come with options for prede-
fined personality traits (neat, outgoing, active, playful, nice) and straightfor-
ward needs (hunger, comfort, hygiene, bladder, energy, fun, social, and room).
As described by J.C. Hertz, founder of Joystick Nation, “The Sims is a remark-
able example of how a company and its customers can help a product evolve to
the point where customers not only do a large portion of the innovation and mar-
keting but also produce as much intellectual capital as they consume.”37 Player/
participants in The Sims can build houses, rooms, and gardens. They can buy hot
tubs, swimming pools, and big-screen TVs. They can exchange houses, families,
and music albums using a teleportation device.
Sims’ players interact. They use the Sims’ home page as their portal and
home base where players can chat, converse in message boards, link to each
other’s sites, and teleport their families and albums for everyone to see. The
Sims’ site also is like the general store, where objects and other utilities can be
downloaded. It looks and acts so much like a portal, but includes so many ways
to exchange and collaborate, we wonder if the Sims, at least in function, might
be a hint at the next generation of collaborative software.
The Sims supports a huge virtual economy, with many fan sites, many artists
creating custom content, and tens of thousands of collectors of custom-created
objects. Players don’t need any programming skills to create and modify their
standard-issue Sims’ characters and to create custom objects of just about any
description in their Sims’ environment: chairs, automobiles, lamps, ladders, and
so forth. Hundreds of fan sites in over 14 languages furnish 90 percent of the
game’s content. 
320
Chapter 10

The Path Ahead
321
J.C. Hertz, an online gaming expert who has studied the Sims as both a gam-
ing and social phenomenon, believes it provides two lessons for the business
community:
■■“The first is that interactive design trumps graphics.” The experience of
the Sims derives its richness and complexity from the people who create
and manipulate the characters, and from their engagement with each
other and with the place. The knowledge-sharing conversation needs
richness and complexity. It needs to feel the humanity of its participants
to become an attraction rather than a duty. 
■■“The second lesson is that online businesses don’t just exist, like build-
ings, in space. They exist, like cities, in human context over time.” We
have always said the same thing about communities: A great part of their
value is in their learning and history. Yes, they are messy and never fin-
ished. They evolve and their members become more and more intercon-
nected, not just bigger. The collective experience is part of the ride. And
as J.C. Hertz says, “When you open your window, there’s a there there.”38
It very well could be that 10 years in the future, workers will log on to assume
graphic online personas in a virtual marketplace of things and ideas, meeting in
rooms of their own design with customers and coworkers to learn and share
not only what they know but also what they have created. The rich knowledge-
sharing environment of the ancient bazaars will be realized again as the virtual
conversational marketplace of ideas, opinions, and experience.
Summary
As always has been true, those who communicate more learn more and learn
faster. Groups who use the Net to collaborate and share knowledge will excel
over those who don’t. Such groups are not limited to who is local and can show
up at a meeting. They are not limited by widely separated time zones and con-
flicting schedules. They are not limited by the need to print and mail documents. 
There will always be groups within an organization who spontaneously orga-
nize and use the Net as a key meeting place. But there are still too many valuable
resources going wasted, not being tapped because they have not been invited to
sit at the table and share what they know. There are still too many organizations
that, wittingly or unwittingly, inhibit their workers from collaborating for the
common good. There are still too many people who, for many reasons, haven’t
learned to use the Net as a regular communications tool. And there are too many
people who don’t trust the Net because they haven’t learned how to use it.

The future of online knowledge sharing will feature many more conversations
as companies encourage and enable them. The study of social networks will
become more widespread as organizations look for better ways to analyze the
group power of their human resources. And as more people in and outside their
workplaces become more accustomed to using the Net as both a social channel
and a business environment, the potential for sharing knowledge and experi-
ences will open new and unanticipated doors. The organizations that make the
best use of that undeniable trend will best be able to deal with a future that is
sure to include instability, unpredictability, and a need for trusted conversation.
322
Chapter 10

323
Suggested Reading
1. Bloor, Robin. The Electronic B@zaar: From the Silk Road to the eRoad.
London: Nicholas Brealey Publishing, 2000.
Bloor describes the brave new world in which an economy based on
paper-based information is rapidly transforming into one in which the
market, money, and its supporting information are all electronic.
2. Boyett, Joseph H., and Boyett, Jimmie T. The Guru Guide to the Knowledge
Economy: The Best Ideas for Operating Profitably in a Hyper-Competitive
World. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 2001.
This is a valuable distillation of the wisdom of 115 successful business
titans who describe what it takes to survive and succeed in this new
global, knowledge-intensive, increasingly high-tech world. Peter Drucker,
Seth Godin, Bill Gates, Alan Greenspan are among those featured.
3. Bressler, Stacey E., and Grantham, Charles E., Sr. Communities of Com-
merce: Building Internet Business Communities to Accelerate Growth,
Minimize Risk, and Increase Customer Loyalty. New York: McGraw-
Hill, 2000.
Resources
AP P E N D I X
A

Bressler and Grantham provide a detailed look at e-commerce and
online communities such as Cisco, Yahoo!, Amazon, Lands End,
MarthaStewart.com, and others, describing how well-run communities
of commerce can help your company achieve record profits.
4. Davenport, Thomas H., and Prusak, Laurence. Working Knowledge: How
Organizations Manage What They Know. Boston: Harvard Business
School Press, 2000.
Two of the leading thinkers in the knowledge management field explain
the how-tos of how organizations can and do put knowledge to work as
a source of competitive advantage in today’s marketplace.
5. Denning, Stephen. The Springboard: How Story-Telling Ignites Action in
Knowledge-Era Organizations. Boston: Butterworth-Heinemann, 2001. 
Denning teaches the science and art of using storytelling as a powerful
tool for organizational change and knowledge management.
6. Levin, Rick, Locke, Christopher, Searles, Doc, and Weinberger, David. The
Cluetrain Manifesto: The End of Business as Usual. Cambridge: Perseus,
2000.
The book that reminded us that “markets are conversations.” Read this
book to shake up your perception of how businesses will communicate
internally and with customers in the networked future.
7. Pfeffer, Jeffrey, and Sutton, Robert I. The Knowing-Doing Gap: How
Smart Companies Turn Knowledge into Action. Boston: Harvard Busi-
ness School Press, 2000.
Businesses can waste millions of dollars by pouring it into fancy knowl-
edge management systems and what the authors call the “smart talk trap.”
Pfeffer and Sutton outline how to turn knowledge into action and use
examples that show how some companies overcome the knowing-doing
gap, why others try but fail, and how your company can avoid the gap.
8. Tiwana, Amrit. The Knowledge Management Toolkit: Practical Tech-
niques for Building a Knowledge Management System. Upper Saddle
River, N.J.: Prentice Hall PTR, 2000.
A nuts-and-bolts guide that includes sections on infrastructure, knowl-
edge audits and analyses, systems deployment, measuring ROI, the role
of the CKO, and reward structures. Includes a CD-ROM with tools for
mapping, data mining, modeling, and workflow.
9. Van Doren, Charles. A History of Knowledge Past, Present, and Future:
The Pivotal Events, People, and Achievements of World History. New
York: Ballantine Books, 1991.
324
Appendix A

Resources
325
An insightful historical perspective of human knowledge sharing and
the definition of knowledge. Good for reminding you that knowledge
networks are far from a new idea.
10. Von Krogh, Georg, Ichijo, Kazuo, and Nonaka, Ikujiro. Enabling Knowledge
Creation: How to Unlock the Mystery of Tacit Knowledge and Release the
Power of Innovation. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press, 2000.
The authors provide clear insights into building workplace cultures
that are conducive to knowledge creation and sharing. They also
describe practical instructions for how to instill a knowledge vision,
inspire knowledge activists, encourage and manage knowledge conver-
sations, and more.
Suggested Web Sites
Here is a useful selection of sites worth bookmarking for the latest writings
and articles on knowledge networking, social use of the Net, and related
online technologies.
1. Brint Institute’s Online Book on Knowledge Management: www
.kmbook.com.
2. Brint Institute’s WWW Virtual Library on Knowledge Management:
http://kmbrint.com.
3. CIO Magazine: www.cio.com.
4. Darwin: Business Evolving in the Information Age: www.darwinmag
.com.
5. Destination CRM’s knowledge management site: www.destinationcrm
.com/km.
6. Intelligent KM: www.intelligentkm.com. 
7. IT Toolbox for Knowledge Management: http://km.ittoolbox.com. 
8. IT-Director.com: www.it-director.com. 
9. KM World magazine’s site: www.kmworld.com. 
10. Knowledge at the Wharton School: http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu. 
11. The McKinsey Quarterly: www.mckinseyquarterly.com. 
12. New Architect: Internet Strategies for Technology Leaders: www
.newarchitectmag.com.

13. Open P2P.com by O’Reilly: http://openp2p.com. 
14. Pew Internet & American Life site: www.pewinternet.org. 
15. Technology Review by M.I.T.: www.techreview.com. 
326
Appendix A

327
1. John B. Horrigan, “Online Communities: Networks That Nurture Long-Dis-
tance Relationships and Local Ties,” Pew Internet & American Life Proj-
ect, at www.pewinternet.org/reports/pdfs/PIP_Communities_Report.pdf.
2. Steven Johnson, Emergence: The Connected Lives of Ants, Brains,
Cities, and Software, Scribner’s, New York, 2001.
3. David Sims and Rael Dornfest, “Steven Johnson ‘Emergence,’” O’Reilly
Network at www.oreillynet.com/pub/a/network/2002/02/22/johnson.html.
Chapter 1
1. Time, February 13, 1995, vol. 145, no. 7.
2. Christopher Locke, Rick Levine, Doc Searls, and David Weinberger, The
Cluetrain Manifesto: The End of Business as Usual, Perseus Press,
Boston, 2000.
3. Charles Van Doren, A History of Knowledge, Ballantine Books, New York,
1991, p. 151.
4. F. W. Taylor, The Principles of Scientific Management, Harper, New York,
1911.
Notes

5. Stephen B. Adam and Orville R. Butler, Manufacturing the Future: A
History of Western Electric, Cambridge University Press, New York, 1999.
6. Edgar Schein Web site at http://web.mit.edu/scheine/www/home.htm.
Chapter 2
1. “Knowledge Management: Making Sense of an Oxymoron,” David Skyrme
Associates Web site, www.skyrme.com/insights/22km.htm.
2. “As We May Think,” Atlantic Monthly, July 1945, at www.theatlantic.com
/unbound/flashbks/computer/bushf.htm.
3. “The History of Notes and Domino,” from the Notes site at www.notes.net
/whatisnotes.
4. “Groupware: Introduction,” Usability First, from www.usabilityfirst.com
/groupware/intro.txl.
5. Marketing Terms.com, dictionary at www.marketingterms.com/dictionary
/network_effect/.
6. Howard Rheingold, The Virtual Community: Homesteading on the Elec-
tronic Frontier, Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass., 1993. Full text available
online at www.rheingold.com/vc/book/.
7. Michael Hauben, “The Social Forces Behind the Development of Usenet,”
in Netizens: An Anthology at www.columbia.edu/~hauben/netbook/.
8. Arie de Geus, “Planning as Learning” Harvard Business Review (1988).
http://www.hbsp.harvard.edu/hbsp/prod_detail.asp
9. Etienne Wenger, “Themes and Ideas: Communities of Practice,” from his
Web site at www.ewenger.com/ewthemes.html.
10. Applefritter: the Apple I Owners’ Club at http://applefritter.com/apple1/.
11. The Stanford University Library Macintosh history site at http://library
.stanford.edu/mac/userg.html.
12. Chris Woodyard, “Firms Use Web Lurkers for Customer Service,” by USA
Today, June 21, 2001, at www.usatoday.com/life/cyber/tech/2001-02-06-
lurker.htm.
13. “Online Extra: Q&A with Hallmark’s Tom Brailsford,” Business Week, July 9,
2001, at www.businessweek.com/magazine/content/01_28/b3740626.htm.
328
Notes
TEAMFLY

Notes
329
Chapter 3
1. Steven Johnson, Emergence: The Connected Lives of Ants, Brains,
Cities, and Software, Scribner’s, New York, 2001.
2. Andrew Leonard, “The Emergent New Order,” Salon.com, at  www.salon
.com/tech/feature/2001/11/28/emergence/index.html.
3. Yogesh Malhotra, “Knowledge Management for E-Business Performance:
Advancing Information Strategy to ‘Internet Time,’” Brint Institute’s Online
Book on Knowledge Management at www.kmbook.com/.
4. “Crawling from the Dot-Com Wreckage,” Business Week Online, December
19, 2000, at www.businessweek.com/bwdaily/dnflash/dec2000/nf20001219
_800,htm.
5. “A Nation Online: How Americans Are Expanding Their Use of the Inter-
net,” report published by the National Telecommunications and Informa-
tion Administration and the Economics and Statistics Administration at
www.ntia.doc.gov/ntiahome/dn/index.html. 
6. “Essential E-Business Numbers for Marketers,” eMarketer at  www.emar-
keter.com/statistics/essential_numbers. 
7. “Hot Off the Net,” Nielsen/NetRatings at www.nielsen-netratings.com/hot
_off_the_net.jsp.
8. “Internet Demographics and eCommerce Statistics,” Commerce Net at
www.commerce.net/research/stats/stats.html.
9. “Online Communities: Networks That Nurture Long-Distance Relation-
ships and Local Ties,” The Pew Internet & American Life Project at
www.pewinternet.org/reports/toc.asp?Report=47.>.
10. Press release: “Total Time Spent Using Instant Messaging Jumps 110 Per-
cent at Work and 48 Percent at Home versus Last Year, Reports Jupiter
Media Metrix,” www.jmm.com/xp/jmm/press/2001/pr_111401.xml.
11. Stephen Denning, The Springboard: How Storytelling Ignites Action in
Knowledge-Era Organizations, Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston, 2000,
p. 27.
12. Thomas H. Davenport and Laurence Prusak, Working Knowledge: How
Organizations Manage What They Know, Harvard Business School
Press, Boston, 1997, p. 58.
13. Mark Monmonier, How to Lie with Maps, 2d ed., University of Chicago
Press, 1996.

14. “Empowering Social Change at the World Bank Institute” found on
Tomoye Web site at www.tomoye.com.
15. Davenport and Prusak, Working Knowledge, p. 36. 
16. Jakob Nielsen, “The 10 Best Intranet Designs of 2001,” Use It.com Alert-
box, November 2001, at www.useit.com/alertbox/20011125.html.
17. “Interview: Jakob Nielsen on Usability and Intranets,” IT-Director.com,
December 3, 2001, at www.it-director.com/article.php?id=2383.
18. Chuleenan Svetvilas, “The Human Factor: Intellectual Capital Guru Nick
Bontis Discusses KM’s Missing Link,” Intelligent KM at www.intelligentkm
.com/feature/010723/feat1.shtml.
19. “Solutions That Drive Bottom-Line Business Benefits,” AskMe.com at
www.askmecorp.com/solutions/default.asp.
20. Nielsen, “The 10 Best Intranet Designs.”
Chapter 4
1. “Executives Unaware of Internal Security Risks,” KMPG survey report at
Nua.com, November 20, 2001, at www.nua.ie/surveys/index/cgi?f=VS&art
_id=905357423&rel=true.
2. Michael Vizard, “CommerceFlow CTO Explains Why Application Integra-
tion Remains Overly Complicated,” interview with Erik Swan in
InfoWorld, October 24, 2001, at www.infoworld.com/articles/hn/xml/01
/10/26/01 1026hnswan.xml.
3. “Interview: Jakob Nielsen on Usability and Intranets,” IT-Director.com,
December 3, 2001, at www.it-director.com/article.php?id=2383.
4. “Measuring Returns on IT Investments: Some Tools and Techniques,”
Managing Technology, on the Wharton School site at http://knowledge
.wharton.upenn.edu/articles.cfm?catid=14&articleid=396.
5. Ibid.
6. Thomas H. Davenport and Laurence Prusak, Working Knowledge: How
Organizations Manage What They Know, Harvard Business School Press,
Boston, 2000, p. 26.
7. Michael Koenig, “User Education for KM: The Problem We Won’t Recog-
nize,” KMWorld, November–December 2001.
8. Ibid.
330
Notes

Notes
331
9. WhatIs.com at http://whatis.techtarget.com. 
10. Katherine C. Adams, “Mapping the Enterprise Software Market,”
KMWorld, September 2001.
11. Robin Hourican, “Tools to Maximize Performance,” Knowledge Manage-
ment, September 2001.
12. David Smith, “Tackle Instant Messaging’s Security Risks—Now,” report
by the Gartner Group, October 12, 2001.
13. Eric Woods, “P2P,” KMWorld, October 2001.
14. Koenig, “User Education for KM.”
15. “Intranet Design Annual: 10 Best Intranets of 2001,” by the Nielsen Nor-
man Group, available for downloading at www.nngroup.com/reports
/intranet/2001/.
16. Woods, “P2P.”
17. Fara Warner, “He Drills for Knowledge,” Fast Company, September 2001.
Chapter 5
1. James C. Collins and Jerry I. Porras, Built to Last, Harperbusiness, New
York, 1997.
2. Brad Bollinger, “Civility and Grace Not Just the H-P Way,” Santa Rosa
Press Democrat, May 6, 2001.
3. Carl Frappaolo, “Ushering in the Knowledge-Based Economy,” by The
Delphi Group Symposium, available at www.delphigroup.com/research.
4. Rebecca O. Barclay, “Leading the Knowledge Enterprise: CIOs, CLOs,
CKOs, and Beyond,” KM Briefs and KM Metazine at  www.lamarheller.pair
.com/technology/knowledgemgmt/leadingtheknowledgeenterprise.htm.
5. Emelie Rutherford, “End Game: A Conversation with David Weinberger,”
CIO, April 2000.
6. Barclay, “Knowledge Enterprise.”
7. Rutherford, “End Game.”
8. Barclay, “Knowledge Enterprise.”
9. Nathaniel W. Foote, Eric Matson, and Nicholas Rudd, “Managing the
Knowledge Manager,” The McKinsey Quarterly, 2001, no. 3.

10. Andrew S. Grove, Only the Paranoid Survive: How to Exploit the Crisis
Points That Challenge Every Company and Career, Currency/Doubleday,
New York, 1996.
11. Etienne Wenger, “Themes and Ideas: Communities of Practice” at  www
.ewenger.com/ewthemes.html. 
12. John Harney, “Intellectual Stimulation,” Intelligent KM, January 1, 2002,
at www.intelligentkm.com/020101/501feat1_1.
13. Rutherford, “End Game.”
14. Barclay, “Knowledge Enterprise.”
15. Rutherford, “End Game.”
16. Barclay, “Knowledge Enterprise.”
Chapter 6
1. John Suler, Ph.D., “The Geezer Brigade: Steps in Studying an Online
Group” at www.rider.edu/uses/suler/psycyber/geezerb.html.
2. Michael Schrage, “Don’t Go There,” Fortune, October 29, 2001.
3. Thomas A. Stewart, “The Case Against Knowledge Management,” Busi-
ness 2.0, February 2002.
Chapter 7
1. Fara Warner, “He Drills for Knowledge,” Fast Company, September 2001,
p. 189.
2. Etienne Wenger, “Supporting Communities of Practice: A Survey of Com-
munity-Oriented Technologies,” a “shareware” report available at www
.ewenger.com/tech/.
3. Shar VanBoskirk with Charlene Li and Jennifer Parr, “Effective Email
Marketing,” Forrester Research, August 2001.
4. Home page of the Learning.org mail list at www.learning-org.com
/LOinfo.html.
5. Chris Lindquist, “Zap to It: Zaplet Suite Makes E-mail Work,” CIO.com,
January 7, 2002, at www.cio.com/online/techtact_010702.html. 
332
Notes

Notes
333
6. Overview page at Jabber.com Web site at www.jabber.com/about
/index.shtml.
7. John Udell, “Can IM Graduate to Business?” OpenP2P.com at www
.openp2p.com/pub/a/p2p/2001/12/20/udell.html.
Chapter 8
1. Stephen Denning, The Springboard, Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston,
2001. p. 82.
2. Thomas H. Davenport and Laurence Prusak, Working Knowledge, Harvard
Business School Press, Boston, 2000. p. x.
3. Clerity, Inc. Web site at www.knowtoday.com/solutions/eks.asp.
Chapter 9
1. Seth Grodin, “Change Agent,” Fast Company, May 2001.
2. Mary Tumolo, “Business-to-Business Exchanges,” Information Systems
Management, Spring 2001.
3. “The 3 Faces of CRM: Analysis of the Worldwide Customer Relationship
Management Market, Part 1: Operational CRM,” Cahners-Interstat, July
2001.
4. John Ellis, “In My Humble Opinion,” Fast Company, September 2001.
5. Interview with Tom Brailsford of Hallmark, provided by Communispace.
Available through Fishman, “But Wait, You Promised … ,” Fast Company,
July 2001.
6. Don Peppers and Martha Rogers, The One to One Future: Building Rela-
tionships One Customer at a Time, Currency/Doubleday, New York, 1997.
7. Ian Zack, “The Question Is the Answer,” Forbes, August 6, 2001.
8. Michael C. Ruettgers, “I Pledge Allegiance to This Company: From Cus-
tomer Satisfaction to Allegiance,” Chief Executive at www.chiefexecutive
.net/mag/.
9. Jack Neff, “PlanetFeedback Happy to Hear Consumer Gripes,” AdAge.com,
October 2, 2000.

10. “How Companies Sponsor, Listen in and Learn from Chat Rooms,” Wharton
School, at http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu.
11. Stephanie Overby, “Healing Channels,” CIO, December 1, 2001.
Chapter 10
1. Thomas H. Davenport and John C. Beck, The Attention Economy: Under-
standing the New Currency of Business, Harvard Business School,
Boston, 2001.
2. Christian Sarkar, “Attention, Management! An Interview with Thomas
Davenport,” Agilebrain.com, at www.agilebrain.com/davenport.html. 
3. Malcolm Gladwell, The Tipping Point: How Little Things Can Make a
Big Difference, Little Brown & Company, Boston, 2000.
4. Michael Zack, “Researching Organizational Systems Using Social Network
Analysis,” paper on the Northeastern University College of Business
Administration Web site at http://web.cba.neu.edu/~mzack/articles/socnet
/socnet.htm.
5. Valdis Krebs, “An Introduction to Social Network Analysis,” paper at
www.orgnet.com/sna.html. 
6. Emelie Rutherford, “End Game: David Weinberger Talks about the
Impending Death of Corporate Life as We Know It,” CIO, April 1, 2000, at
www.cio.com/archive/040100/end.html 
7. Sarkar, “Attention, Management!” 
8. Deloitte Research, “Collaborative Knowledge Networks” at www.dc.com. 
9. Ibid.
10. Navi Radjou, with Ted Schadler, Amanda J. Ciardelli, and Stephanie
Smith, “Collaboration beyond Email,” Forrester Research 1999.
11. Deloitte Research, “Collaborative Knowledge Networks.”
12. Sarkar, “Attention, Management!”
13. Kathy Harris and Waldir Arevolo De Azevedo Filho, “Communities: Soci-
ology Meets Technology,” Gartner, Inc. Web site, July 9, 2001, at
www.gartner.com. 
14. Stephanie Sanborn and Cathleen Moore, “Collaboration Comes Together,”
Infoworld, December 7, 2001, at www.infoworld.com/articles/fe/xml/01/12
/10/011210fecollab.xml.
334
Notes

Notes
335
15. Rutherford, “End Game.”
16. Jean Graef, “Measuring Intellectual Assets,” Montague Institute Review,
1997, at www.montague.com/le/le1096.html.
17. Tom Peters, ‘Tom Peters’s True Confessions,” Fast Company, December
2001, pp. 78–92.
18. Sarkar, “Attention, Management!”
19. Eric Chabrow, “Survey: Internet Key to Collaboration,” Information-
Week.com, February 6, 2002, at www.informationweek.com/story
/IWK2002020206S0007.
20. Radjou et al., “Collaboration beyond E-mail.”
21. Ibid.
22. Sarkar, “Attention, Management!”
23. Frances Hesselbein, Marshall Goldsmith, and Iain Somerville, eds., Lead-
ing for Innovation and Organizing for Results, Jossey-Bass, San Fran-
cisco, 2001.
24. Daniel H. Pink, “Who Has the Next Big Idea? An Interview with Michael
Hammer,” Fast Company, September 2001, pp. 108–116.
25. David Dorsey, “Positive Deviant,” Fast Company, issue 41, December
2000, p. 284.
26. Dorsey, “Positive Deviant.”
27. Pink, “Who Has the Next Big Idea?”
28. Sarkar, “Attention, Management!”
29. Rutherford, “End Game.”
30. Pink, “Who Has the Next Big Idea?”
31. Rutherford, “End Game.”
32. Sanborn and Moore, “Collaboration Comes Together.”
33. Dirk Spiers, “Waiting for the Web Services Wave,” Business 2.0, January 24,
2002, at www.business2.com/articles/web/0,1653,37356,FF.html.
34. Sarkar, “Attention, Management!”
35. “Cisco Chief: Future May Lie in Virtual Networks, Interview with Matt
Krantz,” USA Today online, November 12, 2001, at www.usatoday.com
/life/cyber/tech/2001/11/12/comdex-cisco.htm.
36. The Sims’ home page at http://thesims.ea.com/us/.

37. J.C. Hertz, “Learning from The Sims: A Sleeper Software Hit Shows How
Customers Help Build Better Businesses,” Industry Standard, March 26,
2001, pp. 90–91.
30. Ibid.
336
Notes

337
Index
C HAPTE R
!Kung tribe of the Kalahari,
9–10
A
About.com, 271–72
Accenture, 304
adaptable platforms, 113–15,
149, 174–176, 202, 237–38
Adobe, 50
Advanced Research Project
Agency, 32–33
A History of Knowledge (Van
Doren), 13, 16–18, 19
Amazon.com, 251, 260
American Cancer Society,
280–281, 282
Anadarko Petroleum, 110
AOL, 53–54, 192, 201
Apple computer users’ group,
48–49
application integration
enterprise application
integration (EAI),
89–90, 317–19
Extensible Markup Language
(XML), 52, 89, 317–18
personalization capabilities,
292
platform independent
applications, 317
problems with, 88–89,
99–100
Web services, 51, 88,
100–101, 298, 317–318
Application Service Providers
(ASPs), 101, 174–175, 317,
318–319
Appmail, 181, 300
archivists, 102–3
Ariba, 252
ARPANet, 32–33, 38–39
Ask Jeeves, 261
AskMe, 79–80
ASPs (Application Service
Providers), 101, 174–175,
317, 318–19
assembly lines, 20–21
assessments
cultural, 120–121, 141–142,
209–210
ROI, 81, 300–301, 312
assets, organizational, 30–32
associates. See stakeholders
“As We May Think” (Bush), 32,
33
asynchronous
events on the Web, 242. See
also email; message
boards
asynchronous interfaces. See
discussions
AT&T Bell Labs, 38
The Attention Economy
(Davenport & Beck), 289
auctions, 263–267
audio/video conferencing,
142–143, 148, 172, 241
auditoriums. See forums
B
B2C (business-to-customer),
274–76. See also
stakeholders
Baillargeon, Victor, 128, 129,
134–35
bandwidth
for audio/video conferencing,
142–43, 148, 172, 241
as depth of social contact,
40–41, 67
banner ads, 36–37
B2B (business-to-business). See
stakeholders
BBSs (bulletin board systems).
See message boards
B2E (business-to-employee),
317
Beck, John C., 289
The Berkana Institute, 307
best-of-breed integration
solutions, 99–100
BITNET, 33
Blackshaw, Pete, 273
Boccaccio, Giovanni, 16
Bontis, Nick, 79
bozo filter, 45, 145–146

Buckman Labs, 80, 128–29, 132,
134–35, 213
Buddhism, gradual vs. sudden
school, 7
Built to Last (Collins & 
Porras), 116
bulletin board systems (BBSs).
See message boards
bureaucracy, 22–23
Bush, Vannevar, 32, 33
business exchanges, 251–254
Business Process 
Reengineering, 24
business-to-business (B2B). See
stakeholders
business-to-customer (B2C),
274–276. See also
stakeholders
Business Week, 65
C
Cahners-Interstat, 253–254, 259
Caucus, 242
CBOs (Community Business
Organizations), 77
Centra Software, 199, 317
CERL (Computer-based
Education Research
Laboratory), 34
Chambers, John, 319
change
accelerated pace of, 6–7, 
290, 298
acceptance of, 130–131,
134–135, 292–293, 310
to collaborative
management style, 67
focused, 119–20
inter-organizational, 62,
67–68, 134–135
post September 11, 287,
288–289
proactive, 295
storytelling promotes,
221–223
chat rooms, 53–56, 124, 147,
181–184, 276–277. See also
virtual meeting interfaces
Chauvet Cave, 4–5, 8–9
chief technology officer 
(CTO), 86
chronological discussions, 105,
149–150, 151, 153. See also
discussions
Cisco Systems
adaptable platforms, 149
CBOs (Community Business
Organizations), 77
conflicts within, 118
engaging stakeholders, 215
LOBs (lines of business), 77
NetPro community, 49–50,
68–69, 267–269
terminology for KM, 128
Clerity for Enterprise
Knowledge Sharing,
218–219
The Cluetrain Manifesto
(Locke & Weinberger), 
10, 127
CMC (Computer-Mediated
Communications), 38–39
cohesive groups, 153, 
156–159, 172. See also
groups
collaborative product
development, 49–50
Collins, James, 116
CommerceNet, 66
Commerce One, 252
communication
among ants, 63, 64
human perception factor,
98, 139–140
infoglut, 288–93
self-organizing, 62–63,
131–133, 135
storytelling, 9–10, 14,
220–223, 308–309,
320–21
teams, 91–95, 123. See also
discussions; history of
communication;
synchronous
conversations
Communispace, 195–199
communities
Computer-Supported
Cooperative Work
(CSCW), 35
cross-pollinated, 10–11, 46,
48, 67, 171, 307–308, 318
defined, 37–38
Electronic Information
Exchange System
(EIES), 38
health of, 228–29
homogenous, 48
knowledge sharing, 40–45,
114–115, 161–162
KN technology
development, 91–95
life spans, 234–235, 244
marketing KN to, 211–214,
214–215
product-specific, 249, 260,
262–263
scaled knowledge, 7–8, 171
self-governing, 228, 263–267,
277–278
transitory, 173, 239, 241–243,
244–245
virtual, 33, 38
word-of-mouth marketing,
263, 264. See also
groups; spontaneous
communities
communities of practice (CoPs)
about, 47–48, 131–133
cohesion within, 172
corporate acceptance of,
316
leaders’ responsibilities in 
forming, 297
matching software with
groups, 168–169
Social Networking 
Analysis, 294
Community Business
Organizations (CBOs), 77
community-oriented software
applications. See
groupware
CompuServe, 39
Computer-based Education
Research Laboratory
(CERL), 34
Computer-Mediated
Communications (CMC),
38–39
Computer-Supported
Cooperative Work
(CSCW), 35
computer systems. See IT
(information technology)
conferencing systems, 44–45,
55–56, 172, 184–185. See
also discussions
Connectors, 293
consultant services
bridge between IT and 
users, 90
develop ideas from within
organization, 309
evaluation of success, 78
event production team, 242
facilitators, online, 73,
200–201, 315
338
Index
TEAMFLY

Index
339
organizational change, 121
overview during
implementation
phase, 130
value of, 72–73, 209–211
consumer business 
exchange, 254
Consumer Corner, 256
consumer input, 57–58, 134
content management, 106–7
CoPs. See communities of
practice
corporate culture. See
organizational culture
costs
Business Process
Reengineering, 24
cost or cost-cutting, 279
discussions, 148, 241, 242
implementing pilot stage,
24, 78–80
technical, of KN, 81. See
also financial
investment; return on
investment (ROI)
CRM. See Customer
Relationship Management
cross-pollinated communities,
10–11, 46, 48, 67, 171,
307–308, 318
CSCW (Computer-Supported
Cooperative Work), 35
CTO (chief technology officer),
86. See IT (information
technology)
cultural assessment, 120–121,
141–142, 209–210
culture, organizational. See
organizational culture
cultures within organizations.
See organizational culture
Customer Relationship
Management (CRM)
Amazon.com, 260
customer relationship
development vs. CRM,
261
customers as a self-
organizing subculture,
133–134, 257–259,
271–274, 283–286
customer service
challenges,
250, 283, 311
customer-to-customer
relationships, 249, 260,
262–63, 270–271,
272–273, 279
Hallmark Cards Idea
Exchange, 58–59,
195–99, 256–59,
301–303
learning from customers,
270–271, 276–277,
281–282, 298, 301–303,
320–321
markets as conversations,
254–255
as part of e-learning, 317
Procter & Gamble
Consumer Corner, 256
“The Starwood Lurker,”
USA Today, 58
technology in customer
service, 259–260
Web-based opportunities,
251. See also
stakeholders
customers. See stakeholders
cybercities, 281
D
Daimler-Chrysler, 262, 283–286
Dark Ages, 16, 19
Datek Online, 262
Davenport, Thomas
about, 288
competition for attention,
289
effective knowledge 
markets, 72
email, executive medium of 
choice, 313
enterprise resource
planning (ERP),
298–299
forward looking 
companies, 304
importance of intentions, 68
incentives for knowledge
contributions, 218
leveraging knowledge, 234
managing people’s spirits,
306
online communities,
306–307
optimum use of Internet,
290
team debriefings, Q&A
sessions, 233
Deep Blue vs. Kasparov,
200–201
Deloitte Research, 297, 303
Denison Consulting, 122
Denison Organizational Culture
Survey, 122
Denning, Stephen, 67, 221–223
design, interactive, 320–321
design, interface. See interface
design
deskilling labor force, 20–21
destination cultures, 125
deviance, positive, 310
deviants as innovators, 308, 310
Digital Equipment Corp., 38–39
discussions
audio/video conferencing,
142–143, 148, 172, 241
conferencing systems, 55–56
defined, 41, 147
Experts on The Well, 42–43
formats for, 149–153,
167–168, 170–172
guidelines, 39, 43–44, 78,
160–161, 178–180,
224–229
linear (chronological), 105,
149–150, 151, 153,
186–189
multithreaded, 185
multiuser conferencing, 38–39
multiuser online
conferencing, 33
organizing, 186–189
pay for access, 39–40
planning, 55–56, 199–202, 242
postocracy, 139–140,
144–145, 225
Salon.com’s TableTalk, 57
threaded, 105, 150–153,
186–189
transitory networks, 239,
241–242
Dot-Com Builder Discussion
Forums, 277
dot-coms
collapse of, 287
facts and figures, 65
lessons from, 250–51
dynamic group workspace, 181
E
EAI (enterprise application
integration), 89–90,
317–219
eBay, 251, 254, 263–67
Economics and Statistics 
Administration, 65

EDUNET, 33
EIES (Electronic Information
Exchange System), 38
EIPs (enterprise information
portals), 110–111. See also
portals
e-learning, 317
Electronic Information Exchange
System (EIES), 38
Ellis, John, 255
email
Appmail, 181, 300
benefits, 53, 139
collaborative product
development with, 298
etiquette, 178–180, 237
executive medium of 
choice, 313
listservs, 178, 237
Price Waterhouse list,
144–145, 236
purpose/problems, 104,
146–147, 154, 167,
177–178
Zaplet, email-on-steroids,
181, 300
eMarketer, 66
EMC Corporation, 270–271
Emergence (Johnson), 63
Enlightenment, Age of, 19–20
Enron, 287
enterprise application
integration (EAI), 89–90,
317–19
enterprise information portals
(EIPs), 110–111. See also
portals
enterprise resource planning
(ERP), 317
Epinions, 272–73
ERP (enterprise resource
planning), 317
events on the Web
about, 52–53
celebrity events, 53–54
Cisco initiates NetPro, 268
cost effectiveness, 
148, 241, 242
live interaction, 182, 201–202
Online Social Networking
2001, 55–56
planning, 55–56, 199–202, 242
time-bound, 171–172, 239
Webcasts, 240–241
WorldJam, 56–58, 239–240
exchanges, business, 251–54
Excite, 50–51
Experts on The WELL, 42–43
Exploration, Age of, 19
Extensible Markup Language
(XML), 52, 89, 317–18
extranets, 50
F
face-to-face (F2F), 40–41,
52–53, 140
facilitators, online
About.com guides, 271
business-to-customer (B2C),
274–275
community managers, 111,
184, 185, 228, 257–258,
264–265
consultants as, 73, 200–201
guidelines, 225–26
HP’s ITRC Royalty, 279
Jini community, 277–78
knowledge coordinator, 232
portal maintenance by, 106
SIGs (special interest
groups), 43–44
skills, 315
training of, 209–210
using experts, 306–307
The WELL, 43–44, 133, 
144, 145. See also
discussions
fast-learning lane, 304
F2F (face-to-face), 40–41, 
52–53, 140
financial investment in KM,
79–80, 80–81, 259–260, 300.
See also costs; return on
investment (ROI)
firewalls, 88
Fishman, Charles, 259–60
focus, maintaining, 69–71,
119–20
focus groups, 46, 122–25, 153,
155–156, 157–159. See also
groups
Ford Motor Co., 79
Forrester Research, 177, 298
forums
AOL’s use as a marketing 
tool, 201
commercial chat rooms,
54–56
Cruiser Club Engine
Performance, 285
Dot-Com Builder Discussion 
Forums, 277
HP’s IT Resource Center, 279
spontaneous, 230
Sun Microsystems forums,
277–278. See also
discussions; groups
Frappaolo, Carl
knowledge harvesting, 121
fraud on eBay, 266–267
funding proposals, 78–79, 209,
214–215
G
gap analysis, 120, 141–42
Gartner, 299, 304
GKP (Global Knowledge 
Portal), 70
global interdependence, 
288–93
Global Knowledge Portal 
(GKP), 70
The Globe.com, 36–37
grass roots learning, 213,
231–32
The Great Good Place
(Oldenburg), 115
Greek philosophers, 14–15
Groove Networks, 176, 192–94,
306
Group Jazz, 55–56, 241
groups
Apple computer user, 48–49
cancer patients and
survivors, 280–281
CBOs (Community Business
Organizations), 77
cohesive, 153, 156–59, 172
collaborative, 36–37, 40
focus, 46, 122–225, 153,
155–256, 157–259
interactivity level, 122–125,
143–144, 148–149,
153–155, 157–159
IT support, 91–95
Jini community, 277–278
origin of, 173
Pew report on, 66
relationship profile, 157–159
scaled knowledge
communities, 7–8, 171
utilizing technical
capabilities, 127, 181
Web developer, 277. See also
communities
groupware, 34–36, 38–39, 44–45,
174–176
Grove, Andy, 130–131
340
Index

Index
341
guidelines for discussions, 39,
43–44, 78, 160–161,
178–180, 224–229
Guttenberg, 16–18
H
Hagberg Consulting Group, 122
Hallmark Cards, 58–59,
195–199, 256–259, 301–303
Hammer, Michael, 308, 311, 315
Hards, Eric, 110
Harker, Pat, 96
harvesting knowledge, 121,
126–127, 233–234, 294
Hauben, Michael, 39
Hawthorne Studies, 23
health and medical information,
280–281
health checkups for the 
network, 78
Hertz, J.C., 320–321
Hewlett-Packard, 50, 118–119,
279
hierarchical management
Catholic church, 19
collaborative management 
style vs., 67
command-and-control, 3–4, 7
Internet challenge to,
117–118, 294, 303
monarchies, 19–20
self-organizing
communication vs., 
62, 131–133, 135
top-down, 64
history, pre-Net
ARPANet, 32–33
BBSs (bulletin board
systems), 33
Computer-Supported
Cooperative Work, 35
groupware, 34–36
network development, 25–26
networking software, 32–33
UNIX, 33
virtual communities, 33. See
also history of the Net
history of communication
cave paintings, 4–5, 8–9
censorship by Catholic
Church, 19
community, defined, 37–38
Enlightenment, Age of,
19–20
Exploration, Age of, 19
Greek philosophers, 14–15
Industrial Age, 3, 20–21
Information Age, 21–27
knowledge pool, 41–42
Library of Alexandria, 14
media development, 11–13,
16–18
oral tradition and rituals,
9–10, 18
printing press, benefits of,
17–18
relevant lessons, 8
Renaissance, 16. See also
history, pre-Net;
history of the Net
history of the Net
Apple computer users’
groups, 48–49
ARPANet, 38–39
CMC (Computer-Mediated
Communications),
38–39
Electronic Information
Exchange System
(EIES), 38
external knowledge
network solutions
(extranets), 50
focus groups, 46
intranet interfaces with Net,
51–52
local area networks 
(LANs), 35
pay-for-access discussions,
39–40
portals, 50–51
UNIX, 38–39, 101
World Wide Web interface,
35–36. See also history,
pre-Net; history of
communication; The
WELL
Hoffman-LaRoche, Ltd., 80
Honeywell International Inc., 80
hosts, discussion. See
facilitators, online
Hughes, Robert, 8
I
IBM
Deep Blue vs. Kasparov,
200–201
Lotus Notes, 34, 35, 144–145,
236
time spent information
seeking, 107
WorldJam, 56–58, 239–240
IC (intellectual capital), 292
IDC, 253–54
Idea Exchange, 58–59, 195–199,
256–259, 301–303
ideas, utilizing, 304
ignore feature, 45, 145–46
IM. See instant messaging
incentives for participation,
216–20, 268, 275–76, 
290, 291
income generation, 273
individual-organization fit, 121
Industrial Age, 3, 20–21
infoglut, 288–93
information
filtering, 69–71, 72–73, 
189–190, 290
human approach to, 296
infoglut, 288–93
organizing, 102–103
security of, 88
Information Age, 21–27
information interface. See
interface design; virtual
meeting interfaces
information technology. See IT
(information technology)
Infoworld’s Next-General Web
Services Conference 2002,
318
In Search of Excellence
(Peters), 304
instant messaging (IM)
business-ready IM, 192
maintaining social ties, 181,
182–183
presence management
systems, 192
software availability,
104–105
spontaneous leadership, 139
usage of, 66
The WELL, 45
integration, discussion and
content resources, 102
integration, software
all-in-one vs. best-of-breed,
99–100
application integration
meets personalization,
292
design considerations, 209,
210–211
enterprise application
integration (EAI),
88–90, 317–319

integration solutions, 99–100
Intel, 96
intellectual capital (IC), 292
IntelligentKM, 132
Intelliseek, 273
interactive broadcasts, 242
interactive companies, 250, 305
interactive design, 320–321
interactive games, 320–321
interactive groups, 122–125,
143–144, 148–149, 153–155,
157–159, 165–166. See also
groups
interdependence, global,
288–89
interface, World Wide Web,
35–36
interface control, local, 174
interface design
adaptability of, 174–176,
237–238
American Cancer Society,
280–281, 282
auditorium, 201
Cisco, NetPro community,
268–69
considerations, 138–39
consultants’ role, 209,
210–211
eBay, 263–67
for external relationships,
275
group activity, 122–125,
143–144, 148–149,
153–159, 165–166
Idea Exchange, 195–99
iterative, 81
knowledge sharing,
143–144, 146–149
Nielsen, Jacob, on, 81
as part of funding proposal,
215
planning, 125–128, 141–143,
148–149, 209, 210–211
PT Cruiser Club, 285
relationship profile, 157–159
WebEx, 202
interface design examples
American Cancer Society, 
281, 282
Cisco, NetPro home 
page, 269
Communispace, Idea
Exchange, 196, 197, 
198, 199
eBay, customer page, 264
eBay, fraud protection
program, 267
eBay, members discussion
page, 265
Epinions, comparison
shopping, 272
Groove, chat window, 194
Groove, shared workspace,
193
Group Jazz, IBM’s 
WorldJam, 56
PlanetFeedback, 274
Procter & Gamble, customer
feedback window, 257
PTCruiserClub, message
board, 285
REI, Learn & Share, 302
Salon.com, The Well, 42
silverorange, demo page,
109
Sun Microsystems, Java
Developer Connection,
278
Untied.com, complaint 
form, 284
Verticalnet, exchange 
portal, 253
Web Crossing, message
board, 187, 188, 189,
191
WebEx, case study, 54
WebEx, collaborative
meeting, 202
Internet. See history of the Net
intranet
combining with Net, 101
designing, 81
informational vs.
participatory, 122–125
interfaces with Net, 51–52
ROI assessments, 81
usability, 107–110, 148. See
also portals
intranets
underlying structure 
for KN, 165
investment, financial. See
financial investment
iterative interface designs, 81
IT (information technology)
application integration
solutions, 99–101
chat tools, 183
chief technology officer, 86
interface design, 143
kludges, 99
KN users, working with, 74,
86–87, 91–95, 97–98,
172
mindset within, 90–91
purpose, 85–87, 208
requirements for developing
KN, 92
responsibilities, 87–90
security threats, 88
simplicity, value of, 166–167,
203, 213
technosocial relationships,
91–95
tools for discussions,
103–107, 146–148
IT Resource Center (ITRC), 279
J
Jabber, 192
Java Developer Connection,
277–278
Jini community, 277–278
Johnson, Steven, 63
Johnson-Lenz, Peter & Trudy, 34
Junnarkar, Bipin, 126, 131, 133
Jupiter Media Matrix, 66
K
Kallimachos of Kyrene, 14
Karsh, Richard, 178
Kasparov vs. Deep Blue, 200–201
Kimball, Lisa, 55
kludge, defined, 99
KMA (Knowledge Management
Architecture), 126
KM (knowledge management)
application integration,
88–90, 99–100
compared to KN, 90, 98
improving techniques, 296
KnowledgeCurve, 236
origin, 26, 29–30
transitory networks,
241–243
KN (knowledge network)
compared to KM, 90, 98
conversational
technologies, 170–172,
176–177
cross-organizational
communities, 171, 318
defined, 30
incentives for participation,
216–220
intranets, 108–110
IT role, 111
342
Index

Index
343
motivating users, 115–116,
126–127, 129–131,
145–146
optimal conditions for, 208
organizing, 102–3
principles of, 9
reasons for, 168
roles within, 98, 133
time and distance
considerations, 167
tools, basic, 103–107. See
also IT
KN (knowledge networks)
framework for
implementing, 207
knowledge
as an object, 30–31
as content, 31
knowledge audit, 121–122, 141
knowledge coordinator, 232
knowledge creation
customer input as, 256,
320–321
focus on, 63–64
HP’s IT Resource Center,
279
intellectual capital (IC), 292
knowledge pool, 41–42, 72
monitoring, 133
performance based on,
311–312
KnowledgeCurve, 236
knowledge fairs. See
discussions
knowledge flow, 292–93
knowledge harvesting, 121,
126–27, 233–234
Knowledge Management
Architecture (KMA), 126
knowledge management (KM)
origin, 26, 29–30. See also
information handling
knowledge management 
theory, 29–30
knowledge marketplace
dynamics, 72
knowledge network (KN)
defined, 30. See also
knowledge sharing
knowledge of maximum 
leverage, 234
knowledge sharing
acceptance time frame, 
67, 129
balancing intranet and face-
to-face (F2F), 52–53
beyond social networking,
168–169
collective thinking, 312
communities, 40–45
conversations, 289–293,
298–299, 315
CoPs (communities of
practice), 47–48,
131–133, 168–169, 172,
294, 297, 316
encouraging participation,
125–28, 172–173,
189–192, 207–208, 211,
215–220, 239–240
essentials of a sharing 
culture, 114
key to innovation, 27
knowledge as a process,
31–32
personal profiles, 154–155,
159–160
phased approach builds
practice, 81
spontaneous, task-focused
subcultures, 127
trust and, 9–10, 41, 72,
114–115, 119, 156,
159–160. See also
planning, non-
technical; planning,
technical; strategies
that promote KM
KPMG Consulting, 98, 99
Kraken (email list), 
144–145, 236
L
labor unions, 23
LANs (local area networks), 35
Leading for Innovation
(Wheatley), 307
the learning organization, 46–47
Learning-Org, 178
legacy system, defined, 88
legal questions, 143, 160–161,
252
Library of Alexandria, 14
linear discussions, 105,
149–150, 151, 153, 186–189.
See also discussions
lines of business (LOBs), 77
listservs, 178, 237. See also
email
LOBs (lines of business), 77
local area networks (LANs), 35
Lotus 1-2-3, 33
Lotus Notes, 34, 35, 144–145, 236
Luleå University of
Technology, 81
Lycos, 50–51
M
Mahon, Andrew, 306
Malhotra, Yogesh, 63–64
management
encouraging knowledge
sharing, 125–128,
172–173, 189–192,
207–208, 211, 215–220,
239–240, 242–244
flattened, 71–72, 73–74
leaders’ roles, 73–74,
127–131, 314–315
postocracy, 139–140,
144–145, 225
spontaneous, 126, 127, 
139, 219
of spontaneous
communities, 232. See
also facilitators, online;
management styles
management leverage metrics,
96–97
management styles
Business Process
Reengineering, 24
collaborative, 67
distributed, 294
Hewlett Packard’s, 118–119
innovative, 307
knowledge-focused, 52, 131
mechanistic, 3–4, 20–21,
22–23
motivating workers, 23–24
postocracy, 139–140,
144–145, 225
scientific, 22–24. See also
hierarchical
management; KM
marketing
AOL’s use of forums, 201
banner ads, 36–37
business exchanges,
251–254
creating an online presence,
249–251, 256–259
internal, 209, 211–215
network effect, 36
viral, 263
word-of-mouth, 263, 264
Marketing Terms.com, 36
Mavens, 293

Mayo, Elton, 23
McKinsey & Company, 129–130
measuring success, 311–312
medical and health information,
280–281
meeting interfaces. See
interface design; virtual
meeting interfaces
member profiles, 154–155,
159–160
memex (data retrieval), 32
message boards
American Cancer Society, 
280–281
bundled with portals, 237
flexibility, 237
Idea Exchange, 58–59,
197–198, 256–259,
301–303
Picospan, 44–45
preferred conversations, 190
as a recruiting tool, 276–277
self-organizing systems,
36–40
technical aspects, 184–185
technical knowledge
exchange, 33
time-bound events, 172. See
also discussions
Messaging Software 
Solutions, 183
Microsoft, 101
middleware, 88–89
mind flow, 125–127
The Mining Company, 271
mobil users, 317
Monmonier, Mark, 70
Monsanto, 126, 133
motivational techniques
encourage learning, 115–116
intellectual stimulation,
131–133
listening, 130–131
performance improvement,
129–130
user-friendly interface,
126–127
multithreaded discussions, 185.
See also discussions
N
National Telecommunications
and Information
Administration, 65
Net, history of. See history of
the Net
netiquette, 178–180, 184
Netizens: An Anthology
(Hauben), 39
Net presence statistics, 65–66
NetPro community, 49–50,
68–69, 267–269
NetRatings, 66
Net usage, skill set for, 312–313
network effect, defined, 36
Networking Professionals
Connection, 267–69
Nielsen, Jacob, 66, 81, 96,
108–109
notification of presence,
191–192
O
Oldenburg, Ray, 115
Olds, John, 167
The One to One Future
(Peppers & Rogers), 260
Online Social Networking 2001,
55–56
Only the Paranoid Survive
(Grove), 130–131
organizational assets, 30–32
organizational culture
change as internalized
value, 67–68
collaboration as a priority,
300, 304–306
collaborative interface,
122–125, 143–144,
148–149, 153–159, 
181, 300
communities of practice, 316
conflict within, 117–118
cross-organizational
communities, 171, 318
cultural assessment, 120–121,
141–142, 209–210
defined, 113, 116–117
destination cultures, 125
deviants as innovators, 308
gap analysis, 120, 141–142
global interdependence,
288–289
Hewlett-Packard’s, 118–119
internal marketing based
on, 211–215
intranet, 124–125, 208
knowledge audit, 121–122,
141
Monsanto’s, 126
performance-oriented,
129–130, 130
roles within, 133, 139
supporting internal group
interaction, 207,
232–234, 242–244, 305,
306, 307–310
sustainability, 294
terminology for KM, 128
values, 114, 118–19, 242
organizational goals
aligning with, 40, 120–121
business type determines, 76
Cisco’s strategic, 68–69
core values, 116, 133
define knowledge
requirements, 68–71
defining, 70–71, 128–129
dependent on size and
duration of groups,
165–166
engagement with
stakeholders, 248
fulfillment needs for KN, 97
group utilization of technical
capabilities, 127
improve network 
interface, 78
knowledge, identifying and
prioritizing, 313
organizing knowledge
resources, 102–103
as part of funding 
proposal, 215
synergy, 63
Ozzie, Ray, 176, 192–194
P
P2P. See peer-to-peer
Paolini, George, 300
participation, incentives for,
216–220, 268, 275–276, 
290, 291
peer-to-peer (P2P)
autonomous discussions,
106
flexibility of, 202, 292
Groove, 176, 192–194, 202
interfaces, 147–148
management participation,
314–315
optimum personalization,
231–232
technical expertise for, 292
Peppers, Don, 260
Peppers & Rogers Group, 260
Permission Marketing
(Godin), 249
344
Index

Index
345
personal profiles, 154–155,
159–160
Peters, Tom, 304
Petrach, Francesco, 16
Pew Internet & American Life
Project, 66
PlaceWare, 53, 199, 242, 317
PlanetFeedback, 273–74
planning, non-technical
about, 74–75
collaborative interface,
122–125, 143–144,
148–149, 153–159
encouraging participation,
125–28, 172–173,
189–192, 207–208,
215–220, 239–240
events, 200–202
external knowledge sharing,
161–162, 275–276,
307–308
health checkups for 
network, 78
network expansion, 77–78
pilot phase, 75–77, 81, 121,
209–210
policies and guidelines, 78,
160–161, 178–180,
224–229, 265–266. See
also planning,
technical; strategies
that promote KM
planning, technical
acknowledge limitations,
97–98
collaborative interface, 
181, 195–199, 208, 215,
300, 306
discussion formats, 149–153,
167–168, 170–172
interface design, 81,
125–128, 141–143,
148–149, 173
message filters, 189–90
organization of discussions,
186–189
prioritize KN goals, 97
profiles, 154–155, 157–159,
159–160
simplicity, value of, 166–167,
203. See also planning,
non-technical; strategies
that promote KM
platforms
adaptable, 113–115, 149,
174–176, 202, 237–38
platform independent
applications, 317
procurement-focused,
252, 253
UNIX, 33, 38–39, 101
PLATO Notes, 34
policies for discussions, 78,
160–161, 178–180, 224–229
Porras, Jerry
visionary companies, 116
portals
adaptable platforms, 149, 237
application integration
meets personalization,
292
Appmail, 181, 300
e-learning, 317
Global Knowledge Portal
(GKP), 70
history of, 50–51
integrating in “smart
enterprise portfolios,”
299
limiting access to, 160–161
next generation, 316–317
purpose of, 110–111, 171
underlying structure for 
KN, 165
user-driven, 271
vertical, 252–253. See also
intranet
positive deviance, 310
postocracy, 139–140, 
144–145, 225
presence, notification of,
191–192
Price Waterhouse, 144–145, 236
printing press, benefits of, 17–18
Procter & Gamble, 255–256
productivity analysis, 22
profiles
customer, 259
eBay feedback ratings, 266
group relationship profile,
157–159
personal profiles, 154–155,
159–160
proposals
funding, 78–79, 209, 214–215
Prusak, Laurence, 68, 72, 218,
233, 234
PT Cruiser Club, 284–286
R
real-time events, 172
Recipio, 255
reciprocity, 114–115, 219–220
reengineering, 24, 308, 315
Reengineering the Corporation
(Hammer), 308
REI (Recreational Equipment,
Inc.), 301–302
relationships
customer-to-customer, 249,
260, 262–263, 270–271,
272–273
mutual complaint-
sharing, 283
technosocial, 91–95
user helping user, 279
Renaissance, 16
“Researching Organizational
Systems Using Social
Network Analysis” (Zack),
293–94
return on investment (ROI)
assessments, 81, 300–301, 312
Bontis, Nick, on, 79
Harker, Pat, on, 96
importance of, 311
indirect, 300
IT investment in KN, 95–97
as part of proposal, 215
time frame for, 129
revenue distance, defined, 96
revenue generation, 273
reward, 98, 114–115
Rheingold, Howard, 38, 43
Rogers, Martha, 260
ROI. See return on investment
Royal Dutch Shell, 47
Ruettgers, Michael, 2702–71
S
Salon.com, 57
Sandoz, Phil, 110
Sapient, 280
satisfice, defined, 107, 110
Save the Children, 308–310
Schein, Edgar, 23–24
organizational culture, 117
Schrage, Michael, 142
security of information, 88
selective engagement, 290
self-governing communities,
228, 263–267, 277–278
self-organizing systems
communication, 62, 
131–133, 135
customers, 133–134,
257–259, 271–274,
283–286

self-organizing systems,
Continued
message board users, 36–40
spontaneous, task-focused
subcultures, 127
teams, 133, 303
without central control, 63
seminars. See discussions
Senge, Peter, 47
September 11, 287, 288–289
SIGs (special interest groups), 
33, 43–44
silverorange, 109
SimCity, 320–21
Simple Object Access Protocol
(SOAP), 100–101
simplicity, 166–167, 203, 213,
241–43, 300
skunk-work teams, 
231–232
Skyrme, David, 30
smart enterprise portfolios, 299
SNA (Social Network Analysis),
293–294
Snowden, David, 103
SOAP (Simple Object Access
Protocol), 100–101
Social Network Analysis 
(SNA), 293–294
social networks
bandwidth as depth of, 
40–41, 67
beyond, 168–69
community, defined, 37–38,
71–74
electronic, 146–148, 313
farmers’ markets, 10–11
Idea Exchange, 58–59,
195–199, 256–259,
301–303
instant messaging, 45, 
66, 104–105, 139,
181–183, 192
knowledge marketplace
dynamics, 72
mapping, 293–294
multidimensional
familiarity, 41
Online Social Networking
2001, 55–56
personal profiles, 154–155,
159–160
as a safe haven, 115
in work environment,
124–125. See also
discussions
software companies
Centra Software, 199, 317
Groove Networks, 176,
192–194, 306
Messaging Software
Solutions, 183
Verticalnet, 2522–54
software features
design considerations,
138–139, 209, 210–211
design flexibility, 113–115
design flexibility of, 149,
174–176, 238
smart enterprise 
portfolios, 299
software functions
application integration,
88–90, 99–100
chat tools, 183
community-oriented
applications, 174
content management,
106–107
data integration, 30–31
groupware, 34–36, 38–39,
44–45, 174–176
instant messaging (IM),
104–105
legacy system, defined, 88
middleware, 88–89
networking, 32–33
spreadsheet, 33
Web services, 100–101, 298.
See also platforms
software programs
Appmail, 181, 300
ARPANet, 32–33, 38–39
BITNET, 33
Clerity for Enterprise
Knowledge Sharing,
218–219
EDUNET, 33
Electronic Information
Exchange System
(EIES), 38
Lotus 1-2-3, 33
Lotus Notes, 34, 35, 
144–145, 236
Picospan, 44–45
PLATO Notes, 34
UNIX, 33, 38–39, 101
Usenet, 33, 38–39, 144
Zaplet, email-on-steroids,
181, 300. See also IT
(information
technology)
Song, Mary Lou, 264–265
special interest groups 
(SIGs), 33
speed to learning, 304
Spiers, Dick, 318
spontaneous communities
consumers, 271–274
encouraging, 229–230,
232–234
human development of,
296–297
inhibiting, 230, 235
Kraken (Price Waterhouse),
236
life cycles, 234–235
need-based, 244
networks, transitory and
spontaneous, 241–243
protecting, 235
responsibility within,
231–232
technology for, 173
value from, 229–230, 232,
234
The Springboard (Denning), 67,
221–223
stakeholders
adapting to, 291
American Cancer Society
and, 280–281, 282
business-to-customer
relationships (B2C),
274–276
customer research, 255–256
customer service, 249–250,
298
Daimler-Chrysler and,
283–286
eBay relationship with,
263–267
encouraging involvement,
215–220
HP’s ITRC, 279
importance of customers,
308
learning from, 248–249,
270–271, 276–277,
281–282
REI speaks language of
customers, 301–302
Sun Microsystems and,
277–278
transactions with, 255
United Airlines and, 283
Wharton School and,
276–277. See also
346
Index

Index
347
Customer Relationship
Management (CRM)
“The Starwood Lurker,” USA
Today, 58
statistics
cost savings, 79–80
email usage, 177
Internet as collaboration 
tool, 304
Net presence, 65–66
online search time, 107
time spent information
seeking, 107
Sternin, Jerry, 308–310
Stewart, Thomas A., 144–145
storytelling, 9–10, 14, 26,
220–223, 308–309, 320–321
strategic communities, 173,
242–244
strategies that promote KM
about, 61–62
accepting change, 67–68
consultants’ roles, 72–73,
209–211
encouraging participation,
125–128, 172–173,
189–192, 207–208, 211,
215–220, 239–240,
242–244
filtering messages, 69–71,
72–73, 189–190
grass roots learning 
phase, 213
health check ups for the
network, 78
leaders’ roles, 71–72, 73–74,
127–131, 314–315
long-term, 65–67, 242–243,
306
preparing for surprises, 62,
64–67. See also
planning, non-technical;
planning, technical
“substitution imperative,”
142–143
success
achieving, 244
evaluating, 78–80, 311–312
knowledge as path to, 30–31
redefining, 310–311
Sun Microsystems, 50, 277–278
sustainability, 
organizational, 294
synchronous conversations
audio/video conferencing,
142–143, 148, 172, 241
chat rooms, 53–56, 124, 147,
181–184, 276–277
event planning, 199, 242
forums, 54–56, 201, 230,
277–278, 279, 285
groupware, 34–36, 38–39,
44–45, 174–176
instant messaging (IM), 45, 
66, 104–105, 139,
181–183, 192
live interaction, 182, 201–202
peer-to-peer (P2P), 106,
147–148, 176, 192–194,
202, 231–232, 292,
314–315
sysop control panel, 174–175
systems, self-organizing. See
self-organizing systems
T
TableTalk, 57
taxonomic functions, 102–103
Taylor, F.W., 22–23
teams
event production, 242
project, 232
self-directed, 133, 303
task-based, 239
virtual, 299
technology
ARPANet hubs, 32–33
BBSs influenced design, 46
community-oriented, 169,
240–241
conversational, 170–172,
176–177
development of KN, 91–95
efficiency as a solution to
infoglut, 291–292
future of, 316–321
integration, 317–321
local area network (LAN), 35
locating experts, 299
network development, 24–26
portals, 110–111, 149, 181
rules for applying, 103,
137–138
wireless, 291–292. See also
IT (information
technology)
technosocial relationships,
91–95
Telecomputing Corporation of
America, 39
terminology, KM, 128–129
Texas Instruments, 80
think tanks, 49–50, 58, 68–69,
267–269
threaded discussions, 105,
150–153, 185–189. See also
discussions
time-bound events, 171–172,
239, 242. See also events
on the Web
The Tipping Point (Gladwell),
293
tolerance of others, 114
tools for, 103–107, 146–148
transitory communities, 173,
239, 241–243, 244–245
trends, strategy for, 65–67
True Confessions on The
WELL, 43, 220
trust
building, 41, 72, 119
business exchange, issues
with, 252
business to customer (B2C),
274–275
creating a customer trust
loop, 270–271
on eBay, 265–67
fair policies and rules, 114
group cohension, 156–57,
160, 218–220
relationships with
stakeholders, 251,
301–392
storytelling, 9–10, 115, 221
Web of Trust, 272–273
on The WELL, 115
2002, Gartner predictions 
for, 299
U
UDDI (Universal Description,
Discovery and
Integration), 100–101
Udell, John, 192–193, 194
United Airlines, 283
Universal Description,
Discovery and Integration
(UDDI), 100–101
UNIX, 33, 38–39, 101
Unleashing the Idea Virus
(Godin), 249
Untied Airlines, 283, 284
Usability First, 35
USA Today
“The Starwood Lurker,” 58
use-case surveys, 143
Usenet, 33, 38–39, 144

V
Van Doren, Charles, 13, 16–18, 19
Verticalnet, 252–254
video/audio conferencing,
142–143, 148, 172, 241
The Virtual Community
(Rheingold), 38
virtual meeting interfaces
about, 53
asynchronous discussions,
200–201
audio/video conferencing,
142–143, 148, 172, 241
chat rooms, 53–56, 124, 147,
181–184, 276–277
developing, 92–95, 141–144
forums, 54–56, 201, 230,
277–278, 279, 285
instant messaging, 45, 66,
104–105, 139, 181,
182–183
sharing with external
cultures, 163, 275–276
spontaneous meetings,
237–238
virtual network organizations,
317, 319–321
virtual private networking
(VPN), 268–269
virtual teams, 299
VPN (virtual private
networking), 268–269
W
Web. See portals
Web-based collaboration tools,
36–37
Web Crossing 
events on the Web, 186
Web Crossing 
interface design, 187, 188, 
189, 191
proprietary database, 185
subscription function, 190
sysop control panel, 174–175
Web Tour, 183
WebEx, 53–54, 199, 201–202, 242
Web of Trust, 272–273
Web services, 51, 88, 100–101,
298, 317–318
Web Services Description
Language (WSDL),
100–101
Weinberger, David
about, 288
human approach to
information, 296
learn to love messiness,
132–133
manager’s job is to listen, 129
old model businesses, 301
proactive change within
organizations, 295
substance, not spin, 314–315
The WELL 
conversation topics, 41
design, 44–46
Experts on The Well, 42–43
facilitators (hosts), 43–44,
133, 144, 145
guidelines for discussions,
43–44
presence notification, 191
relationships on, 40–41
True Confessions
conference, 43, 220
trust, sense of belonging,
115, 224
Wenger, Etienne, 47–48, 131,
168–69, 288
Wharton School of Business,
96, 276–277
WhatIs.com, 99
Whole Earth Catalog, 41
Whole Earth ‘Lectronic Link.
See The WELL
Working Knowledge
(Davenport & Prusak), 68,
72, 218, 233, 234
World Bank, 222
WorldJam, 56–58, 239–40
World Wide Web interface, 35–36
WSDL (Web Services
Description Language),
100–101
X
Xerox, 79
XML (Extensible Markup
Language), 52, 89, 317–318
Y
Yahoo! Broadcasts, 240–241, 242
Yahoo!, 50–51
Z
Zack, Michael, 293–294
Zaplet, 181, 300
348
Index
TEAMFLY

