BUILD A SHED 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
Provide a sound, level base and anyone will be able to erect 
a garden shed - though an extra pair of hands is essential 
for lifting the panels into place.  
  
 
 
Have a steady pair of stepladders for working on the roof - 
and get someone to help you lift the heavy wall and roof 
components into place. 
  
 
 
In the long run, it pays to buy a quality shed which, with 
routine maintenance, will provide a dry, sound facility for 
storing tools, materials, garden furniture and other 
equipment. 
  
Never skimp on the size of shed you buy. Get the largest 
that will suit your garden - extra space is invaluable as not 
only can you store more, but the shed will be easier to 
organise and items will be more accessible 
 
2  - Planning 
You can buy a shed to suit whatever amount of storage 
space you need, from a mini-store for a few sun-loungers to 
12ft long (3.7m) buildings that can double as workshops. 
Some sheds have to be ordered as they are not kept in 
stock.  
 
 
 
Planning permission is not normally needed for a 
prefabricated shed to be built in your back garden.  
 
 
 
Think about access for getting the panels from the delivery 
lorry into the back garden. If you have side access to the 
rear garden there should be no problem, but taking them 
through the house could be difficult.  
 
 
 
If you intend to use the shed as a workshop, a bright spot in 
the garden with a pleasant view from the window would be 
advantageous. Also if you intend running an electrical supply 
it would be sensible to have the shed as near to the house 
as possible.  
 
3  -  Looking for quality  
Don't select a shed from a brochure - go and see it for 
yourself so you can judge its construction and quality of 
fittings.  
 
 
 
Check the thickness of timber used for wall panels and look 
for solid construction such as shiplap and overlap cladding. 

With shiplap the tongues and grooves of the planks slip into 
one another. With overlap each plank overlaps the one 
below it.  
 
 
 
Most sheds are made from pine or deal. Some are factory-
treated with a preservative. If not it is well worth applying a 
coat of preservative and repeating the treatment each year 
to prevent decay.  
 
 
 
Check the quality of the floor, a poor-quality floor will flex 
with your movement and will not be suitable for a workshop. 
 
 
 
Garden sheds comprise a number of pre-fabricated wall 
panels and roof sections that are simply joined together to 
form the structure.  
 
 
 
4  -  Roof styles  
The traditional garden shed has a pitched roof with the two 
panels rising from the side wall panels up to a central ridge. 
Here you have plenty of headroom in the middle of the shed 
but less at the sides.  
 
 
 
A single-pitch roof, also called a pent roof, has virtually the 
same headroom inside all round. There is a slight slope on 
the roof to ensure rainwater flows away.  
 
 
 
If you plan to work in the shed you may find a pent roof 
more suitable with the highest part by the windows where 
the workbench is normally sited.  
 
 
 
Usually the roof is supplied with roofing felt already attached 
- all you have to do is fix the panel in place. Sometimes the 
roofing felt is supplied separately for you to attach.  
 
 
 
The only way to judge whether the proportions are going to 
be adequate for your needs is to visit the supplier and stand 
inside the shed.  
 
5  - Doors and windows 
The door comes ready fixed to the door frame and 
assembled within the panel.  
 
 
 
Window frames are fixed similarly to doors.  
 
 
 
The glazing is usually secured using strips of timber pinned 

to the frame. To ensure a window is weatherproof run a 
bead of frame-sealing mastic around the glass. 
 
6  -  Base  
It is essential to have a level and dry foundation. It is 
impossible to erect a shed on an uneven site as screw holes 
connecting the wall panels will not line up. For a lightweight 
shed it may be sufficient to use some paving slabs laid on 
heavy-duty polythene sheeting to act as a damp-resisting 
barrier. For larger buildings especially where the shed is to 
be used as a workshop a concrete slab is best. The slab 
needs to be just smaller than the floor area of the building 
so that rainwater running off the wall panels does not drip 
onto the concrete.  
 
 
 
A concrete base needs to have a 75mm (3in) base of 
compacted hardcore. The base can be level with the ground 
or raised above it. If it is to be level you will need to 
excavate 150mm (6in) to allow for the hardcore layer and 
75mm (3in) thickness of concrete.  
 
 
 
Set up levelled formwork to 
contain the concrete and 
check diagonals (1). Then la
thoroughly compacted 
hardcore and cover with 
sand. 
 
You can mix your own 
concrete using one part 
cement to five parts ballast 
(which is most economical) o
use bags of dry-mixed 
concrete to which you add 
water. 
y 
r 
 
 
 
The concrete should be kept on the dry side - not too much 
water or it will be sloppy.  
 
 
 
Spread the concrete slightly proud of the formwork (2), then 
level it off with a long plank resting on the formwork using a 
sawing motion (3).  
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
If rain is expected cover the concrete with polythene for 24 
hours. In warm weather cover it with wet sacks and sprinkle 
them with water over the 24 hour period. The base is then 
ready for the shed.  
 
7 - Erecting the shed  
 
The floor will comprise b
fixed to bearers. It is simply 
laid in place and will be held 
there by the weight of the 
shed. Check with a spirit level 
that the base is horizontal 
(4).  
oards 
 
 
 

Check each panel to ensure 
you will be fixing them in 
their correct positions - d
and windows in the right 
place (5).  
oors 
ach 
 
 
 
 
 
The panels are joined to e
other through pre-drilled
holes, using screws and 
washers or nails (6). It is 
usual to start with a side and 
back panel, then to add the 
other side panel, and finish
with the door section.  
 
 
 
The action of tightening the 
screws or banging home the 
nails draws the wall panels 
together (7). Subsequent 
panels are secured to each 
other.  
 
 
 
The wall panels are secured 
to the floor joists using 
screws or nails (8). If nails, 
knock them in at an angle 
(skew nailing).  
 
 
 

Once the walls are erected, f
the roof (9). The panel or 
panels are usually fixed to 
the walls with nails.  
it 
 
 
 
 shed kits come with corner strips and fascia boards for
nishing edges.  
tion and power  
th building paper to 
on to protect 
-
overed 
 
 
 
If not already fitted, cover the roofing panels with strips of 
felt, overlapping 50mm minimum. These are always fixed 
from the lowest part of the roof, working upwards (10). This 
ensures that rainwater running down the roof does not seep 
under overlapping edges. Clout nails are used to secure the 
felt (11).  
 
 
 
 
Some
fi
 
 
 
8 -  Insula
 
Some shed wall panels come lined wi
eep out draughts. For better insulati
k
equipment and tools from rusting line the walls with glass
fibre loft insulation or expanded-polystyrene slabs c
with sheets of wallboard or hardboard.  
 
 

 
If power and lighting is to be added to the shed cables will 
ploy
need to be buried in the ground or run overhead supported 
by a wire cable at a safe height. Cables must never be 
trailed along the ground or run along a wall or fence. Em
a qualified electrician to do the work.  
 

