 
 
 
 
 + Bulking Up + 
My Secrets to a Wealthy Lifestyle 
Written by 
iLuSiVe / Kevin Mercurio 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copyright © 2010 by Kevin 
 
All rights reserved. Reproduction and distribution are forbidden. 
 
No part of this e-book shall be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, 
or transmitted by any other means, electronic, mechanical, 
photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without written permission 
from the author. 

Copyright, Legal Notice and Disclaimer:  
 
This publication is protected. All rights are reserved, including resale rights: you are not allowed to give 
or sell this Guide to anyone else. If you received this publication from anyone other than me (Kevin 
Mercurio), you've received a pirated copy. Please contact me via e-mail at Kevin.Mercurio@hotmail.com 
and notify me of the situation. 
 
Please note that much of this publication is based on personal experience and anecdotal evidence. 
Although I have made every reasonable attempt to achieve complete accuracy of the content in this 
Guide, I assume no responsibility for errors or omissions. Also, you should use this information as you 
see fit, and at your own risk. Your particular situation may not be exactly suited to the examples 
illustrated here; in fact, it's likely that they won't be the same, and you should adjust your use of the 
information and recommendations accordingly. 
 
Any trademarks, service marks, product names or named features are assumed to be the property of 
their respective owners, and are used only for reference. There is no implied endorsement if I use one of 
these terms. 
 
Finally, use your head. Nothing in this Guide is intended to replace common sense, legal or other 
professional advice, and is meant to inform the reader. So have fun with monetizing guide, and get your 
stuff done. 
 
Copyright © 2010 Kevin Mercurio. All rights reserved worldwide. 
 
 

Prologue 
 
Greetings future money-maker, 
I would like to formally thank you for purchasing my eBook. It is these 
same methods that I am on the very edge of sharing with you that have 
forever changed my perspective on the corporate controlled world and 
of course my financial status. This guide contains abundant information 
and strategies that marketing professionals don’t want anyone knowing 
about. My mission today is to get this dirty job done and to report back 
to every single one of you aspiring money-makers with that valued 
Intel. 
Throughout the course of my life, I had always perceived multi-million 
dollar corporate enterprises as the fore structure that held our 
civilization together but after writing this eBook, I was convinced that 
they are in fact the reason for which so many of us are left without 
food, clothing and in some countries, even water. 
These monetizing techniques that I’m about to share with you are often 
judged as unethical and immoral but while we’re on the topic, let’s 
discuss ethicality in perspective with our sole competitor; greedy 
corporations. Have you ever found yourself in a situation where you 
have no money to pay for your expenses; whether it was for something 
as significant as your annual car insurance balance or something as 
tedious as your cell phone bill? I know I have and I’m only seventeen.  
When I was younger, I used to always dream of growing up to be a 
successful business man like my father, but as I outgrew my 
adolescence, I saw that all those hierarchical authorities were merely a 
truckload of pencil pushers with a single goal; to invest huge amounts 
of their time and money in something as insignificant as being able to 

make a buck off of everyone. I quickly realized that that was not the life 
I had planned for myself and suddenly had a change of heart. 
I was 12 years old when I found out how to make money and boy was I 
excited. I began as an author on a freelance publishing website and was 
paid for my work. Later, I began practicing methods that would until 
this day, increase my profit margin exponentially. 
The truth remains that even after you’ve read this entire eBook and 
made up your mind that these techniques are unarguably black hat, 
you will undoubtedly still not be a greedier and more unethical 
entrepreneur than our fellow adversaries; corporations, for they have 
caused so much hardship onto others that it can never be forgiven. 
 
For example, say you go buy a car and as convinced as you may be that 
you were offered the best possible price for your purchase, the truth 
remains that the dealer still made a couple hundred dollars profit off of 
your investment. Everyone wants a bigger bang for their buck, so what I 
decided to do was JOIN THEM. 
 
I had had enough of being tossed back and forth by corporate jackasses 
and having my money taken advantage of. That was when I put my foot 
down and said “I’m going to find out where the BIG MONEY is hiding”, 
and I did. 
And THIS is how I did it. 
- 
iLuSiVe  / Kevin Mercurio   - 
 
 
 

Index 
 
 
 
CPA Networks 
 
 
Associated Content 
 
 
Spam Marketing 
 
 
Cloaking 
 
 
YouTube Marketing 
 
 
Craigslist and Kijiji  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CPA Networks 
 
Before you jump to conclusions about any false accusations you may or 
may not have heard regarding CPA monetizing, continue reading. 
For those that were unaware and curious, CPA stands for Cost Per 
Action and is sometimes referred to as PPA (Pay Per Action), but as I 
like to call it; The Cash Cow. That’s right. CPA networks are what I use 
make the higher percentage of my profits since it is so easy considering 
it allows it’s user to incorporate their full imagination into every 
dynamic scheme. But don’t panic if you don’t’ have any imagination, 
that’s what I’m here for. Once you’re done with this guide, you’ll have 
enough potential to write your own. 
First and foremost, you’re going to need to know how CPA networks 
operate in order to understand the tasks you will be required to 
complete. CPA companies pay their affiliates a varied amount for every 
time someone either completes a short survey, signs up on a website or 
purchases a product. Market research companies pay CPA networks for 
every survey that is completed in order to learn more about the 
consumer perspective. The beauty of this monetizing technique, as I 
stated earlier, is that the marketing possibilities are virtually endless. 
You will need to apply for partnership with a CPA network in order to 
continue following the instruction to come. I recommend using “CPA 
Lead” as your cost per action network as they offer among the best 
rates in the industry and allow their affiliates complete control over 
numerous preference options. 

 
You will need to acquire access to a website for your content front. If 
you do not want to spend money on a website, feel free to setup a high 
quality blog. CPA Lead is not very strict; your application for partnership 
will be acknowledged within one to two days.  
Once you have acquired your website, use a free template for your 
website as CPA Lead is very lenient with whom they accept. If you 
would like to go ahead and work on your site/blog by yourself, by all 
means, do so. When I had submitted my application for partnership, my 
website was still under construction and I will still accepted. What is 
most important is how you format your application. Make them aware 
that you know what you’re doing by claiming that you have abundant 
means of promoting their product such as e-mail, article and social 
networking marketing, including your website front. In your application, 
tell them that you have a lot of unique visitors. 
Please follow my referral link in order to be prompted with the affiliate 
application instructions. 
Here is how to sign-up: http://www.cpalead.com/apply.php?ref=53410  

 
After you’ve activated your account, log into it and navigate to the 
Surveys tab. 
You will then be prompted with the following screen. 

 
Choose the option to your right as you will be using the Splash 
Widget(s) for your website/blog. 
 
You will then see the following page. 

 
Browse through the various countries and pick one that pays the most 
or has the most appealing offers. From experience, I can tell you that 
United States offers are the best to use considering the majority of the 
world’s internet users are U.S.A. residents and also because CPA Lead 
associates the highest rates for U.S.A. offers. 

Once you have selected your country of choice, select any three offers 
that you would like to have displayed on your website front by checking 
the boxes beside each offer. (Each time you are targeting a different 
niche for each of the methods in the for coming guide, make sure that 
you change your offer selection as to increase the chances of the users 
drawing a particular interest to your promotion tactic) Once you have 
chosen your three offers, create your Splash Widget like so.  
 
 Or you may choose the option to the right to watch a video tutorial on 
how to do so. 
Once your widget is complete, you will have been given a code that 
looks something like this. 

 
Paste that code into your website script and you should now have a 
gateway for your site content that is asking you to complete one of the 
offers in order to access the content. (You may or may not be able to 
see the gateway if you are in a different country than the country that 
your offers are pertaining to) Once you have that entire part covered, 
move on to the first monetizing method. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Exploiting Forums 
 
This is by far one of the easiest tactics with regards to money making 
that I have yet to come across, although it may seem repetitive to 
some. 
Over the time you’ve spent on the internet, you’ve most certainly 
noticed how abundant web forums are. That is a good thing for us as 
they will serve as our niche in this particular CPA exploiting method. 
Among these forums, there are many that have their own currency or 
point reward system. If such a forum does not, it is clear to assume that 
its operator is not very knowledgeable about what he is doing. The 
pretext for this tactic is to get your hands on as many points (or which 
every unit of currency the forum is using) as you can. The reason for 
such is that you will be using this abundant resource as a means of 
manipulating your potential dummies. You’re offering points in 
exchange for someone to complete a survey or lead offer. On many of 
these forums, it is possible to purchase points for unbelievably low 
prices; that’s what you will be doing. Try to get as many as you can get 
your hands on. 
Furthermore, what you will be doing is selling points to your fellow 
forum members at the expense of a special request. Can you guess it? 
Yes, that’s right. You’re going to be offering them points in return for 
one successfully completed action (for your CPA network). 
While it is quicker to buy points for cheap, you may find members that 
offer points in return for domains, trades, etc., something that will 
benefit you in the long run as it will increase awareness of your 
presence among the forum(s).  

Again, if the forum does not have a member signature feature, it is 
most likely one in need of a new owner. However, if it does, you will be 
creating a signature that informs everyone that you are giving out 
points. Something like this would suffice: “Got some points to give out. 
PM me for details.” Once again, let your creativity take its course for 
that last instruction. 
 
Be sure to use a dummy e-mail address upon signing up to all forums 
and frequently check for point request as I assure you, you will be 
getting A LOT of e-mails and private messages. 
Once you begin receiving inquiries about the points, explain them that 
you will agree to give them what they have came for if they would be 
willing to complete a short survey or sign-up for you (for you CPA 
network offers). When and if they comply with your agreement, 
redirect them to your website/blog that advertises your Splash Widget. 
Make sure that you don’t give too many points with regards to the 
amount of profit you will acquire upon completion of the specific offer. 
 

If you’d like to put a little more work into this method, it is well worth 
the time. You can establish a thread on the forum with the same 
intentions as you signature; to offer members points in accordance 
with completing your specified action. 
For members that have successfully completed your surveys and/or 
sign ups, don’t stop there. You have them in the lute so why not take 
advantage of them since you see that they are willing to do more for 
points. Offer them more points in order to complete a different offer, 
logically one that has a higher payout price. (You may need to create a 
new Splash Widget or re-select your offers to display some with higher 
payout prices) 
Repeat the same process with as many members and on as many 
forums as you can and you will soon see a considerable amount of 
credits accumulating in your CPA Lead account. 
That’s it for Spam Marketing. Let’s move on shall we? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Associated Content 
I know what you’re probably thinking right now: I can’t write an article 
if I had to do so to save my life! Well, not to worry. You’re not going to 
be one writing them.  
Associated Content is a well-known freelance writer’s website and 
there, you can bet you will get a decent amount of views on your 
article(s). Associated Content pays its member to write and publish 
articles pertaining to a very wide range of topics. 
 
It currently offers two types of reward programs; you will be applying 
for the Upfront Cash Reward Program. In order to be eligible to do so, 
you must have selected U.S.A. as your country or residence while 
signing up.  
You will need to sign-up on Associated Content by following this link: 
http://www.associatedcontent.com/  
Remember when I said you’re not going to be the one writing the 
articles? Well, this is what I meant by it. You’re going to be scrounging 
for high quality articles that have already been reviewed and rated, so 
that you know your money is worth the time. 

For example, I take most of my articles from http://www.helium.com/, 
a knowledge co-operative where writers and editors read and rate 
hundreds, if not thousands of articles daily. Find your article and tweak 
it a little bit here and there so that you do not get your Associated 
Content account banned for plagiarism. Now you’re ready to use it as if 
it were your own. 
 
This entire process of finding an article and publishing it on Associated 
Content takes under ten minutes, which is why you will be repeating it 
for maximum profit. I would suggest creating two or more publisher 
accounts on Associated Content considering your average pay will 
decrease if you are constantly submitting articles.     
That’s all you need to know for the Associated Content method. Just 
make sure that you keep adding articles daily, a five minute effort, and 
you will see a reasonable flow of money coming in. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Spam Marketing 
 
This method is relatively straight forward and is what I refer to as my 
back-up plan. This is a plan that has very free-flow instructions since it 
is all up to your buyer. 
Most people despise spammers, with the exclusion of aspiring money-
makers like you. This method in tales offering spamming services for 
someone else.  
Many forums have members that are willing to pay others in exchange 
for you to spam their website and/or product for them. Before you 
decide to begin spamming anywhere, there are certain rules to 
consider when maximizing your profit margin.  
 
For example, if the person you are spamming for is selling a 
technological product such as a new motivation for an iPod (simple 
example), you shouldn’t be advertising his product on weight loss 
websites. I hope you get the gist of what I’m trying to say here. 
Targeting a niche is once again very important for this method and can 
prove to be worth the time. 

You may choose to spam on sites such as Facebook, MySpace, Twitter 
and my personal favourite, YouTube. Otherwise, simply go to a tech 
forum and spam their message boards (referring to the same iPod 
example). YouTube may come across as saturated to most people but 
with its new security and anti-spam regulation, more and more users 
seem to be returning to it. Be sure to take advantage of this because 
many money-makers have given up on it for spamming purposes.  
Once again, another short and effective method to making a little extra 
cash when you need it. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Cloaking 
This is a method known to bring in minimal profits when calculated in a 
short time-span but if used wisely, can be very effective in the long run 
due to its auto-pilot capabilities.  
What you will be doing is using website URL’s to substantially increase 
your daily profits. How? I’ll tell you. 
 
There are companies such as AdFly that will pay their members a fixed 
amount every time a unique user clicks on your links. We will be using 
this company to our advantage because unlike all CPA and PPC 
networks, AdFly entitles their members to earn more profit by allowing 
them to capitalize on repeated user clicks if they have been made after 
twenty-four hours. 
How it works? 
For example, many seem to already know about AdF.ly, which is a 
network that allows you to submit any website URL and shortens it. 
Once shortened, you can advertise that link using the techniques 
explained in the previous and fore coming methods. (Make sure you do 

not violate any of AdFly’s terms of use and/or user agreement 
otherwise your account will be closed without forewarning and you will 
be denied access to your current credits) Tell everyone about your links 
and mostly use it as a cloaking for your website advertising the Splash 
Widget. You will be earning money from the clicks, regardless of 
whether the user ends up completing the survey plus extra if they 
actually do. 
In other words, you will be using your referral and website links as the 
URLs that will be shortened. So in theory, when you spread your 
shortened URL, you will be benefiting from the fixed amount that the 
AdF.ly network pays you and the user that completes the offer. 
What you will need to do is sign-up on AdFly using the following link: 
http://adf.ly/?id=59054 
When signing up, select the account option that reads: Create 
shortened URLs and earn money. 

 
You can also up your earnings with AdFly if you promote their service 
with your referral link. 
You will earn 20% commission of your referral's earnings for life. This is 
a great way to boost your AdFly earnings. 
This method is one that is notorious for running in the background for 
many monetizing operations. 
Use it wisely and don’t disregard it because it doesn’t bring you as 
much money at first because the end results are glorifying.  
Next method... 
 
 

YouTube Marketing 
Wouldn’t you agree that when you want something badly, you will do 
just about anything to get it? I think that sounds just about right, 
judging from what I’ve seen. 
This method is going to be using social engineering in order to have 
users complete your offers. 
 
What you will be doing is creating a YouTube account pertaining to the 
niche you would like to target. (This method can be extremely 
profitable considering it can be repeated of various niches) For 
example, if you were to make a video on jail breaking an iPod, you 
would make an account that has a channel background and username 
pertaining to iPods or technology. For example, your username would 
be “TechnoWiz”.  
Once you’ve made an account, you will be stealing videos that others 
have made pertaining to the same topic. Make sure that the video is 
not branded with the user’s website, initials or audio. 
In order to download a YouTube user’s video, I use a website called 
KeepVid. 
Here is its link: http://keepvid.com/  
Simply copy the URL for the video location and paste it into the website 
provided and it will begin downloading to your computer. 
If you would like to spend the extra time securing your video, I also 

recommend branding or adding a watermark on your video for your 
website with the Splash Widget. 
Now you can upload that video to your account and publicise in the 
description something that will motivate the viewers to visit your 
website and complete your offer(s). It must be something that they 
cannot get anywhere else for free otherwise no one will even bother 
looking at your video, even if you’ve included an eye-catching title.  
 
For example, depending on the topic of the account you created, you 
make a video telling everyone that you know where to get free 
Microsoft keys and serials. Don’t let your creativity limit you. Find 
something that people want but never want to pay for and then you 
are set for each account you make. 
Once you have done that, add the link in the description of the video 
and say that they will be awarded whatever it is that you are offering 
them in the video after they complete the offer on the following 
website. 
One you have done this, you will see money coming in from your CPA 
network in response to completed offers. I would suggest not having 
your Splash Widget(s) contain any offers that require purchases since 

you are claiming you know a way to get whatever it is you are 
advertising for free. 
All that left to do now is to make more accounts and steal more videos 
as you progress into this method. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Craigslist and Kijiji 
I’m sure you’ve probably already heard of Craigslist. It is among one of 
the biggest and well-recognized classifieds website known. This is why 
we always target highly populated websites. 
Craigslist – http://www.craigslist.org/about/sites  
Kijiji – http://www.kijiji.ca/  
 
This method is reoccurring throughout many monetizing guides yet, as 
saturated as it is, still provides me with a considerable amount of profit. 
The reason for such if because there are always possible deviations for 
the situations and there are constantly new users looking on such 
websites for things. Take my word for it. 
What you will be doing is making an ad on either websites (both 
preferably, but it’s up to you o chose) using the following general idea: 
 
“This a notice for all aspiring Poker stars. 
There will be formal tournament that will be held in Atlantic City (or Las 
Vegas, you can alternate from one website to another) on (give a date). 
The grand prize is $100,000. 
Please sign-up here (website with Splash Widget) in order to verify if 
you qualify. Hurry, places are limited.” 

 
Within a couple of days, if not hours, you will get quite a few people to 
complete your survey. This is a strategy that almost never fails since 
there are so many gamblers out there. 
When choosing your affiliate link, make sure you choose an offer that is 
appropriate for the ad you are making. For example, for a poker ad in 
the classifieds, find an offer pertaining to poker and that involves 
signing up for something. 
That’s the end of this method. Don’t forget to rinse and repeat using 
Kijiji as well. I can guarantee that it will make your tons of money since 
there is direct interaction with the user and therefore the situation is 
malleable to your benefit.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Closing Remarks 
 
Although some may seem to think that some of these methods are 
saturated, they are still earning me tons of money every day. And the 
best part about them is that they take no experience whatsoever. 
Anyone can use these methods and easily make money overnight. 
Another great condition about this guide is that all methods intertwine 
with one another. There are also monetizing methods ranging from 
complete opposites. In other words, there are techniques that can be 
used to make quick cash overnight when you need it badly and some 
that can be invested it and are proven to make you large profits over a 
given number of days. 
Once again, I appreciate your purchase and I can guarantee that this 
eBook will serve you as a tool to make a thousand times more money 
that you paid for it. 
In the case that you should still have questions pertaining to any of the 
methods or even an explanation, I welcome you to e-mail me at 
Kevin.Mercurio@hotmail.com 
Best of luck with your monetizing,  
Regards, 
iLuSiVe / Kevin Mercurio 
 
 
  
 

