f o u r t h  e d i t i o n
Pa i g e  B a lt z a n
Business 
Driven 
Information  
Systems

StudentS get: 
• Interactive, engaging content.
• Interactive Applications – chapter 
assignments that help you APPLY what you’ve 
learned in the course.
• Immediate feedback on how you’re doing.  
(No more wishing you could call your 
instructor at 1 a.m.)
• Quick access to lectures, practice materials, 
eBook, and more.  (All the material you need 
to be successful is right at your ﬁngertips.)
With McGraw-Hill's Connect
™ Plus MIS, 
 
Want to get better grades?  (Who doesn’t?)
Ready to do online interactive assignments that help you apply what you’ve 
learned? (You need to know how to use this stuff in the real world…)
Need new ways to study before the big test?  (A little peace of mind is a good thing…)
StudentS...


Less managing. More teaching. Greater learning.
Would you like your students to show up for class more prepared? (Let’s face it, 
class is much more fun if everyone is engaged and prepared…)
Want ready-made application-level interactive assignments, student progress 
reporting, and auto-assignment grading? (Less time grading means more time 
teaching…)
Want an instant view of student or class performance relative to learning 
objectives? (No more wondering if students understand…)
Need to collect data and generate reports required for administration or 
accreditation? (Say good-bye to manually tracking student learning outcomes…)
Want to record and post your lectures for students to view online?
INSTRUCTORS...
Less managing. More teaching. Greater learning.
INSTRUCTORS GET: 
• Interactive Applications—book-specific interactive 
assignments that require students to APPLY what 
they’ve learned.
• Simple assignment management, allowing you to 
spend more time teaching.
• Auto-graded assignments, quizzes, and tests.
• Detailed visual reporting, where student and 
section results can be viewed and analyzed.
• Sophisticated online testing capability.
• A filtering and reporting function 
that allows you to easily assign and 
report on materials that are correlated 
to accreditation standards, learning 
outcomes, and Bloom’s taxonomy.
• An easy-to-use lecture capture tool.
With McGraw-Hill’s Connect
™ Plus MIS, 

Want an online, searchable version of your textbook?
Wish your textbook could be available online while you’re doing 
your assignments?
Want to get more value from your textbook purchase?
Think learning MIS should be a bit more interesting?
Connect™ Plus MIS eBook
If you choose to use Connect™ Plus MIS, you have an affordable and 
searchable online version of your book integrated with your other 
online tools.
Connect™ Plus MIS eBook offers features like:
• Topic search
• Direct links from assignments
• Adjustable text size
• Jump to page number
• Print by section
Check out the STUDENT RESOURCES 
section under the Connect™ Library tab.
Here you’ll find a wealth of resources designed to help you 
achieve your goals in the course. You’ll find things like quizzes, 
PowerPoints, and Internet activities to help you study. Every 
student has different needs, so explore the STUDENT RESOURCES 
to find the materials best suited to you.

  Business Driven 
Information Systems 


TM
 Business Driven 
Information Systems 
 F O U R T H  E D I T I O N 
 P a i g e   B a l t z a n 
 Daniels College of Business, University of Denver 

TM
 BUSINESS DRIVEN INFORMATION SYSTEMS, FOURTH EDITION 
 Published by McGraw-Hill/Irwin, a business unit of The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc., 1221 Avenue of 
the Americas, New York, NY, 10020. Copyright © 2014 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. All rights 
reserved. Printed in the United States of America. Previous editions © 2012, 2009, and 2008. No part of 
this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database 
or retrieval system, without the prior written consent of The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc., including, 
but not limited to, in any network or other electronic storage or transmission, or broadcast for distance 
learning. 
Some ancillaries, including electronic and print components, may not be available to customers outside 
the United States. 
This book is printed on acid-free paper.  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 DOW/DOW 1 0 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 
 ISBN 978-0-07-337689-9 
 MHID 0-07-337689-2 
 Senior Vice President, Products & Markets:  Kurt L.  Strand 
 Vice President, General Manager, Products & Markets:  Brent  Gordon 
 Vice President, Content Production & Technology Services:  Kimberly Meriwether  David 
 Director:  Scott  Davidson 
 Senior Brand Manager:  Wyatt  Morris 
 Executive Director of Development:  Ann  Torbert 
 Development Editor II:  Alaina G.  Tucker 
 Digital Development Editor:  Kevin  White 
 Marketing Manager:  Tiffany  Russell 
 Project Manager:  Kathryn D.  Wright 
 Senior Buyer:  Michael R.  McCormick 
 Senior Designer:  Matt  Diamond 
 Cover Designer: Lisa Buckley  
 Cover Image:  Getty Images
 Lead Content Licensing Specialist:  Keri  Johnson 
 Photo Researcher:  Colleen Miller
 Media Project Manager:  Brent dela  Cruz 
 Typeface:  10/12 Times Roman  
 Compositor:  Laserwords Private Limited 
 Printer:  R. R.  Donnelley 
 All credits appearing on page or at the end of the book are considered to be an extension of the copyright 
page. 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Baltzan, Paige.
 Business driven information systems/Paige Baltzan, Daniels College of Business, University
  of Denver.—FOURTH EDITION.
   pages cm
 Includes index.
 ISBN 978-0-07-337689-9 (alk. paper)—ISBN 0-07-337689-2 (alk. paper)
 1. Information technology—Management. 2. Industrial management—Data processing. I. Title. 
 HD30.2.B357 2014
 658.4’038011—dc23
 
2012040826
 The Internet addresses listed in the text were accurate at the time of publication. The inclusion of a web-
site does not indicate an endorsement by the authors or McGraw-Hill, and McGraw-Hill does not guaran-
tee the accuracy of the information presented at these sites. 
 www.mhhe.com 

 D E D I C AT I O N 
 To Tony, Hannah, Sophie, and Gus: 
What do you always remember? 
That I Love You! That I’m Proud of You! 
 Paige 

Brief Contents
viii
 MODULE 1 
Business Driven MIS 
 Chapter 1 
Management Information Systems: Business Driven MIS 
 Chapter 2 
Decisions and Processes: Value Driven Business 
 Chapter 3 
Ebusiness: Electronic Business Value 
 Chapter 4 
Ethics and Information Security: MIS Business Concerns 
 MODULE 2 
Technical Foundations of MIS 
 Chapter 5 
Infrastructures: Sustainable Technologies 
 Chapter 6 
Data: Business Intelligence 
 Chapter 7 
Networks: Mobile Business 
 MODULE 3 
Enterprise MIS 
 Chapter 8 
Enterprise Applications: Business Communications 
 Chapter 9 
 Systems Development and Project Management: Corporate 
Responsibility  
APPENDIX  
Appendix A 
Hardware and Software Basics 
 Appendix B 
Networks and Telecommunications 
 Appendix C 
Designing Databases 
 The Technology Plug-Ins 
 Apply Your Knowledge 
 Glossary 
 Notes 
 Credits 
 Index 
 BRIEF CONTENTS 

ix
Contents
 module 1  
 Business Driven MIS   1 
 CHAPTER 1  
 Management Information Systems: 
Business Driven MIS  2 
 Opening Case Study: The World 
Is Flat: Thomas Friedman   3  
 Section 1.1 Business Driven MIS   5 
 COMPETING IN THE INFORMATION AGE   5 
 Data  6 
 Information  7 
 Business Intelligence  8 
 Knowledge  10 
 THE CHALLENGE: DEPARTMENTAL COMPANIES   11 
 THE SOLUTION: MANAGEMENT INFORMATION 
SYSTEMS   12  
 MIS Department Roles and Responsibilities  14 
 Section 1.2 Business Strategy   15 
 IDENTIFYING COMPETITIVE ADVANTAGES   15 
 THE FIVE FORCES MODEL—EVALUATING 
INDUSTRY ATTRACTIVENESS   18 
 Buyer Power  18 
 Supplier Power  19 
 Threat of Substitute Products or Services  19 
 Threat of New Entrants  20 
 Rivalry among Existing Competitors  20 
 Analyzing the Airline Industry  20 
 THE THREE GENERIC STRATEGIES—CHOOSING 
A BUSINESS FOCUS   22 
 VALUE CHAIN ANALYSIS—EXECUTING 
BUSINESS STRATEGIES   23 
 Learning Outcome Review   27 
 Opening Case Questions   29 
 Key Terms   29 
 Review Questions   29 
 Closing Case One: Apple—Merging Technology, 
Business, and Entertainment   30 
 Closing Case Two: Best of the Best of the Best—Under 25   32 
 Critical Business Thinking   34 
 Entrepreneurial Challenge   36 
 Apply Your Knowledge Business Projects   37 
 AYK Application Projects   41 
 C O N T E NT S 
 CHAPTER 2   
 Decisions and Processes: 
Value Driven Business  42 
 Opening Case Study: Action 
Finally—Actionly  43  
 Section 2.1 Decision Support Systems   45 
 MAKING BUSINESS DECISIONS  45 
 The Decision-Making Process 46 
 Decision-Making Essentials 46 
 METRICS: MEASURING SUCCESS 48 
 Efficiency and Effectiveness Metrics 50 
 The Interrelationship Between Efficiency 
and Effectiveness MIS Metrics 51 
 SUPPORT: ENHANCING DECISION MAKING WITH MIS 53 
 Operational Support Systems 54 
 Managerial Support Systems 55 
 Strategic Support Systems 56 
 THE FUTURE: ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 60 
 Expert Systems 61 
 Neural Networks 61 
 Genetic Algorithms 62 
 Intelligent Agents 62 
 Virtual Reality 63 
 Section 2.2 Business Processes 64 
 EVALUATING BUSINESS PROCESSES 64 
 MODELS: MEASURING PERFORMANCE 66 
 SUPPORT: ENHANCING BUSINESS PROCESSES 
WITH MIS  71    
 Improving Operational Business 
Processes—Automation 72 
 Improving Managerial Business 
Processes—Streamlining 73 
 Improving Strategic Business 
Processes—Reengineering 74 
 THE FUTURE: BUSINESS PROCESS MANAGEMENT 77 
 Learning Outcome Review 78 
 Opening Case Questions 80 
 Key Terms 80 
 Review Questions 81 
 Closing Case One: Political Micro-Targeting: What 
Decision Support Systems Did for Barack Obama 81 
 Closing Case Two: Second Life: Succeeding 
in Virtual Times 83 
 Critical Business Thinking 84 
 Entrepreneurial Challenge 86 

Contents
x
 Apply Your Knowledge Business Projects 87 
 AYK Application Projects 89 
 CHAPTER 3  
 Ebusiness: Electronic Business Value 90 
 Opening Case Study: Pinterest—
Billboards for the Internet  91  
 Section 3.1 WEB 1.0: Ebusiness 94 
 DISRUPTIVE TECHNOLOGIES AND WEB 1.0 94 
 Disruptive versus Sustaining Technology 94  
 The Internet and World Wide Web—The Ultimate 
Business Disruptors 95 
 Web 1.0: The Catalyst for Ebusiness 96 
 ADVANTAGES OF EBUSINESS 98 
 Expanding Global Reach 98 
 Opening New Markets 98 
 Reducing Costs 100 
 Improving Operations 100 
 Improving Effectiveness 100 
 THE FOUR EBUSINESS MODELS 101 
 Business-to-Business (B2B) 102 
 Business-to-Consumer (B2C) 102 
 Consumer-to-Business (C2B) 103 
 Consumer-to-Consumer (C2C) 103 
 Ebusiness Forms and Revenue-Generating 
Strategies 103 
 EBUSINESS TOOLS FOR CONNECTING 
AND COMMUNICATING 106 
 Email 106 
 Instant Messaging 106 
 Podcasting 107 
 Videoconferencing 107 
 Web Conferencing 108 
 Content Management Systems 108 
 THE CHALLENGES OF EBUSINESS 108 
 Identifying Limited Market Segments 109 
 Managing Consumer Trust 109 
 Ensuring Consumer Protection 109 
 Adhering to Taxation Rules 109 
 Section 3.2 WEB 2.0: Business 2.0 109 
 WEB 2.0: ADVANTAGES OF BUSINESS 2.0 109 
 Content Sharing Through Open Sourcing 111 
 User-Contributed Content 111 
 Collaboration Inside the Organization 111 
 Collaboration Outside the Organization 112 
 NETWORKING COMMUNITIES WITH BUSINESS 2.0 113 
 Social Tagging 114 
 BUSINESS 2.0 TOOLS FOR COLLABORATING 116 
 Blogs 116 
 Wikis 117 
 Mashups 117 
 THE CHALLENGES OF BUSINESS 2.0 118 
 Technology Dependence 118 
 Information Vandalism 119 
 Violations of Copyright and Plagiarism 119 
 WEB 3.0: DEFINING THE NEXT GENERATION 
OF ONLINE BUSINESS OPPORTUNITIES 119 
 Egovernment: The Government Moves Online 120 
 Mbusiness: Supporting Anywhere Business 121 
 Learning Outcome Review 121 
 Opening Case Questions 123 
 Key Terms 124 
 Review Questions 124 
 Closing Case One: Social Media and 
Ashton Kutcher 125 
 Closing Case Two: Amazon.com—Not Your Average 
Bookstore  126     
 Critical Business Thinking 128 
 Entrepreneurial Challenge 130 
 Apply Your Knowledge Business Projects 131 
 AYK Application Projects 135 
 CHAPTER 4   
 Ethics and Information Security: 
MIS Business Concerns 136 
 Opening Case Study: To Share—Or 
Not to Share  137  
 Section 4.1 Ethics 141 
 INFORMATION ETHICS 141 
 Information Does Not Have Ethics, People Do 144 
 DEVELOPING INFORMATION MANAGEMENT POLICIES 145 
 Ethical Computer Use Policy 145 
 Information Privacy Policy 146 
 Acceptable Use Policy 146 
 Email Privacy Policy 147 
 Social Media Policy 148 
 Workplace Monitoring Policy 149 
 Section 4.2 Information Security 151 
 PROTECTING INTELLECTUAL ASSETS 151 
 Security Threats Caused by Hackers 
and Viruses 153 
 THE FIRST LINE OF DEFENSE—PEOPLE 155 
 THE SECOND LINE OF DEFENSE—TECHNOLOGY 156 
 People: Authentication and Authorization 156 
 Data: Prevention and Resistance 159 
 Attack: Detection and Response 160 
 Learning Outcome Review 161 
 Opening Case Questions 162 
 Key Terms 163 
 Review Questions 163 
 Closing Case One: E-Espionage 164 
 Closing Case Two: Hacker Hunters 165 
 Critical Business Thinking 167 
 Entrepreneurial Challenge 168 
 Apply Your Knowledge Business Projects 169 
 AYK Application Projects 171 

xi
Contents
 module 2  
 Technical Foundations of MIS  172 
 CHAPTER 5  
 Infrastructures: Sustainable 
Technologies  173  
 Opening Case Study: Pandora’s 
Music Box  174  
 Section 5.1 MIS Infrastructures 176 
 THE BUSINESS BENEFITS OF A SOLID MIS 
INFRASTRUCTURE 176 
 SUPPORTING OPERATIONS: INFORMATION MIS 
INFRASTRUCTURE 177 
 Backup and Recovery Plan 178 
 Disaster Recovery Plan 179 
 Business Continuity Plan 181 
 SUPPORTING CHANGE: AGILE MIS INFRASTRUCTURE 183 
 Accessibility 183 
 Availability 184 
 Maintainability 185 
 Portability 185 
 Reliability 185 
 Scalability 185 
 Usability 187 
 Section 5.2 Building Sustainable MIS Infrastructures 187 
 MIS AND THE ENVIRONMENT 187 
 Increased Electronic Waste 188 
 Increased Energy Consumption 189 
 Increased Carbon Emissions 189 
 SUPPORTING THE ENVIRONMENT: SUSTAINABLE MIS 
INFRASTRUCTURE 189 
 Grid Computing 189 
 Virtualized Computing 192 
Cloud Computing 195
 Learning Outcome Review 199 
 Opening Case Questions 200 
 Key Terms 201 
 Review Questions 201 
 Closing Case One: UPS Invests $1 Billion to Go Green 202 
 Closing Case Two: Turning Ewaste into Gold 203 
 Critical Business Thinking 203 
 Entrepreneurial Challenge 205 
 Apply Your Knowledge Business Projects 206 
 AYK Application Projects 209 
 CHAPTER 6  
 Data: Business Intelligence 210 
 Opening Case Study: Informing 
Information  211  
 Section 6.1 Data, Information, and Databases 214 
 THE BUSINESS BENEFITS OF HIGH-QUALITY INFORMATION 214 
 Information Type: Transactional and Analytical 214 
 Information Timeliness 216 
 Information Quality 216 
 Information Governance 219 
 STORING INFORMATION USING A RELATIONAL DATABASE 
MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 219 
 Storing Data Elements in Entities and Attributes 221 
 Creating Relationships Through Keys 221 
 USING A RELATIONAL DATABASE FOR BUSINESS 
ADVANTAGES 222 
 Increased Flexibility 222 
 Increased Scalability and Performance 223 
 Reduced Information Redundancy 223 
 Increased Information Integrity (Quality) 224 
 Increased Information Security 224 
 DRIVING WEBSITES WITH DATA 224 
 Section 6.2 Business Intelligence 227 
 THE BUSINESS BENEFITS OF DATA WAREHOUSING 227 
 PERFORMING BUSINESS ANALYSIS WITH DATA MARTS 228 
 Multidimensional Analysis 229 
 Information Cleansing or Scrubbing 230 
 UNCOVERING TRENDS AND PATTERNS WITH DATA MINING 231 
 Cluster Analysis 234 
 Association Detection 235 
 Statistical Analysis 236 
 SUPPORTING DECISIONS WITH BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE 236 
 The Problem: Data Rich, Information Poor 237 
 The Solution: Business Intelligence 237 
 Visual Business Intelligence 238  
 Learning Outcome Review 239 
 Opening Case Questions 240 
 Key Terms 241 
 Review Questions 241 
 Closing Case One: Data Visualization: Stories for the 
Information Age 242 
 Closing Case Two: Zillow 243 
 Critical Business Thinking 244 
 Entrepreneurial Challenge 246 
 Apply Your Knowledge Business Projects 246 
 AYK Application Projects 249 
 CHAPTER 7   
 Networks: Mobile Business 250 
 Opening Case Study: The Ironman  251 
 Section 7.1 Connectivity: The Business Value of 
a Neworked World 253 
 OVERVIEW OF A CONNECTED WORLD 253 
 Network Categories 254 
 Network Providers 254 
 Network Access Technologies 255 
 Network Protocols 258 
 Network Convergence 260 

Contents
xii
 BUILDING A CONNECTED CORPORATION 
THROUGH INTEGRATIONS 300 
 Integration Tools 301 
 SUPPLY CHAIN MANAGEMENT 302 
 THE BENEFITS OF SCM 303 
 Improved Visibility 305 
 Increased Profitability 306 
 THE CHALLENGES OF SCM 307 
 THE FUTURE OF SCM 308 
 Section 8.2  Customer Relationship Management 
and Enterprise Resource Planning  309     
 CUSTOMER RELATIONSHIP MANAGEMENT 309 
 THE BENEFITS OF CRM 311 
 Evolution of CRM 311 
 Operational and Analytical CRM 312 
 Marketing and Operational CRM 313 
 Sales and Operational CRM 314 
 Customer Service and Operational CRM 315 
 Analytical CRM 316 
 Measuring CRM Success 317 
 THE CHALLENGES OF CRM 317 
 THE FUTURE OF CRM 319 
 ENTERPRISE RESOURCE PLANNING 319 
 THE BENEFITS OF ERP 320 
 Core ERP Components 322 
 Extended ERP Components 324 
 Measuring ERP Success 325 
 THE CHALLENGES OF ERP 327 
 THE FUTURE OF ENTERPRISE SYSTEMS: INTEGRATING 
SCM, CRM, AND ERP  327     
 Learning Outcome Review 328 
 Opening Case Questions 330 
 Key Terms 330 
 Review Questions 330 
 Closing Case One: Can Customer Loyalty 
Be a Bad Thing? 331  
 Closing Case Two: Got Milk? It’s Good for You—Unless 
It’s Contaminated! 332 
 Critical Business Thinking 334 
 Entrepreneurial Challenge 336 
 Apply Your Knowledge Business Projects 337 
 AYK Application Projects 340 
 CHAPTER 9   
 Systems Development and Project 
Management: Corporate Responsibility  341  
 Opening Case Study: Getting Your 
Project On Track  342  
 Section 9.1 Developing Enterprise Applications 345 
 THE SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT LIFE CYCLE (SDLC) 345 
 Phase 1: Planning 345 
 Phase 2: Analysis 346 
 Phase 3: Design 348 
 BENEFITS OF A CONNECTED WORLD 263 
 Sharing Resources 263 
 Providing Opportunities 265 
 Reducing Travel 265 
 CHALLENGES OF A CONNECTED WORLD 266 
 Security 266 
 Social, Ethical, and Political Issues 266 
 Section 7.2  Mobility: The Business Value 
of a Wireless World 267 
 WIRELESS NETWORK CATEGORIES 267 
 Personal Area Networks 268 
 Wireless LANs 268 
 Wireless MANs 269 
 Wireless WAN—Cellular Communication System 270 
 Wireless WAN—Satellite Communication System 272 
 BUSINESS APPLICATIONS OF WIRELESS NETWORKS 274 
 Radio-Frequency Identification (RFID) 274 
 Global Positioning System (GPS) 275 
 Geographic Information Systems (GIS) 276 
 BENEFITS OF BUSINESS MOBILITY 278 
 Enhances Mobility 278 
 Provides Immediate Data Access 279 
 Increases Location and Monitoring Capability 279 
 Improves Work Flow 279 
 Provides Mobile Business Opportunities 280 
 Provides Alternative to Wiring 280 
 CHALLENGES OF BUSINESS MOBILITY 280 
 Protecting Against Theft 280 
 Protecting Wireless Connections 282 
 Preventing Viruses on a Mobile Device 283 
 Addressing Privacy Concerns with RFID and LBS 283 
 Learning Outcome Review 284 
 Opening Case Questions 286 
 Key Terms 286 
 Review Questions 287 
 Closing Case One: Wireless Bikes 287 
 Closing Case Two: Google Latitude . . . Without an Attitude? 288 
 Critical Business Thinking 289 
 Entrepreneurial Challenge 291 
 Apply Your Knowledge Business Projects 292 
 AYK Application Projects 295 
 module 3  
 Enterprise MIS  296   
 CHAPTER 8  
 Enterprise Applications: Business 
Communications 297 
 Opening Case Study: Zappos Is 
Passionate for Customers  298  
 Section 8.1 Supply Chain Management 300 

xiii
Contents
 Output Devices A.8 
 Communication Devices A.9 
 COMPUTER CATEGORIES   A.9 
 SOFTWARE BASICS   A.12 
 System Software A.12 
 Application Software A.13 
 Distributing Application Software A.14 
 Key Terms   A.15 
 Apply Your Knowledge  A.15 
 APPENDIX B   
 Networks and Telecommunications  B.1 
 INTRODUCTION  B.1 
 NETWORK BASICS  B.1 
 ARCHITECTURE   B.3 
 Peer-to-Peer Networks B.3 
 Client/Server Networks B.4 
 TOPOLOGY   B.5 
 PROTOCOLS   B.6 
 Ethernet B.6 
 Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol B.7 
 MEDIA   B.8 
 Wire Media B.8 
 Wireless Media B.9 
 Key Terms   B.10 
 Apply Your Knowledge   B.10 
 APPENDIX C   
 Designing Databases  C.1 
 INTRODUCTION   C.1 
 THE RELATIONAL DATABASE MODEL  C.1 
 Entities and Attributes C.2 
 BUSINESS RULES   C.3 
 DOCUMENTING ENTITY RELATIONSHIP DIAGRAMS   C.4 
 Basic Entity Relationships C.4 
 Relationship Cardinality C.6 
 RELATIONAL DATA MODEL AND THE DATABASE   C.7 
 From Entities to Tables C.7 
 Logically Relating Tables C.8 
 Key Terms   C.9 
 Apply Your Knowledge   C.9 
 The Technology Plug-Ins   T.1 
 Apply Your Knowledge   AYK.1 
 Glossary   G.1 
 Notes   N.1 
 Credits   C.1 
 Index   I.1 
 Phase 4: Development 348 
 Phase 5: Testing 349 
 Phase 6: Implementation 349 
 Phase 7: Maintenance 350 
 SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT METHODOLOGY: 
THE WATERFALL 351 
 AGILE SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT METHODOLOGIES 352 
 Rapid Application Development (RAD) Methodology 353 
 Extreme Programming Methodology 353 
 Rational Unified Process (RUP) Methodology 353 
 Scrum Methodology 354 
 Section 9.2 Project Management 354 
 USING PROJECT MANAGEMENT TO DELIVER 
SUCCESSFUL PROJECTS 355 
 Unclear or Missing Business Requirements 356 
 Skipped Phases 356 
 Changing Technology 356 
 The Cost of Finding Errors in the SDLC 356 
 Balance of the Triple Constraint 357 
 PRIMARY PROJECT PLANNING DIAGRAMS 359 
 OUTSOURCING PROJECTS 361 
 Outsourcing Benefits 364 
 Outsourcing Challenges 364 
 Learning Outcome Review 367 
 Opening Case Questions 368 
 Key Terms 368 
 Review Questions 369 
 Closing Case One: Disaster at Denver International 
Airport 370 
 Closing Case Two: Reducing Ambiguity in Business 
Requirements 370 
 Critical Business Thinking 372 
 Entrepreneurial Challenge 373 
 Apply Your Knowledge Business Projects 374 
 AYK Application Projects 378 
 appendices
 APPENDIX A   
 Hardware and Software Basics  A.1 
 INTRODUCTION  A.1 
 HARDWARE BASICS   A.2 
 Central Processing Unit A.2 
 Primary Storage A.3 
 Secondary Storage A.5 
 Input Devices A.7 

Preface
xiv
 Business Driven Information Systems  discusses various business initiatives first and how 
technology supports those initiatives second. The premise for this unique approach 
is that business initiatives should drive technology choices. Every discussion first 
addresses the business needs and then addresses the technology that supports those 
needs. This text provides the foundation that will enable students to achieve excellence 
in business, whether they major in operations management, manufacturing, sales, mar-
keting, finance, human resources, accounting, or virtually any other business discipline. 
 Business Driven Information Systems  is designed to give students the ability to under-
stand how information technology can be a point of strength for an organization. 
 Common business goals associated with information technology projects include 
reducing costs, improving productivity, improving customer satisfaction and loyalty, 
creating competitive advantages, streamlining supply chains, global expansion, and so 
on. Achieving these results is not easy. Implementing a new accounting system or mar-
keting plan is not likely to generate long-term growth or reduce costs across an entire 
organization. Businesses must undertake enterprisewide initiatives to achieve broad 
general business goals such as reducing costs. Information technology plays a critical 
role in deploying such initiatives by facilitating communication and increasing business 
intelligence. Any individual anticipating a successful career in business whether it is in 
accounting, finance, human resources, or operation management must understand the 
basics of information technology that can be found in this text. 
 We have found tremendous success teaching MIS courses by demonstrating the 
correlation between business and IT. Students who understand the tight correlation 
between business and IT understand the power of this course. Students learn 10 percent 
of what they read, 80 percent of what they personally experience, and 90 percent of what 
they teach others. The business driven approach takes the difficult and often intangible 
MIS concepts, brings them to the student’s level, and applies them using a hands-on 
approach to reinforce the concepts. Teaching MIS with a business driven focus helps:
 ■ Add credibility to IT. 
 ■ Open student’s eyes to IT opportunities. 
 ■ Attract majors. 
 ■ Engage students. 
 FORMAT, FEATURES, AND HIGHLIGHTS 
 Business Driven Information Systems  is state-of-the-art in its discussions, presents concepts 
in an easy-to-understand format, and allows students to be active participants in learn-
ing. The dynamic nature of information technology requires all students, more specifically 
business students, to be aware of both current and emerging technologies. Students are 
facing complex subjects and need a clear, concise explanation to be able to understand and 
use the concepts throughout their careers. By engaging students with numerous case stud-
ies, exercises, projects, and questions that enforce concepts,  Business Driven Information 
Systems creates a unique learning experience for both faculty and students. 
 ■  Audience.  Business Driven Information Systems  is designed for use in undergradu-
ate or introductory MBA courses in Management Information Systems, which are 
required in many Business Administration or Management programs as part of the 
common body of knowledge for all business majors. 
 ■  Logical Layout. Students and faculty will find the text well organized with the topics 
flowing logically from one chapter to the next. The definition of each term is provided 
before it is covered in the chapter and an extensive glossary is included at the back of 
the text. Each chapter offers a comprehensive opening case study, learning outcomes, 
closing case studies, key terms, and critical business thinking questions. 
 PRE FA C E 

xv
Preface
 ■  Thorough Explanations.  Complete coverage is provided for each topic that is intro-
duced. Explanations are written so that students can understand the ideas presented 
and relate them to other concepts. 
 ■  Solid Theoretical Base.  The text relies on current theory and practice of informa-
tion systems as they relate to the business environment. Current academic and pro-
fessional journals cited throughout the text are found in the Notes at the end of the 
book—a road map for additional, pertinent readings that can be the basis for learning 
beyond the scope of the chapters or plug-ins. 
 ■  Material to Encourage Discussion.  All chapters contain a diverse selection of case 
studies and individual and group problem-solving activities as they relate to the use 
of information technology in business. Two comprehensive cases at the end of each 
chapter reinforce content. These cases encourage students to consider what concepts 
have been presented and then apply those concepts to a situation they might find in 
an organization. Different people in an organization can view the same facts from dif-
ferent points of view and the cases will force students to consider some of those views. 
 ■  Flexibility in Teaching and Learning.  While most textbooks that are “text only” leave 
faculty on their own when it comes to choosing cases,  Business Driven Information 
Systems  goes much further. Several options are provided to faculty with case selec-
tions from a variety of sources including  CIO, Harvard Business Journal, Wired, Forbes, 
and  Time,  to name just a few. Therefore, faculty can use the text alone, the text and a 
complete selection of cases, or anything in between. 
 ■  Integrative Themes.  Several integrative themes recur throughout the text, which 
adds integration to the material. Among these themes are value-added techniques 
and methodologies, ethics and social responsibility, globalization, and gaining a 
competitive advantage. Such topics are essential to gaining a full understanding of 
the strategies that a business must recognize, formulate, and in turn implement. In 
addition to addressing these in the chapter material, many illustrations are provided 
for their relevance to business practice. 

Walkthrough
xvi
 Learning Outcomes 
 Learning Outcomes.  These outcomes focus on what 
students should learn and be able to answer upon 
completion of the chapter. 
 WALK TH R OU G H 
 section 3.1 
Web 1.0: Ebusiness 
 LE A R NI NG  O UT CO M E S 
 3.1 Compare disruptive and sustaining technologies, and explain how the Internet and WWW caused 
business disruption. 
 3.2 Describe ebusiness and its associated advantages. 
 3.3. Compare the four ebusiness models. 
 3.4. Describe the six ebusiness tools for connecting and communicating. 
 3.5 Identify the four challenges associated with ebusiness. 

Walkthrough
xvii
 1. Knowledge: Do you consider Pinterest a form of disruptive or sustaining technology? 
 2. Comprehension: Categorize Pinterest as an example of Web 1.0 (ebusiness) or Web 2.0 
(Business 2.0).  
 3. Application: Describe the ebusiness model and revenue model for Pinterest. 
 4. Analysis: What is open source software and how could Pinterest take advantage of it? 
 O P E N I N G  C A S E  Q U E S T I O N S 
 opening case study 
 Pinterest—Billboards for the Internet  
 Pinterest has been called the latest addiction for millions of people around the world. 
Pinterest, a visual social media network, allows users to create “interest boards” where 
they “pin” items of interests found on the web. Terms you need to understand to use 
Pinterest include:
 ■  Pin:  A link to an image from a computer or a website. Pins can include captions for other 
users. Users upload, or “pin,” photos or videos to boards. 
 ■  Board: Pins live on boards and users can maintain separate boards, which can be cat-
egorized by activity or interests, such as cooking, do-it-yourself activities, fitness, music, 
movies, etc. 
 ■  Repin:  After pinning an item, it can be repinned by other Pinterest users, spreading the 
content virally. Repinning allows users to share items they like with friends and family. 
 Chapter Opening Case Study. To enhance student interest, each chapter begins 
with an opening case study that highlights an organization that has been time-tested 
and value-proven in the business world. This feature serves to fortify concepts with 
 relevant examples of outstanding companies. Discussion of the case is threaded 
throughout the chapter.  
 Opening Case Questions.  Located at the end of the chapter, poignant questions 
connect the chapter opening case with important chapter concepts. 
 Chapter Opening Case Study and Opening Case Questions 

Walkthrough
xviii
 Projects and Case Studies 
 Case Studies. This text is packed with 27 case studies illustrating how a variety of prominent organizations and 
businesses have successfully implemented many of this text’s concepts. All cases are timely and promote critical 
thinking. Company profiles are especially appealing and relevant to your students, helping to stir classroom discus-
sion and interest. 
Apply Your Knowledge. At the end of each chapter you will find several Apply Your Knowledge projects that challenge 
students to bring the skills they have learned from the chapter to real business problems. There are also 33 Apply Your 
Knowledge projects on the OLC that accompanies this text ( www.mhhe.com/baltzan ) that ask students to use IT 
tools such as Excel, Access, and Dreamweaver to solve business problems. These projects help to develop the applica-
tion and problem-solving skills of your students through challenging and creative business-driven scenarios.  
 PROJECT I 
Making Business Decisions 
 You are the vice president of human resources for a large consulting company. You are compiling a 
list of questions that you want each job interviewee to answer. The first question on your list is, “How 
can MIS enhance your ability to make decisions at our organization?” Prepare a one-page report to 
answer this question. 
 PROJECT II 
DSS and EIS 
 Dr. Rosen runs a large dental conglomerate—Teeth Doctors—that employs more than 700 dentists 
in six states. Dr. Rosen is interested in purchasing a competitor called Dentix that has 150 dentists in 
three additional states. Before deciding whether to purchase Dentix, Dr. Rosen must consider several 
issues:
 ■ The cost of purchasing Dentix. 
 ■ The location of the Dentix offices. 
 ■ The current number of customers per dentist, per office, and per state. 
 ■ The merger between the two companies. 
 ■ The professional reputation of Dentix. 
 ■ Other competitors. 
 A P P LY  Y O U R  K N O W L E D G E  B U S I N E S S  P R O J E C T S 

Walkthrough
xix
 End-of-Chapter Elements 
Key Terms. With page 
numbers referencing 
where they are discussed 
in the text. 
 Each chapter contains complete pedagogical support in the form of: 
 Critical Business Thinking.  The best way to learn MIS is to apply it to scenarios and real-world business 
dilemmas. These projects require students to apply critical thinking skills and chapter concepts to analyze 
the problems and make recommended business decisions. 
 Entrepreneurial Challenge. This unique feature represents a running project that allows students to chal-
lenge themselves by applying the MIS concepts to a real business. The flexibility of the case allows each 
student to choose the type of business he or she would like to operate throughout the case. Each chapter 
provides hands-on projects your students can work with their real-business scenarios. 
 Two Closing Case Studies. 
Reinforcing important concepts 
with prominent examples from 
businesses and organizations. 
Discussion questions follow each 
case study. 
 Business intelligence (BI), 8 
 Business process, 23 
 Business strategy, 15 
 Buyer power, 18 
 Chief information officer 
(CIO), 15 
 Chief knowledge officer 
(CKO), 15 
 Fact, 5 
 Feedback, 14 
 First-mover advantage, 17 
 Goods, 12 
 Information, 7 
 Information age, 5 
 Knowledge, 10 
 Knowledge worker, 10 
 Product differentiation, 20 
 Rivalry among existing 
competitors, 20 
 Services, 12 
 Supplier power, 19 
 Supply chain, 19 
 Support value activities, 24 
 Switching costs, 18 
 K E Y  T E R M S 
 C L O S I N G  C A S E  O N E 
 Political Micro-Targeting: What Decision Support 
Systems Did for Barack Obama 
  On the day he took the oath of office in 2009, President Barack Obama spoke a word rarely heard 
in inaugural addresses— data— referencing indicators of economic and other crises. His use of the 
word is perhaps not so surprising. Capturing and analyzing data were crucial to Obama’s rise to 
 1. Modeling a Business Process 
 Do you hate waiting in line at the grocery store? Do you find it frustrating when you go to the video 
rental store and cannot find the movie you wanted? Do you get annoyed when the pizza delivery 
person brings you the wrong order? This is your chance to reengineer the process that drives you 
 C R I T I C A L  B U S I N E S S  T H I N K I N G 
 E N T R E P R E N E U R I A L  C H A L L E N G E 
 BUILD YOUR OWN BUSINESS 
 1. You realize that you need a digital dashboard to help you operate your business. Create a list of 
all of the components you would want to track in your digital dashboard that would help you run 
your business. Be sure to justify how each component would help you gain insight into the opera-
tions of your business and flag potential issues that could ruin your business. (Be sure to identify 

Walkthrough
xx
 About the Plug-Ins 
 Located on the OLC that accompanies this text ( www.mhhe.com/baltzan ), the overall goal of the plug-ins 
is to provide an alternative for faculty who find themselves in the situation of having to purchase an extra 
book to support Microsoft Office 2010 or 2013. The plug-ins presented here offer integration with the core 
chapters and provide critical knowledge using essential business applications, such as Microsoft Excel, 
Microsoft Access, DreamWeaver, and Microsoft Project. Each plug-in uses hands-on tutorials for compre-
hension and mastery.  
 Each plug-in contains complete pedagogical support in the form of: 
 Plug-In Summary. Revisits the plug-in highlights in summary format. 
 Making Business Decisions. Small scenario-driven projects that help students focus individually on 
decision making as they relate to the topical elements in the chapters. 
 End-of-Plug-In Elements 
Plug-In
Description
T1.  Personal Productivity Using IT
 This plug-in covers a number of things to do to keep a personal computer running effectively 
and efficiently. The 12 topics covered in this plug-in are:
 
■Creating strong passwords.
 
■Performing good ﬁ le management.
 
■Implementing effective backup and recovery strategies.
 
■Using Zip ﬁ les.
 
■Writing professional emails.
 
■Stopping spam.
 
■Preventing phishing.
 
■Detecting spyware.
 
■Threads to instant messaging.
 
■Increasing PC performance.
 
■Using anti-virus software.
 
■Installing a personal ﬁ rewall.
T2. Basic Skills Using Excel
This plug-in introduces the basics of using Microsoft Excel, a spreadsheet program for data 
analysis, along with a few fancy features. The six topics covered in this plug-in are:
 
■Workbooks and worksheets.
 
■Working with cells and cell data.
 
■Printing worksheets.
 
■Formatting worksheets.
 
■Formulas.
 
■Working with charts and graphics.
T4. Decision Making Using Excel
This plug-in examines a few of the advanced business analysis tools used in Microsoft Excel 
that have the capability to identify patterns, trends, and rules, and create “what-if” models. 
The four topics covered in this plug-in are:
 
■IF
 
■Goal Seek
 
■Solver
 
■Scenario Manager

Walkthrough
xxi
 Support and Supplemental Material 
 All of the supplemental material supporting  Business Driven Information Systems was developed by the author to 
ensure you receive accurate, high-quality, and in-depth content. Included is a complete set of materials that will 
assist students and faculty in accomplishing course objectives. 
 Online Learning Center ( www.mhhe.com/baltzan ) The McGraw-Hill website for  Business Driven Information 
Systems  includes support for students and faculty. All supplements will be available exclusively on the OLC. This 
will allow the authors to continually update and add to the instructor support materials. The following materials will 
be available on the OLC:
 Video Exercises. Each of the videos that accompany the text is supported by detailed teaching notes on how to 
turn the videos into classroom exercises where your students can apply the knowledge they are learning after 
watching the videos. 
 Test Bank. This computerized package allows instructors to custom design, save, and generate tests. The test 
program permits instructors to edit, add, or delete questions from the test banks; analyze test results; and organize 
a database of tests and students’ results. 
 Instructor’s Manual (IM). The IM, written by the author, includes suggestions for designing the course and 
presenting the material. Each chapter is supported by answers to end-of-chapter questions and problems, and 
suggestions concerning the discussion topics and cases. 
 PowerPoint Presentations. A set of PowerPoint slides, created by the author, accompanies each chapter and fea-
tures bulleted items that provide a lecture outline, plus key figures and tables from the text, and detailed teaching 
notes on each slide. 
 Image Library. Text figures and tables, as permission allows, are provided in a format by which they can be 
imported into PowerPoint for class lectures. 
 Project Files. The author has provided files for all projects that need further support, such as data files. 
 Cohesion Case. The Broadway Café is a running case instructors can use to reinforce core material such as customer 
relationship management, supply chain management, business intelligence, and decision making. The case has 
15 sections that challenge students to develop and expand their grandfather’s coffee shop. Students receive hands-on 
experience in business and learn technology’s true value of enabling business. Please note that the Cohesion Case is 
not a McGraw-Hill product but a Baltzan direct product. The case can be found at  www.cohesioncase.com .  
 Video Content.  Twenty videos accompany this text and cover topics from entrepreneurship to disaster recovery. 
Video content icons are placed throughout the text highlighting where we recommend watching the videos. Video 
IMs are also available so you can turn the videos into engaging classroom activities. 

Walkthrough
xxii
 McGraw-Hill  Connect MIS  
 
TM
 Less Managing. More Teaching. Greater Learning. 
 McGraw-Hill  Connect MIS  is an online assignment and assessment solution that connects students with the tools 
and resources they’ll need to achieve success. 
 McGraw-Hill  Connect MIS helps prepare students for their future by enabling faster learning, more efficient 
studying, and higher retention of knowledge. 
 McGraw-Hill  Connect MIS  features 
 Connect MIS offers a number of powerful tools and features to make managing assignments easier, so faculty can 
spend more time teaching. With  Connect MIS, students can engage with their coursework anytime and anywhere, 
making the learning process more accessible and efficient.  Connect MIS offers you the features described next. 
 Simple Assignment Management  
With  Connect MIS, creating assignments is easier than ever, so you can spend more time teaching and less time 
managing. The assignment management function enables you to:
 ■ Create and deliver assignments easily with selectable end-of-chapter questions and test bank items. 
 ■ Streamline lesson planning, student progress reporting, and assignment grading to make classroom manage-
ment more efficient than ever. 
 ■ Go paperless with the eBook and online submission and grading of student assignments. 
 Smart Grading  
When it comes to studying, time is precious.  Connect MIS helps students learn more efficiently by providing 
feedback and practice material when they need it, where they need it. When it comes to teaching, your time also is 
precious. The grading function enables you to:
 • Have assignments scored automatically, giving students immediate feedback on their work and side-by-side 
comparisons with correct answers. 
 • Access and review each response; manually change grades or leave comments for students to review. 
 • Reinforce classroom concepts with practice tests and instant quizzes. 
 Instructor Library 
 The  Connect MIS Instructor Library is your repository for additional resources to improve student engagement in 
and out of class. You can select and use any asset that enhances your lecture. 

Walkthrough
xxiii
 Student Study Center  
The  Connect MIS  Student Study Center is the place for students to access additional resources. The Student Study 
Center:
 • Offers students quick access to lectures, practice materials, ebooks, and more. 
 • Provides instant practice material and study questions, easily accessible on the go. 
 • Gives students access to the Personalized Learning Plan described next. 
 Student Progress Tracking 
 Connect MIS keeps instructors informed about how each student, section, and class is performing, allowing for 
more productive use of lecture and office hours. The progress-tracking function enables you to:
 • View scored work immediately and track individual or group performance with assignment and grade reports. 
 • Access an instant view of student or class performance relative to learning objectives. 
 • Collect data and generate reports required by many accreditation organizations, such as AACSB. 
 Lecture Capture  
Increase the attention paid to lecture discussion by decreasing the attention paid to note taking. For an additional 
charge, Lecture Capture offers new ways for students to focus on the in-class discussion, knowing they can revisit 
important topics later. Lecture Capture enables you to:
 • Record and distribute your lecture with a click of button. 
 • Record and index PowerPoint presentations and anything shown on your computer so it is easily searchable, 
frame by frame. 
 • Offer access to lectures anytime and anywhere by computer, iPod, or mobile device. 
 • Increase intent listening and class participation by easing students’ concerns about note taking. Lecture Capture 
will make it more likely you will see students’ faces, not the tops of their heads. 
 McGraw-Hill Connect Plus MIS  
McGraw-Hill reinvents the textbook learning experience for the modern student with  Connect Plus MIS. A  seamless 
integration of an ebook and  Connect MIS, Connect Plus MIS provides all of the  Connect MIS features plus the 
following:
 • An integrated ebook, allowing for anytime, anywhere access to the textbook. 
 • Dynamic links between the problems or questions you assign to your students and the location in the ebook 
where that problem or question is covered. 
 • A powerful search function to pinpoint and connect key concepts in a snap. 
 In short,  Connect MIS offers you and your students powerful tools and features that optimize your time 
and energies, enabling you to focus on course content, teaching, and student learning.  Connect MIS also 

Walkthrough
xxiv
offers a wealth of content resources for both instructors and students. This state-of-the-art, thoroughly tested 
system supports you in preparing students for the world that awaits. 
 For more information about Connect, go to  www.mcgrawhillconnect.com , or contact your local McGraw-Hill 
sales representative. 
 Tegrity Campus: Lectures 24/7 
 Tegrity Campus is a service that makes class time available 24/7 by automatically capturing every lecture in a 
searchable format for students to review when they study and complete assignments. With a simple one-click 
start-and-stop process, you capture all computer screens and corresponding audio. Students can replay any part 
of any class with easy-to-use browser-based viewing on a PC or Mac. 
 Educators know that the more students can see, hear, and experience class resources, the better they learn. In 
fact, studies prove it. With Tegrity Campus, students quickly recall key moments by using Tegrity Campus’s unique 
search feature. This search helps students efficiently find what they need, when they need it, across an entire 
semester of class recordings. Help turn all your students’ study time into learning moments immediately supported 
by your lecture. 
 To learn more about Tegrity watch a two-minute Flash demo at  http://tegritycampus.mhhe.com  .  
 Assurance of Learning Ready 
 Many educational institutions today are focused on the notion of  assurance of learning, an important element of 
some accreditation standards.  Business Driven Information Systems is designed specifically to support your assur-
ance of learning initiatives with a simple, yet powerful solution. 
 Each test bank question for  Business Driven Information Systems maps to a specific chapter learning outcome/
objective listed in the text. You can use our test bank software, EZ Test and EZ Test Online, or in  Connect MIS to 
easily query for learning outcomes/objectives that directly relate to the learning objectives for your course. You can 
then use the reporting features of EZ Test to aggregate student results in similar fashion, making the collection and 
presentation of assurance of learning data simple and easy. 
 AACSB Statement 
 The McGraw-Hill Companies is a proud corporate member of AACSB International. Understanding the importance 
and value of AACSB accreditation,  Business Driven Information Systems 4e recognizes the curricula guidelines 
detailed in the AACSB standards for business accreditation by connecting selected questions in the test bank to the 
six general knowledge and skill guidelines in the AACSB standards. 
 The statements contained in  Business Driven Information Systems 4e are provided only as a guide for the users 
of this textbook. The AACSB leaves content coverage and assessment within the purview of individual schools, the 
mission of the school, and the faculty. While  Business Driven Information Systems 4e and the teaching package 
make no claim of any specific AACSB qualification or evaluation, within  Business Driven Information Systems 4e 
we have labeled selected questions according to the six general knowledge and skills areas. 

Walkthrough
xxv
 McGraw-Hill Customer Care Contact Information 
 At McGraw-Hill, we understand that getting the most from new technology can be challenging. That’s why our 
services don’t stop after you purchase our products. You can email our product specialists 24 hours a day to get 
product-training online. Or you can search our knowledge bank of Frequently Asked Questions on our support 
website. For Customer Support, call  800-331-5094 or visit  www.mhhe.com/support where you can look for 
your question on our FAQ or you can email a question directly to customer support. One of our technical support 
analysts will be able to assist you in a timely fashion. 

Walkthrough
xxvi
 Apply Your Knowledge 
 Business Driven Information Systems contains 33 projects that focus on student application of core concepts and tools. 
These projects can be found on the OLC at  www.mhhe.com/baltzan . 
Project 
Number
Project Name
Project Type
Plug-In
Focus Area
Project Level
Skill Set
Page 
Number
  1
Financial 
Destiny
Excel
T2
Personal 
Budget
Introductory
Formulas
AYK.4
  2
Cash Flow
Excel
T2
Cash Flow
Introductory
Formulas
AYK.4
  3
Technology 
Budget
Excel
T1, T2
Hardware 
and Software
Introductory
Formulas
AYK.4
  4
Tracking 
Donations
Excel
T2
Employee 
Relationships
Introductory
Formulas
AYK.4
  5
Convert 
Currency
Excel
T2
Global 
Commerce
Introductory
Formulas
AYK.5
  6
Cost 
Comparison
Excel
T2
Total Cost of 
Ownership
Introductory
Formulas
AYK.5
  7
Time 
Management
Excel or Project
T12
Project 
Management
Introductory
Gantt Charts
AYK.6
  8
Maximize 
Profit
Excel
T2, T4
Strategic 
Analysis
Intermediate
Formulas or 
Solver
AYK.6
  9
Security 
Analysis
Excel
T3
Filtering Data
Intermediate
Conditional 
Formatting, 
Autofilter, 
Subtotal
AYK.7
10
Gathering 
Data
Excel
T3
Data 
Analysis
Intermediate
Conditional 
Formatting
AYK.8
11
Scanner 
System
Excel
T2
Strategic 
Analysis
Intermediate
Formulas
AYK.8
12
Competitive 
Pricing
Excel
T2
Profit 
Maximization
Intermediate
Formulas
AYK.9
13
Adequate 
Acquisitions
Excel
T2
Break-Even 
Analysis
Intermediate
Formulas
AYK.9
14
Customer 
Relations
Excel
T3
CRM
Intermediate
PivotTable
AYK.9
15
Assessing 
the Value of 
Information
Excel
T3
Data 
Analysis
Intermediate
PivotTable
AYK.10
16
Growth, 
Trends, and 
Forecasts
Excel
T2, T3
Data 
Forecasting
Advanced
Average, 
Trend, Growth
AYK.11
17
Shipping Costs
Excel
T4
SCM
Advanced
Solver
AYK.12
18
Formatting 
Grades
Excel
T3
Data 
Analysis
Advanced
If, LookUp
AYK.12
(Continued)

Walkthrough
xxvii
Project 
Number
Project Name
Project Type
Plug-In
Focus Area
Project Level
Skill Set
Page
Number
19
Moving 
Dilemma
Excel
T2, T3
SCM
Advanced
Absolute 
vs. Relative 
Values
AYK.13
20
Operational 
Efficiencies
Excel
T3
SCM
Advanced
PivotTable
AYK.14
21
Too Much 
Information
Excel
T3
CRM
Advanced
PivotTable
AYK.14
22
Turnover Rates
Excel
T3
Data Mining
Advanced
PivotTable
AYK.15
23
Vital 
Information
Excel
T3
Data Mining
Advanced
PivotTable
AYK.15
24
Breaking Even
Excel
T4
Business 
Analysis
Advanced
Goal Seek
AYK.16
25
Profit Scenario
Excel
T4
Sales 
Analysis
Advanced
Scenario 
Manager
AYK.16
26
Electronic 
Résumés
HTML
T9, T10, 
T11
Electronic 
Personal 
Marketing
Introductory
Structural 
Tags
AYK.17
27
Gathering 
Feedback
Dreamweaver
T9, T10, 
T11
Data 
Collection
Intermediate
Organization 
of Information
AYK.17
28
Daily Invoice
Access
T5, T6, 
T7, T8
Business 
Analysis
Introductory
Entities, 
Relationships, 
and 
Databases
AYK.17
29
Billing Data
Access
T5, T6, 
T7, T8
Business 
Intelligence
Introductory
Entities, 
Relationships, 
and 
Databases
AYK.19
30
Inventory Data
Access
T5, T6, 
T7, T8
SCM
Intermediate
Entities, 
Relationships, 
and 
Databases
AYK.20
31
Call Center
Access
T5, T6, 
T7, T8
CRM
Intermediate
Entities, 
Relationships, 
and
Databases
AYK.21
32
Sales Pipeline
Access
T5, T6, 
T7, T8
Business 
Intelligence
Advanced
Entities, 
Relationships, 
and 
Databases
AYK.23
33
Online 
Classified Ads
Access
T5, T6, 
T7, T8
Ecommerce
Advanced
Entities, 
Relationships, 
and 
Databases
AYK.23

Walkthrough
xxviii
 SimNet Online is McGraw-Hill’s leading solution for learning Microsoft Office skills and beyond! SimNet is our online 
training and assessment solution for Microsoft Office skills, computing concepts, Internet Explorer, and Windows 
content. With no downloads for installation and completely online (requires Adobe Flash Player), SimNet is accessible 
for today’s students through multiple browsers and is easy to use for all. Its consistent user interface and functional-
ity will help save you time and help you be more successful in your course. 
 Moreover, SimNet offers you lifelong learning. Our codes never expire and the online program is designed with Self-
Study and SimSearch features to help you immediately learn isolated Microsoft Office skills on demand. It’s more 
than a resource; it’s a tool you can use throughout your entire time at your higher education institution. 
 Finally, you will see powerful, measurable results with SimNet Online. See results immediately in the student grade-
book and also generate custom training lessons after an exam to help you determine exactly which content areas 
you still need to study. 
 SimNet Online is your solution for mastering Microsoft Office skills! 
 SIMnet: Keep IT SIMple! 
 To learn more, visit  www.simnetkeepitsimple.com 

Walkthrough
xxix
 McGraw-Hill Higher Education and Blackboard have teamed up. What does this mean for you?
 1. Your life, simplified.  Now you and your students can access McGraw-Hill’s Connect™ and Create™ right from 
within your Blackboard course—all with one single sign-on. Say good-bye to the days of logging in to multiple 
applications. 
 2.  Deep integration of content and tools.  Not only do you get single sign-on with Connect™ and Create™, you 
also get deep integration of McGraw-Hill content and content engines right in Blackboard. Whether you’re choos-
ing a book for your course or building Connect™ assignments, all the tools you need are right where you want 
them—inside of Blackboard. 
 3. Seamless Gradebooks.  Are you tired of keeping multiple gradebooks and manually synchronizing grades into 
Blackboard? We thought so. When a student completes an integrated Connect™ assignment, the grade for that 
assignment automatically (and instantly) feeds your Blackboard grade center. 
 4.  A solution for everyone.  Whether your institution is already using Blackboard or you just want to try Blackboard 
on your own, we have a solution for you. McGraw-Hill and Blackboard can now offer you easy access to industry 
leading technology and content, whether your campus hosts it, or we do. Be sure to ask your local McGraw-Hill 
representative for details. 
 Craft your teaching resources to match the way you teach! With McGraw-Hill Create,  www.mcgrawhillcreate.com , you can 
easily rearrange chapters, combine material from other content sources, and quickly upload content you have written, like 
your course syllabus or teaching notes. Find the content you need in Create by searching through thousands of leading 
McGraw-Hill textbooks. Arrange your book to fit your teaching style. Create even allows you to personalize your book’s appear-
ance by selecting the cover and adding your name, school, and course information. Order a Create book and you’ll receive a 
complimentary print review copy in 3–5 business days or a complimentary electronic review copy (eComp) via email in about 
one hour. Go to www.mcgrawhillcreate.com today and register. Experience how McGraw-Hill Create empowers you to teach 
your students  your way. 

Acknowledgments
xxx
Stephen Adams 
Lakeland Community College
Adeyemi A. Adekoya 
Virginia State University—Petersburg
Joni Adkins
Northwest Missouri State University
Chad Anderson
University of Nevada—Reno
Anne Arendt
Utah Valley University
Laura Atkins
James Madison University
William Ayen
University of Colorado
David Bahn
Metropolitan State University—St. 
Paul
Nick Ball 
Brigham Young University—Provo
Patrick Bateman 
Youngstown State University
Terry Begley 
Creighton University
Craig Beytien 
University of Colorado—Boulder
Sudip Bhattacharjee 
University of Connecticut
Meral Binbasioglu 
Hofstra University
Joseph Blankenship 
Fairmont State College
Beverly Bohn 
Park University
Brenda Bradford 
Missouri Baptist University
Casey Cegielski 
Auburn University—Auburn
Amita Chin 
Virginia Commonwealth University
Steve Clements 
Eastern Oregon University
Cynthia Corritore 
Creighton University
Dan Creed
Normandale Community College
Don Danner
San Francisco State University
Sasha Dekleva
DePaul University
Robert Denker
Baruch College
Hongwei Du
California State University, East Bay
Kevin Duffy 
Wright State University—Dayton
Annette Easton 
San Diego State University
Barry Floyd 
California Polytechnic State 
University
Valerie Frear 
Daytona State College
Laura Frost 
Walsh College
Don Gaber 
University of Wisconsin—Eau Claire
Biswadip Ghosh 
Metropolitan State College of Denver
Richard Glass 
Bryant University
Lakshmi Goel 
University of North Florida
Mark Goudreau 
Johnson & Wales University
Katie Gray 
The University of Texas at Austin
Gary Hackbarth 
Northern Kentucky University
Shu Han 
Yeshiva University
Peter Haried 
University of Wisconsin—La Crosse
Rosie Hauck 
Illinois State University
Jun He 
University of Michigan—Dearborn
James Henson 
California State University—Fresno
Terri Holly 
Indian River State College
Scott Hunsinger 
Appalachian State University
Ted Hurewitz 
Rutgers University
Yan Jin 
Elizabeth City State University
Brian Jones
Tennessee Technological University
 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Working on the fourth edition of Business Driven Information Systems has been an 
involved undertaking, and there are many people whom we want to heartily thank for 
their hard work, enthusiasm, and dedication.
This text was produced with the help of a number of people at McGraw-Hill, including 
Brand Manager Wyatt Morris, Development Editor Alaina Tucker, and Kathryn Wright, 
our Project Manager.
Additionally, we would like to thank Scott Davidson (Director), Tiffany Russell 
(Marketing Manager), Matt Diamond (Designer), Kevin White (Digital Development 
Editor), and Keri Johnson (Content Licensing Specialist) for your support and dedica-
tion to the success of this text.
Finally, we offer our sincerest gratitude and deepest appreciation to our valuable 
reviewers whose feedback was instrumental in successfully compiling this text. We could 
not have done this without you!

xxxi
Acknowledgments
Robert Judge
San Diego State University
B. Kahn
Suffolk University
Virginia Kleist
West Virginia University  
Meagan Knoll
Grand Valley State University
Rick Kraas
Kalamazoo Valley Community 
College
Chetan Kumar
California State University—San 
Marcos
Guolin Lai
University of Louisiana—Lafayette
Jose Lepervanche
Florida State College—Jacksonville
Norman Lewis
Wayne State University
Mary Lind
North Carolina A&T State University
Steve Loy
Eastern Kentucky University
Joan Lumpkin
Wright State University—Dayton
Linda Lynam
University of Central Missouri
Nicole Lytle-Kosola
California State University—San 
Bernardino
Garth MacKenzie
University of Maryland University 
College
Michael Martel
Ohio University—Athens
Dana McCann
Central Michigan University
David McCue
University of Maryland  
Lynn McKell
Brigham Young University  
Patricia McQuaid
California Polytechnic State 
University
Fiona Nah
University of Nebraska—Lincoln
Eric Nathan
University of Houston Downtown
Bill Neumann
University of Arizona
Richard Newmark
University of Northern Colorado
Kathleen Noce
Pennsylvania State University—Erie
Gisele Olney
University of Nebraska—Omaha
Kevin Parker
Idaho State University—Pocatello
Neeraj Parolia
Towson University
Gang Peng
Youngstown State University
Julie Pettus
Missouri State University
Craig Piercy
University of Georgia
Clint Pires
Hamline University
Jennifer Pitts
Columbus State University
Carol Pollard
Appalachian State University
Lara Preiser-Houy
California State Polytechnic 
University—Pomona
John Quigley
East Tennessee State University
Muhammad Razi
Western Michigan University
Lisa Rich
Athens State University
Russell Robbins
University of Pittsburgh
Fred Rodammer
Michigan State University
Steve Ross
Western Washington University
Mark Schmidt
St. Cloud State University
Dana Schwieger
Southeast Missouri State University
Darrell Searcy
Palm Beach Community College
Jay Shah
Texas State University
Vivek Shah
Texas State University
Vijay Shah
West Virginia University—
Parkersburg
Jollean Sinclaire
Arkansas State University
Changsoo Sohn
St. Cloud State University
Toni Somers
Wayne State University
Denise Sullivan
Westchester Community College
Yi Sun
California State University—San 
Marcos
Mike Tarn
Western Michigan University
Mark Thouin
The University of Texas at Dallas
Lise Urbaczewski
University of Michigan—Dearborn
Hong Wang
North Carolina A&T State University
Barbara Warner
University of South Florida
Connie Washburn
Georgia Perimeter College
Bruce White
Quinnipiac University
Raymond Whitney
University of Maryland University 
College
Rosemary Wild
California Polytechnic State 
University
Marie Wright
Western Connecticut State University
Yajiong Xue
East Carolina University
Ali Yayla
Binghamton University
Grace Zhang
Midwestern State University
Lin Zhao
Purdue University—Calumet
Jeanne Zucker
East Tennessee State University

About the Author
xxxii
  ABO UT  T H E  A U T H O R 
 Paige  Baltzan  
 Paige Baltzan teaches in the Department of Business Information and Analytics at the 
Daniels College of Business at the University of Denver. She holds a B.S.B.A. specializing 
in Accounting/MIS from Bowling Green State University and an M.B.A. specializing in 
MIS from the University of Denver. She is a coauthor of several books, including  Business 
Driven Technology, Essentials of Business Driven Information Systems, I-Series,  and a con-
tributor to  Management Information Systems for the Information Age. 
 Before joining the Daniels College faculty in 1999, Paige spent several years working 
for a large telecommunications company and an international consulting firm, where 
she participated in client engagements in the United States as well as South America 
and Europe. Paige lives in Lakewood, Colorado, with her husband, Tony, and daughters 
Hannah and Sophie. 

2
3
1
 MODULE 1: 
Business Driven MIS 
 MODULE 3: 
Enterprise MIS 
 MODULE 2: 
Technical Foundations 
of MIS 
 module 1 
 Business Driven MIS 
 M OST COMPANIES TODAY  rely heavily on the use of management information sys-
tems (MIS) to run various aspects of their businesses. Whether they need to order and ship 
goods, interact with customers, or conduct other business functions, management information 
systems are often the underlying infrastructure performing the activities. Management informa-
tion systems allow companies to remain competitive in today’s fast-paced world and especially 
when conducting business on the Internet. Organizations must adapt to technological advances 
and innovations to keep pace with today’s rapidly changing environment. Their competitors cer-
tainly will! 
 No matter how exciting technology is, successful companies do not use it simply for its own 
sake. Companies should have a solid business reason for implementing technology. Using a 
technological solution just because it is available is not a good business strategy. 
 The purpose of Module 1 is to raise your awareness of the vast opportunities made possible 
by the tight correlation between business and technology. Business strategies and processes 
should always drive your technology choices. Although awareness of an emerging technology 
can sometimes lead us in new strategic directions, the role of information systems, for the most 
part, is to support existing business strategies and processes. 
  Module 1: Business Driven MIS
 CHAPTER 1:  Management Information Systems: Business Driven MIS 
 CHAPTER 2:  Decisions and Processes: Value Driven Business 
 CHAPTER 3:  Ebusiness: Electronic Business Value 
 CHAPTER 4:  Ethics and Information Security: MIS Business Concerns 

 What’s in IT for me?  
This chapter sets the stage for the textbook. It starts from ground zero by providing a clear description of what information 
is and how it fits into business operations, strategies, and systems. It provides an overview of how companies operate in 
competitive environments and why they must continually define and redefine their business strategies to create competi-
tive advantages. Doing so allows them to survive and thrive. Information systems are key business enablers for successful 
operations in competitive environments. 
 You, as a business student, must understand the tight correlation between business and technology. You must first rec-
ognize information’s role in daily business activities, and then understand how information supports and helps implement 
global business strategies and competitive advantages. After reading this chapter, you should have a solid understanding of 
business driven information systems and their role in managerial decision making and problem solving. 
 1 
 ■  I d e n t i f y i n g  C o m p e t i t i v e 
A d v a n t a g e s  
 ■  T h e  F i v e  F o rc e s  M o d e l —
E v a l u a t i n g  I n d u s t r y 
A t t r a c t i v e n e s s  
 ■  T h e  T h re e  G e n e r i c  S t r a t e g i e s —
C h o o s i n g  a  B u s i n e s s  F o c u s  
 ■  Va l u e  C h a i n  A n a l y s i s —
E x e c u t i n g  B u s i n e s s  S t r a t e g i e s   
 SECTION 1.2   
Business Strategy
 ■  C o m p e t i n g  i n  t h e  I n f o r m a t i o n 
A g e  
 ■  T h e  C h a l l e n g e :  D ep a r t m e n t a l 
C o m p a n i e s  
 ■  T h e  S o l u t i o n :  M a n ag e m e n t 
I n f o r m a t i o n  S y s t em s  
 SECTION 1.1   
Business Driven MIS
 C H A P T E R  O U T L I N E 
 C H A P T E R 
 Management Information 
Systems: Business Driven MIS 

3
Business Driven MIS Module 1
 opening case study 
 The World Is Flat: Thomas Friedman  
 Christopher Columbus proved in 1492 that the world is round. For centuries, sailors maneu-
vered the seas discovering new lands, new people, and new languages as nations began 
trading goods around the globe. Then Thomas Friedman, a noted columnist for  The New 
York Times, published his book  The World Is Flat. 
 Friedman argues that the world has become flat due to technological advances connecting 
people in China, India, and the United States as if we were all next-door neighbors. Physicians 
in India are reading X-rays for U.S. hospitals, and JetBlue Airways ticket agents take plane 
reservations for the company from the comfort of their Utah homes. Technology has elimi-
nated some of the economic and cultural advantages developed countries enjoy, making the 
world a level playing field for all participants. Friedman calls this Globalization 3.0. 
 Globalization 1.0 started when Christopher Columbus discovered the world is round and 
the world shrank from large to medium. For the next several hundred years, countries domi-
nated by white men controlled business. Globalization 2.0 began around 1800, during the 
Industrial Revolution, when the world went from medium to small. In this era international 
companies dominated by white men controlled business. Globalization 3.0 began in early 
2000, removing distance from the business equation, and the world has gone from small to 
tiny. In this era, people of all colors from the four corners of the world will dominate busi-
ness. Farmers in remote villages in Nepal carry an iPhone to access the world’s knowledge 
at, say, Wikipedia or the stock market closing prices at Bloomberg. 
 Outsourcing, or hiring someone from another country to complete work remotely, will 
play an enormous role in this era. It has advantages and disadvantages. Outsourcing work 
to countries where labor is cheap drives down production costs and allows companies to 
offer lower prices to U.S. consumers. Having an accountant in China complete a U.S. tax 
return is just as easy as driving to the H&R Block office on the corner, and probably far 
cheaper. Calling an 800 number for service can connect consumers to an Indian, Canadian, 
or Chinese worker on the other end of the line. Of course, outsourcing also eliminates some 
U.S. manufacturing and labor jobs, causing pockets of unemployment. In fact, the United 
States has outsourced several million service and manufacturing jobs to offshore, low-cost 
producers. 
  Figure  1.1  shows Friedman’s list of forces that flattened the world. They converged 
around the year 2000 and “created a flat world: a global, web-enabled platform for mul-
tiple forms of sharing knowledge and work, irrespective of time, distance, geography, and 
increasingly, language.” Three powerful new economies began materializing at this time. In 

4
Chapter 1 Management Information Systems: Business Driven MIS
India, China, and the former Soviet Union, more than 3 billion new willing and able partici-
pants walked onto the business playing field. Business students will be competing for their 
first jobs not only against other local students, but also against students from around the 
country and around the globe.1 
Friedman’s 10 Forces That Flattened the World
  1. Fall of the Berlin Wall
The events of November 9, 1989, tilted the worldwide balance of 
power toward democracies and free markets.
  2. Netscape IPO
The August 9, 1995, offering sparked massive investment in fiber-
optic cables.
  3. Work flow software
The rise of applications from PayPal to VPNs enabled faster, closer 
coordination among far-flung employees.
  4. Open sourcing
Self-organizing communities, such as Linux, launched a 
collaborative revolution.
  5. Outsourcing
Migrating business functions to India saved money and a 
Third World economy.
  6. Offshoring
Contract manufacturing elevated China to economic 
prominence.
  7. Supply chaining
Robust networks of suppliers, retailers, and customers 
increased business efficiency.
  8. In-sourcing
Logistics giants took control of customer supply chains, helping 
mom-and-pop shops go global.
  9. Informing
Power searching allowed everyone to use the Internet as a “personal 
supply chain of knowledge.”
10. Wireless
Wireless technologies pumped up collaboration, making it mobile and 
personal.
FIGURE 1.1
Thomas Friedman’s 10 Forces 
That Flattened the World

5
Business Driven MIS Module 1
    section 1.1  
Business Driven MIS 
 LE AR NI NG  O UT CO M E S 
 1.1 Describe the information age and the differences among data, information, business intelligence, 
and knowledge. 
 1.2 Identify the different departments in a company and why they must work together to achieve success. 
 1.3 Explain systems thinking and how management information systems enable business 
communications. 
 COMPETING IN THE INFORMATION AGE 
 Did you know that . . .
 ■ The movie  Avatar  took more than four years to create and cost $450 million. 
 ■ Lady Gaga’s real name is Stefani Joanne Angelina Germanotta. 
 ■ Customers pay $2.6 million for a 30-second advertising time slot during the Super 
Bowl. 2 
 A   fact   is the confirmation or validation of an event or object. In the past, people pri-
marily learned facts from books. Today, by simply pushing a button people can find out 
anything, from anywhere, at any time. We live in the   information age  ,  when infinite 
quantities of facts are widely available to anyone who can use a computer. The impact of 
information technology on the global business environment is equivalent to the printing 
press’s impact on publishing and electricity’s impact on productivity. College student 
startups were mostly unheard of before the information age. Now, it’s not at all unusual 
to read about a business student starting a multimillion-dollar company from his or her 
dorm room. Think of Mark Zuckerberg, who started Facebook from his dorm, or Michael 
Dell (Dell Computers) and Bill Gates (Microsoft), who both founded their legendary 
companies as college students. 
 You may think only students well versed in advanced technology can compete in the 
information age. This is simply not true. Many business leaders have created exceptional 
opportunities by coupling the power of the information age with traditional business 
methods. Here are just a few examples:
 ■ Amazon is not a technology company; its original business focus was to sell books, 
and it now sells nearly everything. 
 ■ Netflix is not a technology company; its primary business focus is to rent videos. 
 ■ Zappos is not a technology company; its primary business focus is to sell shoes, bags, 
clothing, and accessories. 
 Amazon’s founder, Jeff Bezos, at first saw an opportunity to change the way people 
purchase books. Using the power of the information age to tailor offerings to each 
customer and speed the payment process, he in effect opened millions of tiny virtual 
bookstores, each with a vastly larger selection and far cheaper product than traditional 
bookstores. The success of his original business model led him to expand Amazon to 
carry many other types of products. The founders of Netflix and Zappos have done the 
same thing for videos and shoes. All these entrepreneurs were business professionals, 
not technology experts. However, they understood enough about the information age 
to apply it to a particular business, creating innovative companies that now lead entire 
industries. 
Students who understand business along with the power associated with the infor-
mation age will create their own opportunities and perhaps even new industries, as co-
founders Chris DeWolfe and Tom Anderson did with MySpace and Mark Zuckerberg did 
LO. 1.1: Describe the information 
age and the differences among data, 
information, business intelligence, 
and knowledge.

 BUSINESS DRIVEN DISCUSSION 
 Bill Gates, founder of Microsoft, stated that 20 years ago most people would 
rather have been a B student in New York City than a genius in China because 
the opportunities available to students in developed countries were limitless. 
Today, many argue that the opposite is now true due to technological advances 
making it easier to succeed as a genius in China than a B student in New York. 
As a group, discuss if you agree or disagree with Bill Gates statement. 3 
 View from a 
Flat World 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 
6
Chapter 1 Management Information Systems: Business Driven MIS
with Facebook. Our primary goal in this course is to arm you with the knowledge you 
need to compete in the information age. The core drivers of the information age are:
 ■ Data 
 ■ Information 
 ■ Business intelligence 
 ■ Knowledge (see  Figure 1.2 ) 
 Data 
  Data   are raw facts that describe the characteristics of an event or object. Before the 
information age, managers manually collected and analyzed data, a time-consuming 
and complicated task without which they would have little insight into how to run their 
FIGURE 1.2
The Differences among 
Data, Information, Business 
Intelligence, and Knowledge
Data
Information
Business
Intelligence
Knowledge
•
•
• Data converted
 into a meaningful
 and useful
 context
• Information collected
 from multiple sources
 that analyzes patterns,
 trends, and relationships
 for strategic decision
 making
• The skills, experience,
 and expertise, coupled
 with information and
 intelligence, that creates
 a person’s intellectual
 resources.
• Choosing not to ﬁre a
 sales representative
 who is underperforming
 knowing that person is
 experiencing family
 problems
• Listing products that are
 about to expire ﬁrst on
 the menu or creating
 them as a daily special
 to move the product
• Raw facts that 
 describe the
 characteristics 
 of an event 
 or object
• Order date
• Amount sold
• Customer
 number
• Quantity
 ordered
• Best-selling
 product
• Best customer
• Worst-selling
 product
• Worst
 customer
• Lowest sales per week
 compared with the
 economic interest rates
• Best-selling product by
 month compared to
 sports season and city
 team wins and losses

7
Business Driven MIS Module 1
business. Lacking data, managers often found themselves making business decisions 
about how many products to make, how much material to order, or how many employ-
ees to hire based on intuition or gut feelings. In the information age, successful manag-
ers compile, analyze, and comprehend massive amounts of data daily, which helps them 
make more successful business decisions. 
  Figure 1.3  shows sales data for Tony’s Wholesale Company, a fictitious business that 
supplies snacks to stores. The data highlight characteristics such as order date, cus-
tomer, sales representative, product, quantity, and profit. The second line in  Figure 1.3 , 
for instance, shows that Roberta Cross sold 90 boxes of Ruffles to Walmart for $1,350, 
resulting in a profit of $450 (note that Profit  5  Sales  2  Costs). These data are useful for 
understanding individual sales; however, they do not provide us much insight into how 
Tony’s business is performing as a whole. Tony needs to answer questions that will help 
him manage his day-to-day operations such as:
 ■ Who are my best customers? 
 ■ Who are my least-profitable customers? 
 ■ What is my best-selling product? 
 ■ What is my slowest-selling product? 
 ■ Who is my strongest sales representative?  
 ■ Who is my weakest sales representative? 
 What Tony needs, in other words, is not data but  information. 
 Information 
  Information   is data converted into a meaningful and useful context. Having the right 
information at the right moment in time can be worth a fortune. Having the wrong infor-
mation at the right moment; or the right information at the wrong moment can be disas-
trous. The truth about information is that its value is only as good as the people who use 
it. People using the same information can make different decisions depending on how 
they interpret or analyze the information. Thus information has value only insofar as the 
people using it do as well. 
 Tony can analyze his sales data and turn them into information to answer all the 
above questions and understand how his business is operating.  Figures  1.4  and  1.5 , 
for instance, show us that Walmart is Roberta Cross’s best customer, and that Ruffles is 
Tony’s best product measured in terms of total sales. Armed with this information, Tony 
can identify and then address such issues as weak products and underperforming sales 
representatives. 
 A   variable   is a data characteristic that stands for a value that changes or varies 
over time. For example, in Tony’s data, price and quantity ordered can vary. Changing 
FIGURE 1.3
Tony’s Snack Company Data
Order 
Date
Customer
Sales 
Representative
Product
Qty
Unit 
Price
Total 
Sales
Unit 
Cost
Total 
Cost
Profit
4-Jan
Walmart
PJ Helgoth
Doritos
41
$24
$   984
$18
$738
$246
4-Jan
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Ruffles
90
$15
$1,350
$10
$900
$450
5-Jan
Safeway
Craig Schultz
Ruffles
27
$15
$   405
$10
$270
$135
6-Jan
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Ruffles
67
$15
$1,005
$10
$670
$335
7-Jan
7-Eleven
Craig Schultz
Pringles
79
$12
$   948
$  6
$474
$474
7-Jan
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Ruffles
52
$15
$   780
$10
$520
$260
8-Jan
Kroger
Craig Schultz
Ruffles
39
$15
$   585
$10
$390
$195
9-Jan
Walmart
Craig Schultz
Ruffles
66
$15
$   990
$10
$660
$330
10-Jan
Target
Craig Schultz
Ruffles
40
$15
$   600
$10
$400
$200
11-Jan
Walmart
Craig Schultz
Ruffles
71
$15
$1,065
$10
$710
$355

8
Chapter 1 Management Information Systems: Business Driven MIS
FIGURE 1.4
Tony’s Data Sorted by 
Customer “Walmart” and Sales 
Representative “Roberta Cross”
Order 
Date
Customer
Sales 
Representative
Product
Quantity
Unit 
Price
Total 
Sales
Unit Cost
Total 
Cost
Profit
26-Apr
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Fritos
86
$  19
$  1,634
$  17
$  1,462
$   172
29-Aug
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Fritos
76
$  19
$  1,444
$  17
$  1,292
$   152
7-Sep
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Fritos
20
$  19
$ 
 380
$  17
$ 
 340
$ 
 40
22-Nov
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Fritos
39
$  19
$ 
 741
$  17
$ 
 663
$ 
 78
30-Dec
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Fritos
68
$  19
$  1,292
$  17
$  1,156
$   136
7-Jul
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Pringles
79
$  18
$  1,422
$    8
$ 
 632
$   790
6-Aug
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Pringles
21
$  12
$ 
 252
$    6
$ 
 126
$   126
2-Oct
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Pringles
60
$  18
$  1,080
$    8
$ 
 480
$   600
15-Nov
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Pringles
32
$  12
$ 
 384
$    6
$ 
 192
$   192
21-Dec
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Pringles
92
$  12
$  1,104
$    6
$ 
 552
$   552
28-Feb
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Ruffles
67
$  15
$  1,005
$  10
$ 
 670
$   335
6-Mar
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Ruffles
8
$  15
$ 
 120
$  10
$ 
   80
$ 
 40
16-Mar
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Ruffles
68
$  15
$  1,020
$  10
$ 
 680
$   340
23-Apr
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Ruffles
34
$  15
$ 
 510
$  10
$ 
 340
$   170
4-Aug
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Ruffles
40
$  15
$ 
 600
$  10
$ 
 400
$   200
18-Aug
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Ruffles
93
$  15
$  1,395
$  10
$ 
 930
$   465
5-Sep
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Ruffles
41
$  15
$ 
 615
$  10
$ 
 410
$   205
12-Sep
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Ruffles
8
$  15
$ 
 120
$  10
$ 
   80
$ 
 40
28-Oct
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Ruffles
50
$  15
$ 
 750
$  10
$ 
 500
$   250
21-Nov
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Ruffles
79
$  15
$  1,185
$  10
$ 
 790
$   395
29-Jan
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Sun Chips
5
$  22
$ 
 110
$  18
$ 
   90
$ 
 20
12-Apr
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Sun Chips
85
$  22
$  1,870
$  18
$  1,530
$   340
16-Jun
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Sun Chips
55
$  22
$  1,210
$  18
$ 
 990
$   220
1,206
$383
$20,243
$273
$14,385
$5,858
 Sorting the data reveals the information that Roberta Cross’s total sales to Walmart were $20,243 resulting in a profit of $5,858. 
(Profit $5,858 5 Sales $20,243 2 Costs $14,385)
variables allows managers to create hypothetical scenarios to study future possibilities. 
Tony may find it valuable to anticipate how sales or cost increases affect profitability. To 
estimate how a 20 percent increase in prices might improve profits, Tony simply changes 
the price variable for all orders, which automatically calculates the amount of new prof-
its. To estimate how a 10 percent increase in costs hurts profits, Tony changes the cost 
variable for all orders, which automatically calculates the amount of lost profits. Manip-
ulating variables is an important tool for any business. 
 Business Intelligence 
  Business intelligence (BI)   is information collected from multiple sources such as sup-
pliers, customers, competitors, partners, and industries that analyzes patterns, trends, 
and relationships for strategic decision making. BI manipulates multiple variables and 
in some cases even hundreds of variables including such items as interest rates, weather 
conditions, and even gas prices. Tony could use BI to analyze internal data such as 
company sales, along with external data about the environment such as competitors, 
finances, weather, holidays, and even sporting events. Both internal and external vari-
ables affect snack sales, and analyzing these variables will help Tony determine ordering 
levels and sales forecasts. For instance, BI can predict inventory requirements for Tony’s 
business for the week before the Super Bowl if, say, the home team is playing, average 

9
Business Driven MIS Module 1
Tony’s Business Information
Name
Total Profit
Who is Tony’s best customer by total sales?
Walmart
$   560,789
Who is Tony’s least-valuable customer by total sales?
Walgreens
$45,673
Who is Tony’s best customer by profit?
7-Eleven
$   324,550
Who is Tony’s least-valuable customer by profit?
King Soopers
$     23,908
What is Tony’s best-selling product by total sales?
Ruffles
$   232,500
What is Tony’s weakest-selling product by total sales?
Pringles
$     54,890
What is Tony’s best-selling product by profit?
Tostitos
$     13,050
What is Tony’s weakest-selling product by profit?
Pringles
$     23,000
Who is Tony’s best sales representative by profit?
R. Cross
$1,230,980
Who is Tony’s weakest sales representative by profit?
Craig Schultz
$     98,980
What is the best sales representative’s best-selling 
product by total profit?
Ruffles
$     98,780
Who is the best sales representative’s best customer 
by total profit?
Walmart
$   345,900
What is the best sales representative’s weakest-selling product 
by total profit?
Sun Chips
$     45,600
Who is the best sales representative’s weakest 
customer by total profit?
Krogers
$     56,050
FIGURE 1.5
Information Gained after 
Analyzing Tony’s Data
 BUSINESS DRIVEN MIS 
 How can global warming be real when there is so much snow and cold weather? 
That’s what some people wondered after a couple of massive snowstorms bur-
ied Washington, D.C. Politicians across the capital made jokes and built igloos 
as they disputed the existence of climate change. Some concluded the planet 
simply could not be warming with all the snow on the ground. 
 These comments frustrated Joseph Romm, a physicist and climate expert 
with the Center for American Progress. He spent weeks turning data into infor-
mation and graphs to educate anyone who would listen as to why this reason-
ing was incorrect. Climate change is all about analyzing data, turning it into 
information to detect trends. You cannot observe climate change by looking out 
the window; you have to review decades of weather data with advanced tools to 
really understand the trends. 
 Increasingly we see politicians, economists, and newscasters taking tough 
issues and boiling them down to simplistic arguments over what the data 
mean, each interpreting the data and spinning the data to support their views 
and agendas. You need to understand the data and turn them into useful infor-
mation or else you will not understand when someone is telling the truth and 
when you are being lied to. 
 Brainstorm two or three types of data economists use to measure the 
economy. How do they turn the data into information? What issues do they 
encounter when attempting to measure the economy? As a manager, what do 
you need to understand when reading or listening to economic and business 
reports? 4   
 Manipulating 
the Data to Find 
Your Version of 
the Truth 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 

10
Chapter 1 Management Information Systems: Business Driven MIS
temperature is above 80 degrees, and the stock market is performing well. This is BI at 
its finest, incorporating all types of internal and external variables to anticipate business 
performance. 
 Top managers use BI to define the future of the business, analyzing markets, indus-
tries, and economies to determine the strategic direction the company must follow to 
remain profitable. Tony will set the strategic direction for his firm, which might include 
introducing new flavors of potato chips or sport drinks as new product lines or schools 
and hospitals as new market segments. 
 Knowledge 
  Knowledge   includes the skills, experience, and expertise, coupled with information and 
intelligence, that creates a person’s intellectual resources.   Knowledge workers  are indi-
viduals valued for their ability to interpret and analyze information. Today’s workers are 
commonly referred to as knowledge workers and they use BI along with personal experi-
ence to make decisions based on both information and intuition, a valuable resource for 
any company. 
 Imagine that Tony analyzes his data and finds his weakest sales representative for 
this period is Craig Schultz. If Tony considered only this information, he might con-
clude that firing Craig was a good business decision. However, because Tony has 
knowledge about how the company operates, he knows Craig has been out on medi-
cal leave for several weeks; hence, his sales numbers are low. Without this additional 
knowledge, Tony might have executed a bad business decision, delivered a negative 
message to the other employees, and sent his best sales representatives out to look for 
other jobs.  
 The key point in this scenario is that it is simply impossible to collect all the infor-
mation about every situation, and yet without that, it can be easy to misunderstand the 
problem. Using data, information, business intelligence,  and  knowledge to make deci-
sions and solve problems is the key to finding success in business. These core drivers of 
the information age are the building blocks of business systems.   
 BUSINESS DRIVEN ETHICS AND SECURITY 
 We live in the information age where the collection, storage, and use of data are 
hot topics. One example of inappropriate data handling occurred at a college 
where the monitoring of restrooms occurred every 15 seconds to observe the 
use of toilets, mirrors, and sinks. Students, faculty, and staff began complaining 
that the data collection was an invasion of their privacy and a violation of their 
rights. 
 Another example of inappropriate data handling occurred when a profes-
sor of accounting at a college lost a flash drive containing information for 
more than 1,800 students, including Social Security numbers, grades, and 
names. Social Security numbers were included because the data went back 
to before 1993 when the college used Social Security numbers to identify 
students. 
 What types of student data does your college collect? What could happen if 
your professor lost a thumb drive with all of your personal information? What 
types of issues could you encounter if someone stole your personal data? 
What can your college do to ensure this type of data storage violation does 
not occur? 5  
 Information 
Issues in the 
Information Age 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 

11
Business Driven MIS Module 1
Finance
Tracks strategic ﬁnancial
issues including money,
banking, credit,
investments, and assets.
Human resources
Maintains policies, plans,
and procedures for the
effective management of
employees. 
Sales
Performs the function of
selling goods or services.  
Operations
management 
Manages the process of
converting or transforming 
or resources into goods or
services.  
Marketing
Supports sales by
planning, pricing, and
promoting goods or
services.
Accounting
Records, measures, and
reports monetary
transactions.
FIGURE 1.6
Departments Working 
Independently
 THE CHALLENGE: DEPARTMENTAL COMPANIES 
 Companies are typically organized by department or functional area such as:
 ■  Accounting:  Records, measures, and reports monetary transactions. 
 ■  Finance: Deals with strategic financial issues including money, banking, credit, 
investments, and assets.  
 ■  Human resources: Maintains policies, plans, and procedures for the effective man-
agement of employees.  
 ■  Marketing: Supports sales by planning, pricing, and promoting goods or services.  
 ■  Operations management: Manages the process of converting or transforming or 
resources into goods or services. 
 ■  Sales: Performs the function of selling goods or services (see  Figure 1.6 ). 
 Each department performs its own activities. Sales and marketing focus on mov-
ing goods or services into the hands of consumers; they maintain transactional data. 
Finance and accounting focus on managing the company’s resources and maintain 
monetary data. Operations management focuses on manufacturing and maintains 
production data, while human resources focuses on hiring and training people and 
maintains employee data. Although each department has its own focus and data, none 
can work independently if the company is to operate as a whole. It is easy to see how a 
LO 1.2: Identify the different depart-
ments in a company and why they 
must work together to achieve 
success.

12
Chapter 1 Management Information Systems: Business Driven MIS
business decision made by one department can affect other departments. Marketing 
needs to analyze production and sales data to come up with product promotions and 
advertising strategies. Production needs to understand sales forecasts to determine the 
company’s manufacturing needs. Sales needs to rely on information from operations to 
understand inventory, place orders, and forecast consumer demand. All departments 
need to understand the accounting and finance departments’ information for budget-
ing. For the firm to be successful, all departments must work together as a single unit 
sharing common information and not operate independently or in a silo (see  Figure 1.7 ).  
 THE SOLUTION: MANAGEMENT INFORMATION 
SYSTEMS 
 You probably recall the old story of three blind men attempting to describe an elephant. 
The first man, feeling the elephant’s girth, said the elephant seemed very much like a 
wall. The second, feeling the elephant’s trunk, declared the elephant was like a snake. 
The third man felt the elephant’s tusks and said the elephant was like a tree or a cane. 
Companies that operate departmentally are seeing only one part of the elephant, a criti-
cal mistake that hinders successful operation. 
 Successful companies operate cross-functionally, integrating the operations of all 
departments. Systems are the primary enabler of cross-functional operations. A   system  
is a collection of parts that link to achieve a common purpose. A car is a good example 
of a system, since removing a part, such as the steering wheel or accelerator, causes the 
entire system to stop working. 
 Before jumping into how systems work, it is important to have a solid understand-
ing of the basic production process for goods and services.   Goods  are material items 
or products that customers will buy to satisfy a want or need. Clothing, groceries, cell 
phones, and cars are all examples of goods that people buy to fulfill their needs.   Services  
LO 1.3: Explain systems thinking 
and how management informa-
tion systems enable business 
communications.
FIGURE 1.7
Departments Working Together
Accounting
Monetary data
Finance
Monetary data
Human resources
Employee data
Marketing
Transactional data
Sales
Transactional data
Operations management
Production data
Business Decisions

13
Business Driven MIS Module 1
are tasks performed by people that customers will buy to satisfy a want or need. Waiting 
tables, teaching, and cutting hair are all examples of services that people pay for to fulfill 
their needs (see  Figure 1.8 ). 
 Production   is the process where a business takes raw materials and processes them 
or converts them into a finished product for its goods or services. Just think about mak-
ing a hamburger (see  Figure 1.9 ). First, you must gather all of the  inputs  or raw mate-
rials such as the bun, patty, lettuce, tomato, and ketchup. Second, you  process  the raw 
materials, so in this example you would need to cook the patty, wash and chop the let-
tuce and tomato, and place all of the items in the bun. Finally, you would have your  out-
put  or finished product—your hamburger!   Productivity   is the rate at which goods and 
services are produced based upon total output given total inputs. Given our previous 
example, if a business could produce the same hamburger with less expensive inputs 
Cars
Groceries 
Clothing 
Teaching 
Waiting
tables
Cutting hair
GOODS
Material items or products 
that customers will buy to
satisfy a want or need. 
SERVICES
Tasks performed by people 
that customers will buy
to satisfy a want or need. 
FIGURE 1.8
Different Types of Goods 
and Services
Input
Output
Process
Lettuce,
tomatoes, patty,
bun, ketchup
Cook the patty, put 
the ingredients 
together
Hamburger
FIGURE 1.9
Input, Process, Output Example

14
Chapter 1 Management Information Systems: Business Driven MIS
or more hamburgers with the same inputs it would see a rise in productivity and possi-
bly an increase in profits. Ensuring the input, process, and output of goods and services 
work across all of the departments of a company is where systems add tremendous value 
to overall business productivity. 
  Systems thinking   is a way of monitoring the entire system by viewing multiple inputs 
being processed or transformed to produce outputs while continuously gathering feed-
back on each part (see  Figure 1.10 ).   Feedback   is information that returns to its original 
transmitter (input, transform, or output) and modifies the transmitter’s actions. Feed-
back helps the system maintain stability. For example, a car’s system continuously moni-
tors the fuel level and turns on a warning light if the gas level is too low. Systems thinking 
provides an end-to-end view of how operations work together to create a product or 
service. Business students who understand systems thinking are valuable resources 
because they can implement solutions that consider the entire process, not just a single 
component. 
   Management information systems (MIS)    is a business function, like accounting 
and human resources, which moves information about people, products, and processes 
across the company to facilitate decision making and problem solving. MIS incorporates 
systems thinking to help companies operate cross-functionally. For example, to fulfill 
product orders, an MIS for sales moves a single customer order across all functional 
areas including sales, order fulfillment, shipping, billing, and finally customer service. 
Although different functional areas handle different parts of the sale, thanks to MIS, to 
the customer the sale is one continuous process. If one part of the company is experienc-
ing problems, however, then, like the car without a steering wheel, the entire system fails. 
If order fulfillment packages the wrong product, it will not matter that shipping, billing, 
and customer service did their jobs right, since the customer will not be satisfied when 
he or she opens the package. 
 MIS can be an important enabler of business success and innovation. This is not to 
say that MIS  equals  business success and innovation, or that MIS  represents business 
success and innovation. MIS is a tool that is most valuable when it leverages the talents 
of people who know how to use and manage it effectively. To perform the MIS func-
tion effectively, almost all companies, particularly large and medium-sized ones, have 
an internal MIS department, often called information technology (IT), information sys-
tems (IS), or management information systems (MIS). For the purpose of this text, we 
will refer to it as MIS. 
 MIS Department Roles and Responsibilities 
 MIS as a department is a relatively new functional area, having been around formally for 
about 40 years. Job titles, roles, and responsibilities often differ from company to com-
pany, but the most common are displayed in  Figure 1.11 . 
 While many companies may not have a different individual for each of these posi-
tions, they must have top managers who take responsibility for all these areas. 
FIGURE 1.10
Overview of Systems Thinking
Input
Process
Output
Feedback

15
Business Driven MIS Module 1
  section 1.2  
 Business Strategy 
 LEA R NI NG  O UT CO M E S 
 1.4  Explain why competitive advantages are temporary. 
 1.5  Describe Porter’s Five Forces Model and explain each of the five forces. 
 1.6  Compare Porter’s three generic strategies. 
 1.7  Demonstrate how a company can add value by using Porter’s value chain analysis. 
 IDENTIFYING COMPETITIVE ADVANTAGES 
 Running a company today is similar to leading an army; the top manager or leader 
ensures all participants are heading in the right direction and completing their goals and 
objectives. Companies lacking leadership quickly implode as employees head in differ-
ent directions attempting to achieve conflicting goals. To combat these challenges, lead-
ers communicate and execute business strategies (from the Greek word  stratus  for army 
and  ago  for leading). A   business strategy   is a leadership plan that achieves a specific set 
of goals or objectives as displayed in  Figure 1.12 . 
 Good leaders also anticipate unexpected misfortunes, from strikes and economic 
recessions to natural disasters. Their business strategies build in buffers or slack, 
LO 1.4: Explain why competitive 
advantages are temporary.
FIGURE 1.11
The Roles and Responsibilities 
of MIS
MIS Department Roles 
and Responsibilities
Chief information ofﬁcer (CIO) 
Chief knowledge ofﬁcer (CKO) 
Responsible for collecting,
maintaining, and distributing
company knowledge.
Chief privacy ofﬁcer (CPO) 
Responsible for ensuring the ethical and 
legal use of information within a 
company.
Chief security ofﬁcer (CSO) 
Responsible for ensuring the security 
of business systems and developing 
strategies and safeguards against 
attacks by hackers and viruses.
Chief technology ofﬁcer (CTO) 
Responsible for ensuring the 
speed, accuracy, availability,
and reliability of the MIS.
Responsible for (1) overseeing all uses of 
MIS and (2) ensuring that MIS strategically  
aligns with business goals and objectives.

16
Chapter 1 Management Information Systems: Business Driven MIS
allowing the company the ability to ride out any storm and defend against competitive 
or environmental threats. Of course, updating business strategies is a continuous under-
taking as internal and external environments rapidly change. Business strategies that 
match core company competencies to opportunities result in competitive advantages, 
a key to success! 
 A   competitive advantage   is a feature of a product or service on which customers 
place a greater value than they do on similar offerings from competitors. Competitive 
advantages provide the same product or service either at a lower price or with additional 
value that can fetch premium prices. Unfortunately, competitive advantages are typi-
cally temporary, because competitors often quickly seek ways to duplicate them. In turn, 
organizations must develop a strategy based on a new competitive advantage. Ways that 
companies duplicate competitive advantages include acquiring the new technology, 
copying the business operations, and hiring away key employees. The introduction of 
Apple’s iPod and iTunes, a brilliant merger of technology, business, and entertainment, 
offers an excellent example. 
 In early 2000, Steve Jobs was fixated on developing video editing software when he sud-
denly realized that millions of people were using computers to listen to music, a new trend 
in the industry catapulted by illegal online services such as Napster. Jobs was worried that 
he was looking in the wrong direction and had missed the opportunity to jump on the 
online music bandwagon. He moved fast, however, and within four months he had devel-
oped the first version of iTunes for the Mac. Jobs’ next challenge was to make a portable 
iTunes player that could hold thousands of songs and be completely transportable. Within 
nine months the iPod was born. With the combination of iTunes and iPod, Apple created a 
significant competitive advantage in the marketplace. Many firms began following Apple’s 
lead by creating portable music players to compete with the iPod. In addition, Apple con-
tinues to create new and exciting products to gain competitive advantages, such as its 
iPad, a larger version of the iPod that functions more as a computer than a music player. 6  
Decreasing
costs
Attracting
new
customers
Increasing
sales
Increasing
customer
loyalty
Business strategies
Leadership plans
that achieve a 
specific set of goals
or objectives
Entering
new
markets
Developing
new
products
or services
FIGURE 1.12
Examples of Business 
Strategies

 BUSINESS DRIVEN GLOBALIZATION 
 According to the Economic Policy Institute, over the past decade the United 
States has lost an estimated 2.4 million factory jobs to China. Factories in South 
Korea, Taiwan, and China are producing toys, toothpaste, running shoes, com-
puters, appliances, and cars. For a long time U.S. firms did not recognize these 
products as competition; they regarded Asia’s high-tech products as second-
rate knockoffs and believed Asian countries maintained a “factory culture”—
they could imitate but not innovate. 
 In hindsight, it is obvious that once these countries did begin designing and 
creating high-end products, they would have obvious competitive advantages, 
with high-value research and development coupled with low-cost manufac-
turing of unbeatable goods and services. Asia is now on the rise in all indus-
tries from wind turbines to high-speed bullet trains. According to  Bloomberg 
Businessweek ’s ranking of the most innovative companies, 15 of the top 50 are 
Asian, up from just 5 in 2006. In fact, for the first time, the majority of the top 25 
are based outside the United States. 
 How do you, as a business student, view these statistics? What type of 
global business climate will you be competing in when you graduate? If you 
wanted to gather competitive intelligence about the job market, where would 
you look and what types of data would you want to analyze? What can you 
do to create personal competitive advantages to differentiate yourself when 
searching for a job? 7   
 The Competitive 
Landscape for 
Students 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 
17
Business Driven MIS Module 1
 When a company is the first to market with a competitive advantage, it gains a par-
ticular benefit, such as Apple did with its iPod. This   first-mover advantage   occurs when 
a company can significantly increase its market share by being first with a new competi-
tive advantage. FedEx created a first-mover advantage by developing its customer self-
service software, which allows people to request parcel pickups, print mailing slips, and 
track parcels online. Other parcel delivery companies quickly began creating their own 
online services. Today, customer self-service on the Internet is a standard feature of the 
parcel delivery business. 
  Competitive intelligence   is the process of gathering information about the competi-
tive environment, including competitors’ plans, activities, and products, to improve a 
company’s ability to succeed. It means understanding and learning as much as possible 
as soon as possible about what is occurring outside the company to remain competitive. 
Frito-Lay, a premier provider of snack foods such as Cracker Jacks and Cheetos, does not 
send its sales representatives into grocery stores just to stock shelves; they carry hand-
held computers and record the product offerings, inventory, and even product locations 
of competitors. Frito-Lay uses this information to gain competitive intelligence on every-
thing from how well competing products are selling to the strategic placement of its own 
products. 8  
 Managers use three common tools to analyze competitive intelligence and develop 
competitive advantages including:
 1. The Five Forces Model (for evaluating industry attractiveness). 
 2. The three generic strategies (for choosing a business focus).  
 3. Value chain analysis (for executing business strategies). 

Threat of Substitute
Products or Services
The power of customers
to purchase alternatives
Rivalry among
Existing Competitors
The power of
competitors 
Buyer Power
The power of customers
to drive down prices
Threat of New Entrants
The power of competitors to
enter a market
Supplier Power
The power of suppliers
to drive up prices of materials
FIGURE 1.13
Porter’s Five Forces Model 
18
Chapter 1 Management Information Systems: Business Driven MIS
 THE FIVE FORCES MODEL—EVALUATING 
INDUSTRY ATTRACTIVENESS 
 Michael Porter, a university professor at Harvard Business School, identified the follow-
ing pressures that can hurt potential sales:
 ■ Knowledgeable customers can force down prices by pitting rivals against each other. 
 ■ Influential suppliers can drive down profits by charging higher prices for supplies.  
 ■ Competition can steal customers. 
 ■ New market entrants can steal potential investment capital. 
 ■ Substitute products can steal customers. 
 Formally defined,    Porter’s Five Forces Model    analyzes the competitive forces within 
the environment in which a company operates to assess the potential for profitability 
in an industry. Its purpose is to combat these competitive forces by identifying oppor-
tunities, competitive advantages, and competitive intelligence. If the forces are strong, 
they increase competition; if the forces are weak, they decrease competition. This sec-
tion details each of the forces and its associated MIS business strategy (see  Figure 1.13 ). 9 
 Buyer Power 
  Buyer power   is the ability of buyers to affect the price they must pay for an item. Fac-
tors used to assess buyer power include number of customers, their sensitivity to price, 
size of orders, differences between competitors, and availability of substitute products. If 
buyer power is high, customers can force a company and its competitors to compete on 
price, which typically drives prices down. 
 One way to reduce buyer power is by manipulating   switching costs  ,  costs that make 
customers reluctant to switch to another product or service. Switching costs include 
financial as well as intangible values. The cost of switching doctors, for instance, includes 
the powerful intangible components of having to build relationships with the new doctor 
and nurses, as well as transferring all your medical history. With MIS, however, patients 
can store their medical records on DVDs or thumb drives, allowing easy transferability. 
The Internet also lets patients review websites for physician referrals, which takes some 
of the fear out of trying someone new. 10 
LO 1.5: Describe Porter’s Five Forces 
Model and explain each of the five 
forces.

19
Business Driven MIS Module 1
 Companies can also reduce buyer power with   loyalty programs  ,  which reward custom-
ers based on their spending. The airline industry is famous for its frequent-flyer programs, 
for instance. Because of the rewards travelers receive (free airline tickets, upgrades, or hotel 
stays), they are more likely to be loyal to or give most of their business to a single company. 
Keeping track of the activities and accounts of many thousands or millions of customers 
covered by loyalty programs is not practical without large-scale business systems, however. 
Loyalty programs are thus a good example of using MIS to reduce buyer power. 11   
 Supplier Power 
 A   supply chain   consists of all parties involved, directly or indirectly, in obtaining raw 
materials or a product. In a typical supply chain, a company will be both a supplier (to 
customers) and a customer (of other suppliers), as illustrated in  Figure 1.14 .   Supplier 
power   is the suppliers’ ability to influence the prices they charge for supplies (including 
materials, labor, and services). Factors used to appraise supplier power include number 
of suppliers, size of suppliers, uniqueness of services, and availability of substitute prod-
ucts. If supplier power is high, the supplier can influence the industry by:
 ■ Charging higher prices. 
 ■ Limiting quality or services. 
 ■ Shifting costs to industry participants. 12 
 Typically, when a supplier raises prices, the buyers will pass on the increase to their 
customers by raising prices on the end product. When supplier power is high, buyers lose 
revenue because they cannot pass on the raw material price increase to their customers. 
Some powerful suppliers, such as pharmaceutical companies, can exert a threat over 
an entire industry when substitutes are limited and the product is critical to the buyers. 
Patient who need to purchase cancer-fighting drugs have no power over price and must 
pay whatever the drug company asks because there are few available alternatives. 
 Using MIS to find alternative products is one way of decreasing supplier power. Can-
cer patients can now use the Internet to research alternative medications and practices, 
something that was next to impossible just a few decades ago. Buyers can also use MIS 
to form groups or collaborate with other buyers, increasing the size of the buyer group 
and reducing supplier power. For a hypothetical example, the collective group of 30,000 
students from a university has far more power over price when purchasing laptops than 
a single student. 13 
 Threat of Substitute Products or Services 
 The    threat of substitute products or services   is high when there are many alternatives 
to a product or service and low when there are few alternatives from which to choose. 
For example, travelers have numerous substitutes for airline transportation including 
automobiles, trains, and boats. Technology even makes videoconferencing and virtual 
meetings possible, eliminating the need for some business travel. Ideally, a company 
would like to be in a market in which there are few substitutes for the products or ser-
vices it offers. 
 Polaroid had this unique competitive advantage for many years until it forgot to 
observe competitive intelligence. Then the firm went bankrupt when people began tak-
ing digital pictures with everything from video cameras to cell phones. 
 A company can reduce the threat of substitutes by offering additional value through 
wider product distribution. Soft-drink manufacturers distribute their products through 
FIGURE 1.14
Traditional Supply Chain
Suppliers
Company
Customers

20
Chapter 1 Management Information Systems: Business Driven MIS
vending machines, gas stations, and convenience stores, increasing the availability of 
soft drinks relative to other beverages. Companies can also offer various add-on services, 
making the substitute product less of a threat. For example, iPhones include capabilities 
for games, videos, and music, making a traditional cell phone less of a substitute. 14   
 Threat of New Entrants 
 The    threat of new entrants   is high when it is easy for new competitors to enter a market 
and low when there are significant entry barriers to joining a market. An    entry barrier    is a 
feature of a product or service that customers have come to expect and entering competi-
tors must offer the same for survival. For example, a new bank must offer its customers 
an array of MIS-enabled services, including ATMs, online bill paying, and online account 
monitoring. These are significant barriers to new firms entering the banking market. At 
one time, the first bank to offer such services gained a valuable first-mover advantage, 
but only temporarily, as other banking competitors developed their own MIS services. 15   
 Rivalry among Existing Competitors 
   Rivalry among existing competitors    is high when competition is fierce in a market 
and low when competitors are more complacent. Although competition is always more 
intense in some industries than in others, the overall trend is toward increased com-
petition in almost every industry. The retail grocery industry is intensively competitive. 
Kroger, Safeway, and Albertsons in the United States compete in many different ways, 
essentially trying to beat or match each other on price. Most supermarket chains have 
implemented loyalty programs to provide customers special discounts while gathering 
valuable information about their purchasing habits. In the future, expect to see grocery 
stores using wireless technologies that track customer movements throughout the store 
to determine purchasing sequences. 
  Product differentiation   occurs when a company develops unique differences in its 
products or services with the intent to influence demand. Companies can use differenti-
ation to reduce rivalry. For example, while many companies sell books and videos on the 
Internet, Amazon differentiates itself by using customer profiling. When a customer vis-
its  Amazon.com  repeatedly, Amazon begins to offer products tailored to that particular 
customer based on his or her profile. In this way, Amazon has reduced its rivals’ power 
by offering its customers a differentiated service. 
 To review, the Five Forces Model helps managers set business strategy by identify-
ing the competitive structure and economic environment of an industry. If the forces 
are strong, they increase competition; if the forces are weak, they decrease it (see 
 Figure 1.15 ). 16 
 Analyzing the Airline Industry 
 Let us bring Porter’s five forces together to look at the competitive forces shaping an 
industry and highlight business strategies to help it remain competitive. Assume 
a shipping company is deciding whether to enter the commercial airline industry. If 
FIGURE 1.15
Strong and Weak Examples of 
Porter’s Five Forces
Weak Force: Decreases 
Competition or Few Competitors
Strong Force: Increases 
Competition or Lots of Competitors
Buyer Power
An international hotel chain 
purchasing milk
A single consumer purchasing milk
Supplier Power
A company that makes airline 
engines
A company that makes pencils
Threat of Substitute 
Products or Services
Cancer drugs from a 
pharmaceutical company
Coffee from McDonald’s
Threat of New Entrants
A professional hockey team
A dog walking business
Rivalry among Existing 
Competitors
Department of Motor Vehicles
A coffee shop

 BUSINESS DRIVEN INNOVATION 
 Is there anything more frustrating than waiting in line at the post office? Not 
only are those lines frustrating, but they are also unprofitable. The U.S. Postal 
Service has faced multibillion-dollar losses every year for the past few years, 
making for one of the greatest challenges in its history. 
 What is killing the post office? Perhaps it is  Stamps.com , a website that allows 
you to customize and print your own stamps 24 hours a day. Getting married? 
Place a photo of the happy couple right on the stamp for the invitations. Starting 
a business? Place your business logo on your stamps.  Stamps.com  even keeps 
track of a customer’s postal spending and can recommend optimal delivery 
methods. Plus,  Stamps.com  gives you postage discounts you can’t get at the 
post office or with a postage meter. 
 Evaluate the U.S. Postal Service using Porter’s Five Forces Model. How could 
the Postal Service create new products and services to help grow its business? 
What types of competitive advantages can you identify for the Postal Service? 18 
 Fixing the 
Post Office 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 
21
Business Driven MIS Module 1
performed correctly, an analysis of the five forces should determine that this is a highly 
risky business strategy because all five forces are strong. It will thus be difficult to gener-
ate a profit. 
 ■  Buyer power: Buyer power is high because customers have many airlines to choose 
from and typically make purchases based on price, not carrier.  
 ■  Supplier power: Supplier power is high since there are limited plane and engine 
manufacturers to choose from, and unionized workforces (suppliers of labor) restrict 
airline profits.  
 ■  Threat of substitute products or services: The threat of substitute products is high 
from many transportation alternatives including automobiles, trains, and boats, and 
from transportation substitutes such as videoconferencing and virtual meetings. 
 ■  Threat of new entrants: The threat of new entrants is high because new airlines are 
continuously entering the market, including sky taxies offering low-cost on-demand 
air taxi service. 
 ■  Rivalry among existing competitors:  Rivalry in the airline industry is high, and 
websites such as  Travelocity.com force them to compete on price (see  Figure 1.16 ). 17 
FIGURE 1.16
Five Forces Model in the Airline 
Industry
Strong (High) Force: Increases 
Competition or Lots of Competitors
Buyer Power
Many airlines for buyers to choose from forcing competition 
based on price
Supplier Power
Limited number of plane and engine manufacturers to choose 
from along with unionized workers
Threat of Substitute Products 
or Services
Many substitutes including cars, trains, and busses. 
Even substitutes to travel such as video conferencing and virtual 
meetings.
Threat of New Entrants
Many new airlines entering the market all the time including the 
latest sky taxis.
Rivalry among Existing Competitors
Intense competition–many rivals.

22
Chapter 1 Management Information Systems: Business Driven MIS
 THE THREE GENERIC STRATEGIES—CHOOSING 
A BUSINESS FOCUS 
 Once top management has determined the relative attractiveness of an industry and 
decided to enter it, the firm must formulate a strategy for doing so. If our sample com-
pany decided to join the airline industry, it could compete as a low-cost, no-frills airline 
or as a luxury airline providing outstanding service and first-class comfort. Both options 
offer different ways of achieving competitive advantages in a crowded marketplace. The 
low-cost operator saves on expenses and passes the savings along to customers in the 
form of low prices. The luxury airline spends on high-end service and first-class com-
forts and passes the costs on to the customer in the form of high prices. 
 Porter has identified three generic business strategies for entering a new market: (1) 
broad cost leadership, (2) broad differentiation, and (3) focused strategy. Broad strat-
egies reach a large market segment, while focused strategies target a niche or unique 
market with either cost leadership or differentiation. Trying to be all things to all people 
is a recipe for disaster, since doing so makes it difficult to project a consistent image to 
the entire marketplace. For this reason, Porter suggests adopting only one of the three 
generic strategies illustrated in  Figure 1.17 . 19 
  Figure 1.18  applies the three strategies to real companies, demonstrating the relation-
ships among strategies (cost leadership versus differentiation) and market segmentation 
(broad versus focused). 
 ■  Broad market and low cost:  Walmart competes by offering a broad range of prod-
ucts at low prices. Its business strategy is to be the low-cost provider of goods for the 
cost-conscious consumer.  
 ■  Broad market and high cost:  Neiman Marcus competes by offering a broad range of 
differentiated products at high prices. Its business strategy offers a variety of specialty 
and upscale products to affluent consumers. 
LO 1.6: Compare Porter’s three 
generic strategies.
FIGURE 1.18
Examples of Porter’s Three 
Generic Strategies
Walmart
Neiman Marcus
Payless Shoes
Tiffany & Co. 
Low Cost
High Cost
Cost Strategy
Broad
Market
Narrow
Market
Competitive
Scope
FIGURE 1.17
Porter’s Three Generic 
Strategies
Cost Leadership
Differentiation
Focused Strategy
Low Cost
High Cost
Cost Strategy
Broad
Market
Narrow
Market
Competitive
Scope

 BUSINESS DRIVEN DEBATE 
 Apple sold 300,000 units of its highly anticipated iPad in the first 15 hours it was 
available for sale. Hundreds of thousands of Apple devotees flocked to stores 
during Passover and Easter to be the first to obtain the new device, even though 
it is neither a phone nor a laptop computer and many people are still wonder-
ing what it’s for. 
 The controversy over the usefulness of Apple’s portable tablet began as soon 
as Apple announced the device was heading to market. At first glance, the iPad 
is little more than a touch screen the size of a slim book, with a few control but-
tons along the edges and a home button at the bottom. Shrink it, and it would 
look like an iPod Touch. What is the value of this device? That’s the question 
everyone wants to answer. 
 The iPad’s modest features might represent an entirely new way of con-
suming media—video, web pages, music, pictures, and even books. Break into 
groups and review the current value of the iPad for business. Find three exam-
ples of the ways businesses are using, or could use, the iPad. Do you consider it 
the next revolutionary device or just an overpriced music player? 20 
 The iPad—
Greatest Product 
in History or Just 
Another Gadget? 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 
23
Business Driven MIS Module 1
 ■  Narrow market and low cost:  Payless competes by offering a specific product, 
shoes, at low prices. Its business strategy is to be the low-cost provider of shoes. 
Payless competes with Walmart, which also sells low-cost shoes, by offering a far big-
ger selection of sizes and styles. 
 ■  Narrow market and high cost:  Tiffany & Co. competes by offering a differentiated 
product, jewelry, at high prices. Its business strategy allows it to be a high-cost pro-
vider of premier designer jewelry to affluent consumers. 
 VALUE CHAIN ANALYSIS—EXECUTING 
BUSINESS STRATEGIES 
 Firms make profits by taking raw inputs and applying a business process to turn them 
into a product or service that customers find valuable. A   business process   is a standard-
ized set of activities that accomplish a specific task, such as processing a customer’s 
order. Once a firm identifies the industry it wants to enter and the generic strategy it 
will focus on, it must then choose the business processes required to create its products 
or services. Of course, the firm will want to ensure the processes add value and create 
competitive advantages. To identify these competitive advantages, Michael Porter cre-
ated   value chain analysis   ,  which views a firm as a series of business processes that each 
add value to the product or service. 
 Value chain analysis is a useful tool for determining how to create the greatest pos-
sible value for customers (see  Figure 1.19 ). The goal of value chain analysis is to identify 
processes in which the firm can add value for the customer and create a competitive 
advantage for itself, with a cost advantage or product differentiation. 
 The  value chain  groups a firm’s activities into two categories, primary value activities, 
and support value activities.   Primary value activities   ,  shown at the bottom of the value 
chain in  Figure 1.19 , acquire raw materials and manufacture, deliver, market, sell, and 
provide after-sales services. 
 1.  Inbound logistics: acquires raw materials and resources and distributes to manufac-
turing as required.  
 2.  Operations: transforms raw materials or inputs into goods and services. 
 3.  Outbound logistics:  distributes goods and services to customers. 
LO 1.7 Demonstrate how a company 
can add value by using Porter’s value 
chain analysis.

FIGURE 1.19
The Value Chain
Support
Value
Activities  
Primary
Value
Activities
Firm infrastructure (3.1%)
Human resource management (7.1%)
Technology development (and R&D) (4.2%)
Procurement (27%)
Receive
and
store raw
materials
(5.2%)
Make the
product or
service
(40.3%)
Deliver the
product or
service
(6.6%)
Market and
sell the
product or
service
(4.3%)
Service
after
the sale
(2.2%)
Value Added
24
Chapter 1 Management Information Systems: Business Driven MIS
 4.  Marketing and sales: promotes, prices, and sells products to customers. 
 5.  Service: Provides customer support after the sale of goods and services. 21 
  Support value activities   ,  along the top of the value chain in  Figure 1.19 , include firm 
infrastructure, human resource management, technology development, and procure-
ment. Not surprisingly, these support the primary value activities. 
 ■  Firm infrastructure: includes the company format or departmental structures, envi-
ronment, and systems. 
 ■  Human resource management: provides employee training, hiring, and 
compensation. 
 ■  Technology development:  applies MIS to processes to add value.  
 ■  Procurement:  purchases inputs such as raw materials, resources, equipment, and 
supplies.  
 It is easy to understand how a typical manufacturing firm takes raw materials such 
as wood pulp and transforms it into paper. Adding value in this example might include 
using high-quality raw materials or offering next-day free shipping on any order. How, 
though, might a typical service firm take raw inputs such as time, knowledge, and MIS 
and transform them into valuable customer service knowledge? A hotel might use MIS 
to track customer reservations and then inform front-desk employees when a loyal cus-
tomer is checking in so the employee can call the guest by name and offer additional 
services, gift baskets, or upgraded rooms. Examining the firm as a value chain allows 
managers to identify the important business processes that add value for customers and 
then find MIS solutions that support them. 
 When performing a value chain analysis, a firm could survey customers about the 
extent to which they believe each activity adds value to the product or service. This 
step generates responses the firm can measure, shown as percentages in  Figure 1.20 , 
to describe how each activity adds (or reduces) value. Then the competitive advan-
tage decision for the firm is whether to (1) target high value-adding activities to further 
enhance their value, (2) target low value-adding activities to increase their value, or (3) 
perform some combination of the two. 
 MIS adds value to both primary and support value activities. One example of a 
primary value activity facilitated by MIS is the development of a marketing campaign 
management system that could target marketing campaigns more efficiently, thereby 
reducing marketing costs. The system would also help the firm better pinpoint tar-
get market needs, thereby increasing sales. One example of a support value activity 
facilitated by MIS is the development of a human resources system that could more 
efficiently reward employees based on performance. The system could also identify 

Firm infrastructure (3.1%)
Human resource management (7.1%)
Technology development (and R&D) (4.2%)
Procurement (27%)
Receive
and
store raw
materials
(5.2%)
Make the
product or
service
(40.3%)
Deliver the
product or
service
(6.6%)
Market and
sell the
product or
service
(4.3%)
Service
after
the sale
(2.2%)
Value Added
Threat of New
Entrants
The power of competitors
to enter a market
Buyer Power
The power of
customers to drive
down prices
Supplier Power
The power of
suppliers to drive up
prices of materials
Threat of Substitute
Products or Services
The power of customers
to purchase alternatives
FIGURE 1.20
The Value Chain and Porter’s 
Five Forces Model
 BUSINESS DRIVEN START-UP 
 Derek Johnson, a student at the University of Houston, was having lunch with 
his friend who happened to be the communications director for her sorority. 
During lunch Derek’s friend was telling him how hard it was to communicate 
with all of her sisters in the sorority. She had to send out important announce-
ments about meetings, charitable events, and even dues. She had tried every-
thing including Facebook, email, and message boards, but so far nothing was 
working. As Derek pondered his friend’s dilemma, he came up with a solution: 
mass text messaging. 
 Johnson began researching mass text messaging products and was surprised 
to find that none existed for the average consumer. Spotting an entrepreneurial 
opportunity, Derek quickly began working on a product. Within a few months 
he launched his website, Tatango, and began offering group text messaging at a 
reasonable price. Now, a few years later, Tatango offers customers subscription 
plans starting under $20 a month that allows groups to send text messages to all 
members at once—whether 10 or 10,000—from any device. 
 In a group, brainstorm a list of problems you are currently experiencing. 
Decide whether any present potential new business opportunities, and if so, 
analyze the potential using the tools introduced in this chapter. Be prepared to 
present your new business to the class. 22 
 Want to Start 
Your Own 
Business? Just 
Find a Problem 
to Solve 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 
25
Business Driven MIS Module 1
employees who are at risk of quitting, allowing manager’s time to find additional 
challenges or opportunities that would help retain these employees and thus reduce 
turnover costs. 

26
Chapter 1 Management Information Systems: Business Driven MIS
FIGURE 1.21
Overview of Business Driven 
Information Systems
Data
Information
Business Intelligence
Knowledge
Systems Thinking
Porter’s Business Strategies
Business Strategy
MIS Topics
MODULE 1: 
BUSINESS DRIVEN MIS
Transaction Processing Systems
Decision Support Systems
Executive Information Systems
Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Business Process Reengineering
eBusiness
eBusiness Models
Social Networking
Knowledge Management
Collaboration
Chapter 1: Management
Information Systems
Chapter 2: Decisions and
Processes
Chapter 3: Ebusiness
Chapter 4: Ethics and
Information Security
Understanding Business
Driven MIS
Creating Value Driven
Businesses
Finding Electronic Business
Value
Identifying MIS Business
Concerns
Information Security Policies
Authentication and Authorization
Prevention and Resistance
Detection and Response
Chapter 5: Infrastructures
Deploying Organizational MIS
Grid Computing
Cloud Computing
Virtualization
Sustainable MIS Infrastructures
Business Strategy
MIS Topics
MODULE 2: 
TECHNICAL FOUNDATIONS OF MIS
Chapter 6: Data
Uncovering Business
Intelligence
Database
Data Management Systems
Data Warehousing
Data Mining
Chapter 7: Networks
Supporting Mobile Business
Business Networks
Web 1.0, Web 2.0, Web 3.0 
Mobile MIS
Wireless MIS
GPS, GIS, and LBS 
Chapter 8: Enterprise
Applications
Enhancing Business
Communications
Customer Relationship Management
Supply Chain Management
Enterprise Resource Planning
Business Strategy
MIS Topics
MODULE 3:
ENTERPRISE MIS
Chapter 9: Systems
Development and Project 
Management
Leading MIS Projects
MIS Development Methodologies
Project Management
Outsourcing

27
Business Driven MIS Module 1
 Value chain analysis is a highly useful tool that provides hard and fast numbers for 
evaluating the activities that add value to products and services. Managers can find 
additional value by analyzing and constructing the value chain in terms of Porter’s Five 
Forces Model (see  Figure 1.20 ). For example, if the goal is to decrease buyer power, a 
company can construct its value chain activity of “service after the sale” by offering high 
levels of customer service. This will increase customers’ switching costs and reduce their 
power. Analyzing and constructing support value activities can help decrease the threat 
of new entrants. Analyzing and constructing primary value activities can help decrease 
the threat of substitute products or services. 23 
 Revising Porter’s three business strategies is critical. Firms must continually adapt 
to their competitive environments, which can cause business strategy to shift. In 
the remainder of this text we discuss how managers can formulate business strate-
gies using MIS to create competitive advantages.  Figure 1.21  gives an overview of the 
remaining chapters, along with the relevant business strategy and associated MIS 
topics.  
 Learning Outcome 1.1: Describe the information age and the differences among data, 
information, business intelligence, and knowledge. 
 We live in the information age, when infinite quantities of facts are widely available to anyone who 
can use a computer. The core drivers of the information age include data, information, business 
intelligence, and knowledge. Data are raw facts that describe the characteristics of an event or 
object. Information is data converted into a meaningful and useful context. Business intelligence 
(BI) is information collected from multiple sources such as suppliers, customers, competitors, part-
ners, and industries that analyzes patterns, trends, and relationships for strategic decision making. 
Knowledge includes the skills, experience, and expertise, coupled with information and intelligence, 
that creates a person’s intellectual resources. As you move from data to knowledge you include 
more and more variables for analysis resulting in better, more precise support for decision making 
and problem solving.  
 Learning Outcome 1.2: Identify the different departments in a company and why they 
must work together to achieve success. 
 Companies are typically organized by department or functional area such as accounting, finance, 
human resources, marketing, operations management, and sales. Although each department has its 
own focus and its own data, none can work independently if the company is to operate as a whole. 
It is easy to see how a business decision made by one department can affect other departments. 
Functional areas are anything but independent in a business. In fact, functional areas are interdepen-
dent. Sales must rely on information from operations to understand inventory, place orders, calculate 
transportation costs, and gain insight into product availability based on production schedules. For an 
organization to succeed, every department or functional area must work together sharing common 
information and not be a “silo.” Information technology can enable departments to more efficiently 
and effectively perform their business operations. 
 Learning Outcome 1.3: Explain systems thinking and how management information 
systems enable business communications. 
 A system is a collection of parts that link to achieve a common purpose. Systems thinking is a 
way of monitoring the entire system by viewing multiple inputs being processed or transformed 
to produce outputs while continuously gathering feedback on each part. Feedback is information 
 L E A R N I N G  O U T C O M E  R E V I E W 

28
Chapter 1 Management Information Systems: Business Driven MIS
that returns to its original transmitter (input, transform, or output) and modifies the transmitter’s 
actions. Feedback helps the system maintain stability. Management information systems (MIS) is a 
business function, like accounting and human resources, which moves information about people, 
products, and processes across the company to facilitate decision making and problem solving. 
MIS incorporates systems thinking to help companies operate cross-functionally. For example, to 
fulfill product orders, an MIS for sales moves a single customer order across all functional areas 
including sales, order fulfillment, shipping, billing, and finally customer service. Although different 
functional areas handle different parts of the sale, thanks to MIS, to the customer the sale is one 
continuous process.  
 Learning Outcome 1.4: Explain why competitive advantages are temporary. 
 A competitive advantage is a feature of a product or service on which customers place a greater value 
than they do on similar offerings from competitors. Competitive advantages provide the same product 
or service either at a lower price or with additional value that can fetch premium prices. Unfortunately, 
competitive advantages are typically temporary, because competitors often quickly seek ways to 
duplicate them. In turn, organizations must develop a strategy based on a new competitive advan-
tage. Ways that companies duplicate competitive advantages include acquiring the new technology, 
copying business processes, and hiring away employees. 
 Learning Outcome 1.5: Describe Porter’s Five Forces Model and explain each of the five 
forces. 
 Porter’s Five Forces Model analyzes the competitive forces within the environment in which a com-
pany operates, to assess the potential for profitability in an industry. 
 ■ Buyer power is the ability of buyers to affect the price they must pay for an item. 
 ■ Supplier power is the suppliers’ ability to influence the prices they charge for supplies (including 
materials, labor, and services). 
 ■ Threat of substitute products or services is high when there are many alternatives to a product or 
service and low when there are few alternatives from which to choose. 
 ■ Threat of new entrants is high when it is easy for new competitors to enter a market and low 
when there are significant entry barriers to entering a market. 
 ■ Rivalry among existing competitors is high when competition is fierce in a market and low when 
competition is more complacent. 
 Learning Outcome 1.6: Compare Porter’s three generic strategies. 
 Organizations typically follow one of Porter’s three generic strategies when entering a new market: 
(1) broad cost leadership, (2) broad differentiation, (3) focused strategy. Broad strategies reach a large 
market segment. Focused strategies target a niche market. Focused strategies concentrate on either 
cost leadership or differentiation. 
 Learning Outcome 1.7: Demonstrate how a company can add value by using Porter’s 
value chain analysis. 
 To identify competitive advantages, Michael Porter created value chain analysis, which views a firm 
as a series of business processes that each add value to the product or service. The goal of value 
chain analysis is to identify processes in which the firm can add value for the customer and create 
a competitive advantage for itself, with a cost advantage or product differentiation. The value chain 
groups a firm’s activities into two categories—primary value activities and support value activities. 
Primary value activities acquire raw materials and manufacture, deliver, market, sell, and provide 
after-sales services. Support value activities, along the top of the value chain in the figure, include 
firm infrastructure, human resource management, technology development, and procurement. Not 
surprisingly, these support the primary value activities. 

29
Business Driven MIS Module 1
 1.  Knowledge: Define Globalization 1.0, 2.0, and 3.0 and provide a sample of the type of business 
data managers collected during each era. 
 2.  Comprehension: Explain Friedman’s flat world and the reasons it is important for all businesses, 
small or large, to understand.  
 3.  Application: Demonstrate how students competing for jobs in a “flat world” can create competi-
tive advantages to differentiate themselves in the marketplace. 
 4.  Analysis: Analyze the current business environment and identify a new flattener not mentioned 
on Friedman’s list. 
 5.  Synthesis: Propose a plan for how a start-up company can use any of Porter’s strategies to com-
bat competition in a global world.  
 6.  Evaluate: Argue for or against the following statement: “The world is not flat (in Friedman’s sense 
of the term) because many undeveloped countries are not connected electronically.” 
 O P E N I N G  C A S E  Q U E S T I O N S 
 Business intelligence (BI), 8 
 Business process, 23 
 Business strategy, 15 
 Buyer power, 18 
 Chief information officer 
(CIO), 15 
 Chief knowledge officer 
(CKO), 15 
 Chief privacy officer (CPO), 15 
 Chief security officer (CSO), 15 
 Chief technology officer (CTO), 15 
 Competitive advantage, 16 
 Competitive intelligence, 17 
 Data, 6 
 Entry barrier, 20 
 Fact, 5 
 Feedback, 14 
 First-mover advantage, 17 
 Goods, 12 
 Information, 7 
 Information age, 5 
 Knowledge, 10 
 Knowledge worker, 10 
 Loyalty program, 19 
 Management information systems 
(MIS), 14 
 Porter’s Five Forces Model, 18 
 Primary value activities, 23 
 Production, 13 
 Productivity, 13 
 Product differentiation, 20 
 Rivalry among existing 
competitors, 20 
 Services, 12 
 Supplier power, 19 
 Supply chain, 19 
 Support value activities, 24 
 Switching costs, 18 
 System, 12 
 Systems thinking, 14 
 Threat of new entrants, 20 
 Threat of substitute products or 
services, 19 
 Value chain analysis, 23 
 Variable, 7 
 K E Y  T E R M S 
 1. What is data and why is it important to a business? 
 2. How can a manager turn data into information? 
 3. What is the relationship between data, information, business intelligence, and knowledge? 
 4. Why is it important for a company to operate cross-functionally? 
 5. Why would a company want to have a CIO, CPO, and CSO? 
 6. Explain MIS and the role it plays in a company and global business. 
 7. Do you agree that MIS is essential for businesses operating in the information age? Why or why not?  
 8. Why is it important for a business major to understand MIS? 
 9. What type of career are you planning to pursue? How will your specific career use data, informa-
tion, business intelligence, and knowledge? 
 R E V I E W  Q U E S T I O N S 

30
Chapter 1 Management Information Systems: Business Driven MIS
 10. Explain systems thinking and how it supports business operations. 
 11. What business strategies would you use if you were developing a competitive advantage for a 
company? 
 12. Explain Porter’s Five Forces Model and the role it plays in decision making. 
 13. How could a company use loyalty programs to influence buyer power? How could a company 
use switching costs to lock in customers and suppliers? 
 14. What are Porter’s three generic strategies and why would a company want to follow only one? 
 15. How can a company use Porter’s value chain analysis to measure customer satisfaction? 
 C L O S I N G  C A S E  O N E 
 Apple—Merging Technology, Business, 
and Entertainment 
  This might sound hard to believe, but a bit more than a decade ago, Apple was on the brink of 
bankruptcy. Apple Computer Inc., now back from near oblivion, is blazing a trail through the digital 
world with innovation and creativity that has been missing from the company for the past 20 years. 
The unique feature of Apple’s competitive advantages is that they come from customers and users, 
not Apple employees. That’s right; the company welcomes products created by consumers to sell to 
consumers, a trend new to business. 
 Capitalizing on the iPod 
  With millions of iPods in the hands of consumers, many people are finding ways to capitalize on 
the product. John Lin created a prototype of a remote control for the iPod and took his prototype to 
 Macworld,  where he found success. A few months later, Lin’s company had Apple’s blessing and a 
commitment for shelf space in its retail stores. “This is how Apple supports the iPod economy,” Lin 
said. 
 In the iPod-dominated market, hundreds of companies have been inspired to develop more than 
500 accessories—everything from rechargers for the car to $1,500 Fendi bags. Eric Tong, vice presi-
dent at Belkin, a cable and peripheral manufacturer, believes that 75 percent of all iPod owners pur-
chase at least one accessory—selling over 30 million accessories to date. With most of the products 
priced between $10 and $200, that puts the iPod economy well over $300 million and perhaps as 
high as $6 billion. Popular iPod accessories include:
 ■ Altec Lansing Technologies—iPod speakers and recharger dock ($150). 
 ■ Belkin—TuneCast mobile FM transmitter ($40). 
 ■ Etymotic Research—high-end earphones ($150). 
 ■ Griffin Technology—iTrip FM transmitter ($35). 
 ■ Kate Spade—Geneva faux-croc mini iPod holder ($55). 
 ■ Apple—socks set in six colors: green, purple, blue, orange, pink, and gray ($29). 
 ■ Apple—digital camera connector ($29). 
 Capitalizing on the iPhone 
  Looking at someone using an iPhone is an interesting experience because there is a good chance they 
are not making a phone call. They could be doing a number of things from playing a game to trading 
stocks, watching a TV show, or even conducting business with a mobile version of  salesforce.com ’s 
customer-management software. In a brilliant strategic move, Apple let outsiders offer software for 

31
Business Driven MIS Module 1
the iPhone and in less than six months, more than 10,000 applications had been created. In fact, more 
than 15,000 applications are available at its app store section of iTunes, and they have been down-
loaded a total of 500 million times. Now, many of the iPhone apps are available for the iPad. 
 The iPhone and iPad app store market is getting so huge relative to other smartphone markets 
that some developers argue there is little point adapting applications for Google’s Android or any other 
iPhone competitor. According to Jeff Holden, CEO of Pelago Inc., when he created his social networking 
company he fully intended to follow the conventional wisdom for how to build a sizable, fast-growing 
software company: Get your programs on as many platforms and devices as possible. But when he 
crunched the numbers he came to an interesting business conclusion: The 13 million iPhone owners had 
already downloaded more applications than the 1.1 billion other cell phone owners! To entrepreneurs, 
developing a program for the iPhone automatically provides a significantly larger market—almost 94 
times larger than its competitors. “Why would I ever build for anything but the iPhone?” Holden asked.  
 Capitalizing on the iPad 
  Apple’s latest release, the iPad, is a lightweight, portable, tablet computer, similar to the iPhone, that 
allows customers to download applications, check email, and play music all at the touch of a button. 
Both the iPhone and the iPad can multitask, allowing customers to read a web page while download-
ing email in the background over wireless networks. The arrival of the iPad brought a simultaneous 
expansion of the network of accessories. Because the iPad was designed with an exposed screen and 
without a camera, separate keyboard, memory card slots, or expansion ports, one might say it was 
specifically built for accessories. Many owners will modify it in some way, whether for mere decora-
tion or hard-core protection. A few of the new accessories include:
 ■ iPad Clear Armor screen protector—$35. 
 ■ iPad Antique book case cover—$40. 
 ■ iPad wireless keyboard—$99. 
 ■ iPad overcoat sleeve—$35. 
 ■ iPad Joule luxury stand—$130. 
  Apple has consistently outperformed its key rivals through the development of its MP3 player, the 
iPod, and continues to make its products smaller and less expensive, while providing complementary 
features such as games and applications. For the iPhone, Apple developed a unique application called 
Siri, a voice-activation system that is capable of recognizing voice commands. Siri can perform all 
kinds of functions from dialing a contact and creating an email to location services such as “Find my 
Phone,” ensuring lost phones are found quickly. 
 Apple’s latest offering is a new service called the iCloud. The iCloud has the ability to collect all 
of the content, including videos, photos, songs, books, etc., from customer devices such as iPods, 
iPads, and iPhones in one secure location in “the cloud.” Apple customers no longer have to worry 
about backing up their applications or data because everything is automatically uploaded and stored 
in the iCloud when using an Apple device. In a fast-paced, technology-driven sector, with com-
petitors quickly following suit, Apple is constantly pressured to develop new products and product 
extensions. Luckily Apple stays ahead of the pack by focusing on the following key competitive 
advantages:
 ■  Customer focus:  Apple is driven by customer satisfaction and ensures customers are deeply 
involved in product development and application development. 
 ■  Resources and capabilities:  Apple continues to invest heavily in research and development to 
take advantage of new technologies, improved facilities, and cloud infrastructures. 
 ■  Strategic vision:  Apple has a clear alignment of its vision, mission, and business leadership and 
goals. 
 ■  Branding:  Apple is the leader in brand loyalty as it has achieved cult status with its authentic 
product image. 
 ■  Quality focus: Apple has an outstanding commitment to quality.24

32
Chapter 1 Management Information Systems: Business Driven MIS
Customer 
Focus 
Strategic 
Vision 
Resources 
and 
Capabilities
Branding 
Quality 
Focus 
  Questions 
 1. Do you agree or disagree that Apple’s iTunes, iPhone apps, and iPad apps give the company a 
competitive advantage? Be sure to justify your answer. 
 2. Why are data, information, business intelligence, and knowledge important to Apple? Give an 
example of each type in relation to the iPad. 
 3. Analyze Apple using Porter’s Five Forces Model. 
 4. Which of the three generic strategies is Apple following? 
 5. Which of Porter’s five forces did Apple address through its introduction of the iPhone? 
 6. Which of Porter’s five forces did Apple address through its customer-developed applications? 
 Best of the Best of the Best—Under 25  
 Bloomberg Businessweek  runs a yearly article featuring the top five American entrepreneurs under 
25 years old. With between 200 and 300 applications each year, choosing 5 is difficult. To help ensure 
fair competition, the magazine narrows it down to 25 and then asks its readers to decide which 5 
have the greatest potential. Below are the top five winners from 2011.  
 1: SCOREASCORE 
 Founder: Jordan Passman, 24 
 Revenue: $250,000 
 Growing up in Los Angeles, Jordan Passman knew the ins and outs of the music business where his 
father worked as a high-profile music attorney. Passman, wanting to follow in his father’s footsteps, was 
working for the American Society of Composers when he noticed an unmet need in the marketplace–
music buyers in the film, commercial, and television market looking for music composers. An idea 
was born and Passman began working on a website that connected music buyers with music 
composers. “People were still scrounging Craigslist for composers, and I knew there were so many 
composers out there that didn’t have representation,” says Passman. ScoreAscore links music buyers 
who are looking for scores for film, commercials, video games, or other productions with 100 select 
 C L O S I N G  C A S E  T W O   

33
Business Driven MIS Module 1
professional music composers represented by Passman, who charges 20 to 40 percent as a fee for 
each transaction. Passman aspires to be the go-to for YouTube filmmakers! 
 2: THINKLITE 
 Founders: Dinesh Wadhwani, 21; Enrico Palmerino, 22 
 Revenue: $3,500,000 
 In 2009, Babson College students Dinesh Wadhwani and Enrico Palmerino were reading an article about 
energy-efficient lightbulbs when their own lightbulbs went off! The roommates began collaborating on 
how they could build a business with the primary competitive advantage of saving money with energy-
efficient lights, instead of focusing solely on saving the environment as most of the current manufac-
turers in the market were focusing on as their product niche. ThinkLite’s mission is to help companies 
reduce electric bills through energy-efficient lighting. The pair began ThinkLite by licensing technolo-
gies from private companies in Germany, coupled with parts from Korea, and designs from Boston, 
with final production occurring in China. Clients, such as AT&T and Kodak, boast lighting bill reductions 
ranging from 50 percent to 80 percent, a significant savings for big business! ThinkLite now has over 
100 clients and is looking to expand into smaller markets such as restaurants and stores.  
 3: DELTA PRODUCE 
 Founders: Kosta Dionisopoulos, 24; Christos Marafatsos, 24 
 Revenue: $2,600,000 
 The supply chain of food distribution is a tough business, and getting the right perishable goods 
to the correct location at the perfect time is more an art form than analytics and logistics. Kosta 
Dionisopoulos was driving a van delivering produce while attending the University of Maryland when 
Christos Marafatsos saw an opportunity to start a unique produce delivery business. Delta Produce 
not only delivers food, but also provides online marketing, allowing customers to reduce costs by buy-
ing in bulk or in groups. Delta Produce now has 18 employees and its customers include restaurants, 
grocery stores, and wholesalers. “Both my partner and I are young, so interacting online is something 
we’re accustomed to doing,” says Marafatsos. 
 4: APPLETON LEARNING 
 Founder: Glenn Clayton, 25 
 Revenue: $4,200,000 
 Glenn Clayton found himself looking for ways to earn extra money while attending the University of 
Alabama, so he began tutoring local high school students. Clayton soon recognized a need in the mar-
ket and launched Appleton Learning, which matches college tutors with high school students. Clayton 
began hiring friends to help meet the tutoring needs, and by the end of his sophomore year he was 
spending over 60 hours each week managing Appleton Learning. “I realized if people were leaving 
big name tutoring companies to come to some college kid working out of a broom closet, there was a 
need in the market not being met,” Clayton says. Appleton Learning has found sales doubling yearly, 
and Clayton has built a unique website that matches students with tutors based on their individual 
learning needs and styles. Appleton Learning has over 1,000 tutors, including college students, profes-
sionals, and retirees, serving over 6,000 high school students. Appleton Learning is looking to expand 
opening 20 new branches across the Southeast over the next few years.  
 5: DESMOS 
 Founder: Eli Luberoff, 24 
 Revenue: $200,000 
 While taking a year off from Yale, Eli Luberoff noticed a problem in the education arena—software 
compatibility issues. Luberoff decided to create software that would overcome these issues and allow 
teachers and students to collaborate regardless of the systems they were using or their location. 
Luberoff launched his company, Desmos, by testing software from several large publishers, including 
McGraw-Hill, Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, and Pearson just to name a few. Luberoff’s strategy for mak-
ing money is to provide the software for free while charging licensing fees to publishers. 25 

34
Chapter 1 Management Information Systems: Business Driven MIS
 Questions 
 1. If you had $1 million to invest in one of the five above-mentioned start-ups, which one would 
you choose and why? Be sure to justify your answer using Porter’s Five Forces Model and three 
generic strategies analysis. 
 2. Choose one of the above businesses and explain why data, information, business intelligence, and 
knowledge are important to successfully running the business over the next few years. Be sure to 
list examples of the different types of data, information, business intelligence, and knowledge you 
might find in this company. 
 3. Review  Bloomberg Businessweek’s  most current top five under 25. Choose one of the companies 
and perform a detailed analysis of the company using the strategies discussed in this chapter. 
Determine a few ways the company can improve its business by creating competitive advantages 
using the ideas and methods discussed throughout this chapter. 
 1. Focusing on Friedman 
 Thomas Friedman’s newest book is titled  Hot, Flat, and Crowded: Why We Need a Green Revolution—
And How It Can Renew America.  Research the Internet to find out as much information as you can 
about this text. Why would a business manager be interested in reading this text? How will this text 
impact global business? Do you think  Hot, Flat, and Crowded will have as great an impact on society 
as  The World Is Flat had on business? Why or why not? 26   
 2. Pursuing Porter 
 There is no doubt that Michael Porter is one of the more influential business strategists of the 21st 
century. Research Michael Porter on the Internet for interviews, additional articles, and new or 
updated business strategies. Create a summary of your findings to share with your class. How can 
learning about people such as Thomas Friedman and Michael Porter help prepare you for a career 
in business? Name three additional business professionals you should follow to help prepare for 
your career in business. 
 3. Renting Movies 
 The video rental industry is fiercely competitive. Customers have their choice of renting a movie by 
driving to a store (Blockbuster), ordering through the mail (Netflix), or watching directly from their 
television (pay-per-view or Netflix). Using Porter’s Five Forces Model (buyer power, supplier power, 
threat of new entrants, threat of substitute products, and competition), evaluate the attractiveness 
of entering the movie rental business. Be sure to include product differentiation, switching costs, 
and loyalty programs in your analysis. 
 4. Working for the Best 
 Each year,  Fortune  magazine creates a list of the top 100 companies to work for. Find the most 
recent list. What types of data do you think  Fortune  analyzed to determine the company ranking? 
What issues could occur if the analysis of the data was inaccurate? What types of information 
can you gain by analyzing the list? Create five questions a student performing a job search could 
answer by analyzing this list. 
 5. Salary Surveys 
 Salary surveys offer great tools for highlighting the opportunities associated with an MIS major. 
The starting annual salaries in the MIS field range from $50,000 to $85,000 and many are rising. 
 Figure 1.22 displays a  Computerworld  salary survey. Research the Internet for a current MIS salary 
survey. Which types of jobs are on the rise? If there are any jobs you are unfamiliar with, research 
 C R I T I C A L  B U S I N E S S  T H I N K I N G 

35
Business Driven MIS Module 1
the Internet to determine the job characteristics. List the top three jobs you would want if you were 
to pursue a career in MIS. What do you find interesting about these jobs? What skills can you build 
to help you prepare for these jobs? 27 
 6. Starting your own Business 
 Josh James recently sold his web analytics company, Omniture, to Adobe for $1.8 billion. Yes, 
James started Omniture from his dorm room! Have you begun to recognize the unbelievable 
opportunities available to those students who understand the power of MIS, regardless of their 
major? Answer the following questions. 28 
 
 a. Why is it so easy today for students to create start-ups while still in college? 
 
 b. What would it take for you to start a business from your dorm room? 
 
 c. How will this course help you prepare to start your own business? 
 
 d. Research the Internet and find three examples of college student start-ups. 
 
 e.  What’s stopping you from starting your own business today? You are living in the information 
age and with the power of MIS, it is easier than ever to jump into the business game with 
very little capital investment. Why not start your own business today? 
 7. The Five Forces Model at Work 
 Your team is working for a small investment company that specializes in technology invest-
ments. A new company, Geyser, has just released an operating system that plans to compete 
with Microsoft’s operating systems. Your company has a significant amount of capital invested in 
Microsoft. Your boss, Kellee Lazarus, has asked you to compile a Porter’s Five Forces analysis for 
Microsoft to ensure that your company’s Microsoft investment is not at risk. 
 8. Competitive Analysis 
 Cheryl O’Connell is the owner of a small, high-end retailer of women’s clothing called Excelus. 
Excelus’s business has been successful for many years, largely because of O’Connell’s ability to antic-
ipate the needs and wants of her loyal customer base and provide them with personalized service. 
O’Connell does not see any value in IT and does not want to invest any capital in something that will 
not directly affect her bottom line. Develop a proposal describing the potential IT-enabled competitive 
opportunities or threats O’Connell might be missing by not embracing IT. Be sure to include a Porter’s 
Five Forces analysis and discuss which one of the three generic strategies O’Connell should pursue.  
Job Description
Compensation
Business intelligence analyst
$  81,866
Communications specialist
$  85,938
Database architect
$  98,995
Ebusiness specialist
$  71,717
Information security specialist
$  83,693
IT / IS technology / business systems analyst
$  78,305
Network architect
$  96,302
Programmer / analyst
$  75,995
Project leader
$  87,922
Senior systems analyst
$  89,987
Software developer
$  85,684
Software engineer
$  93,726
Storage architect / engineer
$111,077
Systems programmer
$  89,472
Web developer
$  66,347
FIGURE 1.22
Computerworld Salary Survey

36
Chapter 1 Management Information Systems: Business Driven MIS
 9. Applying the Three Generic Strategies 
    This chapter discussed several examples of companies that pursue differentiated strategies so 
that they are not forced into positions where they must compete solely based on price. In a team, 
choose an industry and find and compare two companies, one that is competing based on price 
and another that is pursuing a differentiated strategy enabled by the creative use of IT. Some 
industries you may want to consider are clothing retailers, grocery stores, airlines, and personal 
computers. Prepare a presentation for the class on the ways that the company is using IT to help 
it differentiate and compete against the low-cost provider. Before you begin, spend some class 
time to make sure each team selects a different industry. 
 10.  10 Best Things You Will Say to Your Grandchildren 
    Wired  magazine recently posted the top 10 things you will say to your grandchildren. For each 
expression below try to identify what it is referring to and why it will be considered outdated. 29 
  1. Back in my day, we only needed 140 characters. 
  2. There used to be so much snow up here, you could strap a board to your feet and slide all 
the way down. 
  3. Televised contests gave cash prizes to whoever could store the most data in their head. 
  4. Well, the screens were bigger, but they only showed the movies at certain times of day. 
  5. We all had one, but nobody actually used it. Come to think of it, I bet my LinkedIn profile is 
still out there on the web somewhere. 
  6. Translation: “English used to be the dominant language. Crazy, huh?” 
  7. Our bodies were made of meat and supported by little sticks of calcium. 
  8. You used to keep files right on your computer, and you had to go back to that same computer 
to access them! 
  9. Is that the new iPhone 27G? Got multitasking yet? 
  10. I just can’t get used to this darn vat-grown steak. Texture ain’t right. 
 E N T R E P R E N E U R I A L  C H A L L E N G E 
 BUILD YOUR OWN BUSINESS 
 You have recently inherited your grandfather’s business, which is conveniently located in your city’s 
downtown. The business offers many different kinds of specialized products and services and was 
first opened in 1952 and was a local hot spot for many years. Unfortunately, business has been 
steadily declining over the past few years. The business runs without any computers and all order-
ing takes place manually. Your grandfather had a terrific memory and knew all of his customers and 
suppliers by name, but unfortunately, none of this information is located anywhere in the store. The 
operational information required to run the business, such as sales trends, vendor information, pro-
motional information, and so on, is all located in your grandfather’s memory. Inventory is tracked in a 
notepad, along with employee payroll, and marketing coupons. The business does not have a website, 
uses very little marketing except word of mouth, and essentially still operates the same as it did in 
1952. 
 Throughout this course you will own and operate your grandfather’s business, and by taking 
advantage of business practices discussed in this text, you will attempt to increase profits, decrease 
expenses, and bring the business into the 21st century. For the purpose of this case, please choose 
the business you wish to operate and create a name for the business. For example, the business could 
be a coffee shop called The Broadway Café, an extreme sports store called Cutting Edge Sports, or 

37
Business Driven MIS Module 1
even a movie store called The Silver Screen. Try to pick a business you are genuinely interested in 
running and that aligns with your overall career goals. 
 Project Focus: Competitive Advantage 
 1. Identify the business you are going to build throughout this course and choose a name for your 
business. 
 2. Write an analysis of buyer power and supplier power for your business using Porter’s Five Forces 
Model. Be sure to discuss how you could combat the competition with strategies such as switch-
ing costs and loyalty programs. 
 3. Write an analysis of rivalry, entry barriers, and the threat of substitute products for your business 
using Porter’s Five Forces Model. Be sure to discuss how you could combat the competition with 
strategies such as product differentiation. 
 4. Describe which of Porter’s three generic strategies you would use for your business. Be sure to 
describe the details of how you will implement this strategy and how it will help you create a 
competitive advantage in your industry. 
 PROJECT I 
 Capitalizing on Your Career 
 Business leaders need to be comfortable with management information systems (MIS) for the follow-
ing (primary) reasons:
 ■ The sheer magnitude of the dollars spent on MIS must be managed to ensure business value. 
 ■ Research has consistently shown that when top managers are active in supporting MIS, they 
realize a number of benefits, such as gaining a competitive advantage, streamlining business 
processes, and even transforming entire industries. 
 ■ When business leaders are not involved in MIS, systems fail, revenue is lost, and entire compa-
nies can even fail because of poorly managed systems. 
 How do companies get managers involved in MIS? One of the biggest positive factors is managers’ 
personal experience with MIS and MIS education, including university classes and executive semi-
nars. Once managers understand MIS through experience and education, they are more likely to lead 
their companies in achieving business success through MIS. 
 1. Search the Internet for examples of the types of technologies currently used in the field or indus-
try that you plan to pursue. For example, if you are planning a career in accounting or finance, 
you should become familiar with financial systems such as Oracle Financials. For a career in 
logistics or distribution, research supply chain management systems. If marketing appeals 
to you, research customer relationship management systems, blogs, emarketing, and social 
networking.  
 2. As a competitive tool, MIS can differentiate products, services, and prices from competitors’ 
offerings by improving product quality, shortening product development or delivery time, creating 
new MIS-based products and services, and improving customer service before, during, and after 
a transaction. Search the Internet for examples of companies in the industry where you plan to 
work that have achieved a competitive advantage through MIS. 
 3. Create a brief report of your findings; include an overview of the type of technologies you found 
and how companies are using them to achieve a competitive advantage. 
 A P P LY  Y O U R  K N O W L E D G E  B U S I N E S S  P R O J E C T S 

38
Chapter 1 Management Information Systems: Business Driven MIS
 PROJECT II 
 Achieving Alignment 
 Most companies would like to be in the market-leading position of JetBlue, Dell, or Walmart, all of 
which have used management information systems to secure their respective spots in the market-
place. These companies are relentless about keeping the cost of technology down by combining the 
best of MIS and business leadership. 
 The future belongs to those organizations perceptive enough to grasp the significance of MIS and 
resourceful enough to coordinate their business and management information systems. 
 1. Use any resource to answer the question, “Why is it challenging for businesses to align MIS and 
their other operations?” Use the following questions to begin your analysis:
 
a. How do companies monitor competitive intelligence and create competitive advantages? 
 
b. What are some of the greatest MIS challenges for most firms?  
 
c. What drives MIS decisions?  
 
d. Who or what is the moving force behind MIS decisions for most companies?  
 PROJECT III 
 Market Dissection 
 To illustrate the use of the three generic strategies, consider  Figure 1.23 . The matrix shown demon-
strates the relationships among strategies (cost leadership versus differentiation) and market seg-
mentation (broad versus focused). 
 ■ Hyundai is following a broad cost leadership strategy. It offers low-cost vehicles, in each particu-
lar model stratification, that appeal to a large audience. 
 ■ Audi is pursuing a broad differentiation strategy with its Quattro models available at several price 
points. Audi’s differentiation is safety, and it prices its models higher than Hyundai’s to reach a 
large, stratified audience. 
 ■ Kia has a more focused cost leadership strategy. Kia mainly offers low-cost vehicles in the lower 
levels of model stratification. 
 ■ Hummer offers the most focused differentiation strategy of any in the industry (including 
Mercedes-Benz). 
FIGURE 1.23
Porter’s Three Generic 
Strategies
Broad market
Cost leadership strategy
Differentiation strategy
Hyundai
Audi
Focused market
Kia
Hummer

39
Business Driven MIS Module 1
 Create a similar graph displaying each strategy for a product of your choice. The strategy must 
include an example of the product in each of the following markets: (1) cost leadership, broad market; 
(2) differentiation, broad market; (3) cost leadership, focused market; and (4) differentiation, focused 
market. Potential products include cereal, dog food, soft drinks, computers, shampoo, snack foods, 
jeans, sneakers, sandals, mountain bikes, TV shows, movies. 
 PROJECT IV 
 Porter’s Five Forces 
 Setting strategic direction for a business is a challenge for even seasoned professionals. The good 
news is there are many tools available you can use to help you find competitive advantages, including 
Porter’s Five Forces. Porter’s Five Forces Model analyzes the competitive forces within the environment 
in which a company operates to assess the potential for profitability in an industry. Its purpose is to 
combat these competitive forces by identifying opportunities, competitive advantages, and competitive 
intelligence. If the forces are strong, they increase competition; if the forces are weak, they decrease 
competition. 
 Porter’s Five Forces Model is a good framework for understanding market forces. Break into groups 
and choose a comparison from the list below to perform a Porter’s Five Forces analysis. 
 ■ Notebook computer and laptop computer. 
 ■ PDA and laptop computer. 
 ■ iPhone and cell phone. 
 ■ iPod and CD player. 
 ■ GPS device and a road atlas. 
 ■ Digital books and printed books. 
 PROJECT V 
 Adding Value 
 To identify these competitive advantages, Michael Porter created value chain analysis, which views 
a firm as a series of business processes that each add value to the product or service. Value chain 
analysis is a useful tool for determining how to create the greatest possible value for customers. The 
goal of value chain analysis is to identify processes in which the firm can add value for the customer 
and create a competitive advantage for itself, with a cost advantage or product differentiation. 
 Starbucks has hired you after your graduation for a temporary position that could turn into a full-
time opportunity. With new cafés and juice shops popping up on every corner, coupled with the global 
recession, Starbucks is worried about losing market share to competitors. Your boss, Heather Sweitzer, 
is out of ideas for ways to improve the company’s profitability. You decide that one of the most useful 
tools for identifying competitive advantages is Porter’s value chain analysis. Of course, you do not yet 
have the detailed knowledge to complete all of the elements required, but you know enough to get 
started and plan to take your draft to Sweitzer next week. Using your knowledge of Starbucks, create a 
value chain analysis. Feel free to make assumptions about operations; just be sure to list any that you 
make. Also, be sure to write an overview of the tool and its potential value so Sweitzer can understand 
how it works.  
 PROJECT VI 
 Flat Competition 
 “When I was growing up in Minneapolis, my parents always said, ‘Tom, finish your dinner. There are 
people starving in China and India.’ Today I tell my girls, ‘Finish your homework, because people in 
China and India are starving for your jobs.’ And in a flat world, they can have them, because there’s no 
such thing as an American job anymore.” Thomas Friedman. 
 In his book,  The World Is Flat,  Thomas Friedman describes the unplanned cascade of techno-
logical and social shifts that effectively leveled the economic world, and “accidentally made Beijing, 
Bangalore, and Bethesda next-door neighbors.” The video of Thomas Friedman’s lecture at MIT 

40
Chapter 1 Management Information Systems: Business Driven MIS
discussing the flat world is available at  http://mitworld.mit.edu/video/266 . If you want to be prepared 
to compete in a flat world you must watch this video and answer the following questions:
 ■ Do you agree or disagree with Friedman’s assessment that the world is flat? 
 ■ What are the potential impacts of a flat world for a student performing a job search? 
 ■ What can students do to prepare themselves for competing in a flat world? 30 
 PROJECT VII 
 Wikiblunders 
 According to  PC World these false facts all appeared on Wikipedia:
  1. Robbie Williams eats domestic pets in pubs for money. 
  2. David Beckham was a Chinese goalkeeper in the 18th century. 
  3. Paul Reiser’s dead. (Reiser is an actor). 
  4. Sinbad’s dead. (Sinbad is an actor) .
  5. Sergey Brin’s sexy, dating Jimmy Wales, and dead. (Brin founded Google and Wales founded 
Wikipedia). 
  6. Tony Blair worships Hitler. (Blair was the former prime minister of the United Kingdom). 
  7. The Duchess of Cornwall’s Christian name is Cow-miller. 
  8. Robert Byrd’s dead. (Byrd is a U.S. senator from West Virginia). 
  9. John Seigenthaler helped assassinate John and Robert Kennedy. (Seigenthaler is a journalist). 
 10. Conan O’Brien assaults sea turtles while canoeing. 31 
 We know that people use information technology to work with information. Knowing this, how 
could these types of errors occur? What could happen if you decided to use Wikipedia to collect busi-
ness intelligence for a research paper? What could Wikipedia do to help prevent these types of errors?  
 PROJECT VIII 
 What’s Wrong with This Bathroom? 
 If you were the CEO of a global financial company that was experiencing a financial crisis, would you 
invest $1 million to renovate your office? Probably not and you are possibly wondering if this is a 
fabricated story from  The Onion.  Guess what, this is a true story! John Thain, the former CEO of Merrill 
Lynch, decided to spend $1.2 million refurbishing his office—well after Merrill Lynch posted huge 
financial losses. Thain personally signed off on all of the following:
 ■ Area rug: $87,784 
 ■ Mahogany pedestal table: $25,713 
 ■ 19th century credenza: $68,179 
 ■ Pendant light furniture: $19,751 
 ■ 4 pairs of curtains: $28,091 
 ■ Pair of guest chairs: $87,784 
 ■ George IV chair: $18,468 
 ■ 6 wall sconces: $2,741 
 ■ Parchment waste can: $1,405 (yes, for a trash can!!) 
 ■ Roman shade fabric: $10,967 
 ■ Roman shades: $7,315 
 ■ Coffee table: $5,852 
 ■ Commode on legs: $35,115 32 
 It takes years of education and work experience for people to build the skills necessary to take 
on the role of CEO. Obviously, a company like Merril Lynch would only hire a highly qualified person 
for the job. What do you think happened to John Thain? Why would he spend an obscene amount 

41
Business Driven MIS Module 1
of money redecorating his office when his company was having financial trouble? What happens 
to a company whose executives are not aligned with company goals? How can you ensure that 
your company’s executives are not making monumental mistakes, such as million dollar bathroom 
renovations? 
 PROJECT IX 
 I Love TED! 
 A small nonprofit started in 1984, TED (Technology, Entertainment, Design) hosts conferences for 
Ideas Worth Spreading. TED brings people from all over the globe to share award-winning talks cover-
ing the most innovative, informative, and exciting speeches ever given in 20 minutes. You can find 
TED talks by Al Gore, Bill Gates, Steve Jobs, Douglas Adams, Steven Levitt, Seth Godin, Malcolm 
Gladwell, and so on. 33 
 Visit  www.ted.com  and peruse the thousands of videos that are available then answer the 
following:
 ■ Review the TED website and find three talks you would want to watch. Why did you pick these 
three and will you make time outside of class to watch them? 
 ■ How can you gain a competitive advantage by watching TED? 
 ■ How can you find innovative ideas for a start-up by watching TED? 
 ■ How can you find competitive intelligence by watching TED? 
Project 
Number
Project Name
Project 
Type
Plug-In 
Focus Area
Project Level
Skill Set
Page 
Number
1
Financial 
Destiny
Excel
T2
Personal 
Budget
Introductory 
Formulas
AYK.4
2
Cash Flow
Excel
T2
Cash Flow
Introductory 
Formulas
AYK.4
3
Technology 
Budget
Excel
T1, T2
Hardware 
and Software
Introductory 
Formulas
AYK.4
4
Tracking 
Donations
Excel
T2
Employee 
Relationships
Introductory 
Formulas
AYK.4
5
Convert 
Currency
Excel
T2
Global 
Commerce
Introductory 
Formulas
AYK.5
6
Cost 
Comparison
Excel
T2
Total Cost of 
Ownership
Introductory 
Formulas
AYK.5
7
Time 
Management
Excel or 
Project
T12 Project 
Management
Introductory
Gantt Charts
AYK.6
 AY K  A P P L I C AT I O N  P R O J E C T S 
 If you are looking for Excel projects to incorporate into your class, try any of the following after reading 
this chapter. 

 What’s in IT for me? 
 Working faster and smarter has become a necessity for companies. A firm’s value chain is directly affected by how well 
it designs and coordinates its business processes. Business processes offer competitive advantages if they enable a firm 
to lower operating costs, differentiate, or compete in a niche market. They can also be huge burdens if they are outdated, 
which impedes operations, efficiency, and effectiveness. Thus, the ability of management information systems to improve 
business processes is a key advantage. 
 The goal of Chapter 2 is to provide an overview of specific MIS tools managers can use to support the strategies 
discussed in Chapter 1. After reading this chapter, you, the business student, should have detailed knowledge of the 
types of information systems that exist to support decision making and business process reengineering, which in 
turn can improve organization efficiency and effectiveness and help an organization create and maintain competitive 
advantages.  
 ■  M a k i n g  B u s i n e s s  D ec i s i o n s  
 ■  M e t r i c s :  M e a s u r i n g  S u c c e s s  
 ■  S u p p o r t :  E n h a n c i n g D e c i s i o n 
M a k i n g  w i t h  M I S  
 ■  T h e  F u t u re :  A r t i f i c ial 
I n t e l l i g e n c e   
 SECTION 2.2   
Business Processes
 SECTION 2.1   
Decision Support Systems
 ■  E v a l u a t i n g  B u s i n e s s  Pro c e s s e s  
 ■  M o d e l s :  M e a s u r i n g 
P e r f o r m a n c e  
 ■  S u p p o r t :  E n h a n c i n g  B u s i n e s s 
P ro c e s s e s  wi t h  M I S  
 ■  T h e  F u t u re :  B u s i n e s s  Pro c e s s 
M a n a g e m e n t   
 C H A P T E R 
 C H A P T E R  O U T L I N E 
 Decisions and Processes: 
Value Driven Business 
 2 

43
Business Driven MIS Module 1
 opening case study 
 Action Finally—Actionly    
 Data are all over the Internet! Tons and tons and tons of data! For example, over 152 million 
blogs are created each year, along with 100 million Twitter accounts resulting in 25 billion 
Tweets, 107 trillion emails are sent, and 730 billion hours of YouTube videos are watched. 
Known as the social media sector, this arena is by far one of the fastest growing and 
most influential sectors in business. Companies are struggling to understand how the social 
media sector impacts it both financially and strategically. 
 Data are valuable to any company and the data on the Internet are unique because the 
information comes directly from customers, suppliers, competitors, and even employees. 
As the social media sector takes off, companies are finding themselves at a disadvantage 
when attempting to keep up with all of the “online chatter” about their goods and services 
on the many different social media websites, including Facebook, Twitter, MySpace, Flickr, 
LinkedIn, Yelp, Google, blogs, etc. 
 Any time there is a problem there is a potential business solution, and  Actionly.com  
chooses to capitalize on the data glut problem. Actionly monitors multiple social media 
channels through one tracking service looking for specific keywords for industries, brands, 
companies, and trends. Actionly customers choose a keyword to monitor—such as a brand, 
product names, industry terms, or competitors—and then Actionly constantly collects the 
data from these social channels and pulls that data into a cohesive digital dashboard. The 
digital dashboard tracks the desired information, such as marketplace trends, specific com-
panies, competitive brands, entire industries (for example, clean technology), by simulta-
neously searching Twitter, Facebook, Google, YouTube, Flickr, and blogs. After completing 
a search, Actionly.com uses Google Analytics to create graphs and charts indicating how 
frequently each keyword was found throughout the various channels. Additionally, it links 
each respective channel to the dashboard and filters them with “positive” and “negative” 
connections, allowing users to respond to any comments. 
 Actionly.com’s business model sets it up for success in this emerging industry. Actionly 
has a first-mover advantage because it was the first online brand management company 
offering this service to customers. And the company benefits by using its own services 
to ensure its brand stays number one on all social media websites. Actionly uses Google 
Analytics to help transform the data it collects from the various social media websites into 
valuable business intelligence. Its digital dashboard monitors several key metrics, including:
 ■  Reputation Management:  Actionly’s easy to use digital dashboard allows customers to 
observe and analyze trends and track mentions about brands based on historical data 
as well as continuously updated data. For example, a customer can view graphs that 
highlight key trends across 30 days for specific brands, products, or companies. 

44
Chapter 2 Decisions and Processes: Value Driven Business
 ■  Social ROI:  By connecting to Google Analytics from Actionly, a customer can analyze its 
campaign performance for individual tweets or Facebook posts to determine which are 
successful and which are failing. Actionly analyzes every post and click to track page 
views, visitor information, goal completions, and so on, through its digital dashboard, 
allowing users to customize reports tracking the performance of daily posts. 
 ■  Twitter Analytics:  After adding Twitter accounts to the dashboard, a user can drill down 
into the data to view graphs of followers, mentions, and retweets. This eliminates the 
need to manually track a number of Twitter accounts, and a user can view the data in 
graphs or export the data in Excel for further analysis. 
 ■  Marketing Campaign Tracking:  If a company is launching a big promotion or contest, 
it can post messages across multiple Facebook or Twitter accounts; all the user has to 
do is select which Twitter or Facebook accounts it wants to use and when. Actionly’s 
Campaign Tracking helps a user view which posts are resonating well with customers 
and measure metrics such as page views, signups, conversions, and revenue by post. 
Actionly even segments the data by post, account, campaign, or channel, allowing users 
to measure performance over time. 
 ■  Click Performance:  Actionly tracks performance by hour and day of week, allowing 
customers to view which clicks are getting the most attention. Actionly’s algorithm auto-
matically assigns a sentiment to tweets, allowing the customer to immediately filter 
positive or negative or neutral posts to react to information quickly. 
 ■  Sentiment Analysis:  Reviewing positive and negative feedback helps gauge how a 
brand is doing over time, allowing the client to try to increase the positive sentiment. 
However, no sentiment scoring is 100 percent accurate due to the complexities of inter-
pretation, culture, sarcasm, and other language nuances. For example, if Actionly is 
incorrectly tracking a metric, it can change it, allowing users to assign their unique senti-
ments directly to their tweets. A user can also select to have positive or negative alerts 
for keywords emailed as soon as the keyword is posted to help manage online brand 
and company reputations. 
 ■  Competitive Analysis:  Actionly tracks competitor intelligence by watching new-product 
releases, acquisitions, or customer feedback, allowing a company to stay on top of mar-
ket entrants, market-related blogs, news, or industry-related seminars/webinars. 
 ■  Find Influencers:  Actionly’s digital dashboard allows a user to engage directly with 
key influencers or people who are driving the online chatter about goods and services. 
Actionly identifies influencers and determines their relevance to the company, brand, or 
product. It then compiles a list of influencers based on users with the most followers and 
who have been most active for the specific searches in the past 30 days. 1 

45
Business Driven MIS Module 1
1. Managers need to analyze large amounts of information:  
Innovations in communication and globalization have resulted in a
dramatic increase in the variables and dimensions people need to consider
when making a decision, solving a problem, or appraising an opportunity.
2. Managers must make decisions quickly:
Time is of the essence and people simply do not have time to sift through
all the information manually.
3. Managers must apply sophisticated analysis techniques, such as 
Porter’s strategies or forecasting, to make strategic decisions:
Due to the intensely competitive global business environment, companies
must offer far more than just a great product to succeed. 
MANAGERIAL
DECISION-MAKING
CHALLENGES
 section 2.1 
Decision Support Systems 
 LEA R NI NG  O UT CO M E S 
 2.1  Explain the importance of decision making for managers at each of the three primary organization 
levels along with the associated decision characteristics. 
 2.2  Define critical success factors (CSFs) and key performance indicators (KPIs), and explain how 
managers use them to measure the success of MIS projects. 
 2.3  Classify the different operational support systems, managerial support systems, and strategic 
support systems, and explain how managers can use these systems to make decisions and gain 
competitive advantages. 
 2.4  Describe artificial intelligence, and identify its five main types. 
 MAKING BUSINESS DECISIONS  
 Porter’s strategies outlined in Chapter 1 suggest entering markets with a competitive 
advantage in either overall cost leadership, differentiation, or focus. To achieve these 
results, managers must be able to make decisions and forecast future business needs and 
requirements. The most important and most challenging question confronting manag-
ers today is how to lay the foundation for tomorrow’s success while competing to win 
in today’s business environment. A company will not have a future if it is not cultivat-
ing strategies for tomorrow. The goal of this section is to expand on Porter’s Five Forces 
Model, three generic strategies, and value chain analysis to demonstrate how managers 
can learn the concepts and practices of business decision making to add value. It will also 
highlight how companies heading into the 21st century are taking advantage of advanced 
MIS capable of generating significant competitive advantages across the value chain. 
 As we discussed in Chapter 1, decision making is one of the most important and 
challenging aspects of management. Decisions range from routine choices, such as 
how many items to order or how many people to hire, to unexpected ones such as what 
to do if a key employee suddenly quits or needed materials do not arrive. Today, with 
massive volumes of information available, managers are challenged to make highly 
complex decisions—some involving far more information than the human brain can 
comprehend—in increasingly shorter time frames.  Figure 2.1  displays the three pri-
mary challenges managers face when making decisions.  
 LO. 2.1: Explain the importance of 
decision making for managers at 
each of the three primary organiza-
tion levels along with the associated 
decision characteristics. 
 FIGURE 2.1 
 Managerial Decision-Making 
Challenges 

46
Chapter 2 Decisions and Processes: Value Driven Business
 The Decision-Making Process 
 The process of making decisions plays a crucial role in communication and leadership 
for operational, managerial, and strategic projects.   Analytics   is the science of fact-based 
decision making. There are numerous academic decision-making models;  Figure  2.2  
presents just one example. 2 
 Decision-Making Essentials 
 A few key concepts about organizational structure will help our discussion of MIS deci-
sion-making tools. The structure of a typical organization is similar to a pyramid, and 
the different levels require different types of information to assist in decision making, 
problem solving, and opportunity capturing (see  Figure 2.3 ). 
 Operational  At the   operational level   ,  employees develop, control, and maintain 
core business activities required to run the day-to-day operations. Operational decisions 
are considered   structured decisions   ,  which arise in situations where established pro-
cesses offer potential solutions. Structured decisions are made frequently and are almost 
repetitive in nature; they affect short-term business strategies. Reordering inventory and 
creating the employee staffing and weekly production schedules are examples of rou-
tine structured decisions.  Figure 2.4  highlights the essential elements required for opera-
tional decision making. All the elements in the figure should be familiar, except metrics 
which are discussed in detail below. 
 Managerial  At the   managerial level   ,  employees are continuously evaluating com-
pany operations to hone the firm’s abilities to identify, adapt to, and leverage change. 
A company that has a competitive advantage needs to constantly adjust and revise its 
strategy to remain ahead of fast-following competitors. Managerial decisions cover 
 FIGURE 2.2 
 The Six-Step Decision-Making 
Process 
DECISION-MAKING 
PROCESS
Problem Identiﬁcation: Deﬁne the problem as clearly and precisely
as possible.  
Data Collection: Gather problem-related data, including who, what,
where, when, why, and how.  Be sure to gather facts, not rumors or
opinions about the problem. 
Solution Generation: Detail every solution possible, including ideas
that seem farfetched.
Solution Test: Evaluate solutions in terms of feasibility (can it be
completed?), suitability (is it a permanent or a temporary ﬁx?), and
acceptability (can all participants form a consensus?).
Solution Selection: Select the solution that best solves the problem
and meets the needs of the business.
Solution Implementation: If the solution solves the problem, then
the decisions made were correct.  If not, then the decisions were
incorrect and the process begins again.
1
2
3
4
5
6

47
Business Driven MIS Module 1
 FIGURE 2.3 
 Common Company Structure 
STRATEGIC
MANAGERIAL
OPERATIONAL
 FIGURE 2.4 
 Overview of Operational 
Decision Making 
STRATEGIC
MANAGERIAL
OPERATIONAL
Employee Types: Lower management, department managers, analysts, 
staff 
Focus: Internal, functional
Time Frame: Short term, day-to-day operations
Decision Types: Structured, recurring, repetitive
MIS Type: Information
Metrics: Key performance indicators focusing on efﬁciency
Examples:
• How many employees are out sick?
• What are next week’s production requirements?
• How much inventory is in the warehouse?
• How many problems occurred when running payroll?
• Which employees are on vacation next week?
• How many products need to be made today?

48
Chapter 2 Decisions and Processes: Value Driven Business
short- and medium-range plans, schedules, and budgets along with policies, proce-
dures, and business objectives for the firm. They also allocate resources and monitor 
the performance of organizational subunits, including departments, divisions, process 
teams, project teams, and other work groups. These types of decisions are considered 
  semistructured decisions;   they occur in situations in which a few established processes 
help to evaluate potential solutions, but not enough to lead to a definite recommended 
decision. For example, decisions about producing new products or changing employee 
benefits range from unstructured to semistructured.  Figure 2.5  highlights the essential 
elements required for managerial decision making. 
 Strategic  At the    strategic level    ,  managers develop overall business strategies, goals, 
and objectives as part of the company’s strategic plan. They also monitor the strategic per-
formance of the organization and its overall direction in the political, economic, and com-
petitive business environment. Strategic decisions are highly   unstructured decisions  , 
occurring in situations in which no procedures or rules exist to guide decision makers 
toward the correct choice. They are infrequent, extremely important, and typically related 
to long-term business strategy. Examples include the decision to enter a new market or 
even a new industry over, say, the next three years. In these types of decisions, managers 
rely on many sources of information, along with personal knowledge, to find solutions. 
 Figure 2.6 highlights the essential elements required for strategic decision making.  
 METRICS: MEASURING SUCCESS  
 A    project    is a temporary activity a company undertakes to create a unique product, 
service, or result. For example, the construction of a new subway station is a project, 
as is a movie theater chain’s adoption of a software program to allow online ticketing. 
Peter Drucker, a famous management writer, once said that if you cannot measure 
 LO 2.2: Define critical success 
factors (CSFs) and key performance 
indicators (KPIs), and explain how 
managers use them to measure the 
success of MIS projects. 
 FIGURE 2.5 
 Overview of Managerial 
Decision Making 
STRATEGIC
Employee Types: Middle management, managers, directors
Focus: Internal, cross-functional, (sometimes external)
Time Frame: Short term, daily, monthly, yearly
Decision Types: Semistructured, ad hoc (unplanned) reporting
MIS Requirement: Business intelligence
Metrics: Key performance indicators focusing on efﬁciency, and critical
success factors focusing on effectiveness
Examples:
• Who are our best customers by region, by sales representative, by product?
• What are the sales forecasts for next month? How do they compare to 
actual sales for last year?
• What was the difference between expected sales and actual sales for 
each month?
• What was the impact of last month’s marketing campaign on sales?
• What types of ad hoc or unplanned reports might the company require 
next month?
OPERATIONAL
MANAGERIAL

49
Business Driven MIS Module 1
 FIGURE 2.6 
 Overview of Strategic 
Decision Making 
Employee Types: Senior management, presidents, leaders, executives 
Focus: External, industry, cross company
Time Frame: Long term—yearly, multi-year
Decision Types: Unstructured, nonrecurring, one time
MIS Requirement: Knowledge
Metrics: Critical success factors focusing on effectiveness
Examples:
• How will changes in employment levels over the next 3 years impact the company?
• What industry trends are worth analyzing?
• What new products and new markets does the company need to create competitive 
advantages?
• How will a recession over the next years impact business?
• What measures will the company need to prepare for due to new tax laws?
MANAGERIAL
OPERATIONAL
STRATEGIC
something, you cannot manage it. How do managers measure the progress of a com-
plex business project? 
  Metrics   are measurements that evaluate results to determine whether a project is 
meeting its goals. Two core metrics are critical success factors and key performance 
indicators.    Critical success factors (CSFs)    are the crucial steps companies perform to 
achieve their goals and objectives and implement their strategies (see  Figure 2.7 ).   Key 
performance indicators (KPIs)    are the quantifiable metrics a company uses to evaluate 
progress toward critical success factors. KPIs are far more specific than CSFs. 
 It is important to understand the relationship between critical success factors and 
key performance indicators. CSFs are elements crucial for a business strategy’s success. 
KPIs measure the progress of CSFs with quantifiable measurements, and one CSF can 
have several KPIs. Of course, both categories will vary by company and industry. Imag-
ine  improve graduation rates  as a CSF for a college. The KPIs to measure this CSF can 
include:
 ■ Average grades by course and gender. 
 ■ Student dropout rates by gender and major. 
 ■ Average graduation rate by gender and major. 
 ■ Time spent in tutoring by gender and major. 
 KPIs can focus on external and internal measurements. A common external KPI is 
  market share   ,  or the proportion of the market that a firm captures. We calculate it by 
dividing the firm’s sales by the total market sales for the entire industry. Market share 
measures a firm’s external performance relative to that of its competitors. For example, if 
a firm’s total sales (revenues) are $2 million and sales for the entire industry are $10 mil-
lion, the firm has captured 20 percent of the total market (2/10  5  20%) or a 20 percent 
market share. 

50
Chapter 2 Decisions and Processes: Value Driven Business
 A common internal KPI is    return on investment (ROI)    ,  which indicates the earning 
power of a project. We measure it by dividing the profitability of a project by the costs. 
This sounds easy, and for many departments where the projects are tangible and self-
contained it is; however, for projects that are intangible and cross departmental lines 
(such as MIS projects), ROI is challenging to measure. Imagine attempting to calculate 
the ROI of a fire extinguisher. If the fire extinguisher is never used, its ROI is low. If the 
fire extinguisher puts out a fire that could have destroyed the entire building, its ROI is 
astronomically high. 
 Creating KPIs to measure the success of an MIS project offers similar challenges. 
Think about a firm’s email system. How could managers track departmental costs and 
profits associated with company email? Measuring by volume does not account for 
profitability, because one sales email could land a million-dollar deal while 300 others 
might not generate any revenue. Non-revenue-generating departments such as human 
resources and legal require email but will not be using it to generate profits. For this rea-
son, many managers turn to higher-level metrics, such as efficiency and effectiveness, 
to measure MIS projects.   Best practices  are the most successful solutions or problem-
solving methods that have been developed by a specific organization or industry. Mea-
suring MIS projects helps determine the best practices for an industry. 
 Efficiency and Effectiveness Metrics 
  Efficiency MIS metrics   measure the performance of MIS itself, such as throughput, trans-
action speed, and system availability.   Effectiveness MIS metrics   measure the impact MIS 
has on business processes and activities, including customer satisfaction and customer 
conversion rates. Efficiency focuses on the extent to which a firm is using its resources 
in an optimal way, while effectiveness focuses on how well a firm is achieving its goals 
and objectives. Peter Drucker offers a helpful distinction between efficiency and effec-
tiveness: Doing things right addresses efficiency—getting the most from each resource. 
 FIGURE 2.7 
 CSF and KPI Metrics 
Crucial steps companies 
perform to achieve their 
goals and objectives and 
implement their strategies
•  Create high-quality 
   products 
•  Retain competitive 
    advantages 
•  Reduce product costs 
•  Increase customer
    satisfaction 
•  Hire and retain the best 
   business professionals 
Critical 
Success 
Factors  
Quantiﬁable metrics a 
company uses to evaluate 
progress toward critical 
success factors 
•  Turnover rates of 
    employees 
•  Percentage of help desk 
   calls answered in the ﬁrst 
   minute 
•  Number of product 
   returns 
•  Number of new 
   customers 
•  Average customer 
   spending 
Key 
Performance 
Indicators 

51
Business Driven MIS Module 1
Doing the right things addresses effectiveness—setting the right goals and objectives and 
ensuring they are accomplished.  Figure 2.8  describes a few of the common types of effi-
ciency and effectiveness MIS metrics. KPIs that measure MIS projects include both effi-
ciency and effectiveness metrics. Of course, these metrics are not as concrete as market 
share or ROI, but they do offer valuable insight into project performance. 4   
 Large increases in productivity typically result from increases in effectiveness, which 
focus on CSFs. Efficiency MIS metrics are far easier to measure, however, so most manag-
ers tend to focus on them, often incorrectly, to measure the success of MIS projects. Con-
sider measuring the success of automated teller machines (ATMs). Thinking in terms 
of MIS efficiency metrics, a manager would measure the number of daily transactions, 
the average amount per transaction, and the average speed per transaction to determine 
the success of the ATM. Although these offer solid metrics on how well the system is 
performing, they miss many of the intangible or value-added benefits associated with 
ATM effectiveness. Effectiveness MIS metrics might measure how many new customers 
joined the bank due to its ATM locations or the ATMs’ ease of use. They can also measure 
increases in customer satisfaction due to reduced ATM fees or additional ATM services 
such as the sale of stamps and movie tickets, significant time savers and value-added 
features for customers. Being a great manager means taking the added viewpoint offered 
by effectiveness MIS metrics to analyze all benefits associated with an MIS project. 
 The Interrelationship Between Efficiency 
and Effectiveness MIS Metrics 
 Efficiency and effectiveness are definitely related. However, success in one area does 
not necessarily imply success in the other. Efficiency MIS metrics focus on the tech-
nology itself. While these efficiency MIS metrics are important to monitor, they do not 
always guarantee effectiveness. Effectiveness MIS metrics are determined according 
 BUSINESS DRIVEN DISCUSSION 
 How do people make decisions? Almost daily you can read about someone 
who makes a decision most people would find mind-boggling. Here are a few 
examples:
 ■ A woman in Ohio was charged with child endangerment after police said 
she admitted to breast-feeding her child and talking on a cell phone while 
driving her other children to school. 
 ■ A woman in South Florida was caught driving while talking on a cell phone 
on her left shoulder and eating from a cup of soup in her left hand. The 
woman would take her right hand off the wheel to spoon soup, driving with 
no hands while she continued to talk on the phone. 
 ■ A man in California was cited for driving while carrying a swimming pool. 
He drove with one hand while he held his new swimming pool on the roof 
of his car with the other. His three children were leaning out of the car win-
dows, not wearing seat belts, to help hold onto the pool. 
 ■ A woman in Baltimore was charged with diapering her child in the front 
seat of the car while driving at 65 miles per hour down the highway. 3 
 Find an example of a company that found itself in trouble because its 
employees made bad decisions. What could the company have done to protect 
itself from these types of employee blunders? 
 Driving 
Decisions 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 

52
Chapter 2 Decisions and Processes: Value Driven Business
to an organization’s goals, strategies, and objectives. Here, it becomes important to 
consider a company’s CSFs, such as a broad cost leadership strategy (Walmart, for 
example), as well as KPIs such as increasing new customers by 10 percent or reduc-
ing new-product development cycle times to six months. In the private sector, eBay 
continuously benchmarks its MIS projects for efficiency and effectiveness. Maintaining 
constant website availability and optimal throughput performance are CSFs for eBay. 
  Figure 2.9  depicts the interrelationships between efficiency and effectiveness. Ideally, 
a firm wants to operate in the upper right-hand corner of the graph, realizing both signif-
icant increases in efficiency and effectiveness. However, operating in the upper left-hand 
corner (minimal effectiveness with increased efficiency) or the lower right-hand corner 
(significant effectiveness with minimal efficiency) may be in line with an organization’s 
particular strategies. In general, operating in the lower left-hand corner (minimal effi-
ciency and minimal effectiveness) is not ideal for the operation of any organization. 
 Benchmarks  Regardless of what process is measured, how it is measured, and 
whether it is performed for the sake of efficiency or effectiveness, managers must set 
  benchmarks   ,  or baseline values the system seeks to attain.   Benchmarking   is a process 
of continuously measuring system results, comparing those results to optimal system 
 FIGURE 2.8 
 Common Types of Efficiency 
and Effectiveness Metrics 
Throughput—The amount of information
that can travel through a system at any
point in time.
Efﬁciency Metrics
Effectiveness
Metrics
Usability—The ease with which people perform
transactions and/or ﬁnd information.
Customer satisfaction—Measured by
satisfaction surveys, percentage of existing
customers retained, and increases in revenue
dollars per customer.
Conversion rates—The number of customers
an organization “touches” for the ﬁrst time and
persuades to purchase its products or services.
This is a popular metric for evaluating the
effectiveness of banner, pop-up, and pop-under
ads on the Internet.
Financial—Such as return on investment (the
earning power of an organization’s assets), cost-
beneﬁt analysis (the comparison of projected
revenues and costs including development,
maintenance, ﬁxed, and variable), and break-
even analysis (the point at which constant
revenues equal ongoing costs).
Transaction speed—The amount of time
a system takes to perform a transaction.
System availability—The number of
hours a system is available for users.
Information accuracy—The extent to
which a system generates the correct
results when executing the same
transaction numerous times.
Response time—The time it takes to
respond to user interactions such as a
mouse click.

53
Business Driven MIS Module 1
performance (benchmark values), and identifying steps and procedures to improve sys-
tem performance. Benchmarks help assess how an MIS project performs over time. For 
instance, if a system held a benchmark for response time of 15 seconds, the manager 
would want to ensure response time continued to decrease until it reached that point. If 
response time suddenly increased to 1 minute, the manager would know the system was 
not functioning correctly and could start looking into potential problems. Continuously 
measuring MIS projects against benchmarks provides feedback so managers can control 
the system. 
 SUPPORT: ENHANCING DECISION MAKING WITH MIS  
 Now that we’ve reviewed the essentials of decision making, we are ready to under-
stand the powerful benefits associated with using MIS to support managers making 
decisions. 
 LO 2.3: Classify the different opera-
tional support systems, managerial 
support systems, and strategic support 
systems, and explain how managers 
can use these systems to make deci-
sions and gain competitive advantages. 
 FIGURE 2.9 
 The Interrelationships Between 
Efficiency and Effectiveness 
High
Efﬁciency
Low
Low
High
Effectiveness
Optimal area
in which to
operate
 BUSINESS DRIVEN GLOBALIZATION 
 It is late at night and you are working on your final exam when your computer 
crashes. As your blood pressure climbs and your stress level skyrockets, you call 
your computer manufacturer’s technical support number. Of course that per-
son tells you the problem has nothing to do with the computer and must have a 
different source. What are you going to do? 
  iYogi.net  is a 24/7 online support service that allows technicians to take 
remote control of your computer from Gurgaon, India, and try to fix what ails it. 
iYogi provides technical support for all Walmart computer customers and sells 
its services through Walmart.com and Amazon.com. If the thought of turning 
control over to someone you never met half a world away fills you with terror, 
it shouldn’t. All iYogi technicians are Microsoft, Cisco, and Hewlett-Packard 
certified. 5 
 Describe the types of decisions iYogi technicians are required to make when 
helping a customer with a computer problem. What would potential CSFs and 
KPIs for iYogi be? What types of metrics would managers track so they could 
control operations? 
 iYogi Help 
Desk Support 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 

54
Chapter 2 Decisions and Processes: Value Driven Business
 A   model   is a simplified representation or abstraction of reality. Models help man-
agers calculate risks, understand uncertainty, change variables, and manipulate 
time to make decisions. MIS support systems rely on models for computational and 
analytical routines that mathematically express relationships among variables. For 
example, a spreadsheet program, such as Microsoft Office Excel, might contain mod-
els that calculate market share or ROI. MIS have the capability and functionality to 
express far more complex modeling relationships that provide information, business 
intelligence, and knowledge.  Figure 2.10  highlights the three primary types of man-
agement information systems available to support decision making across the com-
pany levels.  
 Operational Support Systems 
  Transactional information   encompasses all the information contained within a sin-
gle business process or unit of work, and its primary purpose is to support the perfor-
mance of daily operational or structured decisions. Transactional information is created, 
for example, when customers are purchasing stocks, making an airline reservation, or 
withdrawing cash from an ATM. Managers use transactional information when making 
structured decisions at the operational level, such as when analyzing daily sales reports 
to determine how much inventory to carry. 
   Online transaction processing (OLTP)    is the capture of transaction and event infor-
mation using technology to (1) process the information according to defined business 
rules, (2) store the information, and (3) update existing information to reflect the new 
information. During OLTP, the organization must capture every detail of transactions 
and events. A    transaction processing system (TPS)    is the basic business system that 
serves the operational level (analysts) and assists in making structured decisions. The 
most common example of a TPS is an operational accounting system such as a payroll 
system or an order-entry system. 
 FIGURE 2.10 
 Primary Types of MIS Systems 
for Decision Making 
Operational                        Managerial                         Strategic 
Unstructured
Semistructured
Structured 
Transaction
Processing
System
Decision
Support
Systems 
Executive
Information
Systems

55
Business Driven MIS Module 1
 Using systems thinking, we can see that the inputs for a TPS are   source documents  , 
the original transaction record. Source documents for a payroll system can include time 
sheets, wage rates, and employee benefit reports. Transformation includes common 
procedures such as creating, reading, updating, and deleting (commonly referred to as 
CRUD) employee records, along with calculating the payroll and summarizing benefits. 
The output includes cutting the paychecks and generating payroll reports.  Figure 2.11  
demonstrates the systems thinking view of a TPS. 6 
 Managerial Support Systems 
  Analytical information   encompasses all organizational information, and its primary 
purpose is to support the performance of managerial analysis or semistructured deci-
sions. Analytical information includes transactional information along with other 
information such as market and industry information. Examples of analytical infor-
mation are trends, sales, product statistics, and future growth projections. Managers 
use analytical information when making important semistructured decisions, such as 
whether the organization should build a new manufacturing plant or hire additional 
sales reps. 
   Online analytical processing (OLAP)    is the manipulation of information to cre-
ate business intelligence in support of strategic decision making.   Decision support 
systems (DSSs)    model information using OLAP, which provides assistance in evalu-
ating and choosing among different courses of action. DSSs enable high-level man-
agers to examine and manipulate large amounts of detailed data from different 
internal and external sources. Analyzing complex relationships among thousands or 
even millions of data items to discover patterns, trends, and exception conditions 
is one of the key uses associated with a DSS. For example, doctors may enter symp-
toms into a decision support system so it can help diagnose and treat patients. Insur-
ance companies also use a DSS to gauge the risk of providing insurance to drivers 
who have imperfect driving records. One company found that married women who 
are homeowners with one speeding ticket are rarely cited for speeding again. Armed 
with this business intelligence, the company achieved a cost advantage by lowering 
insurance rates to this specific group of customers. The following are common DSS 
analysis techniques. 
 What-If Analysis     What-if analysis   checks the impact of a change in a variable or 
assumption on the model. For example, “What will happen to the supply chain if a hur-
ricane in South Carolina reduces holding inventory from 30 percent to 10 percent?” A 
user would be able to observe and evaluate any changes that occurred to the values in 
 FIGURE 2.11 
 Systems Thinking Example 
of a TPS 
Input
Process
Output
• CRUD
• Calculate
• Summarize
• Reports
• Source Documents
Feedback

56
Chapter 2 Decisions and Processes: Value Driven Business
the model, especially to a variable such as profits. Users repeat this analysis with differ-
ent variables until they understand all the effects of various situations. 
 Sensitivity Analysis     Sensitivity analysis   ,  a special case of what-if analysis, is the 
study of the impact on other variables when one variable is changed repeatedly. Sensitiv-
ity analysis is useful when users are uncertain about the assumptions made in estimat-
ing the value of certain key variables. For example, repeatedly changing revenue in small 
increments to determine its effects on other variables would help a manager understand 
the impact of various revenue levels on other decision factors. 
 Goal-Seeking Analysis     Goal-seeking analysis   finds the inputs necessary to 
achieve a goal such as a desired level of output. It is the reverse of what-if and sensitiv-
ity analysis. Instead of observing how changes in a variable affect other variables, goal-
seeking analysis sets a target value (a goal) for a variable and then repeatedly changes 
other variables until the target value is achieved. For example, goal-seeking analysis 
could determine how many customers must purchase a new product to increase gross 
profits to $5 million. 
 Optimization Analysis     Optimization analysis   ,  an extension of goal-seeking analy-
sis, finds the optimum value for a target variable by repeatedly changing other variables, 
subject to specified constraints. By changing revenue and cost variables in an optimiza-
tion analysis, managers can calculate the highest potential profits. Constraints on rev-
enue and cost variables can be taken into consideration, such as limits on the amount of 
raw materials the company can afford to purchase and limits on employees available to 
meet production needs. 
  Figure 2.12  shows the common systems view of a DSS.  Figure 2.13  shows how TPSs 
supply transactional data to a DSS. The DSS then summarizes and aggregates the 
information from the different TPSs, which assist managers in making semistructured 
decision. 
 Strategic Support Systems 
 Decision making at the strategic level requires both business intelligence and knowl-
edge to support the uncertainty and complexity associated with business strategies. An 
   executive information system (EIS)   is a specialized DSS that supports senior-level exec-
utives and unstructured, long-term, nonroutine decisions requiring judgment, evalua-
tion, and insight. These decisions do not have a right or wrong answer, only efficient and 
 FIGURE 2.12 
 Systems Thinking Example 
of a DSS 
Input
Process
Output
Feedback
• What-if
• Sensitivity
• Goal seeking
• Optimization
• Forecasts
• Simulations
• Ad hoc reports
• TPS

57
Business Driven MIS Module 1
 FIGURE 2.13 
 Interaction Between 
TPS and DSS to Support 
Semistructured Decisions 
Transaction Processing
Systems
Decision Support Systems
Order
Entry
Order Processing System
Inventory Tracking System
Distribution System
Decision Support System
Inventory
Data
Shipping
Data
Sales
Data
Manufacturing
Data
Transportation
Data
Managerial
Reports
 BUSINESS DRIVEN ETHICS AND SECURITY 
 What if the person sitting in the cubicle next to you was running a scam that 
cost your company $7 billion? An employee at a French bank allegedly used 
his inside knowledge of business processes to bypass the system and place 
roughly $73 billion in bogus trades that cost the bank more than $7 billion to 
unwind. 
 Findings from the U.S. Secret Service’s examination of 23 incidents con-
ducted by 26 insiders determined that 70 percent of the time, insiders took 
advantage of failures in business process rules and authorization mechanisms 
to steal from their company. These insiders were authorized and active com-
puter users 78 percent of the time, and a surprising 43 percent used their own 
user name and passwords to commit their crimes. 7 
 This is a daunting reminder that every employee has the potential to become 
a knowledgeable insider and, if started on a criminal path, to do tremendous 
damage to your company. Many DSSs and EISs contain the business intelli-
gence your company needs to operate effectively, and you need to protect these 
assets. What types of sensitive information is housed in a company’s TPS, DSS, 
and EIS? What problems could you encounter if one of your employees decided 
to steal the information housed in your DSS? How could you protect your EIS 
from unethical users? What would you do if you thought the person sharing 
your cube was a rogue insider? 
 The Criminal in 
the Cube Next 
Door 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 
effective answers. Moving up through the organizational pyramid, managers deal less 
with the details (“finer” information) and more with meaningful aggregations of infor-
mation (“coarser” information).   Granularity  refers to the level of detail in the model or 
the decision-making process. The greater the granularity, the deeper the level of detail or 
fineness of data (see  Figure 2.14 ). 

58
Chapter 2 Decisions and Processes: Value Driven Business
 BUSINESS DRIVEN START-UP 
 Do you enjoy kidnapping your rivals’ team mascots or toilet-papering their frat 
houses? If so, you might find your ideal career at College Hunks Hauling Junk. 
The company hires college students and recent grads to pick up junk and take it 
away. The founder, Nick Friedman, had a goal of capturing that friendly rivalry 
so often associated with college life and turning it into profits. When the com-
pany launched in 2005, the haulers from Virginia found their truck had been 
lathered in shaving cream and draped with a University of Maryland flag. The 
Virginia haulers retaliated, and soon after dead fish were found on the seats of 
Maryland’s truck. Friedman decided to use this energy as an incentive instead 
of condemning the unorthodox behavior. “We wanted to harness that competi-
tive, prankster enthusiasm and channel it for good,” he says. 
 Freidman made a bold move and decided that instead of tracking typical key 
performance indicators such as revenue, average job size, and customer loyalty, he 
would set up his dashboard to track volume of junk collected and amount donated or 
recycled. The winning team gains such things as bragging rights and banners, mod-
est monetary prizes, and the right to eat first at the annual company meeting. Most 
employees check the dashboard daily to view their own and rivals’ latest standings. 8 
 Why do you think competition is helping College Hunks Hauling Junk exceed 
its revenue goals? If you were to build a team competition dashboard for your 
school or your work, what types of metrics would you track? What types of moti-
vators would you use to ensure your team is always in the green? What types 
of external information would you want tracked in your dashboard? Could an 
unethical person use the information from your dashboard to hurt your team or 
your organization? What can you do to mitigate these risks? 
 Digital 
Dashboard for 
Tracking Junk 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 
 FIGURE 2.14 
 Information Levels Throughout 
an Organization 
STRATEGIC
MANAGERIAL
OPERATIONAL
Fine
Coarse
Granularity
OLTP
OLAP
Processing
Transactional
Analytical
Processes

59
Business Driven MIS Module 1
 FIGURE 2.15 
 Interaction Between 
a TPS and EIS 
Transaction Processing
Systems
Executive
Reports
EIS
Order
Entry
Order Processing
System
Inventory Data
Inventory Tracking
System
Shipping Data
Distribution System
Sales
Data
Manufacturing
Data
Transportation
Data
Industry
Outlook
Market
Outlook
Executive Information
Systems
Industry
Information
Stock Market
Information
External Sources of
Information
 A DSS differs from an EIS in that an EIS requires data from external sources to sup-
port unstructured decisions (see  Figure 2.15 ). This is not to say that DSSs never use 
data from external sources, but typically DSS semistructured decisions rely on internal 
data only.  
  Visualization   produces graphical displays of patterns and complex relationships in 
large amounts of data. Executive information systems use visualization to deliver spe-
cific key information to top managers at a glance, with little or no interaction with the 
system. A common tool that supports visualization is a   digital dashboard  , which tracks 
KPIs and CSFs by compiling information from multiple sources and tailoring it to meet 
user needs. Following is a list of potential features included in a dashboard designed for 
a manufacturing team:
 ■ A hot list of key performance indicators, refreshed every 15 minutes. 
 ■ A running line graph of planned versus actual production for the past 24 hours. 
 ■ A table showing actual versus forecasted product prices and inventories. 
 ■ A list of outstanding alerts and their resolution status.  
 ■ A graph of stock market prices. 
 Digital dashboards, whether basic or comprehensive, deliver results quickly. As they 
become easier to use, more employees can perform their own analyses without inun-
dating MIS staff with questions and requests for reports. Digital dashboards enable 

60
Chapter 2 Decisions and Processes: Value Driven Business
employees to move beyond reporting to using information to directly increase business 
performance. With them, employees can react to information as soon as it becomes 
available and make decisions, solve problems, and change strategies daily instead of 
monthly. Digital dashboards offer the following capabilities: 
 Consolidation    Consolidation   is the aggregation of data from simple roll-ups to 
complex groupings of interrelated information. For example, data for different sales rep-
resentatives can then be rolled up to an office level, then a state level, then a regional 
sales level. 
 Drill-Down    Drill-down   enables users to view details, and details of details, of infor-
mation. This is the reverse of consolidation; a user can view regional sales data and then 
drill down all the way to each sales representative’s data at each office. Drill-down capa-
bility lets managers view monthly, weekly, daily, or even hourly information. 
 Slice-and-Dice    Slice-and-dice   is the ability to look at information from different 
perspectives. One slice of information could display all product sales during a given pro-
motion. Another slice could display a single product’s sales for all promotions. Slicing 
and dicing is often performed along a time axis to analyze trends and find time-based 
patterns in the information. 
 One thing to remember when making decisions is the old saying, “Garbage in, gar-
bage out.” If the transactional data used in the support system are wrong, then the man-
agerial analysis will be wrong and the DSS will simply assist in making a wrong decision 
faster. Managers should also ask, “What is the DSS  not  telling me before I make my final 
decision?”    
 THE FUTURE: ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
 Executive information systems are starting to take advantage of artificial intelligence to 
facilitate unstructured strategic decision making.   Artificial intelligence (AI)  simulates 
human thinking and behavior, such as the ability to reason and learn. Its ultimate goal is 
to build a system that can mimic human intelligence. 
  Intelligent systems   are various commercial applications of artificial intelligence. 
They include sensors, software, and devices that emulate and enhance human capabili-
ties, learn or understand from experience, make sense of ambiguous or contradictory 
information, and even use reasoning to solve problems and make decisions effectively. 
Intelligent systems perform such tasks as boosting productivity in factories by monitor-
ing equipment and signaling when preventive maintenance is required. They are begin-
ning to show up everywhere:
 ■ At Manchester Airport in England, the Hefner AI Robot Cleaner alerts passen-
gers to security and nonsmoking rules while it scrubs up to 65,600 square feet of 
floor per day. Laser scanners and ultrasonic detectors keep it from colliding with 
passengers.  
 ■ Shell Oil’s SmartPump keeps drivers in their cars on cold, wet winter days. It can ser-
vice any automobile built after 1987 that has been fitted with a special gas cap and a 
windshield-mounted transponder that tells the robot where to insert the pump. 
 ■ Matsushita’s courier robot navigates hospital hallways, delivering patient files, X-ray 
films, and medical supplies.  
 ■ The FireFighter AI Robot can extinguish flames at chemical plants and nuclear reac-
tors with water, foam, powder, or inert gas. The robot puts distance between human 
operators and the fire. 9 
 AI systems increase the speed and consistency of decision making, solve problems 
with incomplete information, and resolve complicated issues that cannot be solved 
by conventional computing. There are many categories of AI systems; five of the most 
familiar are (1) expert systems, (2) neural networks, (3) genetic algorithms, (4) intelligent 
agents, and (5) virtual reality (see  Figure 2.16 ). 
 LO 2.4: Describe artificial 
intelligence, and identify its 
five main types. 

61
Business Driven MIS Module 1
 Expert Systems 
  Expert systems  are computerized advisory programs that imitate the reasoning pro-
cesses of experts in solving difficult problems. Typically, they include a knowledge base 
containing various accumulated experience and a set of rules for applying the knowledge 
base to each particular situation. Expert systems are the most common form of AI in the 
business arena because they fill the gap when human experts are difficult to find or retain 
or are too expensive. The best-known systems play chess and assist in medical diagnosis.  
 Neural Networks 
 A   neural network   ,  also called an artificial neural network, is a category of AI that 
attempts to emulate the way the human brain works. Neural networks analyze large 
quantities of information to establish patterns and characteristics in situations where 
the logic or rules are unknown. Neural networks’ many features include:
 ■ Learning and adjusting to new circumstances on their own. 
 ■ Lending themselves to massive parallel processing. 
 ■ Functioning without complete or well-structured information.  
 ■ Coping with huge volumes of information with many dependent variables. 
 ■ Analyzing nonlinear relationships in information (they have been called fancy 
regression analysis systems). 
 The finance industry is a veteran in the use of neural network technology and has been 
relying on various forms for over two decades. It uses neural networks to review loan 
applications and create patterns or profiles of applications that fall into two categories—
approved or denied. Here are some examples of neural networks in finance:
 ■ Citibank uses neural networks to find opportunities in financial markets. By carefully 
examining historical stock market data with neural network software, Citibank finan-
cial managers learn of interesting coincidences or small anomalies (called market 
inefficiencies). For example, it could be that whenever IBM stock goes up, so does 
Unisys stock, or that a U.S. Treasury note is selling for 1 cent less in Japan than in the 
United States. These snippets of information can make a big difference to Citibank’s 
bottom line in a very competitive financial market.  
 ■ Visa, MasterCard, and many other credit card companies use a neural network 
to spot peculiarities in individual accounts and follow up by checking for fraud. 
MasterCard estimates neural networks save it $50 million annually. 
 FIGURE 2.16 
 Examples of Artificial 
Intelligence 
Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Expert Systems
Example:
Playing chess.
Neural Networks 
Example: Credit
card companies
checking for
fraud.
Genetic Algorithms
Example:
Investment
companies in
trading decisions.
Intelligent Agents 
Example:
Environmental
scanning and
competitive
intelligence.
Virtual Reality
Example:
Working virtually
around the globe.

62
Chapter 2 Decisions and Processes: Value Driven Business
 ■ Insurance companies along with state compensation funds and other carriers use 
neural network software to identify fraud. The system searches for patterns in billing 
charges, laboratory tests, and frequency of office visits. A claim for which the diag-
nosis was a sprained ankle but treatment included an electrocardiogram would be 
flagged for the account manager. 10 
  Fuzzy logic   is a mathematical method of handling imprecise or subjective informa-
tion. The basic approach is to assign values between 0 and 1 to vague or ambiguous 
information. Zero represents information not included, while 1 represents inclusion or 
membership. For example, fuzzy logic is used in washing machines that determine by 
themselves how much water to use or how long to wash (they continue washing until the 
water is clean). In accounting and finance, fuzzy logic allows people to analyze informa-
tion with subjective financial values (intangibles such as goodwill) that are very impor-
tant considerations in economic analysis. Fuzzy logic and neural networks are often 
combined to express complicated and subjective concepts in a form that makes it pos-
sible to simplify the problem and apply rules that are executed with a level of certainty. 
 Genetic Algorithms 
 A   genetic algorithm   is an artificial intelligence system that mimics the evolutionary, 
survival-of-the-fittest process to generate increasingly better solutions to a problem. A 
genetic algorithm is essentially an optimizing system: It finds the combination of inputs 
that gives the best outputs.   Mutation   is the process within a genetic algorithm of ran-
domly trying combinations and evaluating the success (or failure) of the outcome. 
 Genetic algorithms are best suited to decision-making environments in which thou-
sands, or perhaps millions, of solutions are possible. Genetic algorithms can find and 
evaluate solutions with many more possibilities, faster and more thoroughly than a 
human. Organizations face decision-making environments for all types of problems that 
require optimization techniques, such as the following:
 ■ Business executives use genetic algorithms to help them decide which combina-
tion of projects a firm should invest in, taking complicated tax considerations into 
account. 
 ■ Investment companies use genetic algorithms to help in trading decisions. 
 ■ Telecommunication companies use genetic algorithms to determine the optimal 
configuration of fiber-optic cable in a network that may include as many as 100,000 
connection points. The genetic algorithm evaluates millions of cable configurations 
and selects the one that uses the least amount of cable. 
 Intelligent Agents 
 An   intelligent agent   is a special-purpose knowledge-based information system that 
accomplishes specific tasks on behalf of its users. Intelligent agents usually have a graph-
ical representation, such as “Sherlock Holmes” for an information search agent. 
 One of the simplest examples of an intelligent agent is a shopping bot. A   shopping 
bot  is software that will search several retailer websites and provide a comparison of 
each retailer’s offerings including price and availability. Increasingly, intelligent agents 
handle the majority of a company’s Internet buying and selling and complete such pro-
cesses as finding products, bargaining over prices, and executing transactions. Intelli-
gent agents also have the capability to handle all supply chain buying and selling. 
 Another application for intelligent agents is in environmental scanning and com-
petitive intelligence. For instance, an intelligent agent can learn the types of competitor 
information users want to track, continuously scan the web for it, and alert users when a 
significant event occurs. 
 Multiagent Systems and Agent-Based Modeling   What do cargo transport 
systems, book distribution centers, the video game market, and a flu epidemic have in 
common with an ant colony? They are all complex adaptive systems. By observing parts 
of Earth’s ecosystem, like ant colonies, artificial intelligence scientists can use hardware 
and software models that incorporate insect characteristics and behavior to (1) learn 

63
Business Driven MIS Module 1
how people-based systems behave, (2) predict how they will behave under a given set 
of circumstances, and (3) improve human systems to make them more efficient and 
effective. This process of learning from ecosystems and adapting their characteristics to 
human and organizational situations is called biomimicry. 
 In the past few years, AI research has made much progress in modeling complex orga-
nizations as a whole with the help of multiagent systems. In a multiagent system, groups 
of intelligent agents have the ability to work independently and to interact with each 
other. Agent-based modeling is a way of simulating human organizations using multiple 
intelligent agents, each of which follows a set of simple rules and can adapt to changing 
conditions. 
 Agent-based modeling systems are being used to model stock market fluctuations, 
predict the escape routes people seek in a burning building, estimate the effects of inter-
est rates on consumers with different types of debt, and anticipate how changes in con-
ditions will affect the supply chain, to name just a few. 
 Virtual Reality 
  Virtual reality   is a computer-simulated environment that can be a simulation of the 
real world or an imaginary world. Virtual reality is a fast-growing area of artificial intelli-
gence that had its origins in efforts to build more natural, realistic, multisensory human-
computer interfaces. Virtual reality enables telepresence where users can be anywhere 
in the world and use virtual reality systems to work alone or together at a remote site. 
Typically, this involves using a virtual reality system to enhance the sight and touch of a 
human who is remotely manipulating equipment to accomplish a task. Examples range 
from virtual surgery, where surgeon and patient may be on opposite sides of the globe, 
to the remote use of equipment in hazardous environments such as chemical plants and 
nuclear reactors.   Augmented reality   is the viewing of the physical world with computer-
generated layers of information added to it. 
 Virtual Workforce   At Microsoft’s headquarters in Redmond, Washington, traffic 
congestion occurs daily for the 35,000 commuters. To alleviate the congestion Microsoft 
is offering its employees the ability to work virtually from home. Over 42 percent of IBM’s 
 BUSINESS DRIVEN INNOVATION 
 Humans are not permitted inside Staples’ Denver distribution center. Who is 
filling all the orders, you ask? Robots! This 100,000-square-foot space belongs 
to 150 orange robots that resemble overstuffed ottomans and race around with 
uncanny accuracy. They’re making Staples employees more than twice as pro-
ductive. The robots, or bots, are built by Kiva Systems, a company with a single 
critical success factor: Replace the labyrinth of conveyor belts and humans 
that most distributors rely on to pack items in the online mail-order business. 
Companies using Kiva bots include Walgreens, Zappos, The Gap, and Amazon. 
 Robots have captured people’s attention for years. From the quirky droids 
in  Star Wars to the powerful fighting machines in  Transformers, they seem 
to fascinate everyone. Assume your professor has asked you to participate in 
The Robot Challenge, and you must design a robot that will enhance business 
operations. It must contain a digital dashboard and provide decision support 
capabilities for its owners. Be sure to describe your robot, its functions, how 
the digital dashboard works and supports users, and why customers would 
purchase your robot. Feel free to include a picture or diagram of how your 
robot works. 11   
 Building Robots 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 

64
Chapter 2 Decisions and Processes: Value Driven Business
330,000 employees work virtually, saving over $100 million per year in real estate-related 
expenses. Working virtually offers several advantages such as fewer cars on the road, 
increases in worker productive, and decreased real estate expenses. Drawbacks include 
the fear among workers that they will jeopardize their careers by working from home, 
and some workers need a busy environment to stay productive. Virtual workers also tend 
to feel alone, secluded, and deprived of vital training and mentoring. 
 section 2.2 
Business Processes 
 LE A R NI NG  OU T C OM E S 
 2.5 Explain the value of business processes for a company, and differentiate between customer-facing 
and business-facing processes. 
 2.6 Demonstrate the value of business process modeling, and compare As-Is and To-Be models. 
 2.7 Differentiate among automation, streamlining, and reengineering. 
 2.8 Describe business process management and its value to an organization. 
 EVALUATING BUSINESS PROCESSES  
 Most companies pride themselves on providing breakthrough products and services for 
customers. But if customers do not receive what they want quickly, accurately, and has-
sle-free, even fantastic offerings will not prevent a company from annoying customers 
and ultimately eroding its own financial performance. To avoid this pitfall and protect its 
competitive advantage, a company must continually evaluate all the business processes 
in its value chain. Recall from Chapter 1 that a  business process  is a standardized set of 
activities that accomplish a specific task, such as processing a customer’s order. Business 
processes transform a set of inputs into a set of outputs—goods or services—for another 
person or process by using people and tools. Understanding business processes helps a 
manager envision how the entire company operates. 
 Improving the efficiency and effectiveness of its business processes will improve the 
firm’s value chain. The goal of this section is to expand on Porter’s value chain analysis 
by detailing the powerful value-adding relationships between business strategies and 
core business processes.  Figure 2.17 illustrates several common business processes. 
 The processes outlined in  Figure  2.17  reflect functional thinking. Some processes, 
such as a programming process, may be contained wholly within a single department. 
However, most, such as ordering a product, are cross-functional or cross-departmental 
processes and span the entire organization. The process of “order to delivery” focuses 
on the entire customer order process across functional departments (see  Figure 2.18 ). 
Another example is “product realization,” which includes not only the way a product is 
developed, but also the way it is marketed and serviced. Some other cross-functional 
business processes are taking a product from concept to market, acquiring custom-
ers, loan processing, providing post-sales service, claim processing, and reservation 
handling. 
  Customer-facing processes   ,  also called front-office processes, result in a product or 
service received by an organization’s external customer. They include fulfilling orders, 
communicating with customers, and sending out bills and marketing information. 
  Business-facing processes  , also called back-office processes, are invisible to the external 
customer but essential to the effective management of the business; they include goal 
setting, day-to-day planning, giving performance feedback and rewards, and allocating 
resources.  Figure 2.19  displays the different categories of customer-facing and business-
facing processes along with an example of each. 12 
 A company’s strategic vision should provide guidance on which business processes 
are core, that is, which are directly linked to the firm’s critical success factors. Mapping 
these core business processes to the value chain reveals where the processes touch the 
customers and affect their perceptions of value. This type of map conceptualizes the 
 LO 2.5: Explain the value of business 
processes for a company, and differ-
entiate between customer-facing 
and business-facing processes. 

65
Business Driven MIS Module 1
 FIGURE 2.18 
 Five Steps in the Order-to-
Delivery Business Process 
Marketing
Sales
Operations
Management
Accounting and
Finance
Customer
Service
• Create campaign
• Check inventory
Step One
• Place order
• Notify production
• Check credit
Step Two
• Manufacture goods
Step Three
• Deliver goods
• Bill customer
Step Four
• Support sale
Step Five
 FIGURE 2.17 
 Sample Business Processes 
Human Resources
•   Hiring employees
•   Enrolling employees in health care
•   Tracking vacation and sick time
Operations Management
•   Ordering inventory
•   Creating production schedules
•   Manufacturing goods
Marketing and Sales
•   Promoting of discounts
•   Communicating marketing campaigns
•   Attracting customers
•   Processing sales
Accounting and Finance
•   Creating ﬁnancial statements
•   Paying of Accounts Payable
•   Collecting of Accounts Receivable

66
Chapter 2 Decisions and Processes: Value Driven Business
business as a value delivery system, allowing managers to ensure all core business pro-
cesses are operating as efficiently and effectively as possible. 
 A   business process patent   is a patent that protects a specific set of procedures for 
conducting a particular business activity. A firm can create a value chain map of the 
entire industry to extend critical success factors and business process views beyond its 
boundaries.   Core processes   are business processes, such as manufacturing goods, sell-
ing products, and providing service, that make up the primary activities in a value chain. 
Evaluating core processes allowed National Semiconductor to identify the core business 
processes required to move assembly plants to Southeast Asia. The map identified logis-
tics and distribution as critical to the success of the move. Thus, to ensure reliable deliv-
ery of its products, National Semiconductor contracted with Federal Express, combining 
its outstanding manufacturing process and Federal Express’s exceptional distribution 
processes. The move allowed National Semiconductor to save money by closing nine 
warehouses while maintaining excellence in logistics and distribution. As this example 
demonstrates, changing business processes can generate significant competitive advan-
tages across the value chain. 13 
 MODELS: MEASURING PERFORMANCE  
  Business process modeling  , or   mapping   ,  is the activity of creating a detailed flowchart 
or process map of a work process that shows its inputs, tasks, and activities in a struc-
tured sequence. A   business process model   is a graphic description of a process, show-
ing the sequence of process tasks, which is developed for a specific purpose and from a 
selected viewpoint. A set of one or more process models details the many functions of a 
system or subject area with graphics and text, and its purpose is to:
 ■ Expose process detail gradually and in a controlled manner. 
 ■ Encourage conciseness and accuracy in describing the process model. 
 ■ Focus attention on the process model interfaces. 
 ■ Provide a powerful process analysis and consistent design vocabulary. ( Figures 2.20 
through Figure  2.23 provide examples of business process modeling.) 14 
 Business process modeling usually begins with a functional process representation of 
 what the process problem is, or an As-Is process model.   As-Is process models  represent 
the current state of the operation that has been mapped, without any specific improve-
ments or changes to existing processes. The next step is to build a To-Be process model 
that displays  how  the process problem will be solved or implemented.   To-Be process 
models   show the results of applying change improvement opportunities to the cur-
rent (As-Is) process model. This approach ensures that the process is fully and clearly 
understood before the details of a process solution are decided upon. The To-Be process 
model shows  how  the  what  is to be realized.  Figure 2.24  displays the As-Is and To-Be 
process models for ordering a hamburger. 
 LO 2.6: Demonstrate the value of 
business process modeling, and 
compare As-Is and To-Be models. 
 FIGURE 2.19 
 Customer-Facing, Industry-
Specific, and Business-Facing 
Processes 
Order processing
Customer service
Sales process
Customer billing
Order shipping
Customer-Facing
Processes
Banking—Loan processing
Insurance—Claims processing
Government—Grant allocation
Hotel—Reservation handling
Airline—Baggage handling
Industry-Speciﬁc Customer
Facing Processes
Strategic planning
Tactical planning
Budget forecasting
Training
Purchasing raw materials
Business-Facing
Processes

67
Business Driven MIS Module 1
 FIGURE 2.20 
 Online Sales Process Model 
Customer
Website
Credit Card
Transaction
Customer Information
in Database
Warehouse
Quality Assurance
Shipping
Customer Service
Quality Assurance
 FIGURE 2.21 
 Online Banking Process Model 
Automatic
Deposit
Withdraw from Account
Electronic Payment
Paper Check

68
Chapter 2 Decisions and Processes: Value Driven Business
 FIGURE 2.22 
 Order Fulfillment Process Model 
Customer
Call Center
Online Order
Inventory Check
Item in 
stock
Item Packed
Customer Notiﬁed
of Back Order
Process Payment
Item Shipped
Yes
No
 As-Is and To-Be process models are both integral in business process reengineering 
projects, since these diagrams are very powerful in visualizing the activities, processes, 
and data flow of an organization.  Figure 2.25 illustrates an As-Is process model of the 
order to delivery process using swim lanes to represent the relevant departments. The 
 swim lane   layout arranges the steps of a business process into a set of rows depicting 
the various elements.  
 You need to be careful not to become inundated in excessive detail when creating an 
As-Is process model. The primary goal is to simplify, eliminate, and improve the To-Be 
processes. Process improvement efforts focus on defining the most efficient and effec-
tive process identifying all of the illogical, missing, or irrelevant processes. 
 Investigating business processes can help an organization find bottlenecks, remove 
redundant tasks, and recognize smooth-running processes. For example, a florist might 
have a key success factor of reducing delivery time. A florist that has an inefficient order-
ing process or a difficult distribution process will be unable to achieve this goal. Tak-
ing down inaccurate orders, incorrect addresses, or shipping delays can cause errors in 
the delivery process. Improving order entry, production, or scheduling processes can 
improve the delivery process. 
 Business processes should drive MIS choices and should be based on business strat-
egies and goals (see  Figure 2.26 ). Only after determining the most efficient and effec-
tive business process should an organization choose the MIS that supports that business 
process. Of course, this does not always happen, and managers may find themselves in 
the difficult position of changing a business process because the system cannot sup-
port the ideal solution (see  Figure 2.26 ). Managers who make MIS choices and only then 
determine how their business processes should perform typically fail.   

69
Business Driven MIS Module 1
 FIGURE 2.23 
 Purchasing an Item on eBay 
and Selling an Item on eBay 
Process Model 
Decides to Purchase Item
Reviews Auction Listing
Places Bid
Wins Bid
Receives Invoice
Pays Invoice
Receives Item
Rates Seller
Ends Sale
Decides to Sell Item
Lists Item on eBay
Sets Initial Price
Sets Auction Length
Invoices Winning Bid
Receives Payment
Ships Item
Rates Buyer
Ends Sale

70
Chapter 2 Decisions and Processes: Value Driven Business
 FIGURE 2.24 
 As-Is and To-Be Process 
Model for Ordering 
a Hamburger 
Order
Combo
Meal
Customer
Approaches
Cashier
Customer
Pays
Cashier
To-Be Burger Order Process
As-Is Burger Order Process
Order
Fries
Want Fries?
Customer
Pays
Cashier
Order
Drink
No
Yes
Yes
No
Order
Burger
Customer
Approaches
Cashier
Want Drink?
 FIGURE 2.25 
 As-Is Process Model for Order 
Fulfillment 
As-Is Order Fulﬁllment Process
Customer
Order
Submitted
Order
Generated
Order
Received
Credit
Checked
Credit
OK?
Credit
OK?
Invoice
Prepared
Credit
Issues
Assessed
Order
Canceled
Credit
Approved
Order
Entered
Inventory
Available?
Inventory
Ordered
Order
Shipped
Order
Picked and
Packaged
Process
Payment
Shipped
Order?
Invoice
Sent
Billing
Inventory
Shipping
Sales
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
No

71
Business Driven MIS Module 1
 FIGURE 2.26 
 For Best Results, Business 
Processes Should Drive MIS 
Choices 
 SUPPORT: ENHANCING BUSINESS PROCESSES WITH MIS  
 Workflow   includes the tasks, activities, and responsibilities required to execute each 
step in a business process. Understanding workflow, customers’ expectations, and the 
competitive environment provides managers with the necessary ingredients to design 
and evaluate alternative business processes in order to maintain competitive advantages 
when internal or external circumstances change. 
 Alternative business process should be effective (they deliver the intended results) and 
efficient (they consume the least amount of resources for the intended value). They should 
also be adaptable or flexible and support change as customers, market forces, and tech-
nology shift.  Figure 2.27  shows the three primary types of business process change avail-
able to firms and the business areas in which they are most often effective. How does a 
company know whether it needs to undertake the giant step of changing core business 
processes? Three conditions indicate the time is right to initiate a business process change:
 1. There has been a pronounced shift in the market the process was designed to serve. 
 2. The company is markedly below industry benchmarks on its core processes. 
 3. To regain competitive advantage, the company must leapfrog competition on key 
dimensions. 15 
 LO 2.7: Differentiate among 
automation, streamlining, 
and reengineering. 
Order to Delivery
Product Realization
Customer
Acquisition
Order to Delivery
Product Realization
Customer
Acquisition
A)
B)

72
Chapter 2 Decisions and Processes: Value Driven Business
 Improving Operational Business Processes—Automation 
 Improving business processes is critical to staying competitive in today’s electronic 
marketplace. Organizations must improve their business processes because custom-
ers are demanding better products and services; if customers do not receive what they 
want from one supplier, often they can simply click a mouse to find many other choices. 
  Business process improvement   attempts to understand and measure the current pro-
cess and make performance improvements accordingly.  Figure 2.28  displays a typical 
business process improvement model. 16   
 Early adopters of MIS recognized that they could enhance their value chain through 
automation, which reduces costs and increases the speed of performing activities.   Auto-
mation   is the process of computerizing manual tasks, making them more efficient and 
effective and dramatically lowering operational costs. Payroll offers an excellent example. 
Calculating and tracking payroll for 5,000 employees is a highly labor-intensive process 
requiring 30 full-time employees. Every two weeks accounting employees must gather 
everyone’s hours worked, cross-check with wage rates, and then calculate the amount 
due, minus taxes and other withholding such as pension contributions and insurance 
premiums, to create the paychecks. They also track benefits, sick time, and vacation 
time. If the payroll process is automated, however, one employee can easily calculate 
payroll, track withholding and deductions, and create paychecks for 5,000 people in a 
few hours, since everything is performed by the system. Automation improves efficiency 
and effectiveness and reduces head count, lowering overall operational costs. Transac-
tion processing systems (TPS) are primarily used to automate business processes. 
  Figure 2.29  illustrates the basic steps for business process improvement. Organiza-
tions begin by documenting what they currently do, then they establish a way to measure 
the process, follow the process, measure the performance, and finally identify improve-
ment opportunities based on the collected information. The next step is to implement 
process improvements and measure the performance of the new improved process. The 
loop repeats over and over again as it is continuously improved. 17 
 This method of improving business processes is effective for obtaining gradual, incre-
mental improvement. However, several factors have accelerated the need to radically 
improve business processes. The most obvious is technology. New technologies (such as 
wireless Internet access) rapidly bring new capabilities to businesses, thereby raising the 
 FIGURE 2.27 
 Primary Types of Business 
Process Change 
Operational              
          Managerial    
  Strategic             
Streamlining
Reengineering
Automation

73
Business Driven MIS Module 1
 FIGURE 2.29 
 Steps in Business 
Process Improvement 
Document As-Is
Process
Establish
Measures
Follow Process
Measure
Performance
Identify and
Implement
Improvements
 FIGURE 2.28 
 Business Process 
Improvement Model 
Identify one
of the steps
in the process
Is the step
necessary?
Can the step be
improved?
Are resources
available to
implement the
change?
Identify
a Process
Remove the
step
Is there an
additional
step?
Keep the
step
Document
improved
step
Model
improved
process
Yes
No
Yes
No
Implement New
Process
Process Improvement Model
No
No
Yes
Yes
competitive bar and the need to improve business processes dramatically. For example, 
Amazon.com reinvented the supply chain for selling books online. After gaining from 
automation, companies began to look for new ways to use MIS to improve operations, 
and managers recognized the benefits of pairing MIS with business processes by stream-
lining. We look at this improvement method next. 
 Improving Managerial Business Processes—Streamlining 
  Streamlining    improves business process efficiencies by simplifying or eliminating 
unnecessary steps.   Bottlenecks   occur when resources reach full capacity and cannot 
handle any additional demands; they limit throughput and impede operations. A com-
puter working at its maximum capacity will be unable to handle increased demand and 
will become a bottleneck in the process. Streamlining removes bottlenecks, an important 
step if the efficiency and capacity of a business process are being increased. It also elimi-
nates redundancy.   Redundancy   occurs when a task or activity is unnecessarily repeated, 
for example, if both the sales department and the accounting department check cus-
tomer credit.  

74
Chapter 2 Decisions and Processes: Value Driven Business
 BUSINESS DRIVEN MIS 
 The biggest problem with email is that it interferes with workflow. Many 
employees stop what they are working on and begin checking new email as 
soon as it arrives. If they do not have the time or capacity to answer it imme-
diately, however, they leave it in the in-box, creating a bottleneck. This process 
continues all day, and eventually the in-box is overflowing with hundreds of 
emails, most of which require a response or action. Employees begin dreading 
email and feel stressed because their workflow process is off track, and they do 
not know which tasks need to be completed and when. 
 To streamline workflow, you can designate certain times for email process-
ing (at the top of the hour, or for 30 minutes at three set times a day, for exam-
ple). Turning off email notification also ensures you are not interrupted during 
your workflow. When you do begin to check your emails, review them one at a 
time from top to bottom, and deal with each one immediately. Either reply, put 
a note on your to-do list, forward the email, or delete it. Now you are working far 
more efficiently and effectively, and you are less stressed because your in-box 
is empty. 18 
 Choose a process in your life that is inefficient or ineffective and causing you 
stress. Using the principles of streamlining, remove the bottlenecks and reduce 
redundancies. Be sure to diagram the As-Is process and your newly created 
To-Be process. 
 Streamlining 
Your Email 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 
 Automating a business process that contains bottlenecks or redundancies will mag-
nify or amplify these problems if they are not corrected first. Here’s an example based on 
a common source of tension in an organization. Increasing orders is a standard KPI for 
most marketing/sales departments. To meet this KPI, the sales department tends to say 
yes to any customer request, such as for rush or custom orders. Reducing   cycle time  , the 
time required to process an order, is a common KPI for operations management. Rush 
and custom orders tend to create bottlenecks, causing operations to fall below its bench-
marked cycle time. Removing these bottlenecks, however, can create master streamlined 
business processes that deliver both standard and custom orders reliably and profitably. 
The goal of streamlining is not only to automate but also to improve by monitoring, con-
trolling, and changing the business process. 
 FedEx streamlined every business process to provide a CSF of speedy and reliable 
delivery of packages. It created one central hub in Memphis, Tennessee, that processed 
all its orders. It purchased its own planes to be sure it could achieve the desired level 
of service. FedEx combined MIS and traditional distribution and logistics processes to 
create a competitive advantage. FedEx soon identified another market segment of cus-
tomers who cared a little less about speed and were willing to trade off early-morning 
delivery for delivery any time  within  the next day at a significantly lower price. The firm 
had to reevaluate its strategy and realign its business processes to capture this market 
segment. Had Federal Express focused only on improving its traditional delivery process 
to handle increased volume faster and more reliably, it could have missed an entire cus-
tomer segment. 19 
 Improving Strategic Business Processes—Reengineering 
 The flat world (see Chapter 1) is bringing more companies and more customers into 
the marketplace, greatly increasing competition. Wine wholesalers in the United States 
must now compete globally, for instance, because customers can just as easily order a 
bottle of wine from a winery in France as from them. Companies need breakthrough 

75
Business Driven MIS Module 1
performance and business process changes just to stay in the game. As the rate of 
change increases, companies looking for rapid change and dramatic improvement are 
turning to    business process reengineering (BPR)    ,  the analysis and redesign of workflow 
within and between enterprises.  Figure 2.30  highlights an analogy to process improve-
ment by explaining the different means of traveling along the same route. A company 
could improve the way it travels by changing from foot to horse and then from horse to 
car. With a BPR mind-set, however, it would look beyond automating and streamlining 
to find a completely different approach. It would ignore the road and travel by air to get 
from point A to point B. Companies often follow the same indirect path for doing busi-
ness, not realizing there might be a different, faster, and more direct way.  
 An organization can reengineer its cross-departmental business processes or an indi-
vidual department’s business processes to help meet its CSFs and KPIs. When selecting 
a business process to reengineer, wise managers focus on those core processes that are 
critical to performance, rather than marginal processes that have little impact. The effort 
to reengineer a business process as a strategic activity requires a different mind-set than 
that required in continuous business process improvement programs. Because compa-
nies have tended to overlook the powerful contribution that processes can make to strat-
egy, they often undertake process improvement efforts using their current processes as 
the starting point. Managers focusing on reengineering can instead use several criteria 
to identify opportunities:
 ■ Is the process broken? 
 ■ Is it feasible that reengineering of this process will succeed? 
 ■ Does it have a high impact on the agency’s strategic direction? 
 ■ Does it significantly impact customer satisfaction? 
 ■ Is it antiquated? 
 ■ Does it fall far below best-in-class? 
 ■ Is it crucial for productivity improvement? 
 ■ Will savings from automation be clearly visible? 
 ■ Is the return on investment from implementation high and preferably immediate? 
 BPR relies on a different school of thought than business process improvement.  In 
the extreme,  BPR assumes the current process is irrelevant, does not work, or is broken 
and must be overhauled from scratch. Starting from such a clean slate enables business 
process designers to disassociate themselves from today’s process and focus on a new 
process. It is as if they are projecting themselves into the future and asking: What should 
the process look like? What do customers want it to look like? What do other employees 
want it to look like? How do best-in-class companies do it? How can new technology 
facilitate the process? 
  Figure  2.31  displays the basic steps in a business process reengineering effort. It 
begins with defining the scope and objectives of the reengineering project and then 
takes the process designers through a learning process with customers, employees, com-
petitors, and new technology. Given this knowledge base, the designers can create a plan 
of action based on the gap between current processes, technologies, and structures and 
 FIGURE 2.30 
 Different Ways to Travel the 
Same Route 
Better, Faster, Cheaper

76
Chapter 2 Decisions and Processes: Value Driven Business
their vision of the processes of the future. It is then top management’s job to implement 
the chosen solution. 20 
 System thinking plays a big role in BPR. Automation and streamlining operate depart-
mentally, whereas BPR occurs at the systems level or companywide level and the end-to-
end view of a process. 
 Creating value for the customer is the leading reason for instituting BPR, and MIS 
often plays an important enabling role. Fundamentally new business processes enabled 
Progressive Insurance to slash its claims settlement time from 31 days to four hours, for 
instance. Typically, car insurance companies follow this standard claims resolution pro-
cess: The customer gets into an accident, has the car towed, and finds a ride home. The 
customer then calls the insurance company to begin the claims process, which includes 
an evaluation of the damage, assignment of fault, and an estimate of the cost of repairs, 
and which usually takes about a month (see  Figure 2.32 ). Progressive Insurance’s inno-
vation was to offer a mobile claims process. When a customer has a car accident, he or 
she calls in the claim on the spot. The Progressive claims adjuster comes to the accident 
site, surveying the scene and taking digital photographs. The adjuster then offers the cus-
tomer on-site payment, towing services, and a ride home. A true BPR effort does more 
for a company than simply improve a process by performing it better, faster, and cheaper. 
Progressive Insurance’s BPR effort redefined best practices for an entire industry. 21 
 The Business Process Systems View   Leveraging business processes has enor-
mous implications for the business system as a whole. It requires recognition that any 
meaningful change within the organization affects the entire organization. Without a 
systems view, the identification of business process flaws and implementation of pro-
posed solutions will often fix only symptoms. Many times what can make one process 
effective is what makes another process ineffective. Therefore, the redesign of any pro-
cess within an integrated system requires appreciating the impact of the redesign on 
other processes. For example, operations management often wants to wait until a truck 
is full before sending it out for deliveries because the department’s KPI measures cost-
per-mile-transported. Conversely, the customer satisfaction KPIs measure the ability to 
make the order-to-delivery cycle time as short as possible, requiring the truck to leave as 
soon as the product is available, whether it is full or not. Changing business processes to 
 FIGURE 2.31 
 Business Process 
Reengineering Model 
Set Project
Scope
Study
Competition
Create New
Processes
Implement
Solution
 FIGURE 2.32 
 Auto Insurance Claims 
Processes 
Progressive Insurance: Claims Resolution Process
Resolution Cycle Time: 30 minutes–3 hours
Company A: Claims Resolution Process
Resolution Cycle Time: 3–8 weeks

77
Business Driven MIS Module 1
meet operations management KPIs will thus reduce customer satisfaction KPIs. Chang-
ing business processes to meet customer satisfaction KPIs will lower operations man-
agement KPIs. A systems view, on the other hand, will allow managers to understand the 
impact business processes have across the entire organization, so both can be improved.     
 THE FUTURE: BUSINESS PROCESS MANAGEMENT  
 Creating a company that can quickly adapt to market, industry, and economic changes to 
create a competitive advantage requires a new set of operating rules based on achieving 
speed, performance, and improved delivery. Until recently, business process improve-
ment initiatives focused on improving workflow or document-based processes that were 
completed by hand. Now, however,    business process management (BPM) systems   
focus on evaluating and improving processes that include both person-to-person work-
flow and system-to-system communications. BPM systems include advanced features 
such as enhanced process modeling, simulation, execution, and monitoring, providing a 
high level of flexibility while reducing costs. Think of BPM as a way to build, implement, 
and monitor automated processes that span organizational boundaries—a kind of next-
generation workflow. BPM not only allows a business process to be executed more effi-
ciently, but it also provides the tools to measure performance and identify opportunities 
for improvement, as well as to easily capture opportunities such as:
 ■ Bringing processes, people, and information together. 
 ■ Breaking down the barriers between business areas and finding “owners” for the 
processes. 
 ■ Managing front-office and back-office business processes. 
 BPM uniquely offers two types of systems: (1) Customer-facing or front-office BPM 
focuses on person-to-person workflow and (2) business-facing or back-office BPM 
focuses on system-to-system workflow. With BPM the two systems function as one, 
allowing continual improvements to many business processes simultaneously and in 
real time. BPM’s unified environment encourages people to observe, think, and provide 
feedback, harnessing the power of ideas and insight and promoting systems thinking 
throughout the organization. Providing the flexibility for quick BPM change drives effi-
ciency and effectiveness, creating optimal business processes. This ability is the founda-
tion for creating an operation that gives a company competitive advantage. 
 LO 2.8: Describe business process 
management and its value to an 
organization. 
 BUSINESS DRIVEN DEBATE 
 Trina Thompson, a New York City resident, is filing a lawsuit against Monroe 
College stating that she is unable to find employment after graduating with 
her bachelor’s degree. Thompson is seeking tuition reimbursement of $70,000 
and states that she has been unable to find gainful employment since gradu-
ating because the school’s Office of Career Advancement failed to provide her 
with the leads and career advice it promised. Monroe College spokesman Gary 
Axelbank says Thompson’s lawsuit is completely without merit and insists it 
helps its graduates find jobs. 22 
 Do you agree that students should be allowed to hold their academic institu-
tions liable for their inability to find a job after graduation? Design the current 
(As-Is) business process at your school from the time a student begins his or 
her program until graduation. How could your school reengineer the process to 
ensure it does not end up in litigation over an individual’s expectation of auto-
matically receiving a job after graduation? 
 Education 
Processes 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 

78
Chapter 2 Decisions and Processes: Value Driven Business
 Learning Outcome 2.1:  Explain the importance of decision making for managers at 
each of the three primary organization levels along with the associated decision 
characteristics. 
 Decision-making skills are essential for all business professionals, at every company level, who make 
decisions that run the business. At the operational level, employees develop, control, and maintain 
core business activities required to run the day-to-day operations. Operational decisions are con-
sidered structured decisions, which arise in situations where established processes offer potential 
solutions. Structured decisions are made frequently and are almost repetitive in nature; they affect 
short-term business strategies. 
 At the managerial level, employees are continuously evaluating company operations to hone 
the firm’s abilities to identify, adapt to, and leverage change. Managerial decisions cover short- and 
medium-range plans, schedules, and budgets along with policies, procedures, and business objec-
tives for the firm. These types of decisions are considered semistructured decisions; they occur in 
situations in which a few established processes help to evaluate potential solutions, but not enough to 
lead to a definite recommended decision. 
 At the strategic level, managers develop overall business strategies, goals, and objectives as part 
of the company’s strategic plan. They also monitor the strategic performance of the organization and 
its overall direction in the political, economic, and competitive business environment. Strategic deci-
sions are highly unstructured decisions, occurring in situations in which no procedures or rules exist 
to guide decision makers toward the correct choice. They are infrequent, extremely important, and 
typically related to long-term business strategy. 
 Learning Outcome 2.2:  Define critical success factors (CSFs) and key performance 
indicators (KPIs), and explain how managers use them to measure the success of MIS 
projects. 
 Metrics are measurements that evaluate results to determine whether a project is meeting its goals. 
Two core metrics are critical success factors and key performance indicators. CSFs are the crucial 
steps companies perform to achieve their goals and objectives and implement their strategies and 
include creating high-quality products, retaining competitive advantages, and reducing product costs. 
KPIs are the quantifiable metrics a company uses to evaluate progress toward critical success factors. 
KPIs are far more specific than CSFs; examples include turnover rates of employees, percentage of 
help-desk calls answered in the first minute, and number of products returned. 
 It is important to understand the relationship between critical success factors and key performance 
indicators. CSFs are elements crucial for a business strategy’s success. KPIs measure the progress of 
CSFs with quantifiable measurements, and one CSF can have several KPIs. Of course, both categories 
will vary by company and industry. Imagine improved graduation rates as a CSF for a college. 
 Learning Outcome 2.3:  Classify the different operational support systems, managerial 
support systems, and strategic support systems, and explain how managers can use 
these systems to make decisions and gain competitive advantages. 
 Being able to sort, calculate, analyze, and slice-and-dice information is critical to an organization’s 
success. Without knowing what is occurring throughout the organization there is no way that man-
agers and executives can make solid decisions to support the business. The different operational, 
managerial, and strategic support systems include:
 ■ Operational: A transaction processing system (TPS) is the basic business system that serves the 
operational level (analysts) in an organization. The most common example of a TPS is an opera-
tional accounting system such as a payroll system or an order-entry system. 
 L E A R N I N G  O U T C O M E  R E V I E W 

79
Business Driven MIS Module 1
 ■ Managerial: A decision support system (DSS) models information to support managers and busi-
ness professionals during the decision-making process. 
 ■ Strategic: An executive information system (EIS) is a specialized DSS that supports senior-level 
executives within the organization. 
 Learning Outcome 2.4:  Describe artificial intelligence, and identify its five main types. 
 Artificial intelligence (AI) simulates human thinking and behavior, such as the ability to reason and 
learn. The five most common categories of AI are:
 1. Expert systems—computerized advisory programs that imitate the reasoning processes of experts 
in solving difficult problems. 
 2. Neural networks—attempts to emulate the way the human brain works. 
 3. Genetic algorithm—a system that mimics the evolutionary, survival-of-the-fittest process to gen-
erate increasingly better solutions to a problem. 
 4. Intelligent agents—a special-purpose knowledge-based information system that accomplishes 
specific tasks on behalf of its users. 
 5. Virtual reality—a computer-simulated environment that can be a simulation of the real world or an 
imaginary world. 
 Learning Outcome 2.5:  Explain the value of business processes for a company, 
and differentiate between customer-facing and business-facing process. 
 A business process is a standardized set of activities that accomplish a specific task, such as pro-
cessing a customer’s order. Business processes transform a set of inputs into a set of outputs (goods 
or services) for another person or process by using people and tools. Without processes, organizations 
would not be able to complete activities. Customer-facing processes result in a product or service 
that is received by an organization’s external customer. Business-facing processes are invisible to the 
external customer but essential to the effective management of the business. 
 Learning Outcome 2.6:  Demonstrate the value of business process modeling, 
and compare As-Is and To-Be models.  
 Business process modeling (or mapping) is the activity of creating a detailed flowchart or process 
map of a work process showing its inputs, tasks, and activities, in a structured sequence. A business 
process model is a graphic description of a process, showing the sequence of process tasks, which is 
developed for a specific purpose and from a selected viewpoint. 
 Business process modeling usually begins with a functional process representation of what the 
process problem is, or an As-Is process model. As-Is process models represent the current state of 
the operation that has been mapped, without any specific improvements or changes to existing pro-
cesses. The next step is to build a To-Be process model that displays how the process problem will 
be solved or implemented. To-Be process models show the results of applying change improvement 
opportunities to the current (As-Is) process model. This approach ensures that the process is fully and 
clearly understood before the details of a process solution are decided upon. 
 Learning Outcome 2.7:  Differentiate among automation, streamlining, and reengineering. 
 Business process improvement attempts to understand and measure the current process and make 
performance improvements accordingly. Automation is the process of computerizing manual tasks, 
making them more efficient and effective and dramatically lowering operational costs. Streamlining 
improves business process efficiencies by simplifying or eliminating unnecessary steps. Bottlenecks 
occur when resources reach full capacity and cannot handle any additional demands; they limit 
throughput and impede operations. Streamlining removes bottlenecks, an important step if the effi-
ciency and capacity of a business process are being increased. Business process reengineering (BPR) 
is the analysis and redesign of workflow within and between enterprises and occurs at the systems 
level or companywide level and the end-to-end view of a process. 

80
Chapter 2 Decisions and Processes: Value Driven Business
 Learning Outcome 2.8:  Describe business process management and its value to an 
organization. 
 Business process management (BPM) systems focus on evaluating and improving processes that 
include both person-to-person workflow and system-to-system communications. BPM systems include 
advanced features such as enhanced process modeling, simulation, execution, and monitoring, provid-
ing a high level of flexibility while reducing costs.  
 1.  Knowledge: Define the three primary types of decision-making systems, and explain how a cus-
tomer of Actionly might use them to find business intelligence.  
 2.  Comprehension: Describe the difference between transactional and analytical information, and 
determine which types Actionly uses to create a customer’s digital dashboard. 
 3.  Application: Illustrate the business process model used by a customer of Actionly following 
Twitter tweets.  
 4.  Analysis: Explain business process reengineering and how Actionly used it to create its unique 
business model. 
 5.  Synthesis: Formulate different metrics Actionly uses to measure the success of a customer’s 
marketing campaign. 
 6.  Evaluation: Argue for or against the following statement: Actionly invades consumer privacy by 
taking data from different websites such as Twitter and Flickr without the consent of the customer 
that posted the information. 
 O P E N I N G  C A S E  Q U E S T I O N S 
 Analytical information, 55 
 Analytics, 46 
 Artificial intelligence (AI), 60 
 As-Is process model, 66 
 Augmented reality, 63 
 Automation, 72 
 Benchmarking, 52 
 Benchmarks, 52 
 Best practices, 50 
 Bottlenecks, 73 
 Business-facing process, 64 
 Business process 
improvement, 72 
 Business process management 
(BPM) system, 77 
 Business process model, 66 
 Business process modeling 
(or mapping), 66 
 Business process patent, 66 
 Business process reengineering 
(BPR), 75 
 Consolidation, 60 
 Core processes, 66 
 Critical success factors (CSFs), 49 
 Customer-facing process, 64 
 Cycle time, 74 
 Decision support system (DSS), 55 
 Digital dashboard, 59 
 Drill-down, 60 
 Effectiveness MIS metrics, 50 
 Efficiency MIS metrics, 50 
 Executive information system 
(EIS), 56 
 Expert system, 61 
 Fuzzy logic, 62 
 Genetic algorithm, 62 
 Goal-seeking analysis, 56 
 Granularity, 57 
 Intelligent agent, 62 
 Intelligent system, 60 
 Key performance indicators 
(KPIs), 49 
 Managerial level, 46 
 Market share, 49 
 Metrics, 49 
 Model, 54 
 Mutation, 62 
 Neural network, 61 
 Online analytical processing 
(OLAP), 55 
 Online transaction processing 
(OLTP), 54  
 Operational level, 46 
 Optimization analysis, 56 
 Project, 48 
 Redundancy, 73 
 Return on investment (ROI), 50 
 Semistructured decision, 48 
 Sensitivity analysis, 56 
 Shopping bot, 62 
 Slice-and-dice, 60 
 Source document, 55 
 Strategic level, 48 
 Streamlining, 73 
 Structured decision, 46 
 Swim lane, 68 
 To-Be process model, 66 
 Transaction processing system 
(TPS), 54 
 Transactional information, 54 
 Unstructured decision, 48 
 Virtual reality, 63 
 Visualization, 59 
 What-if analysis, 55 
 Workflow, 71 
 K E Y  T E R M S 

81
Business Driven MIS Module 1
  1. Why must business professionals understand how MIS supports decision making and problem 
solving?  
  2. What is the relationship between critical success factors and key performance indicators? How 
can a manager use them to understand business operations? 
  3. What are the three different levels found in a company? What types of decisions are made at 
each level? 
  4. Define transaction processing systems and describe the role they play in a business. 
  5. Define decision support systems and describe the role they play in a business. 
  6. Define expert systems and describe the role they play in a business. 
  7. What are the capabilities associated with digital dashboards? 
  8. What are the common DSS analysis techniques? 
  9. How does an electronic spreadsheet program, such as Excel, provide decision support 
capabilities? 
  10. What is the difference between the ability of a manager to retrieve information instantly on 
demand using an MIS and the capabilities provided by a DSS? 
  11. What is artificial intelligence? What are the five types of AI systems? What applications of AI 
offer the greatest business value? 
  12. What is a business process and what role does it play in an organization? 
  13. Why do managers need to understand business processes? Can you make a correlation 
between systems thinking and business processes? 
  14. Why would a manager need to review an As-Is and To-Be process model? 
  15. How can a manager use automation, streamlining, and business process reengineering to gain 
operational efficiency and effectiveness? 
  16. Explain the difference between customer-facing processes and business-facing processes. 
Which one is more important to an organization? 
  17. Explain how finding different ways to travel the same road relates to automation, streamlining, 
and business process reengineering. 
 R E V I E W  Q U E S T I O N S 
 C L O S I N G  C A S E  O N E 
 Political Micro-Targeting: What Decision Support 
Systems Did for Barack Obama 
  On the day he took the oath of office in 2009, President Barack Obama spoke a word rarely heard 
in inaugural addresses— data— referencing indicators of economic and other crises. His use of the 
word is perhaps not so surprising. Capturing and analyzing data were crucial to Obama’s rise to 
power. Throughout his historic campaign he not only used the Internet for networking and fund-
raising, but he also relied on decision support systems to identify potential swing voters. Obama’s 
team carefully monitored contested states and congressional districts, where as few as 2,000 voters 
could prove decisive—a tiny fraction of the voting public. Both presidential candidates hired technol-
ogy wizards to help sift through mountains of consumer and demographic details to recognize these 
important voters. 

82
Chapter 2 Decisions and Processes: Value Driven Business
 10 “Tribes” 
  Spotlight Analysis, a Democratic consultancy, used political micro-targeting to analyze neighbor-
hood details, family sizes, and spending patterns to categorize every person of voting age—all 
175 million—into 10 “values” tribes. Individual tribe members do not necessarily share the same 
race, religion, or income bracket, but they have common mind-sets about political issues: God, com-
munity, responsibility, and opportunity. Spotlight Analysis predicted the influence of a particular mor-
ally guided (but not necessarily religious) tribe of some 14 million voters, dubbed Barn Raisers. Barn 
Raisers are of many races, religions, and ethnicities; about 40 percent favor Democrats and 27 per-
cent Republicans. Barn Raisers are slightly less likely to have a college education than Spotlight’s 
other swing groups. They are active in community organizations, ambivalent about government, and 
deeply concerned about “playing by the rules” and “keeping promises,” to use Spotlight’s definitions. 
Spotlight believed the Barn Raisers held the key to the race between Obama and his Republican chal-
lenger, Arizona Senator John McCain. 
 Political micro-targeting, which depends on MIS to support decision making, is turning govern-
ment segments into sophisticated, intelligent, methodical political machines. In nanoseconds, deci-
sion support systems sort 175 million voters into segments and quickly calculate the potential for 
each individual voter to swing from red or purple to blue. 
 For some, political micro-targeting signals the dehumanization of politics. For others, this type 
of sophisticated analysis is a highly efficient way of pinpointing potential voters. For example, the 
analysis of a voter in Richmond, Virginia, simply identifies the number of his or her school-age chil-
dren, type of car, zip code, magazine subscriptions, and mortgage balance. Data could even indi-
cate whether the voter has dogs or cats. (Cat owners lean slightly for Democrats, dog owners trend 
Republican.) After the analysis, the voter is placed into a political tribe, and analysts can draw conclu-
sions about the issues that matter to him or her and make campaign decisions accordingly. Is this a 
bad thing?  
 Behavioral Grouping 
  For generations, governments lacked the means to study individual behaviors and simply placed 
all citizens into enormous groupings such as Hispanics, Catholics, union members, hunters, soccer 
moms, and so on. With the use of sophisticated MIS analysis techniques, companies such as Spotlight 
Analysis can group individuals based more on specific behavior and choices, and less on the names, 
colors, and clans that mark us from birth. 
 When Spotlight first embarked on its research, it interviewed thousands of voters the old-fash-
ioned way. The Barn Raisers did not seem significant; the tribe represented about 9 percent of the 
electorate. However, when Spotlight’s analysts drilled down or dug deeper, they discovered that Barn 
Raisers stood at the epicenter of a political swing. In 2004, 90 percent of them voted for President 
Bush, but then the group’s political leanings shifted, with 64 percent saying they voted for Democrats 
in the 2006 election. Spotlight surveys showed that Republican political scandals, tax-funded boon-
doggles such as Alaska’s “bridge to nowhere,” and the botched recovery job after Hurricane Katrina 
sent them packing. 
 Suddenly, Spotlight had identified millions of potential swing voters. The challenge then was to 
locate them by state. For this, the company analyzed the demographics and buying patterns of the 
Barn Raisers it had surveyed personally. Then it began correlating its data with commercially available 
data to match profiles. By Spotlight’s count, this approach nailed Barn Raisers three times out of four. 
So Democrats could bet that at least three-quarters of them would be likely to welcome an election 
appeal stressing honesty and fair play. 
 Still Swing Voters 
  Spotlight has not correlated the Barn Raisers to their actual votes, so it’s not clear how well the 
company’s strategy worked. However, it is reasonable to presume that amid that sea of humanity 
stretched out before the newly inaugurated Obama on the National Mall, at least some were moved 
by micro-targeted appeals. And if Obama and his team fail to honor their mathematically honed vows, 
the Barn Raisers may abandon them in droves. They are swing voters, after all. 23 

83
Business Driven MIS Module 1
 Questions 
 1. Define the three primary types of decision-making systems, and explain how Obama’s campaign 
team used them to win votes. 
 2. Describe the difference between transactional and analytical information, and determine which 
types Spotlight Analysis used to identify its 10 tribes. 
 3. Illustrate the business process model used to identify the 10 tribes. 
 4. Explain business process reengineering and how Obama’s team used it to develop political 
micro-targeting. 
 5. Formulate different metrics the Obama team used to measure the success of political 
micro-targeting. 
 6. Argue for or against the following statement: Political micro-targeting signals the dehumanization 
of politics. 
 C L O S I N G  C A S E  T W O 
 Second Life: Succeeding in Virtual Times 
  Second Life is a virtual world built and owned by its residents. It is inhabited by millions of residents 
from around the world. The three main parts to Second Life are:
 ■  The World:  The world of Second Life is constantly changing and growing. It is filled with hundreds 
of games, from multiplayer role-playing games to puzzles and grid-wide contests. There are also 
dance clubs, shopping malls, space stations, vampire castles, and movie theaters. To find some-
thing to do at any time of the day or night, residents simply open the Search menu and click on 
Events for a listing of discussions, sports, entertainment, games, pageants, education, arts and 
culture, and charity/support groups. 
 ■  The Creations:  Second Life is dedicated to creativity. Everything in Second Life is resident-cre-
ated, from the strobe lights in the nightclubs to the cars (or spaceships) in driveways. Imagine 
tinkering with the steering and handling program of a motorcycle while a friend tweaks the shape 
of the fuel tank and gives it a wicked flame paint job, in-world and in real-time, before taking it for 
a spin down a newly created road to look for land to buy. Have you ever wondered what it would 
be like to have a pair of black leather wings? Build them and give it a go. 
 ■  The Marketplace:  The Marketplace currently supports millions of U.S. dollars in monthly transac-
tions. This commerce is transacted with the in-world unit of trade, the Linden dollar, which can 
be converted to U.S. dollars at several thriving online Linden dollar exchanges or at LindeX, the 
official exchange. Users can make real money in a virtual world because Second Life has a fully 
integrated economy designed to reward risk, innovation, and craftsmanship. Residents create 
their own virtual goods and services, retain the intellectual property rights of their creations, and 
sell them at various in-world venues. Businesses succeed on the ingenuity, artistic ability, entre-
preneurial acumen, and good reputation of their owners. 
 Businesses on Second Life 
 Second Life is an exciting venue for collaboration, business ventures, distance learning, new media 
studies, and marketing. Business possibilities there are endless; a few examples include:
 ■ Holding a virtual meeting with sales managers located in Europe and Asia. 
 ■ Presenting new sales initiatives and discussing them with the team real-time. 
 ■ Allowing Second Life residents to interact with company products or services and test new 
designs and concepts before they are introduced to the real world. 

84
Chapter 2 Decisions and Processes: Value Driven Business
 ■ Selling products and services in Second Life by creating an event to promote the product: a con-
cert, a class, a famous speaker, a party, a contest. Many companies are excited about the numer-
ous ways they can use Second Life to support their business. 24  A few companies paving the way 
on Second Life include the following:
 1-800-flowers.com 
 Adidas 
 Amazon 
 American Apparel 
 American Cancer Society 
 BBC Radio 1 
 Best Buy Co. Inc. 
 BMW 
 Calvin Klein 
 Circuit City 
 Cisco 
 Coca-Cola 
 Coldwell Banker 
 Comcast 
 Crayola 
 Dell 
 H&R Block 
 IBM 
 Intel 
 Kraft Food 
 Lacoste 
 Major League Baseball 
 Mazda 
 Mercedes-Benz 
 Microsoft 
 MTV 
 NASA 
 National Basketball 
 Association 
 NBC 
 Nissan 
 NPR 
 Sony 
 Sprint 
 Student Travel Association 
 Starwood Hotels 
 Sundance Channel 
 Toyota 
 Universal Motown Records 
 Visa 
 Warner Bros. Music 
 Weather Channel 
 Wired magazine 
 Xerox 
 Yahoo 
 Yankee Stadium 
 Questions 
 1. How could financial companies use neural networks in Second Life to help their businesses? 
 2. How could a company such as Nike use decision support systems on Second Life to help its 
business?  
 3. How could an apparel company use Second Life to build a digital dashboard to monitor virtual 
operations? 
 4. How could a company use Second Life to revamp its customer service process? 
 5. How could a company use Second Life to revamp its order-entry process? 
 6. How could a company use Second Life to reinvent its relationships with customers, partners, and 
employees? 
 1. Modeling a Business Process 
 Do you hate waiting in line at the grocery store? Do you find it frustrating when you go to the video 
rental store and cannot find the movie you wanted? Do you get annoyed when the pizza delivery 
person brings you the wrong order? This is your chance to reengineer the process that drives you 
crazy. Choose a problem you are currently experiencing and reengineer the process to make it 
more efficient. Be sure to provide an As-Is and To-Be process model. 
 2. Revamping Accounts 
 The accounting department at your company deals with the processing of critical documents that 
include invoices, purchase orders, statements, purchase requisitions, financial statements, sales 
orders, and price quotes. These documents must arrive at their intended destination in a secure 
and efficient manner. 
 Processing is currently done manually, which causes a negative ripple effect. Documents tend 
to be misplaced or delayed, becoming vulnerable to unauthorized changes or exposure of con-
fidential information. In addition, the accounting department incurs costs such as for preprinted 
 C R I T I C A L  B U S I N E S S  T H I N K I N G 

85
Business Driven MIS Module 1
forms, inefficient distribution, and storage. Explain automation, streamlining, and business process 
reengineering and how they can be used to revamp the accounting department. 
 3. What Type of System Would You Use? 
 You have been assigned as senior director for a large manufacturing company. Your first assign-
ment is to decide which type of MIS can best support your decision-making needs. For all of the 
following, determine which type of system you would use to help solve the business problem or 
make a business decision.
 
 a. You need to analyze daily sales transactions for each region. 
 
 b. You need to analyze staffing requirements for each plant. 
 
 c. You need to determine which customers are at risk of defaulting on their bills. 
 
 d. You need to analyze your competition including prices, discounts, goods, and services. 
 
 e. You need to analyze critical success factors and key performance indicators for status on 
operations. 
 
 f. You need to produce a graphical display of patterns and complex relationships for large 
amounts of data. 
 4. Unstructured Communications 
 You have just received a job as a business analyst for a large sports marketing company. Your 
boss, Sandy Fiero, wants you to evaluate and improve the current corporate communication pro-
cess. With the current process, employees receive a great deal of unstructured information in 
the form of emails, including corporate policies, corporate announcements, and human resource 
information. You quickly realize that using an email system for communication is causing a great 
deal of issues including inaccessible information for any new hires, lost productivity as employees 
search through hundreds of emails to find information, and miscommunication as global divisions 
of your organization send out regional human resource policies. 
 To begin analyzing the processes, create a list of issues you might encounter by using email 
as a primary communication tool for corporate information. What are the redundancies associated 
with an email communication process? What are the bottlenecks with an email communication 
process? Document the As-Is process for sending email communications to employees. Then, 
reengineer the process and document your suggestions for improving the process and the To-Be 
communication process. 
 5. IGoogle Digital Dashboard 
 Executives find information from a variety of sources coming across their computers every day. 
The digital dashboard containing this information might include their calendar, email, issues such 
as production delays or accounts past due, and even financial and industry information. Although 
it would be impossible to fit all of an organization’s information into a single screen, it can sum-
marize the data in ways tailored to meet the executive’s needs. 
 IGoogle is a type of digital dashboard you can create for your own personal view of the world 
through Google. IGoogle allows users to create personalized home pages containing Google search 
along with a number of Google gadgets that provide access to activities and information from all 
over the Internet. If you want one location where you can view Gmail messages, peruse Google 
news, review weather forecasts, stock quotes, and movie showtimes, iGoogle is for you. Visit 
iGoogle and determine how you could customize your Google home page as a digital dashboard 
for your computer. 
 6. Bot Shopping 
 For those of us who love (or hate) shopping, a shopping bot can become your best friend. 
Regardless of whether you are shopping in a store or online you still have to research products, 
compare prices, select a seller, and find the safest way to pay. Shopping in the information age is 
easier than ever, especially with the help of a shopping bot. Shopping bots are price comparison 

86
Chapter 2 Decisions and Processes: Value Driven Business
websites that automatically search the inventory of different vendors to find the lowest possible 
price, saving you time and money. Shopping bots will rank the product you are looking for by price 
and link you directly to the vendor’s website. Popular shopping bots include  mysimon.com ,  Gomez.
com ,  Bizrate.com ,  shopzilla.com , and Google’s shopping bot at  www.google.com/products . 
 Choose a product you are interested in purchasing and use three of the different shopping 
bots to compare prices. Did the different shopping bots return the same information and prices? 
Which shopping bot was the easiest to use? Will you continue using shopping bots? What are the 
advantages and disadvantages for a company using shopping bots to purchase office supplies or 
raw materials? 
 7. Networking Neural 
 Neural networks are a category of AI that attempts to emulate the way the human brain works. A 
neural network could be a great asset for any college student. If a neural network could scan each 
brain for all of the students in your course, what types of information would it acquire? How could 
you use the student neural network to improve your grades? How could you use the student neural 
network to identify trends and new market segments? What would be the risks of using this neural 
network for academic improvement? What types of confidentiality and privacy issues would be 
encountered with this neural network? 
 8. Driving Your Business 
 You have recently opened your own business—choose the business of your dreams and assume 
you have it up and running. What types of decision will you need to make to operate your busi-
ness? How can you use MIS to support your decision-making efforts? What types of processes will 
you find throughout your business? How can you use MIS to revamp your business process for 
efficiency and effectiveness? Overall, how dependent will your business be on MIS? Do you think 
you could be just as successful running your business without MIS? Can you name a business that 
can operate efficiently and effectively without MIS? 
 E N T R E P R E N E U R I A L  C H A L L E N G E 
 BUILD YOUR OWN BUSINESS 
 1. You realize that you need a digital dashboard to help you operate your business. Create a list of 
all of the components you would want to track in your digital dashboard that would help you run 
your business. Be sure to justify how each component would help you gain insight into the opera-
tions of your business and flag potential issues that could ruin your business. (Be sure to identify 
your business and the name of your company as you defined it in Chapter 1.) 
 2. Explain three customer-facing processes and three business-facing process associated with your 
business. Be sure to detail why the process is customer facing or business facing. 
 3. Your friends have asked you to review the customer ordering process for their restaurant, The 
Broadway Café. To make the café as efficient and effective as possible, you want to redesign 
processes to remove bottlenecks, reduce redundancies, and streamline workflow. Review The 
Broadway Café’s customer ordering process highlighted in the accompanying image and reen-
gineer it for improvements in efficiency and effectiveness. If you are looking for a real challenge, 
create your As-Is and To-Be process diagrams using PowerPoint or Visio. 
 After revamping the ordering process for your friends, you decide to create a To-Be process model 
of the most important business processes required for your startup to find success. Create the To-Be 
process model for your most critical business process to ensure you know how to operate your startup 
in the most efficient and effective manner.   

87
Business Driven MIS Module 1
A
B
C
D
A Counter A — Food is ordered
Broadway
Café
Process Flow:
Counter B — Beverages are ordered and food is picked up
Counter C — Beverages are picked up
Counter D — Pay for food and beverages
Counter E — Cream, sugar, lids
B
C
D
E
E
 PROJECT I 
Making Business Decisions 
 You are the vice president of human resources for a large consulting company. You are compiling a 
list of questions that you want each job interviewee to answer. The first question on your list is, “How 
can MIS enhance your ability to make decisions at our organization?” Prepare a one-page report to 
answer this question. 
 PROJECT II 
DSS and EIS 
 Dr. Rosen runs a large dental conglomerate—Teeth Doctors—that employs more than 700 dentists 
in six states. Dr. Rosen is interested in purchasing a competitor called Dentix that has 150 dentists in 
three additional states. Before deciding whether to purchase Dentix, Dr. Rosen must consider several 
issues:
 ■ The cost of purchasing Dentix. 
 ■ The location of the Dentix offices. 
 ■ The current number of customers per dentist, per office, and per state. 
 ■ The merger between the two companies. 
 ■ The professional reputation of Dentix. 
 ■ Other competitors. 
 Explain how Dr. Rosen and Teeth Doctors can benefit from the use of information systems to make 
an accurate business decision about whether to purchase Dentix. 
 A P P LY  Y O U R  K N O W L E D G E  B U S I N E S S  P R O J E C T S 

88
Chapter 2 Decisions and Processes: Value Driven Business
 PROJECT III 
Finding Information on Decision Support Systems 
 You are working on the sales team for a small catering company that maintains 75 employees and 
generates $1 million in revenues per year. The owner, Pam Hetz, wants to understand how she can use 
decision support systems to help expand her business. Hetz has an initial understanding of DSS and is 
interested in learning more about what types are available, how they can be used in a small business, and 
the costs associated. In a group, research the website www.dssresources.com and compile a presenta-
tion that discusses DSSs in detail. Be sure to answer all Hetz’s questions on DSS in your presentation.  
 PROJECT IV 
Discovering Reengineering Opportunities 
 In an effort to increase efficiency, your college has hired you to analyze its current business processes 
for registering for classes. Analyze the current process and determine which steps are:
 ■ Broken  
 ■ Redundant 
 ■ Antiquated 
 Be sure to define how you would reengineer the processes for efficiency. 
 PROJECT V 
Dashboard Design 
 Digital dashboards offer an effective and efficient way to view enterprisewide information at near real 
time. According to Nucleus Research, there is a direct correlation between use of digital dashboards 
and a company’s return on investment (ROI); hence, all executives should be using or pushing the 
development of digital dashboards to monitor and analyze organizational operations. 
 Design a digital dashboard for a customer tracking and enterprise operations system. Be sure to 
address at least four of the following indicators by showing how you would measure it, such as red, 
yellow, green status; percentage complete status; and so on. 
 
Customer Tracking System
Enterprise Operations 
Customers
Accounting
Marketing
Finance
Order entry
Logistics
Collections
Production
Sales
Distribution
Customer service
Manufacturing
Billing
Human resources
Credit limits
Sales
Transportation
Total profit
 PROJECT VI 
 Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) 
Grand Challenge 
 The goal of the DARPA Grand Challenge is to save lives by making one-third of ground military 
forces autonomous or driverless vehicles by 2015. Created in response to a congressional and U.S. 
Department of Defense (DoD) mandate, the DARPA Grand Challenge brings together individuals and 
organizations from industry, the research and development (R&D) community, government, the armed 
services, and academia and includes students, backyard inventors, and automotive enthusiasts. 
 The DARPA Grand Challenge 2004 field test of autonomous ground vehicles ran from Barstow, 
California, to Primm, Nevada, and offered a $1 million prize. From the qualifying round at the California 
Speedway, 15 finalists emerged to attempt the Grand Challenge. However, the prize went unclaimed 
when no vehicles were able to complete the difficult desert route. 

89
Business Driven MIS Module 1
 AY K  A P P L I C AT I O N  P R O J E C T S 
 If you are looking for Excel projects to incorporate into your class, try any of the following after reading 
this chapter. 
 The DARPA Grand Challenge 2005 was held in the Mojave Desert and offered a $2 million prize 
to the team that completed the 132-mile course in the shortest time under 10 hours. The race, over 
desert terrain, included narrow tunnels, sharp turns, and a winding mountain pass with a sheer drop-
off on one side and a rock face on the other. Five teams completed the course, and “Stanley,” the 
Stanford Racing Team’s car, won the $2 million prize with a time of 6 hours, 53 minutes. 
 The third DARPA Grand Challenge was an urban challenge on the site of the now-closed George Air 
Force Base in Victorville, California. It offered a $2 million prize to the autonomous vehicle that could 
cover the 60-mile course in less than 6 hours. The vehicles had to obey stop lights, navigate around 
other vehicles, and even merge into heavy traffic. Tartan Racing, a collaborative effort by Carnegie 
Mellon University and General Motors Corporation, won the prize with “Boss,” a Chevy Tahoe. The 
Stanford Racing Team’s “Junior,” a 2006 Volkswagen Passat, won second prize of $1 million. “Victor 
Tango,” a 2005 Ford Escape hybrid from Virginia Tech, won third place along with a $500,000 prize. 25 
 1. How is the DoD using AI to improve its operations and save lives? 
 2. Why would the DoD use an event like the DARPA Grand Challenge to further technological innovation? 
 3. Describe how autonomous vehicles could be used by organizations around the world to improve 
business efficiency and effectiveness. 
 4. The Ansari X is another technological innovation competition focusing on spacecraft. To win the 
$10 million Ansari X Prize, a private spacecraft had to be the first to carry the weight equivalent 
of three people to an altitude of 62.14 miles twice within two weeks. SpaceShipOne, a privately 
built spacecraft, won on October 4, 2004. Describe the potential business impacts of the Ansari X 
competition. 
 
Project 
Number
Project Name
Project Type
Plug-In 
Focus Area
Project Focus
Project Skill Set
Page 
Number
1
Financial Destiny
Excel
T2
Personal Budget
Introductory Formulas
AYK.4
2
Cash Flow
Excel
T2
Cash Flow
Introductory Formulas
AYK.4
3
Technology Budget
Excel
T1, T2
Hardware and 
Software
Introductory Formulas
AYK.4
4
Tracking Donations
Excel
T2
Employee 
Relationships
Introductory Formulas
AYK.4
5
Convert Currency
Excel
T2
Global Commerce
Introductory Formulas
AYK.5
6
Cost Comparison
Excel
T2
Total Cost of 
Ownership
Introductory Formulas
AYK.5
7
Time Management
Excel or 
Project
T2 or T12
Project Management
Introductory Gantt Charts
AYK.6
8
Maximize Profit
Excel
T2, T4
Strategic Analysis
Intermediate Formulas or 
Solver
AYK.6
9
Security Analysis
Excel
T3
Filtering Data
Intermediate Conditional 
Formatting, Autofilter, Subtotal
AYK.7
10
Gathering Data
Excel
T3
Data Analysis
Intermediate Conditional 
Formatting, PivotTable
AYK.8
11
Scanner System
Excel
T2
Strategic Analysis
Intermediate
AYK.8
12
Competitive Pricing
Excel
T2
Profit Maximization
Intermediate
AYK.9
13
Adequate Acquisitions
Excel
T2
Break-Even Analysis
Intermediate
AYK.9

 What’s in IT for Me? 
 Internet and communication technologies have revolutionized the way business operates, improving upon traditional meth-
ods and even introducing new opportunities and ventures that were simply not possible before. More than just giving orga-
nizations another means of conducting transactions, online business provides the ability to develop and maintain customer 
relationships, supplier relationships, and even employee relationships between and within enterprises. 
 As future managers and organizational knowledge workers, you need to understand the benefits ebusiness can offer an 
organization and your career, the challenges that accompany web technologies and their impact on organizational com-
munication and collaboration. You need to be aware of the strategies organizations can use to deploy ebusiness and the 
methods of measuring ebusiness success. This chapter will give you this knowledge and help prepare you for success in 
tomorrow’s electronic global marketplace. 
 ■  D i s r u p t i v e  Te c h n o lo g i e s  a n d 
We b  1 . 0  
 ■  A d v a n t a g e s  o f  E b u s i n e s s  
 ■  T h e  F o u r  E b u s i n es s  M o d e l s  
 ■  E b u s i n e s s  To o l s 
f o r  C o n n e c t i n g  a n d 
C o m m u n i c a t i n g  
 ■  T h e  C h a l l e n g e s  o f  E b u s i n e s s   
 SECTION 3.2   
 WEB 2.0: Business 2.0 
 SECTION 3.1   
 WEB 1.0: Ebusiness 
 ■  We b  2 . 0 :  A d v a n t a g e s  o f 
B u s i n e s s  2 . 0  
 ■  N e t w o r k i n g  C o m m u n i t i e s  w i t h 
B u s i n e s s  2 . 0  
 ■  B u s i n e s s  2 . 0  To o l s  f o r 
C o l l a b o r a t i n g  
 ■  T h e  C h a l l e n g e s  o f  B u s i n e s s  2 . 0  
 ■  We b  3 . 0 :  D e f i n i n g  t h e  N e x t 
G e n e r a t i o n  o f  O n l i n e  Bu s i n e s s 
O p p o r t u n i t i e s   
 C H A P T E R 
 C H A P T E R  O U T L I N E 
 Ebusiness: Electronic 
Business Value 
 3 

91
Business Driven MIS Module 1
 opening case study 
 Pinterest—Billboards for the Internet  
 Pinterest has been called the latest addiction for millions of people around the world. 
Pinterest, a visual social media network, allows users to create “interest boards” where 
they “pin” items of interests found on the web. Terms you need to understand to use 
Pinterest include:
 ■  Pin:  A link to an image from a computer or a website. Pins can include captions for other 
users. Users upload, or “pin,” photos or videos to boards. 
 ■  Board:  Pins live on boards and users can maintain separate boards, which can be cat-
egorized by activity or interests, such as cooking, do-it-yourself activities, fitness, music, 
movies, etc. 
 ■  Repin:  After pinning an item, it can be repinned by other Pinterest users, spreading the 
content virally. Repinning allows users to share items they like with friends and family. 
 “Pinning” is simply done by clicking on a photo or video that captures the attention of a 
user, whether it be by uploading personal photos or repinning a photo or video from a fellow 
user. Started in 2010, Pinterest has already attracted over 10 million users with the majority 
being women between the ages of 25 and 54. Millions of people visit the website each day 
to find what new items will spark their interest as there are always more and more things 
to see. 
 Pinterest is considered a social network, but unlike other social networks, such as 
Twitter and Facebook, Pinterest is open to invited users only; meaning it is an invitation-only 
website and users must “ask” for an invitation before gaining access. Upon accepting the 
invitation, users can gain access to the website and begin inviting their own “friends” with 
whom they have connections on Facebook or Twitter. Pinterest’s primary mission is to:
 connect everyone in the world through the ‘things’ they find interesting. We think that 
a favorite book, toy, or recipe can reveal a common link between two people. With 
millions of new pins added every week, Pinterest is connecting people all over the 
world based on shared tastes and interests. 
 Just like on other social networks, Pinterest users can compile a list of people they want 
to follow. A user can link a Pinterest board to a Facebook account, allowing instant access 
to quickly see which of his or her Facebook friends are on the social network. Adding book-
marks allows the user to pin images to other websites such as a book at Barnes & Noble or 
a set of mugs at Pier 1 Imports. The image is automatically linked to the retailer’s website, 
and if another users clicks on the image, that user receives additional information on the 
product or service. If users pin a specific image of a plate or sweater, they can add the 

92
Chapter 3 Ebusiness: Electronic Business Value 
item’s price in the description, which will automatically place a banner ad on the image and 
show the listed price. If users are unsure of what they are looking for, they can search for 
a specific event or theme such as “twenty-first birthday party” for a whole array of ideas. 
 Essentially, Pinterest allows users to paint a visual picture. Just imagine a wedding plan-
ner talking to a bride about her upcoming event, and the bride mentions she would like a 
“classic modernism” wedding. If the wedding planner was confused on what exactly the 
bride meant by classic modernism, she could quickly visit Pinterest to find an entire suite of 
photos and videos to spark ideas of how to coordinate the event. 
 The Business Value of Pinterest 
 Visual Communication 
 Pinterest is by far one of the hottest social media spaces available today. Offering all kinds 
of valuable information from useful cleaning tips to fantastic recipes to beautiful photos and 
videos, the website is extremely valuable for sharing anything visual. Pinterest is in no way 
simply a passing fad as companies begin to use the website for social marketing. 
 One of the best business uses of Pinterest is allowing employees to visually commu-
nicate and brainstorm. Visual communication is a new experience for many employees 
and the phrase “A picture is worth a thousand words” can help a company perform many 
tasks from generating new products to transforming business processes. In fact, many 
companies are using Pinterest to solicit feedback directly from employees, customers, and 
suppliers to ensure the company is operating efficiently and effectively. Soliciting feedback 
directly from customers allows companies to have a customer service support team handle 
problems before they become mainstream issues. Providing customers with a new channel 
to post their thoughts and concerns about products or services can provide valuable feed-
back for any company. Companies typically state that they may not respond to every ques-
tion or comment, but that they take each and every concern into account, demonstrating 
that they are devoted to creating a bond between themselves and their customers. 
 Driving Traffic 
 Pinterest drives traffic—it is that simple! Even though the website operates under an 
invitation-only model, it has attracted more than 10 million users in less than two years. That 
number might seem small compared to powerhouses such as Facebook, Twitter, or Google, 
but it demonstrates there is enough of an audience to send a decent amount of traffic to 
any business. The images a business pins up should be linked to the relevant page of its 
website. If users are attracted by it, they may click on it to find out more. 
 Pinterest also drives traffic by providing higher rankings on search engine optimi-
zation as companies appear higher and higher on search lists the more users are pin-
ning to their boards. Linking is one of the key factors search engines consider, and with 
Pinterest gaining in popularity, it is also growing as a trustworthy domain. The number of 
Pinterest users combined with its ability to increase search rankings will play an important 
role when a company is looking to increase visibility and drive traffic to its website. Data 
from Shareholic found that Pinterest sent more referral traffic to bloggers than Google 1 , 
YouTube, and LinkedIn combined, falling just behind Twitter. 

93
Business Driven MIS Module 1
 Product Branding 
 Pinterest is an extraordinary branding tool, offering a place where companies can create a 
presence and community around a product, idea, event, or company. Just like other social 
networking websites, Pinterest allows a company to reach out and engage its customers, 
vendors, suppliers, and even employees to communicate about its products and services. 
Recently the National Football League’s Minnesota Vikings began using Pinterest to create 
a following of favorite photos, statistics, and even game-day recipes! 
 Pinterest recently deployed an iPhone application that allows users to pin photos and 
video from their cameras instantly on their boards. Pinterest’s unique competitive advan-
tage is its ability to host billions of images and redirect users to the appropriate sources in 
a user-friendly interface. 
 Pinterest’s Dilemma 
  Since its inception, Pinterest has been under fire from sites such as Flikr, Photobucket, and 
Instagram over attributing credit to those who own the images that are pinned. Many users 
are concerned that they may one day be sued for the improper use of an image they pinned. 
 The Pinterest Terms of Use state, “If you are a copyright owner, or are authorized to act 
on behalf of one, or authorized to act under any exclusive right under copyright, please 
report alleged copyright infringements taking place on or through the Site by completing the 
following DMCA Notice of Alleged Infringement and delivering it to Pinterest’s Designated 
Copyright Agent.” 
 To protect Pinterest from third-party litigation claims (such as those from authors claim-
ing copyright infringement), Pinterest has incorporated the following statement into its 
indemnity clause: “You agree to indemnify and hold harmless Pinterest and its officers, 
directors, employees and agents, from and against any claims, suits, proceedings, disputes, 
demands, liabilities, damages, losses, costs and expenses, including, without limitation, 
reasonable legal and accounting fees (including costs of defense of claims, suits or pro-
ceedings brought by third parties), arising out of or in any way related to (i) your access to 
or use of the Services or Pinterest Content, (ii) your User Content, or (iii) your breach of any 
of these Terms.” 
 Pinterest is well-aware of the probability that many of the pinned images might be vio-
lating copyright infringement and is attempting to protect itself against any litigation claims 
resulting from users intentionally or unintentionally breaking the law through its site. 1 

94
Chapter 3 Ebusiness: Electronic Business Value 
 section 3.1 
Web 1.0: Ebusiness 
 LE A R NI NG  OU T C OM E S 
 3.1 Compare disruptive and sustaining technologies, and explain how the Internet and WWW caused 
business disruption. 
 3.2 Describe ebusiness and its associated advantages. 
 3.3 Compare the four ebusiness models. 
 3.4 Describe the six ebusiness tools for connecting and communicating. 
 3.5 Identify the four challenges associated with ebusiness. 
 DISRUPTIVE TECHNOLOGIES AND WEB 1.0  
 Polaroid, founded in 1937, produced the first instant camera in the late 1940s. The Pola-
roid camera, whose pictures developed themselves, was one of the most exciting techno-
logical advances the photography industry had ever seen. The company eventually went 
public, becoming one of Wall Street’s most prominent enterprises, with its stock trading 
above $60 per share in 1997. In 2002, the stock dropped to 8 cents and the company 
declared bankruptcy. 2 
 How could a company such as Polaroid, which had innovative technology and a cap-
tive customer base, go bankrupt? Perhaps company executives failed to use Porter’s Five 
Forces Model to analyze the threat of substitute products or services. If they had, would 
they have noticed the two threats—one-hour film processing and digital cameras—which 
eventually stole Polaroid’s market share? Would they have understood that their custom-
ers, people who want instant access to their pictures, would be the first to try these alter-
natives? Could the company have found a way to compete with one-hour film processing 
and the digital camera to save Polaroid? 
 Many organizations face the same dilemma as Polaroid—what’s best for the current 
business might not be what’s best for it in the long term. Some observers of our business 
environment have an ominous vision of the future—digital Darwinism.   Digital Darwinism   
implies that organizations that cannot adapt to the new demands placed on them for sur-
viving in the information age are doomed to extinction. 
 Disruptive versus Sustaining Technology 
 A   disruptive technology   is a new way of doing things that initially does not meet the needs 
of existing customers. Disruptive technologies tend to open new markets and destroy old 
ones. A   sustaining technology,   on the other hand, produces an improved product cus-
tomers are eager to buy, such as a faster car or larger hard drive. Sustaining technolo-
gies tend to provide us with better, faster, and cheaper products in established markets. 
Incumbent companies most often lead sustaining technology to market, but they virtually 
never lead in markets opened by disruptive technologies.  Figure 3.1  positions companies 
expecting future growth from new investments (disruptive technology) and companies 
expecting future growth from existing investments (sustaining technology). 3   
 Disruptive technologies typically enter the low end of the marketplace and eventually 
evolve to displace high-end competitors and their reigning technologies. Sony is a perfect 
example. Sony started as a tiny company that built portable, battery-powered transistor 
radios. The sound quality was poor, but customers were willing to overlook that for the 
convenience of portability. With the experience and revenue stream from the portables, 
Sony improved its technology to produce cheap, low-end transistor amplifiers that were 
suitable for home use and invested those revenues in improving the technology further, 
which produced still-better radios. 4  
 The Innovator’s Dilemma, a book by Clayton M. Christensen, discusses how estab-
lished companies can take advantage of disruptive technologies without hindering 
 LO 3.1:  Compare disruptive and 
sustaining technologies, and explain 
how the Internet and WWW caused 
business disruption. 

95
Business Driven MIS Module 1
existing relationships with customers, partners, and stakeholders. Xerox, IBM, Sears, 
and DEC all listened to existing customers, invested aggressively in technology, had their 
competitive antennae up, and still lost their market-dominant positions. They may have 
placed too much emphasis on satisfying customers’ current needs, while neglecting new 
disruptive technology to meet customers’ future needs and thus losing market share. 
 Figure 3.2  highlights several companies that launched new businesses by capitalizing on 
disruptive technologies. 5 
 The Internet and World Wide Web—The Ultimate 
Business Disruptors 
 The   Internet   is a massive network that connects computers all over the world and allows 
them to communicate with one another. Computers connected via the Internet can send 
and receive information including text, graphics, voice, video, and software. Originally 
the Internet was essentially an emergency military communications system operated 
by the U.S. Department of Defense Advanced Research Project Agency (DARPA), which 
Expected Returns on  New Investments
Expected Returns on Existing Investments
100
80
60
40
20
100
80
60
40
20
Dell
Johnson & Johnson
Procter & Gamble
Walmart
Phillips Petroleum
General Motors
Sears
Home Depot
Cisco
 FIGURE 3.1 
 Disruptive and Sustaining 
Technologies 
 FIGURE 3.2 
 Companies That Capitalized 
on Disruptive Technologies  
Company
Disruptive Technology
Apple
iPod, iPhone, iPad
Charles Schwab
Online brokerage
Hewlett-Packard
Microprocessor-based computers, ink-jet printers
IBM
Minicomputers; personal computers
Intel
Low-end microprocessors
Intuit
QuickBooks software; TurboTax software; Quicken software
Microsoft
Internet-based computing; operating system software; SQL and 
Access database software
Oracle
Database software
Quantum
3.5-inch disks
Sony
Transistor-based consumer electronics

96
Chapter 3 Ebusiness: Electronic Business Value 
called the network ARPANET. No one foresaw the dramatic impact it would have on both 
business and personal communications. In time, all U.S. universities that had defense-
related funding installed ARPANET computers, forming the first official Internet network. 
As users began to notice the value of electronic communications, the purpose of the net-
work started shifting from a military pipeline to a communications tool for scientists. 
 Millions of corporate, educational, and research networks now connect billions of 
computer systems and users in more than 200 countries. Internet users are expected to 
top the 2 billion mark, about one-third of the world’s population. 6 
 Although the Internet was an excellent communication tool for scientists and govern-
ment officials, it was technically challenging for everyday people to operate. This changed 
with the inventions of the World Wide Web and web browsers. The    World Wide Web (WWW)   
provides access to Internet information through documents including text, graphics, audio, 
and video files that use a special formatting language called HTML.   Hypertext markup 
language (HTML)    links documents, allowing users to move from one to another simply by 
clicking on a hot spot or link.   Web browsers,  such as Internet Explorer or Mozilla’s Firefox, 
allow users to access the WWW.   Hypertext transport protocol (HTTP)   is the Internet pro-
tocol web browsers use to request and display web pages using universal resource locators. 
A   universal resource locator (URL)   is the address of a file or resource on the web such 
as www.apple.com. A domain name identifies a URL address and in the previous example 
apple.com is the domain name. URLs use domain names to identify particular websites. 
   Domain name hosting (web hosting)    is a service that allows the owner of a domain name 
to maintain a simple website and provide email capacity. An   applet   is a program that runs 
within another application such as a website. 
 Notice that the Internet and the World Wide Web are not synonymous. The WWW is 
just one part of the Internet, and its primary use is to correlate and disseminate informa-
tion. The Internet includes the WWW and also other forms of communication systems 
such as email.  Figure 3.3  lists the reasons for the massive growth of the WWW. 7 
 Web 1.0: The Catalyst for Ebusiness 
 As people began learning about the WWW and the Internet, they understood that it 
enabled a company to communicate with anyone, anywhere, at anytime, creating a 
new way to participate in business. The competitive advantages for first movers would 
be enormous, thus spurring the beginning of the Web 1.0 Internet boom.   Web 1.0 (or 
Business 1.0)    is a term to refer to the World Wide Web during its first few years of 
operation between 1991 and 2003.   Ecommerce   is the buying and selling of goods and 
services over the Internet. Ecommerce refers only to online transactions.    Ebusiness   
includes ecommerce along with all activities related to internal and external busi-
ness operations such as servicing customer accounts, collaborating with partners, and 
exchanging real-time information. During Web 1.0, entrepreneurs began creating the 
first forms of ebusiness. 
 Ebusiness opened up a new marketplace for any company willing to move its busi-
ness operations online. A   paradigm shift   occurs when a new radical form of business 
enters the market that reshapes the way companies and organizations behave. Ebusi-
ness created a paradigm shift, transforming entire industries and changing enterprise-
wide business processes that fundamentally rewrote traditional business rules. Deciding 
not to make the shift to ebusiness proved fatal for many companies (see  Figure 3.4  for an 
overview of industries revamped by the disruption of ebusiness.) 8 
 FIGURE 3.3 
 Reasons for Growth of the World 
Wide Web 
The microcomputer revolution made it possible for an average person to own a computer.
Advancements in networking hardware, software, and media made it possible for business computers to be 
connected to larger networks at a minimal cost.
Browser software such as Microsoft’s Internet Explorer and Netscape Navigator gave computer users an 
easy-to-use graphical interface to find, download, and display web pages.
The speed, convenience, and low cost of email have made it an incredibly popular tool for business and personal 
communications.
Basic web pages are easy to create and extremely flexible.

97
Business Driven MIS Module 1
 BUSINESS DRIVEN ETHICS AND SECURITY 
 Did you know you can make a living naming things? Eli Altman has been nam-
ing things since he was six years old and has named more than 400 companies 
and brands while working for A Hundred Monkeys, a branding consulting com-
pany. Altman recently noticed an unfamiliar trend in the industry: nonsensical 
names such as Flickr, Socializr, Zoomr, Rowdii, Yuuguu, and Oooooc. Why are 
names like this becoming popular? 
 The reason is “domain squatting” or “cyber squatting,” the practice of buy-
ing a domain to profit from a trademarked name. For example, if you wanted to 
start a business called Drink, chances are a domain squatter has already pur-
chased drink.com and is just waiting for you to pay big bucks for the right to buy 
it. Domain squatting is illegal and outlawed under the 1999 Anticybersquatting 
Consumer Protection Act. 9 
 Do you agree that domain squatting should be illegal? Why or why not? If 
you were starting a business and someone were squatting on your domain, 
what would you do? 
 Unethical 
Disruption 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 
 FIGURE 3.4 
 Ebusiness Disruption of 
Traditional Industries 
 Industry 
 Business Changes Due to Technology 
 Auto 
 AutoTrader.com is the world’s largest used-car marketplace, listing millions 
of cars from both private owners and dealers.  AutoTrader.com actually helps 
to increase used-car dealer’s business as it drives millions of qualified leads 
(potential used-car buyers) to participating automotive dealers and private 
sellers. 
 Publishing 
 With the Internet, anyone can publish online content. Traditionally, publishers 
screened many authors and manuscripts and selected those that had the 
best chances of succeeding. Lulu.com turned this model around by providing 
self-publishing along with print-on-demand capabilities. 
 Education and Training 
 Continuing medical education is costly, and just keeping up-to-date with 
advances often requires taking training courses and traveling to conferences. 
Now continuing education in many fields is moving online, and by 2016 over 
50 percent of doctors will be building their skills through online learning. 
Companies such as Cisco save millions by moving training to the Internet. 
 Entertainment 
 The music industry was hit hard by ebusiness, and online music traders such 
as iTunes average billions of annual downloads. Unable to compete with 
online music, the majority of record stores closed. The next big entertainment 
industry to feel the effects of ebusiness will be the multibillion-dollar movie 
business. Video rental stores are closing their doors as they fail to compete 
with online streaming and home rental delivery companies such as Netflix. 
 Financial Services 
 Nearly every public efinance company makes money, with online mortgage 
service Lending Tree leading the pack. Processing online mortgage applica-
tions is over 50 percent cheaper for customers. 
 Retail 
 Forrester Research predicts ebusiness retail sales will grow at a 10 percent 
annual growth rate through 2014. It forecasts U.S. online retail sales will be 
nearly $250 billion, up from $155 billion in 2009. Online retail sales were 
recently up 11 percent, compared to 2.5 percent for all retail sales. 
 Travel 
 Travel site Expedia.com is now the biggest leisure-travel agency, with higher 
profit margins than even American Express. The majority of travel agencies 
closed as a direct result of ebusiness. 

98
Chapter 3 Ebusiness: Electronic Business Value 
 ADVANTAGES OF EBUSINESS  
 Both individuals and organizations have embraced ebusiness to enhance productiv-
ity, maximize convenience, and improve communications. Companies today need to 
deploy a comprehensive ebusiness strategy, and business students need to understand 
its advantages, outlined in  Figure 3.5 . Let’s look at each.  
 Expanding Global Reach 
 Easy access to real-time information is a primary benefit of ebusiness.   Information 
richness  refers to the depth and breadth of details contained in a piece of textual, 
graphic, audio, or video information.   Information reach   measures the number of peo-
ple a firm can communicate with all over the world. Buyers need information richness 
to make informed purchases, and sellers need information reach to properly market 
and differentiate themselves from the competition. 
 Ebusinesses operate 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. This availability directly reduces 
transaction costs, since consumers no longer have to spend a lot of time researching 
purchases or traveling great distances to make them. The faster delivery cycle for online 
sales helps strengthen customer relationships, improving customer satisfaction and ulti-
mately sales. 
 A firm’s website can be the focal point of a cost-effective communications and mar-
keting strategy. Promoting products online allows the company to precisely target its 
customers whether they are local or around the globe. A physical location is restricted by 
size and limited to those customers who can get there, while an online store has a global 
marketplace with customers and information seekers already waiting in line. 
 Opening New Markets 
 Ebusiness is perfect for increasing niche-product sales.   Mass customization  is the abil-
ity of an organization to tailor its products or services to the customers’ specifications. 
For example, customers can order M&M’s in special colors or with customized sayings 
such as “Marry Me.”   Personalization   occurs when a company knows enough about a 
customer’s likes and dislikes that it can fashion offers more likely to appeal to that per-
son, say by tailoring its website to individuals or groups based on profile information, 
demographics, or prior transactions. Amazon uses personalization to create a unique 
portal for each of its customers. 
 Chris Anderson, editor-in-chief of  Wired  magazine, describes niche-market ebusi-
ness strategies as capturing the   long tail,   referring to the tail of a typical sales curve. 
This strategy demonstrates how niche products can have viable and profitable business 
models when selling via ebusiness. In traditional sales models, a store is limited by shelf 
space when selecting products to sell. For this reason, store owners typically purchase 
products that will be wanted or needed by masses, and the store is stocked with broad 
products as there is not room on the shelf for niche products that only a few custom-
ers might purchase. Ebusinesses such as Amazon and eBay eliminated the shelf-space 
dilemma and were able to offer infinite products. 
 LO 3.2:  Describe ebusiness and its 
associated advantages. 
 FIGURE 3.5 
 Ebusiness Advantages 
• Expanding global reach
• Opening new markets
• Reducing costs
• Improving operations
• Improving effectiveness
Ebusiness
Advantages

99
Business Driven MIS Module 1
 Netflix offers an excellent example of the long tail. Let’s assume that an average Block-
buster store maintains 3,000 movies in its inventory, whereas Netflix, without physical 
shelf limitations, can maintain 100,000 movies in its inventory. Looking at sales data, 
the majority of Blockbuster’s revenue comes from new releases that are rented daily, 
whereas older selections are rented only a few times a month and don’t repay the cost 
of keeping them in stock. Thus Blockbuster’s sales tail ends at title 3,000 (see  Figure 3.6 ) 
However, Netflix, with no physical limitations, can extend its tail beyond 100,000 (and 
with streaming video perhaps 200,000). By extending its tail, Netflix increases sales, even 
if a title is rented only a few times. 10 
  Intermediaries   are agents, software, or businesses that provide a trading infrastruc-
ture to bring buyers and sellers together. The introduction of ebusiness brought about 
  disintermediation,   which occurs when a business sells directly to the customer online 
and cuts out the intermediary (see  Figure 3.7 ). This business strategy lets the company 
shorten the order process and add value with reduced costs or a more responsive and 
efficient service. The disintermediation of the travel agent occurred as people began 
to book their own vacations online, often at a cheaper rate. At Lulu.com anyone can 
 FIGURE 3.7 
 Business Value of 
Disintermediation 
Manufacturer
IBM
Distributor
Retailer
Customer
Dell
Direct
Dell
Walmart
$1,200
$1,000
$800
 FIGURE 3.6 
 The Long Tail 
Products
Long tail
Head
Popularity
The more intermediaries 
that are cut from the 
distribution chain, the 
lower the product price. 
When Dell decided to sell 
its PCs through Walmart 
many were surprised, 
because Dell’s direct-
to-customer sales model 
was the competitive 
advantage that had kept 
Dell the market leader 
for years. 

100
Chapter 3 Ebusiness: Electronic Business Value 
publish and sell print-on-demand books, online music, and custom calendars, making 
the publisher obsolete. 11 
 In   reintermediation,   steps are  added  to the value chain as new players find ways to 
add value to the business process. Levi Strauss originally thought it was a good business 
strategy to limit all online sales to its own website. A few years later, the company real-
ized it could gain a far larger market share by allowing all retailers to sell its products 
directly to customers. As ebusiness matures it has become evident that to serve certain 
markets in volume, some reintermediation may be desirable.   Cybermediation   refers to 
the creation of new kinds of intermediaries that simply could not have existed before 
the advent of ebusiness, including comparison-shopping sites such as Kelkoo and bank 
account aggregation services such as Citibank. 12 
 Reducing Costs 
 Operational benefits of ebusiness include business processes that require less time and 
human effort or can be eliminated. Compare the cost of sending out 100 direct mail-
ings (paper, postage, labor) to the cost of a bulk email campaign. Think about the cost of 
renting a physical location and operating phone lines versus the cost of maintaining an 
online site. Switching to an ebusiness model can eliminate many traditional costs asso-
ciated with communicating by substituting systems, such as Live Help, that let custom-
ers chat live with support or sales staff. 
 Online air travel reservations cost less than those booked over the telephone. Online 
ordering also offers the possibility of merging a sales order system with order fulfillment 
and delivery so customers can check the progress of their orders at all times. Ebusinesses 
can also inexpensively attract new customers with innovative marketing and retain pres-
ent customers with improved service and support. 13 
 One of the most exciting benefits of ebusiness is its low start-up costs. Today, anyone 
can start an ebusiness with just a website and a great product or service. Even a dog-
walking operation can benefit from being an ebusiness. 
 Improving Operations 
 Ebusiness has had some of its biggest impacts on customer service. Communication is 
often faster, more available, and more effective, encouraging customers to learn more 
about the product. Customers can often help themselves, using the content richness 
only a website can provide, and they can both shop and pay online without having to 
leave the house. Companies can also use email, special messages, and private password 
access to special areas for top customers.  
 Improving Effectiveness 
 Just putting up a simple website does not create an ebusiness. Ebusiness websites must 
create buzz, be innovative, add value, and provide useful information. In short, they 
must build a sense of community and collaboration. 
 MIS measures of efficiency, such as the amount of traffic on a site, don’t tell the whole 
story. They do not necessarily indicate large sales volumes, for instance. Many websites 
with lots of traffic have minimal sales. The best way to measure ebusiness success is to 
use  effectiveness  MIS metrics, such as the revenue generated by web traffic, number of 
new customers acquired by web traffic, and reductions in customer service calls result-
ing from web traffic. 
  Interactivity   measures advertising effectiveness by counting visitor interactions with 
the target ad, including time spent viewing the ad, number of pages viewed, and num-
ber of repeat visits to the advertisement. Interactivity measures are a giant step forward 
for advertisers, since traditional advertising methods—newspapers, magazines, radio, 
and television—provide few ways to track effectiveness.  Figure 3.8 displays the ebusi-
ness marketing initiatives allowing companies to expand their reach while measuring 
effectiveness. 14 
 The ultimate outcome of any advertisement is a purchase. Organizations use met-
rics to tie revenue amounts and number of new customers created directly back to the 

101
Business Driven MIS Module 1
websites or banner ads. Through   clickstream data   they can observe the exact pattern of 
a consumer’s navigation through a site.  Figure 3.9  displays different types of clickstream 
metrics, and  Figure 3.10  provides definitions of common metrics based on clickstream 
data. To interpret such data properly, managers try to benchmark against other com-
panies. For instance, consumers seem to visit their preferred websites regularly, even 
checking back multiple times during a given session. 15 
 THE FOUR EBUSINESS MODELS  
 A   business model   is a plan that details how a company creates, delivers, and generates 
revenues. Some models are quite simple: A company produces a good or service and sells 
it to customers. If the company is successful, sales exceed costs and the company gener-
ates a profit. Other models are less straightforward, and sometimes it’s not immediately 
clear who makes money and how much. Radio and network television are broadcast free 
to anyone with a receiver, for instance; advertisers pay the costs of programming. 
 The majority of online business activities consist of the exchange of products and services 
either between businesses or between businesses and consumers. An   ebusiness model   is a 
plan that details how a company creates, delivers, and generates revenues on the Internet. 
 LO 3.3:  Compare the four ebusiness 
models. 
 Marketing via Ebusiness 
 An  associate (affiliate) program allows a business to generate commissions or referral fees when a customer visiting its website clicks on a link to 
another merchant’s website. For example, if a customer to a company website clicks on a banner ad to another vendor’s website, the company will 
receive a referral fee or commission when the customer performs the desired action, typically making a purchase or completing a form. 
 A  banner ad is a box running across a website that advertises the products and services of another business, usually another ebusiness. The banner 
generally contains a link to the advertiser’s website. Advertisers can track how often customers click on a banner ad resulting in a click-through to 
their website. Often the cost of the banner ad depends on the number of customers who click on the banner ad. Web-based advertising services can 
track the number of times users click the banner, generating statistics that enable advertisers to judge whether the advertising fees are worth pay-
ing. Banner ads are like living, breathing classified ads. Tracking the number of banner ad clicks is an excellent way to understand the effectiveness 
of the ad on the website. 
 A  click-through is a count of the number of people who visit one site and click on an advertisement that takes them to the site of the advertiser. 
Tracking effectiveness based on click-throughs guarantees exposure to target ads; however, it does not guarantee that the visitor liked the ad, spent 
any substantial time viewing the ad, or was satisfied with the information contained in the ad. 
 A  cookie is a small file deposited on a hard drive by a website containing information about customers and their browsing activities. Cookies allow 
websites to record the comings and goings of customers, usually without their knowledge or consent. 
 A  pop-up ad is a small web page containing an advertisement that appears outside of the current website loaded in the browser. A pop-under ad is 
a form of a pop-up ad that users do not see until they close the current web browser screen. 
 Viral marketing is a technique that induces websites or users to pass on a marketing message to other websites or users, creating exponential 
growth in the message’s visibility and effect. One example of successful viral marketing is Hotmail, which promotes its service and its own advertis-
ers’ messages in every user’s email notes. Viral marketing encourages users of a product or service supplied by an ebusiness to encourage friends 
to join. Viral marketing is a word-of-mouth type advertising program. 
 FIGURE 3.8 
 Marketing Received Tremendous 
Benefits from Ebusiness 
 FIGURE 3.9 
 Clickstream Data Metrics 
 Types of Clickstream Data Metrics 
 The number of page views (i.e., the number of times a particular page has been presented to a visitor). 
 The pattern of websites visited, including most frequent exit page and most frequent prior website. 
 Length of stay on the website. 
 Dates and times of visits. 
 Number of registrations filled out per 100 visitors. 
 Number of abandoned registrations. 
 Demographics of registered visitors. 
 Number of customers with shopping carts. 
 Number of abandoned shopping carts. 

102
Chapter 3 Ebusiness: Electronic Business Value 
  Dot-com   was the original term for a company operating on the Internet. Ebusiness mod-
els fall into one of the four categories: (1) business-to-business, (2) business-to-consumer, 
(3) consumer-to-business, and (4) consumer-to-consumer (see  Figure 3.11 ).  
 Business-to-Business (B2B) 
  Business-to-business (B2B)   applies to businesses buying from and selling to each other 
over the Internet. Examples include medical billing service, software sales and licens-
ing, and virtual assistant businesses. B2B relationships represent 80 percent of all online 
business and are more complex with greater security needs than the other types. B2B 
examples include Oracle and SAP. 
 Electronic marketplaces, or emarketplaces, are interactive business communities 
providing a central market where multiple buyers and sellers can engage in ebusiness 
activities. By tightening and automating the relationship between the two parties, they 
create structures for conducting commercial exchange, consolidating supply chains, 
and creating new sales channels. 
 Business-to-Consumer (B2C) 
  Business-to-consumer (B2C)   applies to any business that sells its products or services 
directly to consumers online. Carfax offers car buyers detailed histories of used vehicles 
for a fee. An   eshop,   sometimes referred to as an   estore   or   etailer,   is an online version 
METRICS MEASURING WEBSITE SUCCESS
Website Visit Metrics
Stickiness (visit duration time)
The length of time a visitor spends on a website.
Raw visit depth (total web pages 
exposure per session)
The total number of pages a visitor is exposed to during a single visit to a website.
Visit depth (total unique web pages 
exposure per session)
The total number of unique pages a visitor is exposed to during a single visit to a website.
Website Visitor Metrics
Unidentified visitor
A visitor is an individual who visits a website. An “unidentified visitor” means that no information about 
that visitor is available.
Unique visitor
A unique visitor is one who can be recognized and counted only once within a given period of time.
Identified visitor
An ID is available that allows a user to be tracked across multiple visits to a website.
Website Hit Metrics
Hits
When visitors reach a website, their computer sends a request to the site’s computer server to begin dis-
playing pages. Each element of a requested page is recorded by the website’s server log file as a “hit.”
 FIGURE 3.10 
 Website Metrics 
 FIGURE 3.11 
 Ebusiness Models 
Ebusiness Term
Deﬁnition
Business-to-
business (B2B)
Business-to-
consumer (B2C)
Consumer-to-
business (C2B)
Consumer-to-
consumer (C2C)
Applies to businesses buying from and selling
to each other over the Internet.
Applies to any business that sells its products
or services to consumers over the Internet.
Applies to any consumer that sells a product or
service to a business over the Internet.
Applies to sites primarily offering goods and
services to assist consumers interacting with
each other over the Internet.
Business
Business
Consumer
Consumer
B2B
C2B
B2C
C2C

103
Business Driven MIS Module 1
of a retail store where customers can shop at any hour. It can be an extension of an 
existing store such as The Gap or operate only online such as Amazon.com. There are 
three ways to operate as a B2C: brick-and-mortar, click-and-mortar, and pure play (see 
 Figure 3.12 ).   
 Consumer-to-Business (C2B) 
  Consumer-to-business (C2B)   applies to any consumer who sells a product or service 
to a business on the Internet. One example is customers of Priceline.com, who set their 
own prices for items such as airline tickets or hotel rooms and wait for a seller to decide 
whether to supply them. The demand for C2B ebusiness will increase over the next few 
years due to customers’ desire for greater convenience and lower prices.  
 Consumer-to-Consumer (C2C) 
  Consumer-to-consumer (C2C)   applies to customers offering goods and services to each 
other on the Internet. A good example of a C2C is an auction where buyers and sellers 
solicit consecutive bids from each other and prices are determined dynamically. Craigslist 
and eBay are two examples of successful C2C websites, linking like-minded buyers with 
sellers. Other types of online auctions include forward auctions where sellers market to 
many buyers and the highest bid wins, and reverse auctions where buyers select goods 
and services from the seller with the lowest bid.  
 Ebusiness Forms and Revenue-Generating Strategies 
 As more and more companies began jumping on the ebusiness bandwagon new forms 
of ebusiness began to emerge (see  Figure 3.13 ). Many of the new forms of ebusiness went 
to market without clear strategies on how they were going to generate revenue. Google 
is an excellent example of an ebusiness that did not figure out a way to generate profits 
until many years after its launch. 16 
 Google’s primary line of business is its search engine; however, the company does 
not generate revenue from people using its site to search the Internet. It generates 
revenue from the marketers and advertisers that pay to place their ads on the site. 
About 200 million times each day, people from all over the world access Google to 
perform searches. AdWords, a part of the Google site, allows advertisers to bid on 
common search terms. The advertisers simply enter in the keywords they want to bid 
 FIGURE 3.12 
 Forms of Business-to-Consumer 
Operations  
Brick-and-Mortar Business
A business that operates in
a physical store without an
Internet presence.
Example: T.J. Maxx
Pure-Play (Virtual) Business
A business that operates on
the Internet only without a
physical store.
Example: Google
Click-and-Mortar Business
A business that operates
in a physical store and on
the Internet.
Example: Barnes & Noble

104
Chapter 3 Ebusiness: Electronic Business Value 
on and the maximum amounts they want to pay per click per day. Google then deter-
mines a price and a search ranking for those keywords based on how much other 
advertisers are willing to pay for the same terms. Pricing for keywords can range from 
5 cents to $10 a click. Paid search is the ultimate in targeted advertising because con-
sumers type in exactly what they want. A general search term such as  tropical vaca-
tion  costs less than a more specific term such as  Hawaiian vacation.  Whoever bids 
 FIGURE 3.13 
 Ebusiness Forms 
 Form 
 Description 
 Examples 
 Content providers 
 Generate revenues by providing digital 
content such as news, music, photos, 
or videos. 
 Netflix.com ,  iTunes.com ,  CNN.com 
 Infomediaries 
 Provide specialized information on 
behalf of producers of goods and 
services and their potential customers 
 Edmunds.com ,  BizRate.com , 
 Bloomberg.com ,  Zillow.com 
 Online marketplaces 
 Bring together buyers and sellers of 
products and services. 
 Amazon.com ,  eBay.com ,  Priceline.com 
 Portals 
 Operate central website for users to 
access specialized content and other 
services. 
 Google.com ,  Yahoo.com ,  MSN.com 
 Service providers 
 Provide services such as photo shar-
ing, video sharing, online backup and 
storage. 
 Flickr.com ,  Mapquest.com ,  
YouTube.com 
 Transaction brokers 
 Process online sales transactions. 
 Etrade.com ,  Charlesschwab.com , 
 Fidelity.com 
 FIGURE 3.14 
 Different Forms of Searching 
Search Engine
Search Engine 
Ranking
Search 
Optimization
Pay Per Click
Pay Per Call
Pay Per 
Conversion

105
Business Driven MIS Module 1
the most for a term appears in a sponsored advertisement link either at the top or 
along the side of the search-results page. 17  
 A    search engine    is website software that finds other pages based on keyword matching 
similar to Google.    Search engine ranking    evaluates variables that search engines use to 
determine where a URL appears on the list of search results.   Search engine optimization 
(SEO)   combines art along with science to determine how to make URLs more attractive 
to search engines resulting in higher search engine ranking (see  Figure 3.14 ). The bet-
ter the SEO, the higher the ranking for a website in the list of search engine results. SEO 
is critical because most people only view the first few pages of a search result. After that 
a person is more inclined to begin a new search than review pages and pages of search 
results. Websites can generate revenue through:
 ■   Pay-per-click  :  generates revenue each time a user clicks on a link to a retailer’s 
website. 
 ■   Pay-per-call  :  generates revenue each time a user clicks on a link that takes the user 
directly to an online agent waiting for a call. 
 ■   Pay-per-conversion  : generates revenue each time a website visitor is converted to a 
customer. 
 Ebusinesses must have a revenue model, or a model for making money. For instance, 
will it accept advertising, or sell subscriptions or licensing rights?  Figure 3.15  lists the dif-
ferent benefits and challenges of various ebusiness revenue models. 18 
 BUSINESS DRIVEN STARTUP 
 Rich Aberman and Bill Clerico found themselves in the difficult position of 
deciding whether to graduate from college and pursue their dreams of build-
ing their own company or heading off to graduate school and entry-level jobs. 
Aberman choose to head off to law school while Clerico choose an entry-level 
job as an investment banker. After several months they both decided that it was 
now or never if they truly wanted to build their dream business as they were 
both becoming more and more comfortable with their new lifestyles. Obviously, 
it would become harder and harder to leave their comfortable positions for the 
uncertainty of being an entrepreneur. 
 Aberman left law school and Clerico quit his job and the pair cofounded 
WePay, an online funds management company. WePay allows individuals and 
groups all over the world to establish an account and collect money in a vari-
ety of ways—from paper checks to credit cards—and then use a debit card to 
spend the money in the account. WePay collects transaction fees ranging from 
50 cents to 3 percent of credit card payments. Luckily, their decision paid off 
and a little over a year after founding the company, Aberman and Clerico had 
raised nearly $2 million from high-profile Internet investors. WePay boasts sev-
eral thousand customers ranging from sports teams to fraternities to groups of 
roommates managing rent and utilities. 19 
 Have you thought of starting your own business? What are the advantages 
and challenges associated with building your own business early in your 
career? Research the Internet and find three examples of highly successful col-
lege start-ups. What do you think were the primary reasons the start-ups found 
success? What are the advantages of starting your own business while you are 
still in college? What are a few of the challenges you might face if you choose to 
start your own business today? 
 Go for It! 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 

106
Chapter 3 Ebusiness: Electronic Business Value 
 EBUSINESS TOOLS FOR CONNECTING 
AND COMMUNICATING  
 As firms began to move online, more MIS tools were created to support ebusiness pro-
cesses and requirements. The tools supporting and driving ebusiness are highlighted in 
 Figure 3.16  and covered below in detail. 
 Email 
 Email, short for electronic mail, is the exchange of digital messages over the Internet. 
No longer do business professionals have to wait for the mail to receive important docu-
ments as email single-handedly increased the speed of business by allowing the transfer 
of documents with the same speed as the telephone. Its chief business advantage is the 
ability to inform and communicate with many people simultaneously, immediately, and 
with ease. There are no time or place constraints, and users can check, send, and view 
emails whenever they require. 
 An    Internet service provider (ISP)    is a company that provides access to the Internet 
for a monthly fee. Major ISPs in the United States include AOL, AT&T, Comcast, Earthlink, 
and Netzero, as well as thousands of local ISPs including regional telephone companies.  
 Instant Messaging 
  Real-time communication   occurs when a system updates information at the same rate it 
receives it. Email was a great advancement over traditional communication methods such 
as the U.S. mail, but it did not operate in real time.   Instant messaging (IMing)   is a service 
that enables instant or real-time communication between people. Businesses immedi-
ately saw what they could do:
 ■ Answer simple questions quickly and easily. 
 ■ Resolve questions or problems immediately. 
 LO 3.4:  Describe the six ebusiness 
tools for connecting and 
communicating. 
 FIGURE 3.15 
 Ebusiness Revenue Models 
 Ebusiness 
Revenue Model 
 Benefits 
 Challenges 
 Advertising fees 
  ■ Well-targeted advertisements can be 
perceived as value-added content by 
trading participants. 
 ■ Easy to implement 
 ■ Limited revenue potential 
 ■ Overdone or poorly targeted adver-
tisements can be disturbing ele-
ments on the website. 
 License fees 
 ■ Creates incentives to do many 
transactions  
 ■ Customization and back-end integra-
tion lead to lock-in of participants. 
 ■ Up-front fee is a barrier to entry for 
participants. 
 ■ Price differentiation is complicated. 
 Subscription fees 
 ■ Creates incentives to do transactions  
 ■ Price can be differentiated. 
 ■ Possibility to build additional revenue 
from new user groups 
 ■ Fixed fee is a barrier to entry for 
participants. 
 Transaction fees 
 ■ Can be directly tied to savings (both 
process and price savings) 
 ■ Important revenue source when high 
level of liquidity (transaction volume) 
is reached 
 ■ If process savings are not completely 
visible, use of the system is discour-
aged (incentive to move transactions 
offline). 
 ■ Transaction fees likely to decrease 
with time 
 Value-added 
services fees 
 ■ Service offering can be 
differentiated. 
 ■ Price can be differentiated 
 ■ Possibility to build additional revenue 
from established and new user 
groups (third parties) 
 ■ Cumbersome process for customers 
to continually evaluate new services 

107
Business Driven MIS Module 1
 ■ Transmit messages as fast as naturally flowing conversation. 
 ■ Easily hold simultaneous IM sessions with multiple people. 
 ■ Eliminate long-distance phone charges.  
 ■ Quickly identifying which employees are at their computers. 
 Podcasting 
  Podcasting   converts an audio broadcast to a digital music player. Podcasts can increase 
marketing reach and build customer loyalty. Companies use podcasts as marketing 
communication channels discussing everything from corporate strategies to detailed 
product overviews. The senior executive team can share weekly or monthly pod-
casts featuring important issues or expert briefings on new technical or marketing 
developments.  
 Videoconferencing 
 A   videoconference   allows people at two or more locations to interact via two-way video 
and audio transmissions simultaneously as well as share documents, data, computer 
displays, and whiteboards. Point-to-point videoconferences connect two people, and 
multipoint conferences connect more than two people at multiple locations. 
 Videoconferences can increase productivity because users participate without leav-
ing their offices. It can improve communication and relationships, because partici-
pants see each other’s facial expressions and body language, both important aspects of 
communication that are lost with a basic telephone call or email. It also reduces travel 
expenses, a big win for firms facing economic challenges. Of course, nothing can replace 
meeting someone face-to-face and shaking hands, but videoconferencing offers a viable 
and cost-effective alternative. 
 FIGURE 3.16 
 Ebusiness Tools 
Content
Management
System
Email
Podcasting
Videoconferencing
Instant
Messaging
Web
Conferencing

108
Chapter 3 Ebusiness: Electronic Business Value 
 Web Conferencing 
  Web conferencing,   or a   webinar,   blends videoconferencing with document sharing 
and allows the user to deliver a presentation over the web to a group of geographically 
dispersed participants. Regardless of the type of hardware or software the attendees are 
running, every participant can see what is on anyone else’s screen. Schools use web con-
ferencing tools such as Illuminate Live to deliver lectures to students, and businesses use 
tools such as WebEx to demonstrate products. Web conferencing is not quite like being 
there, but professionals can accomplish more sitting at their desks than in an airport 
waiting to make travel connections. 
 Content Management Systems 
 In the fourth century BC Aristotle catalogued the natural world according to a systematic 
organization, and the ancient library at Alexandria was reportedly organized by subject, 
connecting like information with like. Today    content management systems (CMS)   help 
companies manage the creation, storage, editing, and publication of their website con-
tent. CMSs are user-friendly; most include web-based publishing, search, navigation, 
and indexing to organize information; and they let users with little or no technical exper-
tise make website changes. 
 A search is typically carried out by entering a keyword or phrase (query) into a text 
field and clicking a button or a hyperlink. Navigation facilitates movement from one web 
page to another. Content management systems play a crucial role in getting site visitors 
to view more than just the home page. If navigation choices are unclear, visitors may hit 
the “Back” button on their first (and final) visit to a website. One rule of thumb to remem-
ber is that each time a user has to click to find search information, there is a 50 percent 
chance the user will leave the website instead. A key principle of good website design, 
therefore, is to keep the number of clicks to a minimum. 
  Taxonomy   is the scientific classification of organisms into groups based on similari-
ties of structure or origin. Taxonomies are also used for indexing the content on the web-
site into categories and subcategories of topics. For example, car is a subtype of vehicle. 
Every car is a vehicle, but not every vehicle is a car; some vehicles are vans, buses, and 
trucks. Taxonomy terms are arranged so that narrower/more specific/“child” terms 
fall under broader/more generic/“parent” terms.   Information architecture   is the set 
of ideas about how all information in a given context should be organized. Many com-
panies hire information architects to create their website taxonomies. A well-planned 
taxonomy ensures search and navigation are easy and user-friendly. If the taxonomy is 
confusing, the site will soon fail. 
 THE CHALLENGES OF EBUSINESS  
 Although the benefits of ebusiness are enticing, developing, deploying, and man-
aging ebusiness systems is not always easy.  Figure  3.17  lists the challenges facing 
ebusiness. 20   
 LO 3.5:  Identify the four challenges 
associated with ebusiness. 
 FIGURE 3.17 
 Challenges Facing Ebusiness 
Identifying
Limited Market
Segments
Managing
Consumer Trust
Ensuring
Consumer
Protection
Adhering to
Taxation Rules

109
Business Driven MIS Module 1
 Identifying Limited Market Segments 
 The main challenge of ebusiness is the lack of growth in some sectors due to product 
or service limitations. The online food sector has not grown in sales, in part because 
food products are perishable and consumers prefer to buy them at the supermarket 
as needed. Other sectors with limited ebusiness appeal include fragile or consumable 
goods and highly sensitive or confidential businesses such as government agencies. 
 Managing Consumer Trust 
 Trust in the ebusiness exchange deserves special attention. The physical separation of 
buyer and seller, the physical separation of buyer and merchandise, and customer per-
ceptions about the risk of doing business online provide unique challenges. Internet 
marketers must develop a trustworthy relationship to make that initial sale and generate 
customer loyalty. A few ways to build trust when working online include being accessible 
and available to communicate in person with your customers; using customers’ testimo-
nials that link to your client website or to provide their contact information; accepting 
legitimate forms of payment such as credit cards. 
 Ensuring Consumer Protection 
 An organization that wants to dominate with superior customer service as a competi-
tive advantage must not only serve but also protect its customers, guarding them against 
unsolicited goods and communication, illegal or harmful goods, insufficient informa-
tion about goods and suppliers, invasion of privacy and misuse of personal information, 
and online fraud. System security, however, must not make ebusiness websites inflexible 
or difficult to use. 
 Adhering to Taxation Rules 
 Many believe that U.S. tax policy should provide a level playing field for traditional retail 
businesses, mail-order companies, and online merchants. Yet the Internet marketplace 
remains mostly free of traditional forms of sales tax, partly because ecommerce law is 
vaguely defined and differs from state to state. For now, companies that operate online 
must obey a patchwork of rules about which customers are subject to sales tax on their 
purchases and which are not. 
 section 3.2 
Web 2.0: Business 2.0 
 LE AR NI NG  O UT CO M E S 
 3.6 Explain Web 2.0, and identify its four characteristics. 
 3.7 Explain how Business 2.0 is helping communities network and collaborate. 
 3.8 Describe the three Business 2.0 tools for collaborating. 
 3.9 Explain the three challenges associated with Business 2.0. 
 3.10 Describe Web 3.0 and the next generation of online business. 
 WEB 2.0: ADVANTAGES OF BUSINESS 2.0  
 In the mid-1990s the stock market reached an all-time high as companies took advan-
tage of ebusiness and Web 1.0, and many believed the Internet was the wave of the 
future. When new online businesses began failing to meet earning expectations, how-
ever, the bubble burst. Some then believed the ebusiness boom was over, but they could 
not have been more wrong. 
  Web 2.0   (or   Business 2.0  ) is the next generation of Internet use—a more mature, dis-
tinctive communications platform characterized by new qualities such as collaboration, 
 LO 3.6:  Explain Web 2.0, and identify 
its four characteristics. 

110
Chapter 3 Ebusiness: Electronic Business Value 
sharing, and free. Business 2.0 encourages user participation and the formation of 
communities that contribute to the content. In Business 2.0, technical skills are no lon-
ger required to use and publish information to the World Wide Web, eliminating entry 
barriers for online business. 
 Traditional companies tended to view technology as a tool required to perform a pro-
cess or activity, and employees picked up information by walking through the office or 
hanging out around the water cooler. Business 2.0 technologies provide a virtual envi-
ronment that, for many new employees, is just as vibrant and important as the physical 
environment.  Figure 3.18  highlights the common characteristics of Web 2.0. 22 
 BUSINESS DRIVEN GLOBALIZATION 
 Kiva’s mission is to connect people through lending for the sake of alleviating 
poverty. Kiva is a micro-lending online nonprofit organization that enables 
individuals to lend directly to entrepreneurs throughout the world. If you want 
to participate in Kiva you simply browse the website ( www.kiva.org ) and choose 
an entrepreneur that interests you, make a loan, then track your entrepreneur 
for the next 6 to 12 months while he or she builds the business and makes the 
funds to repay the loan. When the loan is up you can relend the money to some-
one else who is in need. 21 
 Kiva is an excellent example of blending ethics and information technology. 
How is Kiva operating differently than traditional nonprofits? What are the risks 
associated with investing in Kiva? When you invest in Kiva you run three pri-
mary risks: entrepreneur risk, local field partner risk, and country risk. Analyze 
each of these risks for potential unethical issues that might arise when donating 
to Kiva.  
 Collaborating for 
Nonprofits—Kiva 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 
Web 2.0 Characteristics
Content
Sharing
Through Open
Sourcing
Collaboration
Inside the
Organization
User-
Contributed
Content
Collaboration
Outside the
Organization
 FIGURE 3.18 
 Four Characteristics of Web 2.0 

111
Business Driven MIS Module 1
 Content Sharing Through Open Sourcing 
 An   open system   consists of nonproprietary hardware and software based on publicly 
known standards that allows third parties to create add-on products to plug into or 
interoperate with the system. Thousands of hardware devices and software applications 
created and sold by third-party vendors interoperate with computers, such as iPods, 
drawing software, and mice. 
  Source code   contains instructions written by a programmer specifying the actions to 
be performed by computer software.   Open source   refers to any software whose source 
code is made available free (not on a fee or licensing basis as in ebusiness) for any third 
party to review and modify. Business 2.0 is capitalizing on open source software. Mozilla, 
for example, offers its Firefox web browser and Thunderbird email software free. Mozilla 
believes the Internet is a public resource that must remain open and accessible to all; it 
continuously develops free products by bringing together thousands of dedicated volun-
teers from around the world. Mozilla’s Firefox now holds over 20 percent of the browser 
market and is quickly becoming a threat to Microsoft’s Internet Explorer. How do open 
source software companies generate revenues? Many people are still awaiting an answer 
to this very important question. 23 
 User-Contributed Content 
 Ebusiness was characterized by a few companies or users posting content for the 
masses. Business 2.0 is characterized by the masses posting content for the masses. 
  User-contributed content   (or   user-generated content  ) is created and updated by many 
users for many users. Websites such as Flickr, Wikipedia, and YouTube, for example, 
move control of online media from the hands of leaders to the hands of users. Netflix 
and Amazon both use user-generated content to drive their recommendation tools, and 
websites such as Yelp use customer reviews to express opinions on products and ser-
vices. Companies are embracing user-generated content to help with everything from 
marketing to product development and quality assurance. 
 One of the most popular forms of user-generated content is a   reputation system,  
where buyers post feedback on sellers. EBay buyers voluntarily comment on the qual-
ity of service, their satisfaction with the item traded, and promptness of shipping. Sell-
ers comment about prompt payment from buyers or respond to comments left by the 
buyer. Companies ranging from Amazon to restaurants are using reputation systems to 
improve quality and enhance customer satisfaction.  
 Collaboration Inside the Organization 
 A   collaboration system   is a set of tools that supports the work of teams or groups by 
facilitating the sharing and flow of information. Business 2.0’s collaborative mind-set 
generates more information faster from a wider audience.   Collective intelligence  is 
collaborating and tapping into the core knowledge of all employees, partners, and cus-
tomers. Knowledge can be a real competitive advantage for an organization. The most 
common form of collective intelligence found inside the organization is   knowledge 
management (KM),    which involves capturing, classifying, evaluating, retrieving, and 
sharing information assets in a way that provides context for effective decisions and 
actions. The primary objective of knowledge management is to be sure that a compa-
ny’s knowledge of facts, sources of information, and solutions are readily available to all 
employees whenever it is needed. A    knowledge management system (KMS)   supports 
the capturing, organization, and dissemination of knowledge (i.e., know-how) through-
out an organization. KMS can distribute an organization’s knowledge base by intercon-
necting people and digitally gathering their expertise. 
 A great example of a knowledge worker is a golf caddie. Golf caddies give advice such 
as, “The rain makes the third hole play 10 yards shorter.” If a golf caddie is good and 
gives accurate advice it can lead to big tips. Collaborating with other golf caddies can 
provide bigger tips for all. How can knowledge management make this happen? Caddies 
could be rewarded for sharing course knowledge by receiving prizes for sharing knowl-
edge. The course manager could compile all of the tips and publish a course notebook 

112
Chapter 3 Ebusiness: Electronic Business Value 
for distribution to all caddies. The goal of a knowledge management system is that every-
one wins. Here the caddies make bigger tips and golfers improve their play by benefiting 
from the collaborative experiences of the caddies, and the course owners win as busi-
ness increases. 
 KM has assumed greater urgency in American business over the past few years as mil-
lions of baby boomers prepare to retire. When they punch out for the last time, the knowl-
edge they gleaned about their jobs, companies, and industries during their long careers 
will walk out with them—unless companies take measures to retain their insights. 
 Explicit and Tacit Knowledge   
Not all information is valuable. Individuals must 
determine what information qualifies as intellectual and knowledge-based assets. 
In general, intellectual and knowledge-based assets fall into one of two categories: 
explicit or tacit. As a rule,   explicit knowledge   consists of anything that can be doc-
umented, archived, and codified, often with the help of MIS. Examples of explicit 
knowledge are assets such as patents, trademarks, business plans, marketing research, 
and customer lists.   Tacit knowledge   is the knowledge contained in people’s heads. 
The challenge inherent in tacit knowledge is figuring out how to recognize, gener-
ate, share, and manage knowledge that resides in people’s heads. While information 
technology in the form of email, instant messaging, and related technologies can help 
facilitate the dissemination of tacit knowledge, identifying it in the first place can be a 
major obstacle.   
 Collaboration Outside the Organization 
 The most common form of collective intelligence found outside the organization is 
  crowdsourcing,   which refers to the wisdom of the crowd. The idea that collective intel-
ligence is greater than the sum of its individual parts has been around for a long time 
(see  Figure 3.19 ). With Business 2.0 the ability to efficiently tap into its power is emerg-
ing. For many years organizations believed that good ideas came from the top. CEOs 
collaborated only with the heads of sales and marketing, the quality assurance expert, 
or the road warrior salesman. The organization chart governed who should work with 
whom and how far up the chain of command a suggestion or idea would travel. With 
Business 2.0 this belief is being challenged, as firms capitalize on crowdsourcing by 
opening up a task or problem to a wider group to find better or cheaper results from 
outside the box.  
 With Business 2.0, people can be continuously connected, a driving force behind 
collaboration. Traditional ebusiness communications were limited to face-to-face 
 FIGURE 3.19 
 Crowdsourcing: The Crowd Is 
Smarter Than the Individual 

113
Business Driven MIS Module 1
conversations and one-way technologies that used   asynchronous communications,  or 
communication such as email in which the message and the response do not occur at 
the same time. Business 2.0 brought   synchronous communication,   or communications 
that occur at the same time such as IM or chat. Ask a group of college students when they 
last spoke to their parents. For most the answer is less than hour ago, as opposed to the 
traditional response of a few days ago. In business too, continuous connections are now 
expected in today’s collaborative world. 
 NETWORKING COMMUNITIES WITH BUSINESS 2.0  
  Social media   refers to websites that rely on user participation and user-contributed 
content, such as Facebook, YouTube, and Digg. A   social network   is an application that 
connects people by matching profile information. Providing individuals with the ability 
to network is by far one of the greatest advantages of Business 2.0.   Social networking  is 
the practice of expanding your business and/or social contacts by constructing a per-
sonal network (see  Figure 3.20 ). Social networking sites provide two basic functions. The 
first is the ability to create and maintain a profile that serves as an online identity within 
the environment. The second is the ability to create connections between other people 
within the network.    Social networking analysis (SNA)   maps group contacts (personal 
and professional) identifying who knows each other and who works together. In a com-
pany it can provide a vision of how employees work together. It can also identify key 
experts with specific knowledge such as how to solve a complicated programming prob-
lem or launch a new product. 
 Business 2.0 simplifies access to information and improves the ability to share it. Instead 
of spending $1,000 and two days at a conference to meet professional peers, business 
 LO 3.7:  Explain how Business 2.0 is 
helping communities network and 
collaborate. 
 BUSINESS DRIVEN INNOVATION 
 Deciding whether a given site is Web 1.0 or Web 2.0 is not as straightforward 
as it appears. Websites do not have version numbers and many are dynamic 
enough to be in “permanent beta testing.” Facebook and MySpace are good 
Web 2.0 examples, primarily due to their social networking functions and their 
reliance on user-generated content. Some sites are easy to identify as Web 1.0 
in their approach: Craigslist, for example, emulates an email list server and has 
no public user profiles or dynamic pages. Many other sites are hard to catego-
rize. Amazon.com launched in the mid-1990s and has gradually added features 
over time. The principal content (product descriptions) is not user-created, but 
much of the site’s value is added by user reviews and ratings. Profiles of users do 
exist, but social features such as friend links, although present, are not widely 
adopted. 24 
 Review the following websites and categorize them as Web 1.0, Web 2.0, or 
both. Be sure to justify your answer with the characteristics that classify the 
website as 1.0, 2.0, or both. Why would certain types of businesses choose to 
remain Web 1.0 and not offer collaboration or open source capabilities?
 ■  www.ebay.com ;  www.amazon.com ;  www.facebook.com ;  www.foursquare.
com ;  www.paypal.com ;  www.vatican.va ;  www.twitter.com ;  www.irs.gov ; 
 www.google.com ;  www.youtube.com . 
 ■ For the following be sure to use your personal websites as references.  www
.Your college’s  website.com ;  www.Your Visa  Card.com ;  www.Your  Bank.com 
 Is It Web 1.0 or 
Web 2.0? 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 

114
Chapter 3 Ebusiness: Electronic Business Value 
people can now use social networks such as LinkedIn to meet new contacts for recruiting, 
prospecting, and identifying experts on a topic. With executive members from all the  For-
tune  500 companies, LinkedIn has become one of the more useful recruiting tools on the 
web. 
 Social networking sites can be especially useful to employers trying to find job can-
didates with unique or highly specialized skill sets that may be harder to locate in larger 
communities. Many employers also search social networking sites to find “dirt” and 
character references for potential employees. Keep in mind that what you post on the 
Internet stays on the Internet. 26 
 Social Tagging 
  Tags   are specific keywords or phrases incorporated into website content for means of 
classification or taxonomy. An item can have one or more tags associated with it, to allow 
for multiple browseable paths through the items, and tags can be changed with minimal 
effort (see  Figure 3.21 ).   Social tagging   describes the collaborative activity of marking 
shared online content with keywords or tags as a way to organize it for future naviga-
tion, filtering, or search. The entire user community is invited to tag, and thus essentially 
defines, the content. Flickr allows users to upload images and tag them with appropriate 
keywords. After enough people have done so, the resulting tag collection will identify 
images correctly and without bias. 
  Folksonomy  is similar to taxonomy except that crowdsourcing determines the tags 
or keyword-based classification system. Using the collective power of a community to 
identify and classify content significantly lowers content categorization costs, because 
there is no complicated nomenclature to learn. Users simply create and apply tags as 
they wish. For example, while cell phone manufacturers often refer to their products as 
mobile devices, the folksonomy could include mobile phone, wireless phone, smart-
phone, iPhone, BlackBerry, and so on. All these keywords, if searched, should take a user 
to the same site. Folksonomies reveal what people truly call things (see  Figure 3.22 ). They 
have been a point of discussion on the web because the whole point of having a website 
is for your customers to find it. The majority of websites are found through search terms 
that match the content. 27 
 A   website bookmark   is a locally stored URL or the address of a file or Internet page 
saved as a shortcut.   Social bookmarking   allows users to share, organize, search, and 
manage bookmarks. Del.icio.us, a website dedicated to social bookmarking, provides 
users with a place to store, categorize, annotate, and share favorites. StumbleUpon is 
another popular social bookmarking website that allows users to locate interesting 
 FIGURE 3.20 
 Social Network Example 25 

115
Business Driven MIS Module 1
websites based on their favorite subjects. The more you use the service, the more the 
system “learns” about your interests and the better it can show you websites that inter-
est you. StumbleUpon represents a new social networking model in which content finds 
the users instead of the other way around. StumbleUpon is all about the users and the 
content they enjoy. 28 
 FIGURE 3.22 
 Folksonomy Example: The User-
Generated Names for Cellular 
Phones 
Cellular
Phone
Mobile
Phone
BlackBerry
iPhone
Cell
 FIGURE 3.21 
 Social Tagging Occurs When 
Many Individuals Categorize 
Content  

116
Chapter 3 Ebusiness: Electronic Business Value 
 BUSINESS 2.0 TOOLS FOR COLLABORATING  
 Social networking and collaborating are leading businesses in new directions, and 
 Figure 3.23  provides an overview of the tools that harness the “power of the people,” 
allowing users to share ideas, discuss business problems, and collaborate on solutions.  
 Blogs 
 A   blog,   or   Web log,   is an online journal that allows users to post their own comments, 
graphics, and video. Unlike traditional HTML web pages, blog websites let writers 
communicate—and reader’s respond—on a regular basis through a simple yet customizable 
interface that does not require any programming. 
 From a business perspective, blogs are no different from marketing channels such as 
video, print, audio, or presentations. They all deliver results of varying kinds. Consider 
Sun Microsystem’s Jonathan Schwartz and GM’s Bob Lutz, who use their blogs for mar-
keting, sharing ideas, gathering feedback, press response, and image shaping. Starbucks 
has developed a blog called My Starbucks Idea, allowing customers to share ideas, tell 
Starbucks what they think of other people’s ideas, and join discussions. Blogs are an ideal 
mechanism for many businesses since they can focus on topic areas more easily than 
traditional media, with no limits on page size, word count, or publication deadline. 29 
 LO 3.8:  Describe the three Business 
2.0 tools for collaborating. 
 BUSINESS DRIVEN DEBATE 
 Before the Internet, angry customers could write letters or make phone calls, 
but their individual power to find satisfaction or bring about change was rela-
tive weak. Now, disgruntled consumers can create a website or upload a video 
bashing a product or service, and their efforts can be instantly seen by millions 
of people. Though many companies monitor the Internet and try to respond 
to such postings quickly, power has clearly shifted to the consumer. Create an 
argument for or against the following statement: “Social networking has given 
power to the consumer that benefits society and creates socially responsible 
corporations.” 
 Anti-Social 
Networking 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 
 FIGURE 3.23 
 Business 2.0 Communication 
and Collaboration Tools 
 
• An online journal
that allows users to
post their own
comments, graphics,
and videos 
 
• Popular business
examples include
Sweet Leaf Tea,
Stoneyﬁeld Farm,
Nuts about
Southwest, Disney
Parks 
• Collaborative
website that allows
users to add,
remove, and change
content 
 
• Popular business
examples include
Wikipedia, National
Institute of Health,
Intelopedia,
LexisNexis, Wiki for
Higher Education 
• Content from
more than one
source to create a
new product or 
service
 
• Examples include
Zillow, Infopedia,
Trendsmap,
SongDNA,
ThisWeKnow 
BLOG
WIKI
MASHUP

117
Business Driven MIS Module 1
 Microblogs     Microblogging   is the practice of sending brief posts (140 to 200 charac-
ters) to a personal blog, either publicly or to a private group of subscribers who can read 
the posts as IMs or as text messages. The main advantage of microblogging is that posts 
can be submitted by a variety of means, such as instant messaging, email, or the web. By 
far the most popular microblogging tool is Twitter, which allows users to send microblog 
entries called tweets to anyone who has registered to “follow” them. Senders can restrict 
delivery to people they want to follow them or, by default, allow open access. Microblog-
ging is covered in detail in Chapter 7. 30   
 Real Simple Syndication (RSS)      Real Simple Syndication (RSS)    is a web format 
used to publish frequently updated works, such as blogs, news headlines, audio, and 
video, in a standardized format. An RSS document or feed includes full or summarized 
text, plus other information such as publication date and authorship. News websites, 
blogs, and podcasts use RSS, constantly feeding news to consumers instead of having 
them search for it. In addition to facilitating syndication, RSS allows a website’s frequent 
readers to track updates on the site. 
 Wikis 
 A   wiki   (the word is Hawaiian for quick) is a type of collaborative web page that allows 
users to add, remove, and change content, which can be easily organized and reorga-
nized as required. While blogs have largely drawn on the creative and personal goals 
of individual authors, wikis are based on open collaboration with any and everybody. 
Wikipedia, the open encyclopedia that launched in 2001, has become one of the 10 
most popular web destinations, reaching an estimated 217 million unique visitors a 
month. 31  
 A wiki user can generally alter the original content of any article, while the blog user 
can only add information in the form of comments. Large wikis, such as Wikipedia, pro-
tect the quality and accuracy of their information by assigning users roles such as reader, 
editor, administrator, patroller, policy maker, subject matter expert, content maintainer, 
software developer, and system operator. Access to some important or sensitive Wikipe-
dia material is limited to users in these authorized roles. 32 
 The   network effect   describes how products in a network increase in value to users 
as the number of users increases. The more users and content managers on a wiki, the 
greater the network affect because more users attract more contributors, whose work 
attracts more users, and so on. For example, Wikipedia becomes more valuable to users 
as the number of its contributors increases. 
 Wikis internal to firms can be vital tools for collecting and disseminating knowl-
edge throughout an organization, across geographic distances, and between functional 
business areas. For example, what U.S. employees call a “sale” may be called “an order 
booked” in the United Kingdom, an “order scheduled” in Germany, and an “order pro-
duced” in France. The corporate wiki can answer any questions about a business process 
or definition. Companies are also using wikis for documentation, reporting, project man-
agement, online dictionaries, and discussion groups. Of course, the more employees who 
use the corporate wiki, the greater the network effect and valued added for the company.  
 Mashups 
 A   mashup   is a website or web application that uses content from more than one source 
to create a completely new product or service. The term is typically used in the context 
of music; putting Jay-Z lyrics over a Radiohead song makes something old new. The 
web version of a mashup allows users to mix map data, photos, video, news feeds, blog 
entries, and so on to create content with a new purpose. Content used in mashups is 
typically sourced from an    application programming interface (API),    which is a set of 
routines, protocols, and tools for building software applications. A programmer then 
puts these building blocks together. 
 Most operating environments, such as Microsoft Windows, provide an API so that 
programmers can write applications consistent with them. Many people experiment-
ing with mashups are using Microsoft, Google, eBay, Amazon, Flickr, and Yahoo APIs, 
leading to the creation of mashup editors.   Mashup editors   are WYSIWYG, or What You 

118
Chapter 3 Ebusiness: Electronic Business Value 
See Is What You Get tools. They provide a visual interface to build a mashup, often allow-
ing the user to drag and drop data points into a web application.  
 Whoever thought technology could help sell bananas? Dole Organic now places 
three-digit farm codes on each banana and creates a mashup using Google Earth and 
its banana database. Socially and environmentally conscious buyers can plug the num-
bers into Dole’s website and look at a bio of the farm where the bananas were raised. 
The site tells the story of the farm and its surrounding community, lists its organic 
certifications, posts some photos, and offers a link to satellite images of the farm in 
Google Earth. Customers can personally monitor the production and treatment of their 
fruit from the tree to the grocer. The process assures customers that their bananas have 
been raised to proper organic standards on an environmentally friendly, holistically 
minded plantation. 34  
 THE CHALLENGES OF BUSINESS 2.0  
 As much as Business 2.0 has positively changed the global landscape of business, a few 
challenges remain in open source software, user-contributed content systems, and col-
laboration systems, all highlighted in  Figure 3.24 . We’ll briefly describe each one. 
 Technology Dependence 
 Many people today expect to be continuously connected, and their dependence on tech-
nology glues them to their web connections for everything from web conferencing for a 
university class or work project to making plans with friends for dinner. If a connection 
is down, how will they function? How long can people go without checking email, text 
messaging, or listening to free music on Pandora or watching on-demand television? As 
society becomes more technology-dependent, outages hold the potential to cause ever-
greater havoc for people, businesses, and educational institutions. 
 LO 3.9:  Explain the three challenges 
associated with Business 2.0. 
 BUSINESS DRIVEN MIS 
 It’s a common, if not a little morbid, practice for news organizations to pre-
pare obituaries well in advance of celebrities’ actual death. So  Bloomberg  had a 
17-page obituary for Apple’s Steve Jobs ready to run on his death; unfortunately, 
the obit was accidently published in 2008 on  Bloomberg ’s financial website. The 
error occurred despite the markers on the story saying “Hold for Release” and 
“Do Not Use.” 
 In addition to publishing the obituary,  Bloomberg  also accidentally pub-
lished the list of people its reporters should contact when Steve Jobs does 
die. That list includes Microsoft founder Bill Gates, former Vice President Al 
Gore (a member of Apple’s board of directors), and Google CEO Eric Schmidt. 
 Bloomberg caught the mistake and pulled the obituary within minutes, but in 
today’s instant information culture, the damage was already done. 33 
 While Jobs was very much alive in 2008, few stockholders may have gone into 
cardiac arrest after reading the obituary. What kind of financial impact could a 
story like this have on Apple? With so many different forms of collaboration, how 
does a company monitor and track each one to ensure the content is error-free? 
Once erroneous content is posted to the Internet or written in a text message, 
what can a company do to rectify the situation? What types of safeguards can a 
company implement to ensure false information is not posted to a wiki or blog?  
 When Did Steve 
Jobs Actually 
Pass Away? 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 

119
Business Driven MIS Module 1
 Information Vandalism 
 Open source and sharing are both major advantages of Business 2.0, and ironically they 
are major challenges as well. Allowing anyone to edit anything opens the door for indi-
viduals to purposely damage, destroy, or vandalize website content. One of the most 
famous examples of wiki vandalism occurred when a false biography entry read that 
John Seigenthaler Sr. was assistant to Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy in the early 
1960s and was thought to have been directly involved in the assassinations of both Ken-
nedy and his brother, President John F. Kennedy. Seigenthaler did work as an assistant to 
Robert Kennedy, but he was never involved in the assassinations. Wiki vandalism is a hot 
issue and for this reason wiki software can now store all versions of a web page, track-
ing updates and changes and ensuring the site can be restored to its original form if the 
site is vandalized. It can also color-code the background ensuring the user understands 
which areas have been validated and which areas have not. The real trick to wiki soft-
ware is to determine which statements are true and which are false, a huge issue when 
considering how easy and frequently wiki software is updated and changed. 35 
 Violations of Copyright and Plagiarism 
 Online collaboration makes plagiarism as easy as clicking a mouse. Unfortunately a great 
deal of copyrighted material tends to find its ways to blogs and wikis where many times 
blame cannot be traced to a single person. Clearly stated copyright and plagiarism policies 
are a must for all corporate blogs and wikis. These topics are discussed in detail in Chapter 4.   
 WEB 3.0: DEFINING THE NEXT GENERATION 
OF ONLINE BUSINESS OPPORTUNITIES  
 While Web 1.0 refers to static text-based information websites and Web 2.0 is about user-
contributed content, Web 3.0 is based on “intelligent” web applications using natural lan-
guage processing, machine-based learning and reasoning, and intelligent applications. 
Web 3.0 is the next step in the evolution of the Internet and web applications. Business 
leaders who explore its opportunities will be the first to market with competitive 
advantages. 
 Web 3.0 offers a way for people to describe information such that computers can start 
to understand the relationships among concepts and topics. To demonstrate the power 
of Web 3.0, let’s look at a few sample relationships, such as Adam Sandler is a come-
dian, Lady Gaga is a singer, and Hannah is friends with Sophie. These are all examples 
of descriptions that can be added to web pages allowing computers to learn about rela-
tionships while displaying the information to humans. With this kind of information in 
place, there will be a far richer interaction between people and machines with Web 3.0. 
 Applying this type of advanced relationship knowledge to a company can create new 
opportunities. After all, businesses run on information. Where Web 2.0 brings peo-
ple closer together with information using machines, Web 3.0 brings  machines closer 
together using  information.  These new relationships unite people, machines, and infor-
mation so a business can be smarter, quicker, more agile, and more successful.  
 LO 3.10:  Describe Web 3.0 and the 
next generation of online business. 
 FIGURE 3.24 
 Challenges of Business 2.0 
Technology Dependence
Information Vandalism
Violations of Copyright
and Plagiarism

120
Chapter 3 Ebusiness: Electronic Business Value 
 One goal of Web 3.0 is to tailor online searches and requests specifically to users’ pref-
erences and needs. For example, instead of making multiple searches, the user might 
type a complex sentence or two in a Web 3.0 browser, such as “I want to see a funny 
movie and then eat at a good Mexican restaurant. What are my options?” The Web 3.0 
browser will analyze the request, search the web for all possible answers, organize the 
results, and present them to the user. 
 Tim Berners-Lee, one of the founders of the Internet, has described the   semantic 
web   as a component of Web 3.0 that describes things in a way that computers can 
understand. The semantic web is not about links between web pages; rather it 
describes the relationships between  things  (such as A is a part of B and Y is a  member 
of Z) and the properties of things (size, weight, age, price). If information about 
music, cars, concert tickets, and so on is stored in a way that describes the informa-
tion and associated resource files, semantic web applications can collect information 
from many different sources, combine it, and present it to users in a meaningful way. 
Although Web 3.0 is still a bit speculative, some topics and features are certain to be 
included in it, such as: 36 
 ■ Integration of legacy devices: the ability to use current devices such as iPhones, lap-
tops, and so on, as credit cards, tickets, and reservations tools. 
 ■ Intelligent applications: the use of agents, machine learning, and semantic web con-
cepts to complete intelligent tasks for users.  
 ■ Open ID: the provision of an online identity that can be easily carried to a variety of 
devices (cell phones, PCs) allowing for easy authentication across different websites. 
 ■ Open technologies: the design of websites and other software so they can be easily 
integrated and work together. 
 ■ A worldwide database: the ability for databases to be distributed and accessed from 
anywhere. 
 Egovernment: The Government Moves Online 
 Recent business models that have arisen to enable organizations to take advantage of 
the Internet and create value are within egovernment.   Egovernment   involves the use 
of strategies and technologies to transform government(s) by improving the delivery of 
services and enhancing the quality of interaction between the citizen-consumer within 
all branches of government. 
 One example of an egovernment portal,  FirstGov.gov , the official U.S. gateway to 
all government information, is the catalyst for a growing electronic government. Its 
 BUSINESS DRIVEN DISCUSSION 
 When you are considering connectivity services for your business, you need to 
take continuous access and connectivity seriously. What if one of your employ-
ees is about to close a huge multimillion-dollar deal and loses the Internet 
connection, jeopardizing the deal? What if a disgruntled employee decides to 
post your business’s collective intelligence on an open-source blog or wiki? 
What if your patient scheduling software crashes and you have no idea which 
patients are scheduled to which operating rooms with which doctors? These 
are far worse scenarios than a teenage boy not gaining access to his email or 
Facebook page. What management and technical challenges do you foresee as 
people and businesses become increasingly dependent on connectivity? What 
can managers do to meet these challenges and prevent problems? 
 Connectivity 
Break-Down 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 

121
Business Driven MIS Module 1
powerful search engine and ever-growing collection of topical and customer-focused 
links connect users to millions of web pages, from the federal government, to local and 
tribal governments, to foreign nations around the world.  Figure 3.25  highlights specific 
egovernment models. 
 Mbusiness: Supporting Anywhere Business 
 Internet-enabled mobile devices are quickly outnumbering personal computers.   Mobile 
business   (or   mbusiness, mcommerce  ) is the ability to purchase goods and services through 
a wireless Internet-enabled device. The emerging technology behind mbusiness is a mobile 
device equipped with a web-ready micro-browser that can perform the following services:
 ■ Mobile entertainment—downloads for music, videos, games, voting, ring tones, as 
well as text-based messaging services.  
 ■ Mobile sales/marketing—advertising, campaigns, discounts, promotions, and coupons.  
 ■ Mobile banking—manage accounts, pay bills, receive alerts, and transfer funds.  
 ■ Mobile ticketing—purchase tickets for entertainment, transportation, and parking 
including the ability to automatically feed parking meters. 
 ■ Mobile payments—pay for goods and services including in-store purchases, home 
delivery, vending machines, taxis, gas, and so on.    
 Organizations face changes more extensive and far reaching in their implications 
than anything since the modern industrial revolution occurred in the early 1900s. Tech-
nology is a primary force driving these changes. Organizations that want to survive must 
recognize the immense power of technology, carry out required organizational changes 
in the face of it, and learn to operate in an entirely different way. 
 FIGURE 3.25 
 Extended Ebusiness Models 
Business
Business
Consumer
Consumer
B2B
conisint.com
C2B
priceline.com
B2C
dell.com
C2C
ebay.com
Government
G2B
export.gov
G2C
medicare.gov
Government
B2G
lockheedmartin.com
C2G
egov.com
G2G
disasterhelp.gov
 Learning Outcome 3.1: Compare disruptive and sustaining technologies, and explain how 
the Internet and WWW caused business disruption. 
 Disruptive technologies offer a new way of doing things that initially does not meet the needs of 
existing customers. Disruptive technologies redefine the competitive playing fields of their respective 
 L E A R N I N G  O U T C O M E  R E V I E W 

122
Chapter 3 Ebusiness: Electronic Business Value 
markets, open new markets and destroy old ones, and cut into the low end of the marketplace and 
eventually evolve to displace high-end competitors and their reigning technologies. 
 Sustaining technologies produce improved products customers are eager to buy, such as a faster 
car or larger hard drive. Sustaining technologies tend to provide us with better, faster, and cheaper 
products in established markets and virtually never lead in markets opened by new and disruptive 
technologies. 
 The Internet and WWW caused business disruption by allowing people to communicate and 
collaborate in ways that were not possible before the information age. The Internet and WWW 
completely disrupted the way businesses operate, employees communicate, and products are 
developed and sold.  
 Learning Outcome 3.2: Describe ebusiness and its associated advantages. 
 Web 1.0 is a term to refer to the World Wide Web during its first few years of operation between 1991 
and 2003. Ebusiness includes ecommerce along with all activities related to internal and external 
business operations such as servicing customer accounts, collaborating with partners, and exchang-
ing real-time information. During Web 1.0, entrepreneurs began creating the first forms of ebusiness. 
Ebusiness advantages include expanding global reach, opening new markets, reducing costs, and 
improving operations and effectiveness. 
 Learning Outcome 3.3: Compare the four ebusiness models. 
 ■ Business-to-business (B2B) applies to businesses buying from and selling to each other over the 
Internet. 
 ■ Business-to-consumer (B2C) applies to any business that sells its products or services to con-
sumers over the Internet. 
 ■ Consumer-to-business (C2B) applies to any consumer that sells a product or service to a busi-
ness over the Internet. 
 ■ Consumer-to-consumer (C2C) applies to sites primarily offering goods and services to assist con-
sumers interacting with each other over the Internet. 
 The primary difference between B2B and B2C are the customers; B2B customers are other busi-
nesses while B2C markets to consumers. Overall, B2B relations are more complex and have higher 
security needs; plus B2B is the dominant ebusiness force, representing 80 percent of all online 
business.  
 Learning Outcome 3.4: Describe the six ebusiness tools for connecting 
and communicating. 
 As firms began to move online, more MIS tools were created to support ebusiness processes and 
requirements. The ebusiness tools used to connect and communicate include email, instant messag-
ing, podcasting, content management systems, videoconferencing, and web conferencing. 
 Learning Outcome 3.5: Identify the four challenges associated with ebusiness. 
 Although the benefits of ebusiness are enticing, developing, deploying, and managing ebusiness 
systems is not always easy. The challenges associated with ebusiness include identifying limited 
market segments, managing consumer trust, ensuring consumer protection, and adhering to taxa-
tion rules.  
 Learning Outcome 3.6: Explain Web 2.0, and identify its four characteristics. 
 Web 2.0, or Business 2.0, is the next generation of Internet use—a more mature, distinctive 
communications platform characterized by new qualities such as collaboration, sharing, and free. 
Web 2.0 encourages user participation and the formation of communities that contribute to the 
content. In Web 2.0, technical skills are no longer required to use and publish information to 

123
Business Driven MIS Module 1
the World Wide Web, eliminating entry barriers for online business. The four characteristics of 
Web 2.0 include:
 ■ Content sharing through open sourcing. 
 ■ User-contributed content. 
 ■ Collaboration inside the organization. 
 ■ Collaboration outside the organization. 
 Learning Outcome 3.7: Explain how Business 2.0 is helping communities network 
and collaborate. 
 A social network is an application that connects people by matching profile information. Providing 
individuals with the ability to network is by far one of the greatest advantages of Business 2.0. Social 
networking is the practice of expanding your business and/or social contacts by constructing a per-
sonal network. Business 2.0 simplifies the way individuals communicate, network, find employment, 
and search for information. 
 Learning Outcome 3.8: Describe the three Business 2.0 tools for collaborating. 
 The three tools that harness the “power of the people” for Business 2.0 include blogs, wikis, and 
mashups. A blog, or web log, is an online journal that allows users to post their own comments, 
graphics, and video. Blog websites let writers communicate—and reader’s respond—on a regular 
basis through a simple yet customizable interface that does not require any programming. A wiki is 
a type of collaborative web page that allows users to add, remove, and change content, which can 
be easily organized and reorganized as required. While blogs have largely drawn on the creative and 
personal goals of individual authors, wikis are based on open collaboration with any and everybody. 
A mashup is a website or web application that uses content from more than one source to create 
a completely new product or service. A mashup allows users to mix map data, photos, video, news 
feeds, blog entries, and so on to create content with a new purpose. 
 Learning Outcome 3.9: Explain the three challenges associated with Business 2.0. 
 As much as Business 2.0 has positively changed the global landscape of business, a few challenges 
remain in open source software, user-contributed content systems, and collaboration systems. These 
challenges include individuals forming unrealistic dependencies on technology, vandalism of informa-
tion on blogs and wikis, and the violation of copyrights and plagiarism. 
 Learning Outcome 3.10: Describe Web 3.0 and the next generation of online business. 
 Web 3.0 is based on “intelligent” web applications using natural language processing, machine-
based learning and reasoning, and intelligent applications. Web 3.0 is the next step in the evolution of 
the Internet and web applications. Business leaders who explore its opportunities will be the first to 
market with competitive advantages. 
 Web 3.0 offers a way for people to describe information such that computers can start to under-
stand the relationships among concepts and topics. 
 1. Knowledge: Do you consider Pinterest a form of disruptive or sustaining technology? 
 2. Comprehension: Categorize Pinterest as an example of Web 1.0 (ebusiness) or Web 2.0 
(Business 2.0).  
 3. Application: Describe the ebusiness model and revenue model for Pinterest. 
 4. Analysis: What is open source software and how could Pinterest take advantage of it? 
 O P E N I N G  C A S E  Q U E S T I O N S 

124
Chapter 3 Ebusiness: Electronic Business Value 
 5. Synthesis: Create a plan for how a start-up company could take advantage of Web 3.0 and gen-
erate the idea for the next great website that is similar to Pinterest. 
 6. Evaluation: Evaluate the challenges facing Pinterest and identify ways the company can prepare 
to face these issues. 
 Applet, 96 
 Application programming interface 
(API), 117 
 Asynchronous communication, 113 
 Blog, or Web log, 116 
 Business model, 101 
 Business-to-business (B2B), 102 
 Business-to-consumer (B2C), 102 
 Clickstream data, 101 
 Collaboration system, 111 
 Collective intelligence, 111 
 Consumer-to-business (C2B), 103 
 Consumer-to-consumer (C2C), 103 
 Content management system 
(CMS), 108  
 Crowdsourcing, 112 
 Cybermediation, 100 
 Digital Darwinism, 94 
 Disintermediation, 99 
 Disruptive technology, 94 
 Domain name hosting (web 
hosting), 96 
 Dot-com, 102 
 Ebusiness, 96 
 Ebusiness model, 101 
 Ecommerce, 96 
 Egovernment, 120 
 Eshop (estore or etailer), 102 
 Explicit knowledge, 112 
 Folksonomy, 114 
 Hypertext markup language 
(HTML), 96 
 Hypertext transport protocol 
(HTTP), 96 
 Information architecture, 108 
 Information reach, 98 
 Information richness, 98 
 Instant messaging (sometimes 
called IM or IMing), 106 
 Interactivity, 100 
 Intermediaries, 99 
 Internet, 95 
  Internet service provider (ISP), 106  
 Knowledge management (KM), 111 
 Knowledge management system 
(KMS), 111 
 Long tail, 98 
 Mashup, 117 
 Mashup editor, 117 
 Mass customization, 98 
 Microblogging, 117 
 Mobile business (mcommerce, 
mbusiness), 121 
 Network effect, 117 
 Open source, 111 
 Open system, 111 
 Paradigm shift, 96 
 Pay-per-call, 105 
 Pay-per-click, 105 
 Pay-per-conversion, 105 
 Personalization, 98 
 Podcasting, 107 
  Real Simple Syndication (RSS), 117  
 Real-time communication, 106 
 Reintermediation, 100 
 Reputation system, 111 
 Search engine, 105 
 Search engine optimization 
(SEO), 105 
 Search engine ranking, 105 
 Semantic web, 120 
 Social bookmarking, 114 
 Social media, 113 
 Social network, 113 
 Social networking, 113 
 Social networking analysis 
(SNA), 113 
 Social tagging, 114 
 Source code, 111 
 Sustaining technology, 94 
 Synchronous communication, 113 
 Tacit knowledge, 112 
 Tags, 114 
 Taxonomy, 108 
  Universal resource locator (URL), 96  
 User-contributed content (also 
referred to as user-generated 
content), 111 
 Videoconference, 107 
 Web 1.0 (or Business 1.0), 96 
 Web 2.0 (or Business 2.0), 109 
 Web browser, 96 
 Web conferencing (webinar), 109 
 Website bookmark, 114 
 Wiki, 117 
 World Wide Web (WWW), 96 
 K E Y  T E R M S 
 1. What is the different between sustaining and disruptive technology? 
 2. Do you consider the Internet and WWW forms of sustaining or disruptive technology? 
 3. How has the Internet and WWW created a global platform for business? 
 4. What is the difference between ebusiness and ecommerce? 
 5. What are the benefits and challenges associated with ebusiness? 
 6. What are the benefits and challenges associated with Business 2.0? 
 7. Explain business models and their role in a company. How did ebusiness change traditional busi-
ness models? 
 R E V I E W  Q U E S T I O N S 

125
Business Driven MIS Module 1
  8. How can a company use mass customization and personalization to decrease buyer power? 
  9. How does ebusiness differ from Business 2.0? 
 10. What are the differences among collective intelligence, knowledge management, and 
crowdsourcing? 
 11. Why is knowledge management critical to a business? 
 12. What are the benefits and challenges associated with wikis? 
 13. How do disintermediation, reintermediation, and cybermediation differ? 
 14. What is the semantic web? 
 15. How does mbusiness different from ebusiness? 
 C L O S I N G  C A S E  O N E 
 Social Media and Ashton Kutcher 
  Where celebrities go, fans follow. The truism applies as much in social media as in the real world, 
David Karp noticed after famous artists began using his blogging service Tumblr. As a result, encour-
aging celebrities to set up accounts on the site has become “absolutely part of our road map and our 
business plan,” Karp says. In fact, he recently hired a full-time employee to help high-profile users 
design and manage their blogs. 
 It’s no secret that well-recognized players in a host of fields—from acting to athletics, music to 
politics—are using social media sites to connect with fans and promote their brands. Celebrities 
used to seek out promotion “in  People  magazine or  Vogue,”  says Robert Passikoff, president of Brand 
Keys, a researcher that tracks the value of celebrity brands. “It’s now become a necessity to have a 
Facebook page.” 
 But the benefits go both ways. Sites benefit greatly from the online cavalcade of stars. Oprah 
Winfrey’s debut on microblogging service Twitter sent visits to the site skyrocketing 43 percent over 
the previous week, according to analytics firm Hitwise. Facebook, Google’s YouTube, Ning, and other 
Web 2.0 destinations have also seen swarms of activity around the profile pages of their famous 
members. And like Tumblr, social sites are going out of their way to keep the celebrities happy and 
coming back.  
 Obama on MySpace, Facebook, and Twitter 
  The Obama administration created profile pages on MySpace, Facebook, and Twitter. To accommodate 
1600 Pennsylvania Avenue, News Corp.’s MySpace agreed to build ad-free pages and equipped the 
profile to get automatic updates from the White House’s official blog. In some cases social networks 
give VIPs a heads-up on changes. Facebook worked with the handlers of select celebrity members 
to get feedback on the new design of the site before it was opened to the public. “We don’t have a 
formalized support program for public figures, but we do offer some support,” says Facebook spokes-
woman Brandee Barker. 
 Some privileged members of Facebook have also been assigned “vanity URLs,” or short, simple, 
personalized web addresses such as  www.facebook.com/KatieCouric . Elsewhere the perks of fame 
are offered up more casually. Twitter co-founder Biz Stone credits high-profile users like actor Ashton 
Kutcher and basketball professional Shaquille O’Neal for bringing attention to the site of 140-character 
messages but says the company doesn’t reserve any “special resources” for them. “Sometimes celeb-
rities who love Twitter stop by and say hello,” Stone says. “It’s usually just a quiet tour and a lunchtime 
chat but it’s really fun for us.”  

126
Chapter 3 Ebusiness: Electronic Business Value 
 John Legend Taps Tumblr 
  In addition to their promotional value, social networking celebrities represent a potential revenue 
source for these young start-ups. Tumblr helped musician John Legend design a professional-looking 
blog that matches the look of his promotional site, created by Sony Music Entertainment. Tumblr’s 
Karp says he took that project on at no charge—in part to bring in Legend’s fans but also to explore 
whether it makes sense to offer similar services at a cost. “For people who want the reach on our 
network, who want to be able to take advantage of our platform, at some point this does turn into a 
premium service,” he says. 
 Ning already collects monthly fees from some of its users, many of whom are celebrities. The site 
is free for anyone who wants to build their own social network but charges as much as $55 a month 
to users who prefer to keep their pages clear of ads or who want to collect revenue generated by ads 
on their pages. Although the service is not exclusive to stars, many of the most successful networks 
on Ning draw on the fame of their operators, including hip-hop artists 50 Cent and Q-Tip, rock band 
Good Charlotte, and Ultimate Fighting Championship titleholder BJ Penn. “The next generation of 
celebrities and social networks is in much richer and deeper collaborations [with fans] than what you 
see today on the more general social networks out there,” says Ning CEO Gina Bianchini. 
 Many big names in business, including Dell CEO Michael Dell, use professional networking site 
LinkedIn more as a business tool than to amass legions of followers. Whatever their reasons for being 
on the site, LinkedIn uses the fact that executives from all of the 500 biggest companies are among 
its members to encourage other businesspeople to join the site, too. 37 
 Questions 
 1. Do you consider Facebook, MySpace, and LinkedIn forms of disruptive or sustaining technology? 
 2. Create a list of the online businesses discussed in the case and determine if they are examples of 
Web 1.0 (ebusiness) or Web 2.0 (Business 2.0). 
 3. Describe the ebusiness model and revenue model for Linked In, MySpace, or Facebook. 
 4. What is open source software and can a business use it for a social networking platforms? 
 5. Create a plan for how a start-up company could take advantage of Web 3.0 and generate the idea 
for the next great website. 
 6. Evaluate the challenges facing social networking websites and identify ways companies can pre-
pare to face these issues. 
 Amazon.com—Not Your Average Bookstore 
  Jeffrey Bezos, CEO and founder of Amazon.com, is running what some people refer to as the “world’s 
biggest bookstore.” The story of Bezos’ virtual bookstore teaches many lessons about online busi-
ness. Out of nowhere, this digital bookstore turned an industry upside down. What happened here 
was more than just creating a website. Bezos conceived and implemented an intelligent, global digital 
business. Its business is its technology; its technology is its business. Shocking traditional value 
chains in the bookselling industry, Amazon opened thousands of virtual bookstores in its first few 
months of operation. 
 Bezos graduated from Princeton and was the youngest vice president at Banker’s Trust in New 
York. He had to decide if he would stay and receive his 1994 Wall Street bonus or leave and start 
a business on the Internet. “I tried to imagine being 80 years old, looking back on my life. I knew 
that I would hardly regret having missed the 1994 Wall Street bonus. But having missed being part 
of the Internet boom—that would have really hurt,” stated Bezos. One evening he compiled a list 
 C L O S I N G  C A S E  T W O 

127
Business Driven MIS Module 1
of 20 products he believed would sell on the Internet. Books, being small-ticket items that are easy 
and inexpensive to ship, were on the top of the list. It was also apparent that no bookstore could 
conceivably stock more than a fraction of the 5 million books published annually. Bezos, who had 
never sold a book in his life, developed a strategic plan for selling books on the Internet. Amazon 
launched three years later. In the fall of 1994, Amazon filled its first book order—personally pack-
aged by Bezos and his wife.  
 Amazon’s Ebusiness Strategy 
  Amazon is a pure-play business and does not operate any physical stores. All of its sales occur 
through its website. It is consistently pushing the technological envelope in its search to provide a 
satisfying, personalized experience for its customers. What started as a human-edited list of product 
suggestions morphed into a sophisticated computer-generated recommendation engine. The com-
pany captures the comments and recommendations of buyers for site visitors to read—similar to the 
friendly salesperson in a store offering advice on which books to buy. The website tracks customer 
traffic, the number of visitors who access the site, how long they stay, what pages they click on, and 
so forth. The company uses the information to evaluate buying and selling patterns and the success 
of promotions. Amazon has quickly become a model success story for ebusinesses around the globe. 
 Amazon retains customers with website features such as personalized recommendations, online 
customer reviews, and “1-click ordering”—the creation of a true one-stop shopping establishment 
where customers can find anything they want to buy online. Through the Amazon.com Auctions, 
zShops (independent third-party sellers), and more recently the Amazon.com Marketplace (where 
customers can sell used items), the company is able to offer its customers almost everything. 
 Shaping Amazon’s Future 
  Amazon released a free web service that enables its business partners (whom Amazon calls “associ-
ates”) to interact with its website. More specifically, this service allows its partners to access catalog 
data, to create and populate an Amazon.com shopping cart, and even to initiate the checkout process. 
In 16 months, the company has inspired 30,000 associates to invent new ways to extend Amazon’s 
visibility on the Internet. With over 30 million customers, Amazon has become a household brand. 
Amazon is always looking for new ways to take advantage of ebusiness. Here are a few of its creations:
 ■  Amazon S3:  Amazon launched an online storage service called Amazon Simple Storage Service 
(Amazon S3). Any type of data, from 1 byte to 5 gigabytes in size, can be stored on the service and 
the customer is charged monthly fees for data stored and transferred. 
 ■  Amazon MP3:  The online music store sells downloadable MP3s. Amazon MP3 is selling music 
from the top four record labels—EMI, Universal, Warner Music, and Sony BMG—as well as many 
independents. 
 ■  Vine:  Amazon launched Amazon Vine, which rewards top product reviewers by providing them 
with free access to products from vendors participating in the program. 
 ■  Kindle: Amazon launched Amazon Kindle, an ebook reader that downloads content over 
“Whispernet,” a free wireless service on the Sprint Nextel network. Initial offerings included 
approximately 90,000 books, newspapers, magazines, and blogs. The screen uses E Ink technol-
ogy to reduce battery consumption.  
 Mobile Amazon 
   Amazon.com  has collaborated with Nokia to pioneer a new territory. With the launch of its  Amazon.
com  Any-where service, it has become one of the first major online retailers to recognize and do 
something about the potential of Internet-enabled wireless devices. As content delivery over wire-
less devices becomes faster, more secure, and scalable, mcommerce will surpass landline ebusiness 
(traditional telephony) as the method of choice for digital commerce transactions. According to the 
research firm Strategy Analytics, the global mcommerce market was expected to be worth more than 
$200 billion by 2005, with some 350 million customers generating almost 14 billion transactions 

128
Chapter 3 Ebusiness: Electronic Business Value 
annually. Additionally, information activities such as email, news, and stock quotes will progress to 
personalized transactions, “one-click” travel reservations, online auctions, and videoconferencing. 38 
 Questions 
 1. How has Amazon used technology to revamp the bookselling industry? 
 2. Is Amazon using disruptive or sustaining technology to run its business? 
 3. How is Amazon using personalization to keep customers loyal? 
 4. What is Amazon’s ebusiness model? 
 5. How can Amazon use mbusiness to increase sales? 
 6. What are the Web 1.0 characteristics of Amazon.com? 
 7. What are the Web 2.0 characteristics of Amazon.com? 
 8. How can Amazon.com use Web 3.0 to create the future bookstore? 
 1. Anything but Online 
 Your best friend, Susan Stewart, has started a highly successful custom T-shirt business from your dorm 
room. Susan is art major, and each week she creates a limited edition T-shirt focusing on the lyrics from 
up-and-coming indie bands. Being an MIS major, you see the advantages Susan could reap by porting 
her business to the Internet. Susan, being an art major, does not like technology and does not believe 
she needs it to grow her business. Do you agree or disagree that Susan needs to compete online? 
How can creating an ebusiness benefit Susan? What are the challenges Susan will face as she moves 
her business to the Internet? How could Susan use Web 2.0 to build loyalty among her followers?  
 2. The Future of Wikipedia 
 Wikipedia is a multilingual, web-based, free-content encyclopedia project written collaboratively 
by volunteers around the world. Since its creation in 2001, it has grown rapidly into one of the 
largest reference websites. Some people believe Wikipedia will eventually fail under an assault 
by marketers and self-promoting users. Eric Goldman, a professor at the Santa Clara University 
School of Law, argues that Wikipedia will see increasingly vigorous efforts to subvert its editorial 
process, including the use of automated marketing tools to alter Wikipedia entries to generate 
online traffic. The site’s editors will burn out trying to maintain it, he projects, or Wikipedia will 
change its open-access architecture and its mission. Do you agree or disagree with Professor 
Goldman’s argument? What can Wikipedia do to combat the challenges of information vandalism 
and copyright/plagiarism issues? 39 
 3. Is Facebook Becoming the Whole World’s Social Network? 
 Facebook’s growth, which we already know is massive, is truly a global phenomenon. Nations 
with the fastest membership growth rate are in South America and Asia. Is Facebook becoming 
the global phone book? If you review InsideFacebook.com, you’ll find a detailed analysis of the 
numerical growth rate of members per nation and the penetration Facebook is achieving among 
each nation’s population. Particularly interesting was the monthly growth rate for Indonesia, the 
Philippines, Mexico, Argentina, and Malaysia—each of which showed about a 10 percent jump in 
Facebook membership in a single month. In a group answer the following: 40 
 
■ What potential business opportunities could be created by a worldwide social media network 
or phone book? 
 
■ Facebook, which contains personal data on each member, is becoming the world’s phone 
book. What are the implications of a world phone book for social change? 
 C R I T I C A L  B U S I N E S S  T H I N K I N G 

129
Business Driven MIS Module 1
 
■ What do you think would be the benefits and challenges of global social networking? 
 
■ How would tags and crowdsourcing be impacted by a global social network? 
 4. The Toughest College Test You’ll Ever Take 
 If your professor asked you today to kick your social networking habits, do you think you could do 
it? Can you go without Facebook, cell phones, or the Internet for a week? For a day? A University of 
Minnesota professor challenged her public relations class to go five days without media or gadgets 
that didn’t exist before 1984. Out of the 43 students in the class, just a handful made it even three 
days without new technology. Among those who didn’t, one student said, “My mother thought I 
died.” How long could you go without any social media? What types of issues might you encounter 
without constant connections to your friends? How has social media impacted society? How has 
social media impacted businesses? 41 
 5. Competing with the Big Boys 
 Provenzo’s Rentals is a small privately owned business that rents sports equipment in Denver, 
Colorado. The company specializes in winter rentals including ski, snowboard, and snowmobile 
equipment. Provenzo’s has been in business for 20 years and, for the first time, it is experiencing 
a decline in rentals. Greg Provenzo, the company’s owner, is puzzled by the recent decreases. 
The snowfall for the past two years has been outstanding, and the ski resorts have opened earlier 
and closed later than most previous years. Reports say tourism in the Colorado area is up, and 
the invention of loyalty programs has significantly increased the number of local skiers. Overall, 
business should be booming. The only reason for the decrease in sales might be the fact that big 
retailers such as Walmart and Gart’s Sports are now renting winter sports equipment. Provenzo 
would like your team’s help in determining how he can use ebusiness and Business 2.0 to help his 
company increase sales, decrease costs, and compete with these big retailers. 
 6. Book’em 
 You are the CIO of Book’em, a company that creates and sells custom book bags. Book’em cur-
rently holds 28 percent of market share with over 3,000 employees operating in six countries. 
You have just finished reading  The Long Tail  by Chris Andersen and  The Innovator’s Dilemma by 
Clayton Christensen, and you are interested in determining how you can grow your business while 
reducing costs. Summarize each book and explain how Book’em could implement the strategies 
explained in each book to create competitive advantages and increase sales. 
 7. Five Ways Google Docs Speeds Up Collaboration 
 Google Docs wants you to skip Microsoft Office and collaborate with your group in your browser 
for free, especially when you’re not in the same physical space. Visit Google Docs and answer the 
following questions. 
 
■ What are five ways the new Google Docs can help your team accomplish work more efficiently, 
even when you’re not in the same room together.  
 
■ Is Google Docs open source software? What revenue model is Google Docs following? 
 
■ Why would putting Google Docs and Microsoft Office on your résumé help differentiate your 
skills?  
 
■ What other applications does Google create that you are interested in learning to help collaborate 
and communicate with peers and co-workers?  
 8. Secure Collaboration 
 As the methods and modes of communication continue to evolve, challenges will mount for busi-
nesses trying to secure their data and for law enforcement agencies looking to monitor communi-
cations as part of their investigations. That was the theme of the keynote that Sun Microsystems 
chief security officer and renowned cryptographer Whitfield Diffie delivered at the AT&T Cyber 
Security Conference. 

130
Chapter 3 Ebusiness: Electronic Business Value 
 E N T R E P R E N E U R I A L  C H A L L E N G E 
 BUILD YOUR OWN BUSINESS 
 1. To build a sense of community, you have provided a mechanism on your business website where 
customers can communicate and post feedback. You review the communication daily to help 
understand customer issues and concerns. You log in and find the following anonymous posting: 
“I do not recommend visiting this business on Thursdays at 2:00 p.m. because the Children’s 
Story Hour is taking place. I hate children, especially in a business. I’m not sure why this busi-
ness encourages people to bring their children. In fact, I recommend that children should be 
banned from this business altogether.” How would you respond to the above post? Is the cus-
tomer’s viewpoint ethical? How do you encourage an open line of communication with your cus-
tomers and still maintain an open forum on your website? 
 Diffie believes that with millions of people joining Second Life and companies building facili-
ties there, it may be that virtual communities will become the preferred communication method 
for humans as virtual communities become a growing source of collective intelligence that can 
be easily watched and monitored. 42 
 Who would be interested in monitoring and spying on the collective intelligence of virtual 
communities? What is your answer to the following question: As we create new and better ways 
to collaborate, what happens to information security? 
 9.  City Council Member Fired for Playing Farmville Game at Work 
   More than 80 million Facebook users are obsessed with Farmville, and one of the more 
devoted players is Bulgaria’s Plovidv City Council member Dimitar Kerin. During council meet-
ings, Kerin would take advantage of the city hall’s laptops and wireless connection to tend 
to his farm. This caught the attention of the council chair, who many times scolded Kerin for 
his virtual farming, warning him that the game was not allowed during meetings. Kerin kept 
on, arguing that he had to catch up with other council members, who achieved higher levels 
on the game. Kerin pointed out logically that many other members used city hall for their 
Farmville pleasures, and he cited the fact that one councilman had reached level 46, whereas 
Kerin was stuck at level 40. Shockingly, council members voted Kerin off the board in a split 
20–19 decision, suggesting that perhaps half the council members in Bulgaria’s second-
largest city are committed to the Facebook application. Do you agree with the firing of Dimitar 
Kerin? Do you agree that it is inappropriate to use social networking applications at work? 
If Dimitar Kerin was fired for playing Farmville, should all other council members who use 
social networking applications at work be fired? Have you ever been reprimanded for playing 
a game while at school or at work? What could you do differently to ensure this situation does 
not happen to you? 43   
 10.  48 Hour Magazine 
   That sound you hear, of thousands of writers, designers, and photographers banging their 
heads against the wall to the beat of a ticking clock? That’s the sound of  48 Hour Magazine, 
an innovative publication that aims to go from inspiration to execution in 48 hours and 
begins . . . now.  48 Hour  is available to the eager public as a real, printed magazine and as 
a website too. What are the limitations of “old media”? How are the editors of the  48 Hour 
Magazine  using Web 2.0 to overcome these limitations? What are the advantages and disad-
vantages of  48 Hour Magazine’s  model? What type of revenue model would you recommend 
 48 Hour Magazine  implement? If you had $50,000 would you invest in the  48 Hour Magazine? 
Why or why not? 44   

131
Business Driven MIS Module 1
 2. Your business needs to take advantage of ebusiness and Business 2.0 strategies if it wants to remain 
competitive. Detail how your business could use Web 1.0 and Web 2.0 to increase sales and decrease 
costs. Be sure to focus on the different areas of business such as marketing, finance, accounting, 
sales, customer service, and human resources. You would like to build a collaboration tool for all of 
your customers and events. Answer the questions below as they pertain to your business.
 
■ What type of collaboration tool would you build? 
 
■ How could you use the tool to facilitate planning, product development, product testing, feed-
back, and so on. 
 
■ What additional benefits could a customer collaboration tool provide that could help you run 
your business? 
 3. The Yankee Group reports that 66 percent of companies determine website success solely by 
measuring the amount of traffic. Unfortunately, large amounts of website traffic do not necessar-
ily indicate large sales. Many websites with lots of traffic have minimal sales. The best way to 
measure a website’s success is to measure such things as the revenue generated by web traffic, 
the number of new customers acquired by web traffic, any reductions in customer service calls 
resulting from web traffic. As you deploy your Business 2.0 strategy, you want to build a website 
that creates stickiness and a sense of community for your customers. Explain why measuring 
web traffic is not a good indicator of web sales or website success. How would you implement 
Business 2.0 characteristics to create a sense of community for your customers? How could a 
wiki help grow your business? Could you use blogs to create a marketing buzz? What else can 
you do to ensure your website finds financial success? 45 
 PROJECT I 
Analyzing Websites 
 Stars Inc. is a large clothing corporation that specializes in reselling clothes worn by celebrities. The 
company’s four websites generate 75 percent of its sales. The remaining 25 percent of sales occur 
directly through the company’s warehouse. You have recently been hired as the director of sales. The 
only information you can find about the success of the four websites follows: 
 You decide that maintaining four separate websites is expensive and adds little business value. You 
want to propose consolidating to one site. Create a report detailing the business value gained by con-
solidating to a single website, along with your recommendation for consolidation. Be sure to include 
your website profitability analysis. Assume that at a minimum 10 percent of hits result in a sale, at an 
average 30 percent of hits result in a sale, and at a maximum 60 percent of hits result in a sale.  
 A P P LY  Y O U R  K N O W L E D G E  B U S I N E S S  P R O J E C T S 
Website
Classic
Contemporary
New Age
Traditional
Traffic analysis
5,000 hits/day
200 hits/day
10,000 hits/day
1,000 hits/day
Stickiness (average)
20 minutes
1 hour
20 minutes
50 minutes
Number of abandoned 
shopping carts
400/day
0/day
5,000/day
200/day
Number of unique visitors
2,000/day
100/day
8,000/day
200/day
Number of identified 
visitors
3,000/day
100/day
2,000/day
800/day
Average revenue 
per sale
$1,000
$ 1,000
$50
$1,300

132
Chapter 3 Ebusiness: Electronic Business Value 
 PROJECT II 
Wiki Your Way 
 Wikis are web-based tools that make it easy for users to add, remove, and change online content. 
Employees at companies such as Intel, Motorola, IBM, and Sony use them for a host of tasks, from 
setting internal meeting agendas to posting documents related to new products. 
 Many companies rely on wikis to engage customers in ongoing discussions about products. Wikis 
for Motorola and T-Mobile handsets serve as continually updated user guides. TV networks, including 
ABC and CBS, created fan wikis that let viewers interact with each other as they unraveled mysteries 
from such shows as  Lost  and  CSI: Crime Scene Investigation.  You would like to implement wikis at 
your new company, The Consulting Edge, a small computer consulting company catering to mid- and 
large-sized businesses. Answer the following questions:
 ■ How can a wiki help you attract customers and grow your business? 
 ■ How can a wiki help your partners and employees? 
 ■ What ethical and security concerns would you have with the wiki? 
 ■ What could you do to minimize these concerns? 
 PROJECT III 
Blogging for Dollars 
 You have purchased a financial investment company, The Financial Level, that caters to individuals 
and families. You would like to develop a few blogs for your customers, employees, and partners. The 
goals for your customer blog are to gather honest feedback, provide a place for customers to interact, 
and help find new opportunities for your businesses. The goals for the employee blog are to gather 
knowledge, collect employment feedback, and offer a place where employees can post anonymous 
feedback for issues and concerns so you can better manage your staff. 
 
a. Research the Internet and find several customer blogs and employee blogs.  
   
b. Determine the top three blogs for customers and for employees, and critique the blogs for 
content, ease of use, and overall value.  
   
c. Design a prototype customer blog and a prototype employee blog for The Financial Level using 
Word, PowerPoint, or a tool of your choice.    
 PROJECT IV 
14th Annual Webby Awards Nominees 
 Who needs the Academy Awards when you can witness the Webby Awards? The Webby Awards 
are the leading international awards honoring excellence in interactive design, creativity, usability, 
and functionality on the Internet. With nearly 70 categories, website entries make up the major-
ity of Webby winners, nominees, and honorees. Some are beautiful to look at and interact with. 
Others are a testament to usability and functionality. And a handful excel across the board. To 
be selected among the best is an incredible achievement worthy of praise and perhaps a little 
bragging. 46  
 Visit the latest edition of the Webby Awards at  www.webbyawards.com and answer the following 
questions:
 ■ Which nominations were the most surprising? 
 ■ Which nominations were you unfamiliar with but will now use? 
 ■ Were there any examples of Web 1.0 winners? 
 ■ Were there any examples of Web 3.0 winners? 
 ■ List the top five websites you think deserve to win a Webby. 

133
Business Driven MIS Module 1
 PROJECT V 
Creating a Podcast 
 Podcasting is a form of audio broadcasting on the Internet. The reason it became linked with the iPod 
in name was because people download podcasts (audio shows) to listen to on their iPods. However, 
you don’t have to listen to podcasts only on iPods; you can use your computer with some music 
software such as Windows built-in Media Player or Winamp, or other portable music players (iPod 
competitors) such as Creative Zen or iRiver. As long as you have some way to play music on your 
computer, you will be able to listen to podcasts. 
    
a. Download Audacity from  audacity.sourceforge.net . It is open source, is cross-platform, is free, 
and lets you mix multiple audio files. Windows, Mac OS, and Linux/Unix versions are available. 
You will also have to download the LAME MP3 encoder, which allows Audacity to export MP3 
files. You will see the download link for that on the same page as the Audacity download. Once 
you download the LAME MP3 encoder, place it in the Audacity program folder (C:Program\
Files\Audacity\Plug-Ins\). Then, open a .WAV file in Audacity, and select the menu option “File” 
then choose “Export As MP3.” When you do, you will see this message: At this Point, browse 
to where you placed the “ lame_enc.dll ” file (such as C:Program\Files\Audacity\Plug-Ins). Click 
on the “ lame_enc.dll ” file. Once finished, you can now effectively use the Export As MP3 menu 
option to create MP3 files.  
   
b. Open Audacity and check the preferences. Make sure your playback and recording device are 
set. If you are going to record a stereo signal, set the number of channels to record to 2 (Stereo) 
on the Audio I/O preferences. When picking a device to record from, make sure you have set up 
all the connections properly, such as plugging a microphone into the Mic Input, and any other 
device into the Line In of your sound card.  
   
c. Click on the red “Record” button to begin recording. You can also click on the blue “Pause” 
button to pause the recording. Press it again to continue. Click on the yellow “Stop” button 
to cease recording. The cursor will return to its previous position, before the recording was 
started. 
   
d. MP3 is the standard format for podcasts. When saving, use the minimum bit rate that provides 
good results. Here are some suggested settings:
 
■ 48–56k Mono—sermons, audio books, talk radio. 
 
■ 64k Stereo—music, music and talk combinations. 
 
■ 128k Stereo—good-quality music. 
   
e. Create a two-to-three-minute podcast that you can share with your class about a success-
ful Business 2.0 entrepreneurial company. A few examples include Digg.com, karmaloop.
com, Foursquare.com, Flickr.com. Figure out what will be said (or not said) during the 
show. There are almost no limits to what content can be included in podcasts. Podcasting 
allows you to create shows, dramatizations, vignettes, commentaries, documentaries, and 
any other content imaginable. However, you need to script out your content before you start 
to record.  
 PROJECT VI 
Photo Story 3—Creating a Video Résumé 
 Microsoft Photo Story 3 for Windows helps create exciting video stories from pictures. For example, 
you could create a video story that features narrated photographs from a family vacation or a video 
story that includes pictures and sounds of an athletic race or game. In a few simple steps, you can 
import and edit your pictures, add titles, record narration, add background music, and save your story 
using the optimal quality settings (profile) for the way your story will be played. 

134
Chapter 3 Ebusiness: Electronic Business Value 
 Download Photo Story 3 from  www.microsoft.com/windowsxp/using/digitalphotography/photostory/
default.mspx . Review the requirements section to make sure your computer is able to run this 
application. Click the “Continue” button in the Validation Required section to begin the short valida-
tion process. Once validated, you will be sent to a page with specific instructions for obtaining the 
download. 
 When you run Photo Story 3, with the view to making a new project, the first option is to select 
“Begin a new story.” After clicking this option, your first task is to “import” pictures. You can import 
pictures from your computer, a network folder, or a website. For each story, you can import up to 300 
pictures, which can be files with .bmp, .dib, .eps, .gif, .jhif, .jpe, .jpeg, .jpg, .pcd, .pcx, .png, .psd, .rle, 
.tga, and .tif file name extensions. 
 Your pictures appear in the filmstrip at the bottom of the page. If you import more pictures, 
Microsoft Photo Story 3 adds them at the end of the filmstrip. 
 By clicking on a series of buttons or options, you can remove black borders, add titles to your pic-
ture, add narration and custom motion, and add background music to your story. 
 Develop a 30-second professional commercial. This is a short description of who you are, what 
job you are looking for, and the skills that make you suited for the job. Building a quality 30-second 
commercial can be tougher than it sounds. The goal is to be able to contact a stranger and let him or 
her know who you are, what your skills are, and why you are approaching the person. Create a list of 
words describing your skills and interests. Begin broadly and then narrow your list to skills related to 
your current job search. 
 PROJECT VII 
Sticky Wiki 
 Wiki (Hawaiian for “quick”) is software that allows users to freely create and edit web page content 
using any web browser. The most common wiki is Wikipedia. Wikis offer a powerful yet flexible col-
laborative communication tool for developing websites. The best part of a wiki is that it grows and 
evolves by the collaborative community adding content—the owner of the wiki does not have to add 
all of the content as is typical in a standard web page. 
 Many sites offer free wiki software such as Socialtext, a group-editable website. As one of the 
first wiki companies, Socialtext wikis are designed for anyone that wants to accelerate team com-
munications, better enable knowledge sharing, foster collaboration, and build online communities. 
Socialtext also offers WikiWidgets, which make it easy for nontechnical business users to create rich, 
dynamic wiki content. Today, more than 3,000 organizations use Socialtext, including Symantec, 
Nokia, IKEA, Conde Nast, Ziff-Davis, Kodak, University of Southern California, Boston College, and 
numerous others. 
 Create your own wiki. Wikis can address a variety of needs from student involvement, fraternities 
and sororities, group activities, sport team updates, local band highlights, and so on. Choose a free 
wiki software vendor from the list below and create a wiki for something you are involved in or excited 
about and want to share with others. This could include a student organization, fraternity or sorority, 
academic organization, favorite author, book, movie, band, musician, or sports team. 
 ■  www.socialtext.com —easy-to-use, business-grade wikis proven by  Fortune 500 companies. 
 ■  www.wetpaint.com —a free easy-to-use wiki building site. 
 ■  www.CentralDesktop.com —Easy-to-use, a wiki for non-techies. 
 ■  www.xwiki.com —Open source and free hosting with professional services. 
 If you have different wiki software you prefer, feel free to use it to create your wiki. 

135
Business Driven MIS Module 1
 AY K  A P P L I C AT I O N  P R O J E C T S 
 If you are looking for Excel projects to incorporate into your class, try any of the following after reading 
this chapter. 
Project 
Number
Project 
Name
Project 
Type
Plug-In 
Focus Area
Project Focus
Project 
Skill Set
Page 
Number
1
Financial 
Destiny
Excel
T2
Personal 
Budget
Introductory 
Formulas
AYK.4
2
Cash Flow
Excel
T2
Cash Flow
Introductory 
Formulas
AYK.4
3
Technology 
Budget
Excel
T1, T2
Hardware and 
Software
Introductory 
Formulas
AYK.4
4
Tracking 
Donations
Excel
T2
Employee 
Relationships
Introductory 
Formulas
AYK.4
5
Convert 
Currency
Excel
T2
Global 
Commerce
Introductory 
Formulas
AYK.5
6
Cost 
Comparison
Excel
T2
Total Cost of 
Ownership
Introductory 
Formulas
AYK.5
7
Time 
Management
Excel or 
Project
T2 or T12
Project 
Management
Introductory 
Gantt Charts
AYK.6
8
Maximize 
Profit
Excel
T2, T4
Strategic 
Analysis
Intermediate 
Formulas or 
Solver
AYK.6
9
Security 
Analysis
Excel
T3
Filtering Data
Intermediate 
Conditional 
Formatting, 
Autofilter, 
Subtotal
AYK.7
10
Gathering 
Data
Excel
T3
Data Analysis
Intermediate 
Conditional 
Formatting, 
PivotTable
AYK.8
11
Scanner 
System
Excel
T2
Strategic 
Analysis
Intermediate
AYK.8
12
Competitive 
Pricing
Excel
T2
Profit 
Maximization
Intermediate
AYK.9
13
Adequate 
Acquisitions
Excel
T2
Break-Even 
Analysis
Intermediate
AYK.9
24
Electronic 
Resumes
HTML
T9, T10, T11
Electronic 
Personal 
Marketing
Introductory 
Structural Tags
AYK.16
25
Gathering 
Feedback
Dreamweaver
T9, T10, T11
Data Collection
Intermediate 
Organization of 
Information
AYK.16

 What’s in IT for me? 
 This chapter concerns itself with protecting information from potential misuse. Organizations must ensure they collect, 
capture, store, and use information in an ethical manner. This means any type of information they collect and utilize, includ-
ing about customers, partners, and employees. Companies must ensure that personal information collected about someone 
remains private. This is not just a nice thing to do. The law requires it. Perhaps more important, information must be kept 
physically secure to prevent access and possible dissemination and use by unauthorized sources. 
 You, the business student, must understand ethics and security because they are the top concerns voiced by custom-
ers today. The way they are handled directly influences a customer’s likelihood of embracing electronic technologies and 
conducting business over the web–and thus the company’s bottom line. You can find evidence in recent news reports about 
how the stock price of organizations falls dramatically when information privacy and security breaches are made known. 
Further, organizations face potential litigation if they fail to meet their ethical, privacy, and security obligations in the handling 
of information. 
 ■  I n f o r m a t i o n  E t h i c s  
 ■  D e v e l o p i n g  I n f o r m ati o n 
M a n a g e m e n t  P o l i c ies  
 SECTION 4.2   
 Information Security 
 SECTION 4.1   
 Ethics 
 ■  P ro t e c t i n g  I n t e l l e c t u a l  A s s e t s  
 ■  T h e  F i r s t  L i n e  o f 
D e f e n s e — P e o p l e  
 ■  T h e  S e c o n d  L i n e  o f 
D e f e n s e — Te c h n o l o g y   
 C H A P T E R 
 C H A P T E R  O U T L I N E 
 Ethics and Information Security: 
MIS Business Concerns 
 4 

137
Business Driven MIS Module 1
 opening case study 
 To Share—Or Not to Share  
 People love social networks! Social networks are everywhere and a perfect way to share 
vacation photos, family events, and birthday parties with family, friends, and co-workers. 
About 40 percent of adults use at least one social media website, and 51 percent of those 
use more than one website. The majority of users are between the ages of 18 and 24. The 
Pew Research Center found that 89 percent of social network users primarily use the web-
sites to update friends and family, while 57 percent use the websites to make plans with 
friends, and 49 percent use the websites to make new friends. 
 Facebook, MySpace, LinkedIn, Friendster, Urban Chat, and Black Planet are just a few 
of more than 100 websites connecting people around the world who are eager to share 
everything from photos to thoughts and feelings. But we need to remember that sometimes 
you can share too much; there can be too much information. Choosing who you share with 
and what you share is something you want to think about for your personal social networks 
and corporate social networks. According to Pew Research, more than 40 percent of users 
allow open access to their social networking profiles, which allows anyone from anywhere 
to view all of their personal information. The remaining 60 percent restrict access to friends, 
family, and co-workers. The following are the top 10 things you should consider before 
posting information to your social networks. 
 1: If You Don’t Want to Share It – Don’t Post It 
  You can select all the privacy settings you want on social networking sites, but the fact is, 
if you post it, it has the potential to be seen by someone you don’t want seeing it. You know 
all those fun Facebook applications, quizzes, and polls you can’t help but fill out? A study 
performed by the University of Virginia found that of the top 150 applications on Facebook, 
90 percent were given access to information they didn’t need in order for the application 
to function. So when you sign up to find out what sitcom star you most identify with, the 
makers of that poll now have access to your personal information. It’s anybody’s guess 
where it goes from there. Social networking is all about sharing, so something you think is 
in confidence can easily be shared and then shared again, and before you know it, someone 
you don’t even know has access to something private. “When in doubt, leave it out” is a 
good motto to follow. And always remember that anything you share has the potential to be 
leaked in some way. 
 2: Never Give Out Your Password Hints 
  Most websites that contain secure personal information require a password and also have 
at least one password hint in case you forget. It typically goes like this: You sign up for 
something such as online banking and you get a log-in and password and then choose 

138
Chapter 4 Ethics and Information Security: MIS Business Concerns
a security question for when you forget your password. What’s the name of your first 
pet? What’s your mother’s maiden name? What was your high school mascot? What’s the 
name of the first street you lived on? Including any of these details on a Facebook wall 
or status update may not seem like a big deal, but it could provide an identity thief with 
the last piece of the puzzle needed to hack into your bank account. Think before you post 
anything that could compromise this information.  
 3: Never Give Out Your Password 
  This one really seems like a no-brainer, but if it didn’t happen, then Facebook probably 
wouldn’t feel the need to list it in the No. 1 slot on its list of things you shouldn’t share. 
Even sharing the password with a friend so he or she can log on and check something for 
you can be a risk. This is especially true with couples who feel like there’s enough trust to 
share these kinds of things. Here’s another scenario for you: You give your boyfriend your 
Facebook password because he wants to help you upload some vacation photos. A couple 
of months later, the relationship sours, he turns into a not-so-nice guy, and then there’s a 
person out there who doesn’t like you and has your log-in information. Time to cancel your 
account and get a new one. If you’d kept that information private, you could simply move on 
with your life. Now you have a compromised profile, and if you link to other sites or profiles, 
all that information is at risk as well. Keep your password to yourself, no matter what, and 
you never have to worry about it. 
 4: Never Provide Personal Financial Information 
  You would think that nobody would share things like where they do their banking or what 
their stock portfolio looks like, but it happens. It’s easy for an innocent Facebook comment 
to reveal too much about your personal finances. Consider this scenario: You’re posting to 
a long thread on a friend’s wall about the bank crisis. You say something along the lines of, 
“We don’t need to worry because we bank with a teacher’s credit union,” or even, “We put all 
our money into blue chip stocks and plan to ride it out.” Again, if you’re one of the 40 percent 
who allow open access to your profile, then suddenly identity thieves know where you bank 
and where you have the bulk of your investments. It’s easy to forget that what may seem 
like a harmless comment on a Facebook wall could reveal a great deal about your personal 
finances. It’s best to avoid that kind of talk.  
 5: Never Give Out Your Address or Phone Numbers 
  File this one under security risk. If you share your address and phone number on a social 
networking site, you open yourself up to threats of identity theft and other personal dangers 
such as burglaries. If you post that you’re going on vacation and you have your address 
posted, then everyone knows you have an empty house. Identity thieves could pay a visit 
to your mailbox and open up a credit card in your name. Burglars could rid your home of 
anything of value. Even just posting your phone number gives people with Internet savvy 
easy access to your address. Reverse lookup services can supply anyone with your home 
address in possession of your phone number. 

139
Business Driven MIS Module 1
 6: Never Share Photos of Your Children 
  Social networking sites are a common place for people to share pictures of their families, 
but if you’re one of the 40 percent of users who don’t restrict access to your profile, then 
those pictures are there for everyone to see. It’s a sad fact, but a lot of predators use the 
Internet to stalk their prey. If you post pictures of your family and combine that with infor-
mation like, “My husband is out of town this weekend” or “Little Johnny is old enough to 
stay at home by himself now,” then your children’s safety could be at risk. Nobody ever 
thinks it will happen to them until it does, so safety first is a good default mode when using 
social networking sites. Just like with other private matters, send family photos only to a 
select group of trusted friends and colleagues who you know won’t share them. 
 7: Never Provide Company Information 
  You may be dying to tell the world about your new work promotion, but if it’s news that 
could be advantageous to one of your company’s competitors, then it’s not something you 
should share. News of a planned expansion or a big project role and anything else about 
your workplace should be kept private. Sophos, a security software company, found that 63 
percent of companies were afraid of what their employees were choosing to share on social 
networking sites. If you want to message it out, be selective and send private emails. Many 
companies are so serious about not being included in social networking sites that they for-
bid employees from using sites like Facebook at work. Some IT departments even filter the 
URLs and block access to these sites so employees aren’t tempted to log on. 
 8: Never Give Links to Websites 
  With 51 percent of social network users taking advantage of more than one site, there’s 
bound to be some crossover, especially if you have the sites linked. You may post some-
thing you find innocuous on Facebook, but then it’s linked to your LinkedIn work profile 
and you’ve put your job at risk. If you link your various profiles, be aware that what you 
post in one world is available to the others. In 2009, a case of an employee caught lying on 
Facebook hit the news. The employee asked off for a weekend shift because he was ill and 
then posted pictures on his Facebook profile of himself at a party that same weekend. The 
news got back to his employer easily enough and he was fired. So if you choose to link your 
profiles, it’s no longer a “personal life” and “work life” scenario. 
 9: Keep Your Social Plans to Yourself 
  Sharing your social plans for everybody to see isn’t a good idea. Unless you’re planning a big 
party and inviting all the users you’re connected to, it will only make your other friends feel 
left out. There are also some security issues at stake here. Imagine a scenario where a jeal-
ous ex-boyfriend knows that you’re meeting a new date out that night. What’s to keep the ex 
from showing up and causing a scene or even potentially getting upset or violent? Nothing. 
If you’re planning a party or an outing with a group of friends, send a personal “e-vite” for 
their eyes only and nobody is the wiser. If you’re trying to cast a wide net by throwing out an 
idea for a social outing, just remember that anyone who has access to your profile sees it.  

140
Chapter 4 Ethics and Information Security: MIS Business Concerns
 10. Do Not Share Personal Conversations 
  On Facebook, users can send personal messages or post notes, images, or videos to 
another user’s wall. The wall is there for all to see, while messages are between the sender 
and the receiver, just like an email. Personal and private matters should never be shared 
on your wall. You wouldn’t go around with a bullhorn announcing a private issue to the 
world, and the same thing goes on the Internet. This falls under the nebulous world of 
social networking etiquette. There is no official handbook for this sort of thing, but use your 
best judgment. If it’s not something you’d feel comfortable sharing in person with extended 
family, acquaintances, work colleagues, or strangers, then you shouldn’t share it on your 
Facebook wall. 1        

141
Business Driven MIS Module 1
  section 4.1 
Ethics 
 LE AR NI NG  O UT CO M E S 
 4.1 Explain the ethical issues in the use of information technology. 
 4.2 Identify the six epolicies organizations should implement to protect themselves. 
 INFORMATION ETHICS  
 Ethics and security are two fundamental building blocks for all organizations. In recent 
years, enormous business scandals along with 9/11 have shed new light on the meaning 
of ethics and security. When the behavior of a few individuals can destroy billion-dollar 
organizations, the value of ethics and security should be evident. 
  Copyright   is the legal protection afforded an expression of an idea, such as a song, 
book, or video game.   Intellectual property   is intangible creative work that is embod-
ied in physical form and includes copyrights, trademarks, and patents. A   patent   is an 
exclusive right to make, use, and sell an invention and is granted by a government to 
the inventor. As it becomes easier for people to copy everything from words and data to 
music and video, the ethical issues surrounding copyright infringement and the viola-
tion of intellectual property rights are consuming the ebusiness world. Technology poses 
new challenges for our   ethics  — the principles and standards that guide our behavior 
toward other people. 
 The protection of customers’ privacy is one of the largest, and murkiest, ethical issues 
facing organizations today.   Privacy   is the right to be left alone when you want to be, 
to have control over your personal possessions, and not to be observed without your 
consent. Privacy is related to   confidentiality,   which is the assurance that messages and 
information remain available only to those authorized to view them. Each time employ-
ees make a decision about a privacy issue, the outcome could sink the company. 
 Trust among companies, customers, partners, and suppliers is the support structure 
of ebusiness. Privacy is one of its main ingredients. Consumers’ concerns that their pri-
vacy will be violated because of their interactions on the web continue to be one of the 
primary barriers to the growth of ebusiness. 
  Information ethics   govern the ethical and moral issues arising from the development 
and use of information technologies, as well as the creation, collection, duplication, distri-
bution, and processing of information itself (with or without the aid of computer technolo-
gies). Ethical dilemmas in this area usually arise not as simple, clear-cut situations but as 
clashes among competing goals, responsibilities, and loyalties. Inevitably, there will be more 
than one socially acceptable or “correct” decision. The two primary areas concerning soft-
ware include pirated software and counterfeit software.   Pirated software   is the unauthor-
ized use, duplication, distribution, or sale of copyrighted software.   Counterfeit software   
 is software that is manufactured to look like the real thing and sold as such.   Digital rights 
management   is a technological solution that allows publishers to control their digital 
media to discourage, limit, or prevent illegal copying and distribution.  Figure 4.1  contains 
examples of ethically questionable or unacceptable uses of information technology. 2   
 LO 4.1:  Explain the ethical issues in 
the use of information technology. 
 FIGURE 4.1 
 Ethically Questionable or 
Unacceptable Information 
Technology Use 
 Individuals copy, use, and distribute software. 
 Employees search organizational databases for sensitive corporate and personal information. 
 Organizations collect, buy, and use information without checking the validity or accuracy of the information. 
 Individuals create and spread viruses that cause trouble for those using and maintaining IT systems. 
 Individuals hack into computer systems to steal proprietary information. 
 Employees destroy or steal proprietary organization information such as schematics, sketches, customer 
lists, and reports. 

 BUSINESS DRIVEN DISCUSSION 
 A high school principal decided it was a good idea to hold a confidential con-
versation about teachers, salaries, and student test scores on his cellular phone 
in a local Starbucks. Not realizing that one of the student’s parents was sitting 
next to him, the principal accidentally divulged sensitive information about his 
employees and students. The irate parent soon notified the school board about 
the principal’s inappropriate behavior and a committee was formed to decide 
how to handle the situation. 3 
 With the new wave of collaboration tools, electronic business, and the 
Internet, employees are finding themselves working outside the office and 
beyond traditional office hours. Advantages associated with remote workers 
include increased productivity, decreased expenses, and boosts in morale as 
employees are given greater flexibility to choose their work location and hours. 
Unfortunately, disadvantages associated with remote workers include new 
forms of ethical challenges and information security risks. 
 In a group, discuss the following statement: Information does not have any 
ethics. If you were elected to the committee to investigate the principal’s inap-
propriate Starbucks phone conversation, what types of questions would you 
want answered? What type of punishment, if any, would you enforce on the 
principal? What types of policies would you implement across the school dis-
trict to ensure this scenario is never repeated? Be sure to highlight how remote 
workers impact business along with any potential ethical challenges and infor-
mation security issues. 
 Information—
Does It Have 
Ethics? 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 
142
Chapter 4 Ethics and Information Security: MIS Business Concerns
 Unfortunately, few hard and fast rules exist for always determining what is ethical. 
Many people can either justify or condemn the actions in  Figure 4.1 , for example. Know-
ing the law is important but that knowledge will not always help, because what is legal 
might not always be ethical, and what might be ethical is not always legal. For example, 
Joe Reidenberg received an offer for AT&T cell phone service. AT&T used Equifax, a 
credit reporting agency, to identify potential customers such as Joe Reidenberg. Over-
all, this seemed like a good business opportunity between Equifax and AT&T wireless. 
Unfortunately, the Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA) forbids repurposing credit informa-
tion except when the information is used for “a firm offer of credit or insurance.” In other 
words, the only product that can be sold based on credit information is credit. A repre-
sentative for Equifax stated, “As long as AT&T Wireless (or any company for that matter) 
is offering the cell phone service on a credit basis, such as allowing the use of the service 
before the consumer has to pay, it is in compliance with the FCRA.” However, the ques-
tion remains—is it ethical? 4 
  Figure 4.2  shows the four quadrants where ethical and legal behaviors intersect. The 
goal for most businesses is to make decisions within quadrant I that are both legal and 
ethical. There are times when a business will find itself in the position of making a deci-
sion in quadrant III, such as hiring child labor in foreign countries, or in quadrant II 
where a business might pay a foreigner who is in the process of getting her immigration 
status approved because the company is in the process of hiring the person. A business 
should never find itself operating in quadrant IV. Ethics are critical to operating a suc-
cessful business today.   

 FIGURE 4.2 
 Acting Ethically and Acting 
Legally Are Not Always the 
Same Thing 
UNETHICAL
ETHICAL
LEGAL
ILLEGAL
Quadrant III
Legal but Unethical
Quadrant IV
Illegal and Unethical
Quadrant I
Legal and Ethical
Quadrant II
Illegal but Ethical
 BUSINESS DRIVEN ETHICS AND SECURITY 
 Ethics. It’s just one tiny word, but it has monumental impact on every area of 
business. From the magazines, blogs, and newspapers you read to the courses 
you take, you will encounter ethics as it is a hot topic in today’s electronic world. 
Technology has provided so many incredible opportunities, but it has also pro-
vided those same opportunities to unethical people. Discuss the ethical issues 
surrounding each of the following situations (yes, these are true stories):
 ■ A student raises her hand in class and states, “I can legally copy any DVD I 
get from Netflix because Netflix purchased the DVD and the copyright only 
applies to the company who purchased the product.”  
 ■ A student stands up the first day of class before the professor arrives and 
announces that his fraternity scans textbooks and he has the textbook for 
this course on his thumb drive, which he will gladly sell for $20. Several 
students pay on the spot and upload the scanned textbook to their PCs. One 
student takes down the student information and contacts the publisher 
about the incident.  
 ■ A senior marketing manager is asked to monitor his employee’s email 
because there is a rumor that the employee is looking for another job. 
 ■ A vice president of sales asks her employee to burn all of the customer data 
onto an external hard drive because she made a deal to provide customer 
information to a strategic partner. 
 ■ A senior manager is asked to monitor his employee’s email to discover if she 
is sexually harassing another employee. 
 ■ An employee is looking at the shared network drive and discovers his boss’s 
entire hard drive, including his email backup, has been copied to the net-
work and is visible to all. 
 ■ An employee is accidently copied on an email listing the targets for the next 
round of layoffs. 
 Is IT Really 
Worth the Risk? 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 
143
Business Driven MIS Module 1

 
 Established Information-Related Laws 
 Privacy Act—1974 
 Restricts what information the federal government can collect; allows people to access and correct infor-
mation on themselves; requires procedures to protect the security of personal information; and forbids 
the disclosure of name-linked information without permission. 
 Family Education Rights and 
Privacy Act—1974 
 Regulates access to personal education records by government agencies and other third parties and 
ensures the right of students to see their own records. 
 Cable Communications Act—1984 
 Requires written or electronic consent from viewers before cable TV providers can release viewing 
choices or other personally identifiable information. 
 Electronic Communications 
Privacy Act—1986 
 Allows the reading of communications by a firm and says that employees have no right to privacy when 
using their companies’ computers. 
 Computer Fraud and Abuse 
Act—1986  
 Prohibits unauthorized access to computers used for financial institutions, the U.S. government, or inter-
state and international trade. 
 The Bork Bill (officially known as the 
Video Privacy Protection Act, 1988) 
 Prohibits the use of video rental information on customers for any purpose other than that of marketing 
goods and services directly to the customer. 
 Communications Assistance for Law 
Enforcement Act—1994 
 Requires that telecommunications equipment be designed so that authorized government agents are able 
to intercept all wired and wireless communications being sent or received by any subscriber. The act also 
requires that subscriber call-identifying information be transmitted to a government when and if required. 
 Freedom of Information Act—1967, 
1975, 1994, and 1998 
 Allows any person to examine government records unless it would cause an invasion of privacy. It was 
amended in 1974 to apply to the FBI, and again in 1994 to allow citizens to monitor government activities 
and information gathering, and once again in 1998 to access government information on the Internet. 
 Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act (HIPAA)—1996 
 Requires that the health care industry formulate and implement regulations to keep patient information 
confidential. 
 Identity Theft and Assumption 
Deterrence Act—1998 
 Strengthened the criminal laws governing identity theft making it a federal crime to use or transfer identi-
fication belonging to another. It also established a central federal service for victims. 
 USA Patriot Act—2001 and 2003 
 Allows law enforcement to get access to almost any information, including library records, video rentals, 
bookstore purchases, and business records when investigating any act of terrorist or clandestine intel-
ligence activities. In 2003, Patriot II broadened the original law. 
 Homeland Security Act—2002 
 Provided new authority to government agencies to mine data on individuals and groups including emails 
and website visits; put limits on the information available under the Freedom of Information Act; and gave 
new powers to government agencies to declare national health emergencies. 
 Sarbanes-Oxley Act—2002 
 Sought to protect investors by improving the accuracy and reliability of corporate disclosures and requires 
companies to (1) implement extensive and detailed policies to prevent illegal activity within the company, 
and (2) to respond in a timely manner to investigate illegal activity. 
 Fair and Accurate Credit 
Transactions Act—2003 
 Included provisions for the prevention of identity theft including consumers’ right to get a credit report 
free each year, requiring merchants to leave all but the last five digits of a credit card number off a 
receipt, and requiring lenders and credit agencies to take action even before a victim knows a crime has 
occurred when they notice any circumstances that might indicate identity theft. 
 CAN-Spam Act—2003 
 Sought to regulate interstate commerce by imposing limitations and penalties on businesses sending 
unsolicited email to consumers. The law forbids deceptive subject lines, headers, return addresses, etc., 
as well as the harvesting of email addresses from websites. It requires businesses that send spam to 
maintain a do-not-spam list and to include a postal mailing address in the message. 
144
Chapter 4 Ethics and Information Security: MIS Business Concerns
 Information Does Not Have Ethics, People Do 
 Information itself has no ethics. It does not care how it is used. It will not stop itself from 
spamming customers, sharing itself if it is sensitive or personal, or revealing details to 
third parties. Information cannot delete or preserve itself. Therefore, it falls to those who 
own the information to develop ethical guidelines about how to manage it.   Information 
management   examines the organizational resource of information and regulates its defini-
tions, uses, value, and distribution ensuring it has the types of data/information required 
to function and grow effectively.   Information governance   is a method or system of gov-
ernment for information management or control.   Information compliance   is the act of 
conforming, acquiescing, or yielding information.   Information property   is an ethical issue 
that focuses on who owns information about individuals and how information can be sold 
and exchanged. A few years ago the ideas of information management, governance, and 
 FIGURE 4.3 
 Established Information-
Related Laws  

145
Business Driven MIS Module 1
compliance were relatively obscure. Today, these concepts are a must for virtually every 
company, both domestic and global, primarily due to the role digital information plays 
in corporate legal proceedings or litigation. Frequently, digital information serves as key 
evidence in legal proceedings and it is far easier to search, organize, and filter than paper 
documents. Digital information is also extremely difficult to destroy, especially if it is on a 
corporate network or sent via email. In fact, the only reliable way to truly obliterate digital 
information is to destroy the hard drives where the file was stored.   Ediscovery   (or   electronic 
discovery  ) refers to the ability of a company to identify, search, gather, seize, or export digital 
information in responding to a litigation, audit, investigation, or information inquiry. As the 
importance of ediscovery grows, so does information governance and information compli-
ance. The   Child Online  Protection Act (COPA)   was passed to protect minors from access-
ing inappropriate material on the Internet.  Figure 4.3  provides an overview of some of the 
important laws individuals and firms must follow in managing and protecting information. 5
 DEVELOPING INFORMATION MANAGEMENT POLICIES  
 Treating sensitive corporate information as a valuable resource is good management. 
Building a corporate culture based on ethical principles that employees can understand 
and implement is responsible management. Organizations should develop written poli-
cies establishing employee guidelines, employee procedures, and organizational rules 
for information. These policies set employee expectations about the organization’s prac-
tices and standards and protect the organization from misuse of computer systems and 
IT resources. If an organization’s employees use computers at work, the organization 
should, at a minimum, implement epolicies.   Epolicies   are policies and procedures that 
address information management along with the ethical use of computers and the Inter-
net in the business environment.  Figure 4.4  displays the epolicies a firm should imple-
ment to set employee expectations. 
 Ethical Computer Use Policy 
 In a case that illustrates the perils of online betting, a leading Internet poker site reported 
that a hacker exploited a security flaw to gain an insurmountable edge in high-stakes, 
no-limit Texas hold-’em tournaments—the ability to see his opponents’ hole cards. The 
cheater, whose illegitimate winnings were estimated at between $400,000 and $700,000 
by one victim, was an employee of AbsolutePoker.com and hacked the system to show 
that it could be done. Regardless of what business a company operates—even one that 
many view as unethical—the company must protect itself from unethical employee 
behavior. 6   Cyberbulling   includes threats, negative remarks, or defamatory comments 
transmitted via the Internet or posted on the website. A threat is an act or object that 
poses a danger to assets.   Click-fraud   is the abuse of pay-per-click, pay-per-call, and pay-
per-conversion revenue models by repeatedly clicking on a link to increase charges or 
costs for the advertiser.   Competitive click-fraud  is a computer crime where a competi-
tor or disgruntled employee increases a company’s search advertising costs by repeat-
edly clicking on the advertiser’s link. 
 LO 4.2:  Identify the six epolicies 
organizations should implement to 
protect themselves. 
 FIGURE 4.4 
 Overview of Epolicies 
Ethical
Computer Use
Policy
Email Privacy
Policy
Social Media
Policy
Workplace
Monitoring
Policy
Information
Privacy Policy
Acceptable
Use Policy

146
Chapter 4 Ethics and Information Security: MIS Business Concerns
 Cyberbullying and click-fraud are just a few examples of the many types of unethical 
computer use found today. 
 One essential step in creating an ethical corporate culture is establishing an ethical 
computer use policy. An    ethical computer use policy    contains general principles to 
guide computer user behavior. For example, it might explicitly state that users should 
refrain from playing computer games during working hours. This policy ensures the 
users know how to behave at work and the organization has a published standard to deal 
with infractions. For example, after appropriate warnings, the company may terminate 
an employee who spends significant amounts of time playing computer games at work. 
 Organizations can legitimately vary in how they expect employees to use computers, 
but in any approach to controlling such use, the overriding principle should be informed 
consent. The users should be  informed  of the rules and, by agreeing to use the system on 
that basis,  consent to abide by them. 
 Managers should make a conscientious effort to ensure all users are aware of the pol-
icy through formal training and other means. If an organization were to have only one 
epolicy, it should be an ethical computer use policy because that is the starting point and 
the umbrella for any other policies the organization might establish. 
 Information Privacy Policy 
 An organization that wants to protect its information should develop an   information 
privacy policy,    which contains general principles regarding information privacy. Visa cre-
ated Inovant to handle all its information systems including its coveted customer informa-
tion, which details how people are spending their money, in which stores, on which days, 
and even at what time of day. Just imagine what a sales and marketing department could 
do if it gained access to this information. For this reason, Inovant bans the use of Visa’s 
customer information for anything outside its intended purpose—billing. Innovant’s pri-
vacy specialists developed a strict credit card information privacy policy, which it follows. 
 Now Inovant is being asked if it can guarantee that unethical use of credit card infor-
mation will never occur. In a large majority of cases, the unethical use of information 
happens not through the malicious scheming of a rogue marketer, but rather uninten-
tionally. For instance, information is collected and stored for some purpose, such as 
record keeping or billing. Then, a sales or marketing professional figures out another 
way to use it internally, share it with partners, or sell it to a trusted third party. The infor-
mation is “unintentionally” used for new purposes. The classic example of this type of 
unintentional information reuse is the Social Security number, which started simply as a 
way to identify government retirement benefits and then was used as a sort of universal 
personal ID, found on everything from drivers’ licenses to savings accounts.  
 Acceptable Use Policy 
 An    acceptable use policy (AUP)    requires a user to agree to follow it to be provided access 
to corporate email, information systems, and the Internet.   Nonrepudiation   is a contrac-
tual stipulation to ensure that ebusiness participants do not deny (repudiate) their online 
actions. A nonrepudiation clause is typically contained in an acceptable use policy. Many 
businesses and educational facilities require employees or students to sign an acceptable 
use policy before gaining network access. When signing up with an email provider, each 
customer is typically presented with an AUP, which states the user agrees to adhere to 
certain stipulations. Users agree to the following in a typical acceptable use policy:
 ■ Not using the service as part of violating any law. 
 ■ Not attempting to break the security of any computer network or user. 
 ■ Not posting commercial messages to groups without prior permission. 
 ■ Not performing any nonrepudiation. 
 Some organizations go so far as to create a unique information management policy focus-
ing solely on Internet use. An   Internet use policy   contains general principles to guide the 
proper use of the Internet. Because of the large amounts of computing resources that Inter-
net users can expend, it is essential that such use be legitimate. In addition, the Internet 
contains numerous materials that some believe are offensive, making regulation in the 

147
Business Driven MIS Module 1
workplace a requirement.   Cybervandalism   is the electronic defacing of an existing web-
site. Typosquatting is a problem that occurs when someone registers purposely misspelled 
variations of well-known domain names. These variants sometimes lure consumers who 
make typographical errors when entering a URL. Website name stealing is the theft of a 
website’s name that occurs when someone, posing as a site’s administrator, changes the 
ownership of the domain name assigned to the website to another website owner. These 
are all examples of unacceptable Internet use. Internet censorship is government attempts 
to control Internet traffic, thus preventing some material from being viewed by a country’s 
citizens. Generally, an Internet use policy:
 ■ Describes the Internet services available to users. 
 ■ Defines the organization’s position on the purpose of Internet access and what 
restrictions, if any, are placed on that access.  
 ■ Describes user responsibility for citing sources, properly handling offensive material, 
and protecting the organization’s good name. 
 ■ States the ramifications if the policy is violated. 
 Email Privacy Policy 
 An   email privacy policy   details the extent to which email messages may be read by oth-
ers. Email is so pervasive in organizations that it requires its own specific policy. Most 
working professionals use email as their preferred means of corporate communications. 
While email and instant messaging are common business communication tools, there 
are risks associated with using them. For instance, a sent email is stored on at least three 
or four computers (see  Figure 4.5 ). Simply deleting an email from one computer does 
not delete it from the others. Companies can mitigate many of the risks of using elec-
tronic messaging systems by implementing and adhering to an email privacy policy.  
 One major problem with email is the user’s expectations of privacy. To a large extent, 
this expectation is based on the false assumption that email privacy protection exists 
somehow analogous to that of U.S. first-class mail. Generally, the organization that owns 
the email system can operate the system as openly or as privately as it wishes. Surveys 
indicate that the majority of large firms regularly read and analyze employees’ email 
looking for confidential data leaks such as unannounced financial results or the sharing 
 BUSINESS DRIVEN GLOBALIZATION 
 The Google debate over operations in China is an excellent example of types 
of global ethical and security issues U.S. companies face as they expand opera-
tions around the world. Google’s systems were targeted by highly sophisticated 
hacker attacks aimed at obtaining proprietary information including personal 
data belonging to Chinese human rights activists who use Google’s Gmail ser-
vice. Google, which originally agreed to filter search results based on Chinese 
government censorship rules, decided to unfilter search results after what 
it called an infiltration of its technology and the email accounts of Chinese 
human-rights activists. China called Google’s plan to defy government censor-
ship rules unfriendly and irresponsible and demanded Google shut down all 
operations in China. 
 Why would China want to filer search results? Do you agree or disagree with 
China’s censorship rules? Do you think Google was acting ethically when it agreed 
to implement China’s censorship rules? Why do companies operating abroad 
need to be aware of the different ethical perspective found in other cultures? 7   
 Censoring Google 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 

148
Chapter 4 Ethics and Information Security: MIS Business Concerns
of trade secrets that result in the violation of an email privacy policy and eventual ter-
mination of the employee. That means that if the organization wants to read everyone’s 
email, it can do so. Basically, using work email for anything other than work is not a good 
idea. A typical email privacy policy:
 ■ Defines legitimate email users and explains what happens to accounts after a person 
leaves the organization. 
 ■ Explains backup procedure so users will know that at some point, even if a message 
is deleted from their computer, it is still stored by the company. 
 ■ Describes the legitimate grounds for reading email and the process required before 
such action is performed. 
 ■ Discourages sending junk email or spam to anyone who does not want to receive it. 
 ■ Prohibits attempting to mail bomb a site. A   mail bomb   sends a massive amount of 
email to a specific person or system that can cause that user’s server to stop functioning.  
 ■ Informs users that the organization has no control over email once it has been trans-
mitted outside the organization. 
  Spam   is unsolicited email. It plagues employees at all levels within an organization, 
from receptionist to CEO, and clogs email systems and siphons MIS resources away from 
legitimate business projects. An   anti-spam policy   simply states that email users will not 
send unsolicited emails (or spam). It is difficult to write anti-spam policies, laws, or soft-
ware because there is no such thing as a universal litmus test for spam. One person’s 
spam is another person’s newsletter. End users have to decide what spam is, because it 
can vary widely not just from one company to the next, but from one person to the next. A 
user can    opt out    of receiving emails by choosing to deny permission to incoming emails. 
  Teergrubing   is an antispamming approach where the receiving computer launches 
a return attack against the spammer, sending email messages back to the computer that 
originated the suspected spam. 
 Social Media Policy 
 Did you see the YouTube video showing two Domino’s Pizza employees violating health 
codes while preparing food by passing gas on sandwiches? Millions of people did and 
the company took notice when disgusted customers began posting negative comments 
all over Twitter. Not having a Twitter account, corporate executives at Domino’s did 
not know about the damaging tweets until it was too late. The use of social media can 
 FIGURE 4.5 
 Email Is Stored on Multiple 
Computers 
Sender’s
Computer
Sender’s Email
Provider’s Server
Recipient’s
Computer
Recipient’s Email
Provider’s Server
Email Message
Email Message
Email Message
Email Message

 BUSINESS DRIVEN MIS 
 The Canadian Broadcasting Company (CBC) has issued a social networking 
policy directing journalists to avoid adding sources or contacts as friends on 
social networking sites such as Facebook or LinkedIn. Basic rules state that 
reporters never allow one source to view what another source says and report-
ers want to ensure private conversations with sources remain private. Adding 
sources as “friends” can compromise a journalist’s work by allowing friends 
to view other friends in the network. It may also not be in a journalist’s best 
interest to become a “friend” in a source’s network. The CBC also discourages 
posting any political preferences in personal profiles, commenting on bulletin 
boards or people’s “Facebook wall.” 
 This might seem like common sense, but for employees who do not spend 
countless hours on the Internet, using social networking sites can be confusing 
and overwhelming. Why is it critical for any new hire to research and review all 
policies, especially social media policies? Research three companies you would 
like to work for upon graduation, and detail the types of social media policies 
that the company currently has or should implement. 9 
 Sources Are 
Not Friends 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 
149
Business Driven MIS Module 1
contribute many benefits to an organization, and implemented correctly it can become 
a huge opportunity for employees to build brands. But there are also tremendous risks as 
a few employees representing an entire company can cause tremendous brand damage. 
Defining a set of guidelines implemented in a social media policy can help mitigate that 
risk. Companies can protect themselves by implementing a   social media policy  outlin-
ing the corporate guidelines or principles governing employee online communications. 
Having a single social media policy might not be enough to ensure the company’s online 
reputation is protected. Additional, more specific, social media policies a company 
might choose to implement include: 8 
 ■ Employee online communication policy detailing brand communication.  
 ■ Employee blog and personal blog policies. 
 ■ Employee social network and personal social network policies. 
 ■ Employee Twitter, corporate Twitter, and personal Twitter policies. 
 ■ Employee LinkedIn policy. 
 ■ Employee Facebook usage and brand usage policy.  
 ■ Corporate YouTube policy. 
 Organizations must protect their online reputations and continuously monitor blogs, 
message boards, social networking sites, and media sharing sites. However, monitor-
ing the hundreds of different social media sites can quickly become overwhelming. To 
combat these issues, a number of companies specialize in online social media moni-
toring; for example, Trackur.com creates digital dashboards allowing executives to view 
at a glance the date published, source, title, and summary of every item tracked. The 
dashboard not only highlights what’s being said, but also the influence of the particular 
person, blog, or social media site. 
 Workplace Monitoring Policy 
 Increasingly, employee monitoring is not a choice; it is a risk-management obliga-
tion. Michael Soden, CEO of the Bank of Ireland, issued a mandate stating that com-
pany employees could not surf illicit websites with company equipment. Next, he hired 

150
Chapter 4 Ethics and Information Security: MIS Business Concerns
Hewlett-Packard to run the MIS department and illicit websites were discovered on 
Soden’s own computer, forcing Soden to resign. Monitoring employees is one of the big-
gest challenges CIOs face when developing information management policies. 10 
  Physical security   is tangible protection such as alarms, guards, fireproof doors, 
fences, and vaults. New technologies make it possible for employers to monitor many 
aspects of their employees’ jobs, especially on telephones, computer terminals, through 
electronic and voice mail, and when employees are using the Internet. Such monitor-
ing is virtually unregulated. Therefore, unless company policy specifically states other-
wise (and even this is not assured), your employer may listen, watch, and read most of 
your workplace communications.   Workplace MIS monitoring   tracks people’s activi-
ties by such measures as number of keystrokes, error rate, and number of transactions 
processed (see  Figure 4.6  for an overview). The best path for an organization planning 
to engage in employee monitoring is open communication including an   employee 
monitoring policy    stating explicitly how, when, and where the company monitors its 
employees. Several common stipulations an organization can follow when creating an 
employee monitoring policy include:
 ■ Be as specific as possible stating when and what (email, IM, Internet, network activ-
ity, etc.) will be monitored. 
 ■ Expressly communicate that the company reserves the right to monitor all 
employees. 
 ■ State the consequences of violating the policy. 
 ■ Always enforce the policy the same for everyone.     
 Many employees use their company’s high-speed Internet access to shop, browse, 
and surf the web. Most managers do not want their employees conducting personal 
business during working hours, and they implement a Big Brother approach to 
employee monitoring. Many management gurus advocate that organizations whose 
corporate cultures are based on trust are more successful than those whose corporate 
cultures are based on mistrust. Before an organization implements monitoring tech-
nology, it should ask itself, “What does this say about how we feel about our employ-
ees?” If the organization really does not trust its employees, then perhaps it should 
find new ones. If an organization does trust its employees, then it might want to treat 
them accordingly. An organization that follows its employees’ every keystroke might 
be unwittingly undermining the relationships with its employees, and it might find the 
effects of employee monitoring are often worse than lost productivity from employee 
web surfing.  
 FIGURE 4.6 
 Internet Monitoring Technologies 
 Common Internet Monitoring Technologies 
 Key logger, or 
key trapper, software 
 A program that records every keystroke and mouse click. 
 Hardware key logger 
 A hardware device that captures keystrokes on their journey from the keyboard 
to the motherboard. 
 Cookie 
 A small file deposited on a hard drive by a website containing information about 
customers and their web activities. Cookies allow websites to record the comings 
and goings of customers, usually without their knowledge or consent. 
 Adware  
 Software that generates ads that install themselves on a computer when a person 
downloads some other program from the Internet. 
 Spyware (sneakware 
or stealthware) 
 Software that comes hidden in free downloadable software and tracks online 
movements, mines the information stored on a computer, or uses a computer’s 
CPU and storage for some task the user knows nothing about. 
 Web log 
 Consists of one line of information for every visitor to a website and is usually 
stored on a web server. 
 Clickstream 
 Records information about a customer during a web surfing session such as 
what websites were visited, how long the visit was, what ads were viewed, and 
what was purchased. 

151
Business Driven MIS Module 1
 section 4.2 
Information Security 
 LE AR NI NG  O UT CO M E S 
 4.3 Describe the relationships and differences between hackers and viruses. 
 4.4 Describe the relationship between information security policies and an information security plan. 
 4.5 Provide an example of each of the three primary information security areas: (1) authentication and 
authorization, (2) prevention and resistance, and (3) detection and response. 
 PROTECTING INTELLECTUAL ASSETS  
 To accurately reflect the crucial interdependence between MIS and business processes, 
we should update the old business axiom “Time is money” to say “Uptime is money.” 
  Downtime   refers to a period of time when a system is unavailable. Unplanned downtime 
can strike at any time for any number of reasons, from tornadoes to sink overflows to net-
work failures to power outages (see  Figure 4.7 ). Although natural disasters may appear to 
be the most devastating causes of MIS outages, they are hardly the most frequent or most 
expensive.  Figure 4.8  demonstrates that the costs of downtime are not only associated 
 LO 4.3:  Describe the relationships 
and differences between hackers 
and viruses. 
 BUSINESS DRIVEN DEBATE 
 New technologies make it possible for employers to monitor many aspects of 
their employees’ jobs, especially on telephones, computer terminals, through 
electronic and voice mail, and when employees are using the Internet. Such 
monitoring is virtually unregulated. Therefore, unless company policy specifi-
cally states otherwise (and even this is not assured), your employer may listen, 
watch, and read most of your workplace communications. 
 Employers are taking monitoring activity a step further and monitoring 
employees, and employees’ spouses, at home and on weekends. Yes, you read 
that correctly. Numerous employees have been fired for smoking cigarettes on 
the weekend in the privacy of their own home. As health care costs escalate, 
employers are increasingly seeking to regulate employee behavior—at home 
as well as in the workplace. Weyco, an insurance benefits administrator in 
Michigan, initiated a program requiring mandatory breath tests to detect for 
nicotine, and any employee testing positive would be sent home without pay 
for one month. If the employee failed the nicotine test a second time, that per-
son would be fired—no matter how long the employee had been with the com-
pany. Weyco’s smoking prohibition does not stop with employees but extends 
to spouses also who must pass monthly nicotine tests. A positive test means 
the employee must pay a monthly fee of $80 until the spouse takes a smoking-
cessation program and tests nicotine-free. 11 
 Do you agree that companies have the right to hold employees accountable 
for actions they perform on weekends in the privacy of their own homes? If you 
were the CEO of Weyco, what would be your argument supporting its smoking 
prohibition policies? Do you think Weyco’s monitoring practices are ethical? 
Do you think Weyco’s monitoring practices are legal?  
 Fired for Smoking 
on the Weekend 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 

152
Chapter 4 Ethics and Information Security: MIS Business Concerns
Sources of Unplanned Downtime
Bomb threat
Frozen pipe
Snowstorm
Burst pipe
Hacker
Sprinkler malfunction
Chemical spill
Hail
Static electricity
Construction
Hurricane
Strike
Corrupted data
Ice storm
Terrorism
Earthquake
Insects
Theft
Electrical short
Lightning
Tornado
Epidemic
Network failure
Train derailment
Equipment failure
Plane crash
Smoke damage
Evacuation
Power outage
Vandalism
Explosion
Power surge
Vehicle crash
Fire
Rodents
Virus
Flood
Sabotage
Water damage (various)
Fraud
Shredded data
Wind
 FIGURE 4.7 
 Sources of Unplanned 
Downtime 
Financial Performance
Revenue recognition
Cash ﬂow
Payment guarantees
Credit rating
Stock price
Revenue
Direct loss
Compensatory payments
Lost future revenue
Billing losses
Investment losses
Lost productivity
Damaged Reputation
Customers
Suppliers
Financial markets
Banks
Business partners
Other Expenses
Temporary employees
Equipment rentals
Overtime costs
Extra shipping charges
Travel expenses
Legal obligations
Know your cost of
downtime per hour,
per day, per week.
 FIGURE 4.8 
 The Cost of Downtime 

153
Business Driven MIS Module 1
with lost revenues, but also with financial performance, damage to reputations, and 
even travel or legal expenses. A few questions managers should ask when determining 
the cost of downtime are: 12 
 ■ How many transactions can the company afford to lose without significantly harm-
ing business? 
 ■ Does the company depend upon one or more mission-critical applications to con-
duct business? 
 ■ How much revenue will the company lose for every hour a critical application is 
unavailable?  
 ■ What is the productivity cost associated with each hour of downtime? 
 ■ How will collaborative business processes with partners, suppliers, and customers 
be affected by an unexpected IT outage? 
 ■ What is the total cost of lost productivity and lost revenue during unplanned 
downtime? 
 The reliability and resilience of IT systems have never been more essential for suc-
cess as businesses cope with the forces of globalization, 24/7 operations, government 
and trade regulations, global recession, and overextended IT budgets and resources. Any 
unexpected downtime in today’s business environment has the potential to cause both 
short- and long-term costs with far-reaching consequences. 
  Information security   is a broad term encompassing the protection of information 
from accidental or intentional misuse by persons inside or outside an organization. 
Information security is the primary tool an organization can use to combat the threats 
associated with downtime. Understanding how to secure information systems is critical 
to keeping downtime to a minimum and uptime to a maximum. Hackers and viruses are 
two of the hottest issues currently facing information security. 
 Security Threats Caused by Hackers and Viruses 
  Hackers   are experts in technology who use their knowledge to break into computers 
and computer networks, either for profit or just motivated by the challenge. Smoking is 
not just bad for a person’s health; it seems it is also bad for company security as hack-
ers regularly use smoking entrances to gain building access. Once inside they pose as 
employees from the MIS department and either ask for permission to use an employee’s 
computer to access the corporate network, or find a conference room where they sim-
ply plug-in their own laptop.   Drive-by hacking   is a computer attack where an attacker 
accesses a wireless computer network, intercepts data, uses network services, and/or 
sends attack instructions without entering the office or organization that owns the net-
work.  Figure 4.9  lists the various types of hackers for organizations to be aware of, and 
 Figure 4.10  shows how a virus is spread. 
 One of the most common forms of computer vulnerabilities is a virus. A   virus  is soft-
ware written with malicious intent to cause annoyance or damage. Some hackers create 
and leave viruses causing massive computer damage.  Figure 4.11  provides an overview 
of the most common types of viruses. Two additional computer vulnerabilities include 
adware and spyware.   Adware   is software that, while purporting to serve some useful 
 Common Types of Hackers 
 ■  Black-hat hackers break into other people’s computer systems and may just look around or may steal and destroy information. 
 ■  Crackers have criminal intent when hacking. 
 ■  Cyberterrorists seek to cause harm to people or to destroy critical systems or information and use the Internet as a weapon of mass destruction. 
 ■  Hactivists have philosophical and political reasons for breaking into systems and will often deface the website as a protest. 
 ■  Script kiddies or   script bunnies find hacking code on the Internet and click-and-point their way into systems to cause damage or spread viruses. 
 ■  White-hat hackers work at the request of the system owners to find system vulnerabilities and plug the holes. 
 FIGURE 4.9 
 Types of Hackers 

154
Chapter 4 Ethics and Information Security: MIS Business Concerns
function and often fulfilling that function, also allows Internet advertisers to display 
advertisements without the consent of the computer user.   Spyware   is a special class 
of adware that collects data about the user and transmits it over the Internet without 
the user’s knowledge or permission. Spyware programs collect specific data about the 
user, ranging from general demographics such as name, address, and browsing habits to 
credit card numbers, Social Security numbers, and user names and passwords. Not all 
adware programs are spyware and used correctly it can generate revenue for a company 
allowing users to receive free products. Spyware is a clear threat to privacy.  Figure 4.12  
displays a few additional weapons hackers use for launching attacks. 13 
 Organizational information is intellectual capital. Just as organizations protect their 
tangible assets—keeping their money in an insured bank or providing a safe working 
environment for employees—they must also protect their intellectual capital, everything 
from patents to transactional and analytical information. With security breaches and 
viruses on the rise and computer hackers everywhere, an organization must put in place 
strong security measures to survive.    
 Backdoor programs open a way into the network for future attacks. 
 Denial-of-service attack (DoS) floods a website with so many requests for service that it slows down or 
crashes the site. 
 Distributed denial-of-service attack (DDoS) attacks from multiple computers that flood a website with so 
many requests for service that it slows down or crashes. A common type is the Ping of Death, in which thou-
sands of computers try to access a website at the same time, overloading it and shutting it down. 
 Polymorphic viruses and worms change their form as they propagate. 
 Trojan-horse virus hides inside other software, usually as an attachment or a downloadable file. 
 Worm spreads itself, not only from file to file, but also from computer to computer. The primary difference 
between a virus and a worm is that a virus must attach to something, such as an executable file, to spread. 
Worms do not need to attach to anything to spread and can tunnel themselves into computers. 
 FIGURE 4.11 
 Common Forms of Viruses 
 FIGURE 4.10 
 How Computer Viruses Spread 
A hacker creates a
virus and attaches
it to a program,
document, or
website.   
Thinking the ﬁle is legitimate,
the user downloads it and the
virus infects other ﬁles and
programs on the computer.
Quickly the virus spreads in
email attachments and shared
ﬁles to co-workers and friends.  

155
Business Driven MIS Module 1
 THE FIRST LINE OF DEFENSE—PEOPLE  
 Organizations today are able to mine valuable information such as the identity of the top 
20 percent of their customers, who usually produce 80 percent of revenues. Most organi-
zations view this type of information as intellectual capital and implement security mea-
sures to prevent it from walking out the door or falling into the wrong hands. At the same 
time, they must enable employees, customers, and partners to access needed information 
electronically. Organizations address security risks through two lines of defense; the first 
is people, the second technology. 
 Surprisingly, the biggest problem is people as the majority of information security 
breaches result from people misusing organizational information.   Insiders   are legiti-
mate users who purposely or accidentally misuse their access to the environment and 
cause some kind of business-affecting incident. For example, many individuals freely 
give up their passwords or write them on sticky notes next to their computers, leaving the 
door wide open for hackers. Through   social engineering,   hackers use their social skills 
to trick people into revealing access credentials or other valuable information.   Dumpster 
diving,   or looking through people’s trash, is another way hackers obtain information. 
  Information security policies   identify the rules required to maintain information 
security, such as requiring users to log off before leaving for lunch or meetings, never 
sharing passwords with anyone, and changing passwords every 30 days. An   information 
security plan    details how an organization will implement the information security poli-
cies. The best way a company can safeguard itself from people is by implementing and 
communicating its information security plan. This becomes even more important with 
Web 2.0 and as the use of mobile devices, remote workforce, and contractors are growing. 
A few details managers should consider surrounding people and information security 
policies include defining the best practices for 14 
 ■ Applications allowed to be placed on the corporate network, especially various file 
sharing applications (Kazaz), IM software, and entertainment or freeware created by 
unknown sources (iPhone applications). 
 ■ Corporate computer equipment used for personal reason on personal networks. 
 ■ Password creation and maintenance including minimum password length, charac-
ters to be included while choosing passwords, and frequency for password changes. 
 ■ Personal computer equipment allowed to connect to the corporate network. 
 LO 4.4:  Describe the relationship 
between information security policies 
and an information security plan. 
 FIGURE 4.12 
 Hacker Weapons 
 Elevation of privilege is a process by which a user misleads a system into granting unauthorized rights, usually for the purpose of compromising or 
destroying the system. For example, an attacker might log onto a network by using a guest account and then exploit a weakness in the software that 
lets the attacker change the guest privileges to administrative privileges. 
 Hoaxes attack computer systems by transmitting a virus hoax, with a real virus attached. By masking the attack in a seemingly legitimate message, 
unsuspecting users more readily distribute the message and send the attack on to their co-workers and friends, infecting many users along the way. 
 Malicious code includes a variety of threats such as viruses, worms, and Trojan horses. 
 Packet tampering consists of altering the contents of packets as they travel over the Internet or altering data on computer disks after penetrating a 
network. For example, an attacker might place a tap on a network line to intercept packets as they leave the computer. The attacker could eavesdrop 
or alter the information as it leaves the network. 
 A  sniffer is a program or device that can monitor data traveling over a network. Sniffers can show all the data being transmitted over a network, 
including passwords and sensitive information. Sniffers tend to be a favorite weapon in the hacker’s arsenal. 
 Spoofing is the forging of the return address on an email so that the message appears to come from someone other than the actual sender. This is 
not a virus but rather a way by which virus authors conceal their identities as they send out viruses. 
 Splogs (spam blogs) are fake blogs created solely to raise the search engine rank of affiliated websites. Even blogs that are legitimate are plagued 
by spam, with spammers taking advantage of the Comment feature of most blogs to comments with links to spam sites. 
 Spyware is software that comes hidden in free downloadable software and tracks online movements, mines the information stored on a computer, 
or uses a computer’s CPU and storage for some task the user knows nothing about. 

156
Chapter 4 Ethics and Information Security: MIS Business Concerns
 ■ Virus protection including how often the system should be scanned and how fre-
quently the software should be updated. This could also include if downloading 
attachments is allowed and practices for safe downloading from trusted and untrust-
worthy sources. 
 THE SECOND LINE OF DEFENSE—TECHNOLOGY  
 Once an organization has protected its intellectual capital by arming its people with 
a detailed information security plan, it can begin to focus on deploying technology to 
help combat attackers.   Destructive agents   are malicious agents designed by spammers 
and other Internet attackers to farm email addresses off websites or deposit spyware on 
machines.  Figure 4.13  displays the three areas where technology can aid in the defense 
against attacks. 
 People: Authentication and Authorization 
 Identity theft   is the forging of someone’s identity for the purpose of fraud. The 
fraud is often financial, because thieves apply for and use credit cards or loans in 
the victim’s name. Two means of stealing an identity are phishing and pharming.  
Information secrecy    is the category of computer security that addresses the protec-
tion of data from unauthorized disclosure and confirmation of data source authentic-
ity.   Phishing   is a technique to gain personal information for the purpose of identity 
theft, usually by means of fraudulent emails that look as though they came from legit-
imate businesses. The messages appear to be genuine, with official-looking formats 
and logos, and typically ask for verification of important information such as pass-
words and account numbers, ostensibly for accounting or auditing purposes. Since 
the emails look authentic, up to one in five recipients responds with the information 
and subsequently becomes a victim of identity theft and other fraud.  Figure 4.14  dis-
plays a phishing scam attempting to gain information for Bank of America; you should 
never click on emails asking you to verify your identity as companies will never contact 
you directly asking for your user name or password. 15   Phishing expedition   is a mas-
querading attack that combines spam with spoofing. The perpetrator sends millions 
of spam emails that appear to be from a respectable company. The emails contain a 
link to a website that is designed to look exactly like the company’s website. The vic-
tim is encouraged to enter his or her username, password, and sometimes credit card 
information.   Spear phishing  is a phishing expedition in which the emails are carefully 
designed to target a particular person or organization.       Vishing (or voice phishing)    is a 
 LO 4.5:  Provide an example of each 
of the three primary information 
security areas: (1) authentication 
and authorization, (2) prevention and 
resistance, and (3) detection and 
response. 
Attacks
Data
Authentication
and
Authorization
Prevention and
Resistance
Detection
and
Response
People
 FIGURE 4.13 
 Three Areas of Information 
Security 

157
Business Driven MIS Module 1
phone scam that attempts to defraud people by asking them to call a bogus telephone 
number to “confirm” their account information. 
  Pharming   reroutes requests for legitimate websites to false websites. For example, if 
you were to type in the URL to your bank, pharming could redirect to a fake site that col-
lects your information. A   zombie   is a program that secretly takes over another computer 
for the purpose of launching attacks on other computers. Zombie attacks are almost 
impossible to trace back to the attacker. A   zombie farm   is a group of computers on which 
a hacker has planted zombie programs. A   pharming attack   uses a zombie farm, often by 
an organized crime association, to launch a massive phishing attack. 
 Authentication and authorization technologies can prevent identity theft, phishing, 
and pharming scams.   Authentication   is a method for confirming users’ identities. Once 
a system determines the authentication of a user, it can then determine the access privi-
leges (or authorization) for that user.   Authorization   is the process of providing a user 
with permission including access levels and abilities such as file access, hours of access, 
and amount of allocated storage space. Authentication and authorization techniques fall 
into three categories; the most secure procedures combine all three:
 1. Something the user knows, such as a user ID and password. 
 2. Something the user has, such as a smart card or token. 
 3. Something that is part of the user, such as a fingerprint or voice signature.    
 FIGURE 4.14 
 Bank of America Phishing Scam 

158
Chapter 4 Ethics and Information Security: MIS Business Concerns
 Something the User Knows Such as a User ID and Password   
The first 
type of authentication, using something the user knows, is the most common way to 
identify individual users and typically consists of a unique user ID and password. How-
ever, this is actually one of the most  ineffective  ways for determining authentication 
because passwords are not secure. All it typically takes to crack one is enough time. 
More than 50 percent of help-desk calls are password related, which can cost an orga-
nization significant money, and a social engineer can coax a password from almost 
anybody.  
 Something the User Has Such as a Smart Card or Token   The second type of 
authentication, using something the user has, offers a much more effective way to  identify 
individuals than a user ID and password. Tokens and smart cards are two of the primary 
forms of this type of authentication.   Tokens   are small electronic devices that change user 
passwords automatically. The user enters his or her user ID and token-displayed pass-
word to gain access to the network. A   smart card   is a device about the size of a credit 
card, containing embedded technologies that can store information and small amounts 
of software to perform some limited processing. Smart cards can act as identification 
instruments, a form of digital cash, or a data storage device with the ability to store an 
entire medical record.  
 BUSINESS DRIVEN INNOVATION 
 As our online world continues to explode, people are finding the number of user 
names and passwords they need to remember growing exponentially. For this 
reason many users will assign the same password for every log-on, choose easy 
to remember names and dates, or simply write down their passwords on sticky 
notes and attach them to their computers. Great for the person who needs to 
remember 72 different passwords, but not so great for system security. 
 Of course the obvious answer is to deploy biometrics across the board, but 
once you start reviewing the costs associated with biometrics you quickly realize 
that this is not feasible. What is coming to the rescue to help with the password 
nightmare we have created? The doodle. Background Draw-a-Secret (BDAS) is 
a new program created by scientists at Newcastle University in England. BDAS 
begins by recording the number of strokes it takes a user to draw a doodle and 
when the user wants to gain access to the system he simply redraws the doo-
dle on a touchpad and it is matched against the stored prototype. If the doodle 
matches, the user is granted access. Doodles are even described as being far 
more anonymous, therefore offering greater security, than biometrics. 
 You are probably thinking that you’ll end up right back in the same posi-
tion having to remember all 72 of your password doodles. The good news is 
that with doodle passwords you don’t have to remember a thing. The doodle 
password can be displayed to users, and they simply have to redraw it since the 
system analyzes how the user draws or the user’s unique hand strokes, not the 
actual doodle (similar to handwriting recognition technologies). 16 
 If you were going to deploy doodle passwords to your organization, what 
issues and concerns do you think might occur? Do you agree that doodles are 
easier to remember than text passwords? Do you agree that doodles offer the 
most effective way to manage authentication and authorization, even greater 
than biometrics? What types of unethical issues do you think you might 
encounter with doodle passwords? 
 Doodling 
Passwords 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 

159
Business Driven MIS Module 1
 Something That Is Part of the User Such as a Fingerprint or Voice 
Signature   The third kind of authentication, something that is part of the user, is by 
far the best and most effective way to manage authentication.   Biometrics  (narrowly 
defined) is the identification of a user based on a physical characteristic, such as a fin-
gerprint, iris, face, voice, or handwriting. Unfortunately, biometric authentication can be 
costly and intrusive.   
 Data: Prevention and Resistance 
 Prevention and resistance technologies stop intruders from accessing and reading data 
by means of content filtering, encryption, and firewalls.    Time bombs  are computer 
viruses that wait for a specific date before executing their instructions.    Content filtering  
occurs when organizations use software that filters content, such as emails, to prevent 
the accidental or malicious transmission of unauthorized information. Organizations 
can use content filtering technologies to filter email and prevent emails containing sen-
sitive information from transmitting, whether the transmission was malicious or acci-
dental. It can also filter emails and prevent any suspicious files from transmitting such 
as potential virus-infected files. Email content filtering can also filter for spam, a form of 
unsolicited email.  
  Encryption   scrambles information into an alternative form that requires a key or 
password to decrypt. If there were a security breach and the stolen information were 
encrypted, the thief would be unable to read it. Encryption can switch the order of char-
acters, replace characters with other characters, insert or remove characters, or use a 
mathematical formula to convert the information into a code. Companies that transmit 
sensitive customer information over the Internet, such as credit card numbers, frequently 
use encryption. To   decrypt   information is to decode it and is the opposite of encrypt. 
  Cryptography   is the science that studies encryption, which is the hiding of messages so 
that only the sender and receiver can read them. The National Institute of Standards and 
Technology (NIST) introduced an    advanced encryption standard (AES)    designed to 
keep government information secure. 
 Some encryption technologies use multiple keys.    Public key encryption (PKE)   uses 
two keys: a public key that everyone can have and a private key for only the recipient 
(see  Figure 4.15 ). The organization provides the public key to all customers, whether end 
consumers or other businesses, who use that key to encrypt their information and send 
it via the Internet. When it arrives at its destination, the organization uses the private key 
to unscramble it.  
 Public keys are becoming popular to use for authentication techniques consisting 
of digital objects in which a trusted third party confirms correlation between the user 
and the public key. A   certificate authority  is a trusted third party, such as VeriSign, 
that validates user identities by means of digital certificates. A   digital certificate   is a 
 FIGURE 4.15 
 Public Key Encryption (PKE) 
Public Key
Encrypted Information
Public Key
Encrypted Information
Public Key
Encrypted Information
Originating Business
Sends the same
public key to all
customers
Uses a private key
to decrypt the
information received
•
•

160
Chapter 4 Ethics and Information Security: MIS Business Concerns
data file that identifies individuals or organizations online and is comparable to a digi-
tal signature. 
 A   firewall   is hardware and/or software that guard a private network by analyzing 
incoming and outgoing information for the correct markings. If they are missing, the 
firewall prevents the information from entering the network. Firewalls can even detect 
computers communicating with the Internet without approval. As  Figure 4.16  illustrates, 
organizations typically place a firewall between a server and the Internet. Think of a 
firewall as a gatekeeper that protects computer networks from intrusion by providing a 
filter and safe transfer points for access to and from the Internet and other networks. It 
screens all network traffic for proper passwords or other security codes and allows only 
authorized transmissions in and out of the network. 
 Firewalls do not guarantee complete protection, and users should enlist additional 
security technologies such as antivirus software and antispyware software.   Antivirus 
software  scans and searches hard drives to prevent, detect, and remove known viruses, 
adware, and spyware. Antivirus software must be frequently updated to protect against 
newly created viruses. 
 Attack: Detection and Response 
 Cyberwar    is  an organized attempt by a country’s military to disrupt or destroy infor-
mation and communication systems for another country. Cyberterrorism is the use 
of computer and networking technologies against persons or property to intimidate or 
coerce governments, individuals, or any segment of society to attain political, religious, 
or ideological goals. With so many intruders planning computer attacks, it is critical 
that all computer systems are protected.  The presence of an intruder can be detected 
by watching for suspicious network events such as bad passwords, the removal of highly 
classified data files, or unauthorized user attempts.    Intrusion detection software (IDS)   
features full-time monitoring tools that search for patterns in network traffic to identify 
intruders. IDS protects against suspicious network traffic and attempts to access files 
and data. If a suspicious event or unauthorized traffic is identified, the IDS will gen-
erate an alarm and can even be customized to shut down a particularly sensitive part 
of a network. After identifying an attack, an MIS department can implement response 
tactics to mitigate the damage. Response tactics outline procedures such as how long 
a system under attack will remain plugged in and connected to the corporate network, 
 FIGURE 4.16 
 Sample Firewall Architecture 
Connecting Systems Located in 
Chicago, New York, and Boston 
Server
Firewall
Chicago
Internet
Database
Firewall
Server
New York
Firewall
Server
Boston
Database
Database

161
Business Driven MIS Module 1
 BUSINESS DRIVEN START-UP 
 Have you ever seen a LifeLock advertisement? If so, you know the Social Security 
number of LifeLock CEO Todd Davis because he posts it in all ads daring hack-
ers to try to steal his identity. Davis has been a victim of identity theft at least 13 
times. The first theft occurred when someone used his identity to secure a $500 
loan from a check-cashing company. Davis discovered the crime only after the 
company called his wife’s cell phone to recover the unpaid debt. 17 
 If you were starting an identity theft prevention company, do you think it 
would be a good idea to post your Social Security number in advertisements? 
Why or why not? What do you think happened that caused Davis’ identity to 
be stolen? What types of information security measure should LifeLock imple-
ment to ensure Davis’ Social Security number is not stolen again? If you were 
LifeLock’s CEO, what type of marketing campaign would you launch next? 
 LifeLock: 
Keeping Your 
Identity Safe 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 
 Learning Outcome 4.1: Explain the ethical issues in the use of information technology. 
 Information ethics govern the ethical and moral issues arising from the development and use of 
information technologies, as well as the creation, collection, duplication, distribution, and processing 
of information itself (with or without the aid of computer technologies). Ethical dilemmas in this area 
usually arise not as simple, clear-cut situations but as clashes between competing goals, responsibili-
ties, and loyalties. Inevitably, there will be more than one socially acceptable or “correct” decision. For 
this reason, acting ethically and legally are not always the same. 
 Learning Outcome 4.2: Identify the six epolicies organizations should implement 
to protect themselves. 
 1. An ethical computer use policy contains general principles to guide computer user behavior. For 
example, it might explicitly state that users should refrain from playing computer games during 
working hours. 
 2. An information privacy policy contains general principles regarding information privacy. 
 3. An acceptable use policy (AUP) is a policy that a user must agree to follow in order to be provided 
access to corporate email, information systems, and to the Internet. 
 4. An email privacy policy details the extent to which email messages may be read by others. 
 L E A R N I N G  O U T C O M E  R E V I E W 
when to shut down a compromised system, and how quickly a backup system will be up 
and running.  
 Guaranteeing the safety of organization information is achieved by implementing 
the two lines of defense: people and technology. To protect information through people, 
firms should develop information security policies and plans that provide employees 
with specific precautions they should take in creating, working with, and transmitting the 
organization’s information assets. Technology-based lines of defense fall into three cat-
egories: authentication and authorization; prevention and resistance; and detection and 
response.        

162
Chapter 4 Ethics and Information Security: MIS Business Concerns
 5. A social media policy outlines the corporate guidelines or principles governing employee online 
communications. 
 6. An employee monitoring policy states explicitly how, when, and where the company monitors its 
employees. 
 Learning Outcome 4.3: Describe the relationships and differences between hackers 
and viruses. 
 Hackers are experts in technology who use their knowledge to break into computers and computer net-
works, either for profit or just motivated by the challenge. A virus is software written with malicious intent to 
cause annoyance or damage. Some hackers create and leave viruses causing massive computer damage.  
 Learning Outcome 4.4: Describe the relationship between information security policies 
and an information security plan. 
 Information security policies identify the rules required to maintain information security, such as 
requiring users to log off before leaving for lunch or meetings, never sharing passwords with anyone, 
and changing passwords every 30 days. An information security plan details how an organization 
will implement the information security policies. The best way a company can safeguard itself from 
people is by implementing and communicating its information security plan. 
 Learning Outcome 4.5: Provide an example of each of the three primary information 
security areas: (1) authentication and authorization, (2) prevention and resistance, and 
(3) detection and response. 
 Authentication and authorization:  Authentication is a method for confirming users’ identities. Once 
a system determines the authentication of a user, it can then determine the access privileges (or 
authorization) for that user. Authorization is the process of providing a user with permission including 
access levels and abilities such as file access, hours of access, and amount of allocated storage space.  
 Prevention and resistance:  Content filtering occurs when organizations use software that filters 
content, such as emails, to prevent the accidental or malicious transmission of unauthorized infor-
mation. Encryption scrambles information into an alternative form that requires a key or password 
to decrypt. In a security breach, a thief is unable to read encrypted information. A firewall is hard-
ware and/or software that guard a private network by analyzing incoming and outgoing informa-
tion for the correct markings. 
 Detection and response:  Intrusion detection software (IDS) features full-time monitoring tools 
that search for patterns in network traffic to identify intruders. 
 1. Knowledge: Define information ethics and information security and explain why each is critical to 
any business.  
 2. Comprehension: Identify two epolicies that a business could implement to ensure the protection 
of sensitive corporate data. 
 3. Application: Demonstrate how a business can use authentication and authorization technologies 
to prevent information theft.  
 4. Analysis: Analyze how a business can use prevention and resistance technologies to safeguard 
its employees from hackers and viruses.  
 5. Synthesis: Propose a plan to implement information security plans to ensure your critical infor-
mation is safe and protected.  
 6. Evaluate: Evaluate the information security issues facing a business and identify its three biggest 
concerns.  
 O P E N I N G  C A S E  Q U E S T I O N S 

163
Business Driven MIS Module 1
  1. What are ethics and why are they important to a company? 
  2. What is the relationship between information management, governance, and compliance? 
  3. Why are epolicies important to a company? 
  4. What is the correlation between privacy and confidentiality? 
  5. What is the relationship between adware and spyware? 
  6. What are the positive and negative effects associated with monitoring employees? 
  7. What is the relationship between hackers and viruses? 
  8. Why is security a business issue, not just a technology issue? 
  9. What are the growing issues related to employee communication methods and what can a 
company do to protect itself? 
 10. How can a company participating in ebusiness keep its information secure? 
 11. What technologies can a company use to safeguard information? 
 12. Why is ediscovery important to a company? 
 13. What are the reasons a company experiences downtime? 
 14. What are the costs associated with downtime? 
 R E V I E W  Q U E S T I O N S 
 Acceptable use policy (AUP), 146 
 Adware, 153 
 Advanced encryption standard 
(AES), 159 
 Anti-spam policy, 148 
 Antivirus software, 160 
 Authentication, 157 
 Authorization, 157 
 Biometrics, 159 
 Black-hat hackers, 153 
 Certificate authority, 159 
 Child Online Protection Act 
(COPA), 145 
 Click-fraud, 145 
 Competitive click-fraud, 145 
 Confidentiality, 141 
 Content filtering, 159 
 Copyright, 141 
 Counterfeit software, 141 
 Cracker, 153 
 Cryptography, 159 
 Cyberterrorists, 153 
 Cyberbullying, 145 
 Cybervandalism, 147 
 Cyberterrorism, 160 
 Cyberwar, 160 
 Decrypt, 159 
 Destructive agents, 157 
 Digital certificate, 159 
 Digital rights management, 141 
 Downtime, 151 
 Drive-by hacking, 153 
 Dumpster diving, 155 
 Ediscovery (or electronic 
discovery), 145 
 Email privacy policy, 147 
 Employee monitoring policy, 150 
 Encryption, 159 
 Epolicies, 145 
 Ethical computer use policy, 146 
 Ethics, 141 
 Firewall, 160 
 Hackers, 153 
 Hactivists, 153 
 Identity theft, 156 
 Information compliance, 144 
 Information ethics, 141 
 Information governance, 144 
 Information management, 144 
 Information property, 144 
 Information secrecy, 156 
 Information privacy policy, 146 
 Information security, 153 
 Information security plan, 155 
 Information security policies, 155 
 Insiders, 155 
 Intellectual property, 141 
 Internet censorship, 147 
 Internet use policy, 146 
 Intrusion detection software 
(IDS), 160 
 Mail bomb, 148 
 Nonrepudiation, 146 
 Opt out, 148 
 Patent, 141 
 Pharming, 157 
 Pharming attack, 157 
 Phishing, 156 
 Phishing expedition, 156 
 Physical security, 150 
 Pirated software, 141 
 Privacy, 141 
 Public key encryption (PKE), 159 
 Script kiddies or script 
bunnies, 153 
 Smart card, 158 
 Spear phishing, 156 
 Social engineering, 155 
 Social media policy, 149 
 Spam, 148 
 Spyware, 154 
 Teergrubing, 148 
 Threat, 142 
 Time bomb, 159 
 Tokens, 158 
 Typosquatting, 147 
 Virus, 153 
 Vishing (voice phishing), 156 
 Website name stealing, 147 
 White-hat hackers, 153 
 Workplace MIS monitoring, 150 
 Zombie, 157 
 Zombie farm, 157 
 K E Y  T E R M S 

164
Chapter 4 Ethics and Information Security: MIS Business Concerns
 C L O S I N G  C A S E  O N E 
 E-Espionage 
 BusinessWeek  magazine probed the rising attacks on America’s most sensitive computer networks, 
uncovering startling security gaps. The email message addressed to a Booz Allen Hamilton executive 
from the Pentagon was mundane—a shopping list of weaponry India wanted to buy. But the missive was 
a brilliant fake. Lurking beneath the description of aircraft, engines, and radar equipment was an insidi-
ous piece of computer code, known as Poison Ivy, designed to suck sensitive data out of the $4 billion 
consulting firm’s computer network. 
 The Pentagon had not sent the email. Its origin is unknown, but the message traveled through 
Korea on its way to Booz Allen. Its authors knew enough about the “sender” and “recipient” to craft 
a message unlikely to arouse suspicion. Had the Booz Allen executive clicked on the attachment, his 
every keystroke would have been reported back to a mysterious master at the Internet address cyber-
syndrome.3322.org, which is registered through an obscure company headquartered on the banks of 
China’s Yangtze River. 
 The email aimed at Booz Allen paints a vivid picture of the alarming new capabilities of America’s 
cyberenemies. The email message was sent to John F. “Jack” Mulhern, vice president for international 
military assistance programs at Booz Allen. In the high-tech world of weapons sales, Mulhern’s spe-
cialty, the email looked authentic enough. “Integrate U.S., Russian, and Indian weapons and avionics,” 
the email noted, describing the Indian government’s expectations for its fighter jets. “Source code 
given to India for indigenous computer upgrade capability.” Such lingo could easily be understood 
by Mulhern. The 62-year-old former U.S. Naval officer and 33-year veteran of Booz Allen’s military 
consulting business is an expert in helping to sell U.S. weapons to foreign governments. 
 The email was more convincing because of its apparent sender: Stephen J. Moree, a civilian who 
worked for a group that reported to the office of then-Air Force Secretary Michael W. Wynne. Among 
its duties, Moree’s unit evaluated the security of selling U.S. military aircraft to other countries. There 
would be little reason to suspect anything seriously amiss in Moree passing along the highly technical 
document with “India MRCA Request for Proposal” in the subject line. The Indian government had just 
released the request a week earlier, on August 28, and the language in the email closely tracked the 
request. Making the message appear more credible still, it referred to upcoming Air Force communi-
qués and a “Team Meeting” to discuss the deal. 
 But the correspondence from Moree to Jack Mulhern was a fake. An analysis of the email’s path 
and attachment, conducted for  BusinessWeek  by three cybersecurity specialists, shows it was sent 
by an unknown attacker, bounced through an Internet address in South Korea, relayed through a 
Yahoo! server in New York, and finally made its way to Mulhern’s Booz Allen in-box. The analysis also 
shows the code—known as malware, for malicious software—tracks keystrokes on the computers 
of people who open it. A separate program disables security measures such as password protection 
on Microsoft Access database files, a program often used by large organizations such as the U.S. 
defense industry to manage big batches of data. 
 Global Threats 
  The U.S. government and its sprawl of defense contractors have been the victims of an unprec-
edented rash of similar attacks, say current and former U.S. government officials. “It’s espionage 
on a massive scale,” said Paul B. Kurtz, a former high-ranking national security official. Government 
agencies reported 12,986 cybersecurity incidents to the U.S. Homeland Security Department in one 
fiscal year, triple the number from two years earlier. Incursions on the military’s networks were up 
55 percent, said Lieutenant General Charles E. Croom, head of the Pentagon’s Joint Task Force for 
Global Network Operations. Private targets such as Booz Allen are just as vulnerable and pose just 
as much potential security risk. “They have our information on their networks. They’re building our 

165
Business Driven MIS Module 1
weapon systems. You wouldn’t want that in enemy hands,” Croom said. Cyber attackers “are not deny-
ing, disrupting, or destroying operations—yet. But that doesn’t mean they don’t have the capability.” 
 Poison Ivy 
  Commercial computer security firms have dubbed the malicious code hidden inside the email attachment 
Poison Ivy, and it has a devious—and worrisome—capability known as a RAT, a remote administration 
tool. RAT gives the attacker control over the host PC, capturing screen shots and perusing files. It lurks in 
the background of Microsoft Internet Explorer browsers while users surf the web. Then it phones home to 
its “master” at an Internet address currently registered under the name  cybersyndrome.3322.org . 
 The digital trail to  cybersyndrome.3322.org , followed by analysts at  BusinessWeek ’s request, leads 
to one of China’s largest free domain-name-registration and email services. Called 3322.org, it is reg-
istered to a company called Bentium in the city of Changzhou, an industrial hub outside Shanghai. A 
range of security experts say that 3322.org provides names for computers and servers that act as the 
command and control centers for more than 10,000 pieces of malicious code launched at government 
and corporate networks in recent years. Many of those PCs are in China; the rest could be anywhere. 
 The founder of 3322.org, a 37-year-old technology entrepreneur named Peng Yong, says his com-
pany merely allows users to register domain names. “As for what our users do, we cannot completely 
control it,” Peng said. The bottom line: If Poison Ivy infected Jack Mulhern’s computer at Booz Allen, 
any secrets inside could be seen in China. And if it spread to other computers, as malware often does, 
the infection opens windows on potentially sensitive information there, too. 
 Many security experts worry the Internet has become too unwieldy to be tamed. New threats 
appear every day, each seemingly more sophisticated than the previous one. The Defense Department, 
whose Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) developed the Internet in the 1960s, is beginning 
to think it created a monster. “You don’t need an Army, a Navy, an Air Force to beat the U.S.,” said 
General William T. Lord, commander of the Air Force Cyber Command, a unit formed to upgrade Air 
Force computer defenses. “You can be a peer force for the price of the PC on my desk.” 18 
 Questions 
 1. Define information ethics and information security and explain why each is critical to any govern-
ment operation. 
 2. Identify two epolicies the government should implement to help combat cyberterrorism. 
 3. Demonstrate how the government can use authentication and authorization technologies to pre-
vent information theft. 
 4. Analyze how the government can use prevention and resistance technologies to safeguard its 
employees from hackers and viruses. 
 5. Propose a plan for how the government can implement information security plans to ensure its 
critical information is safe and protects. 
 6. Evaluate the information security issues facing the government and identify its three biggest 
concerns. 
 Hacker Hunters 
  Hacker hunters are the new breed of crime fighter. They employ the same methodology used to fight 
organized crime in the 1980s—informants and the cyberworld equivalent of wiretaps. Daniel Larking, 
a 20-year veteran who runs the FBI’s Internet Crime Complaint Center, taps online service providers to 
help track down criminal hackers. Leads supplied by the FBI and eBay helped Romanian police round 
 C L O S I N G  C A S E  T W O 

166
Chapter 4 Ethics and Information Security: MIS Business Concerns
up 11 members of a gang that set up fake eBay accounts and auctioned off cell phones, laptops, and 
cameras they never intended to deliver. 
 The FBI unleashed Operation Firewall, targeting the ShadowCrew, a gang whose members were 
schooled in identity theft, bank account pillage, and selling illegal goods on the Internet. ShadowCrew’s 
4,000 gang members lived in a dozen countries and across the United States. For months, agents 
had been watching their every move through a clandestine gateway into their website, shadowcrew.
com. One member turned informant and called a group meeting, ensuring the members would be at 
home on their computers during a certain time, when the Secret Service issued orders to move in 
on the gang. The move was synchronized around the globe to prevent gang members from warning 
each other via instant messages. Twenty-eight gang members in eight states and six countries were 
arrested, most still at their computers. Authorities seized dozens of computers and found 1.7 million 
credit card numbers and more than 18 million email accounts. 
 ShadowCrew’s Operations 
  The alleged ringleaders of ShadowCrew included Andres Mantovani, 23, a part-time community col-
lege student in Arizona, and David Appleyard, 45, a former New Jersey mortgage broker. Mantovani 
and Appleyard allegedly were administrators in charge of running the website and recruiting mem-
bers. The site created a marketplace for more than 4,000 gang members who bought and sold hot 
information and merchandise. The website was open for business 24 hours a day, but since most of 
the members held jobs, the busiest time was from 10 p.m. to 2 a.m. on Sundays. Hundreds of gang 
members would meet online to trade credit card information, passports, and even equipment to make 
fake identity documents. Platinum credit cards cost more than gold ones, and discounts were offered 
for package deals. One member known as “Scarface” sold 115,695 stolen credit card numbers in a 
single trade. Overall, the gang made more than $4 million in credit card purchases over two years. 
ShadowCrew was equivalent to an eBay for the underworld. The site even posted crime tips on how 
to use stolen credit cards and fake IDs at big retailers. 
 The gang stole credit card numbers and other valuable information through clever tricks. One of 
the favorites was sending millions of phishing emails—messages that appeared to be from legitimate 
companies such as Yahoo!—designed to steal passwords and credit card numbers. The gang also 
hacked into corporate databases to steal account data. According to sources familiar with the inves-
tigation, the gang cracked the networks of 12 unidentified companies that were not even aware their 
systems had been breached. 
 Police Operations 
  Brian Nagel, an assistant director at the Secret Service, coordinated the effort to track the ShadowCrew. 
Allies included Britain’s national high-tech crimes unit, the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, and the 
Bulgarian Interior Ministry. Authorities turned one of the high-ranking members of the gang into a 
snitch and had the man help the Secret Service set up a new electronic doorway for ShadowCrew 
members to enter their website. The snitch spread the word that the new gateway was a more secure 
way to the website. It was the first-ever tap of a private computer network. “We became  shadowcrew.
com ,” Nagel said. Mantovani and Appleyard were slated for trial. Authorities anticipated making addi-
tional arrests. 19 
 Questions 
 1. What types of technology could big retailers use to prevent identity thieves from purchasing 
merchandise? 
 2. What can organizations do to protect themselves from hackers looking to steal account data? 
 3. Authorities frequently tap online service providers to track down hackers. Do you think it is ethical 
for authorities to tap an online service provider and read people’s email? Why or why not? 
 4. Do you think it was ethical for authorities to use one of the high-ranking officials to trap other gang 
members? Why or why not? 
 5. In a team, research the Internet and find the best ways to protect yourself from identity theft. 

167
Business Driven MIS Module 1
 1. Cheerleader Charged $27,750 for File Sharing 37 Songs 
 A federal appeals court is ordering a university student to pay the Recording Industry Association 
of America $27,750—$750 a track—for file sharing 37 songs when she was a high school cheer-
leader. Have you ever illegally copied or downloaded a song or movie? If you have and you were 
forced to pay $750 per track, how much would you owe? What is the difference between file shar-
ing and Internet radio streaming? Do you agree or disagree with the federal appeals decision? Why 
or why not? Why is claiming a lack of copyright knowledge not a good defense against illegally 
sharing movies or music? If you do not have a good understanding of information laws, what can 
you do to ensure you are never placed in a federal lawsuit for violating information laws? 20 
 2. Police Records Found in Old Copy Machine 
 Copy machines made after 2002 all contain a hard drive that stores a copy of every document the 
machine has ever scanned, printed, copied, or faxed. If the hard drive is not erased or scrubbed 
when the copy machine is resold, all of that digital information is still maintained inside the 
machine. The Buffalo, New York, Police Sex Crimes Division recently sold several copy machines 
without scrubbing the hard drives. The hard drives yielded detailed domestic violence complaints 
and a list of wanted sex offenders. A machine from the Buffalo Police Narcotics Unit contained 
targets in a major drug raid, and a copier once used by a New York construction company stored 
95 pages of pay stubs with names, addresses, and Social Security numbers. 21 
 Who do you think should be held responsible for the information issues caused at the Buffalo 
police department? What types of ethical issues and information security issues are being vio-
lated? What types of epolicies could a company implement to ensure these situations do not 
occur? What forms of information security could a company implement to ensure these situations 
do not occur? How does this case support the primary reason why ediscovery is so important to 
litigation? 
 3. Firewall Decisions 
 You are the CEO of Inverness Investments, a medium-size venture capital firm that specializes in 
investing in high-tech companies. The company receives more than 30,000 email messages per 
year. On average, there are two viruses and three successful hackings against the company each 
year, which result in losses to the company of about $250,000. Currently, the company has antivi-
rus software installed but does not have any firewalls. 
 Your CIO is suggesting implementing 10 firewalls for a total cost of $80,000. The estimated life 
of each firewall is about three years. The chances of hackers breaking into the system with the 
firewalls installed are about 3 percent. Annual maintenance costs on the firewalls are estimated 
around $15,000. Create an argument for or against supporting your CIO’s recommendation to 
purchase the firewalls. Are there any considerations in addition to finances? 
 4. Preventing Identity Theft 
 The FBI states that identity theft is one of the fastest-growing crimes. If you are a victim of iden-
tity theft, your financial reputation can be ruined, making it impossible for you to cash a check 
or receive a bank loan. Learning how to avoid identity theft can be a valuable activity. Using the 
Internet, research the most current ways the government recommends for you to to prevent iden-
tity theft. 
 5. Discussing the Three Areas of Information Security 
 Great Granola Inc. is a small business operating out of northern California. The company spe-
cializes in selling homemade granola, and its primary sales vehicle is through its website. The 
company is growing exponentially and expects its revenues to triple this year to $12 million. 
 C R I T I C A L  B U S I N E S S  T H I N K I N G 

168
Chapter 4 Ethics and Information Security: MIS Business Concerns
The company also expects to hire 60 additional employees to support its growth. Joan Martin, 
the CEO, is aware that if her competitors discover the recipe for her granola, or who her primary 
customers are, it could easily ruin her business. Martin has hired you to draft a document discuss-
ing the different areas of information security, along with your recommendations for providing a 
secure ebusiness environment.  
 6. Spying on Email 
 Technology advances now allow individuals to monitor computers that they do not even have 
physical access to. New types of software can capture an individual’s incoming and outgoing email 
and then immediately forward that email to another person. For example, if you are at work and 
your child is home from school and she receives an email from John at 3:00 p.m., at 3:01 p.m. you 
can receive a copy of that email sent to your email address. If she replies to John’s email, within 
seconds you will again receive a copy of what she sent to John. Describe two scenarios (other than 
those described here) for the use of this type of software: one in which the use would be ethical 
and one in which it would be unethical. 
 7. Stealing Software 
 The software industry fights against pirated software on a daily basis. The major centers of soft-
ware piracy are in places such as Russia and China where salaries and disposable income are 
comparatively low. People in developing and economically depressed countries will fall behind the 
industrialized world technologically if they cannot afford access to new generations of software. 
Considering this, is it reasonable to blame someone for using pirated software when it could cost 
him or her two months’ salary to purchase a legal copy? Create an argument for or against the 
following statement: Individuals who are economically less fortunate should be allowed access 
to software free of charge in order to ensure that they are provided with an equal technological 
advantage. 
 E N T R E P R E N E U R I A L  C H A L L E N G E 
 BUILD YOUR OWN BUSINESS 
 1. Providing employees with computer access is one of the perks offered by your business. 
Employees enjoy checking their personal email and surfing the Internet on their breaks. So far, 
computer access has been a cherished employee benefit. When you came into work this morning 
you found the following anonymous letter from one of your employees on your desk. “I received a 
highly inappropriate joke from a fellow employee that I found extremely offensive. The employee 
who sent the joke was Debbie Fernandez and I believe she should be reprimanded for her inap-
propriate actions. Signed—a disturbed employee.” What would you do? What could you have 
done to ensure situations such as these would be easily handled if they did arise? What could 
you do to ensure such situations do not happen in the future and if they do all employees are 
aware of the ramifications of inappropriate emails? (Be sure to identify your business and the 
name of your company.) 
 2. The local community has always been a big part of your grandfather’s business and he knew 
almost everyone in the community. Your grandfather attended all types of community events and 
would spend hours talking with friends and neighbors soliciting feedback and ideas on his busi-
ness. As you know, data are important to any business. In fact, data are an essential business 
asset. You have decided to start tracking detailed customer information for all business events 
from fund-raising to promotions. Since you took over the business you have been collecting more 
and more event data to help you run marketing campaigns across events and optimize the event 
schedules. One day, a sophisticated businessman walks into your business and asks to speak 

169
Business Driven MIS Module 1
to the owner. He introduces himself as Lance Smith and says that he would like to talk to you in 
private. Smith is retiring and is closing his business that was located just down the street, and 
he wants to sell you his detailed customer information. Smith would like a large sum of money to 
sell you his confidential customer contact information and sales reports for the past 20 years. He 
says he has more than 10,000 customers in his unique database. What do you do? 
 3. Yesterday you had an interesting conversation with one of your loyal customers, Dan Martello. 
He asked you the following question: “If I find a digital camera on the street is it OK to look at the 
contents, or am I invading the owner’s privacy?” You have a lengthy debate and decided that in 
some scenarios it is an invasion of privacy to be looking at someone else’s photos and is similar to 
looking in their windows. In other scenarios, it is not an invasion of privacy if you do not know the 
person and it is the primary way to identify the owner to return the camera, similar to looking in a 
wallet. As you are cleaning your business, you find a 30 gigabyte thumb drive and you know that it 
probably belongs to one of your valuable customers and contains their sensitive information. What 
do you do? What security concerns are associated with the thumb drive? How could information 
security policies or an information security plan help your business with this type of situation?  
 PROJECT I 
Grading Security 
 Making The Grade is a nonprofit organization that helps students learn how to achieve better grades 
in school. The organization has 40 offices in 25 states and more than 2,000 employees. The company 
wants to build a website to offer its services online. Making The Grade’s online services will pro-
vide parents seven key pieces of advice for communicating with their children to help them achieve 
academic success. The website will offer information on how to maintain open lines of communica-
tion, set goals, organize academics, regularly track progress, identify trouble spots, get to know their 
child’s teacher, and celebrate their children’s successes. 
 You and your team work for the director of information security. Your team’s assignment is to 
develop a document discussing the importance of creating information security polices and an infor-
mation security plan. Be sure to include the following:
 ■ The importance of educating employees on information security. 
 ■ A few samples of employee information security policies specifically for Making The Grade. 
 ■ Other major areas the information security plan should address. 
 ■ Signs the company should look for to determine if the website is being hacked. 
 ■ The major types of attacks the company should expect to experience. 
 PROJECT II 
Eyes Everywhere 
 The movie  Minority Report  chronicled a futuristic world where people are uniquely identifiable by their 
eyes. A scan of each person’s eyes gives or denies them access to rooms, computers, and anything 
else with restrictions. The movie portrayed a black market in new eyeballs to help people hide from 
the authorities. (Why did they not just change the database entry instead? That would have been 
much easier, but a lot less dramatic.) 
 The idea of using a biological signature is entirely plausible because biometrics is currently being 
used and is expected to gain wider acceptance in the near future because forging documents has 
become much easier with the advances in computer graphics programs and color printers. The next 
time you get a new passport, it may incorporate a chip that has your biometric information encoded 
on it. Office of Special Investigations agents with fake documents found that it was relatively easy to 
enter the United States from Canada, Mexico, and Jamaica, by land, sea, and air. 
 A P P LY  Y O U R  K N O W L E D G E  B U S I N E S S  P R O J E C T S 

170
Chapter 4 Ethics and Information Security: MIS Business Concerns
 The task of policing the borders is daunting. Some 500 million foreigners enter the country every 
year and go through identity checkpoints. More than 13 million permanent-resident and border-cross-
ing cards have been issued by the U.S. government. Also, citizens of 27 countries do not need visas to 
enter this country. They are expected to have passports that comply with U.S. specifications that will 
also be readable at the border. 
 In the post-9/11 atmosphere of tightened security, unrestricted border crossing is not acceptable. 
The Department of Homeland Security is charged with securing the nation’s borders, and as part of 
this plan, new entry/exit procedures were instituted at the beginning of 2003. An integrated system, 
using biometrics, will be used to identify foreign visitors to the United States and reduce the likelihood 
of terrorists entering the country. 
 Early in 2003, after 6 million biometric border-crossing cards had been issued, a pilot test con-
ducted at the Canadian border detected more than 250 imposters. The testing started with two bio-
metric identifiers: photographs for facial recognition and fingerprint scans. As people enter and leave 
the country, their actual fingerprints and facial features are compared to the data on the biometric 
chip in the passport. 
 In a group, discuss the following:
    
a. How do you feel about having your fingerprints, facial features, and perhaps more of your 
biometric features encoded in documents such as your passport? Explain your answer.  
   
b. Would you feel the same way about having biometric information on your driver’s license as on 
your passport? Why or why not?  
   
c. Is it reasonable to have different biometric identification requirements for visitors from differ-
ent nations? Explain your answer. What would you recommend as criteria for deciding which 
countries fall into what categories?  
   
d. The checkpoints U.S. citizens pass through upon returning to the country vary greatly in the 
depth of the checks and the time spent. The simplest involves simply walking past the border 
guards who may or may not ask you your citizenship. The other end of the spectrum requires 
that you put up with long waits in airports where you have to line up with hundreds of other 
passengers while each person is questioned and must produce a passport to be scanned. 
Would you welcome biometric information on passports if it would speed the process, or do 
you think that the disadvantages of the reduction in privacy, caused by biometric information, 
outweigh the advantages of better security and faster border processing? Explain your answer. 
 PROJECT III 
Setting Boundaries 
 Even the most ethical people sometimes face difficult choices. Acting ethically means behaving in a 
principled fashion and treating other people with respect and dignity. It is simple to say, but not so 
simple to do since some situations are complex or ambiguous. The important role of ethics in our lives 
has long been recognized. As far back as 44 B.C., Cicero said that ethics are indispensable to anyone 
who wants to have a good career. Having said that, Cicero, along with some of the greatest minds 
over the centuries, struggled with what the rules of ethics should be. 
 Our ethics are rooted in our history, culture, and religion, and our sense of ethics may shift over time. 
The electronic age brings with it a new dimension in the ethics debate—the amount of personal informa-
tion that we can collect and store, and the speed with which we can access and process that information. 
 In a group, discuss how you would react to the following situations:
    
a. A senior marketing manager informs you that one of her employees is looking for another job 
and she wants you to give her access to look through her email.  
   
b. A vice president of sales informs you that he has made a deal to provide customer information 
to a strategic partner, and he wants you to copy all of the customer information to a thumb drive.  
   
c. You are asked to monitor your employee’s email to discover whether he is sexually harassing 
another employee.  
   
d. You are asked to install a video surveillance system in your office to find out whether employ-
ees are taking office supplies home with them.  

171
Business Driven MIS Module 1
 
e. You are looking on the shared network drive and discover that your boss’s entire hard drive has 
been copied to the network for everyone to view. What do you do?  
   
f. You have been accidentally copied on an email from the CEO, which details who will be the 
targets of the next round of layoffs. What do you do?     
 PROJECT IV 
Contemplating Sharing 
 Bram Cohen created BitTorrent which allows users to upload and download large amounts of data. 
Cohen demonstrated his program at the world hacker conference, as a free, open source project 
aimed at computer users who need a cheap way to swap software online. Soon many TV and movie 
fanatics began using the program to download copyrighted materials. As a result of the hacker con-
ference, more than 20 million people downloaded the BitTorrent program and began sharing movies 
and television shows across the Internet. 
 There is much debate surrounding the ethics of peer-to-peer networking. Do you believe BitTorrent 
is ethical or unethical? Justify your answer. 
 AY K  A P P L I C AT I O N  P R O J E C T S 
 If you are looking for Excel projects to incorporate into your class, try any of the following after reading 
this chapter. 
 Project 
Number 
 Project 
Name 
 Project 
Type 
 Plug-In 
Focus Area 
 Project 
Focus 
 Project 
Skill Set 
 Page 
Number 
  1 
 Financial Destiny 
 Excel 
 T2 
 Personal Budget 
 Introductory Formulas 
 AYK.4 
  2 
 Cash Flow 
 Excel 
 T2 
 Cash Flow 
 Introductory Formulas 
 AYK.4 
  3 
 Technology Budget 
 Excel 
 T1, T2 
 Hardware and Software 
 Introductory Formulas 
 AYK.4 
  4 
 Tracking Donations 
 Excel 
 T2 
 Employee Relationships 
 Introductory Formulas 
 AYK.4 
  5 
 Convert Currency 
 Excel 
 T2 
 Global Commerce 
 Introductory Formulas 
 AYK.5 
  6 
 Cost Comparison 
 Excel 
 T2 
 Total Cost of Ownership 
 Introductory Formulas 
 AYK.5 
  7 
 Time Management 
 Excel or Project 
 T2 or T12 
 Project Management 
 Introductory Gantt Charts 
 AYK.6 
  8 
 Maximize Profit 
 Excel 
 T2, T4 
 Strategic Analysis 
 Intermediate Formulas or 
Solver 
 AYK.6 
  9 
 Security Analysis 
 Excel 
 T3 
 Filtering Data 
 Intermediate Conditional 
Formatting, Autofilter, 
Subtotal 
 AYK.7 
 10 
 Gathering Data 
 Excel 
 T3 
 Data Analysis 
 Intermediate Conditional 
Formatting, PivotTable 
 AYK.8 
 11 
 Scanner System 
 Excel 
 T2 
 Strategic Analysis 
 Intermediate 
 AYK.8 
 12 
 Competitive Pricing 
 Excel 
 T2 
 Profit Maximization 
 Intermediate 
 AYK.9 
 13 
 Adequate Acquisitions 
 Excel 
 T2 
 Break-Even Analysis 
 Intermediate 
 AYK.9 
 24 
 Electronic Resumes 
 HTML 
 T9, T10, T11 
 Electronic Personal 
Marketing 
 Introductory Structural Tags 
 AYK.16 
 25 
 Gathering Feedback 
 Dreamweaver 
 T9, T10, T11 
 Data Collection 
 Intermediate Organization 
of Information 
 AYK.16 

1
3
2
 module 2 
 Technical Foundations of MIS  
 MODULE ONE: 
 Business Driven MIS 
 MODULE TWO: 
 Technical Foundations 
of MIS 
 MODULE THREE: 
 Enterprise MIS 
 MODULE 2 CONCENTRATES on the technical foundations of MIS. The power of 
MIS comes from its ability to carry, house, and support information. And information is power to 
an organization. This module highlights this point and raises awareness of the significance of 
information to organizational success. Understanding how the MIS infrastructure supports busi-
ness operations, how business professionals access and analyze information to make business 
decisions, and how wireless and mobile technologies can make information continuously and 
instantaneously available are important for strategically managing any company, large or small. 
Thus, these are the primary learning outcomes of Module 2. 
 The module begins by reviewing the role of MIS in supporting business growth, operations, 
and performance. We quickly turn to the need for MIS to be sustainable given today’s focus 
on being “green,” and then dive into databases, data warehousing, networking, and wireless 
technologies—all fundamental components of MIS infrastructures. A theme throughout the 
module is the need to leverage and yet safeguard the use of information as key to the survival of 
any company. Information must be protected from misuse and harm, especially with the contin-
ued use, development, and exploitation of the Internet and the web. 
 Module 2:
TECHNICAL FOUNDATIONS OF MIS
 CHAPTER 5:  Infrastructures: Sustainable Technologies 
 CHAPTER 6:  Data: Business Intelligence 
 CHAPTER 7:  Networks: Mobile Business 

 What’s in IT for me? 
 Why do you, as a business student, need to understand the underlying technology of any company? Most people think “that 
technical stuff” is something they will never personally encounter and for that reason do not need to know anything about 
MIS infrastructures. Well, those people will be challenged in the business world. When your database fails and you lose all 
of your sales history, you will personally feel the impact when you are unable to receive your bonus. When your computer 
crashes and you lose all of your confidential information, not to mention your emails, calendars, and messages, then you 
will understand why everyone needs to learn about MIS infrastructures. You never want to leave the critical task of backing 
up your data to your MIS department. You want to personally ensure that your information is not only backed up, but also 
safeguarded and recoverable. For these reasons, business professionals in the 21st century need to acquire a base-level 
appreciation of what MIS can and cannot do for their company. Understanding how MIS supports growth, operations, profit-
ability, and most recently sustainability, is crucial whether one is new to the workforce or a seasoned  Fortune  500 employee. 
One of the primary goals of this chapter is to create a more level playing field between you as a business professional and 
the MIS specialists with whom you will work. After reading it you should have many of the skills you need to assist in analyz-
ing current and even some future MIS infrastructures; in recommending needed changes in processes; and in evaluating 
alternatives that support a company’s growth, operations, and profits. 
 ■ M I S  a n d  t h e  E n v i ro n m e n t 
 ■ S u p p o r t i n g  t h e  E n v i ro n m e n t : 
S u s t a i n a b l e  M I S  I n f r a s t r u c t u re  
 SECTION 5.2   
 Building Sustainable MIS 
Infrastructures 
 ■ T h e  B u s i n e s s  B e n e f i t s  of a 
S o l i d  M I S  I n f r a s t r u c t u re 
 ■ S up p o r t i n g  O p e r a t i o n s : 
I n f o r m a t i o n  M I S  I n f r a s tr u c t u re 
 ■ S up p o r t i n g  C h a n g e :  A g ile  M I S 
I n f r a s t r u c t u re  
 SECTION 5.1   
 MIS Infrastructures 
 Infrastructures: 
Sustainable Technologies 
 C H A P T E R  5 
 C H A P T E R  O U T L I N E 

174
Chapter 5 Infrastructures: Sustainable Technologies
 opening case study 
 Pandora’s Music Box    
 Napster was one of the first service providers for sharing online music. Many other 
companies have attempted to legally jump into the online music business, and most found 
little success. However, Pandora, the Internet radio site, is becoming the exception. Pandora 
provides users with the ability to choose specific artists or categories of music and then 
creates individualized playlists. Based on user feedback to Pandora’s suggestions of similar 
tracks, the site “learns” what selections each listener prefers for his or her playlist and uses 
that information to generate a unique customized listening experience for each. 
 At the heart of Pandora’s business is the Music Genome Project (MGP), a computerized 
jukebox of more than 700,000 works by 80,000 artists, with new ones added every day. 
Each selection within the MGP is categorized by hundreds of characteristics, including art-
ist and genre and covering the qualities of melody, harmony, rhythm, form, composition, 
and lyrics. For example, if someone is looking for a song with a certain tempo or wants to 
know what the lyrics are about, Pandora can supply that information. The company has 50 
employees whose sole job is to listen to and analyze music along with assigning more than 
400 characteristics to each track. 
 Computing Merges with Connectivity 
 Pandora is a perfect example of cloud computing as a result of three major trends:
 1. The marriage of computing and connectivity can now occur without having to be teth-
ered to a single location. It’s among the biggest disruptive forces of modern times; one 
that will redefine business models for decades to come. 
 2. The mobile Internet is now pervasive. 
 3. The availability of low-cost, always-on computers—smartphones—that allow sophisti-
cated software to conduct complex tasks on the go.  
 Pandora is strategically planning to reach a broad, global market by embedding itself in all 
sorts of Internet-enabled electronic devices that can access its services directly through the 
cloud. Pandora’s music offerings are now being embedded in everything from thin LED tele-
visions to Blu-ray players to digital frames. Customers are listening to Pandora through their 
Blu-ray players, iPods, iPhones, and BlackBerrys, and soon cars will come with Pandora 
preinstalled. 
 The Pandora team envisions Pandora playing everywhere, allowing users to create as 
many as 100 stations, allowing for a nearly infinite list of musical opportunities. Since its 
founding in 2000, Pandora has registered more than 50 million listeners and adds thou-
sands more every day. 

175
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
 A basic membership, which includes an occasional advertisement or two, is free. 
Members are allowed 40 hours a month to listen to their personal stations. If users want 
more than 40 hours, they can purchase unlimited playing time for 99 cents per month. 
Users can upgrade even further to a Pandora One account for $36 a year that includes 
unlimited playing time, no advertisements, and a higher-quality sound. 
 What drives Pandora’s business? Other than its valued customer base, it is the com-
pany’s solid MIS infrastructure that supports its growth, operations, and profits. So far, 
Pandora’s investment in MIS infrastructure has delivered wonderful results as well as future 
opportunities. The company can now develop new applications that support its core func-
tions more rapidly than ever. And since Pandora is located in the cloud, the company has 
created an MIS infrastructure that is accessible, available, flexible, scalable, reliable, and 
usable and that performs to meet the needs of its growing customer community. 1 

176
Chapter 5 Infrastructures: Sustainable Technologies
 section 5.1 
MIS Infrastructures 
 LE A R NI NG  OU T C OM E S 
 5.1 Explain MIS infrastructure and its three primary types. 
 5.2 Identify the three primary areas associated with an information MIS infrastructure. 
 5.3 Describe the characteristics of an agile MIS infrastructure. 
 THE BUSINESS BENEFITS OF A SOLID 
MIS INFRASTRUCTURE  
 Management information systems have played a significant role in business strategies, 
affected business decisions and processes, and even changed the way companies oper-
ate. What is the foundation supporting all of these systems that enable business growth, 
operations, and profits? What supports the volume and complexity of today’s user and 
application requirements? What protects systems from failures and crashes? It is the 
  MIS infrastructure   ,  which includes the plans for how a firm will build, deploy, use, and 
share its data, processes, and MIS assets. A solid MIS infrastructure can reduce costs, 
improve productivity, optimize business operations, generate growth, and increase 
profitability. 
 Briefly defined,   hardware   consists of the physical devices associated with a com-
puter system, and   software   is the set of instructions the hardware executes to carry 
out specific tasks. In today’s business environment, most hardware and software is run 
via a network. A   network   is a communications system created by linking two or more 
devices and establishing a standard methodology in which they can communicate. As 
more companies need to share more information, the network takes on greater impor-
tance in the infrastructure. Most companies use a specific form of network infrastruc-
ture called a client and server network. A   client  is a computer designed to request 
information from a server. A   server  is a computer dedicated to providing informa-
tion in response to requests. A good way to understand this is when someone uses a 
web browser (this would be the client) to access a website (this would be a server that 
would respond with the web page being requested by the client). Anyone not familiar 
with the basics of hardware, software, or networks should review Appendix A, “Hard-
ware and Software,” and Appendix B, “Networks and Telecommunications,” for more 
information. 
 In the physical world, a detailed blueprint would show how public utilities, such as 
water, electricity, and gas support the foundation of a building. MIS infrastructure is 
similar as it shows in detail how the hardware, software, and network connectivity sup-
port the firm’s processes. Every company, regardless of size, relies on some form of MIS 
infrastructure, whether it is a few personal computers networked together sharing an 
Excel file or a large multinational company with thousands of employees interconnected 
around the world. 
 An MIS infrastructure is dynamic; it continually changes as the business needs 
change. Each time a new form of Internet-enabled device, such as an iPhone or Black-
Berry, is created and made available to the public, a firm’s MIS infrastructure must 
be revised to support the device. This moves beyond just innovations in hardware to 
include new types of software and network connectivity. An   enterprise architect  is 
a person grounded in technology, fluent in business, and able to provide the impor-
tant bridge between MIS and the business. Firms employ enterprise architects to help 
manage change and dynamically update MIS infrastructure.  Figure  5.1  displays the 
three primary areas where enterprise architects focus when maintaining a firm’s MIS 
infrastructure.  
 LO 5.1:  Explain MIS infrastructure 
and its three primary types. 

177
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
 ■  Supporting operations:   Information MIS infrastructure  identifies where and how 
important information, such as customer records, is maintained and secured. 
 ■  Supporting change:   Agile MIS Infrastructure   includes the hardware, software, 
and telecommunications equipment that, when combined, provides the underlying 
foundation to support the organization’s goals.  
 ■  Supporting the environment:   Sustainable MIS infrastructure  identifies ways that 
a company can grow in terms of computing resources while simultaneously becom-
ing less dependent on hardware and energy consumption. 
 SUPPORTING OPERATIONS: INFORMATION MIS 
INFRASTRUCTURE  
 Imagine taking a quick trip to the printer on the other side of the room, and when you 
turn around you find that your laptop has been stolen. How painful would you find this 
experience? What types of information would you lose? How much time would it take 
you to recover all of that information? A few things you might lose include music, mov-
ies, emails, assignments, saved passwords, not to mention that all-important 40-page 
paper that took you more than a month to complete. If this sounds painful then you want 
to pay particular attention to this section and learn how to eliminate this pain. 
 An information MIS infrastructure identifies where and how important information 
is maintained and secured. An information infrastructure supports day-to-day business 
operations and plans for emergencies such as power outages, floods, earthquakes, mali-
cious attacks via the Internet, theft, and security breaches to name just a few. Managers 
must take every precaution to make sure their systems are operational and protected 
 LO 5.2:  Identify the three primary 
areas associated with an information 
MIS infrastructure. 
 FIGURE 5.1 
 MIS Infrastructures 
MIS Infrastructure
Information MIS
Infrastructure
Supports
Operations
Agile MIS
Infrastructure
Supports
Change
Sustainable MIS
Infrastructure
Supports
Sustainability
Backup
Recovery
Disaster Recovery
Business Continuity
Planning
Accessibility
Availability
Maintainability
Portability
Reliability
Scalability
Usability
Grid Computing
Cloud Computing
Virtualization

178
Chapter 5 Infrastructures: Sustainable Technologies
around the clock every day of the year. Losing a laptop or experiencing bad weather in 
one part of the country simply cannot take down systems required to operate core busi-
ness processes. In the past, someone stealing company information would have to carry 
out boxes upon boxes of paper. Today, as data storage technologies grow in capabilities 
while shrinking in size, a person can simply walk out the front door of the building with 
the company’s data files stored on a thumb drive or external hard drive. Today’s man-
agers must act responsibly to protect one of their most valued assets, information. To 
support continuous business operations, an information infrastructure provides three 
primary elements:
 ■ Backup and recovery plan. 
 ■ Disaster recovery plan. 
 ■ Business continuity plan (see  Figure 5.2 ). 
 Backup and Recovery Plan 
 Each year businesses lose time and money because of system crashes and failures. One 
way to minimize the damage of a system crash is to have a backup and recovery strategy 
in place. A   backup   is an exact copy of a system’s information.   Recovery    is the ability to 
get a system up and running in the event of a system crash or failure that includes restor-
ing the information backup. Many different types of backup and recovery media are 
available, including maintaining an identical replica or redundant of the storage server, 
external hard drives, thumb drives, and even DVDs. The primary differences between 
them are speed and cost. 
  Fault tolerance   is the ability for a system to respond to unexpected failures or system 
crashes as the backup system immediately and automatically takes over with no loss of 
service. For example, fault tolerance enables a business to support continuous business 
operations if there is a power failure or flood. Fault tolerance is an expensive form of 
backup, and only mission-critical applications and operations use it.   Failover  , a specific 
type of fault tolerance, occurs when a redundant storage server offers an exact replica of 
the real-time data, and if the primary server crashes, the users are automatically directed 
to the secondary server or backup server. This is a high-speed and high-cost method of 
backup and recovery.   Failback   occurs when the primary machine recovers and resumes 
operations, taking over from the secondary server. 
 FIGURE 5.2 
 Areas of Support Provided by 
Information Infrastructure 
Able to recover information
or systems in the event of a
catastrophic disaster such
as a ﬁre or ﬂood
• 
Creates a way for a company
to recover and restore
partially or completely
interrupted critical functions
within a predetermined time
after a disaster or extended
disruption
• 
Business Continuity
Planning
Backup: Provides an exact
copy of a system’s
information
• 
Recovery: Able to get a
system up and running after
a crash
• 
Backup and
Recovery
Disaster Recovery

179
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
 Using DVDs or thumb drives to store your data offers a low-speed and low-cost 
backup method. It is a good business practice to back up data at least once a week using 
a low-cost method. This will alleviate the pain of having your laptop stolen or your sys-
tem crash as you will still have access to your data, and it will only be a few days old. 
 Deciding how often to back up information and what media to use is a critical deci-
sion. Companies should choose a backup and recovery strategy in line with their goals 
and operational needs. If the company deals with large volumes of critical informa-
tion, it will require daily, perhaps hourly, backups to storage servers. If it relies on small 
amounts of noncritical information, then it might require only weekly backups to exter-
nal hard drives or thumb drives. A company that backs up on a weekly basis is taking 
the risk that, if a system crash occurs, it could lose a week’s worth of work. If this risk is 
acceptable, a weekly backup strategy will work. If it is unacceptable, the company needs 
more frequent backup. 
 Disaster Recovery Plan 
 Disasters such as power outages, fires, floods, hurricanes, and even malicious activities 
such as hackers and viruses strike companies every day. Disasters can have the following 
effects on companies and their business operations. 
 ■  Disrupting communications: Most companies depend on voice and data communi-
cations for daily operational needs. Widespread communications outages, from either 
direct damage to the infrastructure or sudden spikes in usage related to an outside 
disaster, can be as devastating to some firms as shutting down the whole business.  
 ■  Damaging physical infrastructures: Fire and flood can directly damage buildings, 
equipment, and systems, making structures unsafe and systems unusable. Law 
enforcement officers and firefighters may prohibit business professionals from enter-
ing a building, thereby restricting access to retrieve documents or equipment. 
 ■  Halting transportation:  Disasters such as floods and hurricanes can have a deep 
effect on transportation. Disruption to major highways, roads, bridges, railroads, and 
airports can prevent business professionals from reporting to work or going home, 
slow the delivery of supplies, and stop the shipment of products. 
 ■  Blocking utilities:  Public utilities, such as the supply of electric power, water, and 
natural gas, can be interrupted for hours or days even in incidents that cause no 
direct damage to the physical infrastructure. Buildings are often uninhabitable and 
systems unable to function without public utilities. 
 BUSINESS DRIVEN START-UP 
 Think how horrible it would be to finish your term paper at 4 a.m. and find out 
that your computer has a virus and you just lost your entire document. Or per-
haps you submit your final paper, which is worth 50 percent of your grade, and 
then head off to Colorado for winter break. You return to find that you failed the 
course, and you frantically check email to find out what happened. A message 
from your professor informs you that your document was corrupt and couldn’t 
be opened and that you had 24 hours to resend the file, which you missed 
because you were skiing down the slopes. 
 Have you ever experienced having a file corrupted? If so, what could you 
have done to recover from this situation? Do you think your instructor ever 
receives corrupted files? How did the file become corrupted? Do you think your 
instructor would be suspicious if you submitted a corrupted file? How could an 
instructor prove that your file was purchased from this site? 
 I Don’t Have a 
Temperature, 
but I’m Positive 
I Have a Virus 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 

180
Chapter 5 Infrastructures: Sustainable Technologies
 These effects can devastate companies by causing them to cease operations for hours, 
days, or longer and risk losing customers whom they cannot then supply. Therefore, 
to combat these disasters a company can create a   disaster recovery plan  , which is a 
detailed process for recovering information or a system in the event of a catastrophic 
disaster. This plan includes such factors as which files and systems need to have back-
ups and their corresponding frequency and methods along with the strategic location 
of the storage in a separate physical site that is geographically dispersed. A company 
might strategically maintain operations in New York and San Francisco, ensuring that 
a natural disaster would not impact both locations. A disaster recovery plan also fore-
sees the possibility that not only the computer equipment but also the building where 
employees work may be destroyed. A   hot site   is a separate and fully equipped facil-
ity where the company can move immediately after a disaster and resume business. A 
  cold site   is a separate facility that does not have any computer equipment but is a place 
where employees can move after a disaster. A   warm site   is a separate facility with com-
puter equipment that requires installation and configuration.  Figure 5.3  outlines these 
resources that support disaster recovery. 
 A disaster recovery plan usually has a disaster recovery cost curve to support it. A 
   disaster recovery cost curve    charts (1) the cost to the company of the unavailability of 
information and technology and (2) the cost to the company of recovering from a disas-
ter over time.  Figure 5.4  displays a disaster recovery cost curve and shows that the best 
recovery plan in terms of cost and time is where the two lines intersect. Creating such a 
curve is no small task. Managers must consider the cost of losing information and tech-
nology within each department or functional area, and across the whole company. Dur-
ing the first few hours of a disaster, those costs may be low, but they rise over time. With 
those costs in hand, a company must then determine the costs of recovery. 
 FIGURE 5.3 
 Sites to Support Disaster 
Recovery 
A separate and fully
equipped facility where
the company can move
immediately after a
disaster and resume
business.
Hot Site
A separate facility that
does not have any
computer equipment,
but is a place where
employees can move
after a disaster.
Cold Site
A separate facility
with computer
equipment that
requires installation and
conﬁguration.
Warm Site
 FIGURE 5.4 
 Disaster Recovery Cost Curve 
Dollars
Time from Disaster to Recovery
The optimal disaster
recovery plan in terms
of cost and time
The cost to your organization of
the unavailability of information
and technology
The cost to your organization
to recover from a disaster

181
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
 On April 18, 1906, San Francisco was rocked by an earthquake that destroyed large 
sections of the city and claimed the lives of more than 3,000 inhabitants. More than a 
century later, a rebuilt and more durable San Francisco serves as a central location for 
major MIS corporations as well as a major world financial center. Managers of these cor-
porations are well aware of the potential disasters that exist along the San Andreas Fault 
and actively update their business continuity plans anticipating such issues as earth-
quakes and floods. The Union Bank of California is located in the heart of downtown 
San Francisco and maintains a highly detailed and well-developed business continuity 
plan. The company employs hundreds of business professionals scattered around the 
world that coordinate plans for addressing the potential loss of a facility, business pro-
fessionals, or critical systems so that the company can continue to operate if a disaster 
happens. Its disaster recovery plan includes hot sites where staff can walk in and start 
working exactly as if they were in their normal location. It would be a matter of minutes, 
not hours, for the Union Bank of California to be up and running again in the event of a 
disaster. 2 
 Business Continuity Plan 
 An   emergency   is a sudden, unexpected event requiring immediate action due to poten-
tial threat to health and safety, the environment, or property.   Emergency preparedness 
ensures a company is ready to respond to an emergency in an organized, timely, and 
effective manner. Natural disasters and terrorist attacks are on the minds of business 
professionals who take safeguarding their information assets seriously. Disaster recov-
ery plans typically focus on systems and data, ignoring cross-functional and intraorgani-
zational business processes that can be destroyed during an emergency. For this reason 
many companies are turning to a more comprehensive and all-encompassing emer-
gency preparedness plan known as    business continuity planning (BCP)   ,  which details 
how a company recovers and restores critical business operations and systems after a 
disaster or extended disruption. BCP includes such factors as identifying critical sys-
tems, business processes, departments, and the maximum amount of time the business 
can continue to operate without functioning systems. BCP contains disaster recovery 
plans along with many additional plans, including prioritizing business impact analysis, 
emergency notification plans, and technology recovery strategies (see  Figure 5.5 ). 
 FIGURE 5.5 
 Business Continuity Planning 
Focus Areas 
Disaster
Recovery
Plan
Technology
Recovery
Strategies
Emergency
Notiﬁcation
Services
Business
Impact
Analysis
Business
Continuity
Planning

182
Chapter 5 Infrastructures: Sustainable Technologies
 Business Impact Analysis   
A    business impact analysis    identifies all critical 
business functions and the effect that a specific disaster may have upon them. A busi-
ness impact analysis is primarily used to ensure a company has made the right deci-
sions about the order of recovery priorities and strategies. For example, should the 
accounting department have its systems up and running before the sales and market-
ing departments? Will email be the first system for recovery to ensure employees can 
communicate with each other and outside stakeholders such as customers, suppli-
ers, and partners? The business impact analysis is a key part of BCP as it details the 
order in which functional areas should be restored, ensuring the most critical are 
focused on first.  
 Emergency Notification Services   A business continuity plan typically includes 
an   emergency notification service  , that is, an infrastructure built for notifying people in 
the event of an emergency. Radio stations’ occasional tests of the national Emergency 
Alert System are an example of a very large-scale emergency notification system. A firm 
will implement an emergency notification service to warn employees of  unexpected 
events and provide them with instructions about how to handle the situation. Emer-
gency notification services can be deployed through the firm’s own infrastructure, 
 supplied by an outside service provider on company premises, or hosted remotely by 
an outside service provider. All three methods provide notification using a variety of 
methods such as email, voice notification to a cell phone, and text messaging. The noti-
fications can be sent to all the devices selected, providing multiple means in which to 
get critical information to those who need it.  
 Technology Recovery Strategies   Companies create massive amounts of data 
vital to their survival and continued operations. A   technology failure   occurs when the 
ability of a company to operate is impaired because of a hardware, software, or data out-
age. Technology failures can destroy large amounts of vital data, often causing   incidents  , 
unplanned interruption of a service. An   incident record  contains all of the details of an 
incident.   Incident management   is the process responsible for managing how incidents 
are identified and corrected.   Technology recovery strategies   focus specifically on priori-
tizing the order for restoring hardware, software, and data across the organization that 
best meets business recovery requirements. A technology recovery strategy details the 
order of importance for recovering hardware, software, data centers, and networking (or 
connectivity). If one of these four vital components is not functioning, the entire system 
will be unavailable, shutting down cross-functional business processes such as order 
management and payroll.  Figure 5.6  displays the key areas a company should focus on 
when developing technology recovery strategies. 
 FIGURE 5.6 
 Key Areas of Technology 
Recovery Strategies  
Technology
Recovery
Strategies
NETWORKING
(Wireless, LAN,
Fiber, Cable)
SOFTWARE
(Applications
such as Email,
Payroll, Instant
Messaging) 
DATA CENTER
(Climate Control,
Power Supply,
Security) 
HARDWARE
(Servers,
Computers,
Wireless
Devices)

183
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
 SUPPORTING CHANGE: AGILE MIS INFRASTRUCTURE  
 Agile MIS infrastructure includes the hardware, software, and telecommunications 
equipment that, when combined, provides the underlying foundation to support the 
organization’s goals. If a company grows by 50 percent in a single year, its infrastructure 
and systems must be able to handle a 50 percent growth rate. If they cannot, they can 
severely hinder the company’s ability not only to grow but also to function. 
 The future of a company depends on its ability to meet its partners, suppliers, and cus-
tomers any time of the day in any geographic location. Imagine owning an ebusiness and 
everyone on the Internet is tweeting and collaborating about how great your business 
idea is and how successful your company is going to be. Suddenly, you have 5 million 
global customers interested in your website. Unfortunately, you did not anticipate this 
many customers so quickly, and the system crashes. Users typing in your URL find a 
blank message stating the website is unavailable and to try back soon. Or even worse, 
they can get to your website but it takes three minutes to reload each time they click on 
a button. The buzz soon dies about your business idea as some innovative web-savvy 
fast follower quickly copies your idea and creates a website that can handle the massive 
number of customers. The characteristics of agile MIS infrastructures can help ensure 
your systems can meet and perform under any unexpected or unplanned changes.  
Figure 5.7 lists the seven abilities of an agile infrastructure.  
 Accessibility 
  Accessibility   refers to the varying levels that define what a user can access, view, or per-
form when operating a system. Imagine the people at your college accessing the main 
student information system. Each person that accesses the system will have different 
needs and requirements; for example, a payroll employee will need to access vacation 
information and salary information, or a student will need to access course information 
and billing information. Each system user is provided with an access level that details 
which parts of the system the user can and cannot access and what the user can do 
when in the system. For example, you would not want your students to be able to view 
payroll information or professor’s personal information; also, some users can only view 
 LO 5.3:  Describe the characteristics 
of an agile MIS infrastructure. 
 BUSINESS DRIVEN MIS 
 Backup and recovery are essential for any computer system. How painful would 
it be if someone stole your laptop right now? How much critical information 
would you lose? How many hours would it take you to re-create your data? 
Perhaps that will motivate you to implement a backup procedure. How many 
of you have a disaster recovery plan? Disaster recovery is needed when your 
best friend dumps a grande latte on your computer or you accidently wash your 
thumb drive. 
 Disaster recovery plans are crucial for any business, and you should ensure 
that your company has everything it needs to continue operations if there is 
ever a disaster, such as 9/11. You need to decide which disasters are worth wor-
rying about and which ones are probably never going to occur. For example, 
if you live in Colorado, chances are good you don’t have to worry about hur-
ricanes, but avalanches are another story. 
 How often does a company need to back up its data? Where should the 
backup be stored? What types of disasters should companies in your state pre-
pare for in case of an emergency? Why is it important to test the backup? What 
could happen to a company if it failed to create a disaster recovery plan?  
 Disaster 
Recovery 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 

184
Chapter 5 Infrastructures: Sustainable Technologies
information and are not allowed to create or delete information. Top-level MIS employ-
ees require   administrator access  ,  or unrestricted access to the entire system. Adminis-
trator access can perform functions such as resetting passwords, deleting accounts, and 
shutting down entire systems. 
 Tim Berners-Lee, W3C director and inventor of the World Wide Web, stated, “the 
power of the web is in its universality. Access by everyone regardless of disability is an 
essential aspect.”   Web accessibility   means that people with disabilities, including visual, 
auditory, physical, speech, cognitive, and neurological disabilities, can use the web. The 
   web accessibility initiative (WAI)    brings together people from industry, disability orga-
nizations, government, and research labs from around the world to develop guidelines 
and resources to help make the web accessible to people with disabilities, including 
auditory, cognitive, neurological, physical, speech, and visual disabilities. The goal of 
WAI is to allow people to access the full potential of the web, enabling people with dis-
abilities to participate equally. For example, Apple includes screen magnification and 
VoiceOver on its iPhone, iPad, and iPod, which allows the blind and visually impaired to 
use the devices. 
 Availability 
 In a 24/7/365 ebusiness environment, business professionals need to use their systems 
whenever they want from wherever they want.   Availability   refers to the time frames 
when the system is operational. A system is called   unavailable   when it is not operat-
ing and cannot be used.   High availability   occurs when a system is continuously opera-
tional at all times. Availability is typically measured relative to “100 percent operational” 
or “never failing.” A widely held but difficult-to-achieve standard of availability for a 
system is known as “five 9s” (99.999 percent) availability. Some companies have sys-
tems available around the clock to support ebusiness operations, global customers, and 
online suppliers. 
 FIGURE 5.7 
 Agile MIS Infrastructure 
Characteristics 
•  The system is operational during different time frames.
•  The system functions correctly and provides accurate
   information.
•  The system can “scale up” or adapt to the increased
   demands of growth.
•  The system is easy to learn and efﬁcient and satisfying
   to use.
•  Varying levels allow system users to access,
   view, or perform operational functions.
Accessibility
Accessibility
Ac
Acce
cess
ssibibililitity
Ac
Acce
cess
ssibibililitity
Accessibility
Availability
Reliability
Scalability
Usability
Maintainability
•  The system is available to operate on different devices
   or software platforms.
•  The system quickly transforms to support environmental
   changes.
Portability

185
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
 Sometimes systems must be taken down for maintenance, upgrades, and fixes, which 
are completed during downtime .  One challenge with availability is determining when to 
schedule system downtime if the system is expected to operate continuously. Performing 
maintenance during the evening might seem like a great idea, but evening in one city is 
morning somewhere else in the world, and business professionals scattered around the 
globe may not be able to perform specific job functions if the systems they need are unavail-
able. This is where companies deploy failover systems so they can take the primary system 
down for maintenance and activate the secondary system to ensure continuous operations.  
 Maintainability 
 Companies must watch today’s needs, as well as tomorrow’s, when designing and building 
systems that support agile infrastructures. Systems must be flexible enough to meet all types 
of company changes, environmental changes, and business changes.   Maintainability 
(or flexibility)    refers to how quickly a system can transform to support environmental 
changes. Maintainability helps to measure how quickly and effectively a system can be 
changed or repaired after a failure. For example, when starting a small business you might 
not consider that you will have global customers, a common mistake. When building 
your systems, you might not design them to handle multiple currencies and different lan-
guages, which might make sense if the company is not currently performing international 
business. Unfortunately, when the first international order arrives, which happens easily 
with ebusiness, the system will be unable to handle the request because it does not have 
the flexibility to be easily reconfigured for a new language or currency. When the company 
does start growing and operating overseas, the system will need to be redeveloped, which 
is not an easy or cheap task, to handle multiple currencies and different languages. 
 Building and deploying flexible systems allow easy updates, changes, and reconfigu-
rations for unexpected business or environmental changes. Just think what might have 
happened if Facebook had to overhaul its entire system to handle multiple languages. 
Another social networking business could easily have stepped in and become the pro-
vider of choice. That certainly would not be efficient or effective for business operations.  
 Portability 
  Portability  refers to the ability of an application to operate on different devices or soft-
ware platforms, such as different operating systems. Apple’s iTunes is readily available to 
users of Mac computers and also users of PC computers, smartphones, iPods, iPhones, 
iPads, and so on. It is also a portable application. Because Apple insists on compatibil-
ity across its products, both software and hardware, Apple can easily add to its product, 
device, and service offerings without sacrificing portability. Many software develop-
ers are creating programs that are portable to all three devices—the iPhone, iPod, and 
iPad—which increases their target market and they hope their revenue. 
 Reliability 
  Reliability (or accuracy)   ensures a system is functioning correctly and providing accu-
rate information. Inaccuracy can occur for many reasons, from the incorrect entry of 
information to the corruption of information during transmissions. Many argue that the 
information contained in Wikipedia is unreliable. Because the Wikipedia entries can be 
edited by any user, there are examples of rogue users inaccurately updating information. 
Many users skip over Google search findings that correlate to Wikipedia for this reason. 
Housing unreliable information on a website can put a company at risk of losing custom-
ers, placing inaccurate supplier orders, or even making unreliable business decisions. A 
  vulnerability   is a system weakness, such as a password that is never changed or a sys-
tem left on while an employee goes to lunch, that can be exploited by a threat. Reliable 
systems ensure that vulnerabilities are kept at a minimum to reduce risk. 
 Scalability 
 Estimating company growth is a challenging task, in part because growth can occur in 
a number of different forms—the firm can acquire new customers, new product lines, 

186
Chapter 5 Infrastructures: Sustainable Technologies
or new markets.   Scalability   describes how well a system can scale up, or adapt to the 
increased demands of growth. If a company grows faster than anticipated, it might expe-
rience a variety of problems, from running out of storage space to taking more time to 
complete transactions. Anticipating expected, and unexpected, growth is key to building 
scalable systems that can support that development. 
  Performance   measures how quickly a system performs a process or transaction. Per-
formance is a key component of scalability as systems that can’t scale suffer from perfor-
mance issues. Just imagine your college’s content management system suddenly taking 
five minutes to return a page after a button is pushed. Now imagine if this occurs during 
your midterm exam and you miss the two-hour deadline because the system is so slow. 
Performance issues experienced by firms can have disastrous business impacts causing 
loss of customers, loss of suppliers, and even loss of help-desk employees. Most users 
will wait only a few seconds for a website to return a request before growing frustrated 
and either calling the support desk or giving up and moving on to another website. 
  Capacity  represents the maximum throughput a system can deliver; for example, 
the capacity of a hard drive represents its size or volume.   Capacity planning  deter-
mines future environmental infrastructure requirements to ensure high-quality system 
performance. If a company purchases connectivity software that is outdated or too 
slow to meet demand, its employees will waste a great deal of time waiting for systems 
to respond to user requests. It is cheaper for a company to design and implement agile 
infrastructure that envisions growth requirements than to update all the equipment after 
the system is already operational. If a company with 100 workers merges with another 
company and suddenly there are 400 people using the system, performance time could 
suffer. Planning for increases in capacity can ensure systems perform as expected. Wait-
ing for a system to respond to requests is not productive. 
 Web 2.0 is a big driver for capacity planning to ensure agile infrastructures can meet 
the business’s operational needs. Delivering videos over the Internet requires enough 
bandwidth to satisfy millions of users during peak periods such as Friday and Saturday 
evenings. Video transmissions over the Internet cannot tolerate packet loss (blocks of 
data loss), and allowing one additional user to access the system could degrade the 
video quality for every user. 
 BUSINESS DRIVEN MIS 
 Do you know how Google makes so much money? Unlike traditional busi-
nesses, Google does not make money from the users of its service. Google 
makes money by charging the companies that want to appear in the sponsored 
section of a search result. After performing a Google search, you will notice 
three sections on the resulting page. Along the top and side are the sponsored 
search results, and the middle lists the organic search results. Google’s innova-
tive marketing program, called AdWords, allows companies to bid on common 
search terms, and the highest bidder is posted first in the sponsored search 
results. Every time a user clicks on a sponsored link, the company that owns the 
link has to pay Google. This is also called pay-per-click and can cost anywhere 
from a few cents to a few dollars for each click. A general search term such as 
“tropical vacation” costs less than a more specific search term like “Hawaiian 
vacation.” Whichever company bids the most for the search term appears at the 
top of the sponsored section. Clicking on the links in the organic search results 
does not incur any charges for the company that owns the link. 
 Rank the agile infrastructure ab-“ilities” for Google from most important to 
least important in terms of supporting Google’s MIS infrastructure and busi-
ness operations. Be sure to provide the justification behind your ranking.  
 Ranking the 
Ab-“ilities” 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 

187
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
 Usability 
  Usability   is the degree to which a system is easy to learn and efficient and satisfying to 
use. Providing hints, tips, shortcuts, and instructions for any system, regardless of its ease 
of use, is recommended. Apple understood the importance of usability when it designed 
the first iPod. One of the iPod’s initial attractions was the usability of the click wheel. 
One simple and efficient button operates the iPod, making it usable for all ages. And to 
ensure ease of use, Apple also made the corresponding iTunes software intuitive and 
easy to use.   Serviceability   is how quickly a third party can change a system to ensure it 
meets user needs and the terms of any contracts, including agreed levels of reliability, 
maintainability, or availability. When using a system from a third party, it is important to 
ensure the right level of serviceability for all users, including remote employees. 
  section 5.2 
Building Sustainable MIS Infrastructures 
 LE AR NI NG  O UT CO M E S 
 5.4 Identify the environmental impacts associated with MIS. 
 5.5 Explain the three components of a sustainable MIS infrastructure along with their business benefits. 
 MIS AND THE ENVIRONMENT  
 The general trend in MIS is toward smaller, faster, and cheaper devices. Gordon Moore, 
co-founder of Intel, the world’s largest producer of computer chips or microprocessors, 
observed in 1965 that continued advances in technological innovation made it possible 
to reduce the size of a computer chip (the brains of a computer, or even a cell phone 
now) while doubling its capacity every two years. His prediction that this trend would 
continue has come to be known as   Moore’s Law  ,  which refers to the computer chip per-
formance per dollar doubles every 18 months. Although Moore originally assumed a 
two-year period, many sources today refer to the 18-month figure.  
 Moore’s Law is great for many companies as they can acquire large amounts of MIS 
equipment for cheaper and cheaper costs. As ebusinesses continue to grow, companies 
equip their employees with multiple forms of electronic devices ranging from laptops 
to cell phones to iPads. This is great for supporting a connected corporation, significant 
unintended side effects include our dependence upon fossil fuels and increased need 
for safe disposal of outdated computing equipment. Concern about these side effects 
has led many companies to turn to an ecological practice known as sustainable MIS. 
   Sustainable, or green, MIS    describes the production, management, use, and disposal 
of technology in a way that minimizes damage to the environment. Sustainable MIS 
 LO 5.4:  Identify the environmental 
impacts associated with MIS. 
 BUSINESS DRIVEN DEBATE 
 Thanks to Moore’s Law, computing devices are getting smaller, cheaper, and 
faster every year, allowing innovative companies to create new devices that are 
smaller and more powerful than current devices. Just look at desktop, laptop, 
notebook, and tablet computers. These are all different devices allowing users 
to connect and compute around the globe. Moore’s Law has been accurate 
about computing power roughly doubling every 18 months. Do you agree or 
disagree that Moore’s Law will continue to apply for the next 20 years? Why or 
why not? 
 Laptop? 
Notebook? 
Netbook? 
Tablet? 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 

188
Chapter 5 Infrastructures: Sustainable Technologies
 BUSINESS DRIVEN ETHICS AND SECURITY 
 By some estimates, there may be as many as 1 billion surplus or obsolete com-
puters and monitors in the world. Consider California, where 6,000 computers 
become surplus every day. If not disposed of properly, this enormous ewaste 
stream, which can contain more than 1,000 different toxic substances, is harm-
ful to human beings and the environment. Beryllium is found in computer 
motherboards, chromium in floppy disks, lead in batteries and computer mon-
itors, and mercury in alkaline batteries. One of the most toxic chemicals known 
is cadmium, found in many old laptops and computer chips. 
 In poorer countries, where the United States and Europe export some of 
their ewaste, the full impact of the environmental damage is quickly being 
realized. These areas have little use for obsolete electronic equipment so local 
recyclers resell some parts and burn the rest in illegal dumps, often near resi-
dential areas, releasing toxic and carcinogenic substances into the air, land, 
and water. 3  
 Have you ever participated in ewaste? What can you do to ensure you are 
safely disposing of electronic equipment including batteries? What can gov-
ernments do to encourage companies to safely dispose of ewaste? What can be 
done to protect poorer countries from receiving ewaste? Create a list of the ways 
you can safely dispose of cell phones, computers, printers, ink cartridges, MP3 
players, and batteries. What could you do to inform citizens of the issues associ-
ated with ewaste and educate them on safe disposal practices?  
 Ewaste and the 
Environment 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 
is a critical part of   corporate social responsibility   ,  that is, companies’ acknowledged 
responsibility to society. Building sustainable MIS infrastructures is a core initiative and 
critical success factor for socially responsible corporations.  Figure 5.8  displays the three 
primary side effects of businesses’ expanded use of technology. 
 Increased Electronic Waste 
 Moore’s Law has made technological devices smaller, cheaper, and faster, allowing 
more people from all income levels to purchase computing equipment. This increased 
demand is causing numerous environmental issues.   Ewaste   refers to discarded, obso-
lete, or broken electronic devices. Ewaste includes CDs, DVDs, thumb drives, printer 
cartridges, cell phones, iPods, external hard drives, TVs, VCRs, DVD players, micro-
waves, and so on. Some say one human year is equivalent to seven years of technological 
advancements. A personal computer has a life expectancy of only three to five years and 
a cell phone is less than two years. 
  Sustainable MIS disposal   refers to the safe disposal of MIS assets at the end of their 
life cycle. It ensures that ewaste does not end up in landfills causing environmental 
issues. A single computer contains more than 700 chemicals; some are toxic, such as 
mercury, lead, and cadmium. If a computer ends up in a landfill, the toxic substances 
it contains can leach into our land, water, and air. Recycling costs from $15 to $50 for a 
monitor or computer. Many companies, including public schools and universities, sim-
ply can’t afford the recycling costs. 4 
 Ewaste also occurs when unused equipment stored in attics, basements, and stor-
age facilities never reaches a recycling center. Retrieving the silver, gold, and other valu-
able metals from these devices is more efficient and less environmentally harmful than 
removing it from its natural environment. 
 Currently, less than 20 percent of ewaste in the United States is recycled; however, 
even recycling does not guarantee the equipment is disposed of safely. While some 
recyclers process the material ethically, others ship it to countries such as China and 

189
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
India, where environmental enforcement is weak. This action poses its own global 
environmental problems.  
 Increased Energy Consumption 
  Energy consumption   is the amount of energy consumed by business processes and 
systems. Huge increases in technology use have greatly amplified energy consumption. 
The energy consumed by a computer is estimated to produce as much as 10 percent 
of the amount of carbon dioxide produced by an automobile. Computer servers in the 
United States account for about 1 percent of the total energy needs of the country. Put 
in perspective, this is roughly equivalent to the energy consumption of Mississippi. 
 Computers consume energy even when they are not being used. For convenience and 
to allow for automatic updates and backup, the majority of computer equipment is never 
completely shut down. It draws energy 24 hours a day. 
 Increased Carbon Emissions 
 The major human-generated greenhouse gases, such as carbon emissions from energy 
use, are very likely responsible for the increases in climatic temperature over the past half a 
century. Additional temperature increases are projected over the next hundred years, with 
serious consequences for Earth’s environment, if   carbon emissions  ,  including the carbon 
dioxide and carbon monoxide produced by business processes and systems, are not reduced. 
 In the United States, coal provides more than 50 percent of electrical power. When left 
on continuously, a single desktop computer and monitor can consume at least 100 watts 
of power per hour. To generate that much energy 24 hours a day for a year would require 
approximately 714 pounds of coal. When that coal is burned, it releases on average 
5 pounds of sulfur dioxide, 5 pounds of nitrogen oxides, and 1,852 pounds (that is almost 
a ton) of carbon dioxide. 5 
 SUPPORTING THE ENVIRONMENT: SUSTAINABLE 
MIS INFRASTRUCTURE  
 Combating ewaste, energy consumption, and carbon emissions requires a firm to focus 
on creating sustainable MIS infrastructures. A sustainable MIS infrastructure identifies 
ways that a company can grow in terms of computing resources while simultaneously 
becoming less dependent on hardware and energy consumption. The components of a 
sustainable MIS infrastructure are displayed in  Figure 5.9   .
 Grid Computing 
 When a light is turned on, the power grid delivers exactly what is needed, instantly. 
Computers and networks can now work that way using grid computing.   Grid computing  
is a collection of computers, often geographically dispersed, that are coordinated to 
 LO 5.5:  Explain the three 
components of a sustainable MIS 
infrastructure along with their 
business benefits. 
 FIGURE 5.8 
 Three Pressures Driving 
Sustainable MIS Infrastructures 
Increased
Energy
Consumption
Increased
Carbon
Emissions
Increased
Electronic
Waste

190
Chapter 5 Infrastructures: Sustainable Technologies
solve a common problem. With grid computing a problem is broken into pieces and 
distributed to many machines, allowing faster processing than could occur with a single 
system. Computers typically use less than 25 percent of their processing power, leav-
ing more than 75 percent available for other tasks. Innovatively, grid computing takes 
advantage of this unused processing power by linking thousands of individual com-
puters around the world to create a “virtual supercomputer” that can process intensive 
tasks. Grid computing makes better use of MIS resources, allowing greater scalability 
as systems can easily grow to handle peaks and valleys in demand, become more cost 
efficient, and solve problems that would be impossible to tackle with a single computer 
(see  Figure 5.10 ). 6   
 BUSINESS DRIVEN DISCUSSION 
 Cheap electricity is great for keeping business costs down, but it often means 
relying on coal for power. Facebook recently commissioned a new comput-
ing facility in Oregon and is using power from PacifiCorp, a utility that gets 
the majority of its energy from coal-fired power stations, which are major con-
tributors of greenhouse gas emissions. As more and more people subscribe to 
Facebook, its energy needs are increasing almost exponentially. 
 Do you agree that Facebook made a wise business decision in selecting a 
utility provider that uses coal-fired power stations? What alternative sources 
of energy could Facebook have used to power its computing facility? Do you 
think Facebook’s core customers care about the environment? What types of 
business challenges might Facebook encounter if it continues using coal-fired 
power stations? 
 Facebook’s 
Energy Use 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 
 FIGURE 5.9 
 Sustainable MIS Infrastructure 
Components 
Grid
Computing
Virtualized
Computing
Cloud
Computing

191
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
 The uses of grid computing are numerous, including the creative environment of 
animated movies. DreamWorks Animation used grid computing to complete many of 
its hit films including  Antz, Shrek, Madagascar,  and  How to Train Your Dragon. The 
third  Shrek  film required more than 20 million computer hours to make (compared to 
5 million for the first  Shrek  and 10 million for the second). At peak production times, 
DreamWorks dedicated more than 4,000 computers to its  Shrek  grid, allowing it to 
complete scenes in days and hours instead of months. With the increased grid com-
puting power, the DreamWork’s animators were able to add more realistic movement 
to water, fire, and magic scenes (see  Figure 5.11 ). With grid computing a company can 
work faster or more efficiently, providing a potential competitive advantage and addi-
tional cost savings. 7   
 FIGURE 5.10 
 Grid Computing Example 
 FIGURE 5.11 
 Making  Shrek 2 with Grid 
Computing 

192
Chapter 5 Infrastructures: Sustainable Technologies
 Solving the Energy Issue with Smart Grids   A   smart grid  delivers electricity 
using two-way digital technology. It is meant to solve the problem of the world’s outdated 
electrical grid, making it more efficient and reliable by adding the ability to remotely mon-
itor, analyze, and control the transmission of power. The current U.S. power grid is said to 
have outlived its life expectancy by as much as 30 years. Smart grids provide users with 
real-time usage monitoring, allowing them to choose off-peak times for noncritical or less 
urgent applications or processes. Residents of Boulder, Colorado, can monitor their use of 
electricity and control appliances remotely due to the city’s large-scale smart grid system. 
Xcel Energy has installed 21,000 smart grid meters since the $100 million program started 
several years ago. Energy use by early adopters is down as much as 45 percent. 8    
 Virtualized Computing 
 Most computers and even servers typically run only one operating system, such as Win-
dows or Mac OS, and only one application. When a company invests in a large system such 
as inventory management, it dedicates a single server to house the system. This ensures the 
system has enough capacity to run during peak times and to scale to meet demand. Also, 
many systems have specific hardware requirements along with detailed software require-
ments, making it difficult to find two systems with the same requirements that could share 
the same machine. Through the use of virtualization, computers can run multiple operat-
ing systems along with multiple software applications—all at the same time.   Virtualization   
creates multiple “virtual” machines on a single computing device. A good analogy is a 
computer printer. In the past you had to purchase a fax machine, copy machine, answering 
machine, and computer printer separately. This was expensive, required enough energy to 
run four separate machines, not to mention created additional amounts of ewaste. Today, 
you can buy a virtualized computer printer that functions as a fax machine, answering 
machine, and copy machine all on one physical machine, thereby reducing costs, power 
requirements, and ewaste. Virtualization is essentially a form of consolidation that can 
benefit sustainable MIS infrastructures in a variety of ways, for example:
 ■ By increasing availability of applications that can give a higher level of performance 
depending on the hardware used. 
 ■ By increasing energy efficiency by requiring less hardware to run multiple systems 
or applications. 
 ■ By increasing hardware usability by running multiple operating systems on a single 
computer. 
 Originally, computers were designed to run a single application on a single operating 
system. This left most computers vastly underutilized (as mentioned earlier, 75 percent of 
most computing power is available for other tasks). Virtualization allows multiple virtual 
computers to exist on a single machine, which allows it to share its resources, such as mem-
ory and hard disk space, to run different applications and even different operating systems. 
Mac computers have the ability to run both the Apple operating system and the Windows 
PC operating system, with the use of virtualization software (see  Figure 5.12 ). Unfortu-
nately, virtualization, at least at the moment, is not available for a PC to run Mac software.  
 Virtualization is also one of the easiest and quickest ways to achieve a sustainable MIS 
infrastructure because it reduces power consumption and requires less equipment that 
needs to be manufactured, maintained, and later disposed of safely. Managers no lon-
ger have to assign servers, storage, or network capacity permanently to single applica-
tions. Instead, they can assign the hardware resources when and where they are needed, 
achieving the availability, flexibility, and scalability a company needs to thrive and grow. 
Also, by virtually separating the operating system and applications from the hardware, 
if there is a disaster or hardware failure, it is easy to port the virtual machine to a new 
physical machine allowing a company to recovery quickly from disasters. One of the 
primary uses of virtualization is for performing backup, recovery, and disaster recovery. 
Using virtual servers or a virtualization service provider, such as Google, Microsoft, or 
Amazon, to host disaster recovery is more sustainable than a single company incurring 
the expense of having redundant physical systems. Also, these providers’ data centers 
are built to withstand natural disasters and are typically located far away from big cities. 

193
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
 BUSINESS DRIVEN INNOVATION 
 Virtualization is a challenging concept to understand. The formal definition is 
that it creates multiple “virtual” machines on a single computing device. OK, 
let’s try that again in English. Imagine you have three cell phones, one for the 
company you work for, one for a company you are starting on the side, and one 
for personal calls. For the most part the phones are idle and they seldom ever 
ring at the same time. Since the phones are idle the majority of the time, you 
notice that it is a waste of time and resources to support idle time, especially 
when you are paying for cell service on each phone. You decide to use virtual-
ization to help your situation. 
 Essentially, this would put three virtual cell phones on one device. The indi-
vidual services and application for each phone would be independently stored 
on the one device. From the device’s perspective, it sees three separate virtual 
phones. This saves time and money in expenses and maintenance. You could 
even use virtualization to turn your cell phone into a scanner. Visit  ScanR.com  
and for just $5 a month you can use the camera on your phone to scan docu-
ments. Take a photo of any document, business card, or whiteboard and upload 
it to ScanR’s website and in minutes it is returned to you in a digital file. Could 
be helpful if your friend has to miss class and you want to copy your lecture 
notes. 9 
 Virtualization is a hot topic these days as more and more businesses are 
focusing on social responsibility and attempting to find ways to reduce their 
carbon footprints. Create an analogy similar to the cell phone that demon-
strates virtualization. What are the potential environmental impacts associated 
with virtualization? What are the business advantages of virtualization? What 
are the business risks associated with virtualization? 
 Virtualization for 
Your Cell Phone 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 
 FIGURE 5.12 
 Virtualization Allows an Apple 
Macintosh Computer to Run OS 
X and Windows 7 
MAC OS X
Running
Mac
software
Sharing memory and hard disk
space
WINDOWS 7
Running
Windows 7
software
Apple Macintosh Computer
 Virtual Data Centers   A   data center   is a facility used to house management infor-
mation systems and associated components, such as telecommunications and stor-
age systems. Data centers, sometimes referred to as server farms, consume power and 
require cooling and floor space while working to support business growth without 

194
Chapter 5 Infrastructures: Sustainable Technologies
disrupting normal business operations and the quality of service. The amount of data a 
data center stores has grown exponentially over the years as our reliance on information 
increases. Backups, graphics, documents, presentations, photos, audio and video files 
all contribute to the ever-expanding information footprint that requires storage. One of 
the most effective ways to limit the power consumption and cooling requirements of a 
data center is to consolidate parts of the physical infrastructure, particularly by reduc-
ing the number of physical servers through virtualization. For this reason, virtualization 
is having a profound impact on data centers as the sheer number of servers a company 
requires to operate decreases, thereby boosting growth and performance while reducing 
environmental impact, as shown in  Figure 5.13 . Google, Microsoft, Amazon, and Yahoo! 
have all created data centers along the Columbia River in the northwestern United States. 
In this area, each company can benefit from affordable land, high-speed Internet access, 
plentiful water for cooling, and even more important, inexpensive electricity. These fac-
tors are critical to today’s large-scale data centers, whose sheer size and power needs far 
surpass those of the previous generation. Microsoft’s data center in Quincy, Washington, 
is larger than 10 football fields and is powered entirely by hydroelectricity, power gener-
ated from flowing water rather than from the burning of coal or other fossil fuel. 11 
 If we take a holistic and integrated approach to overall company growth, the benefits 
of integrating information MIS infrastructures, environmental MIS infrastructures, and 
sustainable MIS infrastructures become obvious. For example, a company could easily 
create a backup of its software and important information in one or more geographically 
 FIGURE 5.13 
 Ways for Data Centers to 
Become Sustainable 
Stores greater
amounts of
information in
less space
Reduce energy
consumption
Resources are
inexpensive,
clean, and
available
Carbon
Emissions
Floor
Space
Geographic
Location
 BUSINESS DRIVEN GLOBALIZATION 
 Google is considering constructing a floating data center three to seven miles 
offshore that could be both powered and cooled by the ocean. It would consist 
of containers stacked with servers, data storage systems, and networking equip-
ment on barges or other platforms and could be located close to users wherever 
it is not feasible, cost-effective, or efficient to build on land. Bringing the data 
closer to the user allows the data to arrive quicker. And since the ocean is a rent-
free space, data centers can be as large as 100,000 square feet without real estate 
fees. The ocean can provide two critical factors that support a sustainable MIS 
infrastructure—water for cooling and power. 10 
 What are the advantages and disadvantages of housing data centers in the 
ocean? Do you foresee any issues for these data centers with natural disas-
ters? What types of security issues would Google encounter with a floating data 
center? Do you agree that it is good business sense to house a data center on a 
barge in the ocean? Why or why not? 
 Data Centers on 
the High Seas 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 

195
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
dispersed locations using cloud computing. This would be far cheaper than building its 
own hot and cold sites in different areas of the country. In the case of a security breach, 
failover can be deployed as a virtual machine in one location of the cloud can be shut 
down as another virtual machine in a different location on the cloud comes online.   
 Cloud Computing 
 Imagine a cyclical business that specializes in Halloween decorations and how its sales 
trends and orders vary depending on the time of year. The majority of sales occur in 
September and October, and the remaining 10 months have relatively small sales and 
small system usage. The company does not want to invest in massive expensive serv-
ers that sit idle 10 months of the year just to meet its capacity spikes in September and 
October. The perfect solution for this company is cloud computing, which makes it 
easier to gain access to the computing power that was once reserved for large corpora-
tions. Small to medium-size companies no longer have to make big capital investments 
to access the same powerful systems that large companies run. 
 According to the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)   cloud 
computing  is a model for enabling ubiquitous, convenient, on-demand network 
access to a shared pool of configurable computing resources (e.g., networks, servers, 
storage, applications, and services) that can be rapidly provisioned and released with 
minimal management effort or service provider interaction. Cloud computing offers 
new ways to store, access, process, and analyze information and connect people and 
resources from any location in the world where an Internet connection is available. 
As shown in  Figure 5.14 , users connect to the cloud from their personal computers or 
portable devices using a client, such as a web browser. To these individual users, the 
cloud appears as their personal application, device, or document. It is like storing all 
of your software and documents “in the cloud,” and all you need is a device to access 
the cloud. No more hard drives, software, or processing power—that is all located in 
the cloud, transparent to the users. Users are not physically bound to a single com-
puter or network; they can access their programs and documents from wherever they 
are, whenever they need to. Just think of having your hard drive located in the sky and 
you can access your information and programs using any device from wherever you 
are. The best part is that even if your machine crashes, is lost, or is stolen, the informa-
tion hosted in the cloud is safe and always available.  
 FIGURE 5.14 
 Cloud Computing Example 
Amazon EC2
Windows Live
Mozy
Facebook
Gmail

196
Chapter 5 Infrastructures: Sustainable Technologies
  Multi-tenancy   in the cloud means that a single instance of a system serves multi-
ple customers. In the cloud, each customer is called a tenant and multiple tenants can 
access the same system. Multi-tenancy helps to reduce operational costs associated with 
implementing large systems as the costs are dispersed across many tenants as opposed to 
  single-tenancy  ,  in which each customer or tenant must purchase and maintain an indi-
vidual system. With a multi-tenancy cloud approach, the service provider only has one 
place to update its system. With a single-tenancy cloud approach, the service provider 
would have to update its system in every company where the software was running. The 
  cloud fabric   is the software that makes possible the benefits of cloud computing, such 
as multi-tenancy. A   cloud fabric controller   is an individual who monitors and provi-
sions cloud resources, similar to a server administrator at an individual company. Cloud 
fabric controllers provision resources, balance loads, manage servers, update systems, 
and ensure all environments are available and operating correctly. Cloud fabric is the 
primary reason cloud computing promotes all of the seven abilities, allowing a business 
to make its data and applications accessible, available, maintainable, portable, reliable, 
scalable, and usable.  Figure 5.15 displays the benefits of cloud computing. 
 The cloud offers a company higher availability, greater reliability, and improved 
accessibility—all with affordable high-speed access. For flexibility, scalability, and cost 
efficiency, cloud computing is quickly becoming a viable option for companies of all 
sizes. With the cloud, you could simply purchase a single license for software such as 
Microsoft Office or Outlook at a far discounted rate and not worry about the hassle of 
installing and upgrading the software on your computer. No more worries that you don’t 
have enough memory to run a new program because the hardware is provided in the 
cloud, along with the software. You simply pay to access the program. Think of this the 
same way you do your telephone service. You simply pay to access a vendor’s service, 
and you do not have to pay for the equipment required to carry the call around the globe. 
You also don’t have to worry about scalability because the system automatically handles 
peak loads, which can be spread out among the systems in the cloud. 
 Because additional cloud resources are always available, companies no longer have 
to purchase systems for infrequent computing tasks that need intense processing power, 
such as preparing tax returns during tax season or increased sales transactions during 
certain holiday seasons. If a company needs more processing power, it is always there in 
the cloud—and available on a cost-efficient basis. 
 With cloud computing, individuals or businesses pay only for the services they need, 
when they need them, and where, much as we use and pay for electricity. In the past, 
a company would have to pay millions of dollars for the hardware, software, and net-
working equipment required to implement a large system such as payroll or sales man-
agement. A cloud computing user can simply access the cloud and request a single 
license to a payroll application. The user does not have to incur any hardware, software, 
 FIGURE 5.15 
 Benefits of Cloud Computing 
ON-DEMAND SELF-SERVICE
Users can increase storage
and processing power as
needed
RAPID ELASTICITY
Storage, network bandwidth,
and computing capacity can
be increased or decreased
immediately, allowing for
optimal scalability
MEASURED SERVICE
Clients can monitor and
measure transactions and
use of resources
BROAD NETWORK ACCESS
All devices can access
data and applications
MULTI-TENANCY
Customers share pooled
computing resources

197
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
or networking expenses. As the business grows and the user requires more employees 
to have access to the system, the business simply purchases additional licenses. Rather 
than running software on a local computer or server, companies can now reach to the 
cloud to combine software applications, data storage, and considerable computing 
power.   Utility computing  offers a pay-per-use revenue model similar to a metered ser-
vice such as gas or electricity. Many cloud computing service providers use utility com-
puting cloud infrastructures, which are detailed in  Figure 5.16 . 
 Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS)      Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS)   delivers 
hardware networking capabilities, including the use of servers, networking, and stor-
age, over the cloud using a pay-per-use revenue model. With IaaS the customer rents the 
hardware and provides its own custom applications or programs. IaaS customers save 
money by not having to spend a large amount of capital purchasing expensive servers, 
which is a great business advantage considering some servers cost more than $100,000. 
The service is typically paid for on a usage basis, much like a basic utility service such 
as electricity or gas. IaaS offers a cost-effective solution for companies that need their 
computing resources to grow and shrink as business demand changes. This is known as 
  dynamic scaling  ,  which means the MIS infrastructure can be automatically scaled up or 
down based on needed requirements. 
 Currently the most popular IaaS operation is Amazon’s Elastic Compute Cloud, gener-
ally known as Amazon EC2, or simply EC2. EC2 provides a web interface through which 
customers can load and run their own applications on Amazon’s computers. Customers 
control their own operating environment, so they can create, run, and stop services as 
needed, which is why Amazon describes EC2 as elastic. IaaS is a perfect fit for compa-
nies with research-intensive projects that need to process large amounts of information 
at irregular intervals, such as those in the scientific or medical fields. Cloud computing 
services offer these companies considerable cost savings where they can perform testing 
and analysis at levels that are not possible without access to additional and very costly 
computing infrastructure. 
 Software as a Service (SaaS)  
   Software as a Service (SaaS)    delivers applica-
tions over the cloud using a pay-per-use revenue model. Before its introduction, com-
panies often spent huge amounts of money implementing and customizing specialized 
applications to satisfy their business requirements. Many of these applications were 
difficult to implement, expensive to maintain, and challenging to use. Usability was 
one of the biggest drivers for creating interest in and success for cloud computing 
service providers. 
 FIGURE 5.16 
 Cloud Service Delivery Models 
• Example: Amazon EC2
• Offers computer hardware and networking
   equipment on a pay-per-use basis
Infrastructure
as a Service
Software as a
Service
Platform as a
Service
• Example: Salesforce.com
• Offers applications on a pay-per-use basis
• Example: Google Application Engine
• Offers hardware, networking, and
   applications on a pay-per-use basis.

198
Chapter 5 Infrastructures: Sustainable Technologies
 SaaS offers a number of advantages; the most obvious is tremendous cost savings. 
The software is priced on a per-use basis with no up-front costs, so companies get the 
immediate benefit of reducing capital expenditures. They also get the added benefits of 
scalability and flexibility to test new software on a rental basis. 
  Salesforce.com  is one of the most popular SaaS providers.  Salesforce.com  built and 
delivered a sales automation application, suitable for the typical salesperson, that auto-
mates functions such as tracking sales leads and prospects and forecasting. Tapping the 
power of SaaS can provide access to a large-scale, secure infrastructure, along with any 
needed support, which is especially valuable for a start-up or small company with few 
financial resources. 
 Platform as a Service (PaaS)      Platform as a Service (PaaS)    supports the deploy-
ment of entire systems including hardware, networking, and applications using a 
pay-per-use revenue model. PaaS is a perfect solution for a business as it passes on to 
the service provider the headache and challenges of buying, managing, and maintaining 
web development software. With PaaS the development, deployment, management, and 
maintenance is based entirely in the cloud and performed by the PaaS provider, allow-
ing the company to focus resources on its core initiatives. Every aspect of development, 
including the software needed to create it and the hardware to run it, lives in the cloud. 
PaaS helps companies minimize operational costs and increase productivity by provid-
ing all the following without up-front investment:
 ■ Increased security. 
 ■ Access to information anywhere and anytime. 
 ■ Centralized information management. 
 ■ Easy collaboration with partners, suppliers, and customers. 
 ■ Increased speed to market with significantly less cost .
 One of the most popular PaaS services is Google’s Application Engine, which builds 
and deploys web applications for a company. Google’s Application Engine is easy to build, 
easy to maintain, and easy to scale as a company’s web-based application needs grow. 
Google’s Application Engine is free and offers a standard storage limit and enough pro-
cessing power and network usage to support a web application serving about 5 million 
page views a month. When a customer scales beyond these initial limits, it can pay a fee 
to increase capacity and performance. This can turn into some huge costs savings for a 
small business that does not have enough initial capital to buy expensive hardware and 
software for its web applications. Just think, a two-person company can access the same 
computing resources as Google. That makes good business sense. Regardless of which 
cloud model a business chooses, it can select from four different cloud computing envi-
ronments—public, private, community, and hybrid (see  Figure 5.17 ).   
 FIGURE 5.17 
 Cloud Computing Environments 
PUBLIC CLOUD
Amazon Web Services
(AWS), Windows Azure, and
Google Cloud Connect
PRIVATE CLOUD
Bank or sensitive
information
COMMUNITY CLOUD
All Colorado State
government organizations
HYBRID CLOUD
Cloud bursting

199
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
 Public Cloud     Public cloud   promotes massive, global, and industrywide applications 
offered to the general public. In a public cloud, customers are never required to provision, 
manage, upgrade, or replace hardware or software. Pricing is utility-style and custom-
ers pay only for the resources they use. A few great examples of public cloud computing 
include Amazon Web Services (AWS), Windows Azure, and Google Cloud Connect.  
 Private Cloud     Private cloud   serves only one customer or organization and can be 
located on the customer’s premises or off the customer’s premises. A private cloud is the 
optimal solution for an organization such as the government that has high data secu-
rity concerns and values information privacy. Private clouds are far more expensive than 
public clouds because costs are not shared across multiple customers.  
 Community Cloud     Community cloud   serves a specific community with common 
business models, security requirements, and compliance considerations. Community 
clouds are emerging in highly regulated industries such as financial services and phar-
maceutical companies.  
 Hybrid Cloud    Hybrid cloud   includes two or more private, public, or community 
clouds, but each cloud remains separate and is only linked by technology that enables data 
and application portability. For example, a company might use a private cloud for critical 
applications that maintain sensitive data and a public cloud for nonsensitive data appli-
cations. The usage of both private and public clouds together is an example of a hybrid 
cloud.   Cloud bursting   is when a company uses its own computing infrastructure for 
normal usage and accesses the cloud when it needs to scale for peak load requirements, 
ensuring a sudden spike in usage does not result in poor performance or system crashes. 
 Deploying an MIS infrastructure in the cloud forever changes the way an organiza-
tion’s MIS systems are developed, deployed, maintained, and managed. Moving to the 
cloud is a fundamental shift from moving from a physical world to a logical world, mak-
ing irrelevant the notion of which individual server applications or data reside on. As a 
result, organizations and MIS departments need to change the way they view systems 
and the new opportunities to find competitive advantages. 
 Learning Outcome 5.1: Explain MIS infrastructure and its three primary types. 
 The three primary areas where enterprise architects focus when maintaining a firm’s MIS 
infrastructure are:
 ■ Supporting operations: Information MIS infrastructure identifies where and how important 
information, such as customer records, is maintained and secured. 
 ■ Supporting change: Agile MIS infrastructure includes the hardware, software, and telecommu-
nications equipment that, when combined, provides the underlying foundation to support the 
organization’s goals. 
 ■ Supporting the environment: Sustainable MIS infrastructure identifies ways that a company 
can grow in terms of computing resources while simultaneously becoming less dependent on 
hardware and energy consumption.  
 Learning Outcome 5.2: Identify the three primary areas associated with an information 
MIS infrastructure. 
 The three primary areas an information infrastructure provides to support continuous business 
operations are:
 ■ Backup and recovery: A backup is an exact copy of a system’s information. Recovery is the ability 
to get a system up and running in the event of a system crash or failure that includes restoring the 
information backup. 
 L E A R N I N G  O U T C O M E  R E V I E W 

200
Chapter 5 Infrastructures: Sustainable Technologies
 ■ Disaster recovery plan: This plan provides a detailed process for recovering information or a 
system in the event of a catastrophic disaster. 
 ■ Business continuity plan: This details how a company recovers and restores critical business 
operations and systems after a disaster or extended disruption. 
 Learning Outcome 5.3: Describe the characteristics of an agile MIS infrastructure. 
 ■ Accessibility refers to the varying levels that define what a user can access, view, or perform 
when operating a system. 
 ■ Availability refers to the time frames when the system is operational. 
 ■ Maintainability (or flexibility) refers to how quickly a system can transform to support environ-
mental changes. 
 ■ Portability refers to the ability of an application to operate on different devices or software plat-
forms, such as different operating systems. 
 ■ Reliability (or accuracy) ensures a system is functioning correctly and providing accurate 
information. 
 ■ Scalability describes how well a system can “scale up” or adapt to the increased demands of 
growth. 
 ■ Usability is the degree to which a system is easy to learn and efficient and satisfying to use. 
 Learning Outcome 5.4: Identify the environmental impacts associated with MIS. 
 Increased energy consumption, increased electronic waste, and increased carbon emissions are all 
associated with MIS. Ewaste refers to discarded, obsolete, or broken electronic devices. Sustainable 
MIS disposal refers to the safe disposal of MIS assets at the end of their life cycle. 
 Learning Outcome 5.5: Explain the three components of a sustainable MIS infrastructure 
along with their business benefits. 
 The components of a sustainable MIS infrastructure include:
 ■ Grid computing: A collection of computers, often geographically dispersed, that are coordinated to 
solve a common problem. 
 ■ Cloud computing: The use of resources and applications hosted remotely on the Internet. The 
term comes (at least in part) from the image of a cloud to represent the Internet or some large 
networked environment. 
 ■ Virtualized computing: The creation of multiple “virtual” machines on a single computing 
device.  
 1. Knowledge: List the ways that an agile MIS infrastructure supports Pandora’s business. 
 2.  Comprehension: Describe the reasons Pandora would create a disaster recovery plan and a 
business continuity plan. 
 3.  Application: Apply the concepts of cloud computing to Pandora’s business model. 
 4.  Analysis: Analyze how Pandora is using sustainable MIS infrastructures. 
 5.  Synthesis: Develop a way that Pandora could benefit from grid computing. 
 6.  Evaluate:  Assess the use of virtualization to support Pandora’s business growth while helping the 
environment. 
 O P E N I N G  C A S E  Q U E S T I O N S 

201
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
 Accessibility, 183 
 Administrator access, 184 
 Agile MIS infrastructure, 177 
 Availability, 184 
 Backup, 178 
 Business continuity planning 
(BCP), 181 
 Business impact analysis, 182 
 Capacity, 186 
 Capacity planning, 186 
 Carbon emissions, 189 
 Client, 177 
 Cloud bursting, 199 
 Cloud computing, 195 
 Cloud fabric, 196 
 Cloud fabric controller, 196 
 Cold site, 180 
 Community cloud, 199 
 Corporate social 
responsibility, 188  
 Data center, 193 
 Disaster recovery cost curve, 180 
 Disaster recovery plan, 180 
 Dynamic scaling, 197 
 Emergency, 181 
 Emergency notification service, 182 
 Emergency preparedness, 181 
 Energy consumption, 189 
 Enterprise architect, 176 
 Ewaste, 188 
 Failback, 178 
 Failover, 178 
 Fault tolerance, 178 
 Grid computing, 189 
 Hardware, 176 
 High availability, 184 
 Hot site, 180 
 Hybrid cloud, 199 
 Incident, 182 
 Incident management, 182 
 Incident record, 182 
 Information MIS 
infrastructure, 177  
 Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), 197 
 Maintainability (or flexibility), 185 
 MIS infrastructure, 176 
 Moore’s Law, 187 
 Multi-tenancy, 196 
 Network, 176 
 Performance, 186 
 Platform as a Service (PaaS), 198 
 Portability, 185 
 Private cloud, 199 
 Public cloud, 199 
 Recovery, 178 
 Reliability (or accuracy), 185 
 Scalability, 186 
 Server, 176 
 Serviceability, 187 
 Single-tenancy, 196 
 Smart grid, 192 
 Software, 176 
 Software as a Service (SaaS), 197 
 Sustainable MIS disposal, 188 
 Sustainable MIS 
infrastructure, 177 
 Sustainable, or green, MIS, 187 
 Technology failure, 182 
 Technology recovery strategy, 182 
 Unavailable, 184 
 Usability, 187 
 Utility computing, 197 
 Virtualization, 192 
 Vulnerability, 185 
 Warm site, 180 
 Web accessibility, 184 
 Web accessibility initiative 
(WAI), 184 
 K E Y  T E R M S 
  1. How often should a business back up its data? 
  2. Why is it important to ensure backups are working and can be restored? 
  3. What is the difference between a disaster recovery plan and a business continuity plan? 
  4. What are the three forms of MIS infrastructures and what do they support? 
  5. List the characteristics of an agile MIS infrastructure and explain why they are all critical for 
supporting change. 
  6. Explain what capacity planning is and how it can help a business prepare for growth. 
  7. Explain the difference between fault tolerance and failover. 
  8. Compare the differences among a hot, cold, and warm site. 
  9. What is Moore’s Law and how does it affect companies? 
  10. List the business benefits of using grid computing. 
  11. Identify the benefits and challenges of cloud computing 
  12. What is a data center and why would a business develop one. 
  13. List and describe the three most popular cloud computing delivery models. 
  14. Why would a company want to use virtualization? 
  15. Explain why a business today would want to follow sustainable MIS practices. 
  16. Explain why ebusiness is contributing to the three pressures driving sustainable MIS 
infrastructures. 
 R E V I E W  Q U E S T I O N S 

202
Chapter 5 Infrastructures: Sustainable Technologies
 UPS Invests $1 Billion to Go Green 
  United Parcel Service (UPS) will make about $1 billion in technology investments to improve the effi-
ciency of its operations, with the goal of cutting billions more from its costs over the long term. One of 
its main goals is to improve the speed and efficiency of its delivery operations. To achieve that, UPS 
is equipping its vans with sensors that allow it to collect data about things such as fuel consumption, 
chosen routes, and how much time its engines spend idling. Reducing fuel consumption will help UPS 
not only to cut costs, but also to be more environmentally responsible. A big portion of the company’s 
costs comes from transporting packages by air. In fact, UPS is the world’s ninth-largest airline, so it is 
trying to conserve aircraft fuel as well by lowering flight speeds and better planning to avoid duplica-
tion of routes. But a lot of fuel is also burned by its trucks, and the sensors being implemented there 
could save the company millions of dollars. 
 UPS is installing about 200 sensors in its vehicles—in the brakes, engine box, and on the 
exterior—to collect data and pinpoint opportunities where drivers can adjust their driving to maximize 
fuel efficiency. The company wants to reduce idle time of its delivery trucks, as each hour spent idling 
burns about a gallon of fuel. 
 The company is also installing equipment to track the routes drivers take to deliver packages. 
Every morning the drivers are briefed on the data captured by the sensors and how they could drive 
differently to save fuel. UPS wants to optimize the number of times a vehicle has to start, stop, 
reverse, turn, or back up. 
 Green Data Center 
  The company is also investing in more efficient cooling technologies at its two data centers, which 
are in Mahwah, New Jersey, and Alpharetta, Georgia. During the winter, the company can shut off its 
chiller equipment and use outside air for cooling. 
 The Alpharetta data center has a 650,000-gallon water tank outside for cooling and a heat 
exchanger to faster dissipate the heat captured in the fluid. The water flows in a circular motion 
around the data center, cooling the equipment, and the heat exchanger helps lower the temperature 
of the hot exhaust water more quickly. 
 UPS is also investing in faster server processors, allowing it to consolidate existing servers through 
virtualization. That helps lower energy costs and also reduces the physical footprint of its servers. 
And the company has been consolidating smaller server rooms that were scattered around the world. 
These changes are saving UPS around $400,000 each year. 12 
 Questions 
 1. Why do you think UPS is embracing sustainable technologies? 
 2. How is UPS developing a sustainable MIS infrastructure? 
 3. What business benefits will UPS gain from virtualization? 
 4. What role does each characteristics of an agile MIS infrastructure play in helping UPS to operate 
its business? 
 5. How could UPS benefit from cloud or grid computing? 
 6. What types of ethical issues might UPS encounter with the tracking technology it has placed in 
its trucks?  
 7. What types of security issues might UPS encounter with the tracking technology it has placed in 
its trucks?  
 C L O S I N G  C A S E  O N E 

203
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
 Turning Ewaste into Gold 
  During the 2010 Winter Olympic Games in Vancouver, champions were not just taking home gold, 
silver, or bronze medals—they were also playing a role in reducing electronic waste. For the first time 
in Olympic history, each medal, more than 1,000 of them, was made with a tiny bit of the more than 
140,000 tons of ewaste that otherwise would have been sent to landfills. The medals are the first 
containing metal salvaged from televisions, circuit boards, computer monitors, and electronic waste. 
The so-called urban ore was supplied by Teck Resources Ltd., Canada’s largest base-metals pro-
ducer, which provided gold, silver, and copper used to make the medals. Historically, Olympic medals 
have been made from mined mineral deposits; this is the first time that recycled materials have been 
added to them. First-place winners get gold-plated medals that are 92.5 percent silver. The second-
place prizes are also 92.5 percent silver, while the third-place bronze medals are mostly copper. 
 All the medals have some ewaste materials from Teck’s electronic recycling program located in 
Trail, British Columbia. Teck mixed gold, silver, and copper from the program with metals mined from 
the ground. The company said it couldn’t provide the exact percentage of mined versus recycled 
material in the finished medals. Each gold medal contained a little more than 1.5 percent of ewaste 
materials, while each copper medal contained just over 1 percent, and the silver medals contained 
only small pieces. The ewaste came from old computer monitor’s glass, various computer parts, and 
other surplus or discarded technologies. 
 Several different processing methods were used to extract the materials. First, the company 
shredded the equipment to separate out the various metals, glass, and other usable parts. To remove 
the metals that could not be recovered by the shredding process, the parts were fed into a furnace 
operating at a temperature greater than 2,000 degrees (Fahrenheit). The materials were then com-
bined with other metals to create the medals. Each medal was hand-cropped, ensuring no two are 
alike, another first in Olympic history. The medals, designed by Canadian artist Corrine Hunt, were 
also the first nonflat medals made for the Games, with a wavy form to represent the ocean and 
mountain snowdrifts, both characteristic of Vancouver’s environment. In addition to representing the 
athletes’ outstanding achievements, the 2010 Olympic medals gave new life to the precious metals 
recoverable from ewaste. 13 
 Questions 
 1. Why would the Olympics benefit from creating a strong environmental MIS infrastructure? 
 2. How can the Olympics help support ethical ewaste initiatives? 
 3. Why would a sporting event like the Olympics be concerned with reducing its carbon footprint? 
 4. What could the Olympics do to help shed light on global environmental MIS issues? 
 5. How could Moore’s Law enable future Olympic medals to be made from more ewaste? 
 C L O S I N G  C A S E  T W O 
 1. Universities Are Switching to Gmail 
 Schools around the world are moving to cloud computing applications such as Google Docs & 
Spreadsheets and Google Calendar. Yale had planned to move from its own email system to Google 
Mail, but at the last minute decided to cancel the project. The reason was because school admin-
istrators and faculty members did not believe the move could support their business requirements. 
 C R I T I C A L  B U S I N E S S  T H I N K I N G 

204
Chapter 5 Infrastructures: Sustainable Technologies
Do you agree or disagree that Google Gmail would be unable to replace a university’s private email 
system? What are the advantages and disadvantages of a private email system? What are the 
advantages and disadvantages of using a cloud application such as Google Gmail? What choice 
would you make if you were the primary decision maker for choosing your school’s email system? 14 
 2. Desktop Virtualization 
 Every day users are becoming more comfortable with accessing and storing information in the cloud. 
This creates increased demand on MIS personnel to help manage, control, and provide access to that 
information—not just on company-issued computers, but on any number of devices, including per-
sonal ones. More and more employees want to be able to utilize their own computing devices—cell 
phones, netbooks, laptops—instead of company-issued ones. For instance, many students graduat-
ing from college have been exposed to Macs and may even own one, yet they are finding PCs as the 
standard computer of choice for most companies. Do you think it is a good business practice to allow 
your employees to use their personal devices for work-related business? What are the challenges 
of allowing users to port business applications to their personal devices? What are the challenges of 
allowing users to connect to corporate systems with personal devices?  
 3. iTunes in the Cloud 
 Apple is considering a cloud version of its iTunes software that could possibly provide a host of 
new services for its users as they would no longer be required to save iTunes to their computers as 
it would reside in the cloud. With cloud computing, the software for iTunes would reside in central-
ized servers in data centers, rather than on a specific user computer. What would be the benefits 
to customers if they could host iTunes in the clouds and access it using a variety of devices? What 
would be your fears if you were to use iTunes in the cloud? 
 4. Sustainable Departments 
 Energy prices and global warming are discussed daily in the news as the environmental impact of 
ewaste is just beginning to be recognized. Sustainability and corporate social responsibility need 
to be taken seriously by all managers as everyone should take an active role in helping to preserve 
the environment. List the different departments in a business and the types of environmental 
issues they typically encounter. Which department do you think creates the most ewaste? Which 
department uses the greatest amount of electricity or has the largest carbon footprint? What can 
each department do to help combat its environmental issues? Why do all managers, and for that 
matter all employees, need to be aware of environmental issues and ways they can create sus-
tainable MIS infrastructures? 
 5. Making the Smart Grid Smart 
 ISO, a regional electricity company in New England, has launched an $18 million project in part 
because of an $8 million three-year federal grant. The project is designed to speed up the instal-
lation of 30 smart-grid devices covering every state in New England. The smart-grid devices will 
provide control room operators at ISO with enhanced tools to monitor and measure performance of 
the region’s electrical grid, allowing the company to improve its ability to detect and address prob-
lems on the system. System status information coming into ISO will increase from once every four 
seconds to 30 times per second. Would you invest in ISO if you had the chance? Why or why not? 
If you were awarded an $8 million three-year federal grant, what type of sustainable infrastructure 
would you create? 15 
 6. Planning for Disaster Recovery 
 You are the new senior analyst in the MIS department at Beltz, a large snack food manufactur-
ing company. The company is located on the beautiful shoreline in Charleston, North Carolina. 
The company’s location is one of its best and worst features. The weather and surroundings are 
beautiful, but the threat of hurricanes and other natural disasters is high. What types of information 
should be contained in Beltz’s disaster recovery plan that will minimize any risks involved with a 
natural disaster? 

205
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
 7. Comparing Backup and Recovery Systems 
 Research the Internet to find three different vendors of backup and recovery systems. Compare 
and contrast the three systems and determine which one you would recommend if you were 
installing a backup and recovery system for a medium-sized business, with 3,500 employees, 
that maintains information on the stock market. Compile your findings in a presentation that you 
can give to your class that details the three systems’ strengths and weaknesses, along with your 
recommendation. 
 8. Cool Schools 
 Very large computers and data centers incur huge energy costs keeping electronic components 
cooled. Where is your school’s data center located? How big is it? What security measures does 
the facility enforce? Can you get a tour of it? If it is on campus, how is the facility cooled? How 
is the power supplied? Heating and cooling computer systems are certainly a big issue. Think of 
ways you could reuse the heat from a data center, such as sending it to a college dorm. Could 
alternative resources, such as a nearby river or a lake, provide added cooling? What unanticipated 
environmental issues could this create? 
 9. Box.net in the Cloud 
 Box.net was started by two college students, Aaron Levie and Dylan Smith, who needed a secure 
place to collaborate on group projects. The two immediately understood the value of cloud com-
puting, and they created Box.net to allow them to share ideas and collaborate on documents 
in a virtual work space located in the cloud. They knew the cloud would allow them to access 
their documents from anywhere and on any device and that there was no chance of their papers 
being stolen or accidently destroyed. Levie and Smith recognized the business opportunity of 
their site and jumped at turning Box.net into a real business. Explain how Box.net could help 
you if you were working on a project with four other students. What would be the challenges of 
using Box.net? 16   
 E N T R E P R E N E U R I A L  C H A L L E N G E 
 BUILD YOUR OWN BUSINESS 
 1. On your way to work this morning, you stopped for gas. When you were inside paying, some-
one broke into your car and stole your computer bag. You did not notice until you arrived at 
your business and began looking for your bag. As you begin to realize all of the data you just 
lost—customer lists, profit and loss analysis, tax returns, email, sales information, payroll 
files, and so on—you begin to wonder when you last backed up your hard drive. Now that 
you have been stung by a painful data loss experience, you realize the importance of having 
a backup strategy. Create a detailed backup strategy and disaster recovery plan for your 
business. Be sure to include details such as the types of backup you will perform, frequency 
of backups, and location of backups. (Be sure to identify your business and the name of your 
company.)  
 2. Rank the characteristics of an agile MIS infrastructure in order of importance to your business 
and be sure to provide detailed information on each characteristic and your justification for its 
ranking. 
 3. Cloud computing is a business driven MIS infrastructure that supports growth, operations, and 
profits. It helps today’s businesses innovate by using resources and applications hosted remotely 
as a shared service on the Internet. You have decided to research the different types of cloud 
computing services. Create a report listing the types of services your business should implement 
and the advantages and disadvantages of each. 

206
Chapter 5 Infrastructures: Sustainable Technologies
 PROJECT I 
Ranking MIS characteristics 
 In a group, review the list of MIS infrastructure characteristics that support growth and rank them in 
order of their impact on a company’s success, using 1 to indicate the biggest impact and 7 the least. 
 PROJECT II 
Designing a Company Infrastructure 
 Components of an MIS infrastructure include everything from documentation to business concepts 
to software and hardware. Deciding which components to implement and how to implement them 
can be a challenge. New MIS components are released daily, and business needs continually change. 
An MIS infrastructure that meets your company’s needs today may not meet those needs tomorrow. 
Building an MIS infrastructure that is accessible, available, flexible, reliable, scalable, usable, and 
performs well is key to your company’s growth, operations, and profitability. 
 You are the manager for a large clothing company called Xedous. You are responsible for develop-
ing the initial MIS infrastructure. Create a list of questions you will need answered to develop it. Here 
are examples of a few of the questions you might ask:
 ■ What are the company’s growth expectations? 
 ■ Will systems be able to handle additional users? 
 ■ How long will information be stored in the systems? 
 ■ How much customer history must be stored? 
 ■ What are the company’s business hours? 
 ■ What are the company’s backup requirements? 
 PROJECT III 
Recycle Your Cell Phone 
 For all those excited to get a new iPhone with its numerous applications and cool games, what are 
you going to do with your old cell phone? You can help the environment and recycle your phone, PDA, 
charger, and batteries. Recycling cell phones helps to save energy and keep reusable materials out of 
landfills. Cell phones are made of plastic, copper, and precious metals, which require energy to extract 
and manufacture. If you decide to recycle your cell phone be sure to terminate the service, delete any 
contacts or stored information, and take out the SIM card. 
 If your old cell phone is still working, you might also want to consider donating it to charity. Many 
programs will accept working cell phones that they donate to people in need, such as survivors of 
domestic violence, because old cell phones can still dial 911 even after the service is disconnected. To 
find local agencies where you can donate your cell phone, visit ncadv.org. Cell phones are only a small 
percentage of the total computer equipment organizations replace each year. What happens to all of 
 A P P LY  Y O U R  K N O W L E D G E  B U S I N E S S  P R O J E C T S 
MIS Infrastructure Characteristics
Business Impact
Accessibility
Availability
Maintainability
Portability
Reliability
Scalability
Usability

207
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
those old laptops, notebooks, servers, and monitors? What is the environmental impact of throwing a 
computer system into a landfill? What can companies do to recycle their computer equipment? What 
can the government do to help motivate companies and individuals to recycle? 
 PROJECT IV 
Back on Your Feet 
 You are working for GetSmart, a document creation company for legal professionals. Due to the highly 
sensitive nature of their work, employees must store all information on the network drive and are not 
allowed to back up the data to a CD, flash drive, or any other type of external storage, including home 
computers. The company has been following this policy for the past three years without any problems. 
You return to work Monday morning after a long weekend to find that the building was struck by light-
ning, destroying several servers. Unfortunately, the backup network also failed, so all the data from 
your department have been lost. 
 Because of this loss, the MIS manager and four colleagues who developed the company backup 
policy were fired. 
 You have been placed on a committee with several of your peers to revamp the backup and 
recovery policies and create a new disaster recovery plan. You must create policies and procedures 
that will preserve the sensitive nature of the documents, while ensuring the company is safe from 
disasters. Be sure to address a worst-case scenario where the entire building is lost. 
 PROJECT V 
Growing, Growing, Gone 
 You are the founder of Black Pearl, a small comic book start-up. The good news is Black Pearl is tre-
mendously successful, with 34 employees in a functional and creative office in downtown Chicago. 
The comics you produce are of extremely high quality. The artwork is unmatched, and fans find the 
story lines compelling. Black Pearl comics are quickly becoming classics with extremely loyal cus-
tomers. You produce all the comics and sell them in your store and via the Internet to individuals all 
over the United States. 
 You had a vision when you started Black Pearl. You knew the potential of your business model to 
revamp the comic industry. You purchased high-end computers and customizable software to support 
your operations. Now, you are faced with a new dilemma. You have a large international following 
and you have decided to pursue international opportunities. You would like to open stores in Japan, 
France, and Brazil over the next year. To determine whether this is possible you need to evaluate if 
your MIS infrastructure is agile enough to support international requirements. Brainstorm all of the 
business nuances that will be different when working with international companies and customers. 
Create a list of questions your MIS department will need to answer to determine if your system is agile 
enough to support international business. 
 PROJECT VI 
Excuses, Excuses, Excuses 
 Here are a few examples of the strangest and most unusual excuses employees use when 
missing work. 
 ■ I have a sunburn. 
 ■ I’m not sure why but I woke up in Canada. 
 ■ I was caught selling an alligator. 
 ■ I was locked in the trunk of an abandoned car. 
 ■ I have a note from my mom that I could not go to work yesterday. 
 ■ I’m just not into it today. 
 ■ I was riding my motorcycle and I accidentally hit a nun. 
 ■ Some person threw poison ivy at me and now I have a rash on my face. 
 ■ I need to stay home as I am convinced I can catch my spouse having an affair. 

208
Chapter 5 Infrastructures: Sustainable Technologies
 ■ I was chasing a seagull and fell down and had to go to the hospital. 
 ■ I have a migraine from eating too many jalapeño peppers. 
 This chapter focuses on MIS infrastructures, the main building blocks that function together to con-
trol the entire organization’s systems. If your systems cannot operate, then your organization cannot 
work, similar to how your health controls your ability to work. Attempting to do business with an 
organization when its systems have crashed, Internet access is down, or wireless network is malfunc-
tioning is very frustrating. When these types of issues occur, companies do not want to broadcast that 
they are experiencing technical difficulties because of hackers, an unpaid utility bill, or squirrels got 
into the data center and ate through all of the wires (yes, that has really happened). 
 How many times have you called a company and the customer service representative has stated 
that the system is down or that the system is really slow today? How many times have you missed 
submitting an assignment because your Internet service was down? Why is it important for an organi-
zation to have its systems available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, and 365 days a year? Why would 
a company hide the real reason that its systems are malfunctioning? What could happen if customers 
were informed that the systems were down due to hackers? How can an organization safeguard its 
systems? 
 PROJECT VII 
Ewaste Not, Want Not 
 On Earth Day every year many people, including corporate citizens, devote themselves to recycling 
and reducing, along with identifying items they can repurpose. Companies, such as Dell and Microsoft, 
two producers of materials that eventually become ewaste, have joined forces with an electronics 
recycling program run by Goodwill Industries International. Goodwill reports that the program has 
diverted about 96 million pounds in electronics from landfills. 17 
 Assisting in a similar effort are office supply stores Office Depot and Staples that offer their own 
sorting and recycling services for used electronics. Apple has even jumped on this bandwagon, allow-
ing customers to turn their old products in to retail locations when they buy something new. 
 There are so many opportunities to reduce ewaste. Make a list of how the popular technology 
manufacturers are already trying to reduce ewaste. Would starting a company that helped people 
locate used computers or other technologies for reuse be a worthwhile venture? Why or why not? 
Create a list of new alternatives any company could adopt to reuse, recycle, and reduce ewaste. 
 PROJECT VIII 
One Laptop Per Child 
 The One Laptop Per Child (OLPC) project intends to create a $100 laptop for distribution to the world’s 
poorest children. The machine, called the OLPC or XO laptop, has a rubberized keyboard and an ultra-
bright screen readable in daylight; when flipped, it converts to an electronic book reader. To keep the 
cost as low as possible (at $175 it is currently a bit more than the target), the computer has a host of 
free software and other tools to support learning opportunities. A special type of networking allows 
machines within a hundred feet or so to communicate with each other and relays a single Internet 
connection for them to use (where the Internet is available). The XO is targeted at communities where 
power generation is unreliable or nonexistent; it gets its power via a hand crank, pull cord, or foot 
pedal. 18 
 Do you agree that the One Laptop Per Child project will help educate children around the world? 
How does the XO computer provide learning opportunities for children in poor regions of the world? 
What issues could these children encounter if they have an XO laptop? How will cloud computing play 
an important role in the XO laptop, especially in terms of keeping costs low and data safe? What do 
you think the typical environment will be like where the XO laptop will be used? What issues will users 
of the XO laptop encounter that are not common in the United States? What can the creators of the XO 
laptop do to ensure its functionality even in the most extreme environments? 

209
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
 Project 
Number 
 Project Name 
 Project Type 
 Plug-In 
 Focus Area 
 Project Level 
 Skill Set 
 Page Number 
 8 
 Book Boxes 
 Excel 
 T2, T4 
 Strategic Analysis 
 Intermediate 
 Formulas or Solver 
 AYK.6 
 9 
 Security Analysis 
 Excel 
 T3 
 Filtering Data 
 Intermediate 
 Conditional 
Formatting, 
Autofilter, Subtotal 
 AYK.7 
 10 
 Gathering Data 
 Excel 
 T3 
 Data Analysis 
 Intermediate 
 Conditional 
Formatting 
 AYK.8 
 11 
 Splashem 
 Excel 
 T2 
 Strategic Analysis 
 Intermediate 
 Formulas 
 AYK.8 
 12 
 Bill’s Boots 
 Excel 
 T2 
 Profit 
Maximization 
 Intermediate 
 Formulas 
 AYK.9 
 13 
 Adequate 
Acquisitions 
 Excel 
 T2 
 Break Even 
Analysis 
 Intermediate 
 Formulas 
 AYK.9 
 15 
 Assessing 
the Value of 
Information 
 Excel 
 T3 
 Data Analysis 
 Intermediate 
 PivotTable 
 AYK.10 
 16 
 Growth, Trends, 
and Forecasts 
 Excel 
 T2, T3 
 Data Forecasting 
 Advanced 
 Average, Trend, 
Growth 
 AYK.11 
 18 
 Formatting Grades 
 Excel 
 T3 
 Data Analysis 
 Advanced 
 If, LookUp 
 AYK.12 
 22 
 Gizmo Turnover 
 Excel 
 T3 
 Data Mining 
 Advanced 
 PivotTable 
 AYK.15 
 24 
 Mountain Cycle 
 Excel 
 T4 
 Business Analysis 
 Advanced 
 Goal Seek 
 AYK.16 
 25 
 Lutz Motors 
 Excel 
 T4 
 Sales Analysis 
 Advanced 
 Scenario Manager 
 AYK.16 
 AY K  A P P L I C AT I O N  P R O J E C T S 
 If you are looking for Excel projects to incorporate into your class, try any of the following after reading 
this chapter. 

 What’s in IT for me? 
 This chapter introduces the concepts of information and data and their relative importance to business professionals and 
firms. It distinguishes between data stored in transactional databases and powerful business intelligence gleaned from data 
warehouses. Students who understand how to access, manipulate, summarize, sort, and analyze data to support decision 
making find success. Information has power, and understanding that power will help you compete in the global marketplace. 
This chapter will provide you with an overview of database fundamentals and the characteristics associated with high-
quality information. It will also explain how the various bits of data stored across multiple, operational databases can be 
transformed in a centralized repository of summarized information in a data warehouse, which can be used for discovering 
business intelligence. 
 You, as a business student, need to understand the differences between transactional data and summarized information 
and the different types of questions you could use a transactional database to answer versus a data warehouse. You need 
to be aware of the complexity of storing data in databases and the level of effort required to transform operational data 
into meaningful, summarized information. You need to realize the power of information and the competitive advantage a 
data warehouse brings an organization in terms of facilitating business intelligence. Armed with the power of information, 
business students will make smart, informed, and data-supported managerial decisions. 
 ■  T h e  B u s i n e s s  B e n efit s  o f 
H i g h - Q u a l i t y  I n f o r m a t i o n  
 ■  S t o r i n g  I n f o r m a t i o n  U s i n g 
a  R e l a t i o n a l  D a t a b as e 
M a n a g e m e n t  S y s tem  
 ■  U s i n g  a  R e l a t i o n al D a t a b a s e 
f o r  B u s i n e s s  A d v a n ta g e s  
 ■  D r i v i n g  We b s i t e s  wit h  D a t a   
 SECTION 6.2   
 Business Intelligence 
 SECTION 6.1   
 Data, Information, 
and Databases 
 ■  T h e  B u s i n e s s  B e n e f i t s  o f 
D a t a  Wa re h o u s i n g  
 ■  P e r f o r m i n g  B u s i n e s s  An a l y s i s 
w i t h  D a t a  M a r t s  
 ■  U n c o v e r i n g  Tre n d s  a n d 
P a t t e r n s  w i t h  D a t a  M i n i n g  
 ■  S u p p o r t i n g  D e c i s i o n s  w i t h 
B u s i n e s s  I n t e l l i g e n c e   
 
 
 C H A P T E R 
 C H A P T E R  O U T L I N E 
 Data: Business Intelligence 
 6 

211
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
 opening case study 
 Informing Information    
 Since the beginning of time, man has been using pictures and images to communicate, 
moving from caveman drawings to hieroglyphics to the Internet. Today, it is easier than ever 
to paint a picture worth 100,000 words, thanks to technological advances. The primary 
advantages are databases and data warehouses that capture enormous amounts of data. 
Informing means accessing large amounts of data from different management informa-
tion systems. According to a recent analysis of press releases by PR Newswire, an article 
or advertisement that uses visual images can significantly improve the number of views a 
message generates. This can be a true competitive advantage in the digital age. 
 An infographic (or information graphic) displays information graphically so it can be 
more easily understood. Infographics cut straight to the point by taking complex information 
and presenting it in a simple visual format. Infographics can present the results of large 
data analysis, looking for patterns and relationships that monitor changes in variables over 
time. Because infographics can easily become overwhelming, users need to be careful to 
not display too much data or the resulting infographics can result in information overload. 
Effective infographics can achieve outstanding results for marketing, advertising, and public 
relations. According to PR Newswire, infographics gain the greatest competitive advantage 
when they have the following:
 ■ Survey results that are too hard to understand in text format. 
 ■ Statistical data that are not interesting for readers. 
 ■ Comparison research where the impact can be far more dramatic when presented 
visually. 
 ■ Messages for multilingual audiences. 
 ■ Any information that can use a visual element to make it more interesting (see 
 Figures 6.1 ,  6.2 , and  6.3 for examples). 1 

212
Chapter 6 Data: Business Intelligence
 FIGURE 6.1 
 Hotels.com Travel Infographic 

213
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
 FIGURE 6.2 
 Emerson’s Food Waste 
Infographic 
 FIGURE 6.3 
 SC Johnson Consumer 
Environmental Behaviors 
Infographic 

214
Chapter 6 Data: Business Intelligence
 section 6.1 
Data, Information, and Databases 
 LE A R NI NG  OU T C OM E S 
 6.1 Explain the four primary traits that determine the value of information. 
 6.2 Describe a database, a database management system, and the relational database model. 
 6.3 Identify the business advantages of a relational database. 
 6.4 Explain the business benefits of a data-driven website. 
 THE BUSINESS BENEFITS OF HIGH-QUALITY 
INFORMATION  
 Information is powerful. Information can tell an organization how its current opera-
tions are performing and help it estimate and strategize about how future operations 
might perform. The ability to understand, digest, analyze, and filter information is key to 
growth and success for any professional in any industry. Remember that new perspec-
tives and opportunities can open up when you have the right data that you can turn into 
information and ultimately business intelligence. 
 Information is everywhere in an organization. Managers in sales, marketing, human 
resources, and management need information to run their departments and make 
daily decisions. When addressing a significant business issue, employees must be able 
to obtain and analyze all the relevant information so they can make the best decision 
possible. Information comes at different levels, formats, and granularities.   Information 
granularity   refers to the extent of detail within the information (fine and detailed or 
coarse and abstract). Employees must be able to correlate the different levels, formats, 
and granularities of information when making decisions. For example, a company might 
be collecting information from various suppliers to make needed decisions, only to find 
that the information is in different levels, formats, and granularities. One supplier might 
send detailed information in a spreadsheet, while another supplier might send summary 
information in a Word document, and still another might send a collection of informa-
tion from emails. Employees will need to compare these different types of information 
for what they commonly reveal to make strategic decisions.  Figure 6.4  displays the vari-
ous levels, formats, and granularities of organizational information.  
 Successfully collecting, compiling, sorting, and finally analyzing information from 
multiple levels, in varied formats, and exhibiting different granularities can provide 
tremendous insight into how an organization is performing. Exciting and unexpected 
results can include potential new markets, new ways of reaching customers, and even 
new methods of doing business. After understanding the different levels, formats, and 
granularities of information, managers next want to look at the four primary traits that 
help determine the value of information (see  Figure 6.5 ). 
 Information Type: Transactional and Analytical 
 As discussed previously in the text, the two primary types of information are transac-
tional and analytical. Transactional information encompasses all of the information 
contained within a single business process or unit of work, and its primary purpose is to 
support daily operational tasks. Organizations need to capture and store transactional 
information to perform operational tasks and repetitive decisions such as analyzing daily 
sales reports and production schedules to determine how much inventory to carry. Con-
sider Walmart, which handles more than 1 million customer transactions every hour, 
and Facebook, which keeps track of 400 million active users (along with their photos, 
friends, and web links). In addition, every time a cash register rings up a sale, a deposit 
or withdrawal is made from an ATM, or a receipt is given at the gas pump, capturing and 
storing of the transactional information are required. 
 LO 6.1:  Explain the four primary 
traits that determine the value of 
information. 

215
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
 Analytical information encompasses all organizational information, and its primary 
purpose is to support the performing of managerial analysis tasks. Analytical informa-
tion is useful when making important decisions such as whether the organization should 
build a new manufacturing plant or hire additional sales personnel. Analytical informa-
tion makes it possible to do many things that previously were difficult to accomplish, 
such as spot business trends, prevent diseases, and fight crime. For example, credit card 
companies crunch through billions of transactional purchase records to identify fraudu-
lent activity. Indicators such as charges in a foreign country or consecutive purchases of 
gasoline send a red flag highlighting potential fraudulent activity. 
 Walmart was able to use its massive amount of analytical information to identify 
many unusual trends, such as a correlation between storms and Pop-Tarts. Yes, Walmart 
 FIGURE 6.4 
 Levels, Formats, and 
Granularities of Organizational 
Information 
Information Granularities
Detail (Fine), Summary, Aggregate
(Coarse) 
•  Individual knowledge,
goals, and strategies
Departmental goals,
revenues, expenses,
processes, and strategies 
Enterprise revenues,
expenses, processes, and
strategies    
Letters, memos, faxes, emails, reports,
marketing materials, and training materials
•  
Product, strategy, process, ﬁnancial,
customer, and competitor
•  
Sales, marketing, industry, ﬁnancial,
competitor, customer, and order
spreadsheets 
•  
Customer, employee, sales, order,
supplier, and manufacturer databases
•  
Reports for each salesperson, product, and part
Reports for all sales personnel, all products, and
all parts
Reports across departments, organizations, and
companies
•  
•  
•  
•  
•  
Information Levels
Individual, Department, Enterprise
Information Formats
Document, Presentation, Spreadsheet,
Database
 FIGURE 6.5 
 The Four Primary Traits of the 
Value of Information 
Information Type 
Information Timeliness 
Information Quality 
Information Governance 

216
Chapter 6 Data: Business Intelligence
discovered an increase in the demand for Pop-Tarts during the storm season. Armed 
with the valuable information the retail chain was able to stock up on Pop-Tarts that 
were ready for purchase when customers arrived.  Figure 6.6  displays different types of 
transactional and analytical information.   
 Information Timeliness 
 Timeliness is an aspect of information that depends on the situation. In some firms or 
industries, information that is a few days or weeks old can be relevant, while in others 
information that is a few minutes old can be almost worthless. Some organizations, such 
as 911 response centers, stock traders, and banks, require up-to-the-second informa-
tion. Other organizations, such as insurance and construction companies, require only 
daily or even weekly information. 
  Real-time information   means immediate, up-to-date information.   Real-time systems   
provide real-time information in response to requests. Many organizations use real-time 
systems to uncover key corporate transactional information. The growing demand for 
real-time information stems from organizations’ need to make faster and more effective 
decisions, keep smaller inventories, operate more efficiently, and track performance more 
carefully. Information also needs to be timely in the sense that it meets employees’ needs, 
but no more. If employees can absorb information only on an hourly or daily basis, there 
is no need to gather real-time information in smaller increments. 
 Most people request real-time information without understanding one of the biggest 
pitfalls associated with real-time information—continual change. Imagine the following 
scenario: Three managers meet at the end of the day to discuss a business problem. Each 
manager has gathered information at different times during the day to create a picture of 
the situation. Each manager’s picture may be different because of the time differences. 
Their views on the business problem may not match because the information they are 
basing their analysis on is continually changing. This approach may not speed up deci-
sion making, and it may actually slow it down. Business decision makers must evaluate 
the timeliness for the information for every decision. Organizations do not want to find 
themselves using real-time information to make a bad decision faster.  
 Information Quality 
 Business decisions are only as good as the quality of the information used to make them. 
  Information inconsistency   occurs when the same data element has different values. 
Take for example the amount of work that needs to occur to update a customer who had 
changed her last name due to marriage. Changing this information in only a few organi-
zational systems will lead to data inconsistencies causing customer 123456 to be associ-
ated with two last names.   Information integrity issues   occur when a system produces 
 FIGURE 6.6 
 Transactional versus Analytical 
Information 
Packing Slip
Airline Ticket
Sales
Receipt
Database
Transactional Information
Trends
Sales
Projections
Analytical Information
Future
Growth 
Product
Statistics

217
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
incorrect, inconsistent, or duplicate data. Data integrity issues can cause managers to 
consider the system reports invalid and will make decisions based on other sources. 
 To ensure your systems do not suffer from data integrity issues, review  Figure 6.7  for 
the five characteristics common to high-quality information: accuracy, completeness, 
consistency, timeliness, and uniqueness.  Figure  6.8  provides an example of several 
problems associated with using low-quality information including: 
 1.  Completeness. The customer’s first name is missing. 
 2. Another issue with  completeness.  The street address contains only a number and not a 
street name. 
 3.  Consistency.  There may be a duplication of information since there is a slight dif-
ference between the two customers in the spelling of the last name. Similar street 
addresses and phone numbers make this likely. 
 FIGURE 6.7 
 Five Common Characteristics of 
High-Quality Information 
Accurate
Complete
Consistent
Timely
Unique
•  Is there an incorrect value in the information?
•  Example: Is the name spelled correctly? Is the dollar amount
    recorded properly?
•  Is a value missing from the information?
•  Example: Is the address complete including street, city, state,
    and zip code?
•  Is aggregate or summary information in agreement with detailed
    information?
•  Example: Do all total columns equal the true total of the individual item?
•  Is the information current with respect to business needs?
•  Example: Is information updated weekly, daily, or hourly?
•  Is each transaction and event represented only once in the 
    information?
•  Example: Are there any duplicate customers?
 FIGURE 6.8 
 Example of Low-Quality 
Information 
113
114
115
116
Smith
Jones
Roberts
Robert
First
Name
City
Jeff
Jenny
Jenny
1. Missing information
 (no first name)
3. Probable duplicate information
 (similar names, same
 address, phone number)
4. Potential wrong information
 (are the phone and fax numbers
 the same or is this an error?)
5. Inaccurate information
 (invalid email)
6. Incomplete information
 (missing area codes)
Street
123 S. Main
12A
1244 Colfax
1244 Colfax
Denver
Denver
Denver
Denver
State
CO
CO
CO
CO
Zip
80210
80224
85231
85231
Phone
(303) 777-1258
(303) 666-6868
759-5654
759-5654
Fax
(303) 777-5544
(303) 666-6868
853-6584
853-6584
Email
ssmith@aol.com
(303) 666-6868
jr@msn.com
jr@msn.com
ID
Last
Name
2. Incomplete information
 (no street)

 BUSINESS DRIVEN MIS 
 Real People  magazine is geared toward working individuals and provides arti-
cles and advice on everything from car maintenance to family planning. The 
magazine is currently experiencing problems with its distribution list. More 
than 30 percent of the magazines mailed are returned because of incorrect 
address information, and each month it receives numerous calls from angry 
customers complaining that they have not yet received their magazines. Below 
is a sample of  Real People ’s customer information. Create a report detailing all 
the issues with the information, potential causes of the information issues, and 
solutions the company can follow to correct the situation. 
 Determining 
Information 
Quality Issues 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 
 ID 
 First Name 
 Middle Initial 
 Last Name 
 Street 
 City 
 State 
 Zip Code 
 433 
 M 
 J 
 Jones 
 13 Denver 
 Denver 
 CO 
 87654 
 434 
 Margaret 
 J 
 Jones 
 13 First Ave. 
 Denver 
 CO 
 87654 
 434 
 Brian 
 F 
 Hoover 
 Lake Ave. 
 Columbus 
 OH 
 87654 
 435 
 Nick 
 H 
 Schweitzer 
 65 Apple Lane 
 San Francisco 
 OH 
 65664 
 436 
 Richard 
 A 
 
 567 55th St. 
 New York 
 CA 
 98763 
 437 
 Alana 
 B 
 Smith 
 121 Tenny Dr. 
 Buffalo 
 NY 
 142234 
 438 
 Trevor 
 D 
 Darrian 
 90 Fresrdestil 
 Dallas 
 TX 
 74532 
218
Chapter 6 Data: Business Intelligence
 4.  Accuracy.  This may be inaccurate information because the customer’s phone and fax 
numbers are the same. Some customers might have the same number for phone and 
fax, but the fact that the customer also has this number in the email address field is 
suspicious. 
 5. Another issue with  accuracy.  There is inaccurate information because a phone num-
ber is located in the email address field. 
 6. Another issue with  completeness.  The information is incomplete because there is not 
a valid area code for the phone and fax numbers.    
 Nestlé uses 550,000 suppliers to sell more than 100,000 products in 200 countries. 
However, due to poor information, the company was unable to evaluate its business effec-
tively. After some analysis, it found that it had 9 million records of vendors, customers, and 
materials, half of which were duplicated, obsolete, inaccurate, or incomplete. The analy-
sis discovered that some records abbreviated vendor names while other records spelled 
out the vendor names. This created multiple accounts for the same customer, making it 
impossible to determine the true value of Nestlé’s customers. Without being able to iden-
tify customer profitability, a company runs the risk of alienating its best customers. 2   
 Knowing how low-quality information issues typically occur can help a company 
 correct them. Addressing these errors will significantly improve the quality of company 
information and the value to be extracted from it. The four primary reasons for low-quality 
information are:
 1. Online customers intentionally enter inaccurate information to protect their privacy. 
 2. Different systems have different information entry standards and formats. 
 3. Data-entry personnel enter abbreviated information to save time or erroneous infor-
mation by accident. 
 4. Third-party and external information contains inconsistencies, inaccuracies, and errors.    

219
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
 Understanding the Costs of Using Low-Quality Information   Using the 
wrong information can lead managers to make erroneous decisions. Erroneous decisions 
in turn can cost time, money, reputations, and even jobs. Some of the serious business 
consequences that occur due to using low-quality information to make decisions are:
 ■ Inability to accurately track customers. 
 ■ Difficulty identifying the organization’s most valuable customers. 
 ■ Inability to identify selling opportunities. 
 ■ Lost revenue opportunities from marketing to nonexistent customers. 
 ■ The cost of sending nondeliverable mail. 
 ■ Difficulty tracking revenue because of inaccurate invoices. 
 ■ Inability to build strong relationships with customers. 
 Understanding the Benefits of Using High-Quality Information   High-
quality information can significantly improve the chances of making a good decision 
and directly increase an organization’s bottom line. One company discovered that even 
with its large number of golf courses, Phoenix, Arizona, is not a good place to sell golf 
clubs. An analysis revealed that typical golfers in Phoenix are tourists and convention-
eers who usually bring their clubs with them. The analysis further revealed that two 
of the best places to sell golf clubs in the United States are Rochester, New York, and 
Detroit, Michigan. Equipped with this valuable information, the company was able to 
strategically place its stores and launch its marketing campaigns. 
 High-quality information does not automatically guarantee that every decision made 
is going to be a good one, because people ultimately make decisions and no one is per-
fect. However, such information ensures that the basis of the decisions is accurate. The 
success of the organization depends on appreciating and leveraging the true value of 
timely and high-quality information. 
 Information Governance 
 Information is a vital resource and users need to be educated on what they can and can-
not do with it. To ensure a firm manages its information correctly, it will need special pol-
icies and procedures establishing rules on how the information is organized, updated, 
maintained, and accessed. Every firm, large and small, should create an information 
policy concerning data governance.   Data governance   refers to the overall management 
of the availability, usability, integrity, and security of company data. A company that sup-
ports a data governance program has a defined a policy that specifies who is accountable 
for various portions or aspects of the data, including its accuracy, accessibility, consis-
tency, timeliness, and completeness. The policy should clearly define the processes con-
cerning how to store, archive, back up, and secure the data. In addition, the company 
should create a set of procedures identifying accessibility levels for employees. Then, the 
firm should deploy controls and procedures that enforce government regulations and 
compliance with mandates such as Sarbanes-Oxley. 
 STORING INFORMATION USING A RELATIONAL 
DATABASE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM  
 The core component of any system, regardless of size, is a database and a database 
management system. Broadly defined, a   database   maintains information about vari-
ous types of objects (inventory), events (transactions), people (employees), and places 
(warehouses). A    database management system (DBMS)    creates, reads, updates, and 
deletes data in a database while controlling access and security. Managers send requests 
to the DBMS, and the DBMS performs the actual manipulation of the data in the data-
base. Companies store their information in databases, and managers access these sys-
tems to answer operational questions such as how many customers purchased Product 
A in December or what were the average sales by region. There are two primary tools 
available for retrieving information from a DBMS. First is a   query-by-example (QBE) 
 LO 6.2:  Describe a database, a 
database management system, 
and the relational database model. 

220
Chapter 6 Data: Business Intelligence
tool  that helps users graphically design the answer to a question against a database. 
Second is a   structured query language (SQL)   that asks users to write lines of code to 
answer questions against a database. Managers typically interact with QBE tools, and 
MIS professionals have the skills required to code SQL.  Figure 6.9 displays the relation-
ship between a database, a DBMS, and a user. Some of the more popular examples of 
DBMS include MySQL, Microsoft Access, SQL Server, FileMaker, Oracle, and FoxPro. 
 A    data element (or data field)    is the smallest or basic unit of information. Data ele-
ments can include a customer’s name, address, email, discount rate, preferred shipping 
method, product name, quantity ordered, and so on.   Data models   are logical data struc-
tures that detail the relationships among data elements using graphics or pictures.  
  Metadata   provides details about data. For example, metadata for an image could 
include its size, resolution, and date created. Metadata about a text document could con-
tain document length, data created, author’s name, and summary. Each data element is 
given a description, such as Customer Name; metadata is provided for the type of data 
(text, numeric, alphanumeric, date, image, binary value) and descriptions of potential 
predefined values such as a certain area code; and finally the relationship is defined. A 
  data dictionary   compiles all of the metadata about the data elements in the data model. 
Looking at a data model along with reviewing the data dictionary provides tremendous 
insight into the database’s functions, purpose, and business rules. 
 DBMS use three primary data models for organizing information—hierarchical, net-
work, and the relational database, the most prevalent. A   relational database model  
stores information in the form of logically related two-dimensional tables. A   relational 
 BUSINESS DRIVEN DEBATE 
 Without a data governance policy, a company might be leaving its data vulner-
able to hackers and theft. Consider TJX Co., the parent company of T.J. Maxx, 
which had 45 million credit and debit card numbers stolen from its data sys-
tems. The credit card industry provides security rules that mandate vendors 
encrypt credit card data and limit storage of credit card numbers from point-
of-sale terminals. T.J. Maxx did not have a data governance policy adhering to 
these stipulations and was actively storing the customer information and credit 
card numbers for years. 3 
 Who do you think is to blame for the T.J. Maxx credit card data theft—the 
company for not implementing the proper data governance policies or the 
hackers? 
 Securing Credit 
Card Data 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 
 FIGURE 6.9 
 Relationship of Database, 
DBMS, and User 
Customers
Orders
Products
Distributors
DBMS
Database
1. Enter New
    Customer
2. Find Customer
    Order
3. Enter New
    Products
User

221
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
database management system    allows users to create, read, update, and delete data in 
a relational database. Although the hierarchical and network models are important, this 
text focuses only on the relational database model. 
 Storing Data Elements in Entities and Attributes 
 For flexibility in supporting business operations, managers need to query or search for 
the answers to business questions such as which artist sold the most albums during a 
certain month. The relationships in the relational database model help managers extract 
this information.  Figure 6.10  illustrates the primary concepts of the relational database 
model—entities, attributes, keys, and relationships. An   entity  (also referred to as a table) 
stores information about a person, place, thing, transaction, or event. The entities, or 
tables, of interest in  Figure 6.10  are  TRACKS, RECORDINGS, MUSICIANS,  and  CATEGO-
RIES.  Notice that each entity is stored in a different two-dimensional table (with rows 
and columns). 
  Attributes   ( also called columns or fields) are the data elements associated with an 
entity. In  Figure 6.10  the attributes for the entity  TRACKS  are  TrackNumber, TrackTitle, 
TrackLength,  and  RecordingID.  Attributes for the entity  MUSICIANS  are  MusicianID, Musi-
cianName, MusicianPhoto,  and  MusicianNotes.  A   record   is a collection of related data ele-
ments (in the  MUSICIANS  table these include “3, Lady Gaga, gag.tiff, Do not bring young 
kids to live shows”). Each record in an entity occupies one row in its respective table.  
 Creating Relationships Through Keys 
 To manage and organize various entities within the relational database model, you use 
primary keys and foreign keys to create logical relationships. A   primary key   is a field (or 
group of fields) that uniquely identifies a given record in a table. In the table  RECORD-
INGS,  the primary key is the field  RecordingID  that uniquely identifies each record in the 
table. Primary keys are a critical piece of a relational database because they provide a way 
of distinguishing each record in a table; for instance, imagine you need to find information 
 FIGURE 6.10 
 Primary Concepts of the 
Relational Database Model 
Attributes
1
2
3
4
5
6
Pop
R&B
Rock
Country
Blues
Classical
Entities
Foreign keys
TRACKS
TrackNumber
TrackTitle
TrackLength
RecordingID
1
I Won't
3:45
1
RECORDINGS
RecordingID
RecordingTitle
MuscianID
CategoryID
1
Breakthrough
1
1
Primary
keys
3
You Got Me
4:00
1
4
Fallin For you
3:35
1
1
I Gotta Feelin
4:49
2
2
Imma Be
4:17
2
2
The E.N.D.
2
1
3
4
5
3
Boom Boom Pow
4:11
2
4
Meet Me Halfway
4:44
2
6
Monkey Business
Elephunk
The Fame Monster
Raymond v. Raymond
2
2
3
4
1
1
1
2
MUSICIANS
MusicianID
MusicianName
MusicianPhoto
MusicianNotes
1
Colby Caillat
Colby.jpg
Next concert in Boston 7/1/2011
CategoryID
CategoryName
2
Black Eyed  Peas
BYP.bmp
New album due 12/25/2011
3
Lady Gaga
Gaga.tiff
Do not bring young kids to live shows
4
Usher
Usher.bmp
Current album #1 on Billboard
Records
2
Begin Again
4:14
1
CATEGORIES

 BUSINESS DRIVEN START-UP 
 Living in a cramped dorm room is a common college occurrence. This was the 
experience of Ryan Dickerson, a Syracuse University student, who found him-
self wedged into a tiny dorm room with only enough room to fit a bed, desk, and 
chair. Spotting an entrepreneurial opportunity, Dickerson innovatively created 
a hybrid bed and couch, calling his new product the Rylaxer. During the day the 
Rylaxer functioned as a couch and during the night it transformed into a bed, 
solving his limited space issue. The Rylaxer is made of environmentally friendly 
foam and is available in two sizes and a variety of colors. Of course, you can 
pay extra for a custom cover with your school’s name, Greek letters, or favorite 
sports team’s logo. 4 
 Why would a spreadsheet be ineffective for running Dickerson’s business? 
Why would he want to create a database to support his business needs? If you 
were building the Rylaxer database, what are a few of the entities and associated 
attributes you might create? Why would you want to create primary and foreign 
keys? How will you use these keys to turn data into information?  
 The Rylaxer 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 
222
Chapter 6 Data: Business Intelligence
on a customer named Steve Smith. Simply searching the customer name would not be an 
ideal way to find the information because there might be 20 customers with the name Steve 
Smith. This is the reason the relational database model uses primary keys to uniquely iden-
tify each record. Using Steve Smith’s unique ID allows a manager to search the database to 
identify all information associated with this customer. 
 A   foreign key   is a primary key of one table that appears as an attribute in another table 
and acts to provide a logical relationship between the two tables. For instance, Black Eyed 
Peas in  Figure 6.10  is one of the musicians appearing in the  MUSICIANS  table. Its pri-
mary key,  MusicianID,  is “2.” Notice that  MusicianID  also appears as an attribute in the 
 RECORDINGS  table. By matching these attributes, you create a relationship between the 
 MUSICIANS  and  RECORDINGS  tables that states the Black Eyed Peas  (MusicianID 2) 
have several recordings including The E.N.D., Monkey Business, and Elepunk. In essence, 
 MusicianID  in the  RECORDINGS  table creates a logical relationship (who was the musi-
cian that made the recording) to the  MUSICIANS table .  Creating the logical relationship 
between the tables allows managers to search the data and turn it into useful information.    
 USING A RELATIONAL DATABASE FOR BUSINESS 
ADVANTAGES  
 Many business managers are familiar with Excel and other spreadsheet programs they 
can use to store business data. Although spreadsheets are excellent for supporting some 
data analysis, they offer limited functionality in terms of security, accessibility, and flex-
ibility and can rarely scale to support business growth. From a business perspective, 
relational databases offer many advantages over using a text document or a spreadsheet, 
as displayed in  Figure 6.11 . 
 Increased Flexibility 
 Databases tend to mirror business structures, and a database needs to handle changes 
quickly and easily, just as any business needs to be able to do. Equally important, data-
bases need to provide flexibility in allowing each user to access the information in 
whatever way best suits his or her needs. The distinction between logical and physical 
views is important in understanding flexible database user views. The   physical view of 
information   deals with the physical storage of information on a storage device. 
 LO 6.3:  Identify the business 
advantages of a relational database. 

223
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
The    logical view of information    focuses on how individual users logically access infor-
mation to meet their own particular business needs. 
 In the database illustration from  Figure 6.10 , for example, one user could perform 
a query to determine which recordings had a track length of four minutes or more. At 
the same time, another user could perform an analysis to determine the distribution of 
recordings as they relate to the different categories. For example, are there more R&B 
recordings than rock, or are they evenly distributed? This example demonstrates that 
while a database has only one physical view, it can easily support multiple logical views 
that provides for flexibility. 
 Consider another example—a mail-order business. One user might want a report pre-
sented in alphabetical format, in which case last name should appear before first name. 
Another user, working with a catalog mailing system, would want customer names 
appearing as first name and then last name. Both are easily achievable, but different logi-
cal views of the same physical information. 
 Increased Scalability and Performance 
 In its first year of operation, the official website of the American Family Immigration 
History Center,  www.ellisisland.org , generated more than 2.5 billion hits. The site offers 
immigration information about people who entered America through the Port of New 
York and Ellis Island between 1892 and 1924. The database contains more than 25 mil-
lion passenger names that are correlated to 3.5 million images of ships’ manifests. 5 
 The database had to be scalable to handle the massive volumes of information and 
the large numbers of users expected for the launch of the website. In addition, the data-
base needed to perform quickly under heavy use. Some organizations must be able to 
support hundreds or thousands of users including employees, partners, customers, and 
suppliers, who all want to access and share the same information. Databases today scale 
to exceptional levels, allowing all types of users and programs to perform information-
processing and information-searching tasks.  
 Reduced Information Redundancy 
  Information redundancy   is the duplication of data, or the storage of the same data 
in multiple places. Redundant data can cause storage issues along with data integrity 
issues, making it difficult to determine which values are the most current or most accu-
rate. Employees become confused and frustrated when faced with incorrect informa-
tion causing disruptions to business processes and procedures. One primary goal of a 
database is to eliminate information redundancy by recording each piece of information 
in only one place in the database. This saves disk space, makes performing information 
updates easier, and improves information quality. 
 FIGURE 6.11 
 Business Advantages of a 
Relational Database 
Increased
Flexibility
Increased
Scalability
and
Performance
Increased
Information
Security
Increased
Information
Integrity
Reduced
Information
Redundance

224
Chapter 6 Data: Business Intelligence
 Increased Information Integrity (Quality) 
  Information integrity   is a measure of the quality of information.   Integrity constraints  
are rules that help ensure the quality of information. The database design needs to con-
sider integrity constraints. The database and the DBMS ensures that users can never vio-
late these constraints. There are two types of integrity constraints: (1) relational and (2) 
business critical. 
  Relational integrity constraints   are rules that enforce basic and fundamental infor-
mation-based constraints. For example, a relational integrity constraint would not allow 
someone to create an order for a nonexistent customer, provide a markup percentage 
that was negative, or order zero pounds of raw materials from a supplier. A   business rule  
defines how a company performs certain aspects of its business and typically results 
in either a yes/no or true/false answer. Stating that merchandise returns are allowed 
within 10 days of purchase is an example of a business rule.   Business-critical integrity 
constraints    enforce business rules vital to an organization’s success and often require 
more insight and knowledge than relational integrity constraints. Consider a supplier 
of fresh produce to large grocery chains such as Kroger. The supplier might implement 
a business-critical integrity constraint stating that no product returns are accepted after 
15 days past delivery. That would make sense because of the chance of spoilage of the 
produce. Business-critical integrity constraints tend to mirror the very rules by which an 
organization achieves success. 
 The specification and enforcement of integrity constraints produce higher-quality infor-
mation that will provide better support for business decisions. Organizations that establish 
specific procedures for developing integrity constraints typically see an increase in accu-
racy that then increases the use of organizational information by business professionals.  
 Increased Information Security 
 Managers must protect information, like any asset, from unauthorized users or misuse. 
As systems become increasingly complex and highly available over the Internet on many 
different devices, security becomes an even bigger issue. Databases offer many security 
features including passwords to provide authentication, access levels to determine who 
can access the data, and access controls to determine what type of access they have to 
the information. 
 For example, customer service representatives might need read-only access to cus-
tomer order information so they can answer customer order inquiries; they might not 
have or need the authority to change or delete order information. Managers might 
require access to employee files, but they should have access only to their own employ-
ees’ files, not the employee files for the entire company. Various security features of 
databases can ensure that individuals have only certain types of access to certain types 
of information. 
 Security risks are increasing as more and more databases and DBMS systems are 
moving to data centers run in the cloud. The biggest risks when using cloud computing 
are ensuring the security and privacy of the information in the database. Implement-
ing data governance policies and procedures that outline the data management require-
ments can ensure safe and secure cloud computing. 
 DRIVING WEBSITES WITH DATA  
 A   content creator   is the person responsible for creating the original website content. A 
  content editor   is the person responsible for updating and maintaining website content. 
  Static information   includes fixed data incapable of change in the event of a user action. 
  Dynamic information   includes data that change based on user actions. For example, 
static websites supply only information that will not change until the content editor 
changes the information. Dynamic information changes when a user requests infor-
mation. A dynamic website changes information based on user requests such as movie 
ticket availability, airline prices, or restaurant reservations. Dynamic website informa-
tion is stored in a   dynamic catalog   ,  or an area of a website that stores information about 
products in a database. 
 LO 6.4:  Explain the business benefits 
of a data-driven website. 

225
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
 Websites change for site visitors depending on the type of information they request. 
Consider, for example, an automobile dealer. The dealer would create a database con-
taining data elements for each car it has available for sale including make, model, color, 
year, miles per gallon, a photograph, and so on. Website visitors might click on Porsche 
and then enter their specific requests such as price range or year made. Once the user hits 
“go” the website automatically provides a custom view of the requested information. The 
dealer must create, update, and delete automobile information as the inventory changes. 
 A   data-driven website  is an interactive website kept constantly updated and relevant 
to the needs of its customers using a database. Data-driven capabilities are especially 
useful when a firm needs to offer large amounts of information, products, or services. 
Visitors can become quickly annoyed if they find themselves buried under an avalanche 
of information when searching a website. A data-driven website can help limit the 
amount of information displayed to customers based on unique search requirements. 
Companies even use data-driven websites to make information in their internal data-
bases available to customers and business partners. 
 There are a number of advantages to using the web to access company databases. First, 
web browsers are much easier to use than directly accessing the database using a custom-
query tool. Second, the web interface requires few or no changes to the database model. 
Finally, it costs less to add a web interface in front of a DBMS than to redesign and rebuild 
the system to support changes. Additional data-driven website advantages include:
 ■  Easy to manage content: Website owners can make changes without relying on MIS 
professionals; users can update a data-driven website with little or no training. 
 ■  Easy to store large amounts of data: Data-driven websites can keep large volumes 
of information organized. Website owners can use templates to implement changes 
for layouts, navigation, or website structure. This improves website reliability, scal-
ability, and performance.  
 ■  Easy to eliminate human errors: Data-driven websites trap data-entry errors, elimi-
nating inconsistencies while ensuring all information is entered correctly. 
 BUSINESS DRIVEN ETHICS AND SECURITY 
 Peter Warden is not your typical Facebook user. He is a young entrepreneur 
from Boulder, Colorado, who used the online social networking site’s data 
to illustrate people’s interests and common names across the United States. 
Warden collected data from more than 200 million Facebook profiles, and then 
he created a visualization map showing connections between locations that 
share friends. 
 Warden gathered the data from public profiles using “crawling” software 
similar to what search engines use to find content. Analyzing these data could 
provide useful information, such as displaying links between people with simi-
lar income, employment, and social connections. When Facebook learned 
what Warden was doing, the company threatened to sue him unless he deleted 
the data immediately. Warden did not have the funds required to fight the law-
suit and was forced to comply with Facebook’s request and deleted the data. 6 
 Do you agree or disagree that Warden’s use of the information was unethi-
cal? Do you agree with Facebook’s decision to have Warden delete all the data 
he collected? What other social networking sites could Warden use to collect 
public information? How much of your personal information do you think is 
available to the public for data collection efforts such as Warden’s?  
 Facebook 
Fiasco 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 

226
Chapter 6 Data: Business Intelligence
 FIGURE 6.13 
 BI in a Data-Driven Website 
Web Page
Database
1
2
PivotTable
3
 FIGURE 6.12 
 Zappos.com —A Data-Driven 
Website 
Search
query
Zappos Web Server
Results
Database

227
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
 Zappos credits its success as an online shoe retailer to its vast inventory of nearly 3 
million products available through its dynamic data-driven website. The company built 
its data-driven website catering to a specific niche market: consumers who were tired 
of finding that their most-desired items were always out of stock at traditional retailers. 
Zappos’ highly flexible, scalable, and secure database helped it rank as the most-available 
Internet retailer.  Figure 6.12  displays Zappos data-driven website illustrating a user que-
rying the database and receiving information that satisfies the user’s request. 7   
 Companies can gain valuable business knowledge by viewing the data accessed and 
analyzed from their website.  Figure 6.13  displays how running queries or using ana-
lytical tools, such as a PivotTable, on the database that is attached to the website can 
offer insight into the business, such as items browsed, frequent requests, items bought 
together, and so on. 
 section 6.2 
Business Intelligence 
 LE AR NI NG  O UT CO M E S 
 6.5 Define a data warehouse, and provide a few reasons it can make a manager more effective. 
 6.6 Explain ETL and the role of a data mart in business. 
 6.7 Define data mining, and explain the three common forms for mining structured and unstructured data. 
 6.8 Identify the advantages of using business intelligence to support managerial decision making. 
 THE BUSINESS BENEFITS OF DATA WAREHOUSING  
 In the 1990s as organizations began to need more timely information about their busi-
ness, they found that traditional management information systems were too cumber-
some to provide relevant information efficiently and efficiently. Most of the systems were 
in the form of operational databases that were designed for specific business functions, 
such as accounting, order entry, customer service, and sales, and were not appropriate 
for business analysis for the reasons shown in  Figure 6.14 .  
 During the latter half of the 20th century, the numbers and types of operational 
databases increased. Many large businesses found themselves with information scat-
tered across multiple systems with different file types (such as spreadsheets, databases, 
and even word processing files), making it almost impossible for anyone to use the 
information from multiple sources. Completing reporting requests across operational 
systems could take days or weeks using antiquated reporting tools that were ineffective 
for running a business. From this idea, the data warehouse was born as a place where 
relevant information could be stored and accessed for making strategic queries and 
reports. 
 A   data warehouse   is a logical collection of information, gathered from many different 
operational databases, that supports business analysis activities and decision-making 
tasks. The primary purpose of a data warehouse is to combine information, more specifi-
cally, strategic information, throughout an organization into a single repository in such a 
way that the people who need that information can make decisions and undertake busi-
ness analysis. A key idea within data warehousing is to collect information from multiple 
systems in a common location that uses a universal querying tool. This allows opera-
tional databases to run where they are most efficient for the business, while providing 
a common location using a familiar format for the strategic or enterprisewide reporting 
information. 
 Data warehouses go even a step further by standardizing information. Gender, for 
instance can be referred to in many ways (Male, Female, M/F, 1/0), but it should be 
standardized on a data warehouse with one common way of referring to each data ele-
ment that stores gender (M/F). Standardizing of data elements allows for greater accu-
racy, completeness, and consistency as well as increases the quality of the information 
 LO 6.5:  Define a data warehouse, 
and provide a few reasons it can 
make a manager more effective. 

228
Chapter 6 Data: Business Intelligence
in making strategic business decisions. The data warehouse then is simply a tool that 
enables business users, typically managers, to be more effective in many ways, including:
 ■ Developing customer profiles.  
 ■ Identifying new-product opportunities. 
 ■ Improving business operations. 
 ■ Identifying financial issues. 
 ■ Analyzing trends. 
 ■ Understanding competitors. 
 ■ Understanding product performance. 
 PERFORMING BUSINESS ANALYSIS WITH DATA MARTS  
 Businesses collect a tremendous amount of transactional information as part of their 
routine operations. Marketing, sales, and other departments would like to analyze these 
data to understand their operations better. While databases store the details of all trans-
actions (for instance, the sale of a product) and events (hiring a new employee), data 
warehouses store that same information but in an aggregated form more suited to sup-
porting decision-making tasks. Aggregation, in this instance, can include totals, counts, 
averages, and the like. 
 The data warehouse modeled in  Figure  6.15  compiles information from internal 
databases (or transactional and operational databases) and external databases through 
extraction, transformation, and loading.    Extraction, transformation, and loading 
(ETL)   is a process that extracts information from internal and external databases, trans-
forms it using a common set of enterprise definitions, and loads it into a data warehouse. 
The data warehouse then sends portions (or subsets) of the information to data marts. 
A    data mart   contains a subset of data warehouse information. To distinguish between 
 LO 6.6:  Explain ETL and the role of a 
data mart in business. 
 FIGURE 6.14 
 Reasons Business Analysis 
Is Difficult from Operational 
Databases 
Every department had its own method for recording
data so when trying to share information, data did
not match and users did not get the data they really
needed. 
Inconsistent
Data Deﬁnitions
• 
Managers need to perform cross-functional analysis
using data from all departments, which differed in
granularities, formats, and levels.
Lack of Data
Standards
• 
 
The data, if available, were often incorrect or
incomplete. Therefore, users could not rely on the
data to make decisions.
Poor Data
Quality
• 
Users could not get the data they needed; what was
collected was not always useful for intended
purposes. 
Inadequate Data
Usefulness
• 
Most data stored in operational databases did not
allow users direct access; users had to wait to have
their queries or questions answered by MIS
professionals who could code SQL.
Ineffective
Direct Data
Access 
• 

229
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
data warehouses and data marts, think of data warehouses as having a more organiza-
tional focus and data marts as having a functional focus.  Figure 6.15  provides an illustra-
tion of a data warehouse and its relationship to internal and external databases, ETL, 
and data marts. 
 Multidimensional Analysis 
 A relational database contains information in a series of two-dimensional tables. In a 
data warehouse and data mart, information contains layers of columns and rows. For this 
reason, most data warehouses and data marts are multidimensional databases. A dimen-
sion is a particular attribute of information. Each layer in a data warehouse or data mart 
represents information according to an additional dimension. An   information cube  is 
the common term for the representation of multidimensional information.  Figure 6.16  
displays a cube (cube a) that represents store information (the layers), product informa-
tion (the rows), and promotion information (the columns).  
 After creating a cube of information, users can begin to slice-and-dice the cube to drill 
down into the information. The second cube (cube b) in  Figure 6.16  displays a slice rep-
resenting promotion II information for all products at all stores. The third cube (cube c) 
in  Figure 6.16  displays only information for promotion III, product B, at store 2. By using 
multidimensional analysis, users can analyze information in a number of ways and with 
any number of dimensions. Users might want to add dimensions of information to a 
current analysis including product category, region, and even forecasted versus actual 
weather. The true value of a data warehouse is its ability to provide multidimensional 
analysis that allows users to gain insights into their information. 
 Data warehouses and data marts are ideal for off-loading some of the querying against 
a database. For example, querying a database to obtain an average of sales for Product 
B at Store 2 while Promotion III is under way might create a considerable processing 
 FIGURE 6.15 
 Data Warehouse Model 
Marketing
Sales
Inventory
Billing
•  Marketing information
•  Inventory information
•  Sales information
•  Billing information
•  Competitor information
•  Industry information
•  Mailing list information
•  Stock market analysis
Internal Databases
Data Warehouse
Industry
information
Stock
market
analysis
External Databases
Marketing
data mart 
Inventory
data mart
Sales
data mart
Competitor 
information
Mailing
lists
ETL
ETL
ETL
ETL
ETL

230
Chapter 6 Data: Business Intelligence
burden for a database, increasing the time it takes another person to enter a new sale 
into the same database. If an organization performs numerous queries against a data-
base (or multiple databases), aggregating that information into a data warehouse will be 
beneficial. 
 Information Cleansing or Scrubbing 
 Maintaining quality information in a data warehouse or data mart is extremely impor-
tant. To increase the quality of organizational information and thus the effectiveness of 
decision making, businesses must formulate a strategy to keep information clean.   Infor-
mation cleansing or scrubbing    is a process that weeds out and fixes or discards incon-
sistent, incorrect, or incomplete information. 
 Specialized software tools exist that use sophisticated procedures to analyze, stan-
dardize, correct, match, and consolidate data warehouse information. This step is vitally 
important because data warehouses often contain information from several different 
databases, some of which can be external to the organization. In a data warehouse, 
information cleansing occurs first during the ETL process and again once the informa-
tion is in the data warehouse. Companies can choose information cleansing software 
from several different vendors including Oracle, SAS, Ascential Software, and Group 1 
Software. Ideally, scrubbed information is accurate and consistent. 
 Looking at customer information highlights why information cleansing is neces-
sary. Customer information exists in several operational systems. In each system, all the 
details could change—from the customer ID to contact information—depending on the 
business process the user is performing (see  Figure 6.17 ). 
  Figure 6.18  displays a customer name entered differently in multiple operational sys-
tems. Information cleansing allows an organization to fix these types of inconsistencies 
in the data warehouse.  Figure 6.19  displays the typical events that occur during informa-
tion cleansing. 
 Achieving perfect information is almost impossible. The more complete and accu-
rate a company wants its information to be, the more it costs (see  Figure 6.20 ). Compa-
nies may also trade accuracy for completeness. Accurate information is correct, while 
complete information has no blanks. A birth date of 2/31/10 is an example of complete 
but inaccurate information (February 31 does not exist). An address containing Denver, 
Colorado, without a zip code is an example of accurate information that is incomplete. 
Many firms complete   data quality audits   to determine the accuracy and completeness 
of its data. Most organizations determine a percentage of accuracy and completeness 
high enough to make good decisions at a reasonable cost, such as 85 percent accurate 
and 65 percent complete. 
 FIGURE 6.16 
 A Cube of Information for 
Performing a Multidimensional 
Analysis on Three Stores 
for Five Products and Four 
Promotions 
Promo I
Product A
Store 1
Store 2
Store 3
Cube a
Product B
Product C
Product D
Product E
Promo II
Promo III
Promo IV
Promo I
Product A
Store 1
Store 2
Store 3
Cube b
Product B
Product C
Product D
Product E
Promo II
Promo III
Promo IV
Promo I
Product A
Store 1
Store 2
Store 3
Cube c
Product B
Product C
Product D
Product E
Promo II
Promo III
Promo IV

231
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
 UNCOVERING TRENDS AND PATTERNS WITH DATA MINING  
 Companies are collecting more data than ever. Historically, data were housed function-
ally in systems that were unable to talk to each other, such as customer service, finance, 
and human resources.   Data mining   is the process of analyzing data to extract informa-
tion not offered by the raw data alone. Data mining can also begin at a summary infor-
mation level (coarse granularity) and progress through increasing levels of detail (drilling 
down), or the reverse (drilling up). Companies use data-mining techniques to compile 
 LO 6.7:  Define data mining, and 
explain the three common forms for 
mining structured and unstructured 
data. 
 FIGURE 6.17 
 Contact Information in 
Operational Systems 
Billing
Contact: Hans Hultgren 555-1211
Customer Service
Contact: Anne Logan 555-1288
Contact: Deborah Walbridge 555-6543
The billing system has “accounts
payable” customer contact information 
The customer service system has the
“product user” customer contact information 
Marketing
Contact: Paul Bauer 555-2211
Contact: Don McCubbrey 555-3434
Sales
Contact: Paul Bauer 555-2211
Contact: Don McCubbrey 555-3434
The marketing and sales system has “decision maker”customer contact information.
 FIGURE 6.18 
 Standardizing a Customer Name 
in Operational Systems 
 Customers:
JD0021 Jane Doe
BL0557 Bob Lake
JS0288 Judy Smith
PB0092 Pat Burton
Customers:
10622FA Susan Brown
10472FB Judie R Smithe
10772FA Patti Burten
10922MC Larry Trump
Customers:
000980 Burton, Tricia
02670 Smith, Judie
000466 Burton, Patricia
006777 Lake, RobertP.
Sales
Customer Service
Billing
Customers:
10001 Jane Doe
10002 Robert P.Lake
10003 Judie R.Smith
10004 Patricia Burton
Customer Information

232
Chapter 6 Data: Business Intelligence
a complete picture of their operations, all within a single view, allowing them to identify 
trends and improve forecasts. Consider Best Buy, which used data-mining tools to iden-
tify that 7 percent of its customers accounted for 43 percent of its sales, so the company 
reorganized its stores to accommodate those customers. 8 
 To perform data mining, users need data-mining tools.   Data-mining tools   use a 
variety of techniques to find patterns and relationships in large volumes of information 
that predict future behavior and guide decision making. Data mining uncovers trends 
and patterns, which analysts use to build models that, when exposed to new informa-
tion sets, perform a variety of information analysis functions. Data-mining tools for data 
warehouses help users uncover business intelligence in their data. Some of the key areas 
where businesses are using data mining include:
 ■ Analyzing customer buying patterns to predict future marketing and promotion 
campaigns. 
 ■ Building budgets and other financial information.  
 FIGURE 6.19 
 Information Cleansing Activities 
Missing records or attributes
Cleansing
Missing keys or other required data
Redundant records
Erroneous relationships or references
Inaccurate or incomplete data
 FIGURE 6.20 
 The Cost of Accurate and 
Complete Information 
Completeness
100%
Accuracy
Complete but
with known
errors
Not very useful
May be a proto-
type only
Perfect
information
Pricey
Very incomplete
but accurate
Quality Management
100%

233
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
 BUSINESS DRIVEN GLOBALIZATION 
 Congratulations! You have just been hired as a consultant for Integrity 
Information Inc., a start-up business intelligence consulting company. Your 
first job is to help work with the sales department in securing a new client, The 
Warehouse. The Warehouse has been operating in the United States for more 
than a decade, and its primary business is to sell wholesale low-cost products. 
The Warehouse is interested in hiring Integrity Information Inc. to clean up the 
data that are stored in its U.S. database. To determine how good your work is, 
the client would like your analysis of the following spreadsheet. The Warehouse 
is also interested in expanding globally and wants to purchase several inde-
pendent wholesale stores located in Australia, Thailand, China, Japan, and 
the United Kingdom. Before the company moves forward with the venture, it 
wants to understand what types of data issues it might encounter as it begins to 
transfer data from each global entity to the data warehouse. Please create a list 
detailing the potential issues The Warehouse can anticipate encountering as it 
consolidates the global databases into a single data warehouse. 9 
 
 Integrity 
Information Inc. 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 
CUST ID
First Name
Last Name
Address
City
State
Zip
Phone
Last Order 
Date
233620
Christopher
Lee
12421 W Olympic Blvd
Los Angeles
CA
75080-1100 (972)680-7848
4/18/2014
233621
Bruce
Brandwen
268 W 44th St
New York
PA
10036-3906 (212)471-6077
5/3/2014
233622
Glr
Johnson
4100 E Dry Creek Rd
Littleton
CO
80122-3729 (303)712-5461
5/6/2014
233623
Dave
Owens
466 Commerce Rd
Staunton
VA
24401-4432 (540)851-0362
3/19/2014
233624
John
Coulbourn
124 Action St
Maynard
MA
1754
(978)987-0100
4/24/2014
233629
Dan
Gagliardo
2875 Union Rd
Cheektowaga
NY
14227-1461 (716)558-8191
5/4/2014
23362
Damanceee
Allen
1633 Broadway
New York
NY
10019-6708 (212)708-1576
233630
Michael
Peretz
235 E 45th St
New York
NY
10017-3305 (212)210-1340
4/30/2014
233631
Jody
Veeder
440 Science Dr
Madison
WI
53711-1064 (608)238-9690 
X227
3/27/2014
233632
Michael
Kehrer
3015 SSE Loop 323
Tyler
TX
75701
(903)579-3229
4/28/2014
233633
Erin
Yoon
3500 Carillon Pt
Kirkland
WA
98033-7354 (425)897-7221
3/25/2014
233634
Madeline
Shefferly
4100 E Dry Creek Rd
Littleton
CO
80122-3729 (303)486-3949
3/33/2014
233635
Steven
Conduit
1332 Enterprise Dr
West Chester
PA
19380-5970 (610)692-5900
4/27/2014
233636
Joseph
Kovach
1332 Enterprise Dr
West Chester
PA
19380-5970 (610)692-5900
4/28/2014
233637
Richard
Jordan
1700 N
Philadelphia
PA
19131-4728 (215)581-6770
3/19/2014
233638
Scott
Mikolajczyk
1655 Crofton Blvd
Crofton
MD
21114-1387 (410)729-8155
4/28/2014
233639
Susan
Shragg
1875 Century Park E
Los Angeles
CA
90067-2501 (310)785-0511
4/29/2014
233640
Rob
Ponto
29777 Telegraph Rd
Southfield
MI
48034-1303 (810)204-4724
5/5/2014
233642
Lauren
Butler
1211 Avenue Of The 
Americas
New York
NY
10036-8701 (212)852-7494
4/22/2014
233643
Christopher
Lee
12421 W Olympic Blvd
Los Angeles
CA
90064-1022 (310)689-2577
3/25/2014
233644
Michelle
Decker
6922 Hollywood Blvd
Hollywood
CA
90028-6117 (323)817-4655
5/8/2014
233647
Natalia
Galeano
1211 Avenue Of 
The Americas
New York
NY
10036-8701 (646)728-6911
4/23/2014
233648
Bobbie
Orchard
4201 Congress St
Charlotte
NC
28209-4617 (704)557-2444
5/11/2014
233650
Ben
Konfino
1111 Stewart Ave
Bethpage
NY
11714-3533 (516)803-1406
3/19/2014
233651
Lenee
Santana
1050 Techwood Dr NW
Atlanta
GA
30318-KKRR (404)885-2000
3/22/2014
233652
Lauren
Monks
7700 Wisconsin Ave
Bethesda
MD
20814-3578 (301)771-4772
3/19/2005
233653
Mark
Woolley
10950 Washington Blvd
Culver City
CA
90232-4026 (310)202-2900
4/20/2014

234
Chapter 6 Data: Business Intelligence
 ■ Detecting fraud by identifying deceptive spending patterns.  
 ■ Finding the best customers who spend the most money. 
 ■ Keeping customers from leaving or migrating to competitors. 
 ■ Promoting and hiring employees to ensure success for both the company and the 
individual. 
 Data mining enables these companies to determine relationships among such inter-
nal factors as price, product positioning, or staff skills, and external factors such as eco-
nomic indicators, competition, and customer demographics. In addition, it enables 
companies to determine the impact on sales, customer satisfaction, and corporate prof-
its and to drill down into summary information to view detailed transactional data. With 
data mining, a retailer could use point-of-sale records of customer purchases to send 
targeted promotions based on an individual’s purchase history. By mining demographic 
data from comment or warranty cards, the retailer could develop products and promo-
tions to appeal to specific customer segments. 
 Netflix uses data mining to analyze each customer’s film-viewing habits to provide 
recommendations for other customers with Cinematch, its movie recommendation 
system. Using Cinematch, Netflix can present customers with a number of additional 
movies they might want to watch based on the customer’s current preferences. Netflix’s 
innovative use of data mining provides its competitive advantage in the movie rental 
industry. 10 
 Data mining uses specialized technologies and functionalities such as query tools, 
reporting tools, multidimensional analysis tools, statistical tools, and intelligent agents. 
Data mining approaches decision making with a few different activities in mind including:
 ■ Classification—assigns records to one of a predefined set of classes. 
 ■ Estimation—determines values for an unknown continuous variable behavior or 
estimated future value. 
 ■ Affinity grouping—determines which things go together.  
 ■ Clustering—segments a heterogeneous population of records into a number of more 
homogeneous subgroups. 
 Data mining occurs on   structured data   that are already in a database or a spread-
sheet.   Unstructured data  do not exist in a fixed location and can include text docu-
ments, PDFs, voice messages, emails, and so on.   Text mining  analyzes unstructured data 
to find trends and patterns in words and sentences. Text mining a firm’s customer sup-
port email might identify which customer service representative is best able to handle 
the question, allowing the system to forward it to the right person.   Web mining  analyzes 
unstructured data associated with websites to identify consumer behavior and website 
navigation. Three common forms for mining structured and unstructured data are:
 ■ Cluster analysis 
 ■ Association detection 
 ■ Statistical analysis. 
 Cluster Analysis 
  Cluster analysis   is a technique used to divide information sets into mutually exclusive 
groups such that the members of each group are as close together as possible to one 
another and the different groups are as far apart as possible. Cluster analysis segments 
customer information to help organizations identify customers with similar behavioral 
traits, such as clusters of best customers or onetime customers. Cluster analysis also has 
the ability to uncover naturally occurring patterns in information (see  Figure 6.21 ). 
 A great example of using cluster analysis in business is to create target-marketing 
strategies based on zip codes. Evaluating customer segments by zip code allows a busi-
ness to assign a level of importance to each segment. Zip codes offer valuable insight 
into such things as income levels, demographics, lifestyles, and spending habits. With 
target marketing, a business can decrease its costs while increasing the success rate of 
the marketing campaign. 

235
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
 Association Detection 
  Association detection   reveals the relationship between variables along with the nature 
and frequency of the relationships. Many people refer to association detection algo-
rithms as association rule generators because they create rules to determine the likeli-
hood of events occurring together at a particular time or following each other in a logical 
progression. Percentages usually reflect the patterns of these events; for example, “55 
percent of the time, events A and B occurred together,” or “80 percent of the time that 
items A and B occurred together, they were followed by item C within three days.” 
 BUSINESS DRIVEN DISCUSSION 
 Often criticized for accruing large amounts of data about people, Google is now 
giving users an easy way to find out what information it stores about them. The 
company provides a service called Google Dashboard that summarizes the 
data that it collects in users’ accounts on their products such as Gmail, Picasa 
Reader, and YouTube. Using the Dashboard, users can then adjust their privacy 
settings for the various Google applications, even allowing users to review and 
delete recent Google searches. 11 
 Google Dashboard is giving users what they want—control over their own 
data. How is Google using data mining to collect information on users? What 
privacy issues does Google create by the massive amounts of personal data it 
stores? Will the Dashboard prevent Google from tracking users across the web 
if it wants to?  
 Google 
Dashboard 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 
 FIGURE 6.21 
 Example of Cluster Analysis 
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
−2
−1
0
1
2
3

236
Chapter 6 Data: Business Intelligence
 One of the most common forms of association detection analysis is market basket 
analysis.   Market basket analysis   analyzes such items as websites and checkout scanner 
information to detect customers’ buying behavior and predict future behavior by iden-
tifying affinities among customers’ choices of products and services (see  Figure 6.22 ). 
Market basket analysis is frequently used to develop marketing campaigns for cross-sell-
ing products and services (especially in banking, insurance, and finance) and for inven-
tory control, shelf-product placement, and other retail and marketing applications. 
 Statistical Analysis 
  Statistical analysis   performs such functions as information correlations, distributions, 
calculations, and variance analysis. Data-mining tools offer knowledge workers a wide 
range of powerful statistical capabilities so they can quickly build a variety of statistical 
models, examine the models’ assumptions and validity, and compare and contrast the 
various models to determine the best one for a particular business issue. 
 Forecasting is a common form of statistical analysis.   Time-series information   is time-
stamped information collected at a particular frequency. Formally defined,   forecasts  
are predictions based on time-series information. Examples of time-series information 
include web visits per hour, sales per month, and calls per day. Forecasting data-mining 
tools allow users to manipulate the time series for forecasting activities. 
 When discovering trends and seasonal variations in transactional information, use 
a time-series forecast to change the transactional information by units of time, such as 
transforming weekly information into monthly or seasonal information or hourly infor-
mation into daily information. Companies base production, investment, and staffing 
decisions on a host of economic and market indicators in this manner. Forecasting mod-
els allow organizations to consider all sorts of variables when making decisions. 
 SUPPORTING DECISIONS WITH BUSINESS 
INTELLIGENCE  
 Many organizations today find it next to impossible to understand their own strengths 
and weaknesses, let alone their biggest competitors, because the enormous volume of 
organizational data is inaccessible to all but the MIS department. Organization data 
include far more than simple structured data elements in a database; the set of data also 
includes unstructured data such as voice mail, customer phone calls, text messages, 
video clips, along with numerous new forms of data, such as tweets from Twitter. 
 LO 6.8:  Identify the advantages 
of using business intelligence to 
support managerial decision making. 
 FIGURE 6.22 
 Market Basket Analysis 

237
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
 The Problem: Data Rich, Information Poor 
 An ideal business scenario would be as follows: As a business manager on his way to 
meet with a client reviews historical customer data, he realizes that the client’s order-
ing volume has substantially decreased. As he drills down into the data, he notices the 
client had a support issue with a particular product. He quickly calls the support team 
to find out all of the information and learns that a replacement for the defective part 
can be shipped in 24 hours. In addition, he learns that the client has visited the website 
and requested information on a new product line. Armed with all this information, the 
business manager is prepared for a productive meeting with his client. He now under-
stands the client’s needs and issues, and he can address new sales opportunities with 
confidence. 
 For many companies the above example is simply a pipe dream. Attempting to gather 
all of the client information would actually take hours or even days to compile. With 
so much data available, it is surprisingly hard for managers to get information, such as 
inventory levels, past order history, or shipping details. Managers send their information 
requests to the MIS department where a dedicated person compiles the various reports. 
In some situations, responses can take days, by which time the information may be out-
dated and opportunities lost. Many organizations find themselves in the position of 
being data rich and information poor. Even in today’s electronic world, managers strug-
gle with the challenge of turning their business data into business intelligence. 
 The Solution: Business Intelligence 
 Employee decisions are numerous and they include providing service information, 
offering new products, and supporting frustrated customers. Employees can base their 
decisions on data, experience, or knowledge and preferably a combination of all three. 
 BUSINESS DRIVEN INNOVATION 
 Gone are the days of staring at boring spreadsheets and trying to understand 
how the data correlate. With innovative data visualization tools, managers can 
arrange different ways to view the data, providing new forms of pattern rec-
ognition not offered by simply looking at numbers.  Slate,  a news publication, 
developed a new data visualization tool called News Dots that offers readers a 
different way of viewing the daily news through trends and patterns. The News 
Dots tool scans about 500 stories a day from major publications and then tags 
the content with important keywords such as people, places, companies, and 
topics. Surprisingly, the majority of daily news overlaps as the people, places, 
and stories are frequently connected. Using News Dots you can visualize how 
the news fits together, almost similar to a giant social network. News Dots uses 
circles (or dots) to represent the tagged content and arranges them according 
to size. The more frequently a certain topic is tagged, the larger the dot and its 
relationship to other dots. The tool is interactive and users simply click on a 
dot to view which stories mention that topic and which other topics it connects 
to in the network such as a correlation among the U.S. government, Federal 
Reserve, Senate, bank, and Barack Obama. 12 
 How can data visualization help identify trends? What types of business intel-
ligence could you identify if your college used a data visualization tool to analyze 
student information? What types of business intelligence could you identify if you 
used a data visualization tool to analyze the industry where you plan to compete?  
 News Dots 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 

238
Chapter 6 Data: Business Intelligence
Business intelligence can provide managers with the ability to make better decisions. A 
few examples of how different industries use business intelligence include:
 ■  Airlines:  Analyze popular vacation locations with current flight listings. 
 ■  Banking: Understand customer credit card usage and nonpayment rates. 
 ■  Health care:  Compare the demographics of patients with critical illnesses. 
 ■  Insurance:  Predict claim amounts and medical coverage costs.  
 ■  Law enforcement: Track crime patterns, locations, and criminal behavior. 
 ■  Marketing: Analyze customer demographics. 
 ■  Retail: Predict sales, inventory levels, and distribution.  
 ■  Technology: Predict hardware failures. 
  Figure 6.23  displays how organizations using BI can find the cause to many issues and 
problems simply by asking “Why?” The process starts by analyzing a report such as sales 
amounts by quarter. Managers will drill down into the report looking for why sales are 
up or why sales are down. Once they understand why a certain location or product is 
experiencing an increase in sales, they can share the information in an effort to raise 
enterprisewide sales. Once they understand the cause for a decrease in sales, they can 
take effective action to resolve the issue. Here are a few examples of how managers can 
use BI to answer tough business questions: 
 ■  Where has the business been? Historical perspective offers important variables for 
determining trends and patterns. 
 ■  Where is the business now? Looking at the current business situation allows man-
agers to take effective action to solve issues before they grow out of control. 
 ■  Where is the business going? Setting strategic direction is critical for planning and 
creating solid business strategies. 
 Ask a simple question—such as who is my best customer or what is my worst-sell-
ing product—and you might get as many answers as you have employees. Databases, 
data warehouses, and data marts can provide a single source of “trusted” data that can 
answer questions about customers, products, suppliers, production, finances, fraud, and 
even employees. They can also alert managers to inconsistencies or help determine the 
cause and effects of enterprisewide business decisions. All business aspects can benefit 
from the added insights provided by business intelligence, and you, as a business stu-
dent, will benefit from understanding how MIS can help you make intelligent decisions.  
 Visual Business Intelligence 
  Informing   is accessing large amounts of data from different management information 
systems.   Infographics (information graphics)   displays information graphically so 
 FIGURE 6.23 
 How BI Can Answer Tough 
Customer Questions 
Why are sales below target?
Why did we sell less in the West?
Why did X sales drop?
Why did customer
complaints increase?
Because we sold less
in the Western region.
Because sales of product X
dropped.
Because customer
complaints increased.
Because late deliveries went up
60 percent.
Answer
Question

239
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
it can be easily understood. Infographics can present the results of large data analysis 
looking for patterns and relationships that monitor changes in variables over time.   Data 
visualization   describes technologies that allow users to “see” or visualize data to trans-
form information into a business perspective.   Data visualization tools   move beyond 
Excel graphs and charts into sophisticated analysis techniques such as pie charts, con-
trols, instruments, maps, time-series graphs, and more. Data visualization tools can help 
uncover correlations and trends in data that would otherwise go unrecognized.   Business 
intelligence dashboards    track corporate metrics such as critical success factors and key 
performance indicators and include advanced capabilities such as interactive controls 
allowing users to manipulate data for analysis. The majority of business intelligence soft-
ware vendors offer a number of different data visualization tools and business intelli-
gence dashboards. 
 Learning Outcome 6.1: Explain the four primary traits that determine the value of 
information. 
 Information is data converted into a meaningful and useful context. Information can tell an organiza-
tion how its current operations are performing and help it estimate and strategize about how future 
operations might perform. It is important to understand the different levels, formats, and granularities 
of information along with the four primary traits that help determine the value of information, which 
include (1) information type: transactional and analytical; (2) information timeliness; (3) information 
quality; (4) information governance. 
 Learning Outcome 6.2: Describe a database, a database management system, and the 
relational database model. 
 A database maintains information about various types of objects (inventory), events (transactions), 
people (employees), and places (warehouses). A database management system (DBMS) creates, 
reads, updates, and deletes data in a database while controlling access and security. A DBMS pro-
vides methodologies for creating, updating, storing, and retrieving data in a database. In addition, a 
DBMS provides facilities for controlling data access and security, allowing data sharing, and enforcing 
data integrity. The relational database model allows users to create, read, update, and delete data in 
a relational database. 
 Learning Outcome 6.3: Identify the business advantages of a relational database. 
 Many business managers are familiar with Excel and other spreadsheet programs they can use to 
store business data. Although spreadsheets are excellent for supporting some data analysis, they 
offer limited functionality in terms of security, accessibility, and flexibility and can rarely scale to sup-
port business growth. From a business perspective, relational databases offer many advantages over 
using a text document or a spreadsheet, including increased flexibility, increased scalability and per-
formance, reduced information redundancy, increased information integrity (quality), and increased 
information security. 
 Learning Outcome 6.4: Explain the business benefits of a data-driven website. 
 A data-driven website is an interactive website kept constantly updated and relevant to the needs of 
its customers using a database. Data-driven capabilities are especially useful when the website offers 
a great deal of information, products, or services because visitors are frequently annoyed if they are 
buried under an avalanche of information when searching a website. Many companies use the web to 
make some of the information in their internal databases available to customers and business partners.  
 L E A R N I N G  O U T C O M E  R E V I E W 

240
Chapter 6 Data: Business Intelligence
 Learning Outcome 6.5: Define a data warehouse, and provide a few reasons it can make 
a manager more effective. 
 A data warehouse is a logical collection of information, gathered from many different operational 
databases, that supports business analysis and decision making. The primary value of a data ware-
house is to combine information, more specifically, strategic information, throughout an organization 
into a single repository in such a way that the people who need that information can make decisions 
and undertake business analysis. 
 Learning Outcome 6.6: Explain ETL and the role of a data mart in business. 
 Extraction, transformation, and loading (ETL) is a process that extracts information from internal and 
external databases, transforms it using a common set of enterprise definitions, and loads it into a data 
warehouse. The data warehouse then sends portions (or subsets) of the information to data marts. A 
data mart contains a subset of data warehouse information. To distinguish between data warehouses 
and data marts, think of data warehouses as having a more organizational focus and data marts as 
having a functional focus. 
 Learning Outcome 6.7: Define data mining, and explain the three common forms for 
mining structured and unstructured data. 
 Data mining is the process of analyzing data to extract information not offered by the raw data alone. 
Data mining can also begin at a summary information level (coarse granularity) and progress through 
increasing levels of detail (drilling down), or the reverse (drilling up). Data mining occurs on structured 
data that are already in a database or a spreadsheet. Unstructured data do not exist in a fixed location 
and can include text documents, PDFs, voice messages, emails, and so on. Three common forms for min-
ing structured and unstructured data are cluster analysis, association detection, and statistical analysis.  
 Learning Outcome 6.8: Identify the advantages of using business intelligence to support 
managerial decision making. 
 Many organizations today find it next to impossible to understand their own strengths and weak-
nesses, let alone their biggest competitors, due to enormous volumes of organizational data being 
inaccessible to all but the MIS department. Organization data include far more than simple structured 
data elements in a database; the set of data also includes unstructured data such as voice mail, 
customer phone calls, text messages, video clips, along with numerous new forms of data, such as 
tweets from Twitter. Managers today find themselves in the position of being data rich and information 
poor, and they need to implement business intelligence systems to solve this challenge. 
 1.  Knowledge: List the reasons a business would want to display information in a graphic or visual 
format. 
 2.  Comprehension: Describe how a business could use a business intelligence digital dashboard to 
gain an understanding of how the business is operating. 
 3.  Application: Explain how a marketing department could use data visualization tools to help with 
the release of a new product. 
 4.  Analysis: Categorize the five common characteristics of high-quality information and rank them 
in order of importance for  Hotels.com . 
 5.  Synthesis: Develop a list of some possible entities and attributes located in the  Hotels.com  database.  
 6.  Evaluate:  Assess how  Hotels.com  is using BI to identify trends and change associated business 
processes. 
 O P E N I N G  C A S E  Q U E S T I O N S 

241
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
 Association detection, 235 
 Attribute 221 
 Business-critical integrity 
constraint, 224 
 Business rule, 224 
 Business intelligence 
dashboard 239  
 Cluster analysis, 234 
 Content creator, 224 
 Content editor, 224 
 Data dictionary, 220 
 Data element (or data 
field), 220 
 Data governance, 219 
 Data mart, 228 
 Data mining, 231 
 Data model, 220 
 Data quality audit, 230 
 Data visualization, 239 
 Data visualization tools, 239 
 Data warehouse, 227 
 Database, 219 
 Database management system 
(DBMS), 219 
 Data-driven website, 225 
 Data-mining tool, 232 
 Dynamic catalog, 224 
 Dynamic information, 224 
 Entity, 221 
 Extraction, transformation, and 
loading (ETL), 228 
 Forecasts, 236 
 Foreign key, 222 
 Infographic (or information 
graphic), 238 
 Information cleansing or 
scrubbing, 230 
 Information cube, 229 
 Information granularity, 214 
 Information inconsistency, 216 
 Information integrity, 224 
 Information integrity 
issues, 216 
 Information redundancy, 223 
 Informing, 238 
 Integrity constraint, 224 
 Logical view of 
information, 223 
 Market basket analysis, 236 
 Metadata, 220 
 Physical view of 
information, 222 
 Primary key, 221 
 Query-by-example (QBE) 
tool, 219 
 Real-time information, 216 
 Real-time system, 216 
 Record, 221 
 Relational database management 
system, 220–221 
 Relational database model, 220 
 Relational integrity 
constraint, 224 
 Static information, 224 
 Statistical analysis, 236 
 Structured data, 234 
 Structured query language 
(SQL), 220 
 Text mining, 234 
 Time-series information, 236 
 Unstructured data, 234 
 Web mining, 234 
 K E Y  T E R M S 
  1. How does a database turn data elements into information? 
 2.  Why does a business need to be concerned with the quality of its data? 
  3. How can data governance help protect a business from hackers? 
  4. Why would a company care about the timeliness of its data? 
  5. What are the five characteristics common to high-quality information? 
  6. What is data governance and its importance to a company? 
  7. What are the four primary traits that help determine the value of information? 
  8. What is the difference between an entity and an attribute? 
  9. What are the advantages of a relational database? 
 10. What are the advantages of a data-driven website? 
 11. What is a data warehouse and why would a business want to implement one? 
 12. Why would you need to use multidimensional analysis? 
 13. What is the purpose of information cleansing (or scrubbing)? 
 14. Why would a department want a data mart instead of just accessing the entire data 
warehouse? 
 15. Why would a business be data rich, but information poor? 
 R E V I E W  Q U E S T I O N S 

242
Chapter 6 Data: Business Intelligence
 C L O S I N G  C A S E  O N E 
 Data Visualization: Stories for the Information Age 
  At the intersection of art and algorithm, data visualization schematically abstracts information to bring 
about a deeper understanding of the data, wrapping it in an element of awe. While the practice of 
visually representing information is arguably the foundation of all design, a newfound fascination with 
data visualization has been emerging. After  The New York Times  and  The Guardian  recently opened 
their online archives to the public, artists rushed to dissect nearly two centuries worth of information, 
elevating this art form to new prominence. 
 For artists and designers, data visualization is a new frontier of self-expression, powered by the 
proliferation of information and the evolution of available tools. For enterprise, it is a platform for dis-
playing products and services in the context of the cultural interaction that surrounds them, reflecting 
consumers’ increasing demand for corporate transparency. 
 “Looking at something ordinary in a new way makes it extraordinary,” says Aaron Koblin, one 
of the more recent pioneers of the discipline. As technology lead of Google’s Creative Labs in San 
Francisco, he spearheaded the search giant’s Chrome Experiments series designed to show off the 
speed and reliability of the Chrome browser. 
 Forget Pie Charts and Bar Graphs 
  Data visualization has nothing to do with pie charts and bar graphs. And it’s only marginally related to 
“infographics,” information design that tends to be about objectivity and clarification. Such represen-
tations simply offer another iteration of the data—restating it visually and making it easier to digest. 
Data visualization, on the other hand, is an interpretation, a different way to look at and think about 
data that often exposes complex patterns or correlations. 
 Data visualization is a way to make sense of the ever-increasing stream of information with which 
we’re bombarded and provides a creative antidote to the analysis paralysis that can result from the 
burden of processing such a large volume of information. “It’s not about clarifying data,” says Koblin. 
“It’s about contextualizing it.” 
 Today algorithmically inspired artists are reimagining the art-science continuum through work that 
frames the left-brain analysis of data in a right-brain creative story. Some use data visualization as a 
bridge between alienating information and its emotional impact—see Chris Jordan’s portraits of global 
mass culture. Others take a more technological angle and focus on cultural utility—the Zoetrope proj-
ect offers a temporal and historical visualization of the ephemeral web. Still others are pure artistic 
indulgence—like Koblin’s own Flight Patterns project, a visualization of air traffic over North America. 
 How Business Can Benefit 
  There are real implications for business here. Most cell phone providers, for instance, offer a statement 
of a user’s monthly activity. Most often it’s an overwhelming table of various numerical measures of 
how much you talked, when, with whom, and how much it cost. A visual representation of this data 
might help certain patterns emerge, revealing calling habits and perhaps helping users save money. 
 Companies can also use data visualization to gain new insight into consumer behavior. By observ-
ing and understanding what people do with the data—what they find useful and what they dismiss as 
worthless—executives can make the valuable distinction between what consumers say versus what 
they do. Even now, this can be a tricky call to make from behind the two-way mirror of a traditional 
qualitative research setting. 
 It’s essential to understand the importance of creative vision along with the technical mastery of 
software. Data visualization isn’t about using all the data available, but about deciding which patterns 
and elements to focus on, building a narrative, and telling the story of the raw data in a different, 
compelling way. 

243
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
 Ultimately, data visualization is more than complex software or the prettying up of spreadsheets. 
It’s not innovation for the sake of innovation. It’s about the most ancient of social rituals: storytelling. 
It’s about telling the story locked in the data differently, more engagingly, in a way that draws us in, 
makes our eyes open a little wider and our jaw drop ever so slightly. And as we process it, it can 
sometimes change our perspective altogether. 13 
 Questions 
 1. Identify the effects poor information might have on a data visualization project. 
 2. How does data visualization use database technologies? 
 3. How could a business use data visualization to identify new trends? 
 4. What is the correlation between data mining and data visualization? 
 5. Is data visualization a form of business intelligence? Why or why not? 
 6. What security issues are associated with data visualization? 
 7. What might happen to a data visualization project if it failed to cleanse or scrub its data? 
 Zillow 
   Zillow.com  is an online web-based real estate site helping homeowners, buyers, sellers, renters, 
real estate agents, mortgage professionals, property owners, and property managers find and share 
information about real estate and mortgages. Zillow allows users to access, anonymously and free of 
charge, the kinds of tools and information previously reserved for real estate professionals. Zillow’s 
databases cover more than 90 million homes, which represents 95 percent of the homes in the United 
States. Adding to the sheer size of its databases, Zillow recalculates home valuations for each prop-
erty every day, so it can provide historical graphs on home valuations over time. In some areas, Zillow 
is able to display 10 years of valuation history, a value-added benefit for many of its customers. This 
collection of data represents an operational data warehouse for anyone visiting the website. 
 As soon as Zillow launched its website, it immediately generated a massive amount of traffic. As 
the company expanded its services, the founders knew the key to its success would be the site’s abil-
ity to quickly process and manage massive amounts of data, in real time. The company identified a 
need for accessible, scalable, reliable, secure databases that would enable it to continue to increase 
the capacity of its infrastructure indefinitely without sacrificing performance. Zillow’s traffic continues 
to grow despite the weakened real estate market; the company is experiencing annual traffic growth 
of 30 percent and about a third of all U.S. mortgage professionals visit the site in a given month. 
 Data Mining and Business Intelligence 
  Zestimate values on Zillow use data-mining features for spotting trends across property valuations. 
Data mining also allows the company to see how accurate Zestimate values are over time. Zillow has 
also built the industry’s first search by monthly payment, allowing users to find homes that are for 
sale and rent based on a monthly payment they can afford. Along with the monthly payment search, 
users can also enter search criteria such as the number of bedrooms or bathrooms. 
 Zillow also launched a new service aimed at changing the way Americans shop for mortgages. 
Borrowers can use Zillow’s new Mortgage Marketplace to get custom loan quotes from lenders 
without having to give their names, addresses, phone numbers, or Social Security numbers, or field 
unwanted telephone calls from brokers competing for their business. Borrowers reveal their identi-
ties only after contacting the lender of their choice. The company is entering a field of established 
mortgage sites such as  LendingTree.com  and Experian Group’s  Lowermybills.com , which charge 
 C L O S I N G  C A S E  T W O 

244
Chapter 6 Data: Business Intelligence
mortgage companies for borrower information. Zillow, which has an advertising model, says it does 
not plan to charge for leads. 
 For mortgage companies, the anonymous leads come free; they can make a bid based on infor-
mation provided by the borrower, such as salary, assets, credit score, and the type of loan. Lenders 
can browse borrower requests and see competing quotes from other brokers before making a bid. 14 
 Questions 
 1. List the reasons Zillow would need to use a database to run its business. 
 2. Describe how Zillow uses business intelligence to create a unique product for its customers. 
 3. How could the marketing department at Zillow use a data mart to help with the release of a new 
product launch? 
 4. Categorize the five common characteristics of high-quality information and rank them in order of 
importance to Zillow. 
 5. Develop a list of some possible entities and attributes of Zillow’s mortgage database. 
 6. Assess how Zillow uses a data-driven website to run its business. 
 1. Information—Business Intelligence or a Diversion from the Truth? 
 President Obama used part of his commencement address at Virginia’s Hampton University to 
criticize the flood of incomplete information or downright incorrect information that flows in the 
24-hour news cycle. The president said, “You’re coming of age in a 24/7 media environment 
that bombards us with all kinds of content and exposes us to all kinds of arguments, some of 
which don’t always rank all that high on the truth meter. With iPods and iPads and Xboxes and 
PlayStations—none of which I know how to work—information becomes a distraction, a diver-
sion, a form of entertainment, rather than a tool of empowerment, rather than the means of 
emancipation.” 15 
 Do you agree or disagree with President Obama’s statement? Who is responsible for verifying 
the accuracy of online information? What should happen to companies that post inaccurate infor-
mation? What should happen to individuals who post inaccurate information? What should you 
remember when reading or citing sources for online information? 
 2. Illegal Database Access 
 Goldman Sachs has been hit with a $3 million lawsuit by a company that alleges the brokerage 
firm stole intellectual property from its database that had market intelligence facts. The U.S. District 
Court for the Southern District of New York filed the lawsuit in 2010 claiming Goldman Sachs 
employees used other people’s access credentials to log into Ipreo’s proprietary database, dubbed 
Bigdough. Offered on a subscription basis, Bigdough provides detailed information on more than 
80,000 contacts within the financial industry. Ipreo complained to the court that Goldman Sachs 
employees illegally accessed Bigdough at least 264 times in 2008 and 2009. 16 
 Do you agree or disagree with the lawsuit? Should Goldman Sachs be held responsible for 
rogue employees’ behavior? What types of policies should Goldman Sachs implement to ensure 
this does not occur again? 
 3. Data Storage 
 Information is one of the most important assets of any business. Businesses must ensure information 
accuracy, completeness, consistency, timeliness, and uniqueness. In addition, business must have a 
reliable backup service. In part thanks to cloud computing, there are many data hosting services on 
the Internet. These sites offer storage of information that can be accessed from anywhere in the world. 
 C R I T I C A L  B U S I N E S S  T H I N K I N G 

245
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
 These data hosting services include Hosting ( www.hosting.com ), Mozy ( www.mozy.com ), My 
Docs Online ( www.mydocsonline.com ), and Box ( www.box.net ). Visit a few of these sites along 
with a several others you find through research. Which sites are free? Are there limits to how much 
you can store? If so, what is the limit? What type of information can you store (video, text, photos, 
etc.)? Can you allow multiple users with different passwords to access your storage area? Are you 
contractually bound for a certain duration (annual, etc.)? Are different levels of services provided 
such as personal, enterprise, work group? Does it make good business sense to store business 
data on the Internet? What about personal data? 
 4. Gathering Business Intelligence 
 When considering new business opportunities, you need knowledge about the competition. One of 
the things many new business owners fail to do is to gather business intelligence on their com-
petitors, such as how many there are and what differentiates each of them. You may find there are 
too many and that they would be tough competition for you. Or, you may find that there are few 
competitors and the ones who are out there offer very little value. 
 Generate a new business idea you could launch on the Internet. Research the Internet to find 
similar business in the area you have chosen. How many sites did you find that are offering the 
same products or services you are planning to offer? Did you come across any sites from another 
country that have a unique approach that you did not see on any of the sites in your own country? 
How would you use this information in pursuing your business idea? 
 5. Free Data! 
 The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics states that its role is as the “principal fact-finding agency for 
the federal government in the broad field of labor economics and statistics.” And the data that the 
bureau provides via its website are available to anyone, free. This can represent a treasure trove of 
business intelligence and data mining for those who take advantage of this resource. Visit the web-
site  www.bls.gov . What type of information does the site provide? What information do you find most 
useful? What sort of information concerning employment and wages is available? How is this infor-
mation categorized? How would this type of information be helpful to a business manager? What 
type of demographic information is available? How could this benefit a new start-up business? 17   
 6. Explaining Relational Databases 
 You have been hired by Vision, a start-up clothing company. Your manager, Holly Henningson, 
is unfamiliar with databases and their associated business value. Henningson has asked you to 
create a report detailing the basics of databases. She would also like you to provide a detailed 
explanation of relational databases along with their associated business advantages. 
 7. Entities and Attributes 
 Martex Inc. is a manufacturer of athletic equipment, and its primary lines of business include 
running, tennis, golf, swimming, basketball, and aerobics equipment. Martex currently supplies 
four primary vendors including Sam’s Sports, Total Effort, The Underline, and Maximum Workout. 
Martex wants to build a database to help it organize its products. In a group, identify the different 
types of entities, attributes, keys, and relationships Martex will want to consider when designing 
its relational database. 
 8. Compiling Information 
 You are currently working for the Public Transportation Department of Chatfield. The department 
controls all forms of public transportation, including buses, subways, and trains. Each depart-
ment has about 300 employees and maintains its own accounting, inventory, purchasing, and 
human resource systems. Generating reports across departments is a difficult task and usually 
involves gathering and correlating the information from the many different databases. It typically 
takes about two weeks to generate the quarterly balance sheets and profit and loss statements. 
Your team has been asked to compile a report recommending what the Public Transportation 
Department of Chatfield can do to alleviate its information and system issues. Be sure that your 

246
Chapter 6 Data: Business Intelligence
report addresses the various reasons departmental reports are presently difficult to obtain as well 
as how you plan to solve this problem. 18 
 9. Information Timeliness 
 Information timeliness is a major consideration for all organizations. Organizations need to 
decide the frequency of backups and the frequency of updates to a data warehouse. In a team, 
describe the timeliness requirements for backups and updates to a data warehouse for each of 
the following:
 
■ Weather tracking systems. 
 
■ Car dealership inventories. 
 
■ Vehicle tire sales forecasts. 
 
■ Interest rates. 
 
■ Restaurant inventories. 
 
■ Grocery store inventories. 
 10. Improving Information Quality 
 HangUps Corporation designs and distributes closet organization structures. The company oper-
ates five systems—order entry, sales, inventory management, shipping, and billing. The company 
has severe information quality issues including missing, inaccurate, redundant, and incomplete 
information. The company wants to implement a data warehouse containing information from the 
five different systems to help maintain a single customer view, drive business decisions, and per-
form multidimensional analysis. Identify how the organization can improve its information quality 
when it begins designing and building its data warehouse. 
 E N T R E P R E N E U R I A L  C H A L L E N G E 
 BUILD YOUR OWN BUSINESS 
 1. Provide an example of your business data that fits each of the five common characteristics of 
high-quality information. Explain why each characteristic is important to your business data and 
what might happen if your business data were of low quality. (Be sure to identify your business 
and the name of your company.) 
 2. Identify the different entities and their associated attributes that would be found in your potential 
relational database model for your sales database. 
 3. Identify the benefits of having a data warehouse for your business. What types of data marts 
would you want to extract from your data warehouse to help you run your business and make 
strategic decisions. 
 PROJECT I 
Mining the Data Warehouse 
 Alana Smith is a senior buyer for a large wholesaler that sells different types of arts and crafts to 
greeting card stores such as Hallmark. Smith’s latest marketing strategy is to send all of her custom-
ers a new line of handmade picture frames from Russia. All of her information supports her decision 
for the new line. Her analysis predicts that the frames should sell an average of 10 to 15 per store, per 
day. Smith is excited about the new line and is positive it will be a success. 
 A P P LY  Y O U R  K N O W L E D G E  B U S I N E S S  P R O J E C T S 

247
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
 One month later Smith learns the frames are selling 50 percent below expectations and averag-
ing between five and eight frames sold daily in each store. She decides to access the company’s 
data warehouse information to determine why sales are below expectations. Identify several differ-
ent dimensions of information that Smith will want to analyze to help her decide what is causing the 
problems with the picture frame sales. 
 PROJECT II 
Different Dimensions 
 The focus of data warehousing is to extend the transformation of data into information. Data ware-
houses offer strategic level, external, integrated, and historical information so businesses can make 
projections, identify trends, and make key business decisions. The data warehouse collects and stores 
integrated sets of historical information from multiple operational systems and feeds them to one or 
more data marts. It may also provide end user access to support enterprisewide views of information. 
 You are currently working on a marketing team for a large corporation that sells jewelry around the 
world. Your boss has asked you to look at the following dimensions of data to determine which ones 
you want in your data mart for performing sales and market analysis (see  Figure AYK.1 ). As a team, 
categorize the different dimensions ranking them from 1 to 5, with 1 indicating that the dimension 
offers the highest value and must be in your data mart and 5 indicating that the dimension offers the 
lowest value and does not need to be in your data mart. 
 PROJECT III 
Understanding Search 
 Pretend that you are a search engine. Choose a topic to query. It can be anything such as your favorite 
book, movie, band, or sports team. Search your topic on Google, pick three or four pages from the 
results, and print them out. On each printout, find the individual words from your query (such as 
 Dimension 
 Value (1–5) 
 Dimension 
 Value (1–5) 
 Product number 
 
 Season 
 
 Store location 
 
 Promotion 
 
 Customer net worth 
 
 Payment method 
 
 Number of sales personnel 
 
 Commission policy 
 
 Customer eating habits 
 
 Manufacturer 
 
 Store hours 
 
 Traffic report 
 
 Salesperson ID 
 
 Customer language 
 
 Product style 
 
 Weather 
 
 Order date 
 
 Customer gender 
 
 Product quantity 
 
 Local tax information 
 
 Ship date 
 
 Local cultural demographics 
 
 Current interest rate 
 
 Stock market closing 
 
 Product cost 
 
 Customer religious affiliation 
 
 Customer’s political affiliation 
 
 Reason for purchase 
 
 Local market analysis 
 
 Employee dress code policy 
 
 Order time 
 
 Customer age 
 
 Customer spending habits 
 
 Employee vacation policy 
 
 Product price 
 
 Employee benefits 
 
 Exchange rates 
 
 Current tariff information 
 
 Product gross margin 
 
 
 
 FIGURE AYK.1 
 Data Warehouse Data 

248
Chapter 6 Data: Business Intelligence
“Boston Red Sox” or “The Godfather”) and use a highlighter to mark each word with color. Do that for 
each of the documents that you print out. Now tape those documents on a wall, step back a few feet, 
and review your documents. 
 If you did not know what the rest of a page said and could judge only by the colored words, which 
document do you think would be most relevant? Is there anything that would make a document 
look more relevant? Is it better to have the words be in a large heading or to occur several times in 
a smaller font? Do you prefer it if the words are at the top or the bottom of the page? How often do 
the words need to appear? Come up with two or three things you would look for to see if a document 
matched a query well. This exercise mimics search engine processes and should help you understand 
why a search engine returns certain results over others. 
 PROJECT IV 
Predicting Netflix 
 Netflix Inc., the largest online movie rental service, provides more than 12 million subscribers access 
to more than 100,000 unique DVD titles along with a growing on-demand library in excess of 10,000 
choices. Data and information are so important to Netflix that it created The Netflix Prize, an open 
competition for anyone who could improve the data used in prediction ratings for films (an increase of 
10 percent), based on previous ratings. The winner would receive a $1 million prize. 
 The ability to search, analyze, and comprehend information is vital for any organization’s success. It 
certainly was for Netflix, as it was happy to pay anyone $1 million to improve the quality of its information. 
In a group, explain how Netflix might use databases, data warehouses, and data marts to predict customer 
movie recommendations. Here are a few characteristics you might want to analyze to get you started:
 ■ Customer demographics. 
 ■ Movie genre, rating, year, producer, type. 
 ■ Actor information. 
 ■ Internet access. 
 ■ Location for mail pickup. 
 PROJECT V 
The Crunch Factory 
 The Crunch Factory is one of the fourth-largest gyms operating in Australia, and each gym operates its 
own system with its own database. Unfortunately, the company failed to develop any data-capturing 
standards and now faces the challenges associated with low-quality enterprisewide information. For 
example, one system has a field to capture email addresses while another system does not. Duplicate 
customer information among the different systems is another major issue, and the company con-
tinually finds itself sending conflicting or competing messages to customers from different gyms. A 
customer could also have multiple accounts within the company, one representing a membership, 
another representing additional classes, and yet another for a personal trainer. The Crunch Factory 
has no way to identify that the different customer accounts are actually for the same customer. 
 To remain competitive and be able to generate business intelligence The Crunch Factory has to 
resolve these challenges. The Crunch Factory has just hired you as its data quality expert. Your first 
task is to determine how the company can turn its low-quality information into high-quality business 
intelligence. Create a plan that The Crunch Factory can implement that details the following:
 ■ Challenges associated with low-quality information. 
 ■ Benefits associated with high-quality information. 
 ■ Recommendations on how the company can clean up its data. 
 PROJECT VI 
Too Much of a Good Thing 
 The Castle, a premium retailer of clothes and accessories, created an enterprisewide data warehouse 
so all its employees could access information for decision making. The Castle soon discovered that 

249
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
it is possible to have too much of a good thing. The Castle employees found themselves inundated 
with data and unable to make any decisions, a common occurrence called analysis paralysis. When 
sales representatives queried the data warehouse to determine if a certain product in the size, color, 
and category was available, they would get hundreds of results showing everything from production 
orders to supplier contracts. It became easier for the sales representatives to look in the warehouse 
themselves than to check the system. Employees found the data warehouse was simply too big, too 
complicated, and contained too much irrelevant information. 
 The Castle is committed to making its data warehouse system a success and has come to you for 
help. Create a plan that details the value of the data warehouse to the business, how it can be easier 
for all employees to use, along with the potential business benefits the company can derive from its 
data warehouse. 
 PROJECT VII 
Twitter Buzz 
 Technology tools that can predict sales for the coming week, decide when to increase inventory, and 
determine when additional staff is required are extremely valuable. Twitter is not just for tweeting your 
whereabouts anymore. Twitter and other social-media sites have become great tools for gathering 
business intelligence on customers, including what they like, dislike, need, and want. Twitter is easy 
to use, and businesses can track every single time a customer makes a statement about a particular 
product or service. Good businesses turn this valuable information into intelligence spotting trends 
and patterns in customer opinion. 
 Do you agree that a business can use Twitter to gain business intelligence? How many com-
panies do you think are aware of Twitter and exactly how they can use it to gain BI? How do you 
think Twitter uses a data warehouse? How do you think companies store Twitter information? 
How would a company use Twitter in a data mart? How would a company use cubes to analyze 
Twitter data?  
 Project 
Number  
 Project 
Name 
 Project 
Type 
 Plug-In 
 Focus 
Area 
 Project Level 
 Skill 
Set 
 Page 
Number 
 28 
 Daily Invoice 
 Access 
 T5, T6, T7, T8 
 Business 
Analysis 
 Introductory 
 Entities, 
Relationships, and 
Databases 
 AYK.17 
 29 
 Billing Data 
 Access 
 T5, T6, T7, T8 
 Business 
Intelligence 
 Introductory 
 Entities, 
Relationships, and 
Databases 
 AYK.19 
 30 
 Inventory Data 
 Access 
 T5, T6, T7, T8 
 SCM 
 Intermediate 
 Entities, 
Relationships, and 
Databases 
 AYK.20 
 31 
 Call Center 
 Access 
 T5, T6, T7, T8 
 CRM 
 Intermediate 
 Entities, 
Relationships, and 
Databases 
 AYK.21 
 32 
 Sales Pipeline 
 Access 
 T5, T6, T7, T8 
 Business 
Intelligence 
 Advanced 
 Entities, 
Relationships, and 
Databases 
 AYK.23 
 33 
 Online Classified 
Ads 
 Access 
 T5, T6, T7, T8 
 Ecommerce 
 Advanced 
 Entities, 
Relationships, and 
Databases 
 AYK.23 
 AY K  A P P L I C AT I O N  P R O J E C T S 
 If you are looking for Access projects to incorporate into your class, try any of the following after 
reading this chapter. 

 What’s in IT for me? 
 The pace of technological change never ceases to amaze as kindergarten classes are now learning PowerPoint and many 
elementary school children have their own cell phones. What used to take hours to download over a dial-up modem connec-
tion can now transfer in a matter of seconds through an invisible, wireless network connection from a computer thousands 
of miles away. We are living in an increasingly wireless present and hurtling ever faster toward a wireless future. The tipping 
point of ubiquitous, wireless, handheld, mobile computing is approaching quickly. 
 As a business student, understanding network infrastructures and wireless technologies allows you to take advantage of 
mobile workforces. Understanding the benefits and challenges of mobility is a critical skill for business executives, regard-
less if you are a novice or a seasoned  Fortune  500 employee. By learning about the various concepts discussed in this 
chapter, you will develop a better understanding of how business can leverage networking technologies to analyze network 
types, improve wireless and mobile business processes, and evaluate alternative networking options. 
 ■  O v e r v i e w  o f  a  C o n n e c t e d 
Wo r l d  
 ■  B e n e f i t s  o f  a  C o n n ec t e d  Wo r l d  
 ■  C h a l l e n g e s  o f  a  Co n n e c t e d 
Wo r l d  
 SECTION 7.2   
 Mobility: The Business 
Value of a Wireless World 
 SECTION 7.1   
 Connectivity: The Business 
Value of a Networked World 
 ■  W i re l e s s  N e t wo r k  C a t e g o r i e s  
 ■  B u s i n e s s  A p p l i c a t i o n s  o f 
W i re l e s s  N e t wo r k s  
 ■  B e n e f i t s  o f  B u s i n e s s  M o b i l i t y  
 ■  C h a l l e n g e s  o f  B u s i n e s s 
M o b i l i t y   
 
 C H A P T E R 
 C H A P T E R  O U T L I N E 
 Networks: Mobile Business 
 7 

251
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
 opening case study 
 The Ironman    
 Florida-based World Triathlon Corporation (WTC), owner of the Ironman Triathlon World 
Championship, is in the business of fulfilling the dreams of endurance athletes in one of the 
world’s most grueling events. The Ironman Triathlon World Championship brings more than 
1,700 of the world’s top athletes to rugged Kailua-Kona, Hawaii, for a world championship 
race every fall. Athletes attempt to swim 2.4 miles, cycle 112 miles, and run a full 26.2-mile 
marathon—all in a single day. The event features a remote course that threads around the 
side of an active volcano and offers breathtaking views but also rough terrain, intense heat, 
and shifting trade winds. 
 In the past, it was not easy for family and friends to know how a particular athlete was 
faring in the contest. “As a spectator, you’d see the start, and then the athletes would disap-
pear, and that was pretty much it until the finish line,” recalls Dave Scott, who ran his first 
triathlon in 1976. Now, however, Ironman is transforming the way audiences and athletes 
experience the race. By using WiMAX networks to enable remote cameras, the company 
also raised the bar for professional sports broadcasting and spotlighted a technology many 
say will help bring the next billion users into the Internet community. 
 Fans worldwide now can find any athlete’s speed and location thanks to high-speed 
WiMAX broadband connections in various places along the 140-mile course. The company 
uses radio-frequency identification (RFID) ankle bracelets to track the athletes’ progress 
and high-bandwidth communications to transmit professional-quality video and other data, 
making the information accessible on the  Ironmanlive.com website. 
 Networking the course was a challenge due to the same factors that make it challeng-
ing for athletes. “We’re on a very rough, rugged course on an island with an active vol-
cano,” explains Dan Gerson,  Ironmanlive.com  production manager. “It’s hot, it’s windy, and 
there’s no infrastructure. If you can deploy WiMAX here, you can probably deploy it pretty 
much anywhere.” Airspan Networks provided the WiMAX infrastructure, using its high-
performance base stations and subscriber stations to create a high-performance network 
backbone capable of transmitting data rates required for top-quality video. The team set up 
its base station atop the hotel that served as the events’ starting point and finish line, one of 
the lowest geographical points of the course. 
 The team was operating in a non-line-of-sight environment, and highly porous volca-
nic rock absorbed the wireless signals more than other types of rock would. Airspan set 
up relays on the ridge sides of the volcano, the side of the road, and the sides of build-
ings to keep signal fidelity. Cameras in locations without power used generators. This was 
a wireless deployment in every sense of the word, demonstrating the viability of WiMAX 
technology. Footage of the athletes could be incorporated into the live webcast, along with 

252
Chapter 7 Networks: Mobile Business
pre-event interviews, commentary, and film from cameras on motorcycles and helicopters. 
WTC produced the broadcast in a live production studio on-site that streamed the video data 
to the global servers that run the  Ironmanlive.com website. 
 WTC also set up eight wireless hotspots, including five along the event course and at the 
finish line. An Internet café was stocked with laptops, providing convenient wireless access 
to event information and the  Ironmanlive.com  site. Two giant-screen displays showed the live 
program coverage from  Ironmanlive.com . Staff used additional mobile devices to manage the 
race and monitor each athlete’s progress. For example, if athletes needed medical care, the 
health care team used a PDA to scan their RFID tags and instantly access medical records and 
local contact information. 
 Ironman’s transformative use of wireless computing makes sound business sense. 
It draws larger audiences and higher advertising revenues for WTC and NBC, which uses 
WTC’s Ironman Triathlon programming in its own broadcast of the event a month or two later. 
Larger audiences and better experiences for athletes and their families ultimately lead to 
greater participation in the Ironman Triathlon and its more than two dozen qualifying races, 
and to increased popularity for the sport. 1 

253
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
   section 7.1
 
 Connectivity: The Business Value 
of a Networked World 
 LEA R NI NG  O UT CO M E S 
 7.1  Explain the five different networking elements creating a connected world. 
 7.2  Identify the benefits and challenges of a connected world. 
 OVERVIEW OF A CONNECTED WORLD  
 Computer networks are continuously operating all over the globe supporting our 
24/7/365 always on and always connected lifestyles. You are probably using several dif-
ferent networks right now without even realizing it. You might be using a school’s net-
work to communicate with teachers, a phone network to communicate with friends, and 
a cable network to watch TV or listen to the radio. Networks enable telecommunications 
or the exchange of information (voice, text, data, audio, video). The telecommunication 
industry has morphed from a government-regulated monopoly to a deregulated market 
where many suppliers ferociously compete. Competing telecommunication companies 
offer local and global telephony services, satellite service, mobile radio, cable television, 
cellular phone services, and Internet access (all of which are detailed in this chapter). 
Businesses everywhere are increasingly using networks to communicate and collaborate 
with customers, partners, suppliers, and employees. As a manager, you will face many 
different communication alternatives, and the focus of this chapter is to provide you with 
an initial understanding of the different networking elements you will someday need to 
select (see  Figure 7.1 ). 
 LO 7.1:  Explain the five different 
networking elements creating a con-
nected world. 
 FIGURE 7.1 
 Networking Elements Creating a 
Connected World 
NETWORK CATEGORIES
LAN, WAN, MAN
NETWORK PROVIDERS
ISP, NSP, RSP
NETWORK ACCESS
TECHNOLOGIES
DSL, Cable Modem,
Broadband
NETWORK PROTOCOLS
TCP/IP, DNS, DHCP
NETWORK CONVERGENCE
VolP, UC, IPTV

254
Chapter 7 Networks: Mobile Business
 Network Categories 
 The general idea of a network is to allow multiple devices to communicate at the highest 
achievable speeds and, very importantly, to reduce the cost of connecting. How a par-
ticular network achieves these goals depends in part on how it is physically constructed 
and connected. Networks are categorized based on geographic span: local area net-
works, wide area networks, and metropolitan area networks. Today’s business networks 
include a combination of all three. 
 A    local area network (LAN)    connects a group of computers in close proximity, such 
as in an office building, school, or home. LANs allow sharing of files, printers, games, and 
other resources. A LAN also often connects to other LANs, and to wide area networks. 
A    wide area network (WAN)    spans a large geographic area such as a state, province, or 
country. Perhaps the best example is the Internet. WANs are essential for carrying out the 
day-to-day activities of many companies and government organizations, allowing them 
to transmit and receive information among their employees, customers, suppliers, busi-
ness partners, and other organizations across cities, regions, and countries and around 
the world. In networking,   attenuation   represents the loss of a network signal strength 
measured in decibels (dB) and occurs because the transmissions gradually dissipate in 
strength over longer distances or because of radio interference or physical obstructions 
such as walls. A   repeater   receives and repeats a signal to extend its attenuation or range. 
 WANs often connect multiple smaller networks, such as local area networks or met-
ropolitan area networks. A    metropolitan area network (MAN)   is a large computer net-
work usually spanning a city. Most colleges, universities, and large companies that span 
a campus use an infrastructure supported by a MAN.  Figure 7.2 shows the relationships 
and a few differences between a LAN, WAN, and MAN. A cloud image often represents 
the Internet or some large network environment. 
 While LANs, WANs, and MANs all provide users with an accessible and reliable net-
work infrastructure, they differ in many dimensions; two of the most important are cost 
and performance. It is easy to establish a network between two computers in the same 
room or building, but much more difficult if they are in different states or even countries. 
This means someone looking to build or support a WAN either pays more or gets less per-
formance, or both. Ethernet is the most common connection type for wired networking 
and is available in speeds from 10 mbps all the way up to 10,000 Mbps (10 Gbit). The most 
common wire used for Ethernet networking is Cat5 (Category 5) and the connectors used 
are RJ45, slightly larger than the RJ11 connectors used by phones, but the same shape.  
 Network Providers 
 The largest and most important network, the Internet has evolved into a global informa-
tion superhighway. Think of it as a network made up of millions of smaller networks, 
each with the ability to operate independently of, or in harmony with, the others. Keep-
ing the Internet operational is no simple task. No one owns or runs it, but it does have 
an organized network topology. The Internet is a hierarchical structure linking different 
levels of service providers, whose millions of devices, LANs, WANs, and MANs supply all 
the interconnections. At the top of the hierarchy are    national service providers (NSPs),   
private companies that own and maintain the worldwide backbone that supports the 
Internet. These include Sprint, Verizon, MCI (previously UUNet/WorldCom), AT&T, 
NTT, Level3, Century Link, and Cable & Wireless Worldwide. Network access points 
(NAPs) are traffic exchange points in the routing hierarchy of the Internet that connects 
NSPs. They typically have regional or national coverage and connect to only a few NSPs. 
Thus, to reach a large portion of the global Internet, a NAP needs to route traffic through 
one of the NSPs to which it is connected. 2 
 One step down in the hierarchy is the regional service provider.   Regional service pro-
viders (RSPs)    offer Internet service by connecting to NSPs, but they also can connect 
directly to each other. Another level down is an Internet service provider (ISP), which 
specializes in providing management, support, and maintenance to a network. ISPs vary 
services provided and available bandwidth rates. ISPs link to RSPs and, if they are geo-
graphically close, to other ISPs. Some also connect directly to NSPs, thereby sidestepping 
the hierarchy. Individuals and companies use local ISPs to connect to the Internet, and 

255
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
large companies tend to connect directly using an RSP. Major ISPs in the United States 
include AOL, AT&T, Comcast, Earthlink, and NetZero. The further up the hierarchy, the 
faster the connections and the greater the bandwidth. The backbone shown in  Figure 7.3  
is greatly simplified, but it illustrates the concept that basic global interconnections are 
provided by the NSPs, RSPs and ISPs. 3 
 Network Access Technologies 
 Performance is the ultimate goal of any computer, computer system, or network. Perfor-
mance is directly related to the network’s speed of data transfer and capacity to handle 
transmission. A network that does not offer adequate performance simply will not get 
the job done for those who rely on it. Luckily, networks can be upgraded and expanded 
if performance is inadequate. 
 We measure network performance in terms of   bandwidth,   the maximum amount of 
data that can pass from one point to another in a unit of time. Bandwidth is similar to 
water traveling through a hose. If the hose is large, water can flow through it quickly. 
Data differs from a hose in that it must travel great distances, especially on a WAN, and 
not all areas of the network have the same bandwidth. A network essentially has many 
different hoses of unequal capacity connected together, which will restrict the flow of 
data when one is smaller than the others. Therefore, the speed of transmission of a net-
work is determined by the speed of its smallest bandwidth. 
 FIGURE 7.2 
 Network Categories: LAN, 
WAN, and MAN 
Network
Network
Local Area Network (LAN)
Example : City Library
Metropolitan Area Network (MAN)
Example: University Campus
West Campus
East Campus
MAN
Network
Wide Area Network (WAN)
Example: Internet
Sydney, Australia
London, England
Network
Denver, Colorado
Boston, Massachusetts
WAN
Network
Network
Network

256
Chapter 7 Networks: Mobile Business
 A   bit   (short for binary digit) is the smallest element of data and has a value of either 0 or 
1. Bandwidth is measured in terms of   bit rate   (or   data rate  ), the number of bits transferred 
or received per unit of time.  Figure 7.4  represents bandwidth speeds in terms of bit rates. 
Bandwidth is typically given in bits per second (abbreviated as bps) and bytes per second 
(abbreviated as Bps). It is important to note that these two terms are not interchangeable.  
 A   modem  is a device that enables a computer to transmit and receive data. A connec-
tion with a traditional telephone line and a modem, which most residential users had in 
the 1990s, is called dial-up access. Today, many users in underdeveloped countries and in 
rural areas in developed countries still use dial-up. It has two drawbacks. First, it is slow, 
providing a maximum rate of 56 Kbps. (At 56 Kbps, it takes eight minutes to download a 
three-minute song and more than a day to download a two-hour movie.) Second, dial-up 
modem access ties up the telephone line so the user cannot receive and make phone calls 
while online. The good news is this is not as big an issue as it once was as many people 
have cell phones and no longer require using the telephone line for making phone calls. 4 
 Once the most common connection method worldwide, dial-up is quickly being 
replaced by broadband.   Broadband   is a high-speed Internet connection that is always 
connected. High-speed in this case refers to any bandwidth greater than 2 Mbps. Not 
long ago, broadband speeds were available only at a premium price to support large 
companies’ high-traffic networks. Today, inexpensive access is available for home use 
and small companies. 
 The two most prevalent types of broadband access are digital subscriber lines and 
high-speed Internet cable connections.    Digital subscriber line (DSL)    provides high-
speed digital data transmission over standard telephone lines using broadband modem 
technology, allowing both Internet and telephone services to work over the same 
 FIGURE 7.3 
 Internet Topology 
NSP
International
Connection
International
Connection
ISP
RSP
NAP
NSP
NAP
NSP
RSP
ISP
ISP
RSP
RSP
ISP
ISP
ISP
ISP
ISP
ISP
ISP
ISP
ISP
ISP
ISP
 Bandwidth  
 Abbreviation 
 Bits per Second (bps) 
 Example 
 Kilobits 
 Kbps 
 1 Kbps  5  1,000 bps 
 Traditional modem  5  56 Kbps 
 Megabits 
 Mbps 
 1 Mbps  5  1,000 Kbps 
 Traditional Ethernet  5  10 MbpsFast 
Ethernet  5  100 Mbps 
 Gigabits 
 Gbps 
 1 Gbps  5  1,000 Mbps 
 Gigabit Ethernet  5  1,000 Mbps 
 FIGURE 7.4 
 Bandwidth Speeds 

257
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
phone lines. Consumers typically obtain DSL Internet access from the same company 
that provides their wired local telephone access, such as AT&T or Century Link. Thus, 
a customer’s telephone provider is also its ISP, and the telephone line carries both data 
and telephone signals using a DSL modem. DSL Internet services are used primarily in 
homes and small businesses. 
 DSL has two major advantages over dial-up. First, it can transmit and receive data much 
faster—in the 1 to 2 Mbps range for downloading and 128 Kbps to 1 Mbps for upload-
ing. (Most high-speed connections are designed to download faster than they upload, 
because most users download more—including viewing web pages—than they upload.) 
The second major advantage is that because they have an “always on” connection to their 
ISP, users can simultaneously talk on the phone and access the Internet. DSL’s disadvan-
tages are that it works over a limited physical distance and remains unavailable in many 
areas where the local telephone infrastructure does not support DSL technology. 5  
 While dial-up and DSL use local telephone infrastructure,   high-speed Internet cable 
connections   provide Internet access using a cable television company’s infrastructure 
and a special cable modem. A    cable modem (or broadband modem)   is a type of digital 
modem used with high-speed cable Internet service. Cable modems connect a home 
computer (or network of home computers) to residential cable TV service, while DSL 
modems connect to residential public telephone service. The ISP typically supplies 
the cable and DSL modems. Cisco Systems is one of the largest companies producing 
computer networking products and services, including the Linksys brand of network-
ing components. Typically, broadband or high-speed Internet service has an average 
transfer rate 10 times faster than conventional dial-up service.   Telecommuting (virtual 
workforce)   allows users to work from remote locations, such as home or a hotel, using 
high-speed Internet to access business applications and data. 
 Unlike DSL, high-speed Internet cable is a shared service, which means everyone in 
a certain radius, such as a neighborhood, shares the available bandwidth. Therefore, if 
several users are simultaneously downloading a video file, the actual transfer rate for 
each will be significantly lower than if only one person were doing so. On average, the 
available bandwidth using cable can range from 512 Kbps to 50 Mbps for downloading 
and 786 Kbps for uploading. 6 
 Another alternative to DSL or high-speed Internet cable is dedicated communica-
tions lines leased from AT&T or another provider. The most common are T1 lines, a type 
of data connection able to transmit a digital signal at 1.544 Mpbs. Although this speed 
might not seem impressive, and T1 lines are more expensive than DSL or cable, they 
offer far greater reliability because each is composed of 24 channels, creating 24 separate 
connections through one line. If a company has three separate plants that experience a 
high volume of data traffic, it might make sense to lease lines for reliability of service. 7 
 A company must match its needs with Internet access methods. If it always needs high 
bandwidth access to communicate with customers, partners, or suppliers, a T1 line may 
be the most cost-effective method.  Figure 7.5  provides an overview of the main meth-
ods for Internet access. The bandwidths in the figure represent average speeds; actual 
speeds vary depending upon the service provider and other factors such as the type of 
cabling and speed of the computer. 8 
   Broadband over power line (BPL)    technology makes possible high-speed Internet 
access over ordinary residential electrical lines and offers an alternative to DSL or high-speed 
 Access Technology 
 Description 
 Bandwidth 
 Comments 
 Dial-up 
 On-demand access using a modem and 
regular telephone line. 
 Up to 56 Kbps 
 Cheap but slow compared with other 
technologies. 
 DSL 
 Always-on connection. Special modem 
needed. 
 Download: 1 Mbps to 2 Mbps Upload: 
128 Kbps to 1 Mbps 
 Makes use of the existing local tele-
phone infrastructure. 
 Cable 
 Always-on connection. Special cable 
modem and cable line required. 
 Download: 512 Kbps to 50 Mbps 
Upload: 786 Kbps 
 It is a shared resource with other users 
in the area. 
 T1 
 Leased lines for high bandwidth. 
 1.544 Mbps 
 More expensive than dial-up, DSL, or 
cable. 
 FIGURE 7.5 
 Types of Internet Access 

258
Chapter 7 Networks: Mobile Business
cable modems. BPL works by transmitting data over electrical lines using signaling frequen-
cies higher than the electrical (or voice in the case of DSL) signals. BPL allows computer 
data to be sent back and forth across the network with no disruption to power output in the 
home. Many homeowners are surprised to learn that their electrical system can serve as a 
home network running speeds between 1 and 3 Mbps with full Internet access. Unfortu-
nately, limitations such as interference and availability have affected BPL’s popularity.  
 Network Protocols 
 A   packet   is a single unit of binary data routed through a network. Packets directly impact 
network performance and reliability by subdividing an electronic message into smaller 
more manageable packets.   Standard packet formats   include a packet header, packet body 
containing the original message, and packet footer. The   packet header   lists the destination 
(for example, in IP packets the destination is the IP address) along with the length of the 
message data. The   packet footer   represents the end of the packet or transmission end. The 
packet header and packet footer contain error-checking information to ensure the entire 
message is sent and received. The receiving device reassembles the individual packets into 
the original by stripping off the headers and footers and then piecing together the packets 
in the correct sequence.   Traceroute   is a utility application that monitors the network path 
of packet data sent to a remote computer. Traceroute programs send a series of test mes-
sages over the network (using the name or IP address) until the last message finally reaches 
its destination. When finished, traceroute displays the path from the initial computer to the 
destination computer. A   proxy   is software that prevents direct communication between a 
sending and receiving computer and is used to monitor packets for security reasons. 
 A   protocol   is a standard that specifies the format of data as well as the rules to be 
followed during transmission. Computers using the same protocol can communicate 
easily, providing accessibility, scalability, and connectability between networks.   File 
transfer protocol (FTP)   is a simple network protocol that allows the transfer of files 
between two computers on the Internet. To transfer files with FTP, the FTP client pro-
gram initiates a connection to a remote computer running FTP “server” software. After 
completing the connection the client can choose to send and/or receive files electroni-
cally. Network access technologies use a standard Internet protocol called   transmission 
control protocol/Internet protocol (TCP/IP),    which provides the technical foundation 
for the public Internet as well as for large numbers of private networks. One of the pri-
mary reasons for developing TCP/IP was to allow diverse or differing networks to con-
nect and communicate with each other, essentially allowing LANs, WANs, and MANs to 
grow with each new connection. An   IP address   is a unique number that identifies where 
computers are located on the network. IP addresses appear in the form of xxx.xxx.xxx.
xxx, though each grouping can be as short as a single digit. 
 TCP (the TCP part of TCP/IP) verifies the correct delivery of data because data can 
become corrupt when traveling over a network. TCP ensures the size of the data packet is 
the same throughout its transmission and can even retransmit data until delivered cor-
rectly. IP (the IP part of TCP/IP) verifies the data are sent to the correct IP address, num-
bers represented by four strings of numbers ranging from 0 to 255 separated by periods. 
For example, the IP address of  www.apple.com  is 97.17.237.15. 
 Here is another way to understand TCP/IP. Consider a letter that needs to go from the 
University of Denver to Apple’s headquarters in Cupertino, California. TCP makes sure the 
envelope is delivered and does not get lost along the way. IP acts as the sending and receiv-
ing labels, telling the letter carrier where to deliver the envelope and who it was from. The 
Postal Service mainly uses street addresses and zip codes to get letters to their destinations, 
which is really what IP does with its addressing method.  Figure 7.6  illustrates this example. 
However, unlike the Postal Service, which allows multiple people to share the same physi-
cal address, each device using an IP address to connect to the Internet must have a unique 
address or else it could not detect which individual device a request should be sent to.  
 One of the most valuable characteristics of TCP/IP is how scalable its protocols have 
proven to be as the Internet has grown from a small network with just a few machines to 
a huge internetwork with millions of devices. While some changes have been required 
periodically to support this growth, the core of TCP/IP is the same as it was more than 
25 years ago. 9   Dynamic host configuration protocol (DHCP)  allows dynamic IP address 

259
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
allocation so users do not have to have a preconfigured IP address to use the network. 
DHCP allows a computer to access and locate information about a computer on the 
server, enabling users to locate and renew their IP address. ISPs usually use DHCP to allow 
customers to join the Internet with minimum effort. DHCP assigns unique IP addresses 
to devices, then releases and renews these addresses as devices leave and return to the 
network.  
 If there is one flaw in TCP/IP, it is the complexity of IP addresses. This is why we use a 
   domain name system (DNS)    to convert IP addresses into  domains,  or identifying labels 
 BUSINESS DRIVEN DISCUSSION 
 Net Neutrality—the great debate has been raging for some time now, with the 
battle lines clearly drawn.  Net neutrality  is about ensuring that everyone has 
equal access to the Internet. It is the founding principle that all consumers 
should be able to use the Internet and be free to access its resources without 
any form of discrimination. However, regulation on net neutrality is currently 
in flux. The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) recently required 
Comcast to stop slowing down or blocking subscriber access to many peer-to-
peer file-sharing sites such as BitTorrent. Users of many peer-to-peer networks 
often transfer large files, which can be legitimate in nature (such as download-
ing open source applications) or pirated (such as illegal copies of the latest 
Hollywood video). Shortly after the FCC ruling, a federal appeals court over-
turned that decision, unanimously ruling that the agency did not have the legal 
authority to tell Comcast what to do. 
 On one side of the debate are the ISPs, such as Comcast, that are building 
the Internet infrastructure and want to charge customers relative to their use, 
namely, the amount of bandwidth they consume. The ISPs argue more and 
more users accessing bandwidth-intense resources provided by the likes of 
YouTube and Hulu place huge demands on their networks. They want Internet 
access to move from a flat-rate pricing structure to a metered service. The con-
tent providers, such as Google, support the counterargument that if ISPs move 
toward metered schemes, this may limit the usage of many resources on the 
Internet such as iTunes and Netflix. A metered service may also stifle the inno-
vative opportunities the “open” Internet provides. 
 Do you agree that the government should control the Internet? Should web-
site owners be legally forced to receive or transmit information from competi-
tors or other websites they find objectionable? Provide examples of when net 
neutrality might be good for a business and when net neutrality might be bad 
for a business. Overall, is net neutrality good or bad for business? 10 
 Net Neutrality: 
The Great 
Debate 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 
 FIGURE 7.6 
 Example of TCP/IP 
FROM: 130.253.2.7
TO: 97.17.237.15
INTERNET
FROM: 130.253.2.7
TO: 97.17.237.15
IP
University of Denver
Send
Receive
Apple
------------------
------------------
------------------
------------------
TCP: Message sent 
TCP: Message received 
Apple
University of Denver

260
Chapter 7 Networks: Mobile Business
that use a variety of recognizable naming conventions. Therefore, instead of trying  
to remember 97.17.237.15, users can simply specify a domain name to access a com-
puter or website, such as  www.apple.com .  Figure 7.7  lists the most common Internet 
domains. 11   
 The list of domain names is expected to expand in the coming years to include enti-
ties such as .pro (for accountants, lawyers, and physicians), .aero (for the air-transport 
industry), and .museum (for museums). The creation of an .xxx domain was recently 
approved for pornographic content. Countries also have domain names such as .au 
(Australia), .fr (France), and .sp (Spain). 
 Websites with heavy traffic often have several computers working together to share 
the load of requests. This offers load balancing and fault tolerance, so when requests 
are made to a popular site such as  www.facebook.com , they will not overload a single 
computer and the site does not go down if one computer fails. A single computer can 
also have several host names—for instance, if a company is hosting several websites on a 
single server, much as an ISP works with hosting. 
 Domain names are essentially rented, with renewable rights, from a domain name 
registrar, such as  godaddy.com . Some registrars only register domain names, while oth-
ers provide hosting services for a fee. ICANN (Internet Corporation for Assigning Names 
and Numbers) is a nonprofit governance and standards organization that certifies all 
domain name registrars throughout the world. With the certification, each registrar is 
authorized to register domain names, such as  .com ,  .edu , or  .org . 12 
 Network Convergence 
 In part due to the explosive use of the Internet and connectivity of TCP/IP, there is a con-
vergence of network devices, applications, and services. Consumers, companies, educa-
tional institutions, and government agencies extensively engage in texting, web surfing, 
videoconference applications, online gaming, and ebusiness.   Network convergence  is 
the efficient coexistence of telephone, video, and data communication within a single 
network, offering convenience and flexibility not possible with separate infrastructures. 
Almost any type of information can be converted into digital form and exchanged over 
a network. Network convergence then allows the weaving together of voice, data, and 
video. The benefits of network convergence allow for multiple services, multiple devices, 
but one network, one vendor, and one bill, as suggested by  Figure 7.8 . 
 One of the challenges associated with network convergence is using the many dif-
ferent tools efficiently and productively. Knowing which communication channel—PC, 
text message, videoconference—to use with each business participant can be a chal-
lenge.   Unified communications (UC)   is the integration of communication channels 
into a single service. UC integrates communication channels allowing participants to 
communicate using the method that is most convenient for them. UC merges instant 
messaging, videoconferencing, email, voice mail, and VoIP. This can decrease the 
 FIGURE 7.7 
 Internet Domains 
.biz 
.com
.edu
.gov
.info
.mil 
.net 
.org  
Reserved for businesses
Reserved for commercial organizations and businesses
Reserved for accredited postsecondary institutions 
Reserved for U.S. government agencies
Open to any person or entity, but intended for information providers
Reserved for U.S. military
Open to any person or entity
Reserved for nonproﬁt organizations
Domain Name
Use

261
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
communication costs for a business while enhancing the way individuals communicate 
and collaborate. 
 One area experiencing huge growth in network convergence is the use of the Internet 
for voice transmission.    Voice over IP (VoIP)    uses IP technology to transmit telephone 
calls. For the first time in more than 100 years, VoIP is providing an opportunity to bring 
about significant change in the way people communicate using the telephone. VoIP ser-
vice providers—specialists as well as traditional telephone and cable companies and 
some ISPs—allow users to call anyone with a telephone number, whether local, long dis-
tance, cellular, or international. 
 Two ways to use VoIP for telephone calls are through a web interface that allows 
users to make calls from their computer and through a phone attached to a VoIP 
adapter that links directly to the Internet through a broadband modem.  Figure 7.9  illus-
trates these two ways along with the use of VoIP-enabled phones, bypassing the need 
for an adapter.  
 VoIP services include fixed-price unlimited local and long-distance calling plans 
(at least within the United States and Canada), plus a range of interesting features, 
such as:
 ■ The ability to have more than one phone number, including numbers with different 
area codes. 
 ■ Integrating email and voice mail so users can listen to their voice mail using their 
computer. 
 ■ The ability to receive personal or business calls via computer, no matter where the 
user is physically located. 13 
 FIGURE 7.8 
 The Benefits of Network 
Convergence 
Network Convergence
Multiple Services
One Provider
• Internet Access
• One bill
• One point of contact
• One customer support center
• VolP
• IPTV
 FIGURE 7.9 
 VoIP Connectivity 
VoIP
Phone
Adaptor
INTERNET
Broadband
Modem
Broadband
Modem 
Standard
Phone
VoIP Phone
PC
PC

262
Chapter 7 Networks: Mobile Business
 The biggest benefit of VoIP is its low cost. Because it relies on the Internet connection, 
however, service can be affected if the bandwidth is not appropriate or Internet access is 
not available. 
 Skype is a perfect example of IP applied to telephone use. Unlike typical VoIP sys-
tems that use a client and server infrastructure, Skype uses a peer-to-peer network. 
  Peer-to-peer (P2P)   is a computer network that relies on the computing power and 
bandwidth of the participants in the network rather than a centralized server. Skype’s 
user directory  is distributed among the users in its network, allowing scalability with-
out a complex and expensive centralized infrastructure. Peer-to-peer networks became 
an overnight sensation  years ago through a service called Napster that distributed digi-
tal music illegally . Skype has found a way to use this resource to provide value to its 
users. 14  
 As the popularity of VoIP grows, governments are becoming more interested in reg-
ulating it as they do traditional telephone services. In the United States, the Federal 
Communications Commission requires compliance among VoIP service providers com-
parable to those for traditional telephone providers such as support for local number 
portability, services for the disabled, and law enforcement for surveillance, along with 
regulatory and other fees. 
 An exciting and new convergence is occurring in the area of television with   Inter-
net Protocol TV (IPTV),    which distributes digital video content using IP across the 
Internet and private IP networks. Comcast provides an example of a private IP net-
work that also acts as a cable TV provider. Traditional television sends all program 
signals simultaneously to the television, allowing the user to select the program by 
selecting a channel. With IPTV, the user selects a channel and the service provider 
sends only that single program to the television. Like cable TV, IPTV uses a box that 
acts like a modem to send and receive the content (see  Figure 7.10 ). A few IPTV fea-
tures include: 
 ■  Support of multiple devices: PCs and televisions can access IPTV services. 
 ■  Interactivity with users:  Interactive applications and programs are supported by 
IPTV’s two-way communication path.  
 ■  Low bandwidth: IPTV conserves bandwidth because the provider sends only a 
single channel. 
 ■  Personalization:  Users can choose not only what they want to watch, but also when 
they want to watch it. 15 
 FIGURE 7.10 
 IPTV Components 
INTERNET
HDTV
IPTV Set-Top Box
IPTV Service Provider
World TV Broadcasts

263
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
 BENEFITS OF A CONNECTED WORLD  
 Before networks, transferring data between computers was time-consuming and labor-
intensive. People had to physically copy data from machine to machine using a disk. 
Networks offer many advantages for a business including:
 ■ Sharing resources  
 ■ Providing opportunities 
 ■ Reducing travel 
 Sharing Resources 
 Resource sharing makes all applications, equipment (such as a high-volume printer), 
and data available to anyone on the network, without regard to the physical location 
of the resource or the user. Sharing physical resources also supports a sustainable MIS 
infrastructure, allowing companies to be agile, efficient, and responsible at the same 
time. Cloud computing (see Chapter 5) and virtualization consolidate information as 
well as systems that enhance the use of shared resources. By using shared resources, 
cloud computing and virtualization allow for collective computing power, storage, and 
software, in an on-demand basis. 
 Perhaps even more important than sharing physical resources is sharing data. Most 
companies, regardless of size, depend not just on their customer records, inventories, 
accounts receivable, financial statements, and tax information, but also on their ability 
to share these, especially with operations in remote locations. Networking with a LAN, 
WAN, or MAN allows employees to share data quickly and easily and to use applications 
such as databases and collaboration tools that rely on sharing. By sharing data, networks 
have made business processes more efficient. For example, as soon as an order is placed, 
anyone in the company who needs to view it—whether in marketing, purchasing, manu-
facturing, shipping, or billing—can do so. 
 Intranets and extranets let firms share their corporate information securely. An 
  intranet   is a restricted network that relies on Internet technologies to provide an 
 LO 7.2:  Identify the benefits and 
challenges of a connected world. 
 BUSINESS DRIVEN DEBATE 
 As more Internet-related services move beyond delivering content just to the 
computer, Google wants to bring that content into the living room. In a joint 
venture, Google is teaming with Sony and Intel to introduce IPTV services either 
through new Internet accessible TVs or a new set-top box allowing consumers 
to search for content, browse the web, view photo albums, and more. Google 
would provide the needed software, along with advertisement opportunities; 
Sony would manufacture the new TVs; and Intel would supply the processors 
that make it all happen. While consumers can already watch TV shows on their 
computers as well as on a TV, porting Internet content to a HDTV screen seems 
like the next logical step, which is the magic of IPTV. 
 However, this is a very crowded playing field with many firms competing 
for the living room space. Google is competing with the likes of VUDU, TiVo, 
Yahoo! Connected TV, Netflix, Roku, Rovi, DivX, Apple TV, Xbox 360, Boxee, 
CinemaNow, Popbox, and many others, with no clear winner, at least not at the 
moment. 
 Brainstorm the advantages and disadvantages of associated with IPTV. Do 
you think Google TV will be successful? Why or why not? 16 
 Google TV 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 

264
Chapter 7 Networks: Mobile Business
Internet-like environment within the company for information sharing, communications,  
collaboration,  web publishing, and the support of business processes, as suggested 
in  Figure  7.11 . This network is protected by security measures such as passwords, 
encryption,  and firewalls, and thus only authorized users can access it. Intranets provide 
a central location for all kinds of company-related information such as benefits, sched-
ules, strategic directions, and employee directories. 17 
 An   extranet   is an extension of an intranet that is available only to authorized out-
siders, such as customers, partners, and suppliers. Having a common area where these 
parties can share information with employees about, for instance, order and invoice 
processing can be a major competitive advantage in product development, cost control, 
marketing, distribution, and supplier relations. Companies can establish direct private 
network links among themselves or create private, secure Internet access, in effect a 
“private tunnel” within the Internet, called a    virtual private network (VPN).    Figure 7.12 
illustrates using a VPN to connect to a corporate server. 
 Extranets enable customers, suppliers, consultants, subcontractors, business pros-
pects, and others to access selected intranet websites and other company network 
resources that allow the sharing of information. Consultants and contractors can 
facilitate  the design of new products or services. Suppliers can ensure that the raw 
materials  necessary for the company to function are in stock and can be delivered in a 
 FIGURE 7.11 
 Intranet Uses 
Intranets
Business Operations
and Management
Example: Developing custom
applications like order
processing, inventory control,
and sales management.
Employees within the
company can access and run
such applications using web
browsers from anywhere on
the network whenever
needed.
Communications and
Collaboration
Example: Using a browser to
send and receive email, voice
mail, documents, and web
pages to communicate with
others within the organization,
as well as externally through
the Internet.
Web Publishing
Example:
Newsletters, technical
documentations, and product
catalogs can be published in a
variety of ways, including web
pages, email, and as part of
organizational business
applications.
 FIGURE 7.12 
 Using a VPN 
INTERNET
Company Server
Supplier using a VPN
Customer using a VPN
A VPN acts like a “tunnel”

265
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
timely fashion. Customers can access ordering and payment functions and check order 
status. The extranet links the company to the outside world in a way that improves its 
operations. 
 Extranets provide business value in several ways. First, by relying on web browsers 
they make customer and supplier access to company resources easy and fast. Second, 
they enable a company to customize interactive web-enabled services for the intended 
audience, to build and strengthen strategic relationships with customers and suppliers. 
Finally, extranets can allow and improve collaboration with customers and other busi-
ness partners.  
 Providing Opportunities 
 Ebusiness can enhance the opportunities of manufacturers that buy parts from a variety 
of suppliers. Using networks, they can order parts electronically when needed, reducing 
the need for large inventories and enhancing efficiency. 
 Networks allow companies to sell to consumers via the Internet too, offering books, 
clothing, airline tickets, and more. Most midsize and larger companies also have a 
marketing presence on the web and provide extensive online information about their 
products and services. The Internet has lowered entry barriers for start-ups and small 
companies, which can now immediately tap potential customers online without hiring 
an expensive marketing company. 
 Reducing Travel 
 Networks provide the means for videoconferencing. Using this technology, employees 
at distant locations can meet without spending time and money on travel, while seeing 
and hearing each other as if they were in the same location. Nor do all employees have to 
come to the office; some can telecommute using Internet connections for both data and 
voice and, thanks to intranets and extranets, maintain the same access to information as 
they do at work. Telecommuting has been greatly enhanced by VPNs, videoconferenc-
ing, and VoIP. 
 BUSINESS DRIVEN STARTUP 
 ViVu is transforming the way people interact using videoconferencing. The 
company has several useful services, including VuRoom, which uses a Skype 
plug-in that allows remote users to collaborate with presentation and desk-
top sharing functionalities. The company uses a Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) 
model, allowing consumers to purchase a license to host an event of varying 
size. Teleconference members can participate from any platform (PC or Mac) 
using a web browser without having to download any proprietary viewer or 
needing any special hardware. Attendees only need a regular broadband 
Internet connection to receive the service. VuRoom can be used for both small 
videoconferences and big corporate web-based training sessions. The compa-
ny’s flagship service, VuCast, enables meeting organizers to create, publish, and 
manage large-scale, high-quality video events that can accommodate more 
than 10,000 participants. 
 What are the advantages of using videoconferencing? What are the disad-
vantages of using videoconferencing? Would you participate in a teleconfer-
ence with 10,000 users? Why or why not? What types of events does ViVu best 
serve? 18 
 ViVu Video-
conferencing 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 

266
Chapter 7 Networks: Mobile Business
 CHALLENGES OF A CONNECTED WORLD  
 Networks have created a diverse, yet globally connected world. By eliminating time and 
distance, networks make it possible to communicate in ways not previously imaginable. 
Even though networks provide many business advantages, they also create increased 
challenges in (1) security and (2) social, ethical, and political issues. 
 Security 
 Networks are a tempting target for mischief and fraud. A company first has to ensure 
proper identification of users and authorization of network access. Outside suppliers 
might be allowed to access production plans via the company’s extranet, for example, 
but they must not be able to see other information such as financial records. The com-
pany should also preserve the integrity of its data; only qualified users should be allowed 
to change and update data, and only well-specified data. Security problems intensify on 
the Internet where companies need to guard against fraud, invalid purchases, and mis-
appropriation of credit card information. 
 Two methods for encrypting network traffic on the web are secure sockets layer 
and secure hypertext transfer protocol.   Secure sockets layer (SSL)   is a standard secu-
rity technology for establishing an encrypted link between a web server and a browser, 
ensuring that all data passed between them remain private. Millions of websites use SSL 
to protect their online transactions with their customers. 
 To create an SSL connection, a web server requires an   SSL Certificate,   an electronic 
document that confirms the identity of a website or server and verifies that a public key 
belongs to a trustworthy individual or company. (Public key is described in Chapter 4.) 
Typically, an SSL Certificate will contain a domain name, the company name and 
address, and the expiration date of the certificate and other details. Verisign is the leading  
Internet Certification Authority that issues SSL Certificates. When a browser connects 
to a secure site, it retrieves the site’s SSL Certificate, makes sure it has not expired, and 
confirms a Certification Authority has issued it. If the certificate fails on any one of these 
validation measures, the browser will display a warning to the end user that the site is 
not secure. If a website is using SSL, a lock icon appears in the lower right-hand corner 
of the user’s web browser. 
   Secure hypertext transfer protocol (SHTTP    or   HTTPS)   is a combination of HTTP 
and SSL to provide encryption and secure identification of an Internet server. HTTPS 
protects against interception of communications, transferring credit card informa-
tion safely and securely with special encryption techniques. When a user enters a web 
address using  https://  the browser will encrypt the message. However, the server receiv-
ing the message must be configured to receive HTTPS messages. 
 In summary, each company needs to create a network security policy that specifies 
aspects of data integrity availability and confidentiality or privacy as well as account-
ability and authorization. With a variety of security methods, such as SSL and SHTTP, a 
company can protect its most important asset, its data. 
 Social, Ethical, and Political Issues 
 Only a small fraction of the world’s population has access to the Internet, and some 
people who have had access in the past have lost it due to changes in their circum-
stances such as unemployment or poverty. Providing network access to those who want 
or need it helps to level the playing field and removes the   digital divide,   a worldwide 
gap giving advantage to those with access to technology. Organizations trying to bridge 
the divide include the Boston Digital Bridge Foundation, which concentrates on local 
schoolchildren and their parents, helping to make them knowledgeable about comput-
ers, programs, and the Internet. Other organizations provide inexpensive laptops and 
Internet access in low-income areas in developing countries. 19  
 Another social issue with networking occurs with newsgroups or blogs where like-
minded people can exchange messages. If the topics are technical in nature or sports 
related such as cycling, few issues arise. Problems can begin when social media feature 
topics people can be sensitive about, such as politics, religion, or sex, or when someone 

267
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
posts an offensive message to someone else. Different countries have different and even 
conflicting laws about Internet use, but because the Internet knows no physical bound-
aries, communication is hard to regulate, even if anyone could. Some people believe net-
work operators should be responsible for the content they carry, just as newspapers and 
magazines are. Operators, however, feel that like the post office or phone companies, 
they cannot be expected to police what users say. If they censored messages, how would 
they avoid violating users’ rights to free speech? 
 Many employers read and censor employee emails and limit employee access to dis-
tracting entertainment such as YouTube and social networks such as Facebook. Spend-
ing company time “playing” is not a good use of resources, they believe. 
 Social issues can even affect the government and its use of networks to snoop on citi-
zens. The FBI has installed a system at many ISPs to scan all incoming and outgoing 
email for nuggets of interest. The system was originally called Carnivore but bad public-
ity caused it to be renamed DCS1000. While the name is much more generic, its goal 
is the same—locate information on illegal activities by spying on millions of people. 
A common conception associated with networking technologies is “Big Brother is watch-
ing!” People are wary of how much information is available on the Internet and how eas-
ily it can fall into the wrong hands. 20 
  section 7.2
 
 Mobility: The Business Value 
of a Wireless World 
 LE AR NI NG  O UT CO M E S 
 7.3 Describe the different wireless network categories.
 7.4 Explain the different wireless network business applications.
 7.5 Identify the benefits and challenges of business mobility. 
 WIRELESS NETWORK CATEGORIES  
 As far back as 1896, Italian inventor Guglielmo Marconi demonstrated a wireless 
telegraph,  and in 1927, the first radiotelephone system began operating between the 
United States and Great Britain. Automobile-based mobile telephones were offered in 
1947. In 1964, the first communications satellite, Telstar, was launched, and soon after, 
satellite-relayed telephone service and television broadcasts became available. Wireless 
networks have exploded since then, and newer technologies are now maturing that allow 
companies and home users alike to take advantage of both wired and wireless networks. 21 
 Before delving into a discussion of wireless networks, we should distinguish between 
mobile and wireless, terms that are often used synonymously but actually have dif-
ferent meanings.  Mobile  means the technology can travel with the user, for instance, 
users can download software, email messages, and web pages onto a laptop or other 
mobile device for portable reading or reference. Information collected while on the 
road can be synchronized  with a PC or company server.  Wireless,  on the other hand, 
refers to any type of operation accomplished without the use of a hard-wired connec-
tion. There are many environments in which the network devices are wireless but not 
mobile, such as wireless  home or office networks with stationary PCs and printers. Some 
forms of mobility  do not require a wireless connection; for instance, a worker can use a 
wired laptop  at home, shut down the laptop, drive to work, and attach the laptop to the 
company’s wired network. 
 In many networked environments today, users are both wireless and mobile; for 
example, a mobile user commuting to work on a train can maintain a VoIP call and 
multiple  TCP/IP connections at the same time.  Figure 7.13  categorizes wireless networks 
by type. 
 LO 7.3:  Describe the different 
 wireless network categories .

268
Chapter 7 Networks: Mobile Business
 Personal Area Networks 
 A    personal area network (PAN)    provides communication for devices owned by a sin-
gle user that work over a short distance. PANs are used to transfer files, including email, 
calendar appointments, digital photos, and music. A PAN can provide communication 
between a wireless headset and a cell phone or between a computer and a wireless 
mouse or keyboard. Personal area networks generally cover a range of less than 10 meters 
(about 30 feet).   Bluetooth   is a wireless PAN technology that transmits signals over short 
distances among cell phones, computers, and other devices. The name is borrowed from 
Harald Bluetooth, a king in Denmark more than 1,000 years ago. Bluetooth eliminates 
the need for wires, docking stations, or cradles, as well as all the special attachments that 
typically accompany personal computing devices. Bluetooth operates at speeds up to 
1 Mbps within a range of 33 feet or less. Devices that are Bluetooth-enabled communicate 
directly with each other in pairs, like a handshake. Up to eight can be paired simultane-
ously. And Bluetooth is not just for technology devices. An array of Bluetooth-equipped 
appliances, such as a television set, a stove, and a thermostat, can be controlled from a 
cell phone—all from a remote location. 22 
 Wireless LANs 
 A   wireless LAN (WLAN  ) is a local area network that uses radio signals to transmit and 
receive data over distances of a few hundred feet. An   access point (AP)   is the computer 
or network device that serves as an interface between devices and the network. Each 
computer initially connects to the access point and then to other computers on the 
network. A    wireless access point (WAP)    enables devices to connect to a wireless net-
work to communicate with each other. WAPs with   multiple-in/multiple-out (MIMO) 
technology   have multiple transmitters and receivers, allowing them to send and receive 
greater amounts of data than traditional networking devices.   Wireless fidelity (Wi-Fi)  is 
a means by which portable devices can connect wirelessly to a local area network, using 
access points that send and receive data via radio waves. Wi-Fi has a maximum range of 
about 1,000 feet in open areas such as a city park and 250 to 400 feet in closed areas such 
as an office building.   Wi-Fi infrastructure   includes the inner workings of a Wi-Fi ser-
vice or utility, including the signal transmitters, towers, or poles, along with additional 
equipment required to send out a Wi-Fi signal. Most WLANs use a Wi-Fi infrastructure in 
which a wireless device, often a laptop, communicates through an access point or base 
station by means of, for instance, wireless fidelity. 
 Areas around access points where users can connect to the Internet are often called 
hotspots.   Hotspots   are designated locations where Wi-Fi access points are publically 
available. Hotspots are found in places such as restaurants, airports, and hotels—places 
where business professionals tend to gather. Hotspots are extremely valuable for those 
business professionals who travel extensively and need access to business applications. 
By positioning hotspots at strategic locations throughout a building, campus, or city, 
network administrators can keep Wi-Fi users continuously connected to a network or 
the Internet, no matter where they roam. 23 
 In a Wi-Fi network, the user’s laptop or other Wi-Fi-enabled device has a wireless 
adapter that translates data into a radio signal and transmits it to the wireless access 
point. The wireless access point, which consists of a transmitter with an antenna that is 
 FIGURE 7.13 
 Wireless Communication 
Network Categories 
Wireless Wide Area
Networks (WWANs)
Wireless
Metropolitan Area
Networks (WMANs)
Wireless Local Area
Networks (WLANs)
Wireless Networks
Personal Area
Networks (PANs)

269
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
often built into the hardware, receives the signal and decodes it. The access point then 
sends the information to the Internet over a wired broadband connection, as illustrated 
in  Figure  7.14 . When receiving data, the wireless access point takes the information 
from the Internet, translates it into a radio signal, and sends it to the computer’s wireless 
adapter. If too many people try to use the Wi-Fi network at one time, they can experience 
interference or dropped connections. Most laptop computers come with built-in wire-
less transmitters and software to enable computers to automatically discover the exis-
tence of a Wi-Fi network. 
 Wi-Fi operates at considerably higher frequencies than cell phones use, which allows 
greater bandwidth. The bandwidths associated with Wi-Fi are separated according to sev-
eral wireless networking standards, known as 802.11, for carrying out wireless local area 
network communication. The    Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE)   
researches and institutes electrical standards for communication and other technologies. 
   IEEE 802.11n (or Wireless-N)    is the newest standard for wireless networking. Compared 
with earlier standards such as 802.11b, Wireless-N offers faster speeds, more flexibility, and 
greater range. The organization denotes different versions of the standard—for example, 
Wireless-G and Wireless-N—by a lowercase letter at the end of this number.  Figure 7.15  
outlines the bandwidths associated with a few of these standards. 24   
 An increasing number of digital devices, including most laptops, netbooks, tablets 
such as the iPad, and even printers are incorporating Wi-Fi technology into their design. 
Cell phones are incorporating Wi-Fi so they can automatically switch from the cell net-
work to a faster Wi-Fi network where available for data communications. BlackBerrys 
and iPhones can connect to an access point for data communications such as email and 
web browsing, but not for voice unless they use the services of Skype or another VoIP.   
 Wireless MANs 
 A   wireless MAN (WMAN)   is a metropolitan area network that uses radio signals to 
transmit and receive data. WMAN technologies have not been highly successful to date, 
mainly because they are not widely available, at least in the United States. One with the 
 FIGURE 7.14 
 Wi-Fi Networks 
Access
Point
INTERNET
Wireless Network
Broadband
Modem
 Wi-Fi Standard 
 Bandwidth 
 802.11a 
 54 Mbps 
 802.11b 
 11 Mbps 
 802.11g 
 54 Mbps 
 802.11n 
 140 Mbps 
 FIGURE 7.15 
 Wi-Fi Standards and 
Bandwidths 

270
Chapter 7 Networks: Mobile Business
potential for success is   Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access (WiMAX),   a 
communications technology aimed at providing high-speed wireless data over metro-
politan area networks. In many respects, WiMAX operates like Wi-Fi, only over greater 
distances and with higher bandwidths. A WiMAX tower serves as an access point and 
can connect to the Internet or another tower. A single tower can provide up to 3,000 
square miles of coverage, so only a few are needed to cover an entire city. WiMAX can 
support data communications at a rate of 70 Mbps. In New York City, for example, one or 
two WiMAX access points around the city might meet the heavy demand more cheaply 
than hundreds of Wi-Fi access points. WiMAX can also cover remote or rural areas where 
cabling is limited or nonexistent, and where it is too expensive or physically difficult to 
install wires for the relatively few users. 26 
 WiMAX can provide both line-of-sight and non-line-of-sight service. A non-line-of-
sight service uses a small antenna on a mobile device that connects to a WiMAX tower 
less than six miles away where transmissions are disrupted by physical obstructions. 
This form of service is similar to Wi-Fi but has much broader coverage area and higher 
bandwidths. A line-of-sight option offers a fixed antenna that points at the WiMAX tower 
from a rooftop or pole. This option is much faster than non-line-of-sight service, and the 
distance between the WiMAX tower and antenna can be as great as 30 miles.  Figure 7.16  
illustrates the WiMAX infrastructure. 27 
 Some cellular companies are evaluating WiMAX as a means of increasing bandwidth 
for a variety of data-intensive applications such as those used by smartphones. Sprint 
Nextel and Clearwire are building a nationwide WiMAX network in the United States. 
WiMAX-capable gaming devices, laptops, cameras, and even cell phones are being 
manufactured by companies including Intel, Motorola, Nokia, and Samsung. 28 
 Wireless WAN—Cellular Communication System 
 A   wireless WAN (WWAN)   is a wide area network that uses radio signals to transmit and 
receive data. WWAN technologies can be divided into two categories: cellular communi-
cation systems and satellite communication systems. 
 Although mobile communications have been around for generations, including the 
walkie-talkies of the 1940s and mobile radiophones of the 1950s, it was not until 1983 that 
cellular telephony became available commercially. A cell phone is a device for voice and 
 BUSINESS DRIVEN MIS 
 Who would have thought that a car could be hacked? But that is exactly what 
happened in Austin, Texas. About a hundred cars were broken into, not by the 
usual method of either picking the lock or smashing a window but instead via 
a Wi-Fi connection. A local dealership, where all the cars were purchased, had 
installed a Wi-Fi-enabled black box under the dashboard that could disable 
the car and set off the horn if the owner did not make payments. However, in 
this case, the owners were not in arrears, but the victims of a recently laid-off 
employee at the dealership who was seeking revenge by going into the web-
based system to disable the cars one by one. After someone at the dealership 
figured out the cars had been hacked, the password that allowed authorization 
to the black boxes was quickly changed. 
 Is the black box a good idea? Do you consider this an ethical business prac-
tice? If you had bought a car with a black box, would you have it removed? 
How many customers do you think will consider buying another car from that 
dealership? 25 
 Cars Hacked 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 

271
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
 FIGURE 7.16 
 WiMAX Infrastructure 
Line-of-Sight
Transmission
ISP
WiMAX
Tower
Non-Line-of-Sight
Transmission
INTERNET
data, communicating wirelessly through a collection of stationary ground-based sites 
called base stations, each of which is linked to its nearest neighbor stations. Base station 
coverage areas are about 10 square miles and are called cells, as  Figure 7.17 illustrates. 29 
 The first cell phone was demonstrated in 1973 by Motorola (it weighed almost 
2 pounds), but it took 10 years for the technology to become commercially available. 
The Motorola DynaTAC, marketed in 1983, weighed one pound and cost about $4,000. 
Cellular technology has come a long way since then. 30 
 Cellular systems were originally designed to provide voice services to mobile cus-
tomers and thus were designed to interconnect cells to the public telephone network. 
Increasingly, they provide data services and Internet connectivity. There are more cell 
phones than landline phones in many countries today, and it is no longer uncommon 
for cell phones to be the only phones people have. 
 Cell phones have morphed into   smartphones  that offer more advanced computing 
ability and connectivity than basic cell phones. They allow for web browsing, emailing, 
listening to music, watching video, computing, keeping track of contacts, sending text 
messages, and taking and sending photos. The Apple iPhone and RIM BlackBerry are 
examples of smartphones. 
 Cell phones and smartphones, or mobile phones as they are collectively called, 
need a provider to offer services, much as computer users need an ISP to connect to 
the Internet. The most popular mobile phone providers in the United States are AT&T, 
Sprint, T-Mobile, and Verizon. They offer different cell phones, features, coverage areas, 
and services. One of the newer services is third-generation, or   3G,   services that bring 
wireless broadband to mobile phones.  Figure  7.18  lists the cell phone generations. 
The 3G networks let users surf web pages, enjoy streaming music, watch video-on-
demand programming, download and play 3-D games, and participate in social media 

272
Chapter 7 Networks: Mobile Business
and teleconferencing.   Streaming  is a method of sending audio and video files over 
the Internet  in such a way that the user can view the file while it is being transferred. 
Streaming  is not limited to cellular usage; all wireless and even wired networks can take 
advantage of this method. The most obvious advantage is speed, a direct benefit for 
mobile and wireless devices since they are still not as fast as their wired counterparts. 31 
 Wireless WAN—Satellite Communication System 
 The other wireless WAN technology is a satellite communication system. A   satellite   is a 
space station that orbits the Earth receiving and transmitting signals from Earth-based 
stations over a wide area. When satellite systems first came into consideration in the 
 FIGURE 7.18 
 Cell Phone Generations 
The original analog cell phone network.
Digital cell phone service.
Broadband Internet services over cellular
network.
Very high-speed access, anywhere, anytime,
to anything digital—audio, video, text.
Speed 5 9.6 Kbps
Speed 5 10 Kbps2144 Kbps
Speed 5 144 Kbps211 Mbps
Speed 5 22300 Mbps
1G
2G – 2.5G
3G – 3.5G
4G
 FIGURE 7.17 
 Cell Phone Communication 
System Overview 
Each cell is typically sized
at about 10 square miles 
Each cell has a base
station that 
consists of an 
antennae or tower
to relay signals  
Cell

273
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
1990s, the goal was to provide wireless voice and data coverage for the entire planet, 
without the need for mobile phones to roam between many different provider networks. 
But by the time satellite networks were ready for commercial use, they had already been 
overtaken by cellular systems. 
 The devices used for satellite communication range from handheld units to mobile 
base stations to fixed satellite dish receivers. The peak data transmission speeds range 
from 2.4 Kbps to 2 Mbps. For the everyday mobile professional, satellite communi-
cation may not provide a compelling benefit, but for people requiring voice and data 
access from remote locations or guaranteed coverage in nonremote locations, satellite 
technology is a viable solution. 
 Conventional communication satellites move in stationary orbits approximately 
22,000 miles above Earth. A newer satellite medium, the low-orbit satellite, travels much 
closer to Earth and is able to pick up signals from weak transmitters. Low-orbit satel-
lites also consume less power and cost less to launch than conventional satellites. With 
satellite networks, businesspeople almost anywhere in the world have access to full 
communication capabilities, including voice, videoconferencing, and Internet access. 
 Figure 7.19 briefly illustrates the satellite communication system. 33 
 BUSINESS DRIVEN GLOBALIZATION 
 The mobile phone is helping to fight poverty and increase world economic 
development. It can dramatically improve living standards for people living on 
a few dollars a day by helping them find work, providing information about crop 
prices, or calling for medical help. By using mobile phones to find the best local 
marketplace prices for sardines, a group of poor fishermen in Kerala, India, 
increased their profits by an average of 8 percent. The fishermen were able to 
call ahead to a port to identify a buyer. In Muruguru, Kenya, Grace Wachira runs 
a small knitting company. Before using a mobile phone, she would walk hours 
to the nearest town to buy her supplies or meet customers. Using her mobile 
phone, she can now call for her supplies to be delivered and to communicate 
with her customers. 
 What type of mobile phones are these people buying? What other uses can a 
mobile phone provide for people living in poor, rural regions? How can people 
in rural areas turn owning a mobile phone into a small-scale business? 32 
 Fighting Poverty 
with Mobile 
Phones 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 
 FIGURE 7.19 
 Satellite Communication System 
22,000 miles above
Earth 
Fixed Locations
Portable Communications
Vehicles

274
Chapter 7 Networks: Mobile Business
 BUSINESS APPLICATIONS OF WIRELESS NETWORKS  
 Companies of all types and sizes have relied on wireless technology for years. Shipping 
and trucking companies developed some of the earliest wireless applications to help track 
vehicles and valuable cargo, optimize the logistics of their global operations, perfect their 
delivery  capabilities, and reduce theft and damage. Government agencies such as the 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration and the Department of Defense have 
relied on satellite technologies for decades to track the movement of troops, weaponry, and 
military assets; to receive and broadcast data; and to communicate over great distances. 
 Wireless technologies have also aided the creation of new applications. Some build 
upon and improve existing capabilities. UPS, for example, is combining several types of 
wireless network technologies from Bluetooth to WWANs and deploying scanners and 
wearable data-collection terminals to automate and standardize package management 
and tracking across all its delivery centers.  Figure 7.20  displays the three business appli-
cations taking advantage of wireless technologies. 
 Radio-Frequency Identification (RFID) 
  Radio-frequency identification (RFID)   uses electronic tags and labels to identify 
objects wirelessly over short distances. It holds the promise of replacing existing iden-
tification technologies such as the bar code. RFID wirelessly exchanges information 
between a tagged object and a reader/writer. An   RFID tag   is an electronic identification 
device that is made up of a chip and antenna. An   RFID reader (RFID interrogator)  is 
a transmitter/receiver that reads the contents of RFID tags in the area. A RFID system is 
comprised of one or more RFID tags, one or more RFID readers, two or more antennas 
(one on the tag and one on each reader), RFID application software, and a computer 
system or server, as  Figure 7.21  illustrates. Tags, often smaller than a grain of rice, can be 
applied to books or clothing items as part of an adhesive bar-code label, or included in 
 LO 7.4:  Explain the different wireless 
network business applications. 
 FIGURE 7.20 
 Wireless Business Applications 
Global
Positioning
Systems (GPS)
Geographic
Information
Systems (GIS)
Radio-Frequency
Identiﬁcation
(RFID)
 FIGURE 7.21 
 Elements of an RFID system 
Tagged
Products 
RFID
Reader/
Writer
Computer 
System or
Server 
Network

275
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
items such as ID cards or packing labels. Readers can be stand-alone devices, such as for 
self-checkout in a grocery store, integrated with a mobile device for portable use, or built 
in as in printers. The reader sends a wireless request that is received by all tags in the area 
that have been programmed to listen to wireless signals. Tags receive the signal via their 
antennas and respond by transmitting their stored data. The tag can hold many types of 
data, including a product number, installation instructions, and history of activity (such 
as the date the item was shipped). The reader receives a signal from the tag using its 
antenna, interprets the information sent, and transfers the data to the associated com-
puter system or server.  
  Passive RFID tags   do not have a power source, whereas   active RFID tags   have their 
own transmitter and a power source (typically a battery). The power source runs the 
microchip’s circuitry and broadcasts a signal to the reader (similar to the way a cell phone 
transmits signals to a base station). Passive RFID tags draw power from the RFID reader, 
which sends out electromagnetic waves that induce a current in the tag’s antenna.   Semi-
passive RFID tags    use a battery to run the microchip’s circuitry, but communicate by 
drawing power from the RFID reader.   Asset tracking   occurs when a company places 
active or semi-passive RFID tags on expensive products or assets to gather data on the 
items’ location with little or no manual intervention. Asset tracking allows a company to 
focus on its supply chain, reduce theft, identify the last known user of assets, and auto-
mate maintenance routines. Active and semi-passive tags are useful for tracking high-
value goods that need to be scanned over long ranges, such as railway cars on a track. 
The cost of active and semi-passive RFID tags is significant; hence, low-cost items typi-
cally use passive RFID tags. 
  The RFID accelerometer    is a device that measures the acceleration (the rate of change 
of velocity) of an item and is used to track truck speeds or taxi cab speeds.   Chipless RFID 
tags   use plastic or conductive polymers instead of silicon-based microchips, allowing 
them to be washed or exposed to water without damaging the chip. Examples of the 
innovative uses of RFID include:
 ■ RFID chips injected under the skin of animals using a syringe can help ranchers 
meet regulations, track wild animals for ecological studies, and return lost pets to 
their owners.  
 ■ Retail stores use RFID to track and monitor inventory. Hospitals and pharmaceutical 
companies meet government regulations and standards with RFID. Even local 
libraries are using RFID to control theft and speed up the checkout process.  
 ■ Car manufacturers install RFID antitheft systems. Toll roads use RFID to collect 
payments from passing cars. 
 ■ Hospitals track patients’, doctors’, and nurses’ locations to facilitate emergency 
situations and ensure safety. RFID also tracks equipment location to ensure quick 
response times during an emergency. 
 ■ American Express and MasterCard use RFID for automatic payments.  
 ■ Walmart and other large retailers use RFID to maintain inventory, stop shoplifting, 
and speed customer checkout processes. 34 
 Global Positioning System (GPS) 
 A    global positioning system (GPS)   is a satellite-based navigation system providing 
extremely accurate position, time, and speed information. The U.S. Department of 
Defense developed the technology in the early 1970s and later made it available to the 
public. GPS uses 24 global satellites that orbit Earth, sending signals to a receiver that 
can communicate with three or four satellites at a time. A GPS receiver can be a separate 
unit connected to a mobile device using cable or wireless technology such as Bluetooth, 
or it can be included in devices such as mobile phones or vehicle navigation systems. 
   Automatic vehicle location (AVL)    uses GPS tracking to track vehicles. AVL systems use 
a GPS receiver in the vehicle that links to a control center. Garmin is one of the more 
popular manufacturers of GPS tracking systems, offering vehicle tracking, phone and 
laptop integration, and hiker navigation for water and air. 

276
Chapter 7 Networks: Mobile Business
 The satellites broadcast signals constantly, while the receiver measures the time it 
takes for the signals to reach it. This measurement, which uses the speed of the sig-
nal to determine the distance, is taken from three distinct satellites to provide precise 
location  information. The time measurements depend on high-powered clocks on 
each satellite and must be precise, because an error of one-thousandth of a second can 
result in a location  variation of more than 200 miles. GPS can produce very accurate 
results, typically  within 5 to 50 feet of the actual location (military versions have higher 
accuracy) . GPS also provides latitude, longitude, and elevation information. 35   Latitude  
represents a north/south measurement of position.   Longitude   represents an east/west 
measurement  of position.   Geocache   is a GPS technology adventure game that posts 
the longitude and latitude location for an item on the Internet for users to find. GPS 
users find the geocache and typically sign a guest book or take an item and leave an 
item for the next adventure players to find. Caches are often placed in locations that are 
interesting or challenging for people to discover. A    geocoin,    a round coin-sized object, 
is uniquely numbered and hidden in geocache. Geocoins can also be shaped to match 
a theme such as the state of Colorado or a birthday party hat. Geocoins are often deco-
rative or commemorative, making them collectible and highly valuable for technology 
adventures. 
 GPS applications are in every kind of company vehicle these days—from police cars to 
bulldozers, from dump trucks to mayoral limousines. Emergency response systems use 
GPS to track each of their vehicles and so dispatch those closest to the scene of an acci-
dent. If a vehicle is missing, its GPS locator can help locate it.    Estimated time of arrival 
(ETA)   is the time of day of an expected arrival at a certain destination and is typically 
used for navigation applications.    Estimated time enroute (ETE)    is the time remaining 
before reaching a destination using the present speed and is typically used for navigation 
applications. 
 Geographic Information Systems (GIS) 
 GPS provides the foundation for geographic information systems. A   geographic 
information  system (GIS)    stores, views, and analyzes geographic data creating, 
multidimensional charts or maps. For example, GIs are monitoring global warming 
by measuring  the speed of glaciers melting in Canada, Greenland, and Antarctica. 
  Cartography   is the science and art of making an illustrated map or chart. GIS allows 
users to interpret, analyze,  and visualize data in different ways that reveal patterns 
and trends in the form of reports, charts, and maps.    Edge matching (warping, rubber 
sheeting)   occurs when paper maps are laid edge to edge and items that run across maps 
but do not match are reconfigured to match. Edge matching is a critical component of 
creating a GIS database because map misalignments occur frequently for many reasons, 
including survey error and cartographic errors.   GIS map automation   links business 
assets to a centralized system  where they can be tracked and monitored over time. 
   Spatial data (geospatial data or geographic information)    identifies the geographic 
location of features and boundaries on Earth, such as natural or constructed features,  
oceans, and more. Spatial data can be mapped and is stored as coordinates and topology.  
A GIS accesses, manipulates, and analyzes spatial data.   Geocoding  in spatial databases 
is a coding process that assigns a digital map feature to an attribute that serves as a 
unique ID (tract number, node number) or classification (soil type, zoning category). 
GIS professionals  are certified in geocoding practices to ensure industry standards are 
met when classifying spatial data. 
 Companies that deal in transportation combine GISs with database and GPS technol-
ogy. Airlines and shipping companies can plot routes with up-to-the-second informa-
tion about the location of all their transport vehicles. Hospitals can locate their medical 
staff with GIS and sensors that pick up transmissions from ID badges. Automobiles have 
GPSs linked to GIS maps that display the car’s location and driving directions on a dash-
board screen. GM offers the OnStar system, which sends a continuous stream of infor-
mation to the OnStar center about the car’s exact location. 
 Some mobile phone providers combine GPS and GIS capabilities so they can locate 
users within a geographical area about the size of a tennis court to assist emergency 

277
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
services such as 911. Farmers can use GIS to map and analyze fields, telling them where 
to apply the proper amounts of seed, fertilizer, and herbicides. 
 A GIS can find the closest gas station or bank or determine the best way to get to a par-
ticular location. But it is also good at finding patterns, such as finding the most feasible 
location to hold a conference according to where the majority of a company’s customers 
live and work. GIS can present this information in a visually effective way. 
 Some common GIS uses include:
 ■  Finding what is nearby. Given a specific location, the GIS finds sources within a 
defined radius. These might be entertainment venues, medical facilities, restaurants, 
or gas stations. Users can also use GIS to locate vendors that sell a specific item they 
want and get the results as a map of the surrounding area or an address. 
 ■  Routing information.  Once users have an idea where they want to go, GIS can 
provide  directions to get there using either a map or step-by-step instructions. 
Routing information can be especially helpful when combined with search services. 
 ■  Sending information alerts. Users may want to be notified when information 
relevant  to them becomes available near their location. A commuter might want to 
know that a section of the highway has traffic congestion, or a shopper might want to 
be notified when a favorite store is having a sale on a certain item. 
 ■  Mapping densities.  GIS can map population and event densities based on a 
standard  area unit, such as square miles, making it easy to see distributions and 
concentrations.  Police can map crime incidents to determine where additional 
patrolling is required, and stores can map customer orders to identify ideal delivery 
routes. 
 ■  Mapping quantities.  Users can map quantities to find out where the most or least 
of a feature may be. For example, someone interested in opening a specialty coffee 
shop can determine how many others are already in the area, and city planners can 
determine where to build more parks. 36 
 A GIS can provide information and insight to both mobile users and people at fixed 
locations. Google Earth combines satellite imagery, geographic data, and Google’s 
search capabilities to create a virtual globe that users can download to a computer or 
mobile device. Not only does this provide useful business benefits, but it also allows for 
many educational opportunities. Instead of just talking about the Grand Canyon, an 
instructor can use Google Earth to view that region. 
 GPS and GIS both utilize   location-based services (LBS),   applications that use loca-
tion information to provide a service. LBS is designed to give mobile users instant access 
to personalized local content and range from 911 applications to buddy finders (“Let 
me know when my friend is within 1,000 feet”) to games (treasure hunts) to location-
based advertising (“Visit the Starbucks on the corner and get $1.00 off a latte”). Many 
LBS applications complement GPS and GIS, such as:
 ■ Emergency services 
 ■ Field service management 
 ■ Find-it services 
 ■ Mapping 
 ■ Navigation 
 ■ Tracking assets 
 ■ Traffic information 
 ■ Vehicle location 
 ■ Weather information 
 ■ Wireless advertising 37 
 Just as Facebook and Twitter helped fuel the Web 2.0 revolution, applications such 
as Foursquare, Gowalla, and Loopt are bringing attention to LBS. Each application is a 
mobile phone service that helps social media users find their friends’ location. Facebook 
and Twitter have added location-based services to complement their applications.   

278
Chapter 7 Networks: Mobile Business
 BENEFITS OF BUSINESS MOBILITY  
 Mobile and wireless development has come a long way. Consider Dr Pepper/Seven-
Up Inc., of Plano, Texas, which monitors the operation of its antenna-equipped 
vending  machines via wireless technology. The company collects inventory, sales, and 
“machine-health” data and polls the machines daily; managers and salespeople can 
access the stored information via its intranet. Dr Pepper/Seven-Up Inc. understands the 
business value of the data, both for daily operations and for data-mining purposes. The 
information  collected is helpful for deciding where to place new vending machines, such 
as in front of a Target store or a high-traffic supermarket.  Figure 7.22  lists many of the 
advantages of wireless networks. 38 
 Enhances Mobility 
 Enhancing mobility is one of the greatest advantages provided by wireless networks. It 
allows activities that were formerly tied to physical locations to be performed almost 
anywhere. Companies can bring employees, information, and computing resources to 
a job location instead of forcing the job to be located at the company’s site. Consider 
how mobile phones alone have changed the way most companies operate. Executives 
and sales professionals can conduct business wherever they are, eliminating downtime 
during travel and speeding their response to customers. Mobility means more face-to-
face contact with customers and business partners. Even people with internal jobs, such 
as custodians, floor salespeople, production supervisors, and emergency room doctors, 
keep moving throughout the day. Instead of returning periodically to their offices or 
other fixed location for information access or doing without, they can rely on wireless 
technology to bring that access to them, where and when they need it. 
 LO 7.5:  Identify the benefits and 
challenges of business mobility. 
 FIGURE 7.22 
 Advantages of Wireless 
Networks 
Enhances
Mobility
Provides
Alternative to
Wiring
Provides
Mobile
Business
Opportunities
Provides
Immediate
Data Access
Increases
Location and
Monitoring
Capability
Improves
Workﬂow
Advantages of
Using Wireless
Networks

279
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
 Mobility gives a company the power to place the right resources in the right place at 
the right time. It allows for the redistribution of operations to gain efficiencies or react to 
changing conditions. For example, a mobile checkout stand allows additional checkouts 
to be set up during holiday rushes and store sales events. 
 Provides Immediate Data Access 
 Mobility allows activities to be performed where needed; however, providing immediate 
data access offers the value. Wireless networks can support a wide variety of immediate 
data access options, from collecting usage data using Wi-Fi or RFID technologies when 
driving past a water meter to having full Internet access on a laptop or other mobile device. 
A mobile worker can submit a status report or credit card scan or be notified about a new 
assignment. When up-to-the-second data are required, such as for stock transactions 
and credit card authorizations, wireless technology is the only mobile option. Employees 
can “pull” data by linking to the source and requesting the desired information, or “push” 
it by sending an alert to a user’s device or automatically refreshing data. 
 Whether through voice, email, or text messaging, the quality and frequency of infor-
mation exchange increases with wireless access. An emergency room doctor can be noti-
fied of lab test results immediately upon completion. A service worker and appropriate 
information can be rerouted to a higher-priority assignment. A salesperson can submit 
updates right after a sales call. 
 Instant access to customer profiles, account history, and current order status sig-
nificantly improves the quality of interactions with customers, suppliers, and business 
partners. A salesperson can check inventories, generate quotes, take orders, and resolve 
problems all at the customer’s site. Field workers can identify problems with online 
manuals and diagnostic tools. Decision making is always improved by access to accurate 
and current information. 
 Increases Location and Monitoring Capability 
 The ability to locate and monitor assets reduces losses from theft and damage, gathers 
information from remote or difficult-to-reach locations, enhances safety, and makes 
possible a new wave of personalized services. RFID tags permit the tracking of assets 
from cattle to container shipments. LBS devices send storm data from buoys far at sea. 
LBS in cars provide driving directions and enable rescuers to locate the vehicle in case 
of an accident. 
 Through a combination of LBS devices and applications, companies can trace 
shipments  from point of origin to final destination. More advanced applications can 
monitor their condition (e.g., ensuring that refrigeration equipment is operating) and 
notify users of tampering or attempted theft. Wireless applications can collect billing 
data, monitor operating conditions, gather scientific measurements, and relay requests 
for service from locations that are too dangerous, difficult, or costly to access by other 
means. Oil companies use wireless technology to monitor offshore oil rig equipment. We 
have seen that other wireless applications can tailor information to the needs of the user, 
such as listing resources near a given location or offering local traffic reports and driving 
directions. 
 Improves Work Flow 
 Many work flows and job responsibilities are constrained by paper or wired processes. 
Wireless technology offers the opportunity to redesign and simplify those processes to 
be faster, cheaper, and more responsive, and to eliminate redundant activities, integrate  
activities and services, and redistribute tasks. For example, when mobile workers capture  
data on paper forms and clerical workers enter it into computer systems, the process is 
costly, time-consuming, and error-prone. Using a wireless device for the original  data 
capture eliminates the need to reenter the data, increases data accuracy, and provides 
immediate access to results. Rental car staff members now use wireless devices to 
quickly and easily check and enter mileage, fuel levels, and damage for returning cars. 
Drivers receive faster service and staff can focus on providing value-added services.  

280
Chapter 7 Networks: Mobile Business
 Provides Mobile Business Opportunities 
 Unlike ebusiness, which normally requires desktop or laptop computers to connect 
to the Internet, mbusiness offers the advantages of making a purchase via the Inter-
net an anywhere, anytime experience. It provides consumers with the ability to obtain 
information  and order goods and services quickly and easily using a mobile device. 
The growing popularity of iPhones along with iPhone apps have helped fuel the growth 
of mbusiness. 
 A few mbusiness offerings include:
 ■  Digital purchases. The most suitable purchase for a mobile user is for products that 
can be downloaded and used immediately such as music and (electronic) books. 
 ■  Location-based services. The ability for merchants to capture and react to a user’s 
current location and requirements can be a powerful tool for selling products and 
services. 
 ■  Mobile banking and payments.  Using a mobile device can provide access to per-
sonal bank accounts to view account history and execute transactions. In addition, 
a mobile device can be used for making payments, essentially acting as digital cash. 
For example, someone can order and pay for a Starbucks latte using a mobile device 
and app. 
 ■  Mobile shopping. Most forms of shopping may be impractical using mobile devices; 
however, some forms of purchases lend themselves to mbusiness. For example, hav-
ing the ability to purchase movie tickets for a show playing the same evening can be 
quite valuable. Mobile devices can also be used for comparison shopping. Before 
making a purchase, a shopper in a retail store may want to first see what the current 
price of a product is from another vendor to ensure he is getting a good price. 39 
 Provides Alternative to Wiring 
 Wireless networks provide an attractive alternative where physical constraints or conve-
nience make wired solutions costly or impractical. Many office buildings already have a 
maze of wires in their ceilings, floors, and walls representing many generations of net-
work technologies. Tracing existing wires or adding new lines becomes increasingly 
cumbersome and difficult. In other cases, building design or aesthetic considerations 
make wired networks unattractive. In manufacturing facilities or production lines with 
moving equipment or complex setups, wireless connections are simpler to implement 
and safer for workers. The higher per unit cost of a wireless solution may be more than 
offset by its advantages over physical lines. 
 WLANs allow MIS employees to relocate equipment at will, attractive for trade shows, 
temporary offices, and seasonal selling areas. In conference rooms, WLANs enable 
attendees to bring laptops or other Wi-Fi-enabled devices for Internet access. 
 Finally, wireless technology allows voice and data connections with ships at sea, pas-
sengers in airliners, and travelers in remote locations. In developing countries, it is a 
means to bypass the effort and expense of installing and maintaining telephone lines 
across inhospitable terrain. 
 CHALLENGES OF BUSINESS MOBILITY  
 The mobile employee has become the norm rather than the exception, driven by lifestyle 
choices, productivity gains, and technology improvements. Although the advantages 
of using wireless networks are significant, added challenges exist such as protecting 
against theft, protecting wireless connections, preventing viruses on mobile devices, and 
addressing privacy concerns with RFID and LBS (see  Figure 7.23 ). 
 Protecting Against Theft 
 Any mobile device is vulnerable to loss no matter how big or small it is. The company may 
face significant exposure from stolen IDs, passwords, encryption keys, and confidential 
information if the device falls into the wrong hands, especially if the theft is not discov-
ered or reported immediately and the company does not have time to revoke access.  

281
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
 Power-on passwords—passwords implemented at the hardware level that must 
be entered before gaining access to the computer—are the first line of defense against 
unauthorized  use. Companies should activate these passwords before giving their 
workforce  the devices. They should also prohibit storing passwords on devices and 
periodically  monitor compliance with the policy. Companies need to consider encrypting  
and password-protecting data stored on the device, including any flash drives or other 
mobile storage devices. In addition, some device management tools can send messages 
to a device to lock it or destroy its contents, which can be an attractive security feature. 
 FIGURE 7.23 
 Challenges of Using Wireless 
Networks 
CHALLENGES OF WIRELESS NETWORKS
Protecting
Against Theft
Example: Mobile
devices are more
vulnerable to theft
due to their small
size.
Protecting
Wireless
Connections
Example: Wi-Fi
connections need to
enforce data
encryption.
Preventing
Viruses on
Mobile Devices
Example: Mobile
devices are not
immune to viruses
and need to be
protected.
Addressing
Privacy Concerns
with RFID and
LBS
Example: Both RFID
and LBS have the
ability to share where
someone is, which
can cause privacy
concerns.
 BUSINESS DRIVEN INNOVATION 
 Many National Football League teams use wireless devices for communicating 
between players and coaches, and now new devices can be used to communi-
cate just how hard players are being hit in the head. The Chicago Bears, Dallas 
Cowboys, and Jacksonville Jaguars tucked Wi-Fi sensors into helmets that send 
data to the sidelines every time a player is hit or tackled. The sensors have been 
programmed to detect hard hits, triggering a warning to pull the player for fur-
ther assessment. 
 The sensors look like marshmallows that are stuffed between the helmet’s 
padding and the outside shell. Each sensor can measure the acceleration of a 
player’s head during a hit, determine the direction, duration, location on the 
head, magnitude, and time of impact. Once a player’s helmet is hit, the sensors 
immediately transmit the data to staff on the sideline using mobile devices to 
receive the information. If the data sent determine that the hit exceeds a cer-
tain threshold, a mobile device lights up, alerting staff that a player’s condition 
needs to be assessed. The NFL’s new injury-related rules state that if a player 
exhibits any signs of a concussion, he must leave the field for the day. 
 How else can wireless devices be used to prevent injury? Should all football 
teams, including professional, academic, and recreational, use wireless sensors 
in helmets? Why or why not? Should other sports such as hockey and cycling 
start using this technology? Why or why not? 40 
 Crash Pad 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 

282
Chapter 7 Networks: Mobile Business
 Protecting Wireless Connections 
 Network intrusions can occur if access codes or passwords are stored on a device that is 
lost or stolen. However, any time a wireless network connects to a wired one, the wireless 
network can serve as a conduit for a hacker to gain entry into an otherwise secure wired 
network. This risk is especially high if the wireless network is not sufficiently secured in 
its own right. 
 Before the emergence of the Internet, hackers generally had to be physically present 
within the corporate complex to gain access to a wired network. The thousands, if not 
millions, of access points enabled by the Internet now allow hackers to work from a dis-
tance. This threat has spawned a variety of different security techniques from firewalls to 
VPNs to SSL and HTTPS. 
 Several techniques can secure wireless networks from unauthorized access whether 
used separately or in combination. One method is authenticating Wi-Fi access points. 
Because Wi-Fi communications are broadcast, anyone within listening distance can 
intercept communications. Every time someone uses an unsecured website via a public 
Wi-Fi access point, his or her log-on name and password are sent over the open airwaves, 
with a high risk that someone might “eavesdrop” or capture log-on names, passwords, 
credit card numbers, and other vital information.    Wired equivalent privacy (WEP)   is 
an encryption algorithm designed to protect wireless transmission data. If using a Wi-Fi 
connection, WEP encrypts the data using a key that converts the data into a non-human 
readable form. The purpose of WEP was to provide wireless networks with the equiva-
lent level of security as wired networks. Unfortunately, the underlying technology behind 
WEP has been demonstrated to be relatively insecure compared to newer protocols such 
as WPA. WLANs that use Wi-Fi have a built-in security mechanism called   Wi-Fi Protected 
Access (WPA),   a wireless security protocol to protect Wi-Fi networks. It is an improve-
ment on the original Wi-Fi security standard, Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP), and pro-
vides more sophisticated data encryption and user authentication. Anyone who wants to 
use an access point must know the WPA encryption key to access the Wi-Fi connection. 
  War chalking   is the practice of tagging pavement with codes displaying where Wi-Fi 
access is available. The codes for war chalking tell other users the kind of access avail-
able, the speed of the network, and if the network is secured.   War driving   is deliberately 
searching for Wi-Fi signals while driving by in a vehicle. Many individuals who partici-
pate in war driving simply map where Wi-Fi networks are available. Other individuals 
 BUSINESS DRIVEN ETHICS AND SECURITY 
 Jane Goodall loved Tarzan and Dr. Dolittle when she was a young girl and 
dreamed of living in Africa among the wild chimpanzees. The Jane Goodall 
Institute continues Dr. Goodall’s pioneering chimpanzee research that funda-
mentally changed the way many humans view these wild animals. Using Google 
Earth, you can now zoom right into the Gombe National Park in Tanzania to 
watch for yourself the amazing interaction among chimpanzees. New inno-
vative blogs such as Google Earth’s geoblog allows users to simply click on an 
entry, which causes the globe image to spin toward eastern Africa and then 
slowly zooms in on the park, allowing users to view satellite images of the ani-
mals. The Jane Goodall Institute was the first to create such a Google geoblog. 
 Now just imagine what you could do with Google Earth if you added GPS. 
What other types of research could be accomplished using GPS? How could 
other nonprofits use geoblogs and GPS to help their cause? How could a busi-
ness user Google Earth and GPS to create a competitive advantage? Are there 
any ethical or security concerns with this type of geoblog? 41 
 Geoblogging for 
Chimpanzees 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 

283
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
have a more malicious intent and use war driving to hack or break into these networks. 
War driving has been a controversial practice since its inception and has raised the 
awareness of the importance of wireless network security. 
 Preventing Viruses on a Mobile Device 
 The potential for contracting viruses on mobile devices is becoming a reality. The need 
for virus protection at the device level is critical. Any device that can access the Internet 
or receive email is at risk of catching a virus and passing it on to other devices. Because 
of the memory limitations of most mobile devices, antivirus software has typically been 
hosted on a PC or laptop, with the mobile device physically connecting to a PC or laptop 
to perform virus scanning. The first known mobile phone virus, named Cabir, appeared 
several years ago and infected only a small number of Bluetooth-enabled phones that 
carried out no malicious action; the virus was created by a group of malware developers 
to prove it could be done. The developers sent Cabir to anti-virus researchers, so they 
could begin to develop a solution to a problem that promises to get a lot worse. At pres-
ent, mobile phone viruses do not do much damage, but if protective measures are not 
taken, they could be as devastating as their computer counterparts. 42 
 The best way to protect against mobile phone viruses is the same way users protect 
themselves from computer viruses—never open anything that seems suspicious. Another 
method is to turn Bluetooth discoverable mode off. By setting the Bluetooth option to 
“hidden,” other devices cannot detect it and send it the virus. In addition, install some type 
of security software on the mobile device. Many of the mobile phone manufacturers, such 
as Nokia and Samsung, have developed security software for their mobile phones that 
detect and remove a virus as well as protect it from getting certain viruses in the first place.  
 Addressing Privacy Concerns with RFID and LBS 
 As technology advances, the potential for privacy infringement does as well. RFID 
already has the capability to determine the distance of a tag from the reader location. 
It is not difficult to imagine that retailers could determine the location of individuals 
within the store and target specific advertisements to them based upon past purchases 
and shopping and behavior patterns. Many consumers would consider gathering such 
information intrusive enough, but the possibility that it could be sold to other retailers 
might lead consumers to refuse to give retailers any information. 
 Several steps are being taken to address these privacy concerns. For example, one 
proposal would require all RFID-tagged products to be clearly labeled. This would act 
as an alert mechanism to which items are being tracked. Another measure being con-
sidered is “Kill Codes,” which would turn off all RFID tags when someone comes into 
contact with them. Another measure is “RSA Blocker Tags,” which try to address privacy 
concerns while maintaining the integrity of the product. Only that store’s authorized 
reader can track items with these tags; customers cannot be tracked outside the store in 
which they made a purchase. 43 
 LBS can track and monitor objects much like RFID. Tracking vulnerable individuals 
and company assets is beneficial. But the dark side of LBS risks the invasion of privacy 
and security caused by indiscreet location tracking. For example, if a company is using 
LBS to know where each employee is on duty, it must not observe their positions when 
they are off duty. Advertising at random to users in a specific area may violate privacy if 
mobile users in the area do not want to receive these advertisements. Criminals might 
also take advantage of illegal location tracking. And because LBS are based on message 
exchange in a wireless network, there are always security risks because location informa-
tion could be stolen, lost, or modified. 
 Security mechanisms must eliminate or minimize the potential for attacks against LBS 
entities and reduce exposure of the user’s identity and location. One way to solve the loca-
tion privacy problem is to provide strong privacy practices that counterbalance the invis-
ible nature of location collection in the wireless world. LBS policies should specify that:
 ■ Direct marketing purposes are permitted only with the business or service a user has 
a contract with. 
 ■ Electronic messages cannot hide the identity of the sender. 

284
Chapter 7 Networks: Mobile Business
 ■ Solicitation is allowed only if the user has given prior consent. 
 ■ The location service must tell the user about the type, duration, and purpose of the 
data they are collecting. 
 ■ The user must be given the opportunity to reject any direct marketing 
opportunities. 44 
 For mobile service providers, an unwelcome push can lead to increased customer 
care cost. When a user has issues with her PC, she tries to fix it herself. However, when a 
user’s mobile phone is not working, she usually contacts the service provider. As a result, 
subscribers receiving unsolicited messages through LBS would contact their mobile ser-
vice providers with complaints. 
 With the power of a network, business professionals can share data and resources 
around the globe. With the power of a wireless network, business professionals can take 
advantage of mobility allowing them to work from anywhere, at any time, using many 
different devices. 
 Watching people work in airports, restaurants, stores, trains, planes, and automobiles 
is common, and soon even remote villages in Africa, South America, and Asia will have 
access to the Internet along with all the power that comes with wireless networking. 
 Learning Outcome 7.1: Explain the five different networking elements creating a 
connected world. 
 ■  Network categories: 
 Networks are categorized based on geographic span: local area networks, wide area networks, 
and metropolitan area networks. 
 ■  Network providers: 
 At the top of the hierarchy are national service providers (NSPs), private companies that own and 
maintain the worldwide backbone that supports the Internet. Regional service providers (RSPs) 
offer Internet service by connecting to NSPs, but they also can connect directly to each other. 
Another level down are the Internet service providers (ISPs); recall from Chapter 3 that an ISP 
provides access to the Internet for a monthly fee. 
 ■  Network access technologies: 
 A modem is a device that enables a computer to transmit and receive data. Broadband is a high-
speed Internet connection that is always connected. Digital subscriber line (DSL) allows high-
speed digital data transmission over standard telephone lines. Internet cable connections provide 
Internet access using a cable television company’s infrastructure and a special cable modem. A 
T1 line is a type of data connection able to transmit a digital signal at 1.544 Mpbs. 
 ■  Network protocols: 
 A protocol is a standard that specifies the format of data as well as the rules to be followed dur-
ing transmission. Network access technologies use a standard Internet protocol called transmis-
sion control protocol/Internet protocol (TCP/IP); it provides the technical foundation for the public 
Internet as well as for large numbers of private networks. 
 ■  Network convergence: 
 Network convergence is the efficient coexistence of telephone, video, and data communication  
within a single network, offering convenience and flexibility not possible with separate 
infrastructures.  Voice over IP (VoIP) uses IP technology to transmit telephone calls. Internet protocol  
TV (IPTV) distributes digital video content using IP across the Internet and private IP networks.  
 L E A R N I N G  O U T C O M E  R E V I E W 

285
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
 Learning Outcome 7.2: Identify the benefits and challenges of a connected world. 
 Before networks, transferring data between computers was time-consuming and labor-intensive. 
People had to physically copy data from machine to machine using a disk. Networks offer many 
advantages for a business including:
 ■ Sharing resources 
 ■ Providing opportunities 
 ■ Reducing travel 
  Networks have created a diverse, yet globally connected world. By eliminating time and distance, 
networks make it possible to communicate in ways not previously imaginable. Even though networks 
provide many business advantages, they also create increased challenges in (1) security and (2) 
social, ethical, and political issues. 
 Learning Outcome 7.3: Describe the different wireless network categories. 
 There are four types of wireless networks—PAN, WLAN, WMAN, and WWAN. A PAN provides com-
munication over a short distance that is intended for use with devices that are owned and operated 
by a single user. A WLAN is a local area network that uses radio signals to transmit and receive data 
over distances of a few hundred feet. A WMAN is a metropolitan area network that uses radio signals 
to transmit and receive data, and a WWAN is a wide area network that uses radio signals to transmit 
and receive data. 
 Learning Outcome 7.4: Explain the different wireless network business applications. 
 Mobile and wireless business applications and services are using satellite technologies. These 
technologies are GPS, GIS, and LBS. GPS is a satellite-based navigation system providing extremely 
accurate position, time, and speed information. GIS is location information that can be shown on 
a map. LBS are applications that use location information to provide a service used by both GPS 
and GIS.  
 Learning Outcome 7.5: Identify the benefits and challenges of business mobility. 
 A wireless network can enhance mobility, provide immediate data access, increase location and 
monitoring capabilities, provide mobile commerce opportunities, improve work flow, and provide an 
alternative to wiring. 
  There are several challenges of wireless networks including protecting against theft, protecting 
wireless connections, preventing viruses on mobile devices, and addressing privacy concerns with 
RFID and LBS. 
 Any mobile device is vulnerable to loss no matter how big or small it is. The company may face 
significant exposure from stolen IDs, passwords, encryption keys, and confidential information if the 
device falls into the wrong hands, especially if the theft is not discovered or reported immediately and 
the company does not have time to revoke access. 
 Network intrusions can occur if access codes or passwords are stored on a device that is lost or 
stolen. However, any time a wireless network connects to a wired one, the wireless network can serve 
as a conduit for a hacker to gain entry into an otherwise secure wired network. 
 The potential for contracting viruses on mobile devices is becoming a reality. The need for virus 
protection at the device level is critical. Any device that can access the Internet or receive email is at 
risk of catching a virus and passing it on to other devices. 
 As technology advances, the potential for privacy infringement does as well. RFID already 
has the capability to determine the distance of a tag from the reader location. LBS can track and 
monitor objects much like RFID. LBS risks the invasion of privacy and security caused by indiscreet 
location tracking. 

286
Chapter 7 Networks: Mobile Business
 1.  Knowledge: List the ways WTC is using networks to improve its competitive advantage in the 
professional sports broadcasting industry. 
 2.  Comprehension: Describe the different types of networks WTC is using. 
 3.  Application: Apply the concepts of TCP/IP to how the Ironman World Championships are broad-
cast from  Ironmanlive.com . 
 4.  Analysis: Analyze the various wireless technologies that WTC could use in promoting the Ironman 
World Championships.  
 5.  Synthesis: Develop a use for LBS that the WTC could benefit from. 
 6.  Evaluate:  Assess the security dilemmas that WTC faces in using the various forms of wireless 
technology. 
 O P E N I N G  C A S E  Q U E S T I O N S 
 3G, 271 
 Access point (AP), 268 
 Active RFID tag, 275 
 Asset tracking, 275 
 Attenuation, 254 
 Automatic vehicle location 
(AVL), 275  
 Bandwidth, 255 
 Bit, 256 
 Bit rate/data rate, 256 
 Bluetooth, 268 
 Broadband, 256 
 Broadband over power line 
(BPL), 257 
 Cable modem (or broadband 
modem), 257 
 Cartography, 276 
 Chipless RFID tag, 275 
 Digital divide, 266 
 Digital subscriber line (DSL), 256 
 Domain name system (DNS), 259 
 Dynamic Host Configuration 
Protocol (DHCP), 258 
 Edge matching (warping, rubber 
sheeting), 276 
 Estimated-time-enroute 
(ETE), 276  
 Estimated-time-of-arrival (ETA), 276 
 Extranet, 264 
 File transfer protocol (FTP), 258 
 Geocache, 276 
 Geocoding, 276 
 Geocoin, 276 
 Geographic information system 
(GIS), 276 
 GIS map automation, 276 
 Global positioning system 
(GPS), 275 
 High-speed Internet cable 
connection, 257 
 Hotspot, 268 
 IEEE 802.11n (or Wireless-N), 269 
 Institute of Electrical and 
Electronics Engineers 
(IEEE), 269 
 Internet Protocol TV (IPTV), 262 
 Intranet, 263 
 IP address, 258 
 Latitude, 276 
 Longitude, 276 
 Local area network (LAN), 254 
 Location-based service (LBS), 277 
 Metropolitan area network 
(MAN), 254 
 Modem, 256 
 Multiple-in/multiple-out (MIMO) 
technology, 268 
 National service provider 
(NSP), 254 
 Network convergence, 260 
 Packet, 258 
 Packet footer, 258 
 Packet header, 258 
 Passive RFID tag, 275 
 Peer-to-peer (P2P), 262 
 Personal area network (PAN), 268 
 Protocol, 258 
 Proxy, 258 
 Radio-frequency identification 
(RFID), 274 
 Regional service provider 
(RSP), 254 
 Repeater, 254 
 RFID accelerometer, 275 
 RFID reader (RFID 
interrogator), 274 
 RFID tag, 274 
 Satellite, 272 
 Secure hypertext transfer 
protocol (SHTTP or 
HTTPS), 266 
 Secure sockets layer (SSL), 266 
 Semi-passive RFID tag, 275 
 Smartphones, 271 
 Spatial data (geospatial data or 
geographic information), 276 
 SSL Certificate, 266 
 Standard packet format, 258 
 Streaming, 272 
 Telecommuting (virtual 
workforce), 257 
 Traceroute, 258 
 Transmission control protocol/
Internet protocol (TCP/IP), 258 
 Unified communications (UC), 260 
 Virtual private network (VPN), 264 
 Voice over IP (VoIP), 261 
 War chalking, 282 
 War driving, 282 
 Wide area network (WAN), 254 
 Wi-Fi infrastructure, 268 
 Wi-Fi protected access 
(WPA), 282  
 Wired equivalent privacy 
(WEP), 282  
 Wireless access point 
(WAP), 268  
 Wireless fidelity (Wi-Fi), 268 
 Wireless LAN (WLAN), 268 
 Wireless MAN (WMAN), 269 
 Wireless WAN (WWAN), 270 
 Worldwide Interoperability 
for Microwave Access 
(WiMAX), 270 
 K E Y  T E R M S 

287
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
  1. Why would a manager be concerned with bandwidth? How is bandwidth measured? 
  2. How have networks contributed to the digital divide? 
  3.  What are the different levels of service providers that supply the interconnections to the 
Internet?  
  4. What are the different Internet access technologies you can use to connect to the Internet? 
  5. What is network convergence and why is it important to a business? 
  6. What is VoIP and how can it benefit a business? 
  7. What is the difference between an intranet and extranet? 
  8. How do SSL and SHTTP provide security for networks? 
  9. What is a personal area network? 
 10. How does Wi-Fi work? 
 11. What are GIS, GPS, and LBS? How are businesses using these applications to compete? 
 12. What is RFID and how could it help a large retailer track inventory? 
 13. What are the advantages of mobile business? 
 14. How does a domain name system work? 
 15. What is the difference between VoIP and IPTV? 
 R E V I E W  Q U E S T I O N S 
 C L O S I N G  C A S E  O N E 
 Wireless Bikes 
  Bike-sharing programs have been a popular trend in many foreign countries for years but have just 
started in the United States, driven mainly by the desire to provide zero-emissions transportation for 
commuters and tourist in urban areas. A new Denver, Colorado, company, Denver B-cycle, offers one 
of the largest bike-sharing programs in the United States. The company has more than 500 bikes, all 
made by Trek, that are available through more than 50 bike stations, or B-stations as they are called, in 
the Denver metropolitan area. Each B-station is fully operated by using a variety of wireless technolo-
gies, such as RFID, GPS, and Wi-Fi, which have a number of locking docks that hold as few as 5 bikes 
or as many as 25. The number of bikes at each location is dependent upon the amount of use expected. 
 There are several methods in which a user can access a bike. One method is to use the B-station 
kiosk machine that allows users to unlock bikes with a credit card. This method is preferred for those 
who seek infrequent usage for short-term rentals. Here, the user receives a day pass that is good for a 
24-hour rental. Another option is to purchase a 7-day, 30-day, or annual membership online or at the 
B-station kiosk for those planning to use bikes on a regular basis. Members receive an RFID-enabled 
card that allows them to retrieve any of the available bikes from the B-stations located around the 
city. Members can also download an iPhone app with the added convenience of using the device to 
unlock and locate bikes. 
 Once a user selects a bike by using the day pass, RFID-enabled membership card, or iPhone appli-
cation, the transaction must be validated before the bike is unlocked. This is all done using RFID readers 
and Wi-Fi-enabled devices that validate the transaction with the company’s main database. An RFID 
reader collects the ID number encoded to an RFID tag attached to the bike. The device then forwards the 
ID number using Wi-Fi to the company’s central database, so that the system knows which particular 

288
Chapter 7 Networks: Mobile Business
bike to associate with which user. Once validated, the user is then alerted with a beep and a green light, 
indicating the selected bike is unlocked and available for use. When a user wants to return a bicycle, 
he or she only needs to find an empty dock at any B-station to roll the bike into the locking position. 
A beep and green light will signal that the bike has been securely locked, and the RFID reader records the 
tag ID from the bike and sends this information to the company database to complete the transaction. 
 In addition to having an RFID tag on each bike, embedded GPS units record the routes that a user 
travels. When a user returns the bike, the GPS information is uploaded to the company database, 
along with that bike’s tag ID number. These data help Denver B-cycle understand the most common 
routes that its users take in addition to allowing the company to collaborate with Denver merchants 
to target product or service offerings to members, based on their daily routes. For example, a coffee 
shop might email a coupon to a user who rides by each day. The GPS units also help to protect the 
company in case a user does not return a bike, or a bike is stolen. B-cycle can use LBS to help find 
the “missing” bike. 45 
 Questions 
 1. What advantages does a wireless network provide Denver B-cycle? 
 2. What challenges does a wireless network create for Denver B-cycle? 
 3. What information not described in the case can Denver B-cycle use with RFID and LBS data? 
 4. How could Denver B-cycle use other wired or wireless network technologies to gain a competitive 
advantage? 
 C L O S I N G  C A S E  T W O 
 Google Latitude . . . Without an Attitude? 
  Google is at it again, creating applications that have the potential for disruption. Google Latitude is an 
upgrade to Google Maps, specifically developed for mobile users that allows people to track the loca-
tion of friends or family using their mobile phone or PC. Latitude is integrated with a variety of other 
Google applications, such as Google Talk or Gmail, which allows someone to send a message to the 
person whom they are tracking. 
 Latitude can use Wi-Fi access points, cell towers, or GPS to find someone’s location. And if all three 
are active and available, they each can be used collectively to validate location. The Latitude software 
is written for a location-based service that allows any mobile device with Wi-Fi, cellular, or GPS to 
determine its position with an accuracy of 30 to 60 feet. 
 Certainly, there are some real benefits to having this information, such as parents being able to 
easily track their children or companies knowing exactly where a delivery truck is located. Latitude 
is an opt-in service for those who are worried about privacy issues. Users can access a simple inter-
face to allow only specific friends or family members to follow them. Once the opt-in agreement is 
activated, users can see their friends’ or family members’ profile pictures appear on a map using 
their mobile phone or PC. Latitude has many customized settings that can be changed on a person-
by-person basis. For example, someone can choose to share his or her best available location or city-
level location, or even hide their location. 
 Latitude even lets users lie about their location; for instance, if a user is in Rome, instead of having 
the approximate location detected and shared automatically, a manual location can be set for else-
where—perhaps Washington, D.C. 
 Latitude is primarily developed for two broad classes of people: (1) a small circle of friends and 
family with whom users are willing to share their exact location and (2) a larger group with whom a 
user is happy to share city-level detail, convenient for finding out when somebody’s in town, but not 
much more. 46 

289
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
 1. Building Nationwide Broadband 
 The Federal Communications Commission is proposing a nationwide broadband plan, a sweeping 
initiative to provide—among other things—100 megabit per second Internet access to 100 million  
people by 2020. The FCC also proposes to deliver 1 gigabit per second access to places such 
as schools, libraries, and government buildings. “The national broadband plan is a 21st-century 
roadmap to spur economic growth and investment, create jobs, educate our children, protect our 
citizens, and engage in our democracy,” said FCC Chairman Julius Genachowski. 47 
 How will implementing nationwide broadband create technology jobs? Identify three new prod-
ucts or services you could create based on nationwide broadband. Will a nationwide broadband 
plan eliminate the digital divide in the United States? 
 2. Foursquare Cheating 
 Foursquare is one of the latest social networking sites that use location-based services. Users 
check in to places they visit, such as a bar, restaurant, or library. The main goal in using Foursquare 
is to earn badges and “Mayor” titles for favorite establishments by checking in more than friends 
or other Foursquare users. However, users were found to be cheating, recording check-ins to 
places they had not been. In an effort to make it more difficult to cheat, the company introduced 
a new “cheater code,” which uses a smartphones GPS—where available—to validate the users’ 
true location. 48 
 Why is GPS important to Foursquare? How could individuals cheat on providing locations? Why 
would individuals cheat about their locations? What did Foursquare implement to halt cheating? 
Do you think Foursquare users will still find ways to cheat? 
 3. Pandora Makes Users’ Music Public 
 Pandora, the online music company, lets users create personalized music stations that they can 
stream online, but it also makes those stations viewable to anyone on the Internet who knows 
someone’s email address. For example, someone with the email address  sergey@google.com  
likes a band called Rise Against. Using the email address of Steve Jobs implies he likes country 
music legend Willie Nelson and jazz trumpeter Chris Botti. 49 
 Do you view your music selection as private or public information? How could someone use 
this information unethically? Do you see this as a threat for Pandora? Do you think customers will 
stop using the service? What can Pandora do to ensure customer privacy? 
 4. Wireless Network Vulnerability 
 Empty cans of Pringles could be helping malicious hackers spot wireless networks that are 
open to attack. Security companies have demonstrated that by using a simple Pringles can to 
create a homemade antenna, someone can easily identify wireless networks. Known as the 
“PringlesCantenna,” these networks are rapidly becoming popular because they are cheap (under 
$10) and easy to set up. 
 Wireless network security is a big concern of network managers. As companies and home users 
have increasingly adopted wireless technology, security precautions need to be enforced. After all, 
 C R I T I C A L  B U S I N E S S  T H I N K I N G 
 Questions 
 1. What are the privacy and security issues with using Google Latitude? 
 2. If users can lie about the location, is this a very effective tool? 
 3. What are the advantages of using LBS? 
 4. If you wanted to use Google Latitude, what could you do to protect your privacy from someone you 
do not want to be able to locate you? 

290
Chapter 7 Networks: Mobile Business
the very nature of using wireless technology deliberately puts information on the airwaves, and 
anyone within range and equipped with an appropriate receiver (e.g., PringlesCantenna) can grab 
this information. This is why many wireless networks should apply authentication and encryption 
mechanisms to provide a trusted level of security. 50 
 Create a report based on Internet research that discusses the tips, techniques, and best prac-
tices to protect against this type of amateur hacking. Include a summary on the types of detection 
and prevention technology available, specifically the use of firewalls and built-in wireless security 
mechanisms. 
 5. Selecting an ISP 
 You have been hired by Front Range Car Rental, a new company in Colorado, to research com-
panies that can host its website. Because all ISPs are not created equal, you have been pro-
vided with some questions to help you identify their strengths, weaknesses, capabilities, and core 
competencies. 
 Does the ISP offer full life cycle services, including 24/7 accessibility, data storage, 24/7 cus-
tomer support? What is the ISP’s depth and breadth of technical expertise? What are its special-
ties? Does the ISP have actual customers online and if so, what results have they achieved? Can 
the ISP provide development expertise to customize the applications? How does the ISP handle 
updates? Adding product modules? Specifically, does the ISP’s infrastructure deliver:
 
■ High availability (uptime)? 
 
■ Assured data integrity? 
 
■ Scalability? 
 
■ Reliability? 
 
■ High performance? 
 
■ Security and access control? 
 Develop a detailed report answering the questions presented here along with your ISP recom-
mendation. 
 6. Wireless Fitness 
 Sandifer’s Fitness Club is located in central South Carolina. Rosie Sandifer has owned and oper-
ated the club for 20 years. The club has three outdoor pools, two indoor pools, 10 racquetball 
courts, 10 tennis courts, an indoor and outdoor track, along with a two-story exercise equipment 
and massage therapy building. Sandifer has hired you as a summer intern specializing in MIS. The 
extent of Sandifer’s current technology includes a few PCs in the accounting department and two 
PCs with Internet access for the rest of the staff. Your first assignment is to create a report detailing 
networks and wireless technologies. The report should explain how the club could gain a business 
advantage by implementing a wireless network. If Sandifer likes your report, she will hire you as 
the full-time employee in charge of MIS. Be sure to include all of the different uses for wireless 
devices the club could implement to improve its operations. 
 7. The End of the All-You-Can-Eat Wireless Data Plan 
 AT&T, along with other wireless service providers such as Verizon, are switching from an all-
you-can-eat data plan to tiered pricing. The move comes as landline revenues are shrinking and 
mobile usage, especially on smartphones that require higher bandwidths, is greatly expanding. 
Subscribers who consume modest levels of data will pay slightly less every month than they do 
now, while heavy users will see extra fees. 
 AT&T is said to be offering two new plans: one will cost $25 per month and offer 2 gigabytes of 
data per month, and a second plan will cost $15 per month for 200 megabytes of data. If users on 
the second plan go over, they will pay another $15 for 200 megabytes. 51 
 Does this make good business sense? Will these fees disappear when service providers start 
offering 4G or WiMAX services? How scalable do you think AT&T’s network is? 

291
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
 8. Could the Domain Name System Be Hacked? 
 Is it possible for someone to hack the DNS? If so, it would be a disaster! By hacking the DNS, 
someone could change a website’s IP address, thereby redirecting someone to a fictitious or 
look-alike site that could collect passwords and even credit card information. This scenario really 
happened. A Brazilian ISP, NET Virtua, was hacked using a method called DNS  cache poisoning, 
which takes advantage of a hole in DNS software that redirects users to websites they did not 
request. The NET Virtua users were trying to access Bradesco, a bank in Brazil, but were sent to a 
fraudulent website that tried to install malware and steal users’ passwords. Luckily, the hack was 
detected before too much damage was done. 52 
 How can the DNS be protected from cache poisoning? Because every ISP maintains its own 
DNS, is this impossible? 
 9. Shipment Routes 
 Mary Conzachi works in the logistics department for Loadstar, a large trucking company and barge 
operator in the Midwest. She has looked into a variety of systems to keep track of the location of 
trucks and barges so that the company can route shipments better and answer customer inquiries 
faster. Conzachi’s major concern is with the trucks; the barges have commodities and take weeks 
to move something. She states that it is much harder to keep up with trucking. She needs to know 
the exact location of the truck at any given time. You have been hired to assist her in recommend-
ing a solution. What solution would you recommend? Why? 
 10. Google Collected Public Wi-Fi Data . . . By Mistake 
 Google has admitted to mistakenly collecting data sent over unsecured Wi-Fi networks using its 
Street View cars. Google photographs homes from public streets, using a fleet of company cars. 
Google said it was trying to gather information about the location, strength, and configuration 
of Wi-Fi networks so it could improve the accuracy of location-based services such as Google 
Maps and driving directions. However, in the process, the cars were also collecting snippets of 
emails and other Internet activity from wireless networks in the homes, provided they had not 
been secured by passwords. Google blamed this on a programming error, temporarily halted the 
Street View data collection, and announced it would stop collecting all Wi-Fi data. 53  Do you believe 
this was a mistake by Google? If home users do not protect their wireless networks, what is to stop 
a neighbor from collecting the same information? Who is really at fault here? 
 E N T R E P R E N E U R I A L  C H A L L E N G E 
 BUILD YOUR OWN BUSINESS 
 Project Focus 
 1. In an effort to better connect with younger consumers, McDonald’s restaurants in Southern 
California are enticing customers through their mobile phones, offering mobile coupons for a 
free McFlurry. Under the promotion, customer’s text the message “McFlurry” to a five-digit short 
code promotional phone line. An electronic coupon for the free dessert is then downloaded to 
their mobile phones; when consumers bring those phones to participating restaurants, they can 
redeem the coupon electronically. Mobile coupons (mcoupons) that are stored and carried in a 
mobile phone have higher redemption rates than paper or ecoupons because they are not for-
gotten, or left at home. Mcoupons can drastically reduce delivery and redemption cost, trigger 
impulse buys, and send offers to customers in real time that are location based. Your customers 
are mobile, and you want your business to take advantage of mobile technology, so you have 
decided to create an innovative system for mcoupons, allowing customers to capitalize on instant 
redemption coupons. As customers walk past your business (or within a 25-foot radius) a cou-
pon will be pushed to their mobile device. As you prepare to deploy this new mobile marketing 

292
Chapter 7 Networks: Mobile Business
campaign, you need to create a detailed analysis of mcoupons, including all of the potential risks 
and benefits. In your analysis, be sure to discuss the types of coupons you would offer to your 
mobile customers along with all of the potential risks and benefits. 
 2. Radio-frequency identification technologies use active or passive tags in the form of chips or 
smart labels that can store unique identifiers and relay this information to readers. RFID tags 
represent the next big step forward from bar codes, and retailers are using RFID to control theft, 
increase efficiency, and improve demand planning. Businesses are using RFID for everything, 
including preventing toilets from overflowing, refilling customer’s drinks, identifying human 
remains, and combating counterfeit drugs. Develop two new products using RFID that can help 
you reduce expenses, increase profits, and create a competitive advantage for your business. 
 PROJECT I 
GoGo Gadgets 
 Now that Wi-Fi and other types of high-speed wireless networks are becoming common, devices using 
that technology are multiplying rapidly. Wireless gadgets run the gamut from cell phones to kitchen 
appliances and digital cameras. Here are some of the hottest new wireless broadband gadgets. 
 ■ Samsung’s $2,100 Zipel refrigerator features a touch screen with Wi-Fi to browse the Internet, 
stream media, take notes, and even pull up nutritional information for more than 500 different 
types of food. It will also show Google Calendar entries and weather reports, as well as news 
alerts and other articles. 
 ■ Toshiba’s UX600 LED TV is a Wi-Fi-enabled HDTV that can stream content straight to its display 
without network cables. 
 ■ HTC EVO 4G mobile phone has the ultrafast WiMAX technology letting users surf the web and 
download beyond broadband speeds with increased reliability. Users can enjoy VoD and IPTV, plus 
download music or electronic books all delivered on a 3.8-inch WVGA screen. 
 ■ Sony’s Cybershot is a digital camera with Wi-Fi capabilities, allowing users to share their snap-
shots wirelessly using a built-in web browser. 54 
 New wireless technologies promise to make today’s wireless fidelity networks seem like slow modem 
dial-up connections. New technologies will provide greater reach geographically of wireless networks 
along with new personal and business uses. Search the Internet and discover new wireless devices 
that entrepreneurs and established companies can use to improve their business. 
 ■ Explain how companies can use these devices to create competitive advantages, streamline pro-
duction, and improve productivity. 
 PROJECT II 
WAP 
 Wireless Internet access is quickly gaining popularity among people seeking high-speed Internet con-
nections when they are away from their home or office. The signal from a typical wireless access 
point (WAP) extends only about 300 feet in any direction, so the user must find a hotspot to be able 
to access the Internet while on the road. Sometimes hotspots are available for free or for a small fee. 
You work for a sales company, SalesTek, which has a sales force of 25 representatives and customers 
concentrated in Denver, Colorado; Salt Lake City, Utah; and Santa Fe, New Mexico. Your sales repre-
sentatives are constantly on the road and they require 24/7 Internet access. 
 You have been asked to find hotspots for your colleagues to connect while they are on the road. 
It is critical that your sales force can access the Internet 24/7 to connect with customers, suppliers, 
 A P P LY  Y O U R  K N O W L E D G E  B U S I N E S S  P R O J E C T S 

293
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
and the corporate office. Create a document detailing how your mobile workforce will be able to stay 
connected to the Internet while traveling. Here are a few tips to get you started:
 ■ Use websites such as  www.wifinder.com  and  www.jiwire.com  to determine which commercial 
hotspots would be the most appropriate for your sales force and the commercial network service 
that these hotspots use. 
 ■ Search the websites of two or three commercial networks that seem most appropriate to discover 
more about pricing and services. (Hint: T-Mobile is one example.) 
 ■ Use  www.wifinder.com and  www.wififreespot.com to determine how many free public hotspots 
are available in these cities. Are there enough for your company to rely on them or should you use 
a commercial Wi-Fi system. If so, which one? 
 ■ You might also research  www.fon.com  to see alternative methods of using home broadband 
connections. 
 PROJECT III 
Securing Your Home Wireless Network 
 Wireless networks are so ubiquitous and inexpensive that anyone can easily build one with less than 
$100 worth of equipment. However, wireless networks are exactly that—wireless—they do not stop 
at walls. Living in an apartment, dorm, or house means that your neighbors can access your network. 
 It is one thing to let neighbors borrow sugar or a cup of coffee, but problems occur when you allow 
them to borrow your wireless network. There are several good reasons for not sharing a home wire-
less network including:
 ■ Slowing of Internet performance. 
 ■ Potential for others to view files on your computers and spread dangerous software such as viruses.  
 ■ Possibility for others to monitor the websites you visit, read your email and instant messages as 
they travel across the network, and copy your usernames and passwords. 
 ■ Availability for others to send spam or perform illegal activities with your Internet connection. 
 Securing a home wireless network makes it difficult for uninvited guests to connect through your 
wireless network. Create a document detailing how you can secure a home wireless network. 
 PROJECT IV 
Weather Bots 
 Warren Jackson designed a GPS-equipped robot when he was a graduate student at the University of 
Pennsylvania. The robot was created to bring weather balloons back down to Earth, allowing them to 
land in a predetermined location. The National Weather Service has collected most of its information 
using weather balloons that carry a device to measure items such as pressure, wind, and humidity. 
When the balloon reaches about 100,000 feet and pressure causes it to pop, the device falls and 
lands a substantial distance from its launch point. The weather service and researchers sometimes 
look for the $200 device, but of the 80,000 sent up annually, they write off many as lost. 
 Jackson’s idea was so inventive that Penn’s Weiss Tech House—a university organization that 
encourages students to innovate and bring their ideas to market—awarded Jackson and some fellow 
graduate engineering students first prize in its third annual PennVention Contest. Jackson won $5,000 
and access to expert advice on prototyping, legal matters, and branding. 55 
 GPS and GIS can be used in all sorts of devices, in many different industries, for multiple purposes. 
You want to compete, and win first prize, in the PennVention next year. Create a product, using a GPS 
or GIS, that is not currently in the market today that you will present at the next PennVention. 
 PROJECT V 
Free Wi-Fi in Africa 
 Covering Africa with free and low-cost Wi-Fi may not seem like a smart thing, but that is exactly what 
Paul English, the cofounder of travel search engine  Kayak.com , plans to do. English has created a 
hybrid nonprofit/for-profit company, JoinAfrica, to explore the creation of two tiers of Wi-Fi access 
in Africa. The first tier will be free and offer basic email service (from Gmail, Yahoo!, etc.) and web 

294
Chapter 7 Networks: Mobile Business
browsing (Wikipedia, BBC, etc.). The second tier will be fee-based and offer additional capabilities, 
including audio, video, and high-quality images. 56 
 Although many countries in Africa struggle to have proper drinking water or even efficient electri-
cal power, English and the JoinAfrica initiative believe having access to the Internet is just as impor-
tant. JoinAfrica will work with for-profit telecommunication companies in Africa to first branch out 
with existing connections in villages, providing residents with the first-tier services, and residents 
can pay money to upgrade to the second tier. More bandwidth-intensive services such as streaming 
video and pornography will be throttled to ensure a basic level of service for all as the networks grow. 
 ■ List 10 ways wireless access might help remote villages in Africa. 
 ■ List 10 ways wireless access could hurt remote villages in Africa. 
 ■ What other infrastructure requirements will JoinAfrica need to implement to ensure the project’s 
success?  
 ■ How will changes in technology over the next decade affect the JoinAfrica project? 
 ■ What types of security and ethical issues will JoinAfrica face? 
 ■ If you were given $1 million, would you invest it in JoinAfrica? 
 PROJECT VI 
Never Run with Your iPod 
 Jennifer Goebel was disqualified from her first-place spot in the Lakefront Marathon in Milwaukee 
after race officials spotted her using an iPod. A controversial 2007 rule banned portable music 
devices by all U.S. Track and Field participants because music could give a runner a competitive 
advantage and cause safety issues if the runner can’t hear announcements. The officials for the 
Lakefront Marathon took action after viewing online photos of Goebel using her iPod; ironically, the 
photos were posted by Goeble herself on her own website. 57  
 Do you agree with the USTAF’s decision to disqualify Jennifer Goebel? How could an iPod give a run-
ner a competitive advantage? With so many wireless devices entering the market, it is almost impos-
sible to keep up with the surrounding laws. Do you think Goebel was aware of the headphone ban? In 
your state, what are the rules for using wireless devices while driving? Do you agree with these rules? 
How does a business keep up with the numerous, ever-changing rules surrounding wireless devices? 
What could happen to a company that fails to understand the laws surrounding wireless devices?  
 PROJECT VII 
Ding-a-Ling Took My $400! 
 A satellite television customer requested her service be disconnected due to poor reception. Soon 
after disconnecting the service, the customer noticed a direct bank withdrawal for a $430 early-
termination fee from the satellite provider. To make matters worse, the unplanned charge caused 
hundreds of dollars in overdraft charges. To top it all off, a customer service representative apparently 
named Ding-A-Ling called the customer to see if she would consider reconnecting the service. 58 
 Never give any company your checking account number or direct access to your bank account. 
If you want to establish a good relationship with a company, give it your credit card number. When 
a relationship with a supplier turns sour, the last thing you want is for that company to have direct 
access to your checking account. 
 Do you think what the satellite provider did was ethical? What could the customer do when discon-
necting her service to avoid this type of issue? Can credit card companies enter your bank account 
and take out as much money as you owe at any time they want? Why is it important to never give a 
supplier direct access to your business checking account? 
 PROJECT VIII 
911 McNuggets 
 Cellular technologies have changed the way we do business, and it is hard to imagine life without 
them. There are many wonderful advantages of using wireless technologies in business, but there are 
also some serious disadvantages, like the ability to make a bad decision faster. 

295
Technical Foundations of MIS Module 2
 A woman in Florida called 911 three times after a McDonald’s employees told her they were out of 
Chicken McNuggets. The woman stated that this is an emergency and if she had known they didn’t have 
any McNuggets, then she would not have given them any money. The woman said McDonald’s offered 
her a McDouble, but that she didn’t want one. The woman was cited on a misuse of 911 charge. 59  
 It is so easy to pick up the phone, from anywhere, at any time, and make a bad call. How many times 
do you see people making calls on their cell phones from inappropriate locations? If this woman had to 
wait in line to use a pay phone, do you think it would have given her time to calm down and rethink her 
decision? With technology and the ability to communicate at our fingertips, do you agree that it is easier 
than ever to make a bad decision? What can you do to ensure you think before you communicate?  
 PROJECT IX 
Wireless Networks and Streetlights 
 Researchers at Harvard University and BBN Technologies are designing CitySense, a wireless net-
work attached to streetlights that can report real-time data across the entire city of Cambridge, 
Massachusetts. The CitySense network mounts each node on a municipal streetlight, where it draws 
power from city electricity. Each node includes a Wi-Fi interface, weather sensors, along with down-
load and uploading data capabilities. 60 
 You are responsible for deploying a CitySense network around your city. What goals would you 
have for the system besides monitoring urban weather and pollution? What other benefits could a 
CitySense network provide? How could local businesses and citizens benefit from the network? What 
legal and ethical concerns should you understand before deploying the network? What can you do to 
protect your network and your city from these issues? 
 AY K  A P P L I C AT I O N  P R O J E C T S 
 If you are looking for Excel projects to incorporate into your class, try any of the following after reading 
this chapter. 
 Project 
Number 
 Project Name 
 Project Type 
 Plug-In 
 Focus Area 
 Project Level 
 Skill Set 
 Page Number 
 9 
 Security Analysis 
 Excel 
 T3 
 Filtering Data 
 Intermediate 
 Conditional 
Formatting, 
Autofilter, Subtotal 
 AYK.7 
 10 
 Gathering Data 
 Excel 
 T3 
 Data Analysis 
 Intermediate 
 Conditional 
Formatting 
 AYK.8 
 11 
 Scanner System 
 Excel 
 T2 
 Strategic Analysis  Intermediate 
 Formulas 
 AYK.8 
 12 
 Competitive Pricing 
 Excel 
 T2 
 Profit 
Maximization 
 Intermediate 
 Formulas 
 AYK.9 
 13 
 Adequate 
Acquisitions 
 Excel 
 T2 
 Break Even 
Analysis 
 Intermediate 
 Formulas 
 AYK.9 
 15 
 Assessing the Value 
of Information 
 Excel 
 T3 
 Data Analysis 
 Intermediate 
 PivotTable 
 AYK.10 
 16 
 Growth, Trends, 
and Forecasts 
 Excel 
 T2, T3 
 Data Forecasting 
 Advanced 
 Average, Trend, 
Growth 
 AYK.11 
 18 
 Formatting Grades 
 Excel 
 T3 
 Data Analysis 
 Advanced 
 If, LookUp 
 AYK.12 
 22 
 Turnover Rates 
 Excel 
 T3 
 Data Mining 
 Advanced 
 PivotTable 
 AYK.15 
 23 
 Vital Information 
 Excel 
 T3 
 Data Mining 
 Advanced 
 PivotTable 
 AYK.15 
 24 
 Breaking Even 
 Excel 
 T4 
 Business Analysis  Advanced 
 Goal Seek 
 AYK.16 
 25 
 Profit Scenario 
 Excel 
 T4 
 Sales Analysis 
 Advanced 
 Scenario Manager 
 AYK.16 

1
2
3
 module 3 
 Enterprise MIS 
Organizations use various types of information systems to help run their daily operations. These 
primarily transactional systems concentrate on the management and flow of low-level data 
items for basic business processes such as purchasing and order delivery. The data are often 
rolled up and summarized into higher-level decision support systems to help firms understand 
what is happening in their organizations and how best to respond. To achieve seamless and 
efficient handling of data and informed decision making, organizations must ensure that their 
enterprise systems are tightly integrated, providing an end-to-end view of operations.
 This module introduces various types of enterprise information systems and their role in 
helping firms reach their strategic goals, including supply chain management, customer rela-
tionship management, and enterprise resource planning. Organizations that can correlate and 
summarize enterprisewide information are prepared to meet their strategic business goals and 
outperform their competitors. 
 This module then dives into how enterprise systems can be built to support global businesses, 
the challenges in that process, and how well things turn out if systems are built according to 
good design principles, sound management practices, and flexibility to support ever-changing 
business needs. Making this happen requires not only extensive planning, but also well-honed 
people skills. 
 Module 3:
Enterprise MIS
 CHAPTER 8:  Enterprise Applications: Business Communications 
 CHAPTER 9:   Systems Development and Project Management: Corporate 
Responsibility 
 MODULE THREE: 
 Enterprise MIS 
 MODULE TWO: 
 Technical Foundations of MIS 
 MODULE ONE: 
 Business Driven MIS 

 C H A P T E R  O U T L I N E 
 C H A P T E R  8 
 Enterprise Applications: 
Business Communications 
 ■  B ui l d i n g  a  C o n n e c t e d 
C o r p o r a t i o n  t h ro u g h 
I n t e g r a t i o n s  
 ■  S up p l y  C h a i n  M a n a g e m en t  
 ■  T h e  B e n e f i t s  o f  S C M  
 ■  T h e  C h a l l e n g e s  o f  S C M  
 ■  T h e  F u t u re  o f  S C M   
 SECTION 8.2   
 Customer Relationship 
Management and Enterprise 
Resource Planning 
 SECTION 8.1   
 Supply Chain Management 
 ■  C u s t o m e r  R e l a t i o n s h i p 
M a n a g e m e n t  
 ■  T h e  B e n e f i t s  o f  C R M  
 ■  T h e  C h a l l e n g e s  o f  C R M  
 ■  T h e  F u t u re  o f  C R M  
 ■  E n t e r p r i s e  R e s o u rc e  P l a n n i n g  
 ■  T h e  B e n e f i t s  o f  E R P  
 ■  T h e  C h a l l e n g e s  o f  E R P  
 ■  T h e  F u t u re  o f  E n t e r p r i s e 
S y s t e m s :  I n t e g r a t i n g  S C M , 
C R M ,  a n d  E R P   
 What’s in IT for me? 
 This chapter introduces high-profile strategic initiatives an organization can undertake to help it gain competitive 
advantages  and business efficiencies—supply chain management, customer relationship management, and enterprise 
resource planning.  At the simplest level, organizations implement enterprise systems to gain efficiency in business pro-
cesses, effectiveness  in supply chains, and an overall understanding of customer needs and behaviors. Successful organiza-
tions recognize the competitive advantage of maintaining healthy relationships with employees, customers, suppliers, and 
partners. Doing so has a direct and positive effect on revenue and greatly adds to a company’s profitability. 
 You, as a business student, must understand the critical relationship your business will have with its employees, custom-
ers, suppliers, and partners. You must also understand how to analyze your organizational data to ensure you are not just 
meeting but exceeding expectations. Enterprises are technologically empowered as never before to reach their goals of 
integrating, analyzing, and making intelligent business decisions. 

298
Chapter 8 Enterprise Applications: Business Communications
 opening case study 
 Zappos Is Passionate for Customers    
 Tony Hsieh’s first entrepreneurial effort began at the age of 12 when he started his own 
custom button business. Realizing the importance of advertising, Hsieh began marketing 
his business to other kids through directories, and soon his profits soared to a few hundred 
dollars a month. Throughout his adolescence, Hsieh started several businesses, and by the 
time he was in college he was making money selling pizzas out of his Harvard dorm room. 
Another entrepreneurial student, Alfred Lin, bought pizzas from Hsieh and resold them by 
the slice, making a nice profit. Hsieh and Lin quickly became friends. 
 After Harvard, Hsieh founded LinkExchange in 1996, a company that helped small busi-
nesses exchange banner ads. A mere two years later, Hsieh sold LinkExchange to Microsoft 
for $265 million. Using the profits from the sale, Hsieh and Lin formed a venture capital 
company that invested in start-up businesses. One investment that caught their attention 
was Zappos, an online etailer of shoes. Both entrepreneurs viewed the $40 billion shoe 
market as an opportunity they could not miss, and in 2000 Hsieh took over as Zappos’ CEO 
with Lin as his chief financial officer. 
 Today, Zappos is leading its market and offering an enormous selection of more than 
90,000 styles of handbags, clothing, and accessories for more than 500 brands. One reason 
for Zappos’ incredible success was Hsieh’s decision to use the advertising and market-
ing budget for customer service, a tactic that would not have worked before the Internet. 
Zappos’ passionate customer service strategy encourages customers to order as many 
sizes and styles of products as they want, ships them for free, and offers free return ship-
ping. Zappos encourages customer communication, and its call center receives more than 
5,000 calls a day with the longest call to date lasting more than four hours. 
 Zappos’ extensive inventory is stored in a warehouse in Kentucky right next to a UPS 
shipping center. Only available stock is listed on the website, and orders as late as 11 P.M. 
are still guaranteed next-day delivery. To facilitate supplier and partner relationships, 
Zappos built an extranet that provides its vendors with all kinds of product information, such 
as items sold, times sold, price, customer, and so on. Armed with these kinds of details, 
suppliers can quickly change manufacturing schedules to meet demand. 
 Zappos Culture 
  Along with valuing its partners and suppliers, Zappos also places a great deal of value on 
its employee relationships. Zappos employees have fun, and walking through the offices 
you will see all kinds of things not normally seen in business environments—bottle-cap 
pyramids, cotton-candy machines, and bouncing balls. Building loyal employee relation-
ships is a critical success factor at Zappos, and to facilitate this relationship the corporate 

299
Enterprise MIS Module 3
headquarters are located in the same building as the call center (where most employees 
work) in Las Vegas. All employees receive 100 percent company-paid health insurance along 
with a daily free lunch. 
 Of course, the Zappos culture does not work for everyone, and the company pays to find 
the right employees through “The Offer,” which extends to new employees the option of quit-
ting and receiving payment for time worked plus an additional $1,000 bonus. Why the $1,000 
bonus for quitting? Zappos management believes that is a small price to pay to find those 
employees who do not have the sense of commitment Zappos requires. Less than 10 percent 
of new hires take The Offer. 
 Zappos’ unique culture stresses the following:
 1. Delivering WOW through service. 
 2. Embracing and driving change. 
 3. Creating fun and a little weirdness. 
 4. Being adventurous, creative, and open-minded. 
 5. Pursuing growth and learning. 
 6. Building open and honest relationships with communication. 
 7. Building a positive team and family spirit. 
 8. Doing more with less. 
 9. Being passionate and determined. 
 10. Being humble. 
 Zappos’ Sale to Amazon 
   Amazon.com  purchased Zappos for $880 million. Zappos employees shared $40 million  in 
cash and stock, and the Zappos management team remained in place. Having access to 
Amazon’s world-class warehouses and supply chain is sure to catapult Zappos’ revenues, 
though many wonder whether the Zappos culture will remain. It’ll be interesting to watch! 1        

300
Chapter 8 Enterprise Applications: Business Communications
 section 8.1 
Supply Chain Management 
 LE A R NI NG  OU T C OM E S 
 8.1 Explain integrations and the role they play in connecting a corporation. 
 8.2 Describe supply chain management along with its associated benefits and challenges. 
 BUILDING A CONNECTED CORPORATION 
THROUGH INTEGRATIONS  
 Until the 1990s, each department in the United Kingdom’s Ministry of Defense and Army 
headquarters had its own information system, and each system had its own database. 
Sharing information was difficult, requiring employees to manually input the same infor-
mation into different systems multiple times. Often, management could not even com-
pile the information it needed to answer questions, solve problems, and make decisions. 
 To combat this challenge the ministry integrated its systems, or built connections 
among its many databases. These connections or   integrations   allow separate sys-
tems to communicate directly with each other, eliminating the need for manual entry 
into multiple  systems. Building integrations allows the sharing of information across 
databases along with dramatically increasing its quality. The army can now generate 
reports detailing its state of readiness and other essential intelligence, tasks that were 
nearly impossible before the integrations.   Eintegration   is the use of the Internet to pro-
vide customers with the ability to gain personalized information by querying corporate 
databases and their information sources.   Application integration   is the integration of a 
company’s existing management information systems.   Data integration   is the integra-
tion of data from multiple sources, which provides a unified view of all data. 
 Two common methods are used for integrating databases. The first is to create for-
ward and backward integrations that link processes (and their underlying databases) in 
the value chain. A   forward integration   takes information entered into a given system 
and sends it automatically to all downstream systems and processes. A    backward inte-
gration    takes information entered into a given system and sends it automatically to all 
upstream systems and processes.  Figure 8.1  demonstrates how this method works across 
the systems or processes of sales, order entry, order fulfillment, and billing. In the order 
entry system, for example, an employee can update the customer’s information. Via the 
integrations, that information is sent upstream to the sales system and downstream to the 
order fulfillment and billing systems. Ideally, an organization wants to build both forward 
 LO 8.1:  Explain integrations 
and the role they play in connecting 
a corporation. 
 FIGURE 8.1 
 A Forward and Backward 
Customer Information 
Integration Example 
Forward integration of
customer information
Backward integration of
customer information
PB0092
Craig Schultz
PB0092
Craig Schultz
PB0092
Craig Schultz
PB0092
Craig Schultz
Sales System
Order Entry
System
Order Fulﬁllment
System
Billing System

301
Enterprise MIS Module 3
and backward integrations, which provide the flexibility to create, update, and delete 
information in any of the systems. However, integrations are expensive and difficult to 
build and maintain, causing most organizations to invest in forward integrations only.  
 The second integration method builds a central repository for a particular type of 
information.  Figure 8.2  provides an example of customer information integrated using 
this method across four different systems in an organization. Users can create, update, 
and delete customer information only in the central customer database. As users perform 
these tasks, integrations automatically send the new and/or updated customer informa-
tion to the other systems. The other systems limit users to read-only access of the customer 
information stored in them. Both integration methods do not entirely eliminate informa-
tion redundancy, but they do ensure information consistency among multiple systems.  
 Integration Tools 
  Enterprise systems   provide enterprisewide support and data access for a firm’s opera-
tions and business processes. These systems can manage customer information across 
the enterprise, letting you view everything your customer has experienced from sales to 
support. Enterprise systems are often available as a generic, but highly customizable, 
group of programs for business functions such as accounting, manufacturing, and mar-
keting. Generally, the development tools for customization are complex programming 
tools that require specialist capabilities. 
  Enterprise application integration (EAI)   connects the plans, methods, and tools 
aimed at integrating separate enterprise systems. A   legacy system   is a current or existing 
system that will become the base for upgrading or integrating with a new system. EAI 
reviews how legacy systems fit into the new shape of the firm’s business processes and 
devises ways to efficiently reuse what already exists while adding new systems and data. 
 Integrations are achieved using   middleware  —several different types of software that 
sit between and provide connectivity for two or more software applications. Middleware 
translates information between disparate systems.   Enterprise application integration 
(EAI) middleware   takes a new approach to middleware by packaging commonly used 
applications together, reducing the time needed to integrate applications from multiple 
vendors. The remainder of this chapter covers the three enterprise systems most organi-
zations use to integrate their disparate departments and separate operational systems: 
supply chain management (SCM), customer relationship management, and enterprise 
resource planning (see  Figure 8.3 ).  
 FIGURE 8.2 
 Integrating Customer 
Information among Databases 
Sales System
Order Entry
System
Order Fulﬁllment
System
Customer Information
System
Billing System
PB0092
Craig Schultz
PB0092
Craig Schultz
PB0092
Craig Schultz
PB0092
Craig Schultz
PB0092
Craig Schultz

302
Chapter 8 Enterprise Applications: Business Communications
 SUPPLY CHAIN MANAGEMENT  
 The average company spends nearly half of every dollar it earns on suppliers and raw 
materials to manufacture products. It is not uncommon to hear of critical success fac-
tors focusing on getting the right products, to the right place, at the right time, at the 
right cost. For this reason, tools that can help a company source raw materials, man-
ufacture products, and deliver finished goods to retailers and customers are in high 
demand. A   supply chain   consists of all parties involved, directly or indirectly, in obtain-
ing raw materials or a product.  Figure 8.4  highlights the five basic supply chain activities 
a company undertakes to manufacture and distribute products. To automate and enable 
sophisticated decision making in these critical areas, companies are turning to systems 
that provide demand forecasting, inventory control, and information flows between sup-
pliers and customers. 
   Supply chain management (SCM)   is the management of information flows between 
and among activities in a supply chain to maximize total supply chain effectiveness and 
corporate profitability. In the past, manufacturing efforts focused primarily on quality 
improvement efforts within the company; today these efforts reach across the entire 
supply chain, including customers, customers’ customers, suppliers, and suppliers’ sup-
pliers. Today’s supply chain is an intricate network of business partners linked through 
communication channels and relationships. Supply chain management systems man-
age and enhance these relationships with the primary goal of creating a fast, efficient, 
and low-cost network of business relationships that take products from concept to 
market. SCM systems create the integrations or tight process and information linkages 
between all participants in the supply chain. Supply chain management performs three 
main business processes (see  Figure 8.5 ): 
 1. Materials flow from suppliers and their upstream suppliers at all levels. 
 2. Materials are transformed into semifinished and finished products—the organiza-
tion’s own production processes. 
 3. Products are distributed to customers and their downstream customers at all levels. 
 Consider a customer purchasing a mountain bike from a dealer. Dozens of steps are 
required to complete this transaction from beginning to end. The customer places an 
order with the dealer. The dealer purchases the bike from the manufacturer. The manu-
facturer purchases the raw materials required to make the bike such as aluminum, rub-
ber tires, brakes, accessories, and packaging from different suppliers. The raw materials 
are stored in the manufacturer’s warehouse until a production order requires the bike 
to be built, at which time the finished product is sent to the dealer or, in some cases, 
directly to the customer. The supply chain for a bike manufacturer includes all processes 
and people required to fulfill the customer’s order (see  Figure 8.6 ). 
 LO 8.2:  Describe supply chain man-
agement along with its associated 
benefits and challenges. 
 FIGURE 8.3 
 The Three Primary Enterprise 
Systems 
Supply Chain
Management
Customer
Relationship
Management
Enterprise
Resource
Planning

303
Enterprise MIS Module 3
 Walmart and Procter & Gamble (P&G) have implemented a successful SCM system 
that links Walmart’s distribution centers directly to P&G’s manufacturing centers (see 
 Figure 8.7 ). The customer generates order information by purchasing a product from 
Walmart. Walmart supplies the order information to its warehouse or distributor. The 
warehouse or distributor transfers the order information to P&G, which provides pricing 
and availability information to the store and replenishes the product to the distributor. 
Payment is transferred electronically. Effective and efficient supply chain management 
systems can enable an organization to have these impacts on Porter’s Five Forces Model 2 : 
 ■ Decrease the power of its buyers. 
 ■ Increase its supplier power. 
 ■ Increase buyers’ switching costs to reduce the threat of substitute products or services.  
 ■ Create entry barriers to reduce the threat of new entrants. 
 ■ Increase efficiencies while seeking a competitive advantage through cost leadership 
(see  Figure 8.8 ). 
 THE BENEFITS OF SCM  
 Better forecasts for tomorrow result in better preparedness today. Technology advances 
have significantly improved the ability to perform the five basic supply chain activi-
ties such as access to advanced modeling and simulation tools that can combine 
 FIGURE 8.4 
 The Five Basic Supply Chain 
Activities  
PLAN
SOURCE
MAKE
DELIVER
RETURN
Prepare to manage
all resources required
to meet demand
Build relationships
with suppliers to
procure raw materials
Manufacture
products and create
production schedules
Plan for
transportation of
goods to customers
Support
customers and
product returns

304
Chapter 8 Enterprise Applications: Business Communications
 FIGURE 8.5 
 A Typical Supply Chain 
Suppliers’
Supplier
Supplier
Upstream
Manufacturer
Distributor
Retailer
Customer
Customers’
Customer
Suppliers’
Supplier
Customers’
Customer
Suppliers’
Supplier
Customers’
Customer
Downstream
 FIGURE 8.6 
 Supply Chain for a Bike 
Manufacturer 
Distribution of
Finished Bikes
to Retailers
Bike
Production
Aluminum Manufacturer
Tire Manufacturer
Brake Manufacturer
Packaging Manufacturer
Bike Accessory
Manufacturers
Customer
Raw Materials
Storage
Retailer
information from multiple sources to build forecasts that look days, weeks, and months 
ahead. It is now common, for instance, for suppliers to participate in product develop-
ment and for retailers to contribute to marketing campaigns. Considerable evidence 
shows that supply chain integration results in superior supply chain capabilities, which 
drives a firm’s profitability. Although firms have dreamed of integrating their sup-
ply chains for a long time, it is only recently that advances in MIS have brought these 
dreams to life. Improved visibility across the supply chain and increased profitability 
for the firm are the primary business benefits received when implementing supply 
chain management systems. 

305
Enterprise MIS Module 3
 Improved Visibility 
  Supply chain visibility   is the ability to view all areas up and down the supply chain in 
real time. To react to demand, an organization needs to know all customer events trig-
gered upstream and downstream and so must their suppliers and their suppliers’ sup-
pliers. Without this information, supply chain participants are blind to the supply and 
demand needs occurring in the marketplace, a factor required to implement successful 
business strategies. To improve visibility across the supply chain, firms can use supply 
chain planning systems and supply chain execution systems.   Supply chain planning 
systems   use advanced mathematical algorithms to improve the flow and efficiency of the 
supply chain while reducing inventory. To yield accurate results, however, supply chain 
planning systems require information inputs that are correct and up-to-date regarding 
customers, orders, sales, manufacturing, and distribution capabilities. 
 Ideally, the supply chain consists of multiple firms that function as efficiently and 
effectively as a single firm, with full information visibility.    Supply chain execution sys-
tems   ensure supply chain cohesion by automating the different activities of the supply 
chain. For example, a supply chain execution system might electronically route orders 
from a manufacturer to a supplier using    electronic data interchange (EDI)   , a standard 
format for the electronic exchange of information between supply chain participants. 
 Figure 8.9  details how supply chain planning and supply chain execution systems inter-
act with the supply chain. 
 A good example of inventory issues that occur when a company does not have a clear 
vision of its entire supply chain is the bullwhip effect. The   bullwhip effect   occurs when 
 FIGURE 8.7 
 Supply Chain for a Product 
Purchased from Walmart 
Procter &
Gamble
Walmart
Warehouse
or Distributor
Indicates information ﬂows for products,
pricing, scheduling, and availability
Paper
Manufacturer
Packaging
Supplier
Scented Oil
Manufacturer
Cocoa Oil
Manufacturer
Walmart
Store
Customer
 FIGURE 8.8 
 Effective and Efficient Supply 
Chain Management’s Effect on 
Porter’s Five Forces 
Decrease
Increase
Organization’s
Supply Chain
• Supplier power
• Buyer power
• Threat of substitute
 products or services
• Threat of new
 entrants

306
Chapter 8 Enterprise Applications: Business Communications
distorted product-demand information ripples from one partner to the next throughout 
the supply chain. The misinformation regarding a slight rise in demand for a product 
could cause different members in the supply chain to stockpile inventory. These changes 
ripple throughout the supply chain, magnifying the issue and creating excess inventory 
and costs for all. For example, if a car dealership is having a hard time moving a particu-
lar brand of car, it might offer significant discounts to try to move the inventory. Without 
this critical information, the car manufacturer might see a rise in demand for this par-
ticular brand of car and increase production orders, not realizing that the dealerships are 
actually challenged with selling the inventory. Today, integrated supply chains provide 
managers with the visibility to see their suppliers’ and customers’ supply chains, ensur-
ing that supply always meets demand. 
 Increased Profitability 
 Supply chain management systems can increase profitability across an organization. 
For example, a manufacturing plant manager might focus on keeping the inventory of 
Product A as low as possible, which will directly reduce the manufacturing costs and 
make the plant manager look great. However, the plant manager and the business might 
not realize that these savings are causing increased costs in other areas, such as having  
to pay more to procure raw materials for immediate production needs or increasing 
costs due to expedited shipping services. Only an end-to-end view or an integrated sup-
ply chain would uncover these issues, allowing a firm to adjust business strategies to 
increase profitability across the enterprise. 
 Customers are also more demanding than ever before. Because information is so 
readily available, they know exactly what they want, when they want it, and how they 
want it delivered. If your company can’t meet their demand, the competition is simply  a 
mouse-click away. Couple supply chain complexity with today’s demanding customers  
and a firm’s costs can easily escalate out of control.   Demand planning systems  generate 
demand forecasts using statistical tools and forecasting techniques, so companies  
can respond faster and more effectively to consumer demands through supply  chain 
enhancements. Firms are implementing demand planning systems to understand 
customer  demand and production capabilities so they can estimate supply chain costs 
that ultimately impact the firm’s performance and business strategies. Innovative 
wireless  technologies, such as radio-frequency identification (RFID), are also enabling 
companies to operate with improved speed and accuracy, ensuring that they can satisfy 
continuously changing customer demands. 
 FIGURE 8.9 
 Supply Chain Planning’s and 
Supply Chain Execution’s Roles 
in the Supply Chain 
Supply Chain Planning
Information Flows
Payment Flows
Supply Chain Execution
Supplier
Manufacturer
Distributor
Retailer
Customer

307
Enterprise MIS Module 3
 A supply chain is only as strong as its weakest link. Companies use supply chain man-
agement metrics to measure the performance of supply chains to quickly identify weak 
links. A few of the common supply chain management metrics include:
 ■  Back order: An unfilled customer order for a product that is out of stock.  
 ■  Inventory cycle time:  The time it takes to manufacture a product and deliver it to 
the retailer. 
 ■  Customer order cycle time: The agreed upon time between the purchase of a prod-
uct and the delivery of the product. 
 ■  Inventory turnover: The frequency of inventory replacement. 
 THE CHALLENGES OF SCM 
 The primary challenges associated with supply chain management include costs and 
complexity. Supply chain management systems can cost millions of dollars for the soft-
ware and millions of dollars more for help with the implementation. Just walk into any 
manufacturing plant, distribution center, or factory floor and you will witness the com-
plexity and costs associated with supply chain management. Supply chains cross entire 
organizations touching multiple departments and spanning organizationwide busi-
ness processes. Revamping just a single business process can be difficult for a company. 
Revamping all business processes that touch the supply chain is an incredibly difficult 
and complex task but is typically required for the SCM system to become effective. And, 
to top it all off, the supply chain reaches beyond the borders of the organization into 
partner, supplier, and customer domains, adding another layer of complexity for SCM. 
A lack of adequate collaboration among marketing, sales, and manufacturing within a 
company and suppliers, partners, and distributors outside of a company can easily sabo-
tage SCM efforts sending the multimillion-dollar investment down the drain. 
 The move toward globalization is also increasing supply chain complexity. As supply 
chains span geographical locations, issues such as time zone differences, transportation 
fees, cultural and language barriers, and exchange rates all add additional layers to the 
already complex supply chain. Government relationships, taxes, and local laws also tend 
to differ across global regions, creating more confusion and issues in supplier relation-
ships. The bottom line is that SCM systems are complex and costly and implementing 
them correctly can be challenging even for the most sophisticated organization.  
 BUSINESS DRIVEN ETHICS AND SECURITY 
 Zappos, Staples, and Amazon are just a few of the companies taking advantage 
of the latest innovation in warehouse management by replacing traditional 
order fulfillment technologies such as conveyor belts with little orange robots. 
The Kiva Mobile Fulfillment System (Kiva MFS) takes advantage of a unique 
order fulfillment system that improves productivity, speed, accuracy, and flex-
ibility. Watching an order fulfillment center equipped with Kiva MFS robots is 
amazing; the operators stand still while the products come to them. Inventory 
pods store the products that are carried and transferred by a small army of little 
orange robots, eliminating the need for traditional systems such as conveyors 
and sorters. 3 
 What impact could Kiva MFS have on visibility and profitability of the supply 
chain? How would your warehouse employees react if you told them you were 
looking at implementing Kiva robots? What ethical issues arise in the replace-
ment of human labor with robots? What security concerns could a company 
face when implementing Kiva MFS robots? 
 Kiva’s Robots 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 

308
Chapter 8 Enterprise Applications: Business Communications
 THE FUTURE OF SCM 
 There is a great commercial that depicts the future of supply chain management. A man 
wearing a uniform is walking through a home and quietly replaces an empty cereal box 
with a full one just as the child opens the kitchen cabinet. He then produces a new bag of 
dog food as soon as the hungry dog’s bowl is empty and finally reaches into the shower 
to hand a new bottle of shampoo to the man in the shower who had just run out. The 
next wave in supply chain management will be home-based supply chain fulfillment. No 
more running to the store to replace your products as your store will come to you as soon 
as you need a new product. 
 Walgreens is differentiating itself from other national chains as the family’s just-in-
time supplier, developing custom websites for each household that allow families to order 
electronically and then pick up their goods at a self-service counter or drive-through win-
dow at their convenience. Walgreens even calls its customers to let them know their pre-
scription medications are soon going to run out and offers to fulfill the new prescription. 
 As the supply chain management market matures, it is becoming even more 
sophisticated  and incorporating additional functionality such as marketing, cus-
tomer service, and even product development to its extended supply chain. Advanced 
communications  tools, easy-to-use decision support systems, and building trust among 
participants when sharing information are all making the home-based supply chain 
possible. A few of the fastest-growing SCM components include:
 ■  Collaborative demand planning —reduces inventory investments, while improving 
customer satisfaction. 
 ■  Collaborative engineering —reduces product development costs. 
 ■  Selling chain management —automates order processes from initial customer 
inquiry to final product delivery. 
 ■  Supply chain event management (SCEM) —increases real-time information 
sharing  among supply chain partners focusing on reducing response time to 
unexpected events. 
 BUSINESS DRIVEN DEBATE 
 Lines at the post office are frustrating, and they are also becoming unprofitable 
as the U.S. Postal Service faces billion-dollar losses for the first time in its his-
tory. What is causing this failure? It could be any number of things, but ebusi-
ness competition is one of the primary challengers stealing the Postal Service’s 
market share.  Stamps.com  allows you to customize and print your own stamps 
24 hours a day. If you are getting married, you can place your engagement 
picture on the stamp for the invitations. If you are starting your own business, 
you can purchase stamps showing your business logo. And,  Stamps.com  goes 
beyond simply delivering a product by tracking customer spending and recom-
mending optimal delivery methods along with postage discounts. Now that is 
something you can’t get at the post office. Talk about a competitive advantage! 4 
 Why do you think the U.S. Postal Service is losing its market share and becom-
ing unprofitable? What does the Postal Service’s supply chain look like? Who 
are its partners, suppliers, distributors, and customers? What can the Postal 
Service do to revamp its supply chain so it can become profitable? Many people 
believe the Postal Service should not be supported by the government, and that 
if it can’t operate efficiently it should fail. Do you agree? Why or why not?  
 Fixing the 
Post Office 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 

309
Enterprise MIS Module 3
  section 8.2
 
 Customer Relationship Management 
and Enterprise Resource Planning 
 LE AR NI NG  O UT CO M E S 
 8.3 Describe customer relationship management along with its associated benefits and challenges. 
 8.4 Describe enterprise resource planning along with its associated benefits and challenges. 
 CUSTOMER RELATIONSHIP MANAGEMENT  
 Today, most competitors are simply a mouse-click away, and this intense competition is 
forcing firms to switch from sales-focused business strategies to customer-focused busi-
ness strategies. Customers are one of a firm’s most valuable assets, and building strong 
loyal customer relationships is a key competitive advantage. Harley-Davidson offers an 
excellent example of a company that knows the value of customer loyalty, and it finds 
itself in the coveted position of demand outweighing its supply. No other motorcycle 
in the world has the look, feel, and sound of a Harley-Davidson. Demand for Harley-
Davidson motorcycles outweighs supply and some models have up to a two-year waiting 
list. Knowing the value of its customers, Harley-Davidson started the Harley’s Owners 
Group (HOG), which is the largest motorcycle club in the world with more than 600,000 
members. HOG offers a wide array of events, rides, and benefits to its members and is a 
key competitive advantage as it helps to build a strong sense of community among Har-
ley-Davidson owners. Harley-Davidson has built a customer following that is extremely 
loyal, a difficult task to accomplish in any industry. 5 
   Customer relationship management (CRM)    is a means of managing all aspects of 
a customer’s relationship with an organization to increase customer loyalty and reten-
tion and an organization’s profitability. CRM allows an organization to gain insights into 
customers’ shopping and buying behaviors. Every time a customer communicates with 
a company, the firm has the chance to build a trusting relationship with that particu-
lar customer. Harley-Davidson realizes that it takes more than just building and selling 
motorcycles to fulfill the dreams of its loyal customers. For this reason, the company 
strives to deliver unforgettable experiences along with its top-quality products. When 
the company began selling products online it found itself facing a dilemma—its online 
strategy for selling accessories directly to consumers would bypass Harley-Davidson’s 
dealers, who depend on the higha-margin accessories for store revenues. The solution 
was to deploy  Harley-Davidson.com , which prompts customers to select a participating 
Harley-Davidson dealership before placing any online orders. The selected dealership is 
then responsible for fulfilling the order. This strategy ensured that the dealers remained 
the focus point of each customer’s buying experiences. To guarantee that every customer 
has a highly satisfying online buying experience, the company asks the dealers to agree 
to a number of standards including:
 ■ Checking online orders twice daily. 
 ■ Shipping online orders within 24 hours. 
 ■ Responding to customer inquiries within 24 hours. 6 
 Harley-Davidson still monitors online customer metrics such as time taken to process 
orders, number of returned orders, and number of incorrect orders, guaranteeing that 
the company delivers on its critical success factor of providing prompt, excellent cus-
tomer service consistently to all its loyal customers. 
 A primary component of managing a customer relationship is knowing when and 
why the customer is communicating with the company. Imagine an irate customer that 
has just spent an hour on the phone with your call center complaining about a defec-
tive product. While the customer is on the phone, your sales representative decides to 
 LO 8.3:  Describe customer relation-
ship management along with its 
associated benefits and challenges. 

310
Chapter 8 Enterprise Applications: Business Communications
 FIGURE 8.10 
 Customer Relationship 
Management Overview 
Customer
Service
System
Inventory
System
Order
Fulﬁllment
System
Accounting
System
Customer Relationship Management System
Customer information ﬂows
are represented by arrows.
drop by the customer’s office in an attempt to sell additional products. Obviously, this 
is not the ideal time to try to up-sell or cross-sell products to this particular customer. 
A customer relationship management system would inform the sales representative that 
the customer was on the phone with customer service and even provide details of the 
call. Then your sales representative could stop by and offer assistance in resolving the 
product issue, which might help restore the relationship with the customer and provide 
opportunities for future sales. 
 The complicated piece of this puzzle is that customers have many communication 
channels they can use to contact a company including call centers, websites, email, 
faxes, and telephones. To make matters even more complex, a single customer can 
communicate with a firm using all of the different communication channels multiple 
times. Keeping track of customer communications is important if the firm wants to con-
tinue to build and manage that relationship. A CRM system can track every form of cus-
tomer communication providing this information to all employees (see  Figure 8.10 ). 
The firm can then implement strategies for the best ways to communicate effectively 
with each and every customer. With a CRM system a firm can obtain an overview of 
the customer’s products, preferences, account information, communications, and 
purchasing history, allowing it to send customized product offers, expedite shipping, 
ensure satisfaction, and other marketing and sales techniques that can greatly add to 
sales and profits.  

311
Enterprise MIS Module 3
 THE BENEFITS OF CRM  
 Companies that understand individual customer needs are best positioned to achieve 
success. Of course, building successful customer relationships is not a new business prac-
tice; however, implementing CRM systems allows a company to operate more efficiently 
and effectively in the area of supporting customer needs. CRM moves far beyond technol-
ogy by identifying customer needs and designing specific marketing campaigns tailored 
to each. This enables a firm to treat customers as individuals, gaining important insights 
into their buying preferences and shopping behaviors. Firms that treat their customers 
well reap the rewards and generally see higher profits and highly loyal customers. Iden-
tifying the most valuable customers allows a firm to ensure that these customers receive 
the highest levels of customer service and are offered the first opportunity to purchase 
new products. Firms can find their most valuable customers by using the RFM formula—
recency, frequency, and monetary value. In other words, an organization must track:
 ■ How r ecently  a customer purchased items. 
 ■ How  frequently a customer purchases items.  
 ■ The  monetary value  of each customer purchase. 
 After gathering this initial CRM information, the firm can analyze it to identify pat-
terns and create marketing campaigns and sales promotions for different customer seg-
ments. For example, if a customer buys only at the height of the season, the firm should 
send a special offer during the off-season. If a certain customer segment purchases shoes 
but never accessories, the firm can offer discounted accessories with the purchase of a 
new pair of shoes. If the firm determines that its top 20 percent of customers are respon-
sible for 80 percent of the revenue, it can focus on ensuring these customers are always 
satisfied and receive the highest levels of customer service. 
 Evolution of CRM 
 There are three phases in the evolution of CRM: (1) reporting, (2) analyzing, and (3) pre-
dicting.   CRM reporting technologies   help organizations identify their customers across 
other applications.   CRM analysis technologies   help organizations segment their cus-
tomers into categories such as best and worst customers.   CRM predicting technologies  
help organizations predict customer behavior, such as which customers are at risk of 
leaving.  Figure  8.11  highlights a few of the important questions an organization can 
answer in these areas by using CRM technologies. 
 FIGURE 8.11 
 Evolution of CRM 
ANALYZING
Customer Segmentation:
Asking Why It Happened
•  Why did sales not meet
 forecasts?
•  Why was production so
 low?
•  Why did we not sell as
 many units as previous
 years?
•  Who are our customers?
•  Why was revenue
 so high?
•  Why are inventory
 levels low?
PREDICTING
Customer Prediction:
Asking What Will Happen
•  What customers are at
 risk of leaving?
•  Which products will our
 customers buy?
•  Who are the best
 customers for a
 marketing campaign?
•  How do we reach our
 customers?
•  What will sales be this
 year?
•  How much inventory do
 we need to preorder?
REPORTING
Customer Identiﬁcation:
Asking What Happened
•  What is the total
 revenue by customer?
•  How many units did we
 make?
•  What were total sales
 by product?
•  How many customers
 do we have?
•  What are the current
 inventory levels?

312
Chapter 8 Enterprise Applications: Business Communications
 Operational and Analytical CRM 
 The two primary components of a CRM strategy are operational CRM and analytical 
CRM.   Operational CRM   supports traditional transactional processing for day-to-day 
front-office operations or systems that deal directly with the customers.   Analytical CRM  
supports back-office operations and strategic analysis and includes all systems that do 
not deal directly with the customers.  Figure 8.12 provides an overview of the two. 
 BUSINESS DRIVEN GLOBALIZATION 
 Barclays Bank, a leader in the global financial markets, maintains business  
operations  in more than 70 countries. Barclays chose to invest in CRM 
technologies  to help it gain valuable insights into its personal and business 
customers,  many of which carry credit cards. The purpose of the CRM system  
was to predict the financial behavior of individual customers and assess 
whether a customer is likely to pay back a loan in full within the agreed-upon 
time period and interest  rate. Surprisingly, Barclays’ CRM system quickly 
identified  that about 50 percent  of its customers were nonprofitable, and that 
90 percent of its profits were generated by fewer than 30 percent of its customers. 
 This valuable information allowed Barclays to revamp its offerings and 
charge customers an interest rate based on risk assessment. Barclays also iden-
tifies groups of profitable customers, both on a corporate and personal level, 
which it can then target for new financial products. 7 
 How can a business like Barclays use RFM (recency, frequency, and mone-
tary value) to improve customer relations? Provide three examples of questions 
a bank would ask in each of the following categories: CRM reporting technolo-
gies, CRM analysis technologies, and CRM predicting technologies. 
 Banking on 
Customer 
Relationships 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 
 FIGURE 8.12 
 Operational CRM and Analytical 
CRM 
Sales
Systems
Marketing
Systems
Customer
Service
Systems
Front Office–Operational CRM
Collaborative
CRM
System
Data
Warehouse
Data
Mining
Back Office–Analytical CRM

313
Enterprise MIS Module 3
  Figure 8.13  shows the different technologies marketing, sales, and customer service 
departments can use to perform operational CRM. 
 Marketing and Operational CRM 
 Companies are no longer trying to sell one product to as many customers as possible; 
instead, they are trying to sell one customer as many products as possible. Marketing 
departments switch to this new way of doing business by using CRM technologies that 
allow them to gather and analyze customer information to tailor successful market-
ing campaigns. In fact, a marketing campaign’s success is directly proportional to the 
organization’s  ability to gather and analyze the right customer information. The three 
primary operational CRM technologies a marketing department can implement to 
increase customer satisfaction are:
 1. List generator. 
 2. Campaign management. 
 3. Cross-selling and up-selling. 
 List Generator     List generators   compile customer information from a variety 
of sources and segment it for different marketing campaigns. These sources include 
website  visits, questionnaires, surveys, marketing mailers, and so on. After compiling 
the customer list, it can be filtered based on criteria such as household income, gender, 
education level, political facilitation, age, or other factors. List generators provide the 
marketing department with valuable information on the type of customer it must target 
to find success for a marketing campaign. 
 FIGURE 8.13 
 Operational CRM Technologies 
Marketing
Operational CRM Technology
Sales
Operational CRM Technology
Customer Service
Operational CRM Technology
List Generator
Campaign Management
Cross-Selling and Up-Selling
Sales Management
Contact Management
Opportunity Management
Contact Center
Web-Based Self-Service
Call Scripting

314
Chapter 8 Enterprise Applications: Business Communications
 FIGURE 8.14 
 A Typical Sales Process 
 Campaign Management     Campaign management systems   guide users through 
marketing campaigns by performing such tasks as campaign definition, planning, 
scheduling, segmentation, and success analysis. These advanced systems can even cal-
culate the profitability and track the results for each marketing campaign. 
 Cross-Selling and Up-Selling  Two key sales strategies a marketing campaign 
can deploy are cross-selling and up-selling.   Cross-selling   is selling additional products 
or services to an existing customer. For example, if you were to purchase Tim Burton’s 
movie  Alice in Wonderland  on Amazon, you would also be asked if you want to purchase 
the movie’s soundtrack or the original book. Amazon is taking advantage of cross-selling 
by offering customers goods across its book, movie, and music product lines.   Up-selling  
is increasing the value of the sale. McDonald’s performs up-selling by asking customers 
whether they would like to super-size their meals for an extra cost. CRM systems offer 
marketing departments all kinds of information about customers and products, which 
can help identify up-selling and cross-selling opportunities to increase revenues. 
 Sales and Operational CRM 
 Sales departments were the first to begin developing CRM systems. They had two pri-
mary motivations to track customer sales information electronically. First, sales rep-
resentatives were struggling with the overwhelming amount of customer account 
information they were required to maintain and track. Second, managers found them-
selves hindered because much of their vital customer and sales information remained in 
the heads of their sales representatives, even if the sales representative left the company. 
Finding a way to track customer information became a critical success factor for many 
sales departments.    Customer service and support (CSS)    is a part of operational CRM 
that automates service requests, complaints, product returns, and information requests. 
  Figure 8.14  depicts the typical sales process, which begins with an opportunity and 
ends with billing the customer for the sale. Leads and potential customers are the life-
blood of all sales organizations, whether they sell computers, clothing, consulting, or cars. 
How leads are handled can make the difference between revenue growth and decline.  
   Sales force automation (SFA)   automatically tracks all the steps in the sales process. 
SFA products focus on increasing customer satisfaction, building customer relationships, 
Lead sent
to salesperson
Potential
customer
contacted
Sales Process
Potential
customer
meeting
Problems and
solutions
identiﬁed
Order
fulﬁlled
Customer
billed
Sales order
placed
Customer
sales quote
generated
Opportunity
generated

315
Enterprise MIS Module 3
and improving product sales. The three primary operational CRM technologies a sales 
department can adopt are:
 1. Sales management CRM systems.  
 2. Contact management CRM systems.  
 3. Opportunity management CRM systems. 
 Sales Management CRM Systems      Sales management CRM systems   automate 
each phase of the sales process, helping individual sales representatives coordinate and 
organize all their accounts. Features include calendars, reminders for important tasks, 
multimedia presentations, and document generation. These systems can even provide 
an analysis of the sales cycle and calculate how each individual sales representative is 
performing during the sales process.  
 Contact Management CRM Systems   A   contact management CRM system  
maintains customer contact information and identifies prospective customers for future 
sales, using tools such as organizational charts, detailed customer notes, and supple-
mental sales information. For example, a contact management system can take an 
incoming telephone number and automatically display the person’s name along with a 
comprehensive history including all communications with the company. This allows the 
sales representative to personalize the phone conversation and ask such things as, “How 
is your new laptop working, Sue?” or “How was your family vacation to Colorado?” The 
customer feels valued since the sales associate knows her name and even remembers 
details of their last conversation.  
 Opportunity Management CRM Systems      Opportunity management CRM sys-
tems  target sales opportunities by finding new customers or companies for future sales. 
They determine potential customers and competitors and define selling efforts includ-
ing budgets and schedules. Advanced systems can even calculate the probability of a 
sale, which can save sales representatives significant time and money when qualifying 
new customers. The primary difference between contact management and opportunity 
management is that contact management deals with existing customers and opportu-
nity management with new or potential customers. 
 Customer Service and Operational CRM 
 Most companies recognize the importance of building strong customer relationships 
during the marketing and sales efforts, but they must continue this effort by build-
ing strong post-sale relationships also. A primary reason firms lose customers is due 
to negative  customer service experiences. Providing outstanding customer service is 
challenging,  and many CRM technologies can assist organizations with this important 
activity. The three primary ones are:
 1. Contact center. 
 2. Web-based self-service. 
 3. Call scripting. 
 Contact Center   A   contact center   or   call center   is where customer service 
representatives  answer customer inquiries and solve problems, usually by email, chat, 
or phone. It is one of the best assets a customer-driven organization can have because 
maintaining a high level of customer support is critical to obtaining and retaining cus-
tomers.  Figure  8.15 highlights a few of the services contact center systems offer.  
 Contact centers also track customer communication histories along with problem 
resolutions—information critical for providing a comprehensive customer view to the 
service representative. Representatives who can quickly comprehend the customer’s 
concerns provide tremendous value to the customer and to the company. Nothing 
makes frustrated customers happier than not having to explain their problems all over 
again to yet another customer service representative.   

316
Chapter 8 Enterprise Applications: Business Communications
 Web-Based Self-Service     Web-based self-service systems   allow customers to use 
the web to find answers to their questions or solutions to their problems. FedEx uses 
web-based self-service systems to let customers electronically track packages without 
having to talk to a customer service representative. Another feature of web-based self-
service is   click-to-talk   functions, which allow customers to click on a button and talk 
with a representative via the Internet. Powerful customer-driven features such as these 
add value to any organization by providing customers with real-time information that 
helps resolve their concerns. 
 Call Scripting   Companies that market and sell highly technical products have a dif-
ficult time finding competent customer service representatives.   Call scripting systems  
gather product details and issue resolution information that can be automatically gener-
ated into a script for the representative to read to the customer. These systems even pro-
vide questions the representative can ask the customer to troubleshoot the problem and 
find a resolution. This feature not only helps reps answer difficult questions quickly but 
also presents a uniform response so customers don’t receive different answers. 
 Analytical CRM 
 Analytical CRM provides information about customers and products that was once 
impossible to locate, such as which type of marketing and sales campaign to launch and 
which customers to target and when. Unlike operational CRM, which automates call cen-
ters and sales forces with the aim of enhancing customer service, analytical CRM works 
by using business intelligence to identify patterns in product sales and customer behav-
iors. Analytical CRM tools can slice-and-dice vast amounts of information to create cus-
tom views of customers, products, and market segments highlighting opportunities for 
cross-selling and up-selling.   Website personalization   occurs when a website has stored 
enough data about a person’s likes and dislikes to fashion offers more likely to appeal to 
that person. Many marketers use CRM to personalize customer communications and 
 BUSINESS DRIVEN INNOVATION 
 New emotion-detection software called Perform, created by Nice Systems, 
helps firms improve customer service by identifying callers who are displeased 
or upset. Perform determines a baseline of emotion and can detect emotional 
issues during the first few seconds of a call; any variation from the baseline acti-
vates an alert. When an elderly person who was highly distressed over medical 
costs hung up during a phone call to the insurance company, Perform iden-
tified the customer’s frustration and automatically emailed a supervisor. The 
supervisor was able to review a recording of the conversation and immediately 
called the customer back suggesting ways to lower the costs. 8 
 How do you think emotion-detection software will affect customer relation-
ships? What other departments or business processes could benefit from its 
use? Create a new product that uses emotion-detection software. What business 
problem would your product solve and who would be your primary customers?  
 Nice Emotions 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 
 FIGURE 8.15 
 Common Services Provided by 
Contact Centers 
 Automatic call distribution: Routes inbound calls to available agents. 
 Interactive voice response (IVR): Directs customers to use touch-tone phones or keywords to navigate or 
provide information. 
 Predictive dialing: Automatically dials outbound calls and forwards answered calls to an available agent. 

317
Enterprise MIS Module 3
decide which customers are worth pursuing. Here are a few examples of the information 
insights analytical CRM can help an organization gain. 
 ■  Find new profitable customers: Analytical CRM could highlight that the most prof-
itable market segment consists of women between 35 and 45 years old who drive 
SUVs and live within 30 miles of the city limits. The firm could then find a way to 
locate these customers for mailings and other opportunities. 
 ■  Exceed customer expectations: Analytical CRM helps a firm move past the typical 
“Dear Mr. Smith” greeting by personalizing communications. For example, if the firm 
knows the customer’s favorite brand and size of shoe it can notify the customer that a 
pair of size 12 Nike cross trainers are available for him to try on the next time he visits 
the store.  
 ■  Discover the activities the firm performs the best: Analytical CRM can determine 
what an organization does better than its competitors. If a restaurant caters more 
lunches to midsized companies than its competition does, it can purchase a special-
ized mailing targeting these customers for future mailings. 
 ■  Eliminate competition:  Analytical CRM can determine sales trends allowing the 
company to provide customers with special deals outsmarting its competition. 
A sports store might identify its best customers for outdoor apparel and invite them 
to a private sale right before the competition runs its sale.  
 ■  Care about customers: Analytical CRM can determine what customers want and 
need, so a firm can contact them with an invitation to a private sale, reminder that a 
product needs a tune-up, or send them a personalized letter along with a discount 
coupon to help spark a renewed relationship. 
 Measuring CRM Success 
 Using CRM metrics to track and monitor performance is a best practice for many com-
panies.  Figure 8.16 displays a few common CRM metrics a manager can use to track the 
success of the system. Just remember that you only want to track between five and seven 
of the hundreds of CRM metrics available. 
 THE CHALLENGES OF CRM 
 A standard rule of business states that the customer is always right. Although most 
businesses  use this as their motto, they do not actually mean it. Ebusiness firms must 
adhere to this rule as the power of the customer grows exponentially in the information 
age. Various websites and videos on YouTube reveal the power of the individual con-
sumer (see  Figure  8.17 ). A decade ago if you had a complaint against a company you 
could make a phone call or write a letter. Now you can contact hundreds or thousands of 
people around the globe and voice your complaint or anger with a company or product. 
You—the customer—can now take your power directly to millions of people and compa-
nies have to listen. 
 Sales Metrics 
 Customer Service Metrics 
 Marketing Metrics 
 Number of prospective customers 
 Cases closed same day 
 Number of marketing campaigns 
 Number of new customers 
 Number of cases handled by agent 
 New customer retention rates 
 Number of retained customers 
 Number of service calls 
 Number of responses by marketing campaign 
 Number of open leads 
 Average number of service requests by type 
 Number of purchases by marketing campaign 
 Number of sales calls 
 Average time to resolution 
 Revenue generated by marketing campaign 
 Number of sales calls per lead 
 Average number of service calls per day 
 Cost per interaction by marketing campaign 
 Amount of new revenue 
 Percentage compliance with service-level 
agreement 
 Number of new customers acquired by marketing 
campaign 
 Amount of recurring revenue 
 Percentage of service renewals 
 Customer retention rate 
 Number of proposals given 
 Customer satisfaction level 
 Number of new leads by product 
 FIGURE 8.16 
 CRM Metrics 

318
Chapter 8 Enterprise Applications: Business Communications
 FIGURE 8.17 
 The Power of the Customer 

319
Enterprise MIS Module 3
 BUSINESS DRIVEN START-UP 
 You might not want to put the fact that you won the Straightjacket Award on 
your résumé unless you worked for Rackspace, a Texas company that special-
izes in hosting websites. At Rackspace, the coveted Straightjacket Award is 
won by the employee who best delivers “fanatical customer support,” one of 
the firm’s critical success factors. The company motivates its customer service 
representatives by dividing them into teams, each responsible for its own prof-
itability. The company then measures such things as customer turnover, up-
selling, cross-selling, and referrals. The team with the highest scores wins the 
Straightjacket Award and each member receives a 20 percent bonus. 9 
 Assume your professor has hired you as the employee relationship manager 
for your class. What type of award would you create to help increase class par-
ticipation? What type of award would you create to help increase the overall 
average on exams? What type of award would you create to help increase stu-
dent collaboration? Be sure to name your awards and describe their details. 
Also, what type of metrics would you create to measure your awards? How 
could a CRM system help you implement your awards? 
 Straightjacket 
Customer 
Service 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 
 THE FUTURE OF CRM 
 Organizations are discovering a wave of other key business areas where it is beneficial to 
build strong relationships beyond customers. These include supplier relationship man-
agement (SRM), partner relationship management (PRM), and employee relationship 
management (ERM). 
   Supplier relationship management (SRM)    focuses on keeping suppliers satisfied by 
evaluating and categorizing suppliers for different projects. SRM applications help com-
panies analyze suppliers based on a number of key variables including prices, inven-
tory availability, and business focus or strategies. It can then determine the best supplier 
to collaborate with and develop strong relationships with to streamline processes, out-
source services, and provide products the firm could not offer alone. 
   Partner relationship management (PRM)    discovers optimal sales channels by 
selecting the right partners and identifying mutual customers. A PRM system offers real-
time sales channel information about such things as inventory availability, pricing strat-
egies, and shipping information, allowing a company to expand its market by offering 
specialized products and services. 
   Employee relationship management (ERM)   provides web-based self-service tools 
that streamline and automate the human resource department. Employees are the 
backbone  of an enterprise and the communication channel to customers, partners, and 
suppliers. Their relationship with the company is far more complex and long-lasting 
than the relationship with customers, thus many enterprises are turning to ERM systems 
to help retain key employees. 
 ENTERPRISE RESOURCE PLANNING  
 Today’s managers require real-time views into their businesses so they can make deci-
sions when they need to.    Enterprise resource planning (ERP)    integrates all depart-
ments and functions throughout an organization into a single IT system (or integrated 
set of IT systems) so employees can make decisions by viewing enterprisewide informa-
tion about all business operations. 
 LO 8.4:  Describe enterprise resource 
planning along with its associated 
benefits and challenges. 

320
Chapter 8 Enterprise Applications: Business Communications
 Many organizations fail to maintain consistency across business operations. If a single 
department, such as sales, decides to implement a new system without considering other 
departments, like marketing and accounting, inconsistencies can occur throughout the 
company, and operations can become discontinuous, like silos. Enterprise resource plan-
ning systems provide organizations with consistency. They allow for the effective plan-
ning and controlling of all the resources required to plan, source, make, and deliver goods 
and services.  Figure 8.18  shows how an ERP system takes data from across the enterprise, 
consolidates and correlates it, and generates enterprisewide organizational reports.  
 The key word in enterprise resource planning is  enterprise.  At the core of an ERP sys-
tem is a central database that gathers transactional data from operational systems across 
the company. Each time information is altered, it is automatically updated throughout 
the entire system. For example, sales representatives can access the ERP system to view 
all necessary information to process orders such as credit rating, order history, inventory 
levels, and delivery schedules. Once the order is complete, the ERP system automatically 
routes it to the next department in the order process, as illustrated in  Figure 8.19 . ERP sys-
tems facilitate the order process, ensuring customers receive their purchases faster and 
with fewer errors. ERP systems can support numerous business processes far beyond 
order processing, such as employee benefits and financial reporting. An ERP system can 
also support supplier and customer business processes infiltrating the entire value chain 
and helping the organization achieve greater operational efficiency (see  Figure 8.20 ). 
 THE BENEFITS OF ERP  
 The first generation of ERP systems focused on improving the manufacturing process 
through automation, primarily addressing back-office business processes such as inven-
tory ordering and product distribution. The second generation of ERP systems extended 
its reach into the front office and primarily addressed customer issues including mar-
keting and sales. The third generation of ERP systems, known as ERP-II, allows a com-
pany to compete on a functional level by adopting an enterprisewide approach using the 
Internet to connect all participants in the value chain.  Figure 8.21  shows how ERP has 
grown to accommodate the needs of the entire organization. 
 The current generation of ERP, ERP-II is composed of two primary components—core 
and extended.   Core ERP components  are the traditional components included in most 
ERP systems and primarily focus on internal operations.   Extended ERP components  are 
 FIGURE 8.18 
 Enterprise Resource Planning 
System Overview 
A
B
C
D
E
F
Corporate Data
Employees
Orders
Customers
Sales
Inventory
Global Shipping Report
Global Manufacturing Report
Global Sales Report
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
A
B
C
D
E
F
ERP

321
Enterprise MIS Module 3
 FIGURE 8.19 
 ERP Process Flow 
SALES
Information
Sales
Quote
Sales
Order
WAREHOUSE
Pack and
Ship
RECEIVING
Returns
ACCOUNTING
1
2
3
Payment
Billing
 BUSINESS DRIVEN MIS 
 Classic Cars Inc. operates high-end automotive dealerships that offer luxury 
cars along with luxury service. The company is proud of its extensive inven-
tory, top-of-the-line mechanics, and especially its exceptional service, which 
includes operating a cappuccino bar at each dealership. 
 The company currently has 40 sales representatives at four locations. Each 
location maintains its own computer systems, and all sales representatives have 
their own contact management systems. This splintered approach to opera-
tions causes numerous problems in customer communication, pricing strategy, 
and inventory control, such as:
 ■ A customer can get different quotes at different dealerships for the same car.  
 ■ Sales representatives frequently steal each other’s customers and 
commissions. 
 ■ Sales representatives send their customers to other dealerships to see 
specific cars that turn out not to be on the lot.  
 ■ Marketing campaigns are typically generic and not designed to target 
specific customers. 
 ■ If a sales representative quits, all his or her customer information is lost. 
 You work for Customer One, a small consulting company that specializes in 
enterprisewide strategies. The owner of Classic Cars Inc. has hired you to help 
him formulate a strategy to put his company back on track. Develop a proposal 
detailing how an ERP system can alleviate the company’s problems and create 
new sales opportunities.  
 Classic Cars 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 

322
Chapter 8 Enterprise Applications: Business Communications
 FIGURE 8.20 
 The Organization Before 
and After ERP 
Document Management
Work Flow
ERP
Logistics
Sales
Financials
HR
Portal and Website
Project Management
ERP
Financials
Project Management
Portal and Website
Work Flow
Document Management
Sales
HR
Logistics
the extra components that meet organizational needs not covered by the core compo-
nents and primarily focus on external operations.  Figure 8.22  provides an example of an 
ERP system with its core and extended components.  
 Core ERP Components 
 The three most common core ERP components focusing on internal operations are:
 1. Accounting and finance. 
 2. Production and materials management. 
 3. Human resources. 

323
Enterprise MIS Module 3
 FIGURE 8.21 
 The Evolution of ERP 
• Materials Planning
• Order Entry
• Distribution
• General Ledger
• Accounting
• Shop Floor Control
• Project Management
• Knowledge Management
• Work Flow Management
• Customer Relationship Management
• Human Resource Management
• Portal Capability
• Integrated Financials
ERP
• Scheduling
• Forecasting
• Capacity Planning
• Ecommerce
• Warehousing
• Logistics
Extended ERP
ERP-II
1990
2000
Present
 FIGURE 8.22 
 Core ERP Components and 
Extended ERP Components 
Accounting
and
Finance
Production
and Materials
Management
Human
Resources
Core ERP Components
Customer
Relationship
Management
Supply Chain
Management
Business
Intelligence
Ebusiness
Extended ERP Components
Enterprise
Resource Planning
Software
 Accounting and Finance ERP Components      Accounting and finance ERP com-
ponents   manage accounting data and financial processes within the enterprise with func-
tions such as general ledger, accounts payable, accounts receivable, budgeting, and asset 
management. One of the most useful features of an ERP accounting/finance component 
is credit management. Most organizations manage their relationships with customers by 
setting credit limits, or limits on how much a customer can owe at any one time. ERP finan-
cial systems correlate customers’ orders with their account balances to determine credit 
availability. They also perform all types of advanced profitability modeling techniques.  

324
Chapter 8 Enterprise Applications: Business Communications
 Production and Materials Management ERP Components     Production 
and materials management ERP components   handle production planning and execu-
tion tasks such as demand forecasting, production scheduling, job cost accounting, and 
quality control. Demand forecasting helps determine production schedules and materials 
purchasing. A company that makes its own product prepares a detailed production sched-
ule, and a company that buys products for resale develops a materials requirement plan.  
 Human Resources ERP Components      Human resources ERP components   
track employee information including payroll, benefits, compensation, and performance 
assessment and ensure compliance with all laws. They even allow the organization to 
perform detailed employee analysis, such as identifying who is likely to leave the com-
pany unless additional compensation or benefits are provided, and whether the most 
talented people are working in areas where they can have the greatest impact. Human 
resource components can also identify which employees are using which resources, 
such as online training and long-distance telephone services.   
 Extended ERP Components 
 Extended ERP components meet the organizational needs not covered by the core com-
ponents and primarily focus on external operations. Many are Internet-enabled and 
require interaction with customers, suppliers, and business partners outside the organi-
zation. The four most common extended ERP components are:
 1. Business intelligence. 
 2. Customer relationship management. 
 3. Supply chain management. 
 4. Ebusiness. 
 Business Intelligence ERP Components   Many organizations have found that 
ERP tools can provide even greater value with the addition of powerful business intel-
ligence systems. The business intelligence components of ERP systems typically collect 
information used throughout the organization (including data used in many other ERP 
components), organize it, and apply analytical tools to assist managers with decisions. 
Data warehouses are one of the most popular extensions to ERP systems. 
 Customer Relationship Management ERP Components   ERP vendors now 
include additional functionality that provides services formerly found only in CRM 
systems. The CRM components in ERP systems include contact centers, sales force 
automation,  and advanced marketing functions. The goal is to provide an integrated 
view of customer data, enabling a firm to effectively manage customer relationships by 
responding to customer needs and demands while identifying the most (and least) valu-
able customers so the firm can better allocate its marketing resources. 
 Supply Chain Management ERP Components   ERP vendors are expanding 
their systems to include SCM functions that manage the information flows between and 
among supply chain stages, maximizing total supply chain effectiveness and profitabil-
ity. SCM components allow a firm to monitor and control all stages in the supply chain 
from the acquisition of raw materials to the receipt of finished goods by customers. 
 Ebusiness ERP Components   The newest extended ERP components are the 
ebusiness components that allow companies to establish an Internet presence and 
fulfill online orders. Two of the primary features of ebusiness components are elogis-
tics and eprocurement.   Elogistics   manages the transportation and storage of goods. 
  Eprocurement    is the business-to-business (B2B) online purchase and sale of supplies 
and services. A common mistake many businesses make is jumping into online business  
without properly integrating the entire organization on the ERP system. One large toy 

325
Enterprise MIS Module 3
manufacturer announced less than a week before Christmas that it would be unable 
to fulfill any of its online orders. The company had all the toys in the warehouse, but it 
could not organize the basic order processing function to get the toys delivered to con-
sumers on time.   
 Measuring ERP Success 
 One of the best methods of measuring ERP success is the balanced scorecard, created 
by Dr. Robert Kaplan and Dr. David Norton, both from the Harvard Business School. The 
  balanced scorecard   is a management system, as well as a measurement system, that 
a firm uses to translate business strategies into executable tasks. It provides feedback  
for both internal and external business processes, allowing continuous improvement. 
Kaplan and Norton describe the balanced scorecard as follows: “The balanced score-
card retains traditional financial measures. But financial measures tell the story of 
past events, an adequate story for industrial age companies for which investments in 
long-term capabilities and customer relationships were not critical for success. These 
financial measures are inadequate, however, for guiding and evaluating the journey that 
information age companies must make to create future value through investment in cus-
tomers, suppliers, employees, processes, technology, and innovation.” 10  The balanced 
scorecard uses four perspectives to monitor an organization:
 1. The learning and growth perspective. 
 2. The internal business process perspective. 
 3. The customer perspective.  
 4. The financial perspective (see  Figure 8.23 ). 
 FIGURE 8.23 
 The Four Primary Perspectives 
of the Balanced Scorecard 
Financial
Objectives
Measures
Targets
Initiatives
“To succeed
ﬁnancially, how
should we
appear to our
shareholders?”
Learning and
Growth
Objectives
Measures
Targets
Initiatives
“To achieve our
vision, how will
we sustain our
ability to
change and
improve?”
Customer
Objectives
Measures
Targets
Initiatives
“To achieve our
vision, how
should we
appear to our
customers?”
Internal Business
Processes
Objectives
Measures
Targets
Initiatives
“To satisfy our
shareholders
and customers,
what business
processes must
we excel at?”
Vision
and
Strategy

326
Chapter 8 Enterprise Applications: Business Communications
 BUSINESS DRIVEN DISCUSSION 
 At Flavors, a premium coffee shop, customers receive more than just a great 
cup of coffee—they also get exposure to music, art, literature, and town events. 
Flavors offers the following:
 ■ Music center—information about all live music events occurring in the area 
and an open microphone two nights a week for local musicians. 
 ■ Art gallery—a space in the store filled with great pieces from local artists. 
 ■ Book clubs—a way for customers to meet to discuss current and classic 
literature. 
 ■ Coffee sampler—free tastings in which experts showcase coffees from 
around the world. 
 ■ Community calendar—weekly meetings to help customers find ways to 
become more involved in their community. 
 ■ Brewing courses—lessons in the finer details of the brewing, grinding, and 
blending equipment for sale in Flavor stores, from the traditional press to a 
digital espresso machine. Also includes a trouble-shooting guide developed 
by brewing specialists. 
 Flavors’ sales are great and profits are soaring; however, operations need an 
overhaul. The following is a quick look at Flavors’ current nonfood offerings. 
 ■ Flavors does not receive any information about how many customers attend 
live events in the music center. Musicians typically maintain a fan email list 
and CD sales records for the event; however, they don’t always provide this 
information to the store.  
 ■ The art gallery is run by several local artists who pay Flavors a small com-
mission on each sale. Flavors has no input on the art displayed in the store 
or information about who purchases it.  
 ■ Book club events are booked and run through the local bookstore, Pages 
Up, which runs a tab during the meetings and pays Flavor with a check at 
the end of each month. Flavors has no access to book club customer infor-
mation or sales information. 
 ■ Coffee sampler events are run through Flavors’ primary operations.  
 ■ Community event information is open to all members of the community. 
Each event is run by a separate organization, which provides monthly event 
feedback to Flavors in a variety of formats from Word to Access files.  
 ■ Brewing and machine resource courses are run by the equipment manu-
facturers, and all customer and sales information is provided to Flavors in a 
Word document at the end of each year.   
 Flavors’ owners want to revamp the way the company operates so they can 
take advantage of enterprise systems, and they have hired you as an integra-
tion expert. They also want to gain a better understanding of how the different 
events they host affect the different areas of their business. For example, should 
they have more open-microphone nights and fewer book clubs? The other way 
around? Currently, they have no way to tell which events result in higher sales. 
Create an integration strategy so Flavors can take advantage of CRM, SCM, and 
ERP across the company. 
 Bean 
Integration 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 

327
Enterprise MIS Module 3
 FIGURE 8.24 
 Primary Uses and Business 
Benefits of Strategic Initiatives 
Sales, Marketing,
Customer Service
Sales Forecasts,
Sales Strategies,
Marketing Campaigns
CRM
Customers, Resellers,
Partners, Suppliers,
Distributors
Market Demand,
Resource and
Capacity Constraints,
Real-Time Scheduling
SCM
Accounting, Finance,
Logistics, Production
Forecasting, Planning,
Purchasing,
Material Management,
Warehousing,
Inventory, Distribution
ERP
Primary Users
Primary Business Beneﬁt
Enterprise Application
 THE CHALLENGES OF ERP 
 One of the biggest challenges of an ERP system is cost. ERP systems contain multiple 
complex components that are not only expensive to purchase, but also expensive to 
implement. Costs can include the software itself, plus consulting charges, hardware 
expenses, and training fees. A large firm can easily spend millions of dollars and many 
years completing an ERP implementation. The biggest issue facing an ERP implemen-
tation is that it fundamentally changes the way the entire organization operates, caus-
ing employees to learn and adjust to new business processes. Many ERP failures occur 
because the business managers and MIS professionals underestimate the complexity 
of the planning, development, and training required with an ERP implementation. As a 
manager, you must carefully assess your company’s needs and choose the right ERP sys-
tem and ensure proper support for all new processes, while avoiding too much change 
too fast.  
 THE FUTURE OF ENTERPRISE SYSTEMS: 
INTEGRATING SCM, CRM, AND ERP 
 Applications such as SCM, CRM, and ERP are the backbone of ebusiness, yet most 
organizations today have to piece together these systems. A firm might choose its CRM 
components from Siebel, SCM components from i2, and financial components and 
HR management components from Oracle.  Figure 8.24  identifies the general audience 
and purpose for each of these applications, and  Figure 8.25  shows where they are inte-
grated and the underlying premise of an integrated organization. Integrating all of these 
enterprise systems allows an organization to function as a single unit meeting customer, 
partner , and supplier needs. 
 If one application performs poorly, the entire customer value delivery system is 
affected. For example, no matter how great a company is at CRM, if its SCM system does 
not work and the customer never receives the finished product, the company will lose 
that customer. The world-class enterprises of tomorrow must be built on world-class 
applications implemented today. 

328
Chapter 8 Enterprise Applications: Business Communications
 Learning Outcome 8.1: Explain integrations and the role they play in connecting a 
corporation. 
 Integrations allow separate systems to communicate directly with each other, eliminating the need 
for manual entry into multiple systems. Building integrations allows the sharing of information across 
databases along with dramatically increasing its quality. 
 Learning Outcome 8.2: Describe supply chain management along with its associated 
benefits and challenges. 
 A supply chain consists of all parties involved, directly or indirectly, in obtaining raw materials or a 
product. To automate and enable sophisticated decision making in these critical areas, companies are 
turning to systems that provide demand forecasting, inventory control, and information flows between 
suppliers and customers. Supply chain management (SCM) is the management of information flows 
between and among activities in a supply chain to maximize total supply chain effectiveness and 
corporate  profitability. In the past, manufacturing efforts focused primarily on quality improve-
ment efforts within the company; today these efforts reach across the entire supply chain, includ-
ing customers,  customers’ customers, suppliers, and suppliers’ suppliers. Today’s supply chain is 
an intricate network of business partners linked through communication channels and relationships. 
  Improved visibility across the supply chain and increased profitability for the firm are the pri-
mary business benefits received when implementing supply chain management systems. Supply 
chain visibility  is the ability to view all areas up and down the supply chain in real time. The primary 
challenges  associated with supply chain management include costs and complexity. The next wave in 
supply chain management will be home-based supply chain fulfillment. No more running to the store 
to replace your products as your store will come to you as soon as you need a new product. 
 Learning Outcome 8.3: Describe customer relationship management along with its 
associated benefits and challenges. 
 Customer relationship management (CRM) is a means of managing all aspects of a customer’s rela-
tionship with an organization to increase customer loyalty and retention and an organization’s profit-
ability. CRM allows an organization to gain insights into customers’ shopping and buying behaviors. 
 L E A R N I N G  O U T C O M E  R E V I E W 
 FIGURE 8.25 
 Integrations between SCM, 
CRM, and ERP 
Accounting, Finance, Human Resources,
Purchasing, Management, Auditing,
Employees
Customers
SCM
Business
Partners,
Suppliers,
Distributors,
Resellers
ERP
Logistics,
Production,
Distribution
CRM
Marketing,
Sales,
Customer
Service
SCM

329
Enterprise MIS Module 3
Every time a customer communicates with a company, the firm has the chance to build a trusting 
relationship with that particular customer. 
  Companies that understand individual customer needs are best positioned to achieve success. 
Building successful customer relationships is not a new business practice; however, implementing 
CRM systems allows a company to operate more efficiently and effectively in the area of supporting 
customer needs. CRM moves far beyond technology by identifying customer needs and designing 
specific marketing campaigns tailored to each. 
 A decade ago if you had a complaint against a company you could make a phone call or write a 
letter.  Now you can contact people around the globe and voice your complaint or anger with a company  
or product. Companies have to listen, making CRM the primary challenge facing organizations. 
 Organizations are discovering a wave of other key business areas where it is beneficial to build 
strong relationships beyond customers. These include supplier relationship management (SRM), part-
ner relationship management (PRM), and employee relationship management (ERM). 
 Learning Outcome 8.4: Describe enterprise resource planning along with its associated 
benefits and challenges. 
 Enterprise resource planning (ERP) integrates all departments and functions throughout an organiza-
tion into a single IT system (or integrated set of IT systems) so employees can make decisions by 
viewing enterprisewide information about all business operations. Enterprise resource planning sys-
tems provide organizations with consistency. They allow for the effective planning and controlling of 
all the resources required to plan, source, make, and deliver goods and services. 
  The first generation of ERP systems focused on improving the manufacturing process through 
automation, primarily addressing back-office business processes such as inventory ordering and 
product distribution. The second generation of ERP systems extended its reach into the front office 
and primarily addressed customer issues including marketing and sales. The third generation of ERP 
systems, known as ERP-II, allows a company to compete on a functional level, adopting an enter-
prisewide approach using the Internet to connect all participants in the value chain 
 One of the biggest challenges of an ERP system is cost. ERP systems contain multiple complex 
components that are not only expensive to purchase, but also expensive to implement. Costs can 
include the software itself, plus consulting charges, hardware expenses, and training fees. 
 Applications such as SCM, CRM, and ERP are the backbone of ebusiness, yet most organizations 
today have to piece together these systems. A firm might choose its CRM components from Siebel, 
SCM components from i2, and financial components and HR management components from Oracle. 
Integrating all of these enterprise systems allows an organization to function as a single unit meeting 
customer, partner, and supplier needs. 
 1.  Knowledge: Define SCM and how it can benefit Zappos. 
 2.  Comprehension: Explain CRM and why Zappos would benefit from the implementation of a CRM 
system. 
 3.  Application: Demonstrate why Zappos would need to implement SCM, CRM, and ERP for a con-
nected corporation.  
 4.  Analysis: Analyze the merger between Zappos and Amazon and assess potential issues for 
Zappos customers.  
 5.  Synthesis: Propose a plan for how Zappos can use Amazon’s supply chain to increase sales and 
customer satisfaction.  
 6.  Evaluate: Argue for or against the following statement: “In the electronic age customer relation-
ships are more important than ever and Zappos provides the new benchmark that all corporations 
should follow.” 
 O P E N I N G  C A S E  Q U E S T I O N S 

330
Chapter 8 Enterprise Applications: Business Communications
 Accounting and finance ERP 
component, 323 
 Analytical CRM, 312 
 Application integration,  300 
 Backward integration, 300 
 Balanced scorecard, 325 
 Bullwhip effect, 305 
 Call scripting system, 316 
 Campaign management 
system, 314 
 Click-to-talk, 316 
 Contact center or call center, 315 
 Contact management CRM 
system, 315 
 Core ERP component, 320 
 CRM analysis technologies, 311 
 CRM predicting technologies, 311 
 CRM reporting technologies, 311 
 Cross-selling, 314 
 Customer relationship manage-
ment (CRM), 309 
 Customer service and support 
(CSS),  314 
 Data integration,  300 
 Demand planning system, 306 
 Eintegration,  300 
 Electronic data interchange 
(EDI), 305 
 Elogistics, 324 
 Employee relationship manage-
ment (ERM), 319 
 Enterprise application 
integration (EAI), 301 
 Enterprise application 
integration (EAI) 
middleware, 301 
 Enterprise resource planning 
(ERP), 319 
 Enterprise system, 301 
 Eprocurement, 324 
 Extended ERP component, 320 
 Forward integration, 300 
 Human resources ERP 
component, 324 
 Integration, 300 
 List generator, 313 
 Middleware, 301 
 Operational CRM, 312 
 Opportunity management CRM 
system, 315 
 Partner relationship management 
(PRM), 319  
 Production and materials 
management  ERP 
component, 324 
 Sales force automation (SFA), 314 
 Sales management CRM 
system, 315 
 Supplier relationship management 
(SRM), 319 
 Supply chain, 302 
 Supply chain execution 
system, 305 
 Supply chain management 
(SCM), 302 
 Supply chain planning 
system, 305 
 Supply chain visibility, 305 
 Up-selling, 314 
 Web-based self-service 
system, 316 
 Website personalization, 316 
 K E Y  T E R M S 
 R E V I E W  Q U E S T I O N S 
  1. How do integrations connect a corporation? 
  2. What is the difference between forward and backward integrations? 
  3. What are the five primary activities in a supply chain? 
  4. What is the bullwhip effect and how can it impact a supply chain and a firm’s profitability? 
  5.  What are supply chain planning systems, supply chain execution systems, and demand plan-
ning systems? 
  6. What are the challenges associated with SCM systems? 
  7.  Why are customer relationships important to an organization? Do you agree that every business 
needs to focus on customers to survive in the information age? 
  8. What is the difference between operational and analytical CRM? 
  9. How can a sales department use CRM to improve operations? 
 10. How can a marketing department use CRM to improve operations? 
 11.  What is the difference between customer relationship management, supplier relationship man-
agement, and employee relationship management? 
 12. What is an enterprise resource planning system? 
 13. What are the components in a core ERP system? 
 14. What are the components in an extended ERP system? 
 15. What does a company need to integrate to become connected? 

331
Enterprise MIS Module 3
 C L O S I N G  C A S E  O N E 
 Can Customer Loyalty Be a Bad Thing? 
  What happens when you find out that your business’s most faithful customers aren’t necessar-
ily the most profitable ones? The economic crisis has jolted companies into the need to redouble 
efforts to foster customer loyalty. Numerous articles now tout the increased importance of giving 
customers  premium service in troubled times to ensure customer retention. The underlying reasoning 
is simple —through their continued patronage, loyal customers help a company to weather the storm. 
 Without question, there is some truth to this logic. No firm can survive for long without loyal cus-
tomers. The problem, however, is that success through loyalty isn’t nearly so simple. Like most big 
ideas, there are conditions where it is unarguably correct, and less popular but equally true conditions 
where it is wrong. 
 Loyalty is a big idea. At its most basic level, it is a feeling of attachment that causes someone to 
be willing to continue a relationship. And while exclusive loyalty has been replaced in customers’ 
hearts and minds with multiple loyalties for many if not most product categories, often greater than 
50 percent of a company’s customers would classify themselves as holding some level of loyalty to 
a particular company. Even if we narrow our classification of loyalty to customers who feel loyal and 
give the majority of their purchases in a category to the firm, typically we find this to represent one-
third of a firm’s customers. 
 The fly in the ointment is that typically only 20 percent of a firm’s customers are actually profitable. 
And many—often most—of a company’s profitable customers are not loyal. This presents managers 
with a loyalty problem, although not one that they expect. If typically most loyal customers in a firm 
aren’t profitable, how does a customer loyalty strategy ever generate a positive return on investment? 
Instead of asking whether you have enough loyal customers in your customer base, you need to ask 
yourself three more complex questions: (1) which loyal customers are good for the business, (2) how 
do we hang onto them, and (3) how do we get more customers like them. 
 In this slow economy, customers in both B2B and B2C settings are naturally much more sensi-
tive to economic issues. Furthermore, companies in B2B relationships are often more reliant on their 
vendor partners to help them shoulder this burden. There is nothing inherently wrong with this, and 
managers need to recognize that their job is to meet customers’ needs to deserve their loyalty. 
 But the simple solution to improving customer loyalty in a down market is to offer price deals. 
Firms that track their customer loyalty can be guaranteed that loyalty scores will increase with each 
substantial decrease in price. 
 But that’s a bad loyalty strategy. This doesn’t mean businesses shouldn’t find ways to be more 
efficient so they can pass cost savings on to customers. But price-driven loyalty is always the lowest 
form of loyalty. It means the firm isn’t offering differentiated value to its customers. 
 The place to begin any loyalty strategy is to determine which loyal customers are profitable and 
which are not. A closer examination of these two types of customers always reveals very different 
reasons for their loyalty. Unprofitable loyal customers tend to be loyal for one of two reasons: (1) they 
are driven by unprofitable pricing or exchange policies, or (2) they demand an excessive amount of 
service that they are not willing to pay fairly to receive. 
 Profitable loyal customers, on the other hand, are almost always driven by differentiating aspects 
of the product or service offering. The key to a successful loyalty strategy is to become clear as to 
what these differentiating aspects are, and to focus on tangibly improving these elements. It is also 
imperative to actively tell customers and prospective customers that these are the things the com-
pany stands for and that the firm is committed to being best at. By doing this, the best customers will 
have the necessary information to clearly articulate why an organization deserves their loyalty in good 
times and in bad. 11 

332
Chapter 8 Enterprise Applications: Business Communications
 Questions 
 1. Why are customer relationships important to an organization? Do you agree that every business 
needs to focus on customers to survive in the information age? 
 2. How can a company find its most loyal customers? 
 3. Choose a business (maybe Starbucks, Disney, or Nissan). Answer each of the following questions 
based on your business choice. 
 a. Which loyal customers are good for the business? 
 b. How do we hang onto them? 
 c. How do we get more customers like them? 
 4. Do you agree or disagree with the following statement: “The fly in the ointment is that typically only 
20 percent of a firm’s customers are actually profitable. And many—often most—of a company’s  
profitable customers are not loyal.” 
 Got Milk? It’s Good for You—Unless It’s Contaminated! 
  Dong Lizhong bet that being a dairy farmer was his golden ticket out of a factory job in China. 
Unfortunately, a contamination crisis in 2008 shattered his dairy business when babies mysteriously 
started developing kidney stones from contaminated baby formula. A chemical called melamine, an 
additive used to make plastic, was discovered in the milk supply of one of China’s third-largest dairy 
producers. Four infants died from the contamination and at least 53,000 fell ill. According to the official 
Xinhua news agency, officials knew about problems with the milk for months before informing the public. 
 China’s four largest dairy organizations, accounting for nearly half the country’s milk market, pulled 
their goods off shelves. More than 20 countries, including France, India, and South Korea, banned not 
only dairy products from China, but also candies, cookies, and chocolates. “This is a disastrous set-
back. I estimate that it will take one or two years to rebuild confidence in dairy products,” says Luo 
Yunbo, dean of the College of Food Science & Nutritional Engineering at China Agricultural University. 
 The local milk-collection station in Dong Lizhong’s village discontinued purchasing milk. Farmers con-
tinued to milk their cows, but they drank the milk themselves or poured the milk into their cabbage fields.  
 Cutting Corners 
  Chinese do not traditionally drink milk. However, as the country has grown more affluent over the past 
few decades, the domestic dairy industry has skyrocketed. China’s two largest dairy companies have 
greatly benefited from this new trend: China Mengniu Dairy and Inner Mongolia Yili Industrial Group. 
Simultaneously, numerous entrepreneurs—from dairy farmers to milk-collection station owners to 
milk distributors—have jumped into the supply chain of dairy products to make their fortunes. Due to 
the fierce competition within China’s dairy industry, a few companies decided to cut corners to reduce 
costs, regardless of the consequences. 
 As Mengniu and Yili expanded at breathtaking speed, they found themselves in the unique position 
where supply could not keep up with demand. According to KPMG, China consumes 25 million tons of 
milk yearly, putting its dairy market ahead of France and Germany. In their quest for more raw milk, 
Mengniu and Yili have expanded outside their base in the northern province of Inner Mongolia and set up 
production facilities in other parts of China. Most of the quality problems in milk were found in dairy farms 
in Hebei and Inner Mongolia provinces, where the competition for raw milk supplies has been the fiercest. 
 Most dairy farmers in Hebei province traditionally sold their milk to milk-collection stations estab-
lished by local heavyweight Sanlu. In recent years, new privately owned milk-collection stations to 
buy raw milk for Mengniu and Yili started popping up next to existing stations. These new entrants 
 C L O S I N G  C A S E  T W O 

333
Enterprise MIS Module 3
captured raw milk supplies by offering dairy farmers slightly higher prices. “This competition broke 
the rules. As milk buyers fought over milk supplies, their standards for quality fell,” says Roger Liu, 
vice chairman of American Dairy Inc., a Heilongjiang province-based powdered milk company. 
 Additives to Boost Protein 
  Many of the milking stations do not have the equipment to test milk for additives. At the Nanxincheng 
station, 16 households bring their dairy cows in the area to be milked in the red brick farmhouse. The 
farmers hook up the cows to a milking machine, which pumps the milk directly into a big vat. “They 
didn’t test the milk here. They sent it to Sanlu for testing,” says Du Yanjun, a government inspector 
who was posted to monitor the Nanxincheng station after the contamination crisis broke. 
 The milk is collected from the stations and shipped by middlemen to big dairy companies such 
as Sanlu, which would do their own testing and grading. It now appears that unscrupulous middle-
men added melamine to the raw milk to increase protein levels in their milk samples, so their milk 
would be graded higher. However, ingesting melamine can also cause kidney stones or kidney failure, 
especially in infants. 
 Matthew Estes, president and CEO of BabyCare, had looked into switching from Australian and New 
Zealand sources of milk for the company’s infant-formula business in China. BabyCare tested possible 
Chinese suppliers and realized it could not locate a suitable supplier in China. “We couldn’t the find 
quality that met our standards. We chose to not sell in China rather than take the risk,” he says.  
 Stiff Sentences 
  A Chinese court sentenced two of the middlemen to death and a dairy boss to life in prison for their 
roles in the milk contamination scandal. The swift trial and harsh sentences show Beijing’s resolve in 
tackling the country’s stubborn food safety problems and an eagerness by the communist leadership 
to move past the embarrassing scandal. 12 
 Questions 
 1. List 10 products that could possibly be affected by a problem in the U.S. milk supply chain. What 
would be the damages to an ice cream business that used contaminated milk in its manufacturing 
process? Who do you think should be held liable for such an issue? 
 2. Do you think a CRM system could have helped communicate issues in the milk production supply 
chain? How could a company use a CRM system to perform damage control after finding out about 
contaminated milk in the supply chain? 
 3. Do you agree with the Chinese court in sentencing of the middlemen to death and a dairy boss 
to life in prison for their roles in the milk contamination scandal? Do you think the United States 
should implement similar laws for unethical corporate behavior? 
 4. Many companies in the United States use Chinese suppliers in the sourcing of raw materials and 
manufacturing of products. Research the Internet and find three examples of recent issues for 
U.S. companies because of Chinese products. What will happen in the long run as companies use 
Chinese suppliers? 
 1. Political Supply Chains 
 The U.S. government brokered a deal with the United Arab Emirates (UAE) allowing the UAE 
government -owned firm Dubai Ports World (DPW) to operate six major U.S. ports (New York, New 
Jersey, Baltimore, New Orleans, Miami, Philadelphia) after DPW purchased the current United 
Kingdom-based port operator, P&O, the fourth largest port company in the world. 
 Some citizens are worried that the federal government may be outsourcing U.S. port operations 
to a company prone to terrorist infiltration by allowing a firm from the United Arab Emirates to 
 C R I T I C A L  B U S I N E S S  T H I N K I N G 

334
Chapter 8 Enterprise Applications: Business Communications
run port operations within the United States. The United Arab Emirates has had people involved in 
terrorism. Some of its financial institutions laundered the money for the 9/11 terrorists. You have 
been called in on an investigation to determine the potential effects on U.S. businesses’ supply 
chains if these ports were shut down due to terrorist activities. Create an argument for or against 
outsourcing these ports to the UAE. Be sure to detail the effect on U.S. businesses’ supply chains 
if these ports are subjected to terrorist acts. 13 
 2. Analyzing Dell’s Supply Chain Management System 
 Dell’s supply chain strategy is legendary. If you want to build a successful SCM system, your best 
bet is to model your SCM system after Dell’s. In a team, research Dell’s supply chain manage-
ment strategy on the web and create a report discussing any new SCM updates and strategies 
the company is currently using that were not discussed in this text. Be sure to include a graphical 
presentation of Dell’s current supply chain model. 
 3. Total Recall 
 The Firestone Tire Company issued a recall for all tires issued on a certain brand of Ford’s sport-
utility vehicles. The tire treads on some SUVs separated during use, which could cause a fatal 
accident as the defect caused vehicles to roll over. In the beginning Firestone denied it had a tire 
problem, stating that Ford had incorrectly matched its SUVs with the wrong brand of tires. It also 
suggested that the shock absorbers might have been rubbing against the tires, causing the defect. 
Firestone soon recalled the tires as the company received more and more pressure from govern-
ment and consumer advocacy groups. Interestingly, all of the defective tires were manufactured at 
the same tire factory and the company soon shut down that facility. Information was soon found 
that Firestone had recalled the identical type of tire in South America and had already settled a 
lawsuit for an accident caused by the tread defect. Discuss each of the following factors in relation 
to this case: quality, inventory, ethics, supply chain visibility, profitability, customer loyalty. 14 
 4. Finding Shelf Space at Walmart 
 Walmart’s business strategy of being a low-cost provider by managing its supply chain down to 
the minutia has paid off greatly. Each week, approximately 100 million customers, or one-third of 
the U.S. population, visit Walmart’s U.S. stores. Walmart is currently the world’s largest retailer and 
the second-largest corporation behind ExxonMobil. It was founded by Sam Walton in 1962 and is 
the largest private employer in the United States and Mexico. Walmart is also the largest grocery 
retailer in the United States, with an estimated 20 percent of the retail grocery and consumables 
business, and the largest toy seller in the United States, with an estimated 45 percent of the retail 
toy business, having surpassed Toys “R” Us in the late 1990s. 
 Walmart’s business model is based on selling a wide variety of general merchandise at “always 
low prices.” The reason Walmart can offer such low prices is due to its innovative use of informa-
tion technology tools to create its highly sophisticated supply chain. Walmart has famously invited 
its major suppliers to jointly develop powerful supply chain partnerships. These are designed to 
increase product flow efficiency and, consequently, Walmart’s profitability. 15 
 You are the owner of a high-end collectible toy company. You create everything from authen-
tic sports figure replicas to famous musicians and movie characters including Babe Ruth, Hulk 
Hogan, Mick Jagger, Ozzy Osbourne, Alien, and the Terminator. It would be a huge win for your 
company if you could get your collectibles into Walmart. Compile a strategic plan highlighting the 
steps required to approach Walmart as your supply chain partner. Be sure to address the pros and 
cons of partnering with the chain, including the cost to revamp your current supply chain to meet 
Walmart’s tough supply chain requirements. 
 5. Customer Relationship Management Strategies 
 On average, it costs an organization six times more to sell to a new customer than to sell to an 
existing customer. As the co-owner of a medium-sized sports equipment distributor, you have 
recently been notified that sales for the past three months have decreased by an average of 
20 percent. The reasons for the decline in sales are numerous, including a poor economy and 
some negative publicity your company received regarding a defective product line. In a group, 

335
Enterprise MIS Module 3
explain how implementing a CRM system can help you understand and combat the decline in 
sales. Be sure to justify why a CRM system is important to your business and its future growth. 
 Also, search the Internet for at least one recent and authoritative article that compares or ranks 
customer relationship management systems. Select two packages from the list and compare their 
functions and features as described in the article(s) you found as well as on each company’s website. 
Find references in the literature where companies that are using each package have reported their 
experiences, both good and bad. Draw on any other comparisons you can find. Prepare a presentation 
for delivery in class on the strengths and weaknesses of each package, which one you favor, and why.  
 6. Searching for Employee Loyalty 
 You are the CEO of Razz, a start-up web-based search company, which is planning to compete 
directly with Google. The company had an exceptional first year and is currently receiving over 
500,000 hits a day from customers all over the world. You have hired 250 people in the past four 
months, doubling the size of your organization. With so many new employees starting so quickly 
you are concerned about how your company’s culture will evolve and whether your employees are 
receiving enough attention. You are already familiar with customer relationship management and 
how CRM systems can help an organization create strong customer relationships. However, you 
are unfamiliar with employee relationship management and you are wondering what ERM systems 
might be able to offer your employees and your company. Research the web, create a report 
detailing features and functions of ERM systems, and determine what value will be added to your 
organization if you decide to implement an ERM solution. 
 7. Driving Up Profits with Loyalty (or Driving Down?) 
 The Butterfly Café is located in downtown San Francisco and offers specialty coffee, teas, and 
organic fruits and vegetables. The café holds a number of events to attract customers such as 
live music, poetry readings, book clubs, charity events, and local artist’s night. A listing of all 
participants attending each event is tracked in the café’s database. The café uses the information 
for marketing campaigns and offers customers who attend multiple events additional discounts. 
A marketing database company,  InTheKnow.com , has offered to pay the Butterfly Café a substan-
tial amount of money for access to its customer database, which it will then sell to other local busi-
nesses. The owner of the Butterfly Café, Penny Dirks, has come to you for advice. She is not sure 
if her customers would appreciate her selling their personal information and how it might affect 
her business. However, the amount of money  InTheKnow.com  is offering is enough to finance her 
much-needed new patio for the back of the café.  InTheKnow.com  has promised that the sale will 
be completely confidential. What should Dirks do? 
 8. Supporting Customers 
  Creative.com  is an ebusiness that sells craft materials and supplies over the Internet. You have just 
started as the vice president of customer service, and you have a team of 45 customer service rep-
resentatives. Currently, the only form of customer service is the toll-free number and the company 
is receiving a tremendous number of calls regarding products, orders, and shipping information. The 
average wait time for a customer to speak to a customer service representative is 35 minutes. Orders 
are being cancelled and  Creative.com  is losing business due to its lack of customer service. Create a 
strategy to revamp the customer service center and get the company back on track.  
 9. Implementing an ERP System 
 Blue Dog Inc. is a leading manufacturer in the high-end sunglasses industry, reaching record 
revenue  levels of more than $250 million last year. Blue Dog is currently deciding on the possibility 
of implementing an ERP system to help decrease production costs and increase inventory control. 
Many of the executives are nervous about making such a large investment in an ERP system due 
to its low success rates. As a senior manager at Blue Dog Inc., you have been asked to compile a 
list of the potential benefits and risks associated with implementing an ERP system along with your 
recommendations for the steps the company can take to ensure a successful implementation.  Be 
sure to also explain why ERP systems include CRM and SCM components, and the advantages the 
company can gain by implementing all of the components for a connected corporation. 

336
Chapter 8 Enterprise Applications: Business Communications
 E N T R E P R E N E U R I A L  C H A L L E N G E 
 BUILD YOUR OWN BUSINESS 
 1. Netflix reinvented the video rental business using supply chain technology. Netflix is the largest 
online DVD rental service, offering flat-rate rental by mail and over the Internet to customers. 
Customers can create their own personal list of movie favorites and the DVDs are delivered by 
the U.S. Postal Service from one of Netflix’s warehouses. Customers can keep the DVD for as 
long as they want and simply return it by mail to receive their next selection. Netflix’s business 
is video rental, but it used technology to revamp its supply chain to completely disrupt the entire 
video rental industry. Define a way that you can revamp or reinvent your business using supply 
chain technologies. 
 2. Business is booming, and you have achieved your goal of driving operating costs down, which 
helps to drive revenues up. One of your best new products is from China, and it is accounting 
for a 20 percent increase in your profits. Yesterday, a dockworkers union strike began and shut 
down all of the West Coast shipping docks from San Francisco to Canada. Work will resume when 
the union agrees to new labor contracts, which could take months. You need to quickly assess 
the impact of the shutdown on your business. How will you keep business running if you cannot 
receive your shipments? What strategies do you recommend to help the business continue work-
ing while the supply chain is disrupted by the strike? 
 3. The web contains numerous examples of customer power. Examples include  www.ihatedell
.net and  www.donotbuydodge.ca . Customers are using YouTube, MySpace, blogs, and a 
number of other web tools to slam or praise companies. Do you believe that the most 
influential person in your business is the customer? How could customers hurt or help 
your business? Will your employees agree that customers are the most important part of 
the business? 
 PROJECT I 
Shipping Problems 
 Entrepreneurship is in Alyssa Stuart’s blood. Stuart has been starting businesses since she was 
10 years old, and she finally has the perfect business of custom-made furniture. Customers who visit 
her shop can choose from a number of different fabrics and 50 different styles of couch and chair 
designs to create their custom-made furniture. Once the customer decides on a fabric pattern and 
furniture design, the information is sent to China where the furniture is built and shipped to the cus-
tomer via the West Coast. Stuart is excited about her business; all of her hard work has finally paid off 
as she has more than 17,000 customers and 875 orders currently in the pipe. 
 Stuart’s business is booming. Her high-quality products and outstanding customer service have 
created an excellent reputation for her business. But the business is at risk of losing everything and 
she has come to you for help solving her supply chain issues. The parcel delivery companies such 
as FedEx and UPS are on strike and Alyssa is not sure how she is going to get her raw materials or 
finished products delivered. What strategies do you recommend for Alyssa’s business to continue 
working to overcome the strike? 
 A P P LY  Y O U R  K N O W L E D G E  B U S I N E S S  P R O J E C T S 

337
Enterprise MIS Module 3
 PROJECT II 
Great Stories 
 When customers have an unpleasant customer experience, the company no longer has to worry about 
them telling a few friends and family; the company now has to worry about them telling everyone. 
Internet service providers are giving frustrated consumers another means of fighting back. Free or 
low-cost computer space for Internet websites is empowering consumers to tell not only their friends, 
but also the world about the way they have been treated. A few examples of disgruntled customer 
stories from the Internet include:
 ■ A bike-riding tourist requires stitches after being bitten on the leg by a dog. The tourism company 
is banned from renting bikes and in turn bars the tourist from taking any future tours. 
 ■ A customer leaving Best Buy refuses to voluntarily show the receipt to the guard at the door. 
The Best Buy employees try to seize the customer’s cart and then decide to park a car behind the 
customer’s vehicle. 
 ■ Enterprise Rent-A-Car operates a high-stress business, and frequently its customers find that the 
company did not honor reservations, did not have cars ready for reservations, rented cars with 
empty tanks of gas, and charged higher rates to corporate account holders. 
 The pervasive nature of the Internet is increasing customer power and changing business from 
product-focused to a customer-focused. Explain the difference between product-focused business 
and customer-focused business and why CRM is more important than ever before? 
 PROJECT III 
JetBlue on YouTube 
 JetBlue took an unusual and interesting CRM approach by using YouTube to apologize to its custom-
ers. JetBlue’s founder and former CEO, David Neeleman, apologized to customers via YouTube after 
a very bad week for the airline: 1,100 flights were canceled due to snowstorms, causing thousands 
of passengers to be stranded at airports around the country. Neeleman’s unrehearsed, unrefined, and 
sincere YouTube apology made customers understand the issues and accept the company’s apology. 
 You are the founder and CEO of GoodDog, a large pet food manufacturing company. Recently, at 
least 16 pet deaths have been tied to tainted pet food, fortunately not manufactured by your company. 
A recall of potentially deadly pet food has dog and cat owners studying their animals for even the 
slightest hint of illness and swamping veterinarians nationwide with calls about symptoms. Create 
a strategy for using YouTube as a vehicle to communicate with your customers as they fear for their 
pets’ lives. Be sure to highlight the pros and cons of using YouTube as a customer communication 
vehicle. Are there any other new technologies you could use as a customer communication vehicle 
that would be more effective than YouTube? With all the new advances in technology and the many 
ways to reach customers, do you think using YouTube is a smart approach? What else could you do to 
help gain back customers’ trust? 
 PROJECT IV 
Gaining Business Intelligence from Strategic Initiatives 
 You are a new employee in the customer service department at Premier One, a large office supply 
distributor. The company has been in business for three years and focuses on providing top of the line 
office supplies at a low cost. The company currently has 90 employees and operates in seven states. 
 Sales over the past three years have tripled, and the manual systems currently in place are no 
longer sufficient to run the business. Your first task is to meet with your new team and create a 
presentation for the president and chief executive officer describing supply chain management, cus-
tomer relationship management, and enterprise resource planning. The presentation should highlight 
the main benefits Premier One can receive from these enterprise systems along with any additional 
added business value that can be gained from the systems. 

338
Chapter 8 Enterprise Applications: Business Communications
 PROJECT V 
Second Life CRM 
 New virtual worlds such as Second Life are becoming the first point of contact between many firms 
and customers. To say the least, virtual relationships are far different from traditional relationships. 
Firms such as Adidas, Dell, Reuters, and Toyota are all embracing Second Life; however, beyond 
opening a virtual office in a virtual world, they are struggling with how to build virtual customer 
relationships. 
 PA Consulting quickly learned that building a virtual office to answer customer queries is not 
nearly good enough to find and attract loyal customers. The company realized that real people behind 
the avatars need to be housed in a real office similar to having a call center to answer questions for 
online shopping. When a potential customer wants to speak to a human, one must appear or else the 
customer will leave the website. 
 You are the executive director of CRM at StormPeak, an advanced technological company that 
develops robots. You are in charge of overseeing the first virtual site being built in Second Life. Create 
a CRM strategy for doing business in a virtual world. Here are a few questions to get you started:
 ■ How will customer relationships be different in a virtual world? 
 ■ What is your strategy for managing customer relationships in this new virtual environment? 
 ■ How will supporting Second Life customers differ from supporting traditional customers? 
 ■ How will supporting Second Life customers differ from supporting website customers? 
 ■ What customer security issues might you encounter in Second Life? 
 ■ What customer ethical issues might you encounter in Second Life? 
 PROJECT VI 
Searching Telephone Calls 
 Imagine being able to search a database of customer phone calls to find specific requests or to be 
able to sort through digital customer complaints to detect the exact moment when the interaction 
between the customer service representative and the customer went wrong. A new tool called 
Find It allows the sorting of digital voice records as easily as using Google to sift through docu-
ments. Find It is opening limitless business opportunities as organizations begin to understand 
how they can use this technology to help employees search voice mails or recorded calls for 
keywords and phrases. 
 You have recently started your own marketing firm and you want to use the power of Find It to 
help your customers query all of their unique data records, including digital voice recordings. Now all 
you need is to prepare your marketing materials to send to potential customers. Create a marketing 
pitch that you will deliver to customers detailing the business opportunities they could uncover if 
they purchase Find It. Your marketing pitch can be a one-page document, a catchy tune, a video, or a 
PowerPoint presentation. 
 PROJECT VII 
Sharptooth Incorporated 
 Stephen Kern is the founder and CEO of Sharptooth, a small business that buys and sells comic strips 
to magazines and newspapers around the country. Some of Sharptooth’s artists have made it big 
and are syndicated in hundreds of magazines and newspapers, while others are new to the industry. 
Kern started in the business as an artist and began contracting other artists when he realized he had 
a knack for promoting and marketing comic materials. His artistic background is great for spotting 
talented young artists, but not so great for running the business. 
 Kern recently began selling comics to new forms of media such as blogs, websites, and other 
online tools. He has hired you to build him a new system to track all online comic sales. You quickly 
notice that Kern has a separate system for each of his different lines of business including newspaper 

339
Enterprise MIS Module 3
sources, magazine sources, billboard sources, and now online sources. You notice that each system 
works independently to perform its job of creating, updating, and maintaining sales information, but 
you are wondering how he operates his business as a whole. Create a list of issues Kern will encoun-
ter if he continues to run his business with four separate systems performing the same operations. 
What could happen to the business if he cannot correlate the details of each? Be sure to highlight at 
least 10 issues where separate systems could cause problems. 
 PROJECT VIII 
Eating In 
 Having been employed by the same company for more than 20 years, Mary Lou Smith was shocked 
when she was suddenly terminated along with about 900 of her co-workers. It took Smith a few 
weeks to recover from the shock, then she finally began focusing her efforts on searching for a new 
job. Smith was sure her loyal employment history and strong skill set would land her a new job in no 
time; however, after several months of searching she wasn’t having any luck. With her emergency 
funds quickly being depleted, Smith knew she had to find a new job soon or else she’d need to start 
selling her assets or cashing in her retirement. 
 The one positive aspect of having so much free time was that she could focus on her true passion, 
cooking. She began making a little money by catering lunches and dinners for local businesses and 
neighbors. Smith overheard a neighbor remark that she was hosting a large party and didn’t have 
enough time to prepare the meal. Almost jokingly, Smith asked her how much she’d be willing to pay 
for a catered event. Soon Smith was catering for numerous neighbors and small businesses and she 
knew she had to make a decision if she would go into business for herself or continue searching for 
other employment. 
 After a year in the catering business, Smith was earning a good living and building a stellar reputa-
tion. She began catering for all types of events, including weddings, and business was so good that 
she hired several employees to help grow her business. As Smith begins to plan her expansion, she 
has asked for you help in answering the following questions:
 1. How important is customer loyalty for Smith’s business? What can she do to ensure her 
customers remain loyal? How could one disgruntled customer hurt business? What can she do to 
combat this challenge? 
 2. Research the business  Yelp.com . What service does  Yelp.com perform? Would a small business 
see  Yelp.com as an opportunity or a threat? What are the pros and cons a customer should be 
aware of when using  yelp.com ? 
 3. Smith’s responsibilities include forecasting, inventory control, scheduling, and ensuring high-
quality products. What types of forecasts would she require to run her business? What types of 
inventory would she want to track? What might happen if her inventory tracking tool was off by 
50 percent? What types of schedules does Smith need to generate? What things might occur to 
disrupt schedules and cause her to reschedule? How can a supply chain management system 
help run the business? 
 4. Smith wants to create a business based on loyal customers and loyal employees. She offers her 
employees bonuses for new ideas, recipes, or business referrals. What risks is Smith encounter-
ing by offering these bonuses? One employee idea that she has implemented is turning out to be 
a competitive advantage for her business; however, the employee has quit and is now working 
for a competitor. Should Smith still pay the employee the bonus? What should she do to ensure 
she is building strong employee relationships? 
 5. Smith overheard one of her customers talking about enterprise systems such as CRM, 
SCM, and ERP. However, she is sure they are available only to big companies that have lots 
of capital. Research the Internet and find examples of enterprise systems for small business. 
Do you think she should invest in these types of systems to run her business? Why or 
why not? 

340
Chapter 8 Enterprise Applications: Business Communications
 AY K  A P P L I C AT I O N  P R O J E C T S 
 If you are looking for Excel projects to incorporate into your class, try any of the following after reading 
this chapter. 
 Project 
Number  
 Project 
Name 
 Project 
Type 
 Plug-In 
 Focus 
Area 
 Project 
Level 
 Skill 
Set 
 Page 
Number 
 9 
 Security Analysis 
 Excel 
 T3 
 Filtering Data 
 Intermediate 
 Conditional 
Formatting, 
Autofilter, Subtotal 
 AYK.7 
 10 
 Gathering Data 
 Excel 
 T3 
 Data Analysis 
 Intermediate 
 Conditional 
Formatting 
 AYK.8 
 11 
 Scanner System 
 Excel 
 T2 
 Strategic Analysis  Intermediate 
 Formulas 
 AYK.8 
 12 
 Competitive Pricing 
 Excel 
 T2 
 Profit 
Maximization 
 Intermediate 
 Formulas 
 AYK.9 
 13 
 Adequate 
Acquisitions 
 Excel 
 T2 
 Break Even 
Analysis 
 Intermediate 
 Formulas 
 AYK.9 
 15 
 Assessing the Value 
of Information 
 Excel 
 T3 
 Data Analysis 
 Intermediate 
 PivotTable 
 AYK.10 
 16 
 Growth, Trends, 
and Forecasts 
 Excel 
 T2, T3 
 Data Forecasting 
 Advanced 
 Average, Trend, 
Growth 
 AYK.11 
 18 
 Formatting Grades 
 Excel 
 T3 
 Data Analysis 
 Advanced 
 If, LookUp 
 AYK.12 
 22 
 Turnover Rates 
 Excel 
 T3 
 Data Mining 
 Advanced 
 PivotTable 
 AYK.15 
 23 
 Vital Information 
 Excel 
 T3 
 Data Mining 
 Advanced 
 PivotTable 
 AYK.15 
 24 
 Breaking Even 
 Excel 
 T4 
 Business Analysis  Advanced 
 Goal Seek 
 AYK.16 
 25 
 Profit Scenario 
 Excel 
 T4 
 Sales Analysis 
 Advanced 
 Scenario Manager 
 AYK.16 

 9 
 C H A P T E R 
 Systems Development and 
Project Management: 
Corporate Responsibility 
 ■  T h e  S y s t e m s  D e v e l o p m en t  L i f e 
C y c l e  ( S D L C )  
 ■  S o f t w a re  D e v e l o p m e n t 
M e t h o d o l o g y :  Wa t e r f a ll  
 ■  A g i l e  S o f t w a re  D e v e l opm e n t 
M e t h o d o l o g i e s   
 SECTION 9.2   
 Project Management 
 SECTION 9.1   
 Developing Enterprise 
Applications 
 ■  U s i n g  P ro j e c t  M a n a g e m e n t  t o 
D e l i v e r  S u c c e s s f u l  P ro j e c t s  
 ■  T h e  E l e m e n t s  o f  P ro j e c t 
P l a n n i n g  
 ■  P r i m a r y  P ro j e c t  P l a n n i n g 
D i a g r a m s  
 ■  O u t s o u rc i n g  P ro j e c t s     
 What’s in IT for me? 
 This chapter provides an overview of how organizations build information systems. As a business student, you need to 
understand this process because information systems are the underlying foundations of company operations. Your under-
standing of the principles of building information systems will make you a more valuable employee. You will be able to 
identify trouble spots early and make suggestions during the design process that will result in a better information systems 
project—one that satisfies both you and your business. 
 Building an information system is like constructing a house. You could sit back and let the developers do all the design 
work, construction, and testing and hope the finished product will satisfy your needs. However, participating in the process 
helps to guarantee that your needs are not only heard, but also met. It is good business practice to have direct user input 
steering the development of the finished product. Your knowledge of the systems development process will allow you to 
participate and ensure you are building flexible enterprise architectures that support not only current business needs, but 
also future ones. 
 C H A P T E R  O U T L I N E 

342
Chapter 9 Systems Development and Project Management:  Corporate Responsibility
 opening case study 
Getting Your Project on Track
 June is the perfect time of year to reflect on the current state of all the key projects that 
were approved in January. At this stage, you and your management team should have 
enough data to know if each initiative will successfully meet its objectives. You may already 
know there are projects in your organization that are not positioned to succeed, yet they still 
receive funding and staff. When you assess the current state of your projects, do you see 
any of the following signs:
 ■ Critical issues keep opening up, but they’re not getting resolved. 
 ■ Project scope is constantly changing. 
 ■ The project is consistently behind its plan, despite efforts to get it back on schedule. 
 ■ Competing deliverables are distracting your attention. 
 If all of these signs appear, it may be time to cut your losses and cut the project—or 
at least radically restructure it. You know better than anyone that throwing good money 
after the bad will not save the project because it doesn’t address the root cause of the 
project’s  woes. To determine a course of action, ask yourself the following questions about 
the project:
 ■ What can be salvaged? 
 ■ What can be delivered with the time and budget that are left? 
 ■ Do you have the right leadership in place to complete the project successfully?  
 ■ Is the plan for the initiative sound and realistic? 
 ■ Am I and my management team doing everything we can to support the initiative? 
 If part of or the entire project can be salvaged and delivered on time and with the remain-
ing budget, if the right leaders are present to steer the project, if the new plan is solid, and 
if management will continue to support the project, the following four steps will help you 
regain control and deliver the revised project successfully. These steps are basic blocking 
and tackling, but the detail behind the plan—and more importantly, the execution and focus 
the project team brings to the effort—will determine whether the project recovery effort will 
succeed. 
 Step One: Assess the Situation 
  Get as much information about the current state of the project as possible. Use that data to 
make informed decisions about what needs to happen next. Don’t be afraid if, at this stage, 
there are more questions than answers; that is normal. The key is to ask the right question 

343
Enterprise MIS Module 3
to obtain as accurate a picture of the project’s status as possible. The following questions 
address key data points you need to collect:
 ■ How critical is the delivery date? 
 ■ What functionality is exactly required by the delivery date? 
 ■ What has been completed and what is still outstanding? 
 ■ How willing will people be to change scope, dates, and budget? 
 The last question about change is critical because it touches on the people and political issues 
that are present in any project and any organization. Even when faced with sure failure, people  
find it hard to change unless there is a direct benefit to them and their team. For recovery  to 
have a chance, expectations need to change, especially those of the key stakeholders. 
 When gathering data about the current state of the project, remember to ask the current 
team for their opinions on what went wrong. It can be easy to ignore their input since they’re 
associated with the current failure. In fact, each individual can provide great insight into why 
the project arrived in its current state. Reach out to key team members and get their sugges-
tions for correcting the situation. 
 Step Two: Prepare the Team for Recovery 
  Everyone involved in the project—from executive management to stakeholders to project 
team members—needs to accept that the current project is broken and needs to be fixed. 
They also need to accept that the existing project plan and approach to delivering the project 
is flawed and needs to be restructured. If they don’t accept these facts, they will likely resist 
the steps needed for recovery. 
 Once everyone has accepted the need to change course, define realistic expectations for 
what can be delivered given the current state and time frame. Also establish metrics for success  
and control of the recovery. If you had metrics at the outset of the project, you may need to 
establish new ones, or you may simply need to hold yourself and others accountable to them. 
 Both management and the project manager in charge of the recovery need to develop a 
supportive environment for team members. Giving them realistic goals and providing them 
with the needed space, equipment, and training will position them for success. 
 Finally, take advantage of the new momentum associated with the recovery and involve all 
the key parties in the status of the project. This involvement will keep everyone focused and 
engaged. It will assure project team members and stakeholders that they’re needed for more 
than just executing tasks. 
 Step Three: Develop a Game Plan for Recovery 
 Think of the recovery as a new project, separate from the old one. This new project requires 
its own scope of work to make the expectations around what is being delivered and the new 
criteria for judging success crystal clear. The new scope may require you to determine if you 
have the right resources on the project team or if you need to re-staff some team members. 
 Based on the new project scope, the project manager and project team should lay out a 
clear and realistic road map to achieve the objectives. The main difference in the plan this 
time is that it must not fail. It will also be under much greater scrutiny by management. 

344
Chapter 9 Systems Development and Project Management:  Corporate Responsibility
Consequently, it will be critical to make sure the milestones are shorter in duration to dem-
onstrate success and to allow for course correction if needed. The shorter milestones will 
provide valuable data points to determine the health of the project early. 
 Step Four: Execute the Game Plan 
  With the new plan in hand, it’s time to get down to business. Remember that during execution, 
it is not just the project team members who are accountable. Everyone from management 
on down is on the hook. All facets of the project, from environment to support, need to be in 
sync at all times, and everyone needs to know they are accountable for the project recovery 
to succeed. 
 To make sure everyone is on the same page during the recovery, the project communica-
tion needs to be clear, informative, and frequent. Clearly define in your communication plan 
how information will be disseminated, how urgent items will be addressed, and how key 
decisions will be made. 
 Given the added level of scrutiny on the plan and the project, being able to provide the lat-
est on the metrics to show the improved control over the project will be key. The data will also 
allow you to quickly make corrections when any sign of trouble surfaces. 
 Getting a flailing project back on track is not easy. It requires sustained effort, focus, com-
mitment, and objectivity. During the project recovery there is no time for personal agendas. 
The ability to see and do what is best for the project is required from every team member. 
 It is also important to not lose sight of the pressure that everyone is under. Make sure 
there is a positive focus on people. The team needs to have the ability to bond, release a little 
steam, and be focused on the task at hand. 
 When the project has been successfully delivered, celebrate and recognize the effort of 
each and every team member. Finally, learn from this successful project recovery so that you 
and your organization can avoid having to recover a project again. Pay attention to the warn-
ing signs and act swiftly and decisively to make corrections early in the project’s life cycle so 
that successful delivery is ensured the first time. 1 

345
Enterprise MIS Module 3
 section 9.1 
Developing Enterprise Applications 
 LE AR NI NG  O UT CO M E S 
 9.1 Describe the seven phases of the systems development life cycle. 
 9.2 Summarize the different software development methodologies. 
 THE SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT LIFE CYCLE (SDLC)  
 The multimillion-dollar Nike SCM system failure is legendary as Nike CEO Philip Knight 
famously stated, “This is what we get for our $400 million?” Nike partnered with i2 to 
implement an SCM system that never came to fruition. i2 blamed the failed implemen-
tation on the fact that Nike failed to use the vendor’s implementation methodology and 
templates. Nike blamed the failure on faulty software. 2 
 It is difficult to get an organization to work if its systems do not work. In the infor-
mation age, software success, or failure, can lead directly to business success, or fail-
ure. Companies rely on software to drive business operations and ensure work flows 
throughout the company. As more and more companies rely on software to operate, so 
do the business-related consequences of software successes and failures. 
 The potential advantages of successful software implementations provide firms with 
significant incentives to manage software development risks. However, an alarmingly 
high number of software development projects come in late or over budget, and suc-
cessful projects tend to maintain fewer features and functions than originally specified. 
Understanding the basics of software development, or the systems development life 
cycle, will help organizations avoid potential software development pitfalls and ensure 
that software development efforts are successful. 
 Before jumping into software development, it is important to understand a few key 
terms. A   legacy system   is an old system that is fast approaching or beyond the end of 
its useful life within an organization.   Conversion   is the process of transferring informa-
tion from a legacy system to a new system.   Software customization   modifies software 
to meet specific user or business requirements.   Off-the-shelf application software  sup-
ports general business processes and does not require any specific software customiza-
tion to meet the organization’s needs. 
 The    systems development life cycle (SDLC)    is the overall process for developing 
information  systems, from planning and analysis through implementation and mainte-
nance. The SDLC is the foundation for all systems development methods, and hundreds of 
different activities are associated with each phase. These activities typically include deter-
mining budgets, gathering system requirements, and writing detailed user documentation. 
 The SDLC begins with a business need, proceeds to an assessment of the functions a 
system must have to satisfy the need, and ends when the benefits of the system no lon-
ger outweigh its maintenance costs. This is why it is referred to as a life cycle. The SDLC 
is comprised of seven distinct phases: planning, analysis, design, development, testing, 
implementation, and maintenance (see  Figure 9.1 ). 
 Phase 1: Planning 
 The   planning phase   establishes a high-level plan of the intended project and deter-
mines project goals. Planning is the first and most critical phase of any systems develop-
ment effort, regardless of whether the effort is to develop a system that allows customers 
to order products online, determine the best logistical structure for warehouses around 
the world, or develop a strategic information alliance with another organization. Orga-
nizations must carefully plan the activities (and determine why they are necessary) to 
be successful. A   change agent   is a person or event that is the catalyst for implementing 
major changes for a system to meet business changes.   Brainstorming   is a technique for 
 LO 9.1:  Describe the seven phases 
of the systems development life cycle. 

346
Chapter 9 Systems Development and Project Management: Corporate Responsibility 
generating ideas by encouraging participants to offer as many ideas as possible in a short 
period without any analysis until all the ideas have been exhausted. Many times, new 
business opportunities are found as the result of a brainstorming session. 
 The   Project Management Institute (PMI)   develops procedures and concepts neces-
sary to support the profession of project management ( www.pmi.org ). PMI defines a 
  project   as a temporary activity a company undertakes to create a unique product, ser-
vice, or result.   Project management   is the application of knowledge, skills, tools, and 
techniques to project activities to meet project requirements. A   project manager   is an 
individual who is an expert in project planning and management, defines and develops 
the project plan, and tracks the plan to ensure the project is completed on time and on 
budget. The project manager is the person responsible for executing the entire project 
and defining the project scope that links the project to the organization’s overall business 
goals. The   project scope   describes the business need (the problem the project will solve) 
and the justification, requirements, and current boundaries for the project. The   project 
plan  is a formal, approved document that manages and controls the entire project. 
 Phase 2: Analysis 
 In the   analysis phase   the firm analyzes its end-user business requirements and refines 
project goals into defined functions and operations of the intended system.   Business 
requirements   are the specific business requests the system must meet to be successful, 
so the analysis phase is critical because business requirements drive the entire systems 
development effort. A sample business requirement might state, “The CRM system must 
track all customer inquiries by product, region, and sales representative.” The business 
requirement will state what the system must accomplish to be considered successful. 
 BUSINESS DRIVEN START-UP 
 You’ll remember this day because it is the day you were introduced to Ted 
( www.ted.com ). TED is a nonprofit devoted to “ideas worth spreading.” The 
company hosts a yearly conference focusing on technology, entertainment, 
and design (TED). TED gathers the world’s innovative minds who are chal-
lenged to give the talk of their lives in just 18 minutes. Each talk is posted to the 
Ted website  and includes such famous speakers as:
 ■ Chris Anderson, editor of  Wired and author of  The Long Tail: Why the 
Future of Business Is Selling Less of More. 
 ■ Tim Berners-Lee, inventor of the World Wide Web.  
 ■ Jeff Bezos, founder of  Amazon.com . 
 ■ Richard Branson, founder of Virgin. 
 ■ Bill Clinton, former president of the United States. 
 ■ Peter Diamandis, chairman of the X Prize Foundation.  
 ■ Sergey Brin and Larry Page, co-founders of Google. 
 ■ Malcolm Gladwell, author of  Blink and  The Tipping Point. 
 ■ Bill Gates, founder of Microsoft. 
 ■ Seth Godin, a marketing guru. 
 ■ Steven Levitt, author of  Freakonomics. 3 
 As you brainstorm your future start-up, hoping to become the next Bill Gates 
or Steve Jobs, how can you use TED to generate ideas? Review the TED website 
and choose three talks that could help lead to the next great business idea. 
 Just Ask TED 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 

347
Enterprise MIS Module 3
Planning
Analysis
Maintenance
Implementation
Testing
Development
Design
 FIGURE 9.1 
 The SDLC and Its Associated 
Activities  
 Phase 
 Associated Activity 
 Planning 
 ■ Brainstorm issues and identify opportunities for the organization 
 ■ Prioritize and choose projects for development  
 ■ Set the project scope 
 ■ Develop the project plan 
 Analysis 
 ■ Gather the business requirement for the system 
 ■ Define any constraints associated with the system 
 Design 
 ■ Design the technical architecture required to support the system  
 ■ Design the system models 
 Development 
 ■ Build the technical architecture  
 ■ Build the database 
 ■ Build the applications 
 Testing 
 ■ Write the test conditions 
 ■ Perform system testing 
 Implementation 
  ■ Write detailed user documentation 
 ■ Provide training for the system users  
 Maintenance 
  ■ Build a help desk to support the system users  
 ■ Provide an environment to support system changes  
If a system does not meet the business requirements, it will be deemed a failed project. 
For this reason, the organization must spend as much time, energy, and resources as 
necessary to gather accurate and detailed business requirements. 

348
Chapter 9 Systems Development and Project Management: Corporate Responsibility 
  Requirements management   is the process of managing changes to the business  
requirements throughout the project. Projects are typically dynamic in nature, 
and change should be expected and anticipated for successful project completion. 
A   requirements definition document   prioritizes all of the business requirements by 
order of importance to the company.    Sign-off    is the users’ actual signatures indicating 
they approve all of the business requirements.  
 Phase 3: Design 
 The   design phase   establishes descriptions of the desired features and operations of the 
system, including screen layouts, business rules, process diagrams, pseudo code, and 
other documentation. During the analysis phase, end users and MIS specialists work 
together to gather the detailed business requirements for the proposed project from a 
logical point of view. That is, during analysis, business requirements are documented 
without respect to technology or the technical infrastructure that will support the sys-
tem. Moving into the design phase turns the project focus to the physical or technical 
point of view, defining the technical architecture that will support the system, including 
data models, screen designs, report layouts, and database models.  
 Phase 4: Development 
 The   development phase   takes all the detailed design documents from the design phase 
and transforms them into the actual system. In this phase, the project transitions from 
preliminary designs to actual physical implementation. During development, the com-
pany purchases and implements the equipment necessary to support the architecture. 
  Software engineering   is a disciplined approach for constructing information systems 
through the use of common methods, techniques, or tools. Software engineers use 
   computer-aided software engineering (CASE)    tools, which provide automated sup-
port for the development of the system.    Control objects for information and related 
technology (COBIT)   is a set of best practices that helps an organization to maximize the 
benefits of an information system, while at the same time establishing appropriate con-
trols to ensure minimum errors. 
 BUSINESS DRIVEN DEBATE 
 Data must be secure! A computer programming course would teach you 
that security is a critical component that must be included in every system. 
Apparently, the employees that developed the new system for the state of 
Oklahoma were out sick during this important class. The new system mistak-
enly posted confidential data, including Social Security numbers, for thousands 
of Oklahoma residents on the state’s website. The really unfortunate part of this 
systems blunder is that the error went unnoticed for more than three years. 
A programmer found the error when he realized that by changing his web 
browser he could redirect his page to the entire database for the state of 
Oklahoma. To make matters even worse, due to development issues, a hacker 
could have easily changed all of the data in the database or added false data to 
elements such as the state’s Sexual and Violent Offender Registry. 4 
 Why is it important to secure data? What can happen if someone accesses 
your customer database? What could happen if someone changes the informa-
tion in your customer database and adds fictitious data? What phases in the 
systems development life cycle should have found these errors? How could 
these errors go unnoticed for over three years? Who should be held responsible 
for the system issues? 
 Flawed 
Development 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 

349
Enterprise MIS Module 3
 During development, the team defines the programming language it will use to build 
the system. A   scripting language   is a programming method that provides for interactive 
modules to a website.   Object-oriented languages  group data and corresponding pro-
cesses into objects.    Fourth-generation languages (4GL)    are programming languages 
that look similar to human languages. For example, a typical 4GL command might state, 
“FIND ALL RECORDS WHERE NAME IS “SMITH”. ” Programming languages include the 
following order:
 1. First generation: Machine language difficult for businesspeople to understand. 
 2. Second generation: Assembly language difficult for businesspeople to understand. 
 3. Third generation: High-level programming languages, such as C, C 1 1 , and Java. 
 4. Fourth generation: Programming languages that look similar to human languages. 
 5. Fifth generation: Programming languages for artificial intelligence and neural networks.     
 Phase 5: Testing 
 The   testing phase   brings all the project pieces together into a special testing environ-
ment to eliminate errors and bugs and verify that the system meets all the business 
requirements defined in the analysis phase.   Bugs   are defects in the code of an informa-
tion system.   Test conditions   detail the steps the system must perform along with the 
expected result of each step. Testers execute test conditions and compare the expected 
results with the actual results to verify the system functions correctly. Each time the 
actual result is different from the expected result, a “bug” is generated and the system 
must be fixed in development. A typical systems development effort has hundreds or 
thousands of test conditions that must be verified against the business requirements to 
ensure the system is operating as expected.  Figure 9.2  displays the different types of tests 
typically included in a systems development effort.   
 Phase 6: Implementation 
 In the   implementation phase,   the organization places the system into production so 
users can begin to perform actual business operations with it. In this phase, the detailed 
  user documentation   is created that highlights how to use the system and how to trouble-
shoot issues or problems. Training is also provided for the system users and can take 
place online or in a classroom.   Online training   runs over the Internet or on a CD or 
DVD, and employees complete the training on their own time at their own pace.   Work-
shop training    is held in a classroom environment and led by an instructor. One of the 
best ways to support users is to create a   help desk   or a group of people who respond to 
 FIGURE 9.2 
 Different Forms of System 
Testing 
Alpha Testing
Assess if the entire
system meets the design
requirements
of the users
Development Testing
Test the system to ensure
it is bug-free
Integration Testing
Verify that separate
systems can work together,
passing data back and
forth correctly
System Testing
Verify that the units
or pieces of code function
correctly when
integrated
User Acceptance
Testing (UAT)
Determine if the system
satisﬁes the user and
business requirements
Unit Testing
Test individual units or
pieces of code for a
system

350
Chapter 9 Systems Development and Project Management: Corporate Responsibility 
users’ questions.  Figure 9.3  displays the different implementation methods an organiza-
tion can choose to ensure success. 
 Phase 7: Maintenance 
 Maintaining the system is the final sequential phase of any systems development effort. 
In the   maintenance phase,   the organization performs changes, corrections, additions, 
and upgrades to ensure the system continues to meet business goals. This phase contin-
ues for the life of the system because the system must change as the business evolves and 
its needs change, which means conducting constant monitoring, supporting the new sys-
tem with frequent minor changes (for example, new reports or information capturing), 
and reviewing the system to be sure it is moving the organization toward its strategic goals. 
 Corrective maintenance   makes system changes to repair design flaws, coding errors, or 
implementation issues.   Preventive maintenance   makes system changes to reduce the 
chance of future system failure. During the maintenance phase, the system will generate 
reports to help users and MIS specialists ensure it is functioning correctly (see  Figure 9.4 ).     
 FIGURE 9.3 
 System Implementation 
Methods 
 Report 
 Examples 
Internal report 
 Presents data that are distributed inside the organization and intended for employees within an organiza-
tion. Internal reports typically support day-to-day operations monitoring that supports managerial decision 
making. 
Detailed internal report 
 Presents information with little or no filtering or restrictions of the data. 
Summary internal report 
 Organizes and categorizes data for managerial perusal. A report that summarizes total sales by product for 
each month is an example of a summary internal report. The data for a summary report are typically catego-
rized and summarized to indicate trends and potential problems. 
Exception reporting 
 Highlights situations occurring outside of the normal operating range for a condition or standard. These 
internal reports include only exceptions and might highlight accounts that are unpaid or delinquent or identify 
items that are low in stock. 
Information system control report 
 Ensures the reliability of information, consisting of policies and their physical implementation, access restric-
tions, or record keeping of actions and transactions. 
Information systems audit report 
 Assesses a company’s information system to determine necessary changes and to help ensure the informa-
tion systems’ availability, confidentiality, and integrity. 
Post-implementation report
 Presents a formal report or audit of a project after it is up and running. 
 FIGURE 9.4 
 Examples of System Reports 
Parallel Implementation
Uses both the legacy system
and new system until all
users verify that the new
system functions correctly
Plunge Implementation
Discards the legacy system
and immediately migrates
all users to the new system
Pilot Implementation
Assigns a small group of people
to use the new system until it is
veriﬁed that it works correctly;
then the remaining users
migrate to the new system
Phased Implementation
Installs the new system in
phases (for example, by
department) until it is veriﬁed
that it works correctly

351
Enterprise MIS Module 3
 SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT METHODOLOGY: 
THE WATERFALL  
 Today, systems are so large and complex that teams of architects, analysts, developers, 
testers, and users must work together to create the millions of lines of custom-written 
code that drive enterprises. For this reason, developers have created a number of differ-
ent systems development life cycle methodologies. A   methodology   is a set of policies, 
procedures, standards, processes, practices, tools, techniques, and tasks that people 
apply to technical and management challenges. Firms use a methodology to manage the 
deployment of technology with work plans, requirements documents, and test plans, for 
instance. A formal methodology can include coding standards, code libraries, develop-
ment practices, and much more. 
 The oldest and the best known is the   waterfall methodology,   a sequence of phases 
in which the output of each phase becomes the input for the next (see  Figure 9.5 ). In 
the SDLC, this means the steps are performed one at a time, in order, from planning 
through implementation and maintenance. The traditional waterfall method no longer 
serves most of today’s development efforts, however; it is inflexible and expensive, and 
it requires rigid adherence to the sequence of steps. Its success rate is only about 1 in 10. 
 Figure 9.6  explains some issues related to the waterfall methodology. 5 
 LO 9.2:  Summarize the different 
software development methodologies. 
 FIGURE 9.5 
 The Traditional Waterfall 
Methodology 
Phase
Planning
Analysis
Design
Development
Testing
Implementation
Maintenance
Time
 
 Issues Related to the Waterfall Methodology 
 The business problem 
 Any flaws in accurately defining and articulating the business problem in terms 
of what the business users actually require flow onward to the next phase. 
 The plan 
 Managing costs, resources, and time constraints is difficult in the waterfall 
sequence. What happens to the schedule if a programmer quits? How will 
a schedule delay in a specific phase impact the total cost of the project? 
Unexpected contingencies may sabotage the plan. 
 The solution 
 The waterfall methodology is problematic in that it assumes users can specify 
all business requirements in advance. Defining the appropriate IT infrastructure 
that is flexible, scalable, and reliable is a challenge. The final IT infrastructure 
solution must meet not only current but also future needs in terms of time, cost, 
feasibility, and flexibility. Vision is inevitably limited at the head of the waterfall. 
 FIGURE 9.6 
 Disadvantages of the Waterfall 
Methodology 

352
Chapter 9 Systems Development and Project Management: Corporate Responsibility 
 Today’s business environment is fierce. The desire and need to outsmart and outplay 
competitors remains intense. Given this drive for success, leaders push internal devel-
opment teams and external vendors to deliver agreed-upon systems faster and cheaper 
so they can realize benefits as early as possible. Even so, systems remain large and com-
plex. The traditional waterfall methodology no longer serves as an adequate systems 
development methodology in most cases. Because this development environment is the 
norm and not the exception anymore, development teams use a new breed of alternative 
development methods to achieve their business objectives. 
  Prototyping   is a modern design approach where the designers and system users use 
an iterative approach to building the system.   Discovery prototyping   builds a small-scale 
representation or working model of the system to ensure it meets the user and business 
requirements. The advantages of prototyping include:
 ■ Prototyping encourages user participation.  
 ■ Prototypes evolve through iteration, which better supports change.  
 ■ Prototypes have a physical quality allowing users to see, touch, and experience the 
system as it is developed. 
 ■ Prototypes tend to detect errors earlier. 
 ■ Prototyping accelerates the phases of the SDLC, helping to ensure success. 
 AGILE SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT METHODOLOGIES  
 It is common knowledge that the smaller the project, the greater the success rate. 
The iterative development style is the ultimate in small projects. Basically,   iterative 
development   consists of a series of tiny projects. It has become the foundation of mul-
tiple agile methodologies.  Figure 9.7 displays an iterative approach. 
 An   agile methodology   aims for customer satisfaction through early and continuous 
delivery of useful software components developed by an iterative process using the bare 
minimum requirements. Agile methodology is what it sounds like: fast and efficient, 
with lower costs and fewer features. Using agile methods helps refine feasibility and sup-
ports the process for getting rapid feedback as functionality is introduced. Developers 
can adjust as they move along and better clarify unclear requirements. 6 
 FIGURE 9.7 
 The Iterative Approach 
Phase
Planning
Analysis
Design
Development
Testing
Implementation
Maintenance
ITERATION 2
ITERATION 1
Time
Planning
Analysis
Design
Development
Testing
Implementation
Maintenance

353
Enterprise MIS Module 3
 One key to delivering a successful product or system is to deliver value to users as soon 
as possible—give them something they want and like early to create buy-in, generate  
enthusiasm, and, ultimately, reduce scope. Using agile methodologies helps maintain 
accountability and helps to establish a barometer for the satisfaction of end users. It does 
no good to accomplish something on time and on budget if it does not satisfy the end 
user. The primary forms of agile methodologies include:
 ■ Rapid prototyping or rapid application development methodology.  
 ■ Extreme programming methodology. 
 ■ Rational unified process (RUP) methodology. 
 ■ Scrum methodology. 
 It is important not to get hung up on the names of the methodologies—some are pro-
prietary brand names, others are generally accepted names. It is more important to know 
how these alternative methodologies are used in today’s business environment and the 
benefits they can deliver. 
 Rapid Application Development (RAD) Methodology 
 In response to the faster pace of business, rapid application development has become a 
popular route for accelerating systems development.   Rapid application development 
(RAD) methodology  (also called  rapid prototyping   ) emphasizes extensive user 
involvement in the rapid and evolutionary construction of working prototypes of a sys-
tem, to accelerate the systems development process.  Figure 9.8  displays the fundamen-
tals of RAD. 
 Extreme Programming Methodology 
   Extreme programming (XP) methodology   ,  like other agile methods, breaks a project 
into four phases, and developers cannot continue to the next phase until the previous 
phase is complete. The delivery strategy supporting XP is that the quicker the feedback 
the more improved the results. XP has four basic phases: planning, designing, coding, 
and testing. Planning can include user interviews, meetings, and small releases. During  
design, functionality is not added until it is required or needed. During coding, the devel-
opers work together soliciting continuous feedback from users, eliminating the commu-
nication gap that generally exists between developers and customers. During testing, the 
test requirements are generated before any code is developed. Extreme programming 
saves time and produces successful projects by continuously reviewing and revamping 
needed and unneeded requirements. 7 
 Customer satisfaction is the primary reason XP finds success as developers quickly 
respond to changing business requirements, even late in the life cycle. XP encourages 
managers, customers, and developers to work together as a team to ensure the delivery 
of high-quality systems. XP is similar to a puzzle; there are many small pieces and indi-
vidually the pieces make no sense, but when they are pieced together they can create a 
new system.  
 Rational Unified Process (RUP) Methodology 
 The    rational unified process (RUP) methodology,    owned by IBM, provides a frame-
work for breaking down the development of software into four “gates.” Each gate consists 
of executable iterations of the software in development. A project stays in a gate waiting 
 Fundamentals of RAD 
 Focus initially on creating a prototype that looks and acts like the desired system. 
 Actively involve system users in the analysis, design, and development phases. 
 Accelerate collecting the business requirements through an interactive and iterative construction approach. 
 FIGURE 9.8 
 Fundamentals of RAD 

354
Chapter 9 Systems Development and Project Management: Corporate Responsibility 
for the stakeholder’s analysis, and then it either moves to the next gate or is cancelled. 
The gates include: 8 
 ■  Gate one: inception. This phase ensures all stakeholders have a shared understand-
ing of the proposed system and what it will do. 
 ■  Gate two: elaboration.  This phase expands on the agreed-upon details of the sys-
tem, including the ability to provide an architecture to support and build it. 
 ■  Gate three: construction.  This phase includes building and developing the product. 
 ■  Gate four: transition. Primary questions answered in this phase address ownership 
of the system and training of key personnel. 
 Because RUP is an iterative methodology, the user can reject the product and force 
the developers to go back to gate one. RUP helps developers avoid reinventing the wheel 
and focuses on rapidly adding or removing reusable chunks of processes addressing 
common problems. 
 Scrum Methodology 
 Another agile methodology,   scrum methodology,   uses small teams to produce small 
pieces of software using a series of “sprints,” or 30-day intervals, to achieve an appointed 
goal. In rugby, a scrum is a team pack and everyone in the pack works together to move 
the ball down the field. In scrum methodology, each day ends or begins with a stand-up 
meeting to monitor and control the development effort. 
 section 9.2 
Project Management 
 LE A R NI NG  OU T C OM E S 
 9.3 Explain project management and identify the primary reasons projects fail. 
 9.4 Identify the primary project planning diagrams. 
 9.5 Identify the three different types of outsourcing along with their benefits and challenges. 
 BUSINESS DRIVEN ETHICS AND SECURITY 
 Unexpected situations happen all the time, and the more you plan for them 
the better prepared you’ll be when developing software. Your employees will 
get into accidents, contract viruses and diseases, and other life issues. All of 
these scenarios lead to unplanned absenteeism, which can throw your proj-
ect plan into a tailspin. What can happen to a project when a key employee 
suddenly quits or is forced to go on short-term disability? When reviewing all 
the different SDLC methodologies, which one offers the greatest flexibility for 
unplanned employee downtime? If you could choose when your employee was 
absent, which phase in the SDLC would be the safest for your project to still 
continue and achieve success? What can you do to ensure you are preparing for 
unplanned absenteeism on your project plan? 
 Planning for the 
Unexpected 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 

355
Enterprise MIS Module 3
 USING PROJECT MANAGEMENT TO DELIVER 
SUCCESSFUL PROJECTS  
   No one would think of building an office complex by turning loose 100 different construc-
tion teams to build 100 different rooms with no single blueprint or agreed-upon vision of 
the completed structure. Yet this is precisely the situation in which many large organiza-
tions find themselves when managing information technology projects. Organizations rou-
tinely overschedule their resources (human and otherwise), develop redundant projects, 
and damage profitability by investing in nonstrategic efforts that do not contribute to the 
organization’s bottom line. Business leaders face a rapidly moving and unforgiving global 
marketplace that will force them to use every possible tool to sustain competitiveness; 
project management is one of those tools. For this reason, business personnel must antici-
pate being involved in some form of project management during their career.  Figure  9.9 
displays a few examples of the different types of projects organizations encounter.  
 Tangible benefits   are easy to quantify and typically measured to determine the 
success  or failure of a project.   Intangible benefits   are difficult to quantify or measure 
(see  Figure  9.10  for examples). One of the most difficult decisions managers make is 
identifying the projects in which to invest time, energy, and resources. An organiza-
tion must choose what it wants to do—justifying it, defining it, and listing expected 
results—and how to do it, including project budget, schedule, and analysis of project 
risks.   Feasibility   is the measure of the tangible and intangible benefits of an information 
system.  Figure 9.11  displays several types of feasibility studies business analysts can use 
to determine the projects that best fit business goals. 
  With today’s volatile economic environment, many businesses are being forced 
to do more with less. Businesses today must respond quickly to a rapidly changing 
business  environment  by continually innovating goods and services. Effective project 
management  provides a controlled way to respond to changing market conditions, to 
foster global communications, and to provide key metrics to enable managerial decision  
making. Developing projects within budget and on time is challenging, and with the help 
of solid project management skills, managers can avoid the primary reasons projects  
fail, including:
 ■ Unclear or missing business requirements. 
 ■ Skipped SDLC phases. 
 LO 9.3:  Explain project management 
and identify the primary reasons 
projects fail. 
 FIGURE 9.9 
 Types of Organizational Projects 
Sales
Deploying a
new service to
help up-sell a
current
product
Marketing
Creating a
new TV or
radio show
Finance
Requesting a
new report
summarizing
revenue
across
departments
Accounting
Adding
system
functionality
to adhere to
new rules or
regulations
MIS
Upgrading a
payroll system
or adding a
new sales
force
management
system

356
Chapter 9 Systems Development and Project Management: Corporate Responsibility 
 ■ Changing technology.  
 ■ The cost of finding errors. 
 ■ Balance of the triple constraints. 
 Unclear or Missing Business Requirements 
 The most common reason systems fail is because the business requirements are either 
missing or incorrectly gathered during the analysis phase. The business requirements drive 
the entire system. If they are not accurate or complete, the system will not be successful.  
 Skipped Phases 
 The first thing individuals tend to do when a project falls behind schedule is to start skip-
ping phases in the SDLC. For example, if a project is three weeks behind in the devel-
opment phase, the project manager might decide to cut testing from six weeks to three 
weeks. Obviously, it is impossible to perform all the testing in half the time. Failing to test 
the system will lead to unfound errors, and chances are high that the system will fail. It is 
critical that an organization perform all phases in the SDLC during every project. Skip-
ping any of the phases is sure to lead to system failure. 
 Changing Technology 
 Many real-world projects have hundreds of business requirements, take years to com-
plete, and cost millions of dollars. As Moore’s Law states, technology changes at an 
incredibly fast pace; therefore, it is possible that an entire project plan will need to be 
revised in the middle of a project as a result of a change in technology. Technology 
changes so fast that it is almost impossible to deliver an information system without feel-
ing the pain of updates. 
 The Cost of Finding Errors in the SDLC 
 It is important to discuss the relationship between the SDLC and the cost for the orga-
nization to fix errors. An error found during the analysis and design phase is relatively 
inexpensive to fix. All that is typically required is a change to a Word document. However, 
 FIGURE 9.10 
 Examples of Tangible and 
Intangible Benefits 
Decreased expenses
Decreased processing
errors
Decreased response
time
Increased quantity or
sales
Increased quality
Tangible
Beneﬁts
Improved decision
making
Improved community
service
Improved goodwill
Improved morale
Intangible
Beneﬁts

357
Enterprise MIS Module 3
exactly the same error found during the testing or implementation phase is going to cost 
the organization an enormous amount to fix because it has to change the actual system. 
 Figure 9.12  displays how the cost to fix an error grows exponentially the later the error is 
found in the SDLC. 
 Balance of the Triple Constraint 
  Figure 9.13  displays the relationships among the three primary and interdependent vari-
ables in any project—time, cost, and scope. All projects are limited in some way by these 
three constraints. The Project Management Institute calls the framework for evaluating 
these competing demands  the triple constraint. 
 The relationship among these variables is such that if any one changes, at least one 
other is likely to be affected. For example, moving up a project’s finish date could mean 
either increasing costs to hire more staff or decreasing the scope to eliminate features 
or functions. Increasing a project’s scope to include additional customer requests could 
 FIGURE 9.11 
 Types of Feasibility Studies 
Measures how well a solution meets
the identiﬁed system requirements to
solve the problems and take advantage
of opportunites
Operational Feasibility
Measures the cost-effectiveness of
a project
Econmic Feasibility
Measures the project time frame to
ensure it can be completed on time
Schedule Feasibility
Measures the practicality of a technical 
solution and the availability of
technical resources and expertise
Technical Feasibility
Measures how well the solution will
be accepted in a given organization
Political Feasibility
Measures how well a solution can be 
implemented within existing legal and 
contractual obligations
Legal Feasibility

358
Chapter 9 Systems Development and Project Management: Corporate Responsibility 
extend the project’s time to completion or increase the project’s cost—or both—to 
accommodate the changes. Project quality is affected by the project manager’s ability 
to balance these competing demands. High-quality projects deliver the agreed upon 
product or service on time and on budget. Project management is the science of mak-
ing intelligent trade-offs between time, cost, and scope. Benjamin Franklin’s timeless 
advice— by failing to prepare, you prepare to fail— applies to many of today’s software 
development projects. 
  The Project Management Institute created the  Project Management Body of Knowl-
edge (PMBOK)  for the education and certification of project managers.  Figure 9.14  sum-
marizes the key elements of project planning according to  PMBOK. 
 FIGURE 9.12 
 The Cost of Fixing Errors 
Cost $
Planning
Analysis
Design
Development
Testing
Implementation Maintenance
Systems Development Life Cycle Phases
 FIGURE 9.13 
 The Triple Constraint: Changing 
One Changes All 
MANAGING
EXPECTATIONS
Resources
Time
Scope

359
Enterprise MIS Module 3
 PRIMARY PROJECT PLANNING DIAGRAMS  
 Project planning is the process of detailed planning that generates answers to common 
operational questions such as why are we doing this project or what is the project going 
to accomplish for the business? Some of the key questions project planning can help 
answer include:
 ■ How are deliverables being produced? 
 ■ What activities or tasks need to be accomplished to produce the deliverables? 
 ■ Who is responsible for performing the tasks? 
 ■ What resources are required to perform the tasks? 
 ■ When will the tasks be performed? 
 ■ How long will it take to perform each task? 
 ■ Are any tasks dependent upon other tasks being completed before they can begin? 
 ■ How much does each task cost?  
 ■ What skills and experience are required to perform each task? 
 ■ How is the performance of the task being measured including quality? 
 ■ How are issues being tracked? 
 ■ How is change being addressed? 
 ■ How is communication occurring and when?  
 ■ What risks are associated with each task? 
 LO 9.4:  Identify the primary project 
planning diagrams. 
 Tool 
 Description 
 Communication plan 
 Defines the how, what, when, and who regarding the flow of project information to stakeholders and is key 
for managing expectations. 
 Executive sponsor 
 The person or group who provides the financial resources for the project. 
 Project assumption 
 Factors considered to be true, real, or certain without proof or demonstration. Examples include hours in a 
workweek or time of year the work will be performed. 
 Project constraint 
 Specific factors that can limit options, including budget, delivery dates, available skilled resources, and 
 organizational policies. 
 Project deliverable 
 Any measurable, tangible, verifiable outcome, result, or item that is produced to complete a project or part 
of a project. Examples of project deliverables include design documents, testing scripts, and requirements 
documents. 
 Project management office (PMO)  
 An internal department that oversees all organizational projects. This group must formalize and professional-
ize project management expertise and leadership. One of the primary initiatives of the PMO is to educate the 
organization on techniques and procedures necessary to run successful projects. 
 Project milestone 
 Represents key dates when a certain group of activities must be performed. For example, completing the 
planning phase might be a project milestone. If a project milestone is missed, then chances are the project is 
experiencing problems. 
 Project objectives 
 Quantifiable criteria that must be met for the project to be considered a success. 
 Project requirements document 
 Defines the specifications for product/output of the project and is key for managing expectations, controlling 
scope, and completing other planning efforts. 
 Project scope statement 
 Links the project to the organization’s overall business goals. It describes the business need (the problem 
the project will solve) and the justification, requirements, and current boundaries for the project. It defines 
the work that must be completed to deliver the product with the specified features and functions, and it 
includes constraints, assumptions, and requirements—all components necessary for developing accurate 
cost estimates. 
 Project stakeholder 
 Individuals and organizations actively involved in the project or whose interests might be affected as a result 
of project execution or project completion. 
 Responsibility matrix 
 Defines all project roles and indicates what responsibilities are associated with each role. 
 Status report 
 Periodic reviews of actual performance versus expected performance. 
 FIGURE 9.14 
 PMBOK Elements of Project 
Management  

360
Chapter 9 Systems Development and Project Management: Corporate Responsibility 
 The project objectives are among the most important areas to define because they are 
essentially the major elements of the project. When an organization achieves the proj-
ect objectives, it has accomplished the major goals of the project and the project scope 
is satisfied. Project objectives must include metrics so that the project’s success can 
be measured. The metrics can include cost, schedule, and quality metrics.  Figure 9.15  
lists the SMART criteria—useful reminders about how to ensure the project has created 
understandable and measurable objectives. 
 The   project plan   is a formal, approved document that manages and controls project 
execution. The project plan should include a description of the project scope, a list of 
activities, a schedule, time estimates, cost estimates, risk factors, resources, assignments, 
and responsibilities. In addition to these basic components, most project profession-
als also include contingency plans, review and communications strategies, and a   kill 
switch   —a trigger that enables a project manager to close the project before completion. 
 A good project plan should include estimates for revenue and strategic necessities. 
It also should include measurement and reporting methods and details as to how top 
leadership will engage in the project. It also informs stakeholders of the benefits of the 
project and justifies the investment, commitment, and risk of the project as it relates to 
the overall mission of the organization. 
 Managers need to continuously monitor projects to measure their success. If a project 
is failing, the manager must cancel the project and save the company any further project 
costs. Canceling a project is not necessarily a failure as much as it is successful resource 
management as it frees resources that can be used on other projects that are more valu-
able to the firm. 
 The most important part of the plan is communication. The project manager must 
communicate the plan to every member of the project team and to any key stakehold-
ers and executives. The project plan must also include any project assumptions and be 
detailed enough to guide the execution of the project. A key to achieving project success 
is earning consensus and buy-in from all key stakeholders. By including key stakehold-
ers in project plan development, the project manager allows them to have ownership of 
the plan. This often translates to greater commitment, which in turn results in enhanced 
motivation and productivity. The two primary diagrams most frequently used in project 
planning are PERT and Gantt charts. 
 A    PERT (Program Evaluation and Review Technique) chart    is a graphical net-
work model that depicts a project’s tasks and the relationships between them. 
 FIGURE 9.15 
 SMART Criteria for Successful 
Objective Creation 
S
•  Speciﬁc
M
•  Measurable
•  Agreed Upon
•  Realistic
R
•  Time Frame
T
A

361
Enterprise MIS Module 3
A   dependency    is a logical relationship that exists between the project tasks, or between 
a project task and a milestone. PERT charts define dependency between project tasks 
before those tasks are scheduled (see  Figure 9.16 ). The boxes in  Figure 9.16  represent 
project tasks, and the project manager can adjust the contents of the boxes to dis-
play various project  attributes  such as schedule and actual start and finish times. The 
arrows indicate that a task depends on the start or the completion of a different task. 
The   critical path   estimates  the shortest path through the project ensuring all critical 
tasks are completed from start to finish. The red line in  Figure 9.16  displays the critical 
path for the project.  
 A   Gantt chart   is a simple bar chart that lists project tasks vertically against the proj-
ect’s time frame, listed horizontally. A Gantt chart works well for representing the project 
schedule. It also shows actual progress of tasks against the planned duration.  Figure 9.17  
displays a software development project using a Gantt chart. 
 OUTSOURCING PROJECTS  
 In the high-speed global business environment, an organization needs to increase 
profits, grow market share, and reduce costs. Two basic options are available to orga-
nizations wishing to develop and maintain their information systems—in-sourcing or 
outsourcing. 
  In-sourcing (in-house development)   uses the professional expertise within an orga-
nization to develop and maintain its information technology systems. In-sourcing has 
been instrumental in creating a viable supply of IT professionals and in creating a better 
quality workforce combining both technical and business skills. 
  Outsourcing   is an arrangement by which one organization provides a service or 
services for another organization that chooses not to perform them in-house. In some 
cases, the entire MIS department is outsourced, including planning and business anal-
ysis as well as the design, development, and maintenance of equipment and projects. 
Outsourcing can range from a large contract under which an organization such as IBM 
 LO 9.5:  Identify the three different 
types of outsourcing along with their 
benefits and challenges. 
 BUSINESS DRIVEN MIS 
 Google is scanning all or parts of the book collections of the University of 
Michigan, Harvard University, Stanford University, the New York Public Library, 
and Oxford University as part of its Google Print Library Project with the intent 
of making all of the copyrighted material free and searchable on Google. 
Of course many authors and publishers are furious with Google, claiming 
copyright  infringement. According to Google, scanning books will help make 
out-of-print books accessible as customers can find, read, and print books 
directly from the website and will actually generate sales by giving customers 
the ability to buy books online. 
 Do you view Google’s Print Library Project as a violation of copyright laws? 
Of all the projects Google can afford to tackle, why would the company choose 
one that directly violates copyright laws? If all books were available for free on 
Google, what would happen to the publishing industry? As you prioritize proj-
ects for your business, what types of competitive information will you want to 
view before choosing projects? What do you think the future of the book pub-
lishing industry will look like based on Google’s radical new website? If you 
owned a publishing business, what could you do to combat Google’s book 
project? 9 
 Google Books 
Project 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 

362
Chapter 9 Systems Development and Project Management: Corporate Responsibility 
 FIGURE 9.16 
 PERT Chart Expert, a PERT Chart 
Example 
 FIGURE 9.17 
 Microsoft Project, a Gantt Chart 
Example 

363
Enterprise MIS Module 3
manages all MIS services for another company, to hiring contractors and temporary staff 
on an individual basis. Common reasons companies outsource include:
 ■  Core competencies. Many companies have recently begun to consider outsourcing 
as a way to acquire best-practices and the business process expertise of highly skilled 
technology resources for a low cost. Technology is advancing at such an accelerated 
rate that companies often lack the technical resources required to keep current. 
 ■  Financial savings.  It is far cheaper to hire people in China and India than pay the 
required salaries for similar labor in the United States.  
 ■  Rapid growth. Firms must get their products to market quickly and still be able to 
react to market changes. By taking advantage of outsourcing, an organization can 
acquire the resources required to speed up operations or scale to new demand levels. 
 ■  The Internet and globalization.  The pervasive nature of the Internet has made 
more people comfortable with outsourcing abroad as India, China, and the United 
States become virtual neighbors.    
 Outsourcing MIS enables organizations to keep up with market and technology 
advances—with less strain on human and financial resources and more assurance that 
the IT infrastructure will keep pace with evolving business priorities (see  Figure 9.18 ). 
The three forms of outsourcing options available for a project are: 
 1.   Onshore outsourcing  —engaging another company within the same country for 
services. 
 2.   Nearshore outsourcing  —contracting an outsourcing arrangement with a company 
in a nearby country. Often this country will share a border with the native country.  
 3.   Offshore outsourcing  —using organizations from developing countries to write code 
and develop systems. In offshore outsourcing the country is geographically far away. 
 BUSINESS DRIVEN INNOVATION 
 The next time one of your employees submits an expense report, you might 
want to think twice as a number of websites offer phony documentation indi-
viduals can use to help cheat on their taxes, expense reports, or even spouses. 
Here are a few you should be aware of:
 ■  Customreceipts.com : This website can print a fake ATM receipt. Why would 
people want a fake ATM receipt? To impress others with their massive bal-
ances of course!  
 ■  Alibi Network: This website can create you a customized excuse, such as an 
emergency phone call giving you a reason to leave that boring meeting, or a 
false invitation to a corporate or business event so an unfaithful partner can 
give physical proof of a false destination and location. 
 ■  The Restaurant Maloney & Porcelli’s:  This innovative, yet highly unethical, 
restaurant started a website that allows its customers to enter an amount for 
a meal and it generates fake receipts adding up to the cost of the meal. 10     
 All these systems were created by software developers. If you were asked to par-
ticipate in one of these website development efforts, what would you do? Who do 
you think should be held liable for unethical websites—the employee or the host 
of the website? Now that you know about the existence of these types of web-
sites, how will you manage your employees? What would you do to an employee 
who was using one of these services? How can a project manager combat these 
types of issues without wasting enormous amounts of time and energy?  
 $7,500 Steak 
Dinner 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 

364
Chapter 9 Systems Development and Project Management: Corporate Responsibility 
 Since the mid-1990s, major U.S. companies have been sending significant portions  of their 
software development work offshore—primarily to vendors in India, but also to vendors in 
China, eastern Europe (including Russia), Ireland, Israel, and the Philippines.  The big selling 
point for offshore outsourcing is inexpensive but good work. The overseas  counterpart to an 
American programmer who earns as much as $63,000 per year is paid as little as $5,000 per 
year (see  Figure 9.19 ). Developing countries in Asia and South Africa offer some outsourc-
ing services but are challenged by language difference, inadequate  telecommunication  
equipment,  and regulatory obstacles. India is the largest offshore marketplace  because 
it promotes English along with a technologically advanced population. Infosys, NIIT, 
Mahindra  Satyam, Tata Consultancy Services, and Wipro are among the biggest Indian out-
sourcing service providers, each of which has a large presence in the United States. 11   
 Outsourcing Benefits 
 The many benefits associated with outsourcing include:
 ■ Increased quality and efficiency of business processes. 
 ■ Reduced operating expenses for head count and exposure to risk for large capital 
investments. 
 ■ Access to outsourcing service provider’s expertise, economies of scale, best practices, 
and advanced technologies. 
 ■ Increased flexibility for faster response to market changes and less time to market for 
new products or services. 
 Outsourcing Challenges 
 Outsourcing comes with several challenges. These arguments are valid and should be 
considered when a company is thinking about outsourcing. Many challenges can be 
avoided with proper research. The challenges include:
 FIGURE 9.18 
 Outsourcing Models 
Indirect
Customer Control
Direct
Close
Remote
Locations of Outsourcing
Onshore
Nearshore
Offshore
 Country 
 Salary Range Per Year 
 China 
 $5,000–$9,000 
 India 
 6,000–10,000 
 Philippines 
 6,500–11,000 
 Russia 
 7,000–13,000 
 Ireland 
 21,000–28,000 
 Canada 
 25,000–50,000 
 United States 
 60,000–90,000 
 FIGURE 9.19 
 Typical Salary Ranges for 
Computer Programmers 
 Source: From  Edward Yourdon, Death 
March, 2nd edition, © 2004. Reproduced 
by permission of Pearson Education, Inc., 
Upper Saddle River, New Jersey. 

365
Enterprise MIS Module 3
 ■  Length of contract.  Most companies look at outsourcing as a long-term solution 
with a time period of several years. Training and transferring resources around the 
globe is difficult and expensive, hence most companies pursuing offshore outsourc-
ing contract for multiple years of service. A few of the challenges facing the length of 
the contract include:
  1. It can be difficult to break the contract. 
  2. Forecasting business needs for the next several years is challenging and the con-
tract might not meet future business needs. 
  3. Re-creating an internal MIS department if the outsource provider fails is costly and 
challenging. 
 ■  Threat to competitive advantage. Many businesses view MIS as a competitive 
advantage and view outsourcing as a threat because the outsourcer could share the 
company’s trade secrets.  
 ■  Loss of confidentiality.  Information on pricing, products, sales, and customers can 
be a competitive asset and often critical for business success. Outsourcing could 
place confidential information in the wrong hands. Although confidentiality clauses 
contained in the contracts are supposed to protect the company, the potential risk 
and costs of a breach must be analyzed. 
 Every type of organization in business today relies on software to operate and solve 
complex problems or create exciting opportunities. Software built correctly can support 
nimble organizations and transform with them as they and their businesses transform. 
Software that effectively meets employee needs will help an organization become more 
productive and enhance decision making. Software that does not meet employee needs 
might have a damaging effect on productivity and can even cause a business to fail. 
Employee involvement in software development, along with the right implementation, 
is critical to the success of an organization. 
 BUSINESS DRIVEN GLOBALIZATION 
 Swedish police stopped Bill Murray and charged him with drunk driving when 
he attempted to drive his golf cart around the city. A golf cart hits top speed at 
three miles per hour and although it might seem odd that you can be issued a 
DUI for driving one, many countries have laws against such practices. A few 
other culture blunders you want to avoid include:
 ■ One American company learned that the name of the cooking oil they were 
marketing translated into “jackass oil” in Spanish. 
 ■ A deodorant marketing campaign displayed images of a strong courageous 
man washing his dog. The campaign failed in Islamic countries where dogs 
are considered unclean. 
 ■ A sports equipment company packaged golf balls in groups of four for sales 
throughout Japan. Sales plummeted because the word  four pronounced in 
Japanese sounds the same as the word  death and items packaged in fours 
are considered unlucky. 12 
 Companies that are expanding globally are looking for opportunities, not 
problems. Yet local laws and procedures that come into play when setting up 
shop abroad—everything from hiring and firing to tax filings—can be a mine-
field. What types of culture, language, and legal issues should a company expect 
to encounter when dealing with outsourcing to another country? What can a 
company do to mitigate these risks?  
 DUI in a Golf 
Cart 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 

366
Chapter 9 Systems Development and Project Management: Corporate Responsibility 
 BUSINESS DRIVEN DISCUSSION 
 Edward Yourdon’s book  Death March  describes the complete software devel-
oper’s guide to surviving “mission impossible” projects. MIS projects are 
challenging, and project managers are expected to achieve the impossible by 
pulling off a successful project even when pitted against impossible challenges. 
In  Death March,  infamous software developer Edward Yourdon presents his 
project classification displayed here. Yourdon measures projects based on the 
level of pain and chances for success. 
 ■  Mission Impossible Project:  This project has a great chance of success and 
your hard work will pay off as you find happiness and joy in the work. For 
example, this is the type of project where you work all day and night for a 
year and become the project hero as you complete the mission impossible 
and reap a giant promotion as your reward. 
 ■  Ugly Project: This project has a high chance of success but is very painful 
and offers little happiness. For example, you work day and night to install a 
new accounting system and although successful, you hate accounting and 
dislike the company and its products. 
 ■  Kamikaze Project: This is a project that has little chance of success but you 
are so passionate about the content that you find great happiness working 
on the project. For example, you are asked to build a website to support a 
cancer foundation, a cause near to your heart, but the company is nonprofit 
and doesn’t have any funds to help buy the software you need to get every-
thing working. You patch the system together and implement many manual 
work-arounds just to keep the system functioning. 
 ■  Suicide Project: This project has no chance of success and offers you noth-
ing but pain. This is the equivalent of your worst nightmare project. Word of 
caution, avoid suicide projects! 13 
 Analyze your school and work projects and find a project that would fit in 
each box. What could you have done differently on your suicide project to 
ensure its success? What can you do to avoid being placed on a suicide project? 
Given the choice, which type of project would you choose to work on and why? 
 Death March 
 APPLY YOUR KNOWLEDGE 
Kamikaze
Suicide
Ugly
Chance of Success
Mission
Impossible
Level of Happiness

367
Enterprise MIS Module 3
 Learning Outcome 9.1: Describe the seven phases of the systems development  life cycle. 
 The seven phases in the SDLC are:
 ■ Planning—involves establishing a high-level plan of the intended project and determining project 
goals. 
 ■ Analysis—involves analyzing end-user business requirements and refining project goals into 
defined functions and operations of the intended system. 
 ■ Design—involves describing the desired features and operations of the system including screen 
layouts, business rules, process diagrams, pseudo code, and other documentation. 
 ■ Development—involves taking all of the detailed design documents from the design phase and 
transforming them into the actual system. 
 ■ Testing—involves bringing all the project pieces together into a special testing environment to 
test for errors, bugs, and interoperability and verify that the system meets all of the business 
requirements defined in the analysis phase. 
 ■ Implementation—involves placing the system into production so users can begin to perform 
actual business operations with the system. 
 ■ Maintenance—involves performing changes, corrections, additions, and upgrades to ensure the 
system continues to meet the business goals. 
 Learning Outcome 9.2: Summarize the different software development methodologies.  
 The oldest and the best known project management methodology is the waterfall methodology, a 
sequence of phases in which the output of each phase becomes the input for the next. In the SDLC, 
this means the steps are performed one at a time, in order, from planning through implementation and 
maintenance. The traditional waterfall method no longer serves most of today’s development efforts, 
however; it is inflexible and expensive, and it requires rigid adherence to the sequence of steps. Its 
success rate is only about 1 in 10.  
There are a number of different software development methodologies including:
 ■ Agile methodology aims for customer satisfaction through early and continuous delivery of useful 
software components developed by an iterative process with a design point that uses the bare 
minimum requirements. 
 ■ Waterfall methodology follows an activity-based process in which each phase in the SDLC is 
performed sequentially from planning through implementation and maintenance. 
 ■ Rapid application development methodology (RAD) emphasizes extensive user involvement in the 
rapid and evolutionary construction of working prototypes of a system to accelerate the systems 
development process. 
 ■ Extreme programming (XP) methodology breaks a project into tiny phases, and developers cannot 
continue on to the next phase until the first phase is complete. 
 ■ Rational unified process (RUP) provides a framework for breaking down the development of soft-
ware into four gates. 
 ■ Scrum uses small teams to produce small pieces of deliverable software using sprints, or 30-day 
intervals, to achieve an appointed goal. 
 Learning Outcome 9.3: Explain project management and identify the primary reasons 
projects fail. 
 A project is a temporary or short-term endeavor undertaken to create a unique product, service, or 
result, such as developing a custom ecommerce site or merging databases. Project management is the 
 L E A R N I N G  O U T C O M E  R E V I E W 

368
Chapter 9 Systems Development and Project Management: Corporate Responsibility 
application of knowledge, skills, tools, and techniques to project activities to meet project requirements. 
A project manager is an individual who is an expert in project planning and management, defines and 
develops the project plan, and tracks the plan to ensure the project is completed on time and on budget.    
 The primary reasons projects fail include unclear or missing business requirements, skipped phases, 
changing technology, the cost of finding errors in the SDLC, and balance of the triple constraints.  
 Learning Outcome 9.4: Identify the primary project planning diagrams. 
 A PERT (Program Evaluation and Review Technique) chart is a graphical network model that depicts a 
project’s tasks and the relationships between those tasks. A dependency is a logical relationship that 
exists between the project tasks, or between a project task and a milestone. A Gantt chart is a simple 
bar chart that depicts project tasks against a calendar. In a Gantt chart, tasks are listed vertically and 
the project’s time frame is listed horizontally. A Gantt chart works well for representing the project 
schedule. It also shows actual progress of tasks against the planned duration. 
 Learning Outcome 9.5: Identify the three different types of outsourcing along with their 
benefits and challenges. 
 ■ Onshore outsourcing—engaging another company within the same country for services. 
 ■ Nearshore outsourcing—contracting an outsourcing arrangement with a company in a nearby 
country. 
 ■ Offshore outsourcing—using organizations from developing countries to write code and develop 
systems. 
 The many benefits associated with outsourcing include increased quality and efficiency of a pro-
cess, service, or function; reduction of operating expenses and exposure to risks involved with large 
capital investments; and access to outsourcing service provider’s expertise, economies of scale, best 
practices, and advanced technologies. Outsourcing comes with several challenges, including length 
of contracts, losing competitive advantages, and risking a breach of confidential information. 
 1.  Knowledge: List the signs for assessing if a current project is experiencing issues. 
 2.  Comprehension: Identify the options a project manager can follow if a project is not meeting its 
success criteria. 
 3.  Application: Illustrate the triple constraints role in a project. 
 4. Analysis: Analyze the four steps to recovering a project and determine which one is the most 
critical. 
 5. Synthesis: Propose how you would develop a game plan to recover a project. 
 6. Evaluate: Argue for or against the following statement: “Throwing good money after bad will not 
save a project.”  
 O P E N I N G  C A S E  Q U E S T I O N S 
 Agile methodology, 352 
 Alpha testing, 349 
 Analysis phase, 346 
 Brainstorming, 345 
 Bug, 349 
 Business requirement, 346 
 Change agent, 345 
 Communication plan, 359 
 Computer-aided software 
engineering  (CASE), 348  
 Control objects for informa-
tion and related technology 
(COBIT), 348 
 Conversion, 345 
 Corrective maintenance, 350 
 K E Y  T E R M S 

369
Enterprise MIS Module 3
  1. What role does project management play in the systems development effort? 
  2. What role does the project manager play in determining a project’s success? 
  3. Why would a project require an executive sponsor? 
  4. Which phase in the systems development life cycle is the most important? 
  5. If you had to skip a phase during the development of a system, which phase would it be and why? 
  6.  Which phase in the systems development life cycle contains the most risk? Be sure to explain 
your answer. 
  7.  Which project management methodology would you choose to run your software development 
project?  
  8.  If you started on a new software development project and the project plan was using the water-
fall methodology, would you remain on the project? What could you do to better prepare your 
project for success? 
  9.  Explain the different types of feasibility studies a project manager can use to prioritize project 
importance. 
 10. Why should end users be involved in the systems development effort? 
 11. Why would a project manager use Gantt and PERT charts? 
 12. Why is gathering business requirements a challenge for most projects? 
 13. What are the different types of outsourcing available for a project? 
 14. What are the risks associated with outsourcing? 
 15.  Explain the goals of the Project Management Institute and identify three key terms associated 
with  PMBOK. 
 R E V I E W  Q U E S T I O N S 
 Critical path, 361 
 Dependency, 361 
 Design phase, 348 
 Development phase, 348 
 Development testing, 349 
 Discovery prototyping, 352 
 Executive sponsor, 359 
 Extreme programming (XP) 
methodology, 353 
 Feasibility, 355 
 Fourth-generation languages 
(4GL), 349 
 Gantt chart, 361 
 Help desk, 349 
 Implementation phase, 349 
 In-sourcing (in-house 
development), 361 
 Intangible benefits, 355 
 Integration testing, 349 
 Iterative development, 352 
 Kill switch, 360 
 Legacy system, 345 
 Maintenance phase, 350 
 Methodology, 351 
 Nearshore outsourcing, 363 
 Object-oriented languages, 349 
 Offshore outsourcing, 363 
 Off-the-shelf application 
software, 345 
 Online training, 349 
 Onshore outsourcing, 363 
 Outsourcing, 361 
 Parallel implementation, 350 
 PERT (Program Evaluation 
and Review Technique) 
chart, 360 
 Phased implementation, 350 
 Pilot implementation, 350 
 Planning phase, 345 
 Plunge implementation, 350 
 Preventive maintenance, 350 
 Project, 346 
 Project assumption, 359 
 Project constraint, 359 
 Project deliverable, 359 
 Project management, 346 
 Project management office 
(PMO), 359 
 Project manager, 346 
 Project milestones, 359 
 Project objective, 359 
 Project plan, 346 
 Project requirements 
document, 359 
Project scope, 346
 Project scope statement, 359 
 Project stakeholder, 359 
 Prototyping, 352 
 Rapid application development 
(RAD) methodology (also called 
rapid prototyping), 353 
 Rational unified process (RUP) 
methodology, 353 
 Requirements 
management, 348 
 Requirements definition 
document, 348 
 Responsibility matrix, 359 
 Scripting language, 349 
 Scrum methodology, 354 
 Sign-off, 348 
 Software customization, 345 
 Software engineering, 348 
 Status report, 359 
 Systems development life 
cycle (SDLC), 345 
 System testing, 349 
 Tangible benefits, 355 
 Test conditions, 349 
 Testing phase, 349 
 Unit testing, 349 
 User acceptance testing 
(UAT), 349 
 User documentation, 349 
 Waterfall methodology, 351 
 Workshop training, 349 

370
Chapter 9 Systems Development and Project Management: Corporate Responsibility 
 C L O S I N G  C A S E  O N E 
 Disaster at Denver International Airport 
  One good way to learn how to develop successful systems is to review past failures. One of the most 
infamous system failures is Denver International Airport’s (DIA) baggage system. When the automated 
baggage system design for DIA was introduced, it was hailed as the savior of modern airport design. 
The design relied on a network of 300 computers to route bags and 4,000 cars to carry luggage 
across 21 miles of track. Laser scanners were to read bar-coded luggage tags, while advanced scan-
ners tracked the movement of toboggan-like baggage carts. 
 When DIA finally opened its doors for reporters to witness its revolutionary baggage handling sys-
tem, the scene was rather unpleasant. Bags were chewed up, lost, and misrouted in what has since 
become a legendary systems nightmare. 
 One of the biggest mistakes made in the baggage handling system fiasco was that not enough 
time was allowed to properly develop the system. In the beginning of the project, DIA assumed it was 
the responsibility of individual airlines to find their own way of moving the baggage from the plane to 
the baggage claim area. The automated baggage system was not involved in the initial planning of the 
DIA project. By the time the DIA developers decided to create an integrated baggage system, the time 
frame for designing and implementing such a complex and huge system was not possible. 
 Another common mistake that occurred during the project was that the airlines kept changing 
their business requirements. This caused numerous issues, including the implementation of power 
supplies that were not properly updated for the revised system design, which caused overloaded 
motors and mechanical failures. Besides the power supply design problem, the optical sensors did not 
read the bar codes correctly, causing issues with baggage routing. 
 Finally, BAE, the company that designed and implemented the automated baggage system for 
DIA, had never created a baggage system of this size before. BAE had created a similar system in an 
airport in Munich, Germany, where the scope was much smaller. Essentially, the baggage system had 
an inadequate IT infrastructure because it was designed for a much smaller system. 
 DIA simply could not open without a functional baggage system so the city had no choice but to 
delay the opening date for more than 16 months, costing taxpayers roughly $1 million per day, which 
totaled around $500 million. 14 
 Questions 
 1. One problem with DIA’s baggage system was inadequate testing. Why is testing important to a 
project’s success? Why do so many projects decide to skip testing? 
 2. Evaluate the different systems development methodologies. Which one would have most 
significantly increased the chances of the project’s success? 
 3. How could more time spent in the analysis and design phase have saved Colorado taxpayers 
hundreds of millions of dollars? 
 4. Why could BAE not take an existing IT infrastructure and simply increase its scale and expect it to work?       
 Reducing Ambiguity in Business Requirements 
  The main reason projects fail is bad business requirements. Business requirements are considered 
“bad” because of ambiguity or insufficient involvement of end users during analysis and design. 
 C L O S I N G  C A S E  T W O 

371
Enterprise MIS Module 3
 A requirement is unambiguous if it has the same interpretation for all parties. Different interpre-
tations by different participants will usually result in unmet expectations. Here is an example of an 
ambiguous requirement and an example of an unambiguous requirement: 
 Ambiguous requirement: The financial report must show profits in local and U.S. currencies. 
 Unambiguous requirement: The financial report must show profits in local and U.S. currencies using 
the exchange rate printed in  The Wall Street Journal  for the last business day of the period being reported. 
 Ambiguity is impossible to prevent completely because it is introduced into requirements in natural  
ways. For example:
 ■ Requirements can contain technical implications that are obvious to the IT developers but not to 
the customers. 
 ■ Requirements can contain business implications that are obvious to the customer but not to the IT 
developers. 
 ■ Requirements may contain everyday words whose meanings are “obvious” to everyone, yet 
different for everyone. 
 ■ Requirements are reflections of detailed explanations that may have included multiple events, 
multiple perspectives, verbal rephrasing, emotion, iterative refinement, selective emphasis, and 
body language—none of which are captured in the written statements. 
 Tips for Reviewing Business Requirements 
  When reviewing business requirements always look for the following words to help dramatically 
reduce ambiguity:
 ■  And  and  or  have well-defined meanings and ought to be completely unambiguous, yet they are often 
understood only informally and interpreted inconsistently. For example, consider the statement “The 
alarm must ring if button T is pressed and if button F is pressed.” This statement may be intended to 
mean that to ring the alarm, both buttons must be pressed or it may be intended to mean that either one 
can be pressed. A statement like this should never appear in a requirement because the potential for mis-
interpretation is too great. A preferable approach is to be very explicit, for example, “The alarm must ring 
if both buttons T and F are pressed simultaneously. The alarm should not ring in any other circumstance.”  
 ■  Always  might really mean “most of the time,” in which case it should be made more explicit. For 
example, the statement “We always run reports A and B together” could be challenged with “In 
other words, there is never any circumstance where you would run A without B and B without A?” 
If you build a system with an “always” requirement, then you are actually building the system to 
never run report A without report B. If a user suddenly wants report B without report A, you will 
need to make significant system changes. 
 ■  Never  might mean rarely, in which case it should be made more explicit. For example, the state-
ment “We never run reports A and B in the same month” could be challenged with, “So that 
means that if I see that A has been run, I can be absolutely certain that no one will want to run B.” 
Again, if you build a system that supports a “never” requirement, then the system users can never 
perform that requirement. For example, the system would never allow a user to run reports A and 
B in the same month, no matter what the circumstances. 
 ■ Boundary conditions are statements about the line between true and false and do and do not. 
These statements may or may not be meant to include end points. For example, “We want to 
use method X when there are up to 10 pages, but method Y otherwise.” If you were building this 
system, would you include page 10 in method X or in method Y? The answer to this question will 
vary causing an ambiguous business requirement. 15 
 Questions 
 1. Why are ambiguous business requirements the leading cause of system development failures? 
 2. Why do the words  and and  or tend to lead to ambiguous requirements? 
 3. Research the web and determine other reasons for “bad” business requirements. 
 4. What is wrong with the following business requirement: “The system must support employee 
birthdays because every employee always has a birthday every year.” 

372
Chapter 9 Systems Development and Project Management: Corporate Responsibility 
 1. Selecting a Systems Development Methodology 
 Exus Incorporated is an international billing outsourcing company. Exus currently has revenues 
of $5 billion, more than 3,500 employees, and operations on every continent. You have recently 
been hired as the CIO. Your first task is to increase the software development project success rate, 
which is currently at 20 percent. To ensure that future software development projects are success-
ful, you want to standardize the systems development methodology across the entire enterprise. 
Currently, each project determines which methodology it uses to develop software. 
 Create a report detailing three system development methodologies that were covered in this text. 
Compare each of these methodologies to the traditional waterfall approach. Finally, recommend 
which methodology you want to implement as your organizational standard. Be sure to highlight 
any potential roadblocks you might encounter when implementing the new standard methodology. 
 2. Understanding Project Failure 
 You are the director of project management for Stello, a global manufacturer of high-end writing 
instruments. The company sells to primarily high-end customers, and the average price for one of 
its fine writing instruments is about $350. You are currently implementing a new customer relation-
ship management system, and you want to do everything you can to ensure a successful systems 
development effort. Create a document summarizing the primary reasons this project could fail, 
along with your strategy to eliminate the possibility of system development failure on your project. 
 3. Missing Phases in the Systems Development Life Cycle 
 Hello Inc. is a large concierge service for executives operating in Chicago, San Francisco, and New 
York. The company performs all kinds of services from dog walking to airport transportation. Your 
manager, Dan Martello, wants to skip the testing phase during the company’s financial ERP imple-
mentation. He feels that because the system came from a vendor, it should work correctly. Draft a 
memo explaining the importance of following the SDLC and the ramifications to the business if the 
financial system is not tested. 
 4. Refusing to Sign Off 
 You are the primary client on a large extranet development project. After carefully reviewing the 
requirements definition document, you are positive that there are missing, ambiguous, inaccurate, 
and unclear requirements. The project manager is pressuring you for your sign-off because he has 
already received sign-off from five of your co-workers. If you fail to sign off on the requirements, 
you are going to put the entire project at risk because the time frame is nonnegotiable. What would 
you do? Why? 
 5. Saving Failing Systems 
 Crik Candle Company manufactures low-end candles for restaurants. The company generates 
more than $40 million in annual revenues and has more than 300 employees. You are in the 
middle of a large multimillion-dollar supply chain management implementation. Your project man-
ager has just come to you with the information that the project might fail for the following reasons:
 
■ Several business requirements were incorrect and the scope has to be doubled. 
 
■ Three developers recently quit. 
 
■ The deadline has been moved up a month. 
 Develop a list of options that your company can follow to ensure the project remains on schedule 
and within budget. 
 C R I T I C A L  B U S I N E S S  T H I N K I N G 

373
Enterprise MIS Module 3
 6. Explaining Project Management 
 Prime Time Inc. is a large consulting company that specializes in outsourcing people with project 
management capabilities and skills. You are in the middle of an interview for a job with Prime 
Time. The manager performing the interview asks you to explain why managing a project plan 
is critical to a project’s success. The manager also wants you to explain scope creep and feature 
creep and your tactics for managing them on a project. Finally, the manager wants you to elabo-
rate on your strategies for delivering successful projects and reducing risks. 
 7. Applying Project Management Techniques 
 You have been hired by a medium-sized airline company, Sun Best. Sun Best currently flies more 
than 300 routes in the East. The company is experiencing tremendous issues coordinating its 
3,500 pilots, 7,000 flight attendants, and 2,000 daily flights. Determine how Sun Best could use 
a Gantt chart to help it coordinate pilots, flight attendants, and daily flights. Using Excel, create a 
sample Gantt chart highlighting the different types of activities and resources Sun Best could track 
with the tool. 
 E N T R E P R E N E U R I A L  C H A L L E N G E 
 BUILD YOUR OWN BUSINESS 
 1. Your business is undertaking many new and exciting initiatives to boost growth, including 
employee blogs, customer wikis, and implementation of a new time and attendance system. 
Time and attendance software is critical to the business because it can ensure you have the 
right employees, at the right place, at the right time, which can increase sales. You never want to 
find yourself understaffed during busy times and overstaffed during slow times. Also, accurately 
accounting for employees’ time is crucial to effectively analyzing labor expenses, which are 
the largest operating expense your business incurs. Conveniently, time and attendance solution 
providers, time clock manufacturers, and software development companies are developing high-
quality affordable products. You have decided to replace the manual employee tracking system 
your grandfather implemented in the 1950s. You have a highly technical employee, Nick Zele, 
who has offered to build the system for you and ensures you it is a simple build. You could also 
purchase one of the many off-the-shelf applications and have an outsourcing firm customize the 
application for your business. What are the pros and cons of using an employee to build you a 
custom system? What are the pros and cons of purchasing an off-the-shelf time and attendance 
application and outsourcing custom development? How will your older employees feel about the 
new system and what can you do to ensure a smooth transition? 
 2. You have decided to implement a new payroll system for your business. Review the following 
business requirements and highlight any potential issues.
 
■ All employees must have a unique employee ID. 
 
■ The system must track employee hours worked based on employee’s last name. 
 
■ Employees must be scheduled to work a minimum of eight hours per day. 
 
■ Employee payroll is calculated by multiplying the employee’s hours worked by $7.25. 
 
■ Managers must be scheduled to work morning shifts. 
 
■ Employees cannot be scheduled to work more than eight hours per day. 
 
■ Servers cannot be scheduled to work morning, afternoon, or evening shifts. 
 
■ The system must allow managers to change and delete employees from the system. 

374
Chapter 9 Systems Development and Project Management: Corporate Responsibility 
 3. You are in the middle of implementing a new system at your business. Your project team is failing 
for the following three reasons: (1) The project is using the traditional waterfall methodology; (2) 
the SDLC was not followed and the developers decided to skip the testing phase; (3) a project 
plan was developed during the analysis phase, but the old project manager never updated or 
followed the plan and never updated the business requirements. Detail your strategy for getting 
your project back on track. 
 PROJECT I 
Methods Behind Methodologies 
 Signatures Inc. specializes in producing personalized products such as coffee mugs and pens with 
company logos. The company generates more than $40 million in annual revenues and has more than 
300 employees. The company is in the middle of a large multimillion-dollar SCM implementation, and it 
has just hired your project management outsourcing firm to take over the project management efforts. 
 On your first day, your team is told that the project is failing for the following reasons:
 ■ The project is using the traditional waterfall methodology. 
 ■ The SDLC was not followed and the developers decided to skip the testing phase. 
 ■ A project plan was developed during the analysis phase, but the old project manager never 
updated or followed the plan. 
 Determine what your first steps would be to get this project back on track. 
 PROJECT II 
The Travel Store 
 The Travel Store is facing a dilemma as it tripled in size over the past three years and finds its online 
sales escalating beyond a billion dollars. The company is having a hard time continuing with opera-
tions as its business processes can’t scale to meet the new demand. In the past six months, sales 
and profits have dropped and the stock price is plummeting. 
 The Travel Store is determined to take quick and decisive action to restore profitability and 
improve its credibility in the marketplace. One of its top priorities is to overhaul its inventory 
management  system in an effort to create optimal levels of inventory to support sales demand. 
This would prevent higher-volume stores from running out of key sale items while also ensuring 
that lower-sales stores would not be burdened with excess inventory that could be moved only 
at closeout prices. The company would like to outsource this function but is worried about the 
challenges of transferring the responsibility of this important business function, as well as the 
issues surrounding confidentiality, and scope definition. List the competitive advantages outsourc-
ing could give to The Travel Store, along with recommendations for addressing the company’s 
outsourcing concerns.  
 PROJECT III 
GEM Athletic Center 
 First Information Corporation is a large consulting company that specializes in systems analysis 
and design. The company has more than 2,000 employees, and first-quarter revenues reached $15 
million.  The company prides itself on maintaining an 85 percent success rate for all project imple-
mentations. The primary reason attributed to the unusually high project success rate is the company’s 
ability to define accurate, complete, and high-quality business requirements. 
 The GEM Athletic Center located in Cleveland, Ohio, is interested in implementing a new payroll 
system. The current payroll process is manual and takes three employees two days each month to 
complete. The GEM Athletic Center does not have an IT department and is outsourcing the entire pro-
curement, customization, and installation of the new payroll system to First Information Corporation. 
 A P P LY  Y O U R  K N O W L E D G E  B U S I N E S S  P R O J E C T S 

375
Enterprise MIS Module 3
 You have been working for First Information for a little over one month. Your team has just been 
assigned the GEM Athletic Center project, and your first task is to define the initial business require-
ments for the development of the new payroll system. 
    
a. Review the testimony of three current GEM Athletic Center accounting employees who detail 
the current payroll process along with their wish list for the new system.  Figure 9.20  presents 
the testimonies of Maggie Cleaver, Anne Logan, and Jim Poulos.   
  
b. Review Closing Case Two, “Reducing Ambiguity in Business Requirements,” and highlight 
several techniques you can use to develop solid business requirements.  
   
c. After careful analysis, create a report detailing the business requirements for the new system. 
Be sure to list any assumptions, issues, or questions in your document.    
 PROJECT IV 
Confusing Coffee 
 Business requirements are the detailed set of business requests that any new system must meet to 
be successful. A sample business requirement might state, “The system must track all customer sales 
by product, region, and sales representative.” This requirement states what the system must do from 
the business perspective, giving no details or information on how the system is going to meet this 
requirement. 
 You have been hired to build an employee payroll system for a new coffee shop. Review the follow-
ing business requirements and highlight any potential issues. 
 ■ All employees must have a unique employee ID. 
 ■ The system must track employee hours worked based on employee’s last name. 
 ■ Employees must be scheduled to work a minimum of eight hours per day. 
 ■ Employee payroll is calculated by multiplying the employee’s hours worked by $7.25. 
 ■ Managers must be scheduled to work morning shifts. 
 ■ Employees cannot be scheduled to work more than eight hours per day. 
 ■ Servers cannot be scheduled to work morning, afternoon, or evening shifts. 
 ■ The system must allow managers to change and delete employees from the system. 
 PROJECT V 
Picking Projects 
 You are a project management contractor attempting to contract work at a large telecommunications 
company, Hex Incorporated. Your interview with Debbie Fernandez, the senior vice president of IT, 
went smoothly. The last thing she wants to see from you before she makes her final hiring decision 
is a prioritized list of the following projects. You are sure to land the job if Fernandez is satisfied with 
your prioritization. 
 Create a report prioritizing the following projects and be sure to include the business justifications 
for your prioritization. 
 ■ Upgrade accounting system. 
 ■ Develop employee vacation tracking system. 
 ■ Enhance employee intranet. 
 ■ Cleanse and scrub data warehouse information. 
 ■ Performance-test all hardware to ensure 20 percent growth scalability. 
 ■ Implement changes to employee benefits system. 
 ■ Develop backup and recovery strategy. 
 ■ Implement supply chain management system. 
 ■ Upgrade customer relationship management system. 
 ■ Build executive information system for CEO. 

376
Chapter 9 Systems Development and Project Management: Corporate Responsibility 
 FIGURE 9.20 
 Employee Testimonies 
 Jim Poulos, Director of Sales 
 Each week I have to review all of the new memberships sold in our club. Each of my seven sales 
representatives  receives $50 from a new sale for the initiation fee. They also receive 10 percent of the type of 
membership sold. Membership types include:
 ■ Adult, $450/month 
 ■ Youth, $300/month 
 ■ Family, $750/month 
 ■ Senior, $300/month 
 Each sales representative is also paid $4.50/hour and receives a 25 percent bonus for working overtime 
and holidays. If the sales representative sells over 200 percent of expected sales they receive an additional 
25 percent bonus on their commissions. If the membership is sold during a promotion, the commission rate 
decreases. The payroll department uses time sheets to track my sales representatives’ hourly pay. I have to 
sign all time sheets once they are completed by the payroll department. I check my sales representatives’ 
schedule to validate the times on the employee time sheets. I then have to submit a separate listing of each 
employee and their corresponding commissions for initiation fees and memberships sold. I track all of my 
sales representatives’ vacation and sick time. If they are over their vacation or sick time, I have them sign a 
form stating that if they quit they will pay back all negative vacation or sick time. 
 I would like a system that can automatically calculate commissions and be able to handle sales forecast-
ing and “what if” analysis on my sales representatives’ commission rates. I would like to be able to walk up 
to my sales representatives and tell them that if they sell four more family memberships and one adult they 
will receive their bonus. I would also like to be able to design promotions for our best customers. These types 
of things would really help boost sales at our club. 
 Maggie Cleaver, Payroll Manager 
 The first thing I do each week is collect the time sheets. I review each time sheet to ensure the employee 
punched in and out correctly. If the employee forgot to clock out, I contact that person’s director to find the 
time that the employee should have clocked out. I then calculate all regular hours, overtime hours, and 
holiday hours and total these on the time sheet. I also track sick time and vacation time and total these on 
the time sheet. Once completed, I send the time sheet to the directors of each department for approval. 
 When I receive the signed time sheets back, I begin to calculate payments. First, I calculate regular pay, 
then overtime pay, and finally holiday pay. I then add in the sales representatives’ commissions, which I 
receive from the director of sales. I then calculate payment amounts for aerobics instructors because they 
are paid by class, not by hour. I receive the aerobics class schedule from the fitness coordinator. I then total 
the entire pay and send a sheet with payment amounts to my co-worker Anne, who calculates taxes. I then 
calculate all sick time and vacation time and track this in a separate document. I then print labels that state 
each employee’s name, department, and the pay period. I place the labels on a new time sheet, which is 
returned to the employee punch clock. 
 I would like a system that automatically tracks employee sick time and vacation time. I would also like a 
system that can automatically calculate regular pay, overtime pay, and holiday pay. I don’t know if there is a 
system that can validate employee time sheets, but if there is that would be great. 
 Anne Logan, Tax Manager 
 I receive the payment amounts from Maggie. I then calculate all city, state, and federal taxes. I also deduct 
health benefits and retirement plan benefits. I then cut the check to the employee and the corresponding 
checks for the taxes to the government. I manually calculate W2s and all quarterly taxes. I’m also responsible 
for correcting personal information such as a change of address. I’m also responsible for cutting checks if an 
incorrect amount was issued. I also track amounts owed by employees that have gone over their sick time or 
vacation time. I also generate checks for all salaried employees. 
 The part of my job that takes the longest is correlating the total cash debit for all checks and the total 
amount calculated for all checks. It’s amazing how many times these two figures do not match, which 
indicates that a check was written for the wrong amount. 
 I would like a system that determines taxes automatically, along with quarterly tax filing statements. 
I would also like a system that can perform audits. 

377
Enterprise MIS Module 3
 PROJECT VI 
Keeping Time 
 Time Keepers Inc. is a small firm that specializes in project management consulting. You are a senior 
project manager, and you have recently been assigned to the Tahiti Tanning Lotion account. The Tahiti 
Tanning Lotion company is currently experiencing a 10 percent success rate (90 percent failure rate) 
on all internal IT projects. Your first assignment is to analyze one of the current project plans being 
used to develop a new CRM system (see  Figure 9.21 ). 
 Review the project plan and create a document listing the numerous errors in the plan. Be sure to 
also provide suggestions on how to fix the errors. 
 FIGURE 9.21 
 CRM Project Plan 

378
Chapter 9 Systems Development and Project Management: Corporate Responsibility 
 AY K  A P P L I C AT I O N  P R O J E C T S 
 If you are looking for Excel projects to incorporate into your class, try any of the following after reading 
this chapter. 
 Project 
Number  
 Project 
Name 
 Project 
Type 
 Plug-In 
 Focus 
Area  
 Project 
Level 
 Skill Set 
 Page 
Number 
 9 
 Security Analysis 
 Excel 
 T3 
 Filtering Data 
 Intermediate 
 Conditional 
Formatting, 
Autofilter, Subtotal 
 AYK.7 
 10 
 Gathering Data 
 Excel 
 T3 
 Data Analysis 
 Intermediate 
 Conditional 
Formatting 
 AYK.8 
 11 
 Scanner System 
 Excel 
 T2 
 Strategic Analysis  Intermediate 
 Formulas 
 AYK.8 
 12 
 Competitive Pricing 
 Excel 
 T2 
 Profit 
Maximization 
 Intermediate 
 Formulas 
 AYK.9 
 13 
 Adequate 
Acquisitions 
 Excel 
 T2 
 Break Even 
Analysis 
 Intermediate 
 Formulas 
 AYK.9 
 15 
 Assessing the Value 
of Information 
 Excel 
 T3 
 Data Analysis 
 Intermediate 
 PivotTable 
 AYK.10 
 16 
 Growth, Trends, 
and Forecasts 
 Excel 
 T2, T3 
 Data Forecasting 
 Advanced 
 Average, Trend, 
Growth 
 AYK.11 
 18 
 Formatting Grades 
 Excel 
 T3 
 Data Analysis 
 Advanced 
 If, LookUp 
 AYK.12 
 22 
 Turnover Rates 
 Excel 
 T3 
 Data Mining 
 Advanced 
 PivotTable 
 AYK.12 
 23 
 Vital Information 
 Excel 
 T3 
 Data Mining 
 Advanced 
 PivotTable 
 AYK.15 
 24 
 Breaking Even 
 Excel 
 T4 
 Business Analysis  Advanced 
 Goal Seek 
 AYK.16 
 25 
 Profit Scenario 
 Excel 
 T4 
 Sales Analysis 
 Advanced 
 Scenario Manager 
 AYK.16 

A 
 LEARNING OUTCOMES 
 A.1 Describe the six major categories of hardware, and provide an example of each. 
 A.2 Identify the different computer categories, and explain their potential business uses. 
 A.3 Identify the two main types of software.  
 INTRODUCTION 
  Managers need to determine what types of hardware and software will satisfy their cur-
rent and future business needs, the right time to buy the equipment, and how to protect 
their investments. This does not imply that managers need to be experts in all areas of 
technology; however, building a basic understanding of hardware and software can help 
them make the right investment choices. 
 Information technology can be an important enabler of business success and innova-
tion. Information technology can be composed of the Internet, a personal computer, a 
cell phone that can access the web, a personal digital assistant, or presentation software. 
All of these technologies help to perform specific information processing tasks. There 
are two basic categories of information technology: hardware and software.  Hardware 
consists of the physical devices associated with a computer system.  Software  is the set of 
instructions the hardware executes to carry out specific tasks. Software, such as Micro-
soft Excel, and various hardware devices, such as a keyboard and a monitor, interact to 
create a spreadsheet or a graph. This appendix covers the basics of computer hardware 
and software including terminology, characteristics, and the associated managerial 
responsibilities for building a solid enterprise architecture. 
 HARDWARE BASICS 
  In many industries, exploiting computer hardware is key to gaining a competitive advan-
tage. Frito-Lay gained a competitive advantage by using handheld devices to track the 
strategic placement and sale of items in convenience stores. Sales representatives could 
track sale price, competitor information, the number of items sold, and item location in 
the store all from their handheld device. 1 
LO A.1: Describe the six major cat-
egories of hardware and provide an 
example of each.
 A P P E N D I X
 Hardware and Software Basics 
A.1

Appendix A Hardware and Software Basics
A.2
 A  computer  is an electronic device operating under the control of instructions stored 
in its own memory that can accept, manipulate, and store data.  Figure A.1  displays the 
two primary components of a computer—hardware and software. A computer system 
consists of six hardware components (see  Figure A.2 ).  Figure A.3  displays how these 
components work together to form a computer system.     
 Central Processing Unit 
 The dominant manufacturers of CPUs today include Intel (with its Celeron and Pen-
tium lines for personal computers) and Advanced Micro Devices (AMD) (with its Athlon 
series). 2 
 The  central processing unit (CPU)  (or  microprocessor ) is the actual hardware that 
interprets and executes the program (software) instructions and coordinates how all the 
other hardware devices work together. The CPU is built on a small flake of silicon and 
can contain the equivalent of several million transistors. CPUs are unquestionably one 
of the 20th century’s greatest technological advances. 
 A CPU contains two primary parts: control unit and arithmetic/logic unit. The  control 
unit  interprets software instructions and literally tells the other hardware devices what 
to do, based on the software instructions. The  arithmetic-logic unit (ALU)  performs all 
arithmetic operations (for example, addition and subtraction) and all logic operations 
(such as sorting and comparing numbers). The control unit and ALU perform different 
functions. The control unit obtains instructions from the software. It then interprets the 
instructions, decides which tasks other devices perform, and finally tells each device to 
perform the task. The ALU responds to the control unit and does whatever it dictates, 
performing either arithmetic or logic operations. 
 FIGURE A.1 
 Hardware and Software 
Overview 
CENTRAL PROCESSING UNIT
HARDWARE
OUTPUT DEVICE
STORAGE DEVICE
COMMUNICATION DEVICE
CONNECTING DEVICE
INPUT DEVICE
• Keyboard; mouse; scanner
The physical
devices
associated
with a
computer
system
• Monitor; printer; headphones
• DVD; memory stick; hard drive
• Modem; wireless card
• Cables; USB port
CPU: The computer´s “brains”
RAM: Integrated circuits; works with the CPU
SYSTEM SOFTWARE
SOFTWARE
UTILITY SOFTWARE
APPLICATION SOFTWARE
WORD PROCESSING SOFTWARE
SPREADSHEET SOFTWARE
OPERATING SYSTEM SOFTWARE
• Windows; Mac OS; Linux
• Antivirus; screen savers; data
  recovery
Performs speciﬁc information processing
needs
• Microsoft Word
• Microsoft Excel
Controls how the various tools work
together along with application software
The set of
instructions
the hardware
executes to
carry out
speciﬁc
tasks

Hardware and Software Basics Appendix A
A.3
 The number of CPU cycles per second determines how fast a CPU carries out the 
software instructions; more cycles per second means faster processing, and faster CPUs 
cost more than their slower counterparts. CPU speed is usually quoted in megahertz 
and gigahertz.  Megahertz (MHz)  is the number of millions of CPU cycles per second. 
Gigahertz (GHz)  is the number of billions of CPU cycles per second.  Figure A.4  displays 
the factors that determine CPU speed.  
 Advances in CPU Design   Chip makers are pressing more functionality into CPU 
technology. Most CPUs are  complex instruction set computer (CISC) chips,  which is a 
type of CPU that can recognize as many as 100 or more instructions, enough to carry out 
most computations directly.  Reduced instruction set computer (RISC) chips  limit the 
number of instructions the CPU can execute to increase processing speed. The idea of 
RISC is to reduce the instruction set to the bare minimum, emphasizing the instructions 
used most of the time and optimizing them for the fastest possible execution. An RISC 
processor runs faster than a CISC processor. 
 Primary Storage 
Primary storage  is the com-
puter’s main memory, which 
consists of the random access 
memory (RAM), cache mem-
ory, and read-only memory 
(ROM) that is directly acces-
sible to the CPU.   
 FIGURE A.2 
 Hardware Components of a 
Computer System 
t5IFBDUVBMIBSEXBSFUIBUJOUFSQSFUTBOEFYFDVUFTUIF
QSPHSBN	TPGUXBSF
JOTUSVDUJPOTBOEDPPSEJOBUFTIPX
BMMUIFPUIFSIBSEXBSFEFWJDFTXPSLUPHFUIFS
t5IFDPNQVUFSTNBJONFNPSZXIJDIDPOTJTUTPGUIF
SBOEPNBDDFTTNFNPSZ	3".
UIFDBDIFNFNPSZ
BOEUIFSFBEPOMZNFNPSZ	30.
UIBUJTEJSFDUMZ
BDDFTTJCMFUPUIFDFOUSBMQSPDFTTJOHVOJU	$16
t&RVJQNFOUEFTJHOFEUPTUPSFMBSHFWPMVNFTPGEBUBGPS
MPOHUFSNTUPSBHF	EJTLFUUF$%%7%NFNPSZTUJDL
t&RVJQNFOUVTFEUPDBQUVSFJOGPSNBUJPOBOEDPNNBOET
	NPVTFLFZCPBSETDBOOFS
t&RVJQNFOUVTFEUPTFFIFBSPSPUIFSXJTFBDDFQUUIF
SFTVMUTPGJOGPSNBUJPOQSPDFTTJOHSFRVFTUT	NPOJUPS
QSJOUFSNJDSPQIPOF
t&RVJQNFOUVTFEUPTFOEJOGPSNBUJPOBOESFDFJWFJU
GSPNPOFMPDBUJPOUPBOPUIFS	NPEFNXJSFMFTTDBSE
$16
1SJNBSZ4UPSBHF
4FDPOEBSZ4UPSBHF
*OQVU%FWJDFT
0VUQVU%FWJDFT
$PNNVOJDBUJPO%FWJDF

Appendix A Hardware and Software Basics
A.4
 Random Access Memory    Random access memory (RAM)  is the computer’s pri-
mary working memory, in which program instructions and data are stored so that they can 
be accessed directly by the CPU via the processor’s high-speed external data bus. 
 RAM is often called read/write memory. In RAM, the CPU can write and read data. Most 
programs set aside a portion of RAM as a temporary workspace for data so that one can 
modify (rewrite) as needed until the data are ready for printing or storage on secondary 
Central Processing Unit (CPU)
Control Unit
Arithmetic-Logic Unit
Input Device
Output Device
Secondary Storage Device
Communication Device
Primary Storage Device
 FIGURE A.3 
 How the Hardware Components 
Work Together 
 FIGURE A.4 
 Factors That Determine CPU 
Speed 
CPU Speed Factors
Clock speed—the speed of the internal clock of a CPU that sets the pace at which operations proceed within 
the computer’s internal processing circuitry. 
Word length—number of bits (0s and 1s) that can be processed by the CPU at any one time. Computers work 
in terms of bits and bytes using electrical pulses that have two states: on and off. 
Bus width—the size of the internal electrical pathway along which signals are sent from one part of the 
computer to another. A wider bus can move more data, hence faster processing.
Chip line width—the distance between transistors on a chip. The shorter the chip line width the faster the 
chip since more transistors can be placed on a chip and the data and instructions travel short distances dur-
ing processing.

Hardware and Software Basics Appendix A
A.5
storage media, such as a hard drive or memory key. 
RAM does not retain its contents when the power 
to the computer is switched off, hence individuals 
should save their work frequently. When the com-
puter is turned off, everything in RAM is wiped clean. 
 Volatility refers to a device’s ability to function with 
or without power. RAM is  volatile,  meaning it must 
have constant power to function; its contents are lost 
when the computer’s electric supply fails.  
 Cache Memory    Cache memory  is a small unit 
of ultra-fast memory that is used to store recently 
accessed or frequently accessed data so that the 
CPU does not have to retrieve this data from slower 
memory circuits such as RAM. Cache memory that 
is built directly into the CPU’s circuits is called pri-
mary cache. Cache memory contained on an exter-
nal circuit is called secondary cache. 
 Read-Only Memory (ROM)    Read-only  memory (ROM)  is the portion of a comput-
er’s primary storage that does not lose its contents when one switches off the power. 
ROM is  nonvolatile,  meaning it does not require constant power to function. ROM 
contains essential system programs that neither the user nor the computer can erase. 
Since the computer’s internal memory is blank during start-up, the computer cannot 
perform any functions unless given start-up instructions. These instructions are stored 
in ROM. 
 Flash memory  is a special type of rewritable read-only memory (ROM) that is com-
pact and portable.  Memory cards  contain high-capacity storage that holds data such as 
captured images, music, or text files. Memory cards are removable; when one is full the 
user can insert an additional card. Subsequently, the data can be downloaded from the 
card to a computer. The card can then be erased and used again. Memory cards are typi-
cally used in digital devices such as cameras, cellular phones, and personal digital assis-
tants (PDA).  Memory sticks  provide nonvolatile memory for a range of portable devices 
including computers, digital cameras, MP3 players, and PDAs. 
 Secondary Storage 
 Storage is a hot area in the business arena as organizations struggle to make sense of 
exploding volumes of data.  Secondary storage  consists of equipment designed to store 
large volumes of data for long-term storage. Secondary storage devices are nonvolatile 
and do not lose their contents when the computer is turned off. Some storage devices, 
such as a hard disk, offer easy update capabilities and a large storage capacity. Others, 
such as CD-ROMs, offer limited update capabilities but possess large storage capacities. 
 Storage capacity is expressed in bytes, with megabytes being the most common. 
A  megabyte (MB  or  M  or  Meg) is roughly 1 million bytes. 
Therefore, a computer with 256 MB of RAM translates into 
the RAM being able to hold roughly 256 million charac-
ters of data and software instructions. A  gigabyte (GB) is 
roughly 1 billion bytes. A  terabyte (TB)  is roughly 1 trillion 
bytes (refer to  Figure A.5 ). 3 
  A typical double-spaced page of pure text is roughly 
2,000 characters. Therefore, a 40 GB (40 gigabyte or 40 bil-
lion characters) hard drive can hold approximately 20 mil-
lion pages of text. 
 Common storage devices include:
 ■ Magnetic medium 
 ■ Optical medium 

Appendix A Hardware and Software Basics
A.6
 FIGURE A.5 
 Binary Terms  
 Magnetic medium    Magnetic medium  is a secondary storage medium that uses 
magnetic techniques to store and retrieve data on disks or tapes coated with magneti-
cally sensitive materials. Like iron filings on a sheet of waxed paper, these materials are 
reoriented when a magnetic field passes over them. During write operations, the read/
write heads emit a magnetic field that orients the magnetic materials on the disk or 
tape to represent encoded data. During read operations, the read/write heads sense the 
encoded data on the medium. 
 One of the first forms of magnetic medium developed was magnetic tape.  Magnetic 
tape  is an older secondary storage medium that uses a strip of thin plastic coated with a 
magnetically sensitive recording medium. The most popular type of magnetic medium 
is a hard drive. A  hard drive  is a secondary storage medium that uses several rigid disks 
coated with a magnetically sensitive material and housed together with the recording 
heads in a hermetically sealed mechanism. Hard drive performance is measured in 
terms of access time, seek time, rotational speed, and data transfer rate. 
 Optical Medium   Optical medium is a secondary storage medium for computers on 
which information is stored at extremely high density in the form of tiny pits. The pres-
ence or absence of pits is read by a tightly focused laser beam. Optical medium types 
include:
 ■  Compact disk-read-only memory (CD-ROM) drive—
 an optical drive designed to read the data encoded on 
CD-ROMs and to transfer this data to a computer. 
 ■  Compact disk-read-write (CD-RW) drive— an opti-
cal drive that enables users to erase existing data and to 
write new data repeatedly to a CD-RW.  
 ■  Digital video disk (DVD)— a CD-ROM format capable 
of storing up to a maximum of 17 GB of data; enough for 
a full-length feature movie.  
 ■  DVD-ROM drive— a read-only drive designed to read the data encoded on a DVD 
and transfer the data to a computer. 
 ■  Digital video disk-read/write (DVD-RW)— a standard for DVD discs and player/
recorder mechanisms that enables users to record in the DVD format. 
 CD-ROMs and DVDs offer an increasingly economical medium for storing data and 
programs. The overall trend in secondary storage is toward more direct-access methods, 
higher capacity with lower costs, and increased portability. 
Term
Size
Kilobyte (KB)
1,024 Bytes
Megabyte (MB)
1,024 KB
1,048,576 Bytes
Gigabyte (GB)
1,024 MB (109 bytes)
Terabyte (TB)
1,024 GB (1012 bytes)
1 TB  5  Printing of 1 TB would require 50,000 trees to be made into paper 
and printed
Petabyte (PB)
1,024 TB (1015 bytes)
200 PB  5  All production of digital magnetic tape in 1995
Exabyte (EB)
1,024 PB (1018 bytes)
2 EB  5  Total volume of information generated worldwide annually
5 EB  5  All words ever spoken by human beings

Hardware and Software Basics Appendix A
A.7
 Input Devices 
 An  input device  is equipment used to capture information and commands. A keyboard is 
used to type in information, and a mouse is used to point and click on buttons and icons. A 
 stylus is used as a pen-like device 
that taps the screen to enter com-
mands. Numerous input devices 
are available in many different 
environments, some of which 
have applications that are more 
suitable in a personal setting 
than a business setting. A key-
board, mouse, and scanner are 
the most common forms of input 
devices (see  Figure A.6 ).  
 New forms of input devices allow people to exercise and play video games at the same 
time. The Kilowatt Sport from Powergrid Fitness lets people combine strength training 
with their favorite video games. Players can choose any PlayStation or Xbox game that 
uses a joystick to run the elliptical trainer. After loading the game, participants stand 
 FIGURE A.6 
 Input Devices 
t1SPWJEFTBTFUPGBMQIBCFUJDOVNFSJD
 QVODUVBUJPOTZNCPMBOEDPOUSPMLFZT
t0OFPSNPSFDPOUSPMCVUUPOTIPVTFEJOBQBMN
 TJ[FEDBTFBOEEFTJHOFETPUIBUPOFDBONPWF
 JUBCPVUPOUIFUBCMFOFYUUPUIFLFZCPBSE
t'PSNPGBTUBUJPOBSZNPVTFPOXIJDIUIF
 NPWFNFOUPGBmOHFSDBVTFTUIFQPJOUFSPO
 UIFTDSFFOUPNPWFUZQJDBMMZGPVOECFMPXUIF
 TQBDFCBSPOMBQUPQT
,&:#0"3%
MANUAL INPUT DEVICES
.064&
506$)1"%
t"MMPXTUIFVTFPGBmOHFSUPQPJOUBUBOEUPVDI
BNPOJUPSUPFYFDVUFDPNNBOET
t%FWJDFTVTFEUPOBWJHBUFBOETFMFDUPCKFDUT
 POBEJTQMBZTDSFFO
t%FWJDFTVTFEGPSHBNFTUPPCUBJOCFUUFS
 DPOUSPMTDSFFOBDUJPO
506$)4$3&&/
10*/5*/(%&7*$&
(".&
$0/530--&3
t$BQUVSFTJNBHFTQIPUPTHSBQIJDTBOEUFYU
UIBUBMSFBEZFYJTUPOQBQFS
t$BQUVSFTJOGPSNBUJPOUIBUFYJTUTJOUIFGPSNPG
 WFSUJDBMCBSTXIPTFXJEUIBOEEJTUBODFBQBSU
 EFUFSNJOFBOVNCFS
t$BQUVSFTIVNBOQIZTJDBMBUUSJCVUFTTVDIBTB
 mOHFSQSJOUPSJSJTGPSTFDVSJUZQVSQPTFT
t%FUFDUTUIFQSFTFODFPSBCTFODFPGBNBSLJO
BQSFEFUFSNJOFEQMBDF	QPQVMBSGPSNVMUJQMF
DIPJDFFYBNT
t$POWFSUTUFYUJOUPEJHJUBMGPSNBUGPSDPNQVUFS
JOQVU
*."(&4$"//&3
AUTOMATED INPUT DEVICES
#"3$0%&
4$"//&3
#*0.&53*$
4$"//&3
015*$"-
$)"3"$5&3
3&"%&3
015*$"-."3,
3&"%&3
t%JHJUBMMZDBQUVSFTTUJMMJNBHFTJOWBSZJOH
SFTPMVUJPOT
t%JHJUBMMZDBQUVSFTWJEFP
t%JHJUBMMZDBQUVSFTWJEFPBOEVQMPBETJUEJSFDUMZ
UPUIF*OUFSOFU
t$BQUVSFTTPVOETTVDIBTBWPJDFGPSWPJDF
 SFDPHOJUJPOTPGUXBSF
t$BQUVSFTJOGPSNBUJPOBUUIFQPJOUPGB
USBOTBDUJPOUZQJDBMMZJOBSFUBJMFOWJSPONFOU
%*(*5"-45*--
$".&3"
%*(*5"-7*%&0
$".&3"
8&#$".
10*/50'4"-&
	104
.*$301)0/&

Appendix A Hardware and Software Basics
A.8
on a platform while pushing and pulling a resistance rod in all directions to control 
what happens in the game. The varied movement targets muscle groups on the chest, 
arms, shoulders, abdomen, and back. The machine’s display shows information such as 
pounds lifted and current resistance level, and players can use one-touch adjustment to 
vary the degree of difficulty. 4  Adaptive computer devices  are input devices designed for 
special applications for use by people with different types of special needs. An example 
is a keyboard with tactile surfaces, which can be used by the visually impaired. 
 Another new input device is a stationary bicycle. A computer design team of graduate 
and undergraduate students at MIT built the Cyclescore, an integrated video game and 
bicycle. The MIT students tested current games on the market but found users would 
stop pedaling to concentrate on the game. To engage users, the team is designing games 
that interact with the experience of exercise itself, for example, monitoring heart rate 
and adjusting the difficulty of the game according to the user’s bicycling capabilities. In 
one game, the player must pedal to make a hot-air balloon float over mountains, while 
collecting coins and shooting at random targets. 5 
 Output Devices 
 An  output device  is equipment used to see, hear, or otherwise accept the results of infor-
mation processing requests. Among output devices, printers and monitors are the most 
common; however, speakers and plotters (special printers that draw output on a page) 
are widely used (see  Figure A.7 ). In addition, output devices are responsible for convert-
ing computer-stored information into a form that can be understood. 
 FIGURE A.7 
 Output Devices 
t"WBDVVNUVCFUIBUVTFTBOFMFDUSPOHVO
	DBUIPEF
UPFNJUBCFBNPGFMFDUSPOTUIBU
JMMVNJOBUFTQIPTQIPSTPOBTDSFFOBTUIF
CFBNTXFFQTBDSPTTUIFEJTQMBZSFQFBUFEMZ
$"5)0%&3":56#&
	$35
MONITORS
t-PXQPXFSFEEJTQMBZTVTFEJOMBQUPQ
DPNQVUFSTXIFSFSPETIBQFEDSZTUBM
NPMFDVMFTDIBOHFUIFJSPSJFOUBUJPOXIFOBO
FMFDUSJDBMDVSSFOUnPXTUISPVHIUIFN
-*26*%$3:45"-
%*41-":	-$%
t5JOZCVMCVTFEGPSCBDLMJHIUUPJNQSPWFUIF
JNBHFPOUIFTDSFFO
t%JTQMBZTVTFNBOZMBZFSTPGPSHBOJDNBUFSJBM
FNJUUJOHBWJTJCMFMJHIUBOEUIFSFGPSF
FMJNJOBUJOHUIFOFFEGPSCBDLMJHIUJOH
-*()5&.*55*/(
%*0%&	-&%
03("/*$-*()5
&.*55*/(%*0%&
	0-&%
t1SJOUFSUIBUNBLFTJNBHFTCZGPSDJOHJOL
ESPQMFUTUISPVHIOP[[MFT
t1SJOUFSUIBUGPSNTJNBHFTVTJOHBO
FMFDUSPTUBUJDQSPDFTTUIFTBNFXBZB
QIPUPDPQJFSXPSLT
t1SJOUFSUIBUDBOTDBODPQZGBYBOEQSJOUBMM
JOPOFEFWJDF
t1SJOUFSUIBUVTFTDPNQVUFSEJSFDUFEQFOTGPS
 DSFBUJOHIJHIRVBMJUZJNBHFTCMVFQSJOUT
TDIFNBUJDTFUD
t1SJOUFSUIBUDBOQSPEVDFTPMJEUISFF
EJNFOTJPOBMPCKFDUT
*/,+&513*/5&3
PRINTERS
-"4&313*/5&3
.6-5*'6/$5*0/
13*/5&3
%13*/5&3
1-055&3

Hardware and Software Basics Appendix A
A.9
 A new output device based on sensor technology aims to translate American Sign 
Language (ASL) into speech, enabling the millions of people who use ASL to better com-
municate with those who do not know the rapid gesturing system. The AcceleGlove is a 
glove lined on the inside with sensors embedded in rings. The sensors, called acceler-
ometers, measure acceleration and can categorize and translate finger and hand move-
ments. Additional, interconnected attachments for the elbow and shoulder capture 
ASL signs that are made with full arm motion. When users wear the glove while sign-
ing ASL, algorithms in the glove’s software translate the hand gestures into words. The 
translations can be relayed through speech synthesizers or read on a PDA-size computer 
screen. Inventor Jose L. Hernandez-Rebollar started with a single glove that could trans-
late only the ASL alphabet. Now, the device employs two gloves that contain a 1,000-
word vocabulary. 6 
 Other new output devices are being developed every day.  Needapresent.com , a Brit-
ish company, has developed a vibrating USB massage ball, which plugs into a comput-
er’s USB port to generate a warm massage for sore body parts during those long evenings 
spent coding software or writing papers.  Needapresent.com  also makes a coffee cup 
warmer that plugs into the USB port. 7 
 Communication Devices 
 A  communication device  is equipment used to send 
information and receive it from one location to another. 
A telephone modem connects a computer to a phone line 
in order to access another computer. The computer works 
in terms of digital signals, while a standard telephone line 
works with analog signals. Each digital signal represents 
a bit (either 0 or 1). The modem must convert the digital 
signals of a computer into analog signals so they can be 
sent across the telephone line. At the other end, another 
modem translates the analog signals into digital signals, 
which can then be used by the other computer.  Figure A.8  
displays the different types of modems.  
 COMPUTER CATEGORIES 
  Supercomputers today can hit processing capabilities of well over 200 teraflops—
the equivalent of everyone on Earth performing 35,000 calculations per second (see 
 Figure A.9 ). For the past 20 years, federally funded supercomputing research has given 
birth to some of the computer industry’s most significant technology breakthroughs 
including: 
 ■ Clustering, which allows companies to chain together thousands of PCs to build 
mass-market systems. 
 ■ Parallel processing, which provides the ability to run two or more tasks simultane-
ously and is viewed as the chip industry’s future. 
 ■ Mosaic browser, which morphed into Netscape and made the web a household 
name.    
 Federally funded supercomputers have also advanced some of the country’s most 
dynamic industries, including advanced manufacturing, gene research in the life sci-
ences, and real-time financial-market modeling. 8 
 Computers come in different shapes, sizes, and colors. And they meet a variety of 
needs. An  appliance  is a computer dedicated to a single function, such as a calcula-
tor or computer game. An  ebook  is an electronic book that can be read on a computer 
or special reading device. Some are small enough to carry around, while others are the 
LO A.2: Identify the different 
 computer categories and explain 
their potential business uses.

Appendix A Hardware and Software Basics
A.10
size of a telephone booth. Size does not always correlate to power, speed, and price (see 
 Figure A.10 ). 
  MIT’s Media Lab is developing a laptop that it will sell for $100 each to government 
agencies around the world for distribution to millions of underprivileged schoolchil-
dren. Using a simplified sales model and reengineering the device helped MIT reach 
the $100 price point. Almost half the price of a current laptop comprises marketing, 
 FIGURE A.8 
 Comparing Modems 
 FIGURE A.9 
 Supercomputer 
Carrier Technology
Description
Speed
Comments
Dial-up access
On demand access 
using a modem and regu-
lar telephone 
line (POT).
2400 bps to 56 Kbps
 ■ Cheap but slow.
Cable
Special cable modem and 
cable line required.
512 Kbps to 20 Mbps
 ■  Must have existing cable 
access in area.
 ■ Bandwidth is shared.
DSL
Digital Subscriber 
Line
This technology uses 
the unused digital por-
tion of a regular copper 
telephone line to transmit 
and receive information. 
A special modem and 
adapter card are required.
128 Kbps to 8 Mbps
 ■ Doesn’t interfere with 
normal tele phone use.
 ■ Bandwidth is
dedicated.
 ■ Must be within 5 km 
(3.1 miles) of telephone 
company switch.
Wireless (LMCS)
Access is gained by con-
nection to a high-speed 
cellular-like 
local multipoint commu-
nications system (LMCS) 
network via wireless 
transmitter/receiver.
30 Mbps or more
 ■ Can be used for high-
speed data, broadcast TV, 
and wireless telephone 
service.
Satellite
Newer versions have two-
way satellite
access, removing need for 
phone line.
6 Mbps or more
 ■ Bandwidth is not shared.
 ■ Some connections require 
an existing Internet service 
account.
 ■ Setup fees can range from 
$500–$1,000.

Hardware and Software Basics Appendix A
A.11
 FIGURE A.10 
 Computer Categories 
Smartphone/Personal Digital Assistant (PDA)
Handheld/Ultra Portable/Pocket Computer
Laptop/Notebook/Portable Computer/Netbook
Tablet Computer
Personal/Desktop Computer
Workstation/Minicomputer
Mainframe Computer
Supercomputer
Computer Category
Description
Smartphone
A cellular telephone with a keypad that runs programs, music, photos, and email and includes many features of a PDA.
Personal digital 
assistant (PDA)
A small handheld computer that performs simple tasks such as taking notes, scheduling appointments, and main-
taining an address book and a calendar. The PDA screen is touch-sensitive, allowing a user to write directly on the 
screen, capturing what is written.
Handheld (ultra portable, 
pocket) computer
Computer portable enough to fit in a purse or pocket and has its own power source or battery.
Laptop (portable, 
notebook) computer
Computer portable enough to fit on a lap or in a bag and has its own power source or battery. Laptops come 
equipped with all of the technology that a personal desktop computer has, yet weigh as little as two pounds.
Tablet computer
Computer with a flat screen that uses a mouse or fingertip for input instead of a keyboard. Similar to PDAs, tablet PCs 
use a writing pen or stylus to write notes on the screen and touch the screen to perform functions such as clicking on 
a link while visiting a website.
Personal computer 
(microcomputer)
Computer that is operated by a single user who can customize the functions to match personal preferences.
Desktop computer
Computer that sits on, next to, or under a user’s desk and is too large to carry around. The computer box is where 
the CPU, RAM, and storage devices are held with a monitor on top, or a vertical system box (called a tower) usually 
placed on the floor within a work area.
Workstation computer
Similar to a desktop but has more powerful mathematical and graphics processing capabilities and can perform 
more complicated tasks in less time. Typically used for software development, web development, engineering, and 
ebusiness tools.
Minicomputer (server)
Designed to meet the computing needs of several people simultaneously in a small to medium-size business 
 environment. A common type of minicomputer is a server and is used for managing internal company applications, 
networks, and websites.
Mainframe computer
Designed to meet the computing needs of hundreds of people in a large business environment. Mainframe computers 
are a step up in size, power, capability, and cost from minicomputers.
Supercomputer
The fastest, most powerful, and most expensive type of computer. Organizations such as NASA that are heavily 
involved in research and number crunching employ supercomputers because of the speed with which they 
can  process information. Other large, customer-oriented businesses such as General Motors and AT&T employ 
 supercomputers just to handle customer information and transaction processing.

Appendix A Hardware and Software Basics
A.12
sales, distribution, and profit. Of the remaining costs, the display panel and back-
light account for roughly half while the rest covers the operating system. The low-cost 
laptop will use a display system that costs less than $25, a 500 MHz processor from 
AMD, a wireless LAN connection, 1 GB of storage, and the Linux operating system. The 
machine will automatically connect with others. China and Brazil have already ordered 
3 million and 1 million laptops, respectively. MIT’s goal is to produce around 150 million 
laptops per year. 9    
 SOFTWARE BASICS 
  Hardware is only as good as the software that runs it. Over the years, the cost of hardware 
has decreased while the complexity and cost of software have increased. Some large 
software applications, such as customer relationship management systems, contain mil-
lions of lines of code, take years to develop, and cost millions of dollars. The two main 
types of software are system software and application software.  
 SYSTEM SOFTWARE 
 System software  controls how the various technology tools work together along with the 
application software. System software includes both operating system software and util-
ity software. 
 Operating System Software   Linus Torvalds, a Finnish programmer, may seem an 
unlikely choice to be one of the world’s top managers. However, Linux, the software proj-
ect he created while a university student, is now one of the most powerful influences on 
the computer world. Linux is an operating system built by volunteers and distributed for 
free and has become one of the primary competitors to Microsoft. Torvalds coordinates 
Linux development with a few dozen volunteer assistants and more than 1,000 program-
mers scattered around the globe. They contribute code for the kernel—or core piece—
of Linux. He also sets the rules for dozens of technology companies that have lined up 
behind Linux, including IBM, Dell, Hewlett-Packard, and Intel. 
 While basic versions of Linux are available for free, Linux is having a considerable 
financial impact. 10 
 Operating system software  controls the application software and manages how the 
hardware devices work together. When using Excel to create and print a graph, the oper-
ating system software controls the process, ensures that a printer is attached and has 
paper, and sends the graph to the printer along with instructions on how to print it. Some 
computers are configured with two operating systems so they can  dual boot— provide 
the user with the option of choosing the operating system when the computer is turned 
on. An  embedded operating system  is used in computer appliances and special-purpose 
applications, such as an automobile, ATM, or media player and are used for a single pur-
pose. An iPod has a single-purpose embedded operating system. 
 Operating system software also supports a variety of useful features, one of which is 
multitasking.  Multitasking  allows more than one piece of software to be used at a time. 
Multitasking is used when creating a graph in Excel and simultaneously printing a word 
processing document. With multitasking, both pieces of application software are operat-
ing at the same time. There are different types of operating system software for personal 
environments and for organizational environments (see  Figure A.11 ). 
 Utility Software    Utility software  provides additional functionality to the operating 
system. Utility software includes antivirus software, screen savers, and anti-spam soft-
ware. Operating systems are customized by using the  control panel,  which is a Windows 
feature that provides options that set default values for the Windows operating system. 
For example, the  system clock  works like a wristwatch and uses a battery mounted on 
the motherboard to provide power when the computer is turned off. If the user moves 
to a different time zone, the system clock can be adjusted in the control panel.  Safe 
mode  occurs if the system is failing and will load only the most essential parts of the 
LO A.3: Identify the two main types 
of software.

Hardware and Software Basics Appendix A
A.13
 FIGURE A.11 
 Operating System Software 
Operating System Software
Linux
An open source operating system that provides a rich environment for high-end 
workstations and network servers. Open source refers to any program whose 
source code is made available for use or modification as users or other developers 
see fit.
Mac OS X
The operating system of Macintosh computers.
Microsoft Windows
Generic name for the various operating systems in the Microsoft Windows fam-
ily, including Microsoft Windows CE, Microsoft Windows, Microsoft Windows ME, 
Microsoft Windows, Microsoft Windows XP, Microsoft Windows NT, and Microsoft 
Windows Server.
MS-DOS
The standard, single-user operating system of IBM and IBM-compatible computers, 
introduced in 1981. MS-DOS is a command-line operating system that requires the 
user to enter commands, arguments, and syntax.
UNIX
A 32-bit multitasking and multiuser operating system that originated at AT&T’s Bell 
Laboratories and is now used on a wide variety of computers, from mainframes to 
PDAs.
 FIGURE A.12 
 Utility Software 
Types of Utility Software
Crash-proof
Helps save information if a computer crashes.
Disk image for 
data recovery
Relieves the burden of reinstalling applications if a hard drive crashes or 
becomes irretrievably corrupted.
Disk optimization
Organizes information on a hard disk in the most efficient way.
Encrypt data
Protects confidential information from unauthorized eyes. 
File and data recovery
Retrieves accidental deletion of photos or documents.
Text protect
In Microsoft Word, prevents users from typing over existing text after
accidentally hitting the Insert key. Launch the Insert Toggle Key program, and the 
PC will beep whenever a user presses the Insert key.
Preventive security
Through programs such as Window Washer, erases file histories, browser 
 cookies, cache contents, and other crumbs that applications and Windows leave 
on a hard drive.
Spyware
Removes any software that employs a user’s Internet connection in the back-
ground without the user’s knowledge or explicit permission.
Uninstaller
Can remove software that is no longer needed.
operating system and will not run many of the background operating utilities.  System 
restore  enables a user to return to the previous operating system.  Figure A.12  displays a 
few types of available utility software. 
 APPLICATION SOFTWARE 
 Application software  is used for specific information processing needs, including pay-
roll, customer relationship management, project management, training, and many oth-
ers. Application software is used to solve specific problems or perform specific tasks. 
From an organizational perspective, payroll software, collaborative software such as 
videoconferencing (within groupware), and inventory management software are all 

Appendix A Hardware and Software Basics
A.14
 FIGURE A.13 
 Application Software 
Types of Application Software
Browser
Enables the user to navigate the World Wide Web. The two leading browsers are 
Netscape Navigator and Microsoft Internet Explorer.
Communication
Turns a computer into a terminal for transmitting data to and receiving data from 
distant computers through the telephone system.
Data management
Provides the tools for data retrieval, modification, deletion, and insertion; for exam-
ple, Access, MySQL, and Oracle.
Desktop publishing
Transforms a computer into a desktop publishing workstation. Leading packages 
include Adobe FrameMaker, Adobe PageMaker, and QuarkXpress.
Email
Provides email services for computer users, including receiving mail, sending mail, 
and storing messages. Leading email software includes Microsoft Outlook, Microsoft 
Outlook Express, and Eudora.
Groupware
Increases the cooperation and joint productivity of small groups of co-workers.
Presentation 
graphics
Creates and enhances charts and graphs so that they are visually appealing and 
easily understood by an audience. A full-features presentation graphics package 
such as Lotus Freelance Graphics or Microsoft PowerPoint includes facilities for 
making a wide variety of charts and graphs and for adding titles, legends, and 
explanatory text anywhere in the chart or graph.
Programming
Possesses an artificial language consisting of a fixed vocabulary and a set of rules 
(called syntax) that programmers use to write computer programs. Leading pro-
gramming languages include Java, C ++, C#, and .NET.
Spreadsheet
Simulates an accountant’s worksheet on-screen and lets users embed hidden for-
mulas that perform calculations on the visible data. Many spreadsheet programs 
also include powerful graphics and presentation capabilities to create attractive 
products. The leading spreadsheet application is Microsoft Excel.
Word processing
Transforms a computer into a tool for creating, editing, proofreading, formatting, and 
printing documents. Leading word processing applications include Microsoft Word 
and WordPerfect.
examples of application software (see  Figure A.13 ).  Personal information  management 
(PIM) software  handles contact information, appointments, task lists, and email. 
 Course management software  contains course information such as a syllabus and 
assignments and offers drop boxes for quizzes and homework along with a grade book.  
 Distributing Application Software 
 After software has been deployed to its users, it is not uncommon to find bugs or addi-
tional errors that require fixing.  Software updates (software patch)  occur when the soft-
ware vendor releases updates to software to fix problems or enhance features.  Software 
upgrade  occurs when the software vendor releases a new version of the software, mak-
ing significant changes to the program. Application software can be distributed using 
one of the following methods:
 ■  Single user license —restricts the use of the software to one user at a time. 
 ■  Network user license —enables anyone on the network to install and use the 
software.  
 ■  Site license —enables any qualified users within the organization to install the soft-
ware, regardless of whether the computer is on a network. Some employees might 
install the software on a home computer for working remotely.  
 ■  Application service provider license —specialty software paid for on a license basis 
or per-use basis or usage-based licensing. 

Hardware and Software Basics Appendix A
A.15
 Adaptive computer device, A.8 
 Appliance, A.9 
 Application service provider 
license, A.14 
 Application software A.13 
 Arithmetic-logic unit (ALU) A.2 
 Cache memory A.5 
 Central processing unit (CPU) 
(or microprocessor) A.2 
 Communication device A.9 
 Complex instruction set computer 
(CISC) chip A.3 
 Computer A.2 
 Control panel, A.12 
 Control unit A.2 
 Course management 
software, A.14 
 Dual boot, A.12 
 Ebook, A.9 
 Embedded operating 
system, A.12 
 Flash memory A.5 
 Gigabyte (GB) A.5 
 Gigahertz (GHz) A.3 
 Hard drive A.6 
 Hardware A.1 
 Input device A.7 
 Magnetic medium A.6 
 Magnetic tape A.6 
 Megabyte (MB, M, or Meg) A.5 
 Megahertz (MHz) A.3 
 Memory card A.5 
 Memory stick A.5 
 Multitasking A.12 
 Network user license, A.14 
 Nonvolatile, A.5 
 Operating system software A.12 
 Output device A.8 
 Personal information 
management (PIM) 
software, A.14 
 Primary storage A.4 
 Random access memory 
(RAM) A.4 
 Read-only memory (ROM) A.5 
 Reduced instruction set computer 
(RISC) chip A.3 
 Safe mode, A.12 
 Single-user license, A.14 
 Site license, A.14 
 Secondary storage A.5 
 Software A.1 
 Software updates 
(software patch), A.14 
 Software upgrade, A.14 
 Stylus, A.7 
 System clock, A.12 
 System restore, A.13 
 System software A.12 
 Terabyte (TB) A.5 
 Utility software A.12 
 Volatile, A.5 
 Volatility A.5 
 K E Y  T E R M S 
 ■ CPU 
 ■ Memory 
 ■ Hard drive 
 ■ Optical drive 
 ■ Operating system 
 ■ Utility software 
 ■ Application software 
 ■ Support plan 
 Determine which computer you would recommend for a small business looking for an inexpensive 
laptop. Determine which computer you would recommend for a small business looking for an expen-
sive laptop. 
 1. A Computer 
 Dell is considered the fastest company on Earth and specializes in computer customization. Connect 
to Dell’s website at  www.dell.com . Go to the portion of Dell’s site that allows you to customize either 
a laptop or a desktop computer. First, choose an already prepared system and note its price and 
capability in terms of CPU speed, RAM size, monitor quality, and storage capacity. Now, customize 
that system to increase CPU speed, add more RAM, increase monitor size and quality, and add more 
storage capacity. What is the difference in price between the two? Which system is more in your price 
range? Which system has the speed and capacity you need? 
 2. Small Business Computers 
 Many different types of computers are available for small businesses. Use the Internet to find three 
different vendors of laptops or notebooks that are good for small businesses. Find the most expensive 
and the least expensive that the vendor offers and create a table comparing the different computers 
based on the following:
 A P P LY  Y O U R  K N O W L E D G E 


B 
 LEARNING OUTCOMES 
 B.1 Compare LANs, WANs, and MANs. 
 B.2 Compare the two types of network architectures. 
 B.3 Explain topology and the different types found in networks. 
 B.4 Describe protocols and the importance of TCP/IP. 
 B.5 Identify the different media types found in networks.  
 INTRODUCTION 
  Change is everywhere in the information technology domain, but nowhere is change 
more evident and more dramatic than the realm of networks and telecommunications. 
Most management information systems today rely on digital networks to communicate 
information in the form of data, graphics, video, and voice. Companies large and small 
from all over the world are using networks and the Internet to locate suppliers and buy-
ers, to negotiate contracts with them, and to provide bigger, better, and faster services 
than ever before.  Telecommunication systems  enable the transmission of data over 
public or private networks. A  network  is a communications system created by linking 
two or more devices and establishing a standard methodology by which they can com-
municate. The world’s largest and most widely used network is the Internet. The Inter-
net is a global “network of networks” that uses universal standards to connect millions 
of different networks around the world. Telecommunication systems and networks are 
traditionally complicated and historically inefficient. However, businesses can benefit 
from today’s network infrastructures that provide reliable global reach to employees and 
customers. 
 NETWORK BASICS 
  Networks range from small two-computer networks to the biggest network of all, the 
Internet. A network provides two principle benefits: the ability to communicate and the 
ability to share. 
LO B.1: Compare LANs, WANs, and 
MANs.
 A P P E N D I X
 Networks and Telecommunications 
B.1

Appendix B Networks and Telecommunications
B.2
 Today’s corporate digital networks include a combination of local area networks, wide 
area networks, and metropolitan area networks. A  local area network (LAN)  is designed 
to connect a group of computers in proximity to each other such as in an office building, 
a school, or a home. A LAN is useful for sharing resources such as files, printers, games, 
or other applications. A LAN in turn often connects to other LANs, and to the Internet or 
wide area networks. A  wide area network (WAN)  spans a large geographic area, such 
as a state, province, or country. WANs often connect multiple smaller networks, such as 
local area networks or metropolitan area networks. The world’s most popular WAN is 
the Internet. A  metropolitan area network (MAN)  is a large computer network usually 
spanning a city.  Figure B.1  highlights the three different types of networks, and  Figure B.2  
illustrates each network type.  
 Direct data communication links between a company and its suppliers or  customers, or 
both, have been successfully used to give the company a strategic advantage. The SABRE 
airline reservation system is a classic example of a strategic management  information 
system that depends upon communication provided through a network. SABRE Airline 
Solutions pioneered technological advances for the industry in areas such as revenue 
 management, pricing, flight scheduling, cargo, flight operations, and crew scheduling. In 
addition, not only did SABRE help invent ecommerce for the travel industry, the company 
holds claim to progressive solutions that defined—and continue to revolutionize—the 
travel and transportation marketplace. 
 A network typically includes four things (besides the computers themselves):
 1.  Protocol —a set of communication rules to make sure that everyone speaks the same 
language. 
 2.  Network interface card (NIC) —card that plugs into the back (or side) of your com-
puters and lets them send and receive messages from other computers. 
 3.  Cable —the medium to connect all of the computers. 
 4.  Hub (switch or router) —hardware to perform traffic control. 
 We will continue to define many of these terms and concepts in the sections that follow. 
 Networks are differentiated by the following:
 ■ Architecture—peer-to-peer, client/server. 
 ■ Topology—bus, star, ring, hybrid, wireless. 
 ■ Protocols—Ethernet, transmission control protocol/Internet protocol (TCP/IP). 
 ■ Media—coaxial, twisted-pair, fiber-optic. 
 FIGURE B.1 
 Network Types 
Network Types
Local area network (LAN)
Designed to connect a group of computers in proximity to each 
other such as in an office building, a school, or such as a home. 
A LAN is useful for sharing resources such as files, printers, 
games, or other applications. A LAN in turn often connects to 
other LANs, and to the Internet or wide area networks.
Wide area network (WAN)
Spans a large geographic area, such as a state, province, or 
country. WANs often connect multiple smaller networks, such 
as local area networks (LANs) or metropolitan area networks 
(MANs).
 Metropolitan area network (MAN)
A large computer network usually spanning a city. Most  colleges, 
universities, and large companies that span a campus use an 
infrastructure supported by a MAN.

Networks and Telecommunications Appendix B
B.3
 ARCHITECTURE 
  The two primary types of network architectures are peer-to-peer networks and client/
server networks. 
 Peer-to-Peer Networks 
 A  peer-to-peer (P2P) network  is a computer network that relies on the computing 
power and bandwidth of the participants in the network rather than a centralized server, 
as illustrated in  Figure  B.3 . Each networked computer can allow other computers to 
access its files and use connected printers while it is in use as a workstation without the 
aid of a server. 
 While Napster may be the most widely known example of a P2P implementation, it 
may also be one of the most narrowly focused since the Napster model takes advantage 
of only one of the many capabilities of P2P computing: file sharing. The technology has 
far broader capabilities, including the sharing of processing, memory, and storage, and 
the supporting of collaboration among vast numbers of distributed computers such as 
grid computing described in Chapter 5. Peer-to-peer computing enables immediate 
interaction among people and computer systems. 1 
LO B.2: Compare the two types of 
network architectures.
 FIGURE B.2 
 LAN, WAN, and MAN 
Network
Network
Local Area Network (LAN)
Example : City Library
Metropolitan Area Network (MAN)
Example: University Campus
West Campus
East Campus
MAN
Network
Wide Area Network (WAN)
Example: Internet
Sydney,  Australia
London,  England
Network
Denver,  Colorado
Boston,  Massachusetts
WAN
Network
Network
Network

Appendix B Networks and Telecommunications
B.4
 Client/Server Networks 
 A  client  is a computer designed to request information from a server. A  server  is a com-
puter dedicated to providing information in response to requests. A  client/server network 
is a model for applications in which the bulk of the back-end processing, such as perform-
ing a physical search of a database, takes place on a server, while the front-end processing, 
which involves communicating with the users, is handled by the clients (see  Figure B.4 ). 
A  network operating system (NOS)  is the operating system that runs a network, steer-
ing information between computers and managing security and users. The client/server 
model has become one of the central ideas of network computing. Most business applica-
tions written today use the client/server model.  
 A fundamental part of client/server architecture is packet-switching.  Packet-switching 
occurs when the sending computer divides a message into a number of efficiently 
sized units of data called packets, each of which contains the address of the destination 
 computer. Each packet is sent on the network and intercepted by routers. A  router is 
an intelligent connecting device that examines each packet of data it receives and then 
decides which way to send it onward toward its destination. The packets arrive at their 
intended destination, although some may have actually traveled by different physical 
paths, and the receiving computer assembles the packets and delivers the message to the 
 appropriate application.    
 FIGURE B.3 
 Peer-to-Peer Networks 
Connection such
as Internet or Cables
LAN/MAN/WAN
Network
LAN
LAN
Network
Client
Client
Server
Client
Server
Client
Client
Client
Client
Client
 FIGURE B.4 
 Client/Server Network 

Networks and Telecommunications Appendix B
B.5
 TOPOLOGY 
  Networks are assembled according to certain rules. Cables, for example, have to be a 
certain length; each cable strand can support only a certain amount of network traffic. 
A  network topology refers to the geometric arrangement of the actual physical orga-
nization of the computers (and other network devices) in a network. Topologies vary 
depending on cost and functionality.  Figure B.5  highlights the five common topologies 
used in networks, and  Figure B.6 displays each topology. 
LO B.3: Explain topology and the 
 different types found in networks.
 FIGURE B.6 
 Network Topologies 
Network Topologies
Bus
All devices are connected to a central cable, called the bus or backbone. Bus
networks are relatively inexpensive and easy to install for small networks.
Star
All devices are connected to a central device, called a hub. Star networks are relatively easy 
to install and manage, but bottlenecks can occur because all data must pass through a hub.
Ring
All devices are connected to one another in the shape of a closed loop, so that each device is 
connected directly to two other devices, one on either side of it. Ring topologies are relatively 
expensive and difficult to install, but they offer high speed and can span large distances.
Hybrid
Groups of star-configured workstations are connected to a linear bus backbone cable, com-
bining the characteristics of the bus and star topologies.
Wireless
Devices are connected by signals between access points and wireless transmitters within a 
limited range. 
 FIGURE B.5 
 Five Network Topologies  
Ring Topology
Star Topology
Bus Topology
Hybrid Topology
Wireless Topology
Access
Point
Access
Point
Wireless
LAN/WAN/MAN

Appendix B Networks and Telecommunications
B.6
 PROTOCOLS 
 A  protocol  is a standard that specifies the format of data as well as the rules to be fol-
lowed during transmission. Simply put, for one computer (or computer program) to talk 
to another computer (or computer program) they must both be talking the same lan-
guage, and this language is called a protocol. 
 A protocol is based on an agreed-upon and established standard, and this way all 
manufacturers of hardware and software that are using the protocol do so in a similar 
fashion to allow for interoperability.  Interoperability  is the capability of two or more 
computer systems to share data and resources, even though they are made by different 
manufacturers. The most popular network protocols used are Ethernet and transmission 
control protocol/Internet protocol (TCP/IP). 
 Ethernet 
 Ethernet  is a physical and data layer technology for LAN networking (see  Figure B.7 ). 
Ethernet is the most widely installed LAN access method, originally developed by Xerox 
and then developed further by Xerox, Digital Equipment Corporation, and Intel. When 
it first began to be widely deployed in the 1980s, Ethernet supported a maximum theo-
retical data transfer rate of 10 megabits per second (Mbps). More recently, Fast Ethernet 
has extended traditional Ethernet technology to 100 Mbps peak, and Gigabit Ethernet 
technology extends performance up to 1,000 Mbps. 
 Ethernet is one of the most popular LAN technologies for the following reasons:
 ■ Is easy to implement, manage, and maintain. 
 ■ Allows low-cost network implementations. 
 ■ Provides extensive flexibility for network installation. 
 ■ Guarantees interoperability of standards-compliant products, regardless of 
manufacturer. 2 
LO B.4: Describe protocols and the 
importance of TCP/IP.
 FIGURE B.7 
 Ethernet Protocols 
Ethernet
HR Department
Sales Department
Department Server
Finance Department
Ethernet LAN Diagram
Printers
Router-Firewall
Internet

Networks and Telecommunications Appendix B
B.7
 Transmission Control Protocol/ Internet Protocol 
 The most common telecommunication protocol is transmission control protocol/
Internet protocol (TCP/IP), which was originally developed by the Department of 
Defense to connect a system of computer networks that became known as the Internet. 
 Transmission control protocol/Internet protocol (TCP/IP)  provides the technical 
foundation for the public Internet as well as for large numbers of private networks. The 
key achievement of TCP/IP is its flexibility with respect to lower-level protocols. TCP/IP 
uses a special transmission method that maximizes data transfer and automatically 
adjusts to slower devices and other delays encountered on a network. Although more 
than 100 protocols make up the entire TCP/IP protocol suite, the two most important of 
these are TCP and IP.  TCP  provides transport functions, ensuring, among other things, 
that the amount of data received is the same as the amount transmitted.  IP provides 
the addressing and routing mechanism that acts as a postmaster.  Figure B.8  displays 
TCP/IP’s four-layer reference model: 
 ■ Application layer—serves as the window for users and application processes to 
access network services. 
 ■ Transport layer—handles end-to-end packet transportation. 
 ■ Internet layer—formats the data into packets, adds a header containing the packet 
sequence and the address of the receiving device, and specifies the services required 
from the network. 
 ■ Network interface layer—places data packets on the network for transmission. 3 
 For a computer to communicate with other computers and web servers on the Inter-
net, it must have a unique numeric IP address. IP provides the addressing and routing 
mechanism that acts as a postmaster. An IP address is a unique 32-bit number that iden-
tifies the location of a computer on a network. It works like a street address—as a way to 
find out exactly where to deliver information. 
 When IP addressing first came out, everyone thought that there were plenty of 
addresses to cover any need. Theoretically, you could have 4,294,967,296 unique 
addresses. The actual number of available addresses is smaller (somewhere between 3.2 
and 3.3 billion) due to the way that the addresses are separated into classes, and some 
addresses are set aside for multicasting, testing, or other special uses. 4 
 With the explosion of the Internet and the increase in home networks and business 
networks, the number of available IP addresses is simply not enough. The obvious solu-
tion is to redesign the address format to allow for more possible addresses.  Internet 
protocol version 6 (IPv6)  is the “next generation” protocol designed to replace the cur-
rent version Internet protocol, IP version 4 (IPv4). However, IPv6 will take several years 
 FIGURE B.8 
 TCP/IP Four-Layer Reference 
Model 
Applications
Transport
TCP
FTP, SMTP, Telnet, HTTP, SNTP
IP
Ethernet, Token Ring, FDDI
Internet
Network Interface

Appendix B Networks and Telecommunications
B.8
to implement because it requires modification of the entire infrastructure of the Inter-
net. The main change brought by IPv6 is a much larger address space that allows greater 
flexibility in assigning addresses. IPv6 uses a 128-bit addressing scheme that produces 
3.4  3  10 38 addresses. 5  
 The TCP/IP suite of applications includes five protocols—file transfer, simple mail 
transfer, telnet, hypertext transfer, and simple network management (see  Figures B.9  
and  B.10 ). 6       
 MEDIA 
 Network transmission media  refers to the various types of media used to carry the sig-
nal between computers. When information is sent across the network, it is converted into 
electrical signals. These signals are generated as electromagnetic waves (analog signal-
ing) or as a sequence of voltage pulses (digital signaling). To be sent from one location to 
another, a signal must travel along a physical path. The physical path that is used to carry 
a signal between a signal transmitter and a signal receiver is called the transmission 
media. The two types of transmission media are wire (guided) and wireless (unguided). 
 Wire Media 
 Wire media  are transmission material manufactured so that signals will be confined 
to a narrow path and will behave predictably. The three most commonly used types of 
guided media are (see  Figure B.11 ): 
 ■ Twisted-pair cable 
 ■ Coaxial cable 
 ■ Fiber-optic cable 
LO B.5: Identify the different media 
types found in networks.
TCP/IP Applications
File Transfer Protocol (FTP)
Allows files containing text, programs, graphics, numerical data, and so 
on to be downloaded off or uploaded onto a 
network.
 Simple Mail Transfer Protocol 
(SMTP)
TCP/IP’s own messaging system for email.
Telnet Protocol
Provides terminal emulation that allows a personal computer or work-
station to act as a terminal, or access device, for a server.
 Hypertext Transfer Protocol 
(HTTP)
Allows web browsers and servers to send and receive web pages.
 Simple Network Management
Protocol (SNMP)
Allows networked nodes to be managed from a single point.
 FIGURE B.9 
 TCP/IP Applications 
OSI Model
7. Application
6. Presentation
5. Session
4. Transport
3. Network
2. Data Link
1. Physical
 FIGURE B.10 
 Open System Interconnection 
Model 

Networks and Telecommunications Appendix B
B.9
 Twisted-Pair Cable    Twisted-pair cable  refers to a type of cable composed of four 
(or more) copper wires twisted around each other within a plastic sheath. The wires are 
twisted to reduce outside electrical interference. Twisted-pair cables come in shielded 
and unshielded varieties. Shielded cables have a metal shield encasing the wires that 
acts as a ground for electromagnetic interference. Unshielded twisted-pair (UTP) is the 
most popular and is generally the best option for LAN networks. The quality of UTP may 
vary from telephone-grade wire to high-speed cable. The cable has four pairs of wires 
inside the jacket. Each pair is twisted with a different number of twists per inch to help 
eliminate interference from adjacent pairs and other electrical devices. The connectors 
(called RF-45) on twisted-pair cables resemble large telephone connectors. 7 
 Coaxial Cable    Coaxial cable  is cable that can carry a wide range of frequencies with 
low signal loss. It consists of a metallic shield with a single wire placed along the center 
of a shield and isolated from the shield by an insulator. Coaxial cable is similar to that 
used for cable television. This type of cable is referred to as coaxial because it contains 
one copper wire (or physical data channel) that carries the signal and is surrounded by 
another concentric physical channel consisting of a wire mesh. The outer channel serves 
as a ground for electrical interference. Because of this grounding feature, several coaxial 
cables can be placed within a single conduit or sheath without significant loss of data 
integrity. 8 
 Fiber-Optic Cable    Fiber optic  (or  optical fiber ) refers to the technology associ-
ated with the transmission of information as light impulses along a glass wire or fiber. 
Fiber-optic cable is the same type used by most telephone companies for long-distance 
service. Fiber-optic cable can transmit data over long distances with little loss in data 
integrity. In addition, because data are transferred as a pulse of light, fiber optical is not 
subject to interference. The light pulses travel through a glass wire or fiber encased in an 
insulating sheath. 9 
 Fiber optic’s increased maximum effective distance comes at a price. Optical fiber is 
more fragile than wire, difficult to split, and labor intensive to install. For these reasons, 
fiber optics is used primarily to transmit data over extended distances where the hard-
ware required to relay the data signal on less expensive media would exceed the cost of 
fiber-optic installation. It is also used where large amounts of data need to be transmit-
ted on a regular basis. 
 Wireless Media 
 Wireless media  are natural parts of the Earth’s environment that can be used as physi-
cal paths to carry electrical signals. The atmosphere and outer space are examples of 
Twisted-Pair Cabling
(10Base-T)
Coaxial Cable
Fiber-Optic Cable
Protective outside cover
Jacket
Cladding
Glass fiber core
Protective outside cover
Copper/aluminum mesh
Insulator
Copper center conductor
Inner, single-wire cover
Copper wire
 FIGURE B.11 
 Twisted-Pair, Coaxial Cable, 
and Fiber-Optic 

Appendix B Networks and Telecommunications
B.10
wireless media that are commonly used to carry these signals. Today, technologies for 
wireless data transmission include microwave transmission, communication satellites, 
(see  Figure B.12 ) mobile phones, personal digital assistants (PDAs), personal computers 
(e.g., laptops), and mobile data networks.  
 Network signals are transmitted through all media as a type of waveform. When trans-
mitted through wire and cable, the signal is an electrical waveform. When transmitted 
through fiber-optic cable, the signal is a light wave, either visible or infrared light. When 
transmitted through the Earth’s atmosphere, the signal can take the form of waves in the 
radio spectrum, including microwaves, infrared, or visible light. 
 FIGURE B.12 
 Communication Satellite 
Example 
22,000 miles above
Earth 
Fixed Locations
Satellite
Satellite
Portable Communications
Vehicles
 Client, B.4 
 Client/server network, B.4 
 Coaxial cable, B.9 
 Ethernet, B.6 
 Fiber optic (or optical fiber), B.9 
 Internet protocol version 6 
(IPv6), B.7  
 Interoperability, B.6 
 Local area network 
(LAN), B.2 
 Metropolitan area network 
(MAN), B.2 
 Network, B.1 
 Network operating system 
(NOS), B.4 
 Network topology, B.5 
 Network transmission 
media, B.8 
 Packet-switching, B.4 
 Peer-to-peer (P2P) network, B.3 
 Protocol, B.6 
 Router, B.4 
 Server, B.4 
 Telecommunication system, B.1 
 Transmission control protocol/
Internet protocol (TCP/IP), B.7 
 Twisted-pair cable, B.9 
 Wide area network (WAN), B.2 
 Wire media, B.8 
 Wireless media, B.9 
 K E Y  T E R M S 
 1. Network Analysis 
 Global Manufacturing is considering a new technology application. The company wants to process 
orders in a central location and then assign production to different plants. Each plant will operate 
its own production scheduling and control system. Data on work in process and completed assem-
blies will be transmitted back to the central location that processes orders. At each plant, Global 
uses personal computers that perform routine tasks such as payroll and accounting. The production 
 A P P LY  Y O U R  K N O W L E D G E 

Networks and Telecommunications Appendix B
B.11
scheduling and control systems will be a package program running on a new computer dedicated to 
this application. 
 The MIS personnel at Global have retained you as a consultant to help with further analysis. What 
kind of network configuration seems most appropriate? How much bandwidth is needed? What data 
should be collected? Prepare a plan showing the information Global must develop to establish this 
network system. Should Global use a private network or can it accomplish its objectives through the 
Internet? 
 2. Secure Access 
 Organizations that have traditionally maintained private, closed systems have begun to look at the 
potential of the Internet as a ready-made network resource. The Internet is inexpensive and glob-
ally pervasive: Every phone jack is a potential connection. However, the Internet lacks security. What 
obstacles must organizations overcome to allow secure network connections? 
 3. Telecommunications Options 
 Research the telecommunications options that currently exist for you to link to the Internet from 
where you live. Prepare a list of criteria on which to compare the different technologies, such as price 
(is there tiered pricing depending on speed and amount you can download?), start-up cost (do you 
need to buy a special modem, or is there an installation fee), maximum data transfer rate, and so 
on. Compare your responses with several classmates, and then develop a summary of all telecom-
munications options that you identified, including the criteria and your group comparison based on 
the criteria. 
 4. Frying Your Brains? 
 Radio waves, microwaves, and infrared all belong to the electromagnetic radiation spectrum used. 
These terms reference ranges of radiation frequencies we use every day in our wireless network-
ing environments. However, the very word  radiation  strikes fear in many people. Cell towers have 
sprouted from fields all along highways. Tall rooftops harbor many more cell stations in cities. Millions 
of cell phone users place microwave transmitters/receivers next to their heads each time they make 
a call. With all this radiation zapping around, should we be concerned? Research the Internet to find 
out what the World Health Organization (WHO) has had to say about this. 
 5. Home Network Experience 
 If you maintain a home computer network (or have set one up in the past), create a document that 
describes the benefits that the network provides along with the difficulties that you have experienced. 
Include in your document a network topology, a detailed description of the type of network you have 
and the equipment you use. If you have no experience with home networking, interview someone 
who does, and write up his or her comments. Compare this with several classmates, and discuss the 
benefits and challenges. 


C.1
C 
 LEARNING OUTCOMES 
 C.1 Identify the relational database model’s basic components. 
 C.2 Explain the importance of documenting entity relationship diagrams. 
 C.3 Explain the need for an entity-relationship diagram in a database management system. 
  INTRODUCTION 
  Businesses rely on databases for accurate, up-to-date information. Without access to 
mission critical data, most businesses are unable to perform their normal daily func-
tions, much less create queries and reports that help make strategic decisions. For those 
decisions to be useful, the database must have data that are accurate, complete, con-
sistent, timely, and unique. However, without a good underlying database design, deci-
sions will be inaccurate and inconstant. 
 A  database  maintains information about various types of objects (inventory), events 
(transactions), people (employees), and places (warehouses). A  database management 
system (DBMS)  creates, reads, updates, and deletes data in a database while controlling 
access and security. A DBMS provides a way to create, update, delete, store, and retrieve 
data in the database. 
 Using a data model offers a method for designing a database correctly that will help in 
meeting the needs of the users in a DBMS environment. 
 THE RELATIONAL DATABASE MODEL 
  Numerous elements in a business environment need to store data, and those elements 
are related to one another in a variety of ways. In fact, a database must contain not only 
the data but also information about the relationships between those data. Designing a 
database properly is fundamental to establishing a solid foundation in which to base 
business decisions. This is done by using a  data model,  or the logical data structures that 
detail the relationships among data elements using graphics or pictures. A  relational 
database model  stores information in the form of logically related two-dimensional 
tables. Tables, or entities as they are formally referred to, will be discussed later. 
LO C.1: Identify the relational data-
base model’s basic components.
 A P P E N D I X
 Designing Databases 

Appendix C Designing Databases
C.2
 In developing the relational database model to design a database, an entity-relation-
ship diagram is used. An  entity-relationship diagram (ERD) is a technique for docu-
menting the entities and relationships in a database environment. Before describing the 
notation used for developing an ERD, it is important to understand what entities and 
attributes are. 
 Entities and Attributes 
 An  entity  stores information about a person, place, thing, transaction, or event. A cus-
tomer is an entity, as is a product and an appointment. An  attribute  is the data elements 
associated with an entity. For example, consider Mega-Video, a physical and online 
retail store that sells movie DVDs. The company would need to store information on 
its customers (especially for online purchases) by creating an entity called  CUSTOMER 
that contained many attributes such as  Customer Number, First Name, Last Name, Street, 
City, State, Zip Code, Phone Number, and  Email  (refer to  Figure C.1 ). 
 Type of Attributes  There are several types of attributes, including:
 ■  Simple versus composite. A simple attribute cannot be broken down into a smaller 
component. For example, a customer’s first name and last name are simple. A com-
posite attribute can be divided into smaller components, which represent more 
basic attributes that have their own meanings. A common example of a composite 
attribute is  Address (see  Figure C.2 ).  Address can be broken down into a number of 
subparts, such as  Street, City, State, Zip Code. 
 ■  Single-valued versus multi-valued. When creating a relational database, the attributes 
in the data model must be single-valued.  Single-valued attribute means having only a 
single value of each attribute of an entity. A person’s age is an example of a single-valued 
attribute because a person cannot have more than one age.  Multi-valued attribute  
means having the potential to contain more than one value for an attribute . For exam-
ple, an educational degree of a person is a multi-valued attribute because a person can 
have more than one degree. An entity in a relational database cannot have multi-valued 
attributes; those attributes must be handled by creating another entity to hold them. 
Therefore, in the example given previously, in designing the database there would be 
two entities, one called  PERSON (or something similar) and one called  DEGREE. If a 
multi-valued attribute has been identified, it typically is a clue that another entity is 
needed.  
ENTITIES
Attributes
DISTRIBUTOR
Distributor Number
Name
Street
City
State
Zip Code
Phone
Contact Name
Contact Phone
ITEM
Item Number
Title
Distributor Number
Price
Release Date
Genre
ORDER
Order Number
Customer Number
Order Date
Order Filled
CUSTOMER
Customer Number
First Name
Last Name
Street
City
State
Zip Code
Phone
Email
 FIGURE C.1 
 Entities and Attributes Examples 

C.3
Designing Databases Appendix C
 ■  Stored versus derived. If an attribute can be calculated using the value of another 
attribute, it is called a derived attribute. The attribute that is used to derive the attri-
bute is called a stored attribute. Derived attributes are not stored in the file, but can 
be derived when needed from the stored attributes. One example of a derived and 
stored attribute is a person’s age. If the database has a stored attribute such as the 
person’s  Date of Birth, then a derived attribute called  Age can be created from taking 
the  Current Date  (this is retrieved from the DBMS) and subtracting the  Date of Birth 
to get the age.  
 ■  Null-valued. There are cases where an attribute does not have an applicable value 
for an attribute. For these situations, the null-valued attribute is created.  Null-valued 
attribute  is assigned to an attribute when no other value applies or when a value is 
unknown. A person who does not have a mobile phone would have null stored for 
the value for the  Mobile Phone Number attribute. Null can also be used in situations 
where the attribute value is unknown such as  Hair Color. Every person has a hair 
color, but the information may be missing. 
 Business Rules 
  The “correct” design for a specific business depends on the business rules; what is 
correct for one organization may not be correct for another. A  business rule  is a state-
ment that defines an aspect of a business. It is intended to convey the behavior and 
rules of a business. The following statements are examples of possible business rules for 
Mega-Video:
 ■ A customer can purchase many DVDs. 
 ■ DVDs can be purchased by many customers. 
 ■ A DVD title can have many copies. 
 A typical business may have hundreds of business rules. Each business rule will 
have entities and sometimes even attributes in the statements. For instance, in the first 
example above,  CUSTOMER  and  DVD  would be entities according to this business rule. 
Identifying the business rules will help to create a more accurate and complete database 
design. In addition, the business rules also assist with identifying relationships between 
entities. This is very useful in creating ERDs.   
 DOCUMENTING ENTITY RELATIONSHIP DIAGRAMS 
  Once entities, attributes, and business rules have been identified, the ERD can be 
documented. The two most commonly used models of ERD documentation are 
Chen, named after the originator of entity-relationship modeling, Dr. Peter Chen, 
and information engineering, which grew out of work by James Martin and Clive 
LO C.2: Explain the importance of 
documenting entity relationship 
diagrams.
 FIGURE C.2 
 Composite Attributes 
Address
A Composite Attribute 
City
State
Zip Code
Street

Appendix C Designing Databases
C.4
 FIGURE C.3 
 Chen Model with Attributes 
First Name
Last Name
Street
City
State
Zip Code
Email
Customer Number
CUSTOMER
Finkelstein. It does not matter which is used, as long as everyone who is using the 
diagram understands the notation. For purposes of simplicity, only the Chen model 
will be described here. 
 The Chen model notation uses very specific symbols in representing entities and 
attributes. Rectangles are used to represent entities. Each entity’s name appears in the 
rectangle, is expressed in the singular, and is capitalized, as in  CUSTOMER. Originally, 
attributes were not part of the Chen model; however, many database designers have 
extended it to include the attributes in ovals as illustrated in  Figure C.3 . 
 Basic Entity Relationships 
 One of the main reasons for creating an ERD is to identify and represent the relationships 
between entities. If the business rules for Mega-Video state that a customer can order 
many videos (in this case, an item), then a relationship needs to be created between 
 CUSTOMER, ORDER,  and  ITEM.  This is a purely conceptual representation of what the 
database will look like and is completely unrelated to the physical storage of the data. 
Again, what the ERD is doing is creating a model in which to design the database. 
 The Chen model uses diamonds for relationships and lines to connect relationships 
between entities.  Figure  C.4  displays the relationship between a Mega-Video  CUS-
TOMER and  ORDER  using this notation. The word within the relationship gives some 
indication of the meaning of the relationship. 
  Once the basic entities and their attributes have been defined, the next task is to iden-
tify the relationships among those entities. There are three basic types of relationships: 
(1) one-to-one, (2) one-to-many, and (3) many-to-many. 
 One-to-One Relationship   A  one-to-one relationship (1:1)  is between two entities 
in which an instance of one entity can be related to only one instance of a related entity. 
Consider Mega-Video, which has many different stores with several employees and one 
manager. According to the company’s business rules, the manager, who is an employee, 
can manage only one store. The relationship then becomes 1:1 between  EMPLOYEE 
and  STORE.  Using the Chen model notation, as shown in  Figure C.5 , the relationships 
 FIGURE C.4 
 Chen Method with Relationship 
Has
CUSTOMER
ORDER

C.5
Designing Databases Appendix C
between the two instances can then be expressed as “An employee can manage one store 
and one store has one manager.” The number “1” next to the  EMPLOYEE  and  STORE 
entities indicates that only one  EMPLOYEE manages one  STORE. 
 One-to-Many Relationship   Most relational databases are constructed from one-
to-many relationships. A  one-to-many relationship (1:M)  is between two entities in 
which an instance of one entity can be related to many instances of a related entity. For 
example, Mega-Video receives many  ITEM (s) from one  DISTRIBUTOR  and each  DIS-
TRIBUTOR  supplies many  ITEM (s) as  Figure C.6  illustrates. Similarly, a  CUSTOMER can 
have many  ORDER (s), but an  ORDER  has only one  CUSTOMER. These are both exam-
ples of a one-to-many relationship. The “M” next to the  ORDER  entity indicates that a 
 CUSTOMER  can place one or more  ORDER (s). That notation is also used with  ITEM, as 
an  ORDER can contain one or more  ITEM (s). 
   Many-to-Many Relationship   Identifying and removing many-to-many relationships 
will help to create an accurate and consistent database. A  many-to-many relationship 
(M:N)  is between two entities in which an instance of one entity is related to many instances 
of another and one instance of the other can be related to many instances of the first entity. 
There is a many-to-many relationship between a Mega-Video  ORDER  and  ITEM (refer 
back to  Figure C.6 ). An  ORDER  can contain many  ITEM (s) and each  ITEM  can be on many 
 ORDER (s). The letter “N” next to  ITEM  in  Figure C.6  indicates the many-to-many relation-
ship between  ORDER and  ITEM.  
 However, there are problems with many-to-many relationships. First, the relational 
data model was not designed to handle many-to-many relationships. This means they 
need to be replaced with a one-to-many relationship to be used in a relational DBMS. 
Second, many-to-many relationships will create redundancy in the data that are stored. 
This then has a negative impact on the accuracy and consistency that a database 
needs. To better understand this problem, consider the relationship between  ITEM 
and  ORDER.  There is a many-to-many relationship between the  ORDER and the  ITEM 
because each  ORDER  can contain many  ITEM (s) and, over time, each  ITEM  will be on 
many  ORDER (s). Whenever a  CUSTOMER  places an  ORDER  for an  ITEM,  the number 
of  ITEM (s) varies, depending on how many DVDs the  CUSTOMER is buying. To break 
the many-to-many relationship, a composite entity is needed. 
 FIGURE C.5 
 A One-to-One Relationship 
Manages
EMPLOYEE
STORE
1
1
Has
Contains
Supplied
CUSTOMER
ORDER
ITEM
DISTRIBUTOR
M
1
M
N
M
1
 FIGURE C.6 
 A One-to-Many Relationship 

Appendix C Designing Databases
C.6
 Entities that exist to represent the relationship between two other entities are known 
as  composite entities.  Our above example needs another entity that breaks up the 
many-to-many relationship between  ORDER  and  ITEM.   Figure  C.7  displays the new 
relationship. 
  Creating a composite entity called  LINE ITEM  (think of it as a line item on an invoice 
slip) breaks up the many-to-many relationship between  ORDER  and  ITEM,  which then 
eliminates redundancy and other anomalies when deleting or updating information. 
Using the Chen model, composite entities are documented with a combination of a rect-
angle and a diamond. 
 Given the new ERD in  Figure C.7 , each  ORDER can contain many  LINE ITEM (s), but a 
 LINE ITEM can belong to only one  ORDER. As a result, the relationship between  ORDER 
and  LINE ITEM  is one-to-many (one order has one or more line items) and the rela-
tionship between  LINE  ITEM  and  ITEM  is one-to-many (one item can be in many line 
items). The composite entity has removed the original many-to-many relationship and 
turned it into two one-to-many relationships. 
 Relationship Cardinality 
 Cardinality  expresses the specific number of instances in an entity. In the Chen model, 
the cardinality is indicated by placing numbers beside the entities in the format of (x, y). 
The first number in the cardinality represents the minimum value and the second num-
ber is for the maximum value. 
 Mega-Video can store data about a  CUSTOMER  in its database before the  CUSTOMER 
places an  ORDER.  An instance of the  CUSTOMER  entity does not have to be related to 
any instance of the  ORDER  entity, meaning there is an optional cardinality. 
 However, the reverse is not true for the Mega-Video database, an  ORDER  must be 
related to a  CUSTOMER.  Without a  CUSTOMER,  an  ORDER  cannot exist. An instance 
of the  CUSTOMER  entity can be related to zero, one, or more  ORDER (s) using the cardi-
nality notation (0,N). An instance of the  ORDER  entity must be related to one and only 
one  CUSTOMER,  having a cardinality of (1,1). The relationship between an instance 
of  ORDER  and  CUSTOMER  is a mandatory relationship.  Figure  C.8  illustrates these 
cardinalities. 
 FIGURE C.7 
 A Composite Entity 
Has
CUSTOMER
M
1
Contains
ORDER
1
DISTRIBUTOR
1
M
M
M
1
LINE ITEM
Has
ITEM
Supplied
 FIGURE C.8 
 Example of Cardinalities 
Has
CUSTOMER
M
ORDER
1
(1,1)
(0,N)

C.7
Designing Databases Appendix C
 RELATIONAL DATA MODEL AND THE DATABASE 
 Once the ERD is completed, it can be translated from a conceptual logical model into 
the formal data model required by the DBMS. The relational data model is the result of 
the work of Edgar (E. F.) Codd, a mathematician. During the 1960s, Dr. Codd was work-
ing with existing data models when he noticed that data relationships were very inef-
ficient. Using his experience and knowledge in mathematics, he created the relational 
data model. Most databases, such as Access 2010 and SQL Server 2010, are based on the 
relational data model.  
 From Entities to Tables 
 In creating an ERD for the conceptual model, the focus was on identifying entities and 
attributes. For the logical relational data model, the attention is on tables and fields. 
Using the ERD the entities become tables and attributes turn into fields. A  table  is com-
posed of rows and columns that represent an entity. A  field  is a characteristic of a table. 
A  record  is a collection of related data elements. The columns in the table definition 
represent the field, while a row is a record. 
 At first glance, a table along with the fields and records looks much like information in 
a spreadsheet, such as that displayed in  Figure C.9 of a  CUSTOMER table. 
 Fields   Figure C.9  has four fields,  Customer Number, First Name, Last Name,  and  Phone 
Number.  Two or more tables within the same relational data model may have fields with 
the same names, but a single table must have unique field names. Using the relational 
data model notation, the table names are capitalized (e.g.,  CUSTOMER ) and all columns 
are in title case (e.g., Customer Number), as in: 
 CUSTOMER (Customer Number, First Name, Last Name, Phone Number) 
 Records  A record in a table has the following properties:
 ■ A table cannot have multi-valued attributes (as mentioned previously); therefore, 
only one value is allowed at the intersection of a field and record. 
 ■ Each record needs to be unique; there are no duplicate records in a table. 
 ■ A record must have an entity identifier, or  primary key,  which is a field (or group of 
fields), that uniquely identifies a given record in a table.     
 Primary Key   A primary key makes it possible to uniquely identify every record in a 
table. The primary key is important to retrieve data accurately from the database. 
 Using a  Customer Number  as a primary key states that no two customers will ever 
have the same number. The primary key will be used to identify records associated with 
it. For example, if someone was searching the Mega-Video database for all the  ITEMS 
that a  CUSTOMER  with a  Customer Number  of “112299” bought, he would retrieve only 
those records and not those associated with another customer. 
 Along with being unique, a primary key must not contain the value  null.  Recall that 
null is a special value meaning unknown; however, it is not the same as a field being 
LO C.3: Explain the need for an 
entity-relationship diagram in a 
database management systems.
CUSTOMER
Customer Number
First Name
Last Name
Phone Number
0001
Bill
Miller
777-777-7777
0505
Jane
Cook
444-444-4444
1111
Sam
Smith
555-555-5555
1212
John
Doe
666-666-6666
FIGURE C.9
A Sample Customer Table

Appendix C Designing Databases
C.8
blank or set to the value of zero. If one record has a null primary key, then the data struc-
ture is not in violation. But once a second null value for another record is introduced, the 
uniqueness of the primary key is lost. Therefore, nulls are forbidden when establishing 
primary keys. 
 The proper notation to use when documenting the primary key is to underline it, 
such as: 
 CUSTOMER ( Customer Number, First Name, Last Name, Phone Number)   
 Logically Relating Tables 
 Once the primary key has been defined, tables can be logically related. Each table in 
 Figure C.10  is directly analogous to the entities of the same name in the Mega-Video ERD 
presented in  Figure C.8 , excluding the  DISTRIBUTOR.  The  CUSTOMER  table is iden-
tified by a Customer Number, a randomly generated unique primary key. The  ORDER 
table is identified by an Order Number, another arbitrary unique primary key assigned 
by Mega-Video. The table  ORDER LINE  tells the company which  ITEM (s) are part of 
which  ORDER.  This table requires a concatenated primary key (that is to say, joining 
two fields that act as one primary key) because multiple  ITEM (s) can appear on multiple 
 ORDER (s). The selection of this primary key, however, has more significance than simply 
 FIGURE C.10 
 Logically Relating Tables 
CUSTOMER
1111
Sam
Jane
0505
Foreign key
Foreign key
9244
Primary
key
Primary
key
Primary
key
Foreign
key
ORDER
1000
9250
9255
9244
LINE ITEM
ITEM
Twilight Zone
Iron Man 2
Avatar
Item Number
Title
Distributor Number
Price
4.95
4.95
5.95
002
002
004
Item Number
Order Number
Shipped?
Quantity
1
9244
1001
1
9250
1002
1
9255
1002
1
Y
Y
Y
Y
Customer Number
Order Number
Order Date
1111
1000
11/1/2011
1111
1001
11/10/2011
0505
1002
12/11/2011
Customer Number
First Name
Phone
Last Name
555-555-5555
Smith
444-444-4444
Cook

C.9
Designing Databases Appendix C
identifying each record; it also represents a relationship between the  ORDER LINES, the 
 ORDER  on which they appear, and the  ITEM (s) being ordered. The primary key for the 
 ITEM  table is identified by the  Item Number. 
 The  Item Number  field in the  ORDER LINE  table is the same as the primary key in the 
 ITEM  table. This indicates a one-to-many relationship between the two tables. Similarly, 
there is also a one-to-many relationship between the  ORDER  and  ORDER LINE tables 
because the  Order Number  column in the  ORDER LINE  table is the same as the primary 
key of the  ORDER table. 
 When a table contains a field that is the same as the primary key of another table, it is 
called a foreign key. A  foreign key  is a primary key of one table that appears as an attribute in 
another table and acts to provide a logical relationship between the two tables. The match-
ing of foreign keys to primary keys represents data relationships in a relational database. 
 Foreign keys may be a part of a concatenated primary key, as is the case in the  LINE 
ITEM  table in  Figure C.10 . By concatenating, or combining, both  Order Number and 
 Item Number  in the  LINE ITEM  table as foreign keys, they then become primary keys. 
However, most foreign keys are not part of the table’s primary key. Consider the relation 
between Mega-Video’s  CUSTOMER  and  ORDER  in  Figure C.10 . The  Customer Number 
field in the  ORDER  table is a foreign key that matches the primary key of the  CUSTOMER 
table. It represents the one-to-many relationship between  CUSTOMER  and  ORDER. 
However, the  Customer Number  is not part of the primary key of the  ORDER  table; it is 
simply used to create a relationship between the two tables,  CUSTOMER and  ORDER. 
 A relational database uses the relationships indicated by matching data between pri-
mary and foreign keys. Assume that a Mega-Video employee wanted to see what  Titles 
had been ordered with  Order Number  1002. First, the database identifies the records in 
the  LINE ITEM  table that contain an  Order Number  of 1002. Then, it matches them to 
the  Item Number (s) in the  ITEM  table. The results are those that match the records from 
each table. 
Attributes, C.2
Business rule, C.2
Cardinality, C.3
Composite entity, C.6
Data model, C.2
Database, C.1
Database management system 
(DBMS), C.1
Entity, C.2
Entity-relationship diagram 
(ERD), C.2
Field, C.7
Foreign key, C.9
Many-to-many relationship 
(M:N), C.5
Multi-valued attribute, C.2
Null-valued attribute, C.3
One-to-many relationship 
(1:M), C.5
One-to-one relationship (1:1), C.4
Primary key, C.7
Record, C.7
Relational database model, C.2
Single-valued attribute, C.2
Table, C.7
K E Y  T E R M S
 1. SportTech Events
SportTech Events puts on athletic events for local high school athletes. The company needs a data-
base designed to keep track of the sponsor for the event and where the event is located. Each event 
needs a description, date, and cost. Separate costs are negotiated for each event. The company would 
also like to have a list of potential sponsors that includes each sponsor’s contact information, such as 
the name, phone number, and address.
A P P LY  Y O U R  K N O W L E D G E

Appendix C Designing Databases
C.10
Each event will have a single sponsor, but a particular sponsor may sponsor more than one event. 
Each location will need an ID, contact person, and phone number. A particular event will use only one 
location, but a location may be used for multiple events. SportTech asks you to create an ERD from 
the information described here.
 2. Course and Student Schedules
Paul Bauer, the chair for the information technology (IT) department at the University of Denver, needs 
to create a database to keep track of all the courses offered by the department. In addition to the 
course information, Bauer would like the database to include each instructor’s basic contact infor-
mation, such as ID number, name, office location, and phone number. Currently, the department has 
nine instructors (seven full-time faculty and two adjuncts). For each course, Bauer would like to keep 
track of the course ID, title, and number of credit hours. When courses are offered, the section of the 
course receives an ID number, and with that number, the department keeps track of which instructor 
is teaching the course. There is only one instructor per course.
Finally, Bauer needs to be able to keep track of the IT students and to know which courses each 
student has taken. The information he would like to know about each student includes ID number, 
name, and phone number. He also needs to know what grade the student receives in each course.
He has asked you to create an ERD from the information described here using the Chen model.
 3. Foothills Athletics
Foothills Athletics is an athletic facility offering services in Highlands Ranch, Colorado. All property 
owners living in Highlands Ranch are members of the Highlands Ranch Community Association 
(HRCA), which has partnered with Foothills Athletics to provide recreation facilities for its residents. 
Foothills Athletics has been using a spreadsheet to keep track of its personnel, facilities, equipment, 
and the HRCA members. The spreadsheet has created many redundancies along with several anoma-
lies in adding, modifying, and deleting information. One of the HRCA members has suggested that the 
athletic facility should create a database to improve data collection that will also remove many of the 
difficulties that the spreadsheet is creating.
Foothills Athletics primary business operations are based on the following:
 ■ Personnel: Foothills Athletics has a number of employees, primarily fitness instructors and 
administrative personnel. Records are kept on each employee, detailing employee name, address, 
phone number, data of hire, position, and status as either a current or former employee. Employees 
are assigned a unique four-digit employee ID number when they are hired.
 ■ Members: When joining Foothills Athletics, HRCA members are assigned a unique four-digit 
member ID number. This information along with their name, address, phone number, gender, birth 
date, and date of membership are recorded. At the time of enrollment, each member decides on 
one of three available membership types along with a fixed membership fee: Platinum ($400), 
Gold ($300), and Silver ($200). This is a one-time fee that establishes a lifetime membership.
 ■ Facilities and equipment: Foothills Athletics has a variety of facilities and equipment choices. 
Each facility has a unique room number and a size limitation associated with it. Some of the 
rooms contain a variety of exercise equipment; all have a serial number that is used for inventory 
and maintenance purposes. In addition, for each piece of equipment, the purchase date and the 
date of its last maintenance are recorded. Each piece of equipment belongs to a specific equip-
ment type, such as elliptical machine, and is assigned a unique three-digit identification number. 
The description, the manufacturer’s model number, and the recommended maintenance interval 
for that model of equipment are also kept on file. Each equipment type is associated with a single 
manufacturer that is referenced by a unique two-digit manufacturer ID number.
You have been hired to assist Foothills Athletics to create an ERD from the information described 
here using the Chen model.

C.11
Designing Databases Appendix C
4. Slopeside Ski Rentals
Vail Resort in Vail, Colorado, is internationally known as one of the best places in North America for 
skiing. Since 1973, Slopeside Ski Rentals has been a tradition in the area. At Slopeside Ski Rentals, 
customers will find the largest selection of skis, boots, snowboards, clothing, helmets, eyewear, and a 
variety of other accessories needed for the slopes.
You have been employed for the past three winters by the company. Recently, there has been a 
surge in business, and the owners need a more accurate way to manage the rental business. You 
have decided to create a database to help the owners keep track of the ski rentals, who the custom-
ers are, amount paid, and any damage to the skis when they are rented. The skis and snowboards 
vary in type, size, and bindings. When customers rent equipment, they are required to leave their 
driver’s license number and to give a home address, phone number, and credit card number.
A few business rules that you are aware of include:
 ■ A customer can rent one or more skis or snowboards at one time.
 ■ Skis and snowboards can be rented by many customers.
 ■ A ski or snowboard need not be assigned to any customer.
Your job is to develop an ERD from the business rules mentioned here.


 
The Technology Plug-Ins      T.1
      The overall goal of the Technology Plug-Ins is to provide additional information 
not covered in the text such as personal productivity using information technology, 
problem solving using Excel, and decision making using Access. These plug-ins also 
offer an all-in-one text to faculty, avoiding need to purchase an extra book to sup-
port Microsoft Office. These plug-ins offer integration with the core chapters and pro-
vide critical knowledge using essential business applications, such as Microsoft Excel, 
Microsoft Access, and Microsoft Project with hands-on tutorials for comprehension 
and mastery. Plug-Ins T1 to T12 are located on this textbook’s website at www.mhhe
.com/baltzan. 
T H E  T E C H N O L OG Y  P L U G-INS
Plug-In
Description
T1.  Personal Productivity Using IT
 This plug-in covers a number of things to do to keep a personal computer running effectively 
and efficiently. The 12 topics covered in this plug-in are:
 
■Creating strong passwords.
 
■Performing good ﬁ le management.
 
■Implementing effective backup and recovery strategies.
 
■Using Zip ﬁ les.
 
■Writing professional emails.
 
■Stopping spam.
 
■Preventing phishing.
 
■Detecting spyware.
 
■Threads to instant messaging.
 
■Increasing PC performance.
 
■Using anti-virus software.
 
■Installing a personal ﬁ rewall.
T2. Basic Skills Using Excel
This plug-in introduces the basics of using Microsoft Excel, a spreadsheet program for data 
analysis, along with a few fancy features. The six topics covered in this plug-in are:
 
■Workbooks and worksheets.
 
■Working with cells and cell data.
 
■Printing worksheets.
 
■Formatting worksheets.
 
■Formulas.
 
■Working with charts and graphics.
T3. Problem Solving Using Excel
This plug-in provides a comprehensive tutorial on how to use a variety of Microsoft Excel 
functions and features for problem solving. The five areas covered in this plug-in are:
 
■Lists
 
■Conditional Formatting
 
■AutoFilter
 
■Subtotals
 
■PivotTables
T4. Decision Making Using Excel
This plug-in examines a few of the advanced business analysis tools used in Microsoft Excel 
that have the capability to identify patterns, trends, and rules, and create “what-if” models. 
The four topics covered in this plug-in are:
 
■IF
 
■Goal Seek
 
■Solver
 
■Scenario Manager
(continued)

T.2 
The Technology Plug-Ins
T5.  Designing Database 
Applications
This plug-in provides specific details on how to design relational database applications. One of 
the most efficient and powerful information management computer-based applications is the 
relational database. The four topics covered in this plug-in are:
 
■Entities and data relationships.
 
■Documenting logical data relationships.
 
■The relational data model.
 
■Normalization.
T6.   Basic Skills Using
Access
This plug-in focuses on creating a Microsoft Access database file. One of the most efficient 
information management computer-based applications is Microsoft Access. Access provides a 
powerful set of tools for creating and maintaining a relational database. The two topics covered 
in this plug-in are:
 
■Create a new database ﬁ le.
 
■Create and modify tables.
T7.  Problem Solving Using 
Access
This plug-in provides a comprehensive tutorial on how to query a database in Microsoft Access. 
Queries are essential for problem solving, allowing a user to sort information, summarize data 
(display totals, averages, counts, and so on), display the results of calculations on data, and 
choose exactly which fields are shown. The three topics in this plug-in are:
 
■Create simple queries using the simple query wizard.
 
■Create advanced queries using calculated ﬁ elds.
 
■Format results displayed in calculated ﬁ elds.
T8.  Decision Making Using  
Access
This plug-in provides a comprehensive tutorial on entering data in a well-designed form and 
creating functional reports using Microsoft Access. A form is essential to use for data entry 
and a report is an effective way to present data in a printed format. The two topics in this 
plug-in are:
 
■Creating, modifying, and running forms.
 
■Creating, modifying, and running reports.
T9. Designing Web Pages
This plug-in provides a comprehensive assessment into the functional aspects of web design. 
Websites are beginning to look more alike and to employ the same metaphors and conventions. 
The web has now become an everyday thing whose design should not make users think. The six 
topics in this plug-in are:
 
■The World Wide Web.
 
■The unknown(s).
 
■The process of web design.
 
■HTML basics.
 
■Web fonts.
 
■Web graphics.
T10.  Creating Web Pages 
Using HTML
This plug-in provides an overview of creating web pages using the HTML language. 
HTML is a system of codes that you use to create interactive web pages. It provides 
a means to describe the structure of text-based information in a document—by 
denoting certain text as headings, paragraphs, lists, and so on. The five topics in this 
plug-in are:
 
■HTML (an introduction).
 
■Creating, saving, and viewing HTML documents.
 
■Applying style tags and attributes.
 
■Using fancier formatting.
 
■Creating hyperlinks.
 
■Displaying graphics.
Plug-In
Description
(continued)

 
The Technology Plug-Ins      T.3
Plug-In
Description
T11.  Creating Web Pages 
Using Dreamweaver
This plug-in provides a tour of using Dreamweaver to create web pages. Dreamweaver allows 
anyone with limited web page design experience to create, modify, and maintain full-featured, 
professional-looking pages without having to learn how to code all the functions and features 
from scratch. The five topics in this plug-in are:
 
■Navigation in Dreamweaver.
 
■Adding content.
 
■Formatting content.
 
■Developing style sheets.
 
■Creating tables.
T12.  Creating Gantt Charts 
with Excel and Microsoft 
Project
This plug-in offers a quick and efficient way to manage projects. Excel and Microsoft Project 
are great for managing all phases of a project, creating templates, collaborating on planning 
processes, tracking project progress, and sharing information with all interested parties. The 
two topics in this plug-in are:
 
■Creating Gantt Charts with Excel.
 
■Creating Gantt Charts with Microsoft Project.


 
Apply Your Knowledge    AYK.1
Project 
Number
Project Name
Project Type
Plug-In
Focus Area
Project Level
Skill Set
Page 
Number
  1
Financial 
Destiny
Excel
T2
Personal 
Budget
Introductory
Formulas
AYK.4
  2
Cash Flow
Excel
T2
Cash Flow
Introductory
Formulas
AYK.4
  3
Technology 
Budget
Excel
T1, T2
Hardware 
and Software
Introductory
Formulas
AYK.4
  4
Tracking 
Donations
Excel
T2
Employee 
Relationships
Introductory
Formulas
AYK.4
  5
Convert 
Currency
Excel
T2
Global 
Commerce
Introductory
Formulas
AYK.5
  6
Cost 
Comparison
Excel
T2
Total Cost of 
Ownership
Introductory
Formulas
AYK.5
  7
Time 
Management
Excel or Project
T12
Project 
Management
Introductory
Gantt Charts
AYK.6
  8
Maximize 
Profit
Excel
T2, T4
Strategic 
Analysis
Intermediate
Formulas or 
Solver
AYK.6
  9
Security 
Analysis
Excel
T3
Filtering Data
Intermediate
Conditional 
Formatting, 
Autofilter, 
Subtotal
AYK.7
10
Gathering 
Data
Excel
T3
Data 
Analysis
Intermediate
Conditional 
Formatting
AYK.8
11
Scanner 
System
Excel
T2
Strategic 
Analysis
Intermediate
Formulas
AYK.8
12
Competitive 
Pricing
Excel
T2
Profit 
Maximization
Intermediate
Formulas
AYK.9
13
Adequate 
Acquisitions
Excel
T2
Break-Even 
Analysis
Intermediate
Formulas
AYK.9
14
Customer 
Relations
Excel
T3
CRM
Intermediate
PivotTable
AYK.9
15
Assessing 
the Value of 
Information
Excel
T3
Data 
Analysis
Intermediate
PivotTable
AYK.10
16
Growth, 
Trends, and 
Forecasts
Excel
T2, T3
Data 
Forecasting
Advanced
Average, 
Trend, Growth
AYK.11
17
Shipping Costs
Excel
T4
SCM
Advanced
Solver
AYK.12
18
Formatting 
Grades
Excel
T3
Data 
Analysis
Advanced
If, LookUp
AYK.12
(Continued)
 Apply Your Knowledge Project Overview 
 A P P LY  YOU R  K N OWL EDGE 

AYK.2 
Apply Your Knowledge
 NOTE: Many of the Excel projects support multiple data files. Therefore the naming convention that 
you see in the text may not be the same as what you see in a data folder. As an example, in the text we 
reference data files as AYK1_Data.xlsx; however, you may see a file named AYK1_Data_Version_1.xlsx, 
or AYK1_Data_Version_2.xlsx.    
Project 
Number
Project Name
Project Type
Plug-In
Focus Area
Project Level
Skill Set
Page
Number
19
Moving 
Dilemma
Excel
T2, T3
SCM
Advanced
Absolute 
vs. Relative 
Values
AYK.13
20
Operational 
Efficiencies
Excel
T3
SCM
Advanced
PivotTable
AYK.14
21
Too Much 
Information
Excel
T3
CRM
Advanced
PivotTable
AYK.14
22
Turnover Rates
Excel
T3
Data Mining
Advanced
PivotTable
AYK.15
23
Vital 
Information
Excel
T3
Data Mining
Advanced
PivotTable
AYK.15
24
Breaking Even
Excel
T4
Business 
Analysis
Advanced
Goal Seek
AYK.16
25
Profit Scenario
Excel
T4
Sales 
Analysis
Advanced
Scenario 
Manager
AYK.16
26
Electronic 
Résumés
HTML
T9, T10, 
T11
Electronic 
Personal 
Marketing
Introductory
Structural 
Tags
AYK.17
27
Gathering 
Feedback
Dreamweaver
T9, T10, 
T11
Data 
Collection
Intermediate
Organization 
of Information
AYK.17
28
Daily Invoice
Access
T5, T6, 
T7, T8
Business 
Analysis
Introductory
Entities, 
Relationships, 
and 
Databases
AYK.17
29
Billing Data
Access
T5, T6, 
T7, T8
Business 
Intelligence
Introductory
Entities, 
Relationships, 
and 
Databases
AYK.19
30
Inventory Data
Access
T5, T6, 
T7, T8
SCM
Intermediate
Entities, 
Relationships, 
and 
Databases
AYK.20
31
Call Center
Access
T5, T6, 
T7, T8
CRM
Intermediate
Entities, 
Relationships, 
and 
Databases
AYK.21
32
Sales Pipeline
Access
T5, T6, 
T7, T8
Business 
Intelligence
Advanced
Entities, 
Relationships, 
and 
Databases
AYK.23
33
Online 
Classified Ads
Access
T5, T6, 
T7, T8
Ecommerce
Advanced
Entities, 
Relationships, 
and 
Databases
AYK.23

 
Apply Your Knowledge    AYK.3
 Project 1: 
 Financial Destiny 
 You have been introduced to Microsoft Excel and are ready to begin using it to help track 
your monthly expenses and take charge of your financial destiny. The first step is to cre-
ate a personal budget so you can see where you are spending money and if you need to 
decrease your monthly expenses or increase your monthly income.  
 Create a template for a monthly budget of your income and expenditures, with some 
money set aside for savings (or you can use the data file, AYK1_Data.xlsx, we created). 
Create variations of this budget to show how much you could save if you cut back on cer-
tain expenses, found a roommate, or got a part-time job. Compare the costs of a meal plan 
to costs of groceries. Consider how much interest would be earned if you saved $100 a 
month, or how much debt paid on student loans or credit card bills. To expand your data 
set, make a fantasy budget for 10 years from now, when you might own a home, have stu-
dent loan payments, and have a good salary. 
 Data File: AYK1_Data.xlsx 
 Project 2: 
 Cash Flow 
 Gears is a five-year-old company that specializes in bike components. The company is hav-
ing trouble paying for its monthly supplies and would like to perform a cash flow analysis 
so it can understand its financial position. Cash flow represents the money an investment 
produces after subtracting cash expenses from income. The statement of cash flows sum-
marizes sources and uses of cash, indicates whether enough cash is available to carry on 
routine operations, and offers an analysis of all business transactions, reporting where 
the firm obtained its cash and how it chose to allocate the cash. The cash flow statement 
shows where money comes from, how the company is going to spend it, and when the 
company will require additional cash. Gears would like to project a cash flow statement for 
the next month. 
 Using the data file AYK2_Data.xlsx complete the cash flow statement for Gears using 
Excel. Be sure to create formulas so the company can simply input numbers in the future 
to determine cash flow. 
 Data File: AYK2_Data.xlsx 
 Project 3: 
 Technology Budget 
 Tally is a start-up website development company located in Seattle, Washington. The com-
pany currently has seven employees and is looking to hire six new employees in the next 
month. 
 You are in charge of purchasing for Tally. Your first task is to purchase computers for 
the new employees. Your budget is $250,000 to buy the best computer systems with a 
scanner, three color printers, and business software. Use the web to research various 
products and calculate the costs of different systems using Excel. Use a variety of Excel 
formulas as you analyze costs and compare prices. Use the data file AYK3_Data.xlsx as 
a template. 
 Data File: AYK3_Data.xlsx 
 Project 4: 
 Tracking Donations 
 Lazarus Consulting is a large computer consulting company in New York. Pete Lazarus, 
the CEO and founder, is well known for his philanthropic efforts. Pete knows that most of 
his employees contribute to nonprofit organizations and wants to reward them for their 

AYK.4 
Apply Your Knowledge
efforts while encouraging others to contribute to charities. Pete began a program that 
matches 50 percent of each employee donation. The only stipulations are that the charity 
must be a nonprofit organization and the company will match only up to $2,000 per year 
per employee.    
 Open the data file AYK4_Data.xlsx and determine the following:
 ■ What was the total donation amount per organization? 
 ■ What were the average donations per organization? 
 Data File: AYK4_Data.xlsx 
 Project 5: 
 Convert Currency 
 You have decided to spend the summer traveling abroad with your friends. Your trip is going 
to take you to France, England, Italy, Switzerland, Germany, Norway, and Ireland. You want 
to use Excel to convert currencies as you travel around the world. 
 Locate one of the exchange rate calculators on the Internet ( www.xe.com  or  www
.x-rates.com ). Find the exchange rates for each of the countries listed above and create 
formulas in Excel to convert $100, $500, and $1,000. Use the data file AYK5_Data.xlsx as a 
template. 
 Data File: AYK5_Data.xls 
 Project 6: 
 Cost Comparison 
 You are thinking about purchasing a new computer since the machine you are using now is 
four years old, slow, not always reliable, and does not support the latest operating system. 
Your needs for the new computer are simple: anti-virus software, email, web browsing, 
word processing, spreadsheet, database, iTunes, and some lightweight graphical tools. 
Your concern is what the total cost of ownership will be for the next three years. You 
have to factor in a few added costs beyond just the initial purchase price for the com-
puter itself, such as: added hardware (this could include a new printer, docking station, or 
scanner), software (purchase of a new operating system), training (you’re thinking about 
pursuing web training to get an internship next term), subsequent software upgrades, and 
maintenance.    
 ■ It is useful to think about costs over time—both direct as well as indirect costs. Part of 
the reason this distinction is important is that a decision should rest not on the nominal 
sum of the purchase, but rather on the present value of the purchase. 
 ■ A dollar today is worth more than a dollar one year from now.  
 FIGURE AYK.1 
 Sample Layout of New 
Computer Spreadsheet 
 

 
Apply Your Knowledge    AYK.5
 ■ The relevant discount rate (interest rate) is your marginal cost of capital corresponding 
to a level of risk equal with the purchase. 
 ■ Use the data file AYK6_Data.xlsx as a template.  
 Data File: AYK6_Data.xlsx  
 Project 7: 
 Time Management 
 You have just been hired as a business analyst by a new start-up company called Multi-
Media. Multi-Media is an interactive agency that constructs phased and affordable web-
site marketing, providing its clients with real and measurable solutions that are supported 
by easy-to-use tools. Since the company is very new to the business arena, it needs help 
in creating a project management plan for developing its own website. The major tasks for 
the development team have been identified but you need to create the timeline. 
 1. The task names, durations, and any prerequisites are:
 ■ Analyze and plan—two weeks. Cannot start anything else until done.  
 ■ Create and organize content—four weeks. Can start to develop “look and feel” 
before this is done. 
 ■ Develop the “look and feel”—four weeks. Start working on graphics and HTML at 
the same time. 
 ■ Produce graphics and HTML documents—two weeks. Create working prototype 
after the first week. 
 ■ Create a working prototype—two weeks. Give to test team when complete. 
 ■ Test, test, test—four weeks. 
 ■ Upload to a web server and test again—one week. 
 ■ Maintain. 
 2. Using Microsoft Excel or Microsoft Project, create a Gantt chart using the information 
provided above.  
 Project 8: 
 Maximize Proﬁ t 
 Books, Books, Books is a wholesale distributor of popular books. The business buys 
overstocked books and sells them for a discount of more than 50 percent to local area 
bookstores. The owner of the company, BK Kane, would like to determine the best 
approach to boxing books so he can make the most profit possible. The local book-
stores accept all shipments from Books, Books, Books because of BK’s incredibly 
low prices. BK can order as many overstocked books as he requires, and this week’s 
options include: 
Title
Weight
Cost
Sale Price
Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows, J. K. Rowling
5 lb
$9
$17
The Children of Húrin, J. R. R. Tolkien
4 lb
$8
$13
The Time Traveler’s Wife, Audrey Niffenegger
3.5 lb
$7
$11
The Dark River, John Twelve Hawks
3 lb
$6
$  9
The Road, Cormac McCarthy
2.5 lb
$5
$  7
Slaughterhouse-Five, Kurt Vonnegut
1 lb
$4
$ 5

AYK.6 
Apply Your Knowledge
 When packing a single box, BK must adhere to the following:
 ■ 20 books or less. 
 ■ Books by three different authors. 
 ■ Between four and eight books from each author. 
 ■ Weight equal to or less than 50 pounds. 
 BK has come to you to help him determine which books he should order to maximize his 
profit based on the above information. Using the data file AYK8_Data.xlsx, determine the 
optimal book order for a single box of books. 
 Data File: AYK8_Data.xlsx 
 Project 9: 
 Security Analysis 
 SecureWorks, Inc., is a small computer security contractor that provides computer 
security analysis, design, and software implementation for the U.S. government and 
commercial clients. SecureWorks competes for both private and U.S. government com-
puter security contract work by submitting detailed bids outlining the work the com-
pany will perform if awarded the contracts. Because all of the work involves computer 
security, a highly sensitive area, almost all of SecureWorks tasks require access to 
classified material or company confidential documents. Consequently, all of the secu-
rity engineers (simply known as “engineers” within the company) have U.S. govern-
ment clearances of either Secret or Top Secret. Some have even higher clearances 
for the 2 percent of SecureWorks work that involves so-called “black box” security 
work. Most of the employees also hold clearances because they must handle classified 
documents. 
 Leslie Mamalis is SecureWorks’ human resources (HR) manager. She maintains all 
employee records and is responsible for semiannual review reports, payroll process-
ing, personnel records, recruiting data, employee training, and pension option informa-
tion. At the heart of an HR system are personnel records. Personnel record maintenance 
includes activities such as maintaining employee records, tracking cost center data, 
recording and maintaining pension information, and absence and sick leave record 
keeping. While most of this information resides in sophisticated database systems, Leslie 
maintains a basic employee worksheet for quick calculations and ad hoc report genera-
tion. Because SecureWorks is a small company, Leslie can take advantage of Excel’s 
excellent list management capabilities to satisfy many of her personnel information man-
agement needs.  
 Leslie has asked you to assist with a number of functions (she has provided you with a 
copy of her “trusted” personnel data file, AYK9_Data.xlsx):
 1. Copy the worksheet Data to a new worksheet called Sort. Sort the employee list in 
ascending order by department, then by last name, then by first name. 
 2. Copy the worksheet Data to a new worksheet called Autofilter. Using the Autofilter fea-
ture, create a custom filter that will display employees whose birth date is greater than 
or equal to 1/1/1965 and less than or equal to 12/31/1975. 
 3. Copy the worksheet Data to a new worksheet called Subtotal. Using the subtotal feature 
create a sum of the salary for each department. 
 4. Copy the worksheet Data to a new worksheet called Formatting. Using the salary col-
umn, change the font color to red if the cell value is greater than or equal to 55000. You 
must use the conditional formatting feature to complete this step. 
 Data File: AYK9_Data.xlsx 

 
Apply Your Knowledge    AYK.7
 Project 10: 
 Gathering Data 
 You have just accepted a new job offer from a firm that has offices in San Diego, Los 
Angeles, and San Francisco. You need to decide which location to move to. Because you 
have not visited any of these three cities and want to get in a lot of golf time, you determine 
that the main factor that will affect your decision is weather. 
 Go to  www.weather.com and locate the box in which you can enter the city or zip code 
for which you want information. Enter San Diego, CA, and when the data appear, click 
the Averages and Records tab. Print this page and repeat this for Los Angeles and San 
Francisco. You will want to focus on the Monthly Average and Records section on the top 
of the page. 
 1. Create a spreadsheet to summarize the information you find. 
 2. Record the temperature and rainfall in columns, and group the cities into four groups of 
rows labeled Average High, Average Low, Mean, and Average Precipitation. 
 3. Fill in the appropriate data for each city and month. 
 4. Because rain is your greatest concern, use conditional formatting to display the months 
with an average precipitation below 2.5 inches in blue and apply boldface. 
 5. You also want to be in the warmest weather possible while in California. Use conditional 
formatting to display the months with average high temperatures above 65 degrees in 
green and apply an italic font face. 
 6. Looking at the average high temperatures above 65 degrees and average precipi-
tation below two inches, to which city do you think you should relocate? Explain 
your answer.  
 Project 11: 
 Scanner System 
 FunTown is a popular amusement park filled with roller coasters, games, and water 
features. Boasting 24 roller coasters, 10 of which exceed 200 feet and 70 miles per 
hour, and five water parks, the park’s attendance remains steady throughout the sea-
son. Due to the park’s popularity, it is not uncommon for entrance lines to exceed one 
hour on busy days. FunTown would like your help to find a solution to decrease park 
entrance lines.  
 FunTown would like to implement a handheld scanner system that can allow employees 
to walk around the front gates and accept credit card purchases and print tickets on the 
spot. The park anticipates an overall increase in sales of 4 percent per year with online 
ticketing, with an expense of 6 percent of total sales for the scanning equipment. FunTown 
has created a data file for you to use, AYK11_Data.xlsx, that compares scanning sales 
and traditional sales. You will need to create the necessary formulas to calculate all the 
assumptions including:
 ■ Tickets sold at the booth. 
 ■ Tickets sold by the scanner. 
 ■ Revenues generated by booth sales. 
 ■ Revenues generated by scanner sales. 
 ■ Scanner ticket expense. 
 ■ Revenue with and without scanner sales. 
 ■ Three year row totals. 
 Data File: AYK11_Data.xlsx 

AYK.8 
Apply Your Knowledge
 Project 12: 
 Competitive Pricing 
 Bill Schultz is thinking of starting a store that specializes in handmade cowboy boots. Bill 
is a longtime rancher in the town of Taos, New Mexico. Bill’s reputation for honesty and 
integrity is well-known around town, and he is positive that his new store will be highly 
successful.  
 Before opening his store, Bill is curious about how his profit, revenue, and variable 
costs will change depending on the amount he charges for his boots. Bill would like you 
to perform the work required for this analysis and has given you the data file AYK12_Data.
xlsx. Here are a few things to consider while you perform your analysis:
 ■ Current competitive prices for custom cowboy boots are between $225 and $275 
a pair.  
 ■ Variable costs will be either $100 or $150 a pair depending on the types of material Bill 
chooses to use. 
 ■ Fixed costs are $10,000 a month. 
 Data File: AYK12_Data.xlsx 
 Project 13: 
 Adequate Acquisitions 
  XMark.com  is a major Internet company specializing in organic food.  XMark.com  is  thinking 
of purchasing GoodGrow, another organic food Internet company. GoodGrow has current 
revenues of $100 million, with expenses of $150 million. Current projections indicate that 
GoodGrow’s revenues are increasing at 35 percent per year and its expenses are increas-
ing by 10 percent per year.  XMark.com  understands that projections can be erroneous, 
however; the company must determine the number of years before GoodGrow will return 
a profit.  
 You need to help  XMark.com determine the number of years required to break even, 
using annual growth rates in revenue between 20 percent and 60 percent and annual 
expense growth rates between 10 percent and 30 percent. You have been provided with a 
template, AYK13_Data.xlsx, to assist with your analysis. 
 Data File: AYK13_Data.xlsx 
 Project 14: 
 Customer Relations 
 Schweizer Distribution specializes in distributing fresh produce to local restaurants in the 
Chicago area. The company currently sells 12 different products through the efforts of 
three sales representatives to 10 restaurants. The company, like all small businesses, is 
always interested in finding ways to increase revenues and decrease expenses. 
 The company’s founder, Bob Schweizer, has recently hired you as a new business ana-
lyst. You have just graduated from college with a degree in marketing and a specialization 
in customer relationship management. Bob is eager to hear your thoughts and ideas on 
how to improve the business and help the company build strong lasting relationships with 
its customers.  
 Bob has provided you with last year’s sales information in the data file AYK14_Data.
xlsx. Help Bob analyze his distribution company by using a PivotTable to determine the 
following:
 1. Who is Bob’s best customer by total sales? 
 2. Who is Bob’s worst customer by total sales? 
 3. Who is Bob’s best customer by total profit? 
 4. Who is Bob’s worst customer by total profit? 

 
Apply Your Knowledge    AYK.9
 5. What is Bob’s best-selling product by total sales? 
 6. What is Bob’s worst-selling product by total sales? 
 7. What is Bob’s best-selling product by total profit? 
 8. What is Bob’s worst-selling product by total profit? 
 9. Who is Bob’s best sales representative by total profit? 
 10. Who is Bob’s worst sales representative by total profit? 
 11. What is the best sales representative’s best-selling product (by total profit)? 
 12. Who is the best sales representative’s best customer (by total profit)? 
 13. What is the best sales representative’s worst-selling product (by total profit)? 
 14. Who is the best sales representative’s worst customer (by total profit)? 
 Data File: AYK14_Data.xlsx 
 Project 15: 
 Assessing the Value of Information 
 Recently Santa Fe, New Mexico, was named one of the safest places to live in the United 
States. Since then housing development projects have been springing up all around Santa 
Fe. Six housing development projects are currently dominating the local market—Pinon 
Pine, Rancho Hondo, Creek Side, Vista Del Monte, Forest View, and Santa Fe South. 
These six projects each started with 100 homes, have sold all of them, and are currently 
 developing phase two. 
 As one of the three partners and real estate agents of Affordable Homes Real Estate, it 
is your responsibility to analyze the information concerning the past 600 home sales and 
choose which development project to focus on for selling homes in phase two. Because 
your real estate firm is so small, you and your partners have decided that the firm should 
focus on selling homes in only one of the development projects. 
 From the New Mexico Real Estate Association you have obtained a spreadsheet file that 
contains information concerning each of the sales for the first 600 homes. It contains the 
following fields: 
Column
Name
Description
A
LOT #
The number assigned to a specific home within each 
project.
B
PROJECT #
A unique number assigned to each of the six housing 
development projects (see table on the next page).
C
ASK PRICE
The initial posted asking price for the home.
D
SELL PRICE
The actual price for which the home was sold.
E
LIST DATE
The date the home was listed for sale.
F
SALE DATE
The date on which the final contract closed and the 
home was sold.
G
SQ. FT.
The total square footage for the home.
H
# BATH.
The number of bathrooms in the home.
I
# BDRMS
The numb er of bedrooms in the home.

AYK.10 
Apply Your Knowledge
 The following numbers have been assigned to each of the housing development 
projects: 
 It is your responsibility to analyze the sales list and prepare a report that details which 
housing development project your real estate firm should focus on. Your analysis should be 
from as many angles as possible. 
 1. You do not know how many other real estate firms will also be competing for sales in 
each of the housing development projects. 
 2. Phase two for each housing development project will develop homes similar in style, 
price, and square footage to their respective first phases. 
 3. As you consider the information provided to you, think in terms of what information is 
important and what information is not important. Be prepared to justify how you went 
about your analysis. 
 4. Upon completing your analysis, please provide concise, yet detailed and thorough, 
 documentation (in narrative, numeric, and graphic forms) that justifies your decision. 
 Data ﬁ le: AYK15_Data.xlsx 
 Project 16: 
 Growth, Trends, and Forecasts 
 Founded in 2002, Analytics Software provides innovative search software, website acces-
sibility testing software, and usability testing software. All serve as part of its desktop 
and enterprise content management solutions for government, corporate, educational, 
and consumer markets. The company’s solutions are used by website publishers, digital 
media publishers, content managers, document managers, business users, consumers, 
software companies, and consulting services companies. Analytics Software solutions 
help organizations develop long-term strategies to achieve web content accessibil-
ity, enhance usability, and comply with U.S. and international accessibility and search 
standards. 
 You manage the customer service group for the company and have just received an 
email from CIO Sue Downs that the number of phone calls from customers having problems 
with one of your newer applications is on the increase. This company has a 10-year history 
of approximately 1 percent in turnover a year, and its focus had always been on customer 
service. With the informal motto of ”Grow big, but stay small,” it takes pride in 100 percent 
callbacks in customer care, knowing that its personal service was one thing that made it 
outstanding. 
 The rapid growth to six times its original customer-base size has forced the company 
to deal with difficult questions for the first time, such as, ”How do we serve this many 
customers?” 
Project Number
Project Name
23
Pinon Pine
47
Rancho Hondo
61
Creek Side
78
Vista Del Monte
92
Forest View
97
Santa Fe South

 
Apply Your Knowledge    AYK.11
 One option might be for the company to outsource its customer service department. 
Before deciding to do that, Analytics Software needs to create a growth, trend, forecast 
analysis for future predictions. 
 1. Create a weekly analysis from the data provided in AYK16_Data.xlsx. 
 2. The price of the products, the actual product type, and any warrantee information is 
irrelevant. 
 3. Develop a growth, trend, and forecast analysis. You should use a three-day moving 
average; a shorter moving average might not display the trend well, and a much longer 
moving average would shorten the trend too much. 
 4. Upon completing your analysis, please provide concise yet detailed and thorough docu-
mentation (in narrative, numeric, and graphic forms) that justifies your recommendations.   
 Data File: AYK16_Data.xlsx 
 Project 17: 
 Shipping Costs 
 One of the main products of the Fairway Woods Company is custom-made golf clubs. The 
clubs are manufactured at three plants (Denver, Colorado; Phoenix, Arizona; and Dallas, 
Texas) and are then shipped by truck to five distribution warehouses in Sacramento, 
California; Salt Lake City, Utah; Chicago, Illinois; Albuquerque, New Mexico; and New York 
City, New York. Since shipping costs are a major expense, management has begun an anal-
ysis to determine ways to reduce them. For the upcoming golf season, the output from each 
manufacturing plant and how much each warehouse will require to satisfy its customers 
have been estimated. 
 The CIO from Fairway Woods Company has created a data file for you, AYK17_Data.
xlsx, of the shipping costs from each manufacturing plant to each warehouse as a baseline 
analysis. Some business rules and requirements you should be aware of include:
 ■ The problem presented involves the shipment of goods from three plants to five regional 
warehouses. 
 ■ Goods can be shipped from any plant to any warehouse, but it costs more to ship goods 
over long distances than over short distances. 
 1. Your goal is to minimize the costs of shipping goods from production plants to ware-
houses, thereby meeting the demand from each metropolitan area while not exceeding 
the supply available from each plant. To complete this project it is recommended that 
you use the Solver function in Excel to assist with the analysis. 
 2. Specifically you want to focus on:
 ■ Minimizing the total shipping costs. 
 ■ Total shipped must be less than or equal to supply at a plant. 
 ■ Total shipped to warehouses must be greater than or equal to the warehouse 
demand.  
 ■ Number to ship must be greater than or equal to 0. 
 Data File: AYK17_Data.xlsx 
 Project 18: 
 Formatting Grades 
 Professor Streterstein is a bit absentminded. His instructor’s grade book is a mess, and he 
would like your help cleaning it up and making it easier to use. In Professor Streterstein’s 

AYK.12 
Apply Your Knowledge
course, the maximum possible points a student can earn is 750. The following table dis-
plays the grade equivalent to total points for the course. 
Total Points
Calculated Grade
675
A
635
A–
600
B
560
B–
535
C
490
C–
450
D
0
F
 Help Professor Streterstein rework his grade book. Open the data file AYK18_Data.xlsx 
and perform the following:
 1. Reformat the workbook so it is readable, understandable, and consistent. Replace col-
umn labels, format and align the headings, add borders and shading as appropriate.  
 2. Add a column in the grade book for final grade next to the total points earned column. 
 3. Use the VLookup Function to automatically assess final grades based on the total points 
column. 
 4. Using the If Function, format the workbook so each student’s grade shows a pass or 
fail—P for pass, F for fail—based on the total points. 
 Data File: AYK18_Data.xlsx 
 Project 19: 
 Moving Dilemma 
 Pony Espresso is a small business that sells specialty coffee drinks at office buildings. Each 
morning and afternoon, trucks arrive at offices’ front entrances, and the office employees 
purchase various beverages such as Java du Jour and Café de Colombia. The business is 
profitable. Pony Espresso offices, however, are located north of town, where lease rates 
are less expensive, and the principal sales area is south of town. This means the trucks 
must drive across town four times each day. 
 The cost of transportation to and from the sales area plus the power demands of the 
trucks’ coffee brewing equipment are a significant portion of variable costs. Pony Espresso 
could reduce the amount of driving and, therefore, the variable costs, if it moved the offices 
closer to the sales area. 
 Pony Espresso presently has fixed costs of $10,000 per month. The lease of a new office, 
closer to the sales area, would cost an additional $2,200 per month. This would increase 
the fixed costs to $12,200 per month. 
 Although the lease of new offices would increase the fixed costs, a careful estimate of 
the potential savings in gasoline and vehicle maintenance indicates that Pony Espresso 
could reduce the variable costs from $0.60 per unit to $0.35 per unit. Total sales are unlikely 
to increase as a result of the move, but the savings in variable costs should increase the 
annual profit. 
 Consider the information provided to you from the owner in the data file AYK19_Data.
xlsx. Especially look at the change in the variability of the profit from month to month. From 

 
Apply Your Knowledge    AYK.13
November through January, when it is much more difficult to lure office workers out into 
the cold to purchase coffee, Pony Espresso barely breaks even. In fact, in December, the 
business lost money.
 1. Develop the cost analysis on the existing lease information using the monthly sales 
figures provided to you in the data file. 
 2. Develop the cost analysis from the new lease information provided above. 
 3. Calculate the variability that is reflected in the month-to-month standard deviation of 
earnings for the current cost structure and the projected cost structure. 
 4. Do not consider any association with downsizing such as overhead—simply focus on 
the information provided to you. 
 5. You will need to calculate the EBIT (earnings before interest and taxes). 
 Data File: AYK19_Data.xlsx 
 Project 20: 
 Operational Efﬁ ciencies 
 Hoover Transportation, Inc., is a large distribution company located in Denver, Colorado. 
The company is currently seeking to gain operational efficiencies in its supply chain by 
reducing the number of transportation carriers that it is using to outsource. Operational 
efficiencies for Hoover Transportation, Inc., suggest that reducing the number of carri-
ers from the Denver distribution center to warehouses in the selected states will lead to 
reduced costs. Brian Hoover, the CEO of Hoover Transportation, requests that the num-
ber of carriers transporting products from its Denver distribution center to wholesalers 
in Arizona, Arkansas, Iowa, Missouri, Montana, Oklahoma, Oregon, and Washington be 
reduced from the current five carriers to two carriers. 
 Carrier selection should be based on the assumptions that all environmental factors 
are equal and historical cost trends will continue. Review the historical data from the past 
several years to determine your recommendation for the top two carriers that Hoover 
Transportation should continue to use.
 1. Analyze the last 24 months of Hoover’s Transportation carrier transactions found in the 
data file AYK20_Data.xlsx. 
 2. Create a report detailing your recommendation for the top two carriers with which 
Hoover Transportation should continue to do business. Be sure to use PivotTables and 
PivotCharts in your report. A few questions to get you started include:
 ■ Calculate the average cost per carrier. 
 ■ Calculate the total shipping costs per state. 
 ■ Calculate the total shipping weights per state. 
 ■ Calculate the average shipping costs per pound. 
 ■ Calculate the average cost per carrier. 
 Data File: AYK20_Data.xlsx 
 Project 21: 
 Too Much Information 
 You have just landed the job of vice president of operations for The Pitt Stop Restaurants, a 
national chain of full-service, casual-themed restaurants. During your first week on the job, 
Suzanne Graham, your boss and CEO of the company, has asked you to provide an analysis 
of how well the company’s restaurants are performing. Specifically, she would like to know 
which units and regions are performing extremely well, which are performing moderately 

AYK.14 
Apply Your Knowledge
well, and which are underperforming. Her goal is to identify where to spend time and focus 
efforts to improve the overall health of the company. 
 Review the data file AYK21_Data.xlsx and determine how best to analyze and inter-
pret the data. Create a formal presentation of your findings. A few things to consider 
include:
 ■ Should underperforming restaurants be closed or sold? 
 ■ Should high-performing restaurants be expanded to accommodate more seats? 
 ■ Should the company spend more or less on advertising? 
 ■ In which markets should the advertising budget be adjusted? 
 ■ How are The Pitt Stop Restaurants performing compared to the competition? 
 ■ How are units of like size performing relative to each other? 
 Data File: AYK21_Data.xlsx 
 Project 22: 
 Turnover Rates 
 Employee turnover rates are at an all-time high at Gizmo’s Manufacturing plants. The com-
pany is experiencing severe worker retention issues, which are leading to productivity and 
quality control problems. The majority of the company’s workers perform a variety of tasks 
and are paid by the hour. The company currently tests potential applicants to ensure they 
have the skills necessary for the intense mental concentration and dexterity required to 
fill the positions. Since significant costs are associated with employee turnover, Gizmo 
Manufacturing wants to find a way to predict which applicants have the characteristics of 
being a short-term versus a long-term employee. 
 1. Review the information that Gizmo Manufacturing has collected from two of its differ-
ent data sources. The first data file, AYK22_Data_A.xlsx, contains information regard-
ing employee wages. The second data file, AYK22_Data_B.xlsx, contains information 
regarding employee retention. 
 2. Using Excel analysis functions, determine the employee characteristics that you would 
recommend Gizmo Manufacturing look for when hiring new personnel. It is highly rec-
ommended that you use PivotTables as part of your analysis. 
 3. Prepare a report based on your findings (which should include several forms of graphi-
cal representation) for your recommendations. 
 Data Files: AYK22_Data_A.xlsx and AYK22_Data_B.xlsx 
 Project 23: 
 Vital Information 
 Martin Resorts, Inc., owns and operates four Spa and Golf resorts in Colorado. The com-
pany has five traditional lines of business: (1) golf sales; (2) golf lessons; (3) restaurants; (4) 
retail and rentals; and (5) hotels. David Logan, director of marketing technology at Martin 
Resorts, Inc., and Donald Mayer, the lead strategic analyst for Martin Resorts, are soliciting 
your input for their CRM strategic initiative. 
 Martin Resorts’ IT infrastructure is pieced together with various systems and applica-
tions. Currently, the company has a difficult time with CRM because its systems are not 
integrated. The company cannot determine vital information such as which customers are 
golfing and staying at the hotel or which customers are staying at the hotel and not golfing. 
 For example, the three details that the customer Diego Titus (1) stayed four nights at a 
Martin Resorts’ managed hotel, (2) golfed three days, and (3) took an all-day spa treatment 

 
Apply Your Knowledge    AYK.15
the first day are discrete facts housed in separate systems. Martin Resorts hopes that by 
using data warehousing technology to integrate its data, the next time Diego reserves lodg-
ing for another trip, sales associates may ask him if he would like to book a spa treatment 
as well, and even if he would like the same masseuse that he had on his prior trip. 
 Martin Resorts is excited about the possibility of taking advantage of customer segmen-
tation and CRM strategies to help increase its business. 
 The company wants to use CRM and data warehouse technologies to improve service 
and personalization at each customer touch point. Using a data warehousing tool, impor-
tant customer information can be accessed from all of its systems either daily, weekly, 
monthly, or once or twice per year. Analyze the sample data in AYK23_Data.xlsx for the 
following:
 1. Currently, the quality of the data within the above disparate systems is low. Develop a 
report for David and Donald discussing the importance of high-quality information and 
how low-quality information can affect Martin Resorts’ business. 
 2. Review the data that David and Donald are working with from the data warehouse in the 
data file AYK23_Data.xlsx.
 a. Give examples from the data showing the kind of information Martin Resorts might 
be able to use to gain a better understanding of its customers. Include the types of 
data quality issues the company can anticipate and the strategies it can use to help 
avoid such issues.  
 b. Determine who are Martin Resorts’ best customers, and provide examples of 
the types of marketing campaigns the company should offer these valuable 
 customers.  
 c. Prepare a report that summarizes the benefits Martin Resorts can receive from using 
business intelligence to mine the data warehouse. Include a financial analysis of the 
costs and benefits.  
 Data File: AYK23_Data.xlsx 
 Project 24: 
 Breaking Even 
 Mountain Cycle specializes in making custom mountain bikes. The company founder, 
PJ Steffan, is having a hard time making the business profitable. Knowing that you have 
great business knowledge and solid financial sense, PJ has come to you for advice. 
 PJ would like you to determine how many bikes Mountain Cycle needs to sell per year to 
break even. Using Goal Seek in Excel solve using the following:
 ■ Fixed cost equals 
 $65,000 
 ■ Variable cost equals 
 $1,575 
 ■ Bike price equals 
 $2,500 
 Project 25: 
 Proﬁ t Scenario 
 Murry Lutz owns a small shop, Lutz Motors, that sells and services vintage motorcycles. 
Murry is curious how his profit will be affected by his sales over the next year. 
 Murry would like your help creating best, worst, and most-likely scenarios for his motor-
cycle sales over the next year. Using Scenario Manager, help Murry analyze the informa-
tion in the data file AYK25_Data.xlsx. 
 Data File: AYK25_Data.xlsx 

AYK.16 
Apply Your Knowledge
 Project 26: 
 Electronic Résumés 
 Résumés are the currency of the recruitment industry. They are the cornerstone of com-
munication between candidates, recruiters, and employers. Technology is automating ele-
ments of the recruitment process, but a complete solution requires proper handling of the 
actual development of all the pieces and parts that comprise not just a résumé, but also an 
erésumé. Electronic résumés, or erésumés, have moved into the mainstream of today’s job 
market at lightning speed. Erésumés have stepped up the efficiency of job placement to such 
a point that you could get a call from a recruiter just hours after submitting your erésumé. 
With this kind of opportunity, you cannot afford to be left in the dark ages of using only a 
paper résumé.  
 In the text or HTML editor of your choice, write your erésumé as though you were really 
putting it online and inviting prospective employers to see it. We recommend typing in 
all the text and then later adding the HTML tags (rather than trying to type in the tags as 
you go). 
 Use the following checklist to make sure you’re covering the basics. You do not need to 
match it exactly; it just shows what can be done.
 ■ Add structural tags. 
 ■ Add paragraphs and headings. 
 ■ Find an opportunity to include a list. 
 ■ Add inline styles. 
 ■ Play with the alignment of elements. 
 ■ Add appropriate font selection, font size, and color. 
 Project 27: 
 Gathering Feedback 
 Gathering feedback from website’s visitors can be a valuable way of assessing a site’s 
success, and it can help build a customer or subscriber database. For example, a business 
could collect the addresses of people who are interested in receiving product samples, 
email newsletters, or notifications of special offers. 
 Adding form elements to a web page is simple: They are created using a set of HTML 
form tags that define menus, text fields, buttons, and so on. Form elements are generally 
used to collect information from a web page. 
 In the text or HTML editor of your choice, create a web page form that would collect 
information for a customer ordering a customized bicycle. Use proper web page design 
and HTML tools to understand the process and function of form elements. Be sure to pay 
attention to:
 ■ Form layout and design. 
 ■ Visual elements, including labels, alignment, font selection, font size, color. 
 ■ Required versus nonrequired fields. 
 ■ Drop-down boxes, text fields, and radio buttons. 
 Project 28: 
 Daily Invoice 
 Foothills Animal Hospital is a full-service small animal veterinary hospital located in 
Morrison, Colorado, specializing in routine medical care, vaccinations, laboratory testing, 
and surgery. The hospital has experienced tremendous growth over the past six months 
due to customer referrals. While Foothills Animal Hospital has typically kept its daily 
 service records in a workbook format, it feels the need to expand its reporting capabilities 
to develop a relational database as a more functional structure. 

 
Apply Your Knowledge    AYK.17
 Foothills Animal Hospital needs help developing a database, specifically:
 ■ Create a customer table—name, address, phone, and date of entrance. 
 ■ Create a pet table—pet name, type of animal, breed, gender, color, neutered/spayed, 
weight, and comments. 
 ■ Create a medications table—medication code, name of medication, and cost of medication.  
 ■ Create a visit table—details of treatments performed, medications dispensed, and date 
of the visit. 
 ■ Produce a daily invoice report.  
 Figure AYK.2 displays a sample daily invoice report that the Foothills Animal Hospital 
accountants have requested. Foothills Animal Hospital organizes its treatments using the 
codes displayed in  Figure AYK.3 . The entities and primary keys for the database have been 
identified in  Figure AYK.4 . 
 The following business rules have been identified:
 1. A customer can have many pets but must have at least one. 
 2. A pet must be assigned to one and only one customer. 
 3. A pet can have one or more treatments per visit but must have at least one. 
 4. A pet can have one or more medications but need not have any. 
 Your job is to complete the following tasks:
 1. Develop and describe the entity-relationship diagram. 
 2. Use normalization to assure the correctness of the tables (relations). 
FIGURE AYK.2
 Foothills Animal Hospital 
Daily Invoice Report 

AYK.18 
Apply Your Knowledge
 3. Create the database using a personal DBMS package (preferably Microsoft Access). 
 4. Use the data in  Figure AYK.3  to populate your tables. Feel free to enter your own per-
sonal information. 
 5. Use the DBMS package to create the basic report in  Figure AYK.2 . 
 Project 29: 
 Billing Data 
 On-The-Level Construction Company is a Denver-based construction company that spe-
cializes in subcontracting the development of single-family homes. In business since 1998, 
On-The-Level Construction has maintained a talented pool of certified staff and indepen-
dent consultants providing the flexibility and combined experience required to meet the 
needs of its nearly 300 completed projects in the Denver metropolitan area. The field of 
operation methods that On-The-Level Construction is responsible for includes structural 
development, heating and cooling, plumbing, and electricity. 
 The company charges its clients by billing the hours spent on each contract. The hourly 
billing rate is dependent on the employee’s position according to the field of operations (as 
noted above).  Figure AYK.5  shows a basic report that On-The-Level Construction foremen 
would like to see every week concerning what projects are being assigned, the overall 
assignment hours, and the charges for the assignment. On-The-Level Construction orga-
nizes its internal structure in four different operations—Structure (500), Plumbing (501), 
Electrical (502), and Heating and Ventilation (503). Each of these operational departments 
can and should have many subcontractors who specialize in that area. On-The-Level 
Construction has decided to implement a relational database model to track project details 
according to project name, hours assigned, and charges per hour for each job descrip-
tion. Originally, On-The-Level Construction decided to let one of its employees handle the 
construction of the database. However, that employee has not had the time to completely 
implement the project. On-The-Level Construction has asked you to take over and com-
plete the development of the database. 
 The entities and primary keys for the database have been identified in  Figure AYK.6 . 
 The following business rules have been identified:
 1. A job can have many employees assigned but must have at least one. 
 2. An employee must be assigned to one and only one job number. 
FIGURE AYK.3
 Treatment Codes, Treatments, 
and Price Descriptions 
Treatment Code
Treatment
Price
0100
Tetrinious Shot
$10.00
0201
Rabonius Shot
$20.00
0300
General Exam
$50.00
0303
Eye/Ear Examination
$20.00
0400
Spay/Neuter
$225.00
0405
Reset Dislocation
$165.00
0406
Amputation of Limb
$450.00
0407
Wrap Affected Area
$15.00
0408
Cast Affected Area
$120.00
1000
Lab Work—Blood
$50.00
1003
Lab Work—Misc
$35.00
2003
Flea Spray
$25.00
9999
Other Not Listed
$10.00
FIGURE AYK.4
 Entity Names and Primary 
Keys Foothills Animal Hospital 
Entity
Primary Key
CUSTOMER
Customer Number
PET
Pet Number
VISIT
Visit Number
VISIT DETAIL
Visit Number and Line 
Number (a composite key)
TREATMENT
Treatment Code
MEDICATION
Medication Code

 
Apply Your Knowledge    AYK.19
 3. An employee can be assigned to work on one or more projects. 
 4.  A project can be assigned to only one employee but need not be assigned to 
any employee. 
 Your job is to complete the following tasks:
 1. Develop and describe the entity relationship diagram. 
 2. Use normalization to assure the correctness of the tables (relations). 
 3.  Create the database using a personal DBMS package (preferably Microsoft Access). 
 4. Use the DBMS package to create the basic report in  Figure AYK.5 . 
 5.  You may not be able to develop a report that looks exactly like the one in  Figure AYK.5 . 
However, your report should include the same information. 
 6. Complete personnel information is tracked by another database. For this application, 
include only the minimum: employee number, last name, and first name. 
 7. Information concerning all projects, employees, and jobs is not readily available. You 
should create information for several fictitious projects, employees, and jobs to include 
in your database. 
 Project 30: 
 Inventory Data 
 An independent retailer of mobile entertainment and wireless phones,  iToys.com  has built 
its business on offering the widest selection, expert advice, and outstanding customer 
service. However,  iToys.com  does not use a formal, consistent inventory tracking sys-
tem. Periodically, an  iToys.com  employee visually checks to see what items are in stock. 
Although  iToys.com  does try to keep a certain level of each “top seller” in stock, the lack 
of a formal inventory tracking system has led to the overstocking of some items and under-
stocking of other items. On occasion, a customer will request a hot item, and it is only then 
that  iToys.com  realizes that the item is out of stock. If an item is not available,  iToys.com  
risks losing a customer to a competitor. 
 Lately,  iToys.com  has become concerned with its inventory management methods. 
The owner of  iToys.com , Dan Connolly, wants to better manage his inventory. The com-
pany receives orders by mail, by telephone, or through its website. Regardless of how 
FIGURE AYK.6
 Entity Classes and Primary 
Keys for On-The-Level 
Construction 
Entity
Primary Key
PROJECT
Project Number
EMPLOYEE
Employee Number
JOB
Job Number
ASSIGNMENT
Assignment Number
 FIGURE AYK.5 
 On-The-Level-Construction 
Detail Report 

AYK.20 
Apply Your Knowledge
the orders are received, Dan needs a database to automate the inventory checking and 
ordering process.  
 Dan has provided you with a simplified version of the company’s current system (an Excel 
workbook) for recording inventory and orders in an Excel spreadsheet data file AYK30_
Data.xlsx.
 1. Develop an ERD diagram before you begin to create the database. You will need to use 
the information provided here as well as the data given in the Excel workbook. 
 2. Create the database using a personal DBMS package (preferably Microsoft Access) 
that will track items (i.e., products), orders, order details, categories, suppliers, and 
shipping methods. 
 3. In addition to what is mentioned above, the database needs to track the inventory levels 
for each product, according to a reorder level and lead time. 
 4. At this time, Dan does not need information stored about the customer; he simply needs 
you to focus on the inventory structure. 
 5. Develop a query that will display the products that need to be ordered from their supplier. To 
complete this, you will want to compare a reorder level with how many units are in stock.  
 6. Develop several reports that display:
 a. Each product ordered by its supplier. The report should include the product name, 
quantity on hand, and reorder level.  
 b. Each supplier ordered by shipping method.  
 c. Each product that requires more than five days lead time. (Hint: You will want to cre-
ate a query for this first).  
 d. Each product ordered by category.     
 7. Here are some additional business rules to assist you in completing this task:
 a. An order must have at least one product, but can contain more than one product.  
 b. A product can have one or more orders, but need not have any orders.  
 c. A product must belong to one and only one category, but a category may contain 
many different products.  
 d. A product can only be stocked by one supplier, but a supplier can provide more than 
one product.  
 e. A supplier will use one type of shipping method, but shipping methods can be used 
by more than one supplier.  
 Data File: AYK30_Data.xlsx 
 Project 31: 
 Call Center 
 A manufacturing company, Teleworks, has been a market leader in the wireless telephone 
business for the past 10 years. Other firms have imitated its product with some degree of 
success, but Teleworks occupies a dominant position in the marketplace because it has a 
first-mover advantage with a quality product. 
 Recently Teleworks began selling a new, enhanced wireless phone. This new phone 
does not replace its current product, but offers additional features, greater durability, and 
better performance for a somewhat higher price. Offering this enhanced phone has estab-
lished a new revenue stream for the company. 
 Many sales executives at Teleworks seem to subscribe to the-more-you-have, the-
more-you-want theory of managing customer data. That is, they believe they can never 
accumulate too much information about their customers, and that they can do their jobs 
more effectively by collecting infinite amounts of customer details. Having a firm grasp on 
a wide range of customer-focused details—specifically reports summarizing call center 

 
Apply Your Knowledge    AYK.21
information—can be critical in enabling your company to successfully manage a customer 
relationship management (CRM) solution that creates a positive impact. 
 To continue to provide excellent customer support, and in anticipation of increased calls 
due to the release of its new product, Teleworks needs a database that it can use to record, 
track, and query call center information. Teleworks CIO KED Davisson has hired you to 
develop this database.  
 1. Teleworks has provided you with a data file AYK31_Data.xlsx; its current approach for 
recording cell center information is a spreadsheet file. 
 2. Develop an ERD diagram before you begin to create the database. 
 3. Create the database using a personal DBMS package (preferably Microsoft Access) 
that will allow data analysts to enter call center data according to the type of issue and 
the customer, assign each call to a consultant, and prioritize the call. 
 4. Develop a query that will display all issues that are “open.” 
 5. Develop a screen form to browse all issues. 
 6. Develop several reports that display:
 a. All closed issues.  
 b. Each issue in detail ordered by issue ID.  
 c. Each issue in detail ordered by consultant.  
 d. Each issue in detail ordered by category.  
 e. Each issue in detail ordered by status.     
 7. Here are some additional business rules to assist you in completing this task:
 a. An issue must have at least one customer.  
 b. A customer can have more than one issue.  
 c. Each issue must be assigned to one consultant.  
 d. Each consultant can be assigned to more than one issue.  
 e. An issue can only belong to one category.  
 f. An issue must be assigned only one status code.  
 g. An issue must be assigned a priority code.     
 8. Priorities are assigned accordingly:
Priority Level
Critical
High
Moderate
Standard
Low
  
 9. Status is recorded as either open or closed. 
 10. The categories of each issue need to be recorded as:
Category
Hardware/Phone
Software/Voice mail
Internet/Web
  
 Data File: AYK31_Data.xlsx 

AYK.22 
Apply Your Knowledge
 Project 32: 
 Sales Pipeline 
 Sales drive any organization. This is true for every for-profit business irrespective of size 
or industry type. If customers are not buying your goods or services, you run the risk of not 
having a business. This is when tough decisions have to be made like whether to slash 
budgets, lay off staff, or seek additional financing. 
 Unfortunately, you do not wield ultimate power over your customers’ buying habits. 
While you can attempt to influence buying behavior through strategic marketing, smart 
businesses remain one step ahead by collecting and analyzing historical and current cus-
tomer information from a range of internal and external sources to forecast future sales. In 
other words, managing the sales pipeline is an essential ingredient to business success. 
 You have recently been hired by RealTime Solutions, a new company that collects infor-
mation to understand, manage, and predict specific sales cycle (including the supply chain 
and lead times) in the automobile business. Having an accurate forecast of future sales will 
allow the company to increase or decrease the production cycle as required and manage 
personnel levels, inventory, and cash flow.  
 Using a personal DBMS package (preferably Microsoft Access) create a sales pipeline 
database that will:
 1. Track opportunities from employees to customers.
 ■ Opportunities should have a ranking, category, source of opportunity, open date, 
closed date, description. 
 2. Create a form for inputting customer, employee, and opportunity data. 
 3. Create a few reports that display:
 ■ All open opportunities, including relevant customer and employee information. 
 ■ Closed opportunities, including relevant customer and employee information. 
 ■ All customers. 
 4. Create your own data to test the integrity of the relationships. Use approximately 10 
records per table. 
 Project 33: 
 Online Classiﬁ ed Ads 
 With the emergence of the Internet as a worldwide standard for communicating informa-
tion,  The Morrison Post,  a medium-size community newspaper in central Colorado, is cre-
ating an electronic version of its paper-based classified ads. 
 Advertisers can place a small ad that lists items that they wish to sell and provide a 
means (e.g., telephone number and email) by which prospective buyers can contact them. 
 The nature of a sale via the newspaper’s classified system goes as follows:
 ■ During the course of the sale, the information flows in different directions at different 
stages. 
 ■ First, there is a downstream flow of information (from seller to buyer): the listing in print 
in the newspaper. (Thus, the classified ad listing is just a way of bringing a buyer and 
seller together.) 
 ■ When a potential purchaser’s interest has been raised, then that interest must be 
relayed upstream, usually by telephone or by email. 
 ■ Finally, a meeting should result that uses face-to-face negotiation to finalize the sale, if 
the sale can be agreed. 
 By placing the entire system on the Internet, the upstream and downstream commu-
nications are accomplished using a web browser. The sale becomes more of an auction, 

 
Apply Your Knowledge    AYK.23
because many potential buyers, all with equal status, can bid for the same item. So it is 
fairer for all purchasers and gets a better deal for the seller. 
 Any user who is trying to buy an item can:
 ■ View items for sale. 
 ■ Bid on an item they wish to purchase. 
 Any user who is trying to sell an item can: 
 ■ Place a new item for sale. 
 ■ Browse a list of the items that he or she is trying to sell, and examine the bids that have 
been made on each of those items. 
 ■ Accept a bid on an item that he or she is selling. 
 Your job is to complete the following:
 1. Develop and describe the entity-relationship diagram for the database that will support 
the listed activities. 
 2. Use normalization to ensure the correctness of the tables. 
 3. Create the database using a personal DBMS package. 
 4. Use  Figure AYK.7 as a baseline for your database design. 
 Data File: AYK33_Data.xlsx   
FIGURE AYK.7


G.1
Glossary
 3G  A service that brings wireless broadband to mobile phones. 
 A 
 acceptable use policy (AUP)  A policy that a user must agree to follow to 
be provided access to corporate email, information systems, and the Internet. 
 access point (AP)  The computer or network device that serves as an 
interface between devices and the network. 
 accessibility  Refers to the varying levels that define what a user can 
access, view, or perform when operating a system. 
 accounting and finance ERP component  Manages accounting data 
and financial processes within the enterprise with functions such as 
 general ledger, accounts payable, accounts receivable, budgeting, 
and asset management. 
 active RFID tags  Have their own transmitter and a power source 
(typically a battery). 
 adaptive computer devices  Input devices designed for special 
applications for use by people with different types of special needs. 
 administrator access  Unrestricted access to the entire system. 
 advanced encryption standard (AES)  Introduced by the National 
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), AES is an encryption 
standard designed to keep government information secure. 
 adware  Software, while purporting to serve some useful function and 
often fulfilling that function, also allows Internet advertisers to display 
advertisements without the consent of the computer user. 
 agile methodology  Aims for customer satisfaction through early and 
continuous delivery of useful software components developed by an 
iterative process using the bare minimum requirements. 
 agile MIS infrastructure  Includes the hardware, software, and 
telecommunications equipment that, when combined, provides the 
underlying foundation to support the organization's goals. 
 alpha testing  Assess if the entire system meets the design requirements 
of the users.  
 analysis phase  The firm analyzes its end-user business requirements 
and refines project goals into defined functions and operations of the 
intended system. 
 analytical CRM  Supports back-office operations and strategic analysis 
and includes all systems that do not deal directly with the customers. 
 analytical information  Encompasses all organizational information, 
and its primary purpose is to support the performing of managerial 
analysis or semistructured decisions. 
 analytics  The science of fact-based decision making. 
 anti-spam policy  Simply states that email users will not send 
unsolicited emails (or spam). 
 antivirus software  Scans and searches hard drives to prevent, detect, 
and remove known viruses, adware, and spyware. 
 applet  A program that runs within another application such as a website. 
 appliance  A computer dedicated to a single function, such as a 
calculator or computer game. 
 application integration  The integration of a company's existing 
management information systems to each other. 
 application programming interface (API)  A set of routines, protocols, 
and tools for building software applications. 
 application service provider license  Specialty software paid for on a 
license basis or per-use basis or usage-based licensing. 
 application software  Used for specific information processing 
needs, including payroll, customer relationship management, project 
management, training, and many others. 
 arithmetic-logic unit (ALU)  Performs all arithmetic operations (for 
example, addition and subtraction) and all logic operations (such as 
sorting and comparing numbers). 
 artificial intelligence (AI)  Simulates human thinking and behavior 
such as the ability to reason and learn. 
 As-Is process model  Represents the current state of the operation 
that has been mapped, without any specific improvements or changes to 
existing processes. 
 asset tracking  Occurs when a company places active or semi-passive 
RFID tags on expensive products or assets to gather data on the items' 
location with little or no manual intervention. 
 association detection  Reveals the relationship between variables 
along with the nature and frequency of the relationships. 
 asynchronous communication  Communication such as email in 
which the message and the response do not occur at the same time. 
 attenuation  Represents the loss of a network signal strength measured 
in decibels (dB) and occurs because the transmissions gradually dissipate 
in strength over longer distances or because of radio interference or 
physical obstructions such as walls. 
 attribute  The data elements associated with an entity. 
 augmented reality  The viewing of the physical world with computer-
generated layers of information added to it. 
 authentication  A method for confirming users' identities. 
 authorization  The process of providing a user with permission 
including access levels and abilities such as file access, hours of access, 
and amount of allocated storage space. 
 automatic vehicle location (AVL)  Uses GPS tracking to track vehicles. 
 automation  Involves computerizing manual tasks making them more 
efficient and effective and dramatically lowering operational costs. 
 availability  Refers to the time frames when the system is operational. 
 B 
 backup  An exact copy of a system's information. 
 backward integration  Takes information entered into a given system 
and sends it automatically to all upstream systems and processes. 
 balanced scorecard  A management system, as well as a 
measurement system, that a firm uses to translate business strategies 
into executable tasks. 
 bandwidth  The maximum amount of data that can pass from one point 
to another in a unit of time. 
 benchmark  Baseline values the system seeks to attain. 
 benchmarking  A process of continuously measuring system results, 
comparing those results to optimal system performance (benchmark 
values), and identifying steps and procedures to improve system 
performance. 
 best practice  The most successful solutions or problem-solving 
methods that have been developed by a specific organization or industry. 
 G L OSSARY 

Glossary
G.2
 business requirement  The specific business requests the system 
must meet to be successful. 
 business rule  Defines how a company performs a certain aspect of its 
business and typically results in either a yes/no or true/false answer. 
 business strategy  A leadership plan that achieves a specific set of 
goals or objectives. 
 business-critical integrity constraint  Enforces business rules vital to 
an organization's success and often requires more insight and knowledge 
than relational integrity constraints. 
 business-to-business (B2B)  Applies to businesses buying from and 
selling to each other over the Internet. 
 business-to-consumer (B2C)  Applies to any business that sells its 
products or services directly to consumers online. 
 buyer power  One of Porter's five forces; measures the ability of buyers 
to directly affect the price they are willing to pay for an item. 
 C 
 cable modem (or broadband modem)  A type of digital modem used 
with high-speed cable Internet service. 
 cache memory  A small unit of ultra-fast memory that is used to store 
recently accessed or frequently accessed data so that the CPU does not 
have to retrieve this data from slower memory circuits such as RAM. 
 call scripting system  Gathers product details and issue resolution 
information that can be automatically generated into a script for the 
representative to read to the customer. 
 campaign management system  Guides users through marketing 
campaigns by performing such tasks as campaign definition, planning, 
scheduling, segmentation, and success analysis 
 capacity  Represents the maximum throughput a system can deliver; 
for example, the capacity of a hard drive represents the size or volume. 
 capacity planning  Determines future environmental infrastructure 
requirements to ensure high-quality system performance. 
 carbon emissions  Includes the carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide in 
the atmosphere, produced by business processes and systems. 
 cardinality  Expresses the specific number of instances in an entity. 
 cartography  The science and art of making an illustrated map or chart. 
 central processing unit (CPU ) (or microprocessor)  The actual 
hardware that interprets and executes the program (software) instructions 
and coordinates how all the other hardware devices work together. 
 certificate authority  A trusted third party, such as VeriSign, that 
validates user identities by means of digital certificates. 
 change agent  A person or event that is the catalyst for implementing 
major changes for a system to meet business changes. 
 chief information officer (CIO)  Responsible for (1) overseeing all uses 
of MIS and (2) ensuring that MIS strategically aligns with business goals 
and objectives. 
 chief knowledge officer (CKO)  Responsible for collecting, maintaining, 
and distributing company knowledge. 
 chief privacy officer (CPO)  Responsible for ensuring the ethical and 
legal use of information within a company. 
 chief security officer (CSO)  Responsible for ensuring the security 
of business systems and developing strategies and safeguards against 
attacks from hackers and viruses. 
 chief technology officer (CTO)  Responsible for ensuring the speed, 
accuracy, availability, and reliability for MIS. 
 Child Online Protection Act (COPA)  A law that protects minors from 
accessing inappropriate material on the Internet. 
 biometrics  The identification of a user based on a physical 
characteristic, such as a fingerprint, iris, face, voice, or handwriting. 
 bit  The smallest element of data and has a value of either 0 or 1. 
 bit rate  The number of bits transferred or received per unit of time. 
 black-hat hacker  Breaks into other people's computer systems and 
may just look around or may steal and destroy information. 
 blog, or web log  An online journal that allows users to post their own 
comments, graphics, and video. 
  bluetooth  Wireless PAN technology that transmits signals over short 
distances between cell phones, computers, and other devices. 
 bottleneck  Occurs when resources reach full capacity and cannot handle 
any additional demands; they limit throughput and impede operations.  
 brainstorming  A technique for generating ideas by encouraging 
participants to offer as many ideas as possible in a short period of time 
without any analysis until all the ideas have been exhausted 
  broadband  A high-speed Internet connection that is always connected. 
 broadband over power line (BPL)  Technology makes possible high-
speed Internet access over ordinary residential electrical lines and offers 
an alternative to DSL or high-speed cable modems. 
  bugs  Defects in the code of an information system. 
  bullwhip effect  Occurs when distorted product-demand information 
ripples from one partner to the next throughout the supply chain. 
  business continuity planning (BCP)  Details how a company recovers 
and restores critical business operations and systems after a disaster or 
extended disruption. 
 business facing process  Invisible to the external customer but 
essential to the effective management of the business; they include goal 
setting, day-to-day planning, giving performance feedback and rewards, 
and allocating resources. 
 business impact analysis  A process that identifies all critical business 
functions and the effect that a specific disaster may have upon them. 
  business intelligence (BI)  Information collected from multiple sources 
such as suppliers, customers, competitors, partners, and industries that 
analyze patterns, trends, and relationships for strategic decision making. 
 business intelligence dashboards  Track corporate metrics such 
as critical success factors and key performance indicators and include 
advanced capabilities such as interactive controls, allowing users to 
manipulate data for analysis. 
 business model   A plan that details how a company creates, delivers, 
and generates revenues.  
  business process  Standardized set of activities that accomplish a 
specific task. 
 business process improvement  Attempts to understand and measure 
the current process and make performance improvements accordingly. 
 business process management (BPM) system  Focus on evaluating 
and improving processes that include both person-to-person workflow 
and system-to-system communications. 
 business process model  A graphic description of a process, showing 
the sequence of process tasks, which is developed for a specific purpose 
and from a selected viewpoint. 
  business process modeling (or mapping)  The activity of creating 
a detailed flowchart or process map of a work process that shows its 
inputs, tasks, and activities in a structured sequence. 
 business process patent  A patent that protects a specific set of 
procedures for conducting a particular business activity. 
 business process reengineering (BPR)  The analysis and redesign of 
workflow within and between enterprises. 

G.3
Glossary
 computer  An electronic device operating under the control of instructions 
stored in its own memory that can accept, manipulate, and store data.  
 computer-aided software engineering (CASE)  Software tools provide 
automated support for the development of the system. 
 confidentiality  The assurance that messages and information remain 
available only to those authorized to view them. 
 consolidation  The aggregation of data from simple roll-ups to complex 
groupings of interrelated information. 
 consumer-to-business (C2B)  Applies to any consumer who sells a 
product or service to a business on the Internet. 
 consumer-to-consumer (C2C)  Applies to customers offering goods 
and services to each other on the Internet. 
 contact center or call center  Where customer service representatives 
answer customer inquiries and solve problems, usually by email, chat, or phone. 
 contact management CRM system  Maintains customer contact 
information and identifies prospective customers for future sales, 
using tools such as organizational charts, detailed customer notes, and 
supplemental sales information. 
 content creator  The person responsible for creating the original 
website content. 
 content editor  The person responsible for updating and maintaining 
website content. 
 content filtering  Occurs when organizations use software that 
filters content, such as emails, to prevent the accidental or malicious 
transmission of unauthorized information. 
 content management system (CMS)  Helps companies manage the 
creation, storage, editing, and publication of their website content. 
 control objectives for information and related technologies (COBIT) 
 A set of best practices that helps an organization to maximize the benefits 
of an information system, while at the same time establishing appropriate 
controls to ensure minimum errors. 
 control panel  A Windows feature that provides a group of options that 
sets default values for the Windows operating system. 
 control unit  Interprets software instructions and literally tells the other 
hardware devices what to do, based on the software instructions. 
 conversion  The process of transferring information from a legacy 
system to a new system. 
 copyright  The legal protection afforded an expression of an idea, such 
as a song, book, or video game. 
 core ERP component  The traditional components included in most ERP 
systems and primarily focus on internal operations. 
 core process  Business processes, such as manufacturing goods, 
selling products, and providing service that make up the primary activities 
in a value chain. 
 corporate social responsibility  Companies' acknowledged 
responsibility to society. 
 corrective maintenance  Makes system changes to repair design 
flaws, coding errors, or implementation issues. 
 counterfeit software  Software that is manufactured to look like the 
real thing and sold as such. 
 course management software  Contains course information such 
as a syllabus and assignments and offers drop boxes for quizzes and 
homework along with a grade book. 
 cracker  A hacker with criminal intent. 
 critical path  Estimates the shortest path through the project ensuring 
all critical tasks are completed from start to finish. 
 critical success factors (CSFs)  Crucial steps companies perform to 
achieve their goals and objectives and implement their strategies.  
 chipless RFID tags  Use plastic or conductive polymers instead of 
silicon-based microchips, allowing them to be washed or exposed to 
water without damaging the chip. 
 clickstream data  Exact pattern of a consumer's navigation through a site. 
 click-fraud  The abuse of pay-per-click, pay-per-call, and pay-per-
conversion revenue models by repeatedly clicking on a link to increase 
charges or costs for the advertiser. 
 click-to-talk  Allows customers to click on a button and talk with a 
representative via the Internet. 
 client   A computer designed to request information from a server. 
 client/server network  A model for applications in which the bulk 
of the back-end processing, such as performing a physical search of a 
database, takes place on a server, while the front-end processing, which 
involves communicating with the users, is handled by the clients. 
 cloud bursting  When a company uses its own computing infrastructure 
for normal usage and accesses the cloud when it needs to scale for high/
peak load requirements, ensuring a sudden spike in usage does not result 
in poor performance or system crashes. 
 cloud computing  A model for enabling ubiquitous, convenient, 
on-demand network access to a shared pool of configurable computing 
resources (e.g., networks, servers, storage, applications, and services) 
that can be rapidly provisioned and released with minimal management 
effort or service provider interaction .
 cloud fabric  The software that makes the benefits of cloud computing 
possible, such as multi-tenancy. 
 cloud fabric controller  An individual who monitors and provisions cloud 
resources similar to a server administrator at an individual company.  
 cluster analysis  A technique used to divide information sets into mutually 
exclusive groups such that the members of each group are as close together 
as possible to one another and the different groups are as far apart as possible. 
 coaxial cable  Cable that can carry a wide range of frequencies with 
low signal loss. 
 cold site  A separate facility that does not have any computer 
equipment but is a place where employees can move after a disaster. 
 collaboration system  A set of tools that supports the work of teams or 
groups by facilitating the sharing and flow of information. 
 collective intelligence  Collaborating and tapping into the core 
knowledge of all employees, partners, and customers. 
 communication device  Equipment used to send information and 
receive it from one location to another. 
 communication plan  Defines the how, what, when, and who regarding 
the flow of project information to stakeholders and is key for managing 
expectations. 
 community cloud  Serves a specific community with common business 
models, security requirements, and compliance considerations .
 competitive advantage  A feature of a product or service on which 
customers place a greater value than on similar offerings from competitors. 
 competitive click-fraud  A computer crime where a competitor or 
disgruntled employee increases a company's search advertising costs by 
repeatedly clicking on the advertiser's link. 
 competitive intelligence  The process of gathering information about 
the competitive environment, including competitors' plans, activities, and 
products, to improve a company's ability to succeed. 
 complex instruction set computer (CISC) chips  Type of CPU that can 
recognize as many as 100 or more instructions, enough to carry out most 
computations directly. 
 composite entities  Entities that exist to represent the relationship 
between two other entities. 

Glossary
G.4
 data warehouse  A logical collection of information, gathered from 
many different operational databases, that supports business analysis 
activities and decision-making tasks. 
 database  Maintains information about various types of objects (inventory), 
events (transactions), people (employees), and places (warehouses).  
 database management system (DBMS)  Creates, reads, updates, and 
deletes data in a database while controlling access and security. 
 data-driven website  An interactive website kept constantly updated 
and relevant to the needs of its customers using a database. 
 decision support system (DSS)  Model information using OLAP, which 
provides assistance in evaluating and choosing among different courses 
of action. 
 decrypt  Decodes information and is the opposite of encrypted. 
 demand planning system  Generates demand forecasts using statistical 
tools and forecasting techniques, so companies can respond faster and 
more effectively to consumer demands through supply chain enhancements. 
 dependency  A logical relationship that exists between the project 
tasks, or between a project task and a milestone. 
 design phase  Establishes descriptions of the desired features and 
operations of the system including screen layouts, business rules, process 
diagrams, pseudo code, and other documentation. 
 destructive agents  Malicious agents designed by spammers and 
other Internet attackers to farm email addresses off websites or deposit 
spyware on machines. 
 development phase  Takes all the detailed design documents from the 
design phase and transforms them into the actual system. 
 development testing  Programmers test the system to ensure it is bug-free. 
 digital certificate  A data file that identifies individuals or organizations 
online and is comparable to a digital signature. 
 digital Darwinism  Implies that organizations that cannot adapt to the 
new demands placed on them for surviving in the information age are 
doomed to extinction. 
 digital dashboard  Tracks KPIs and CSFs by compiling information from 
multiple sources and tailoring it to meet user needs. 
 digital divide  A worldwide gap giving advantage to those with access 
to technology. 
 digital rights management  A technological solution that allows 
publishers to control their digital media to discourage, limit, or prevent 
illegal copying and distribution. 
 digital subscriber line (DSL)  Provides high-speed digital data 
transmission over standard telephone lines using broadband modem 
technology allowing both Internet and telephone services to work over the 
same phone lines. 
 disaster recovery cost curve  Charts (1) the cost to the company of 
the unavailability of information and technology and (2) the cost to the 
company of recovering from a disaster over time. 
 disaster recovery plan  A detailed process for recovering information 
or a system in the event of a catastrophic disaster. 
 discovery prototyping  Builds a small-scale representation or working 
model of the system to ensure it meets the user and business requirements. 
 disintermediation  Occurs when a business sells direct to the customer 
online and cuts out the intermediary. 
 disruptive technology  A new way of doing things that initially does not 
meet the needs of existing customers. 
 domain name hosting (web hosting)  A service that allows the 
owner of a domain name to maintain a simple website and provide 
email capacity. 
 CRM analysis technologies  Help organizations segment their 
customers into categories such as best and worst customers. 
  CRM predicting technologies  Help organizations predict customer 
behavior, such as which customers are at risk of leaving. 
  CRM reporting technologies  Help organizations identify their 
customers across other applications. 
 cross-selling  Selling additional products or services to an existing customer. 
 crowdsourcing  Refers to the wisdom of the crowd. 
  cryptography  The science that studies encryption, which is the hiding 
of messages so that only the sender and receiver can read them. 
  customer-facing process  Results in a product or service that is 
received by an organization's external customer. 
  customer relationship management (CRM)  A means of managing 
all aspects of a customer's relationship with an organization to increase 
customer loyalty and retention and an organization's profitability. 
 customer service and support (CSS)  A part of operational CRM that 
automates service requests, complaints, product returns, and information 
requests. 
 cyberbulling  Threats, negative remarks, or defamatory comments 
transmitted via the Internet or posted on a website. 
 cybermediation   Refers to the creation of new kinds of intermediaries 
that simply could not have existed before the advent of ebusiness. 
 cyberterrorism  The use of computer and networking technologies 
against persons or property to intimidate or coerce governments, individuals, 
or any segment of society to attain political, religious, or ideological goals.  
 cyberterrorists  Seek to cause harm to people or to destroy critical systems 
or information and use the Internet as a weapon of mass destruction.  
 cybervandalism  The electronic defacing of an existing website. 
 cyberwar  An organized attempt by a country's military to disrupt or 
destroy information and communication systems for another country. 
 cycle time  The time required to process an order. 
 D 
 data  Raw facts that describe the characteristics of an event or object. 
 data center  A facility used to house management information systems 
and associated components, such as telecommunications and storage 
systems. 
 data dictionary  Compiles all of the metadata about the data elements 
in the data model. 
 data element (or data field)  The smallest or basic unit of information. 
 data integration  The integration of data from multiple sources, which 
provides a unified view of all data. 
  data mart  Contains a subset of data warehouse information. 
 data mining  The process of analyzing data to extract information not 
offered by the raw data alone. 
 data-mining tool  Uses a variety of techniques to find patterns and 
relationships in large volumes of information that predict future behavior 
and guide decision making. 
 data model  Logical data structures that detail the relationships among 
data elements using graphics or pictures. 
 data quality audit  Determines the accuracy and completeness of its data. 
  data visualization  Describes technologies that allow users to “see” or 
visualize data to transform information into a business perspective. 
  data visualization tools  Moves beyond Excel graphs and charts 
into sophisticated analysis techniques such as pie charts, controls, 
instruments, maps, time-series graphs, etc. 

G.5
Glossary
 embedded operating system  Used for a single purpose in computer 
appliances and special-purpose applications, such as an automobile, 
ATM, or media player. 
 emergency  A sudden, unexpected event requiring immediate action 
due to potential threat to health and safety, the environment, or property. 
 emergency notification service  An infrastructure built for notifying 
people in the event of an emergency. 
 emergency preparedness  Ensures a company is ready to respond to 
an emergency in an organized, timely, and effective manner. 
 employee monitoring policy  States explicitly how, when, and where 
the company monitors its employees. 
 employee relationship management (ERM)  Provides web-based self-
service tools that streamline and automate the human resource department.  
 encryption  Scrambles information into an alternative form that requires 
a key or password to decrypt. 
 energy consumption  The amount of energy consumed by business 
processes and systems. 
 enterprise application integration (EAI)  Connects the plans, methods, 
and tools aimed at integrating separate enterprise systems. 
 enterprise application integration (EAI) middleware  Takes a new 
approach to middleware by packaging commonly used applications 
together, reducing the time needed to integrate applications from 
multiple vendors.  
 enterprise architect  A person grounded in technology, fluent in business, 
and able to provide the important bridge between MIS and the business.  
 enterprise resource planning (ERP)  Integrates all departments and 
functions throughout an organization into a single IT system (or integrated 
set of IT systems) so employees can make decisions by viewing 
enterprisewide information about all business operations. 
 enterprise system  Provides enterprisewide support and data access 
for a firm's operations and business processes. 
 entity  Stores information about a person, place, thing, transaction, or event. 
 entity-relationship diagram (ERD)  A technique for documenting the 
entities and relationships in a database environment. 
 entry barrier  A feature of a product or service that customers have 
come to expect and entering competitors must offer the same for survival. 
 epolicies  Policies and procedures that address information 
management along with the ethical use of computers and the Internet in 
the business environment. 
 eprocurement  The business-to-business (B2B) online purchase and 
sale of supplies and services. 
 eshop (estore or etailer)  An online version of a retail store where 
customers can shop at any hour. 
 estimated-time-enroute (ETE)  The time remaining before reaching 
a destination using the present speed; typically used for navigation 
applications.  
 estimated-time-of-arrival (ETA)  The time of day of an expected arrival 
at a certain destination; typically used for navigation applications. 
 ethernet  A physical and data layer technology for LAN networking. 
 ethical computer use policy  Contains general principles to guide 
computer user behavior. 
 ethics  The principles and standards that guide our behavior toward 
other people. 
 ewaste  Refers to discarded, obsolete, or broken electronic devices. 
 executive information system (EIS)  A specialized DSS that supports 
senior-level executives and unstructured, long-term, nonroutine decisions 
requiring judgment, evaluation, and insight. 
 domain name system (DNS)  Converts IP address into domains, or 
identifying labels that use a variety of recognizable naming conventions. 
 dot-com  The original term for a company operating on the Internet. 
 downtime  Refers to a period of time when a system is unavailable. 
 drill-down  Enables users to view details, and details of details, of 
information.  
 drive-by hacking  A computer attack where an attacker accesses a 
wireless computer network, intercepts data, uses network services, and/
or sends attack instructions without entering the office or organization 
that owns the network. 
 dual boot  Provides the user with the option of choosing the operating 
system when the computer is turned on. 
 dumpster diving  Looking through people's trash, another way hackers 
obtain information. 
 dynamic catalog  An area of a website that stores information about 
products in a database. 
 dynamic host configuration protocol (DHCP)  Allows dynamic IP 
address allocation so users do not have to have a preconfigured IP 
address to use the network. 
 dynamic information  Includes data that change based on user actions. 
For example, static websites supply only information that will not change 
until the content editor changes the information. 
 dynamic scaling  Means that the MIS infrastructure can be 
automatically scaled up or down based on needed requirements. 
 E 
 ebook  An electronic book that can be read on a computer or special 
reading device. 
 ebusiness  Includes ecommerce along with all activities related to internal 
and external business operations such as servicing customer accounts, 
collaborating with partners, and exchanging real-time information.  
 ebusiness model  A plan that details how a company creates, delivers, 
and generates revenues on the Internet. 
 ecommerce  The buying and selling of goods and services over the Internet. 
 edge matching (warping, rubber sheeting)  Occurs when paper maps 
are laid edge to edge, and items that run across maps but do not match 
are reconfigured to match. 
 ediscovery (or electronic discovery)  Refers to the ability of a 
company to identify, search, gather, seize, or export digital information in 
responding to a litigation, audit, investigation, or information inquiry. 
 effectiveness MIS metrics  Measure the impact MIS has on business 
processes and activities including customer satisfaction and customer 
conversion rates. 
 efficiency MIS metrics  Measure the performance of MIS itself such as 
throughput, transaction speed, and system availability. 
 egovernment  Involves the use of strategies and technologies to 
transform government(s) by improving the delivery of services and 
enhancing the quality of interaction between the citizen-consumer within 
all branches of government. 
 eintegration  The use of the Internet to provide customers with the 
ability to gain personalized information by querying corporate databases 
and their information sources. 
 electronic data interchange (EDI)  A standard format for the electronic 
exchange of information between supply chain participants. 
 elogistics  Manages the transportation and storage of goods. 
 email privacy policy  Details the extent to which email messages may 
be read by others. 

Glossary
G.6
 G 
 Gantt chart  A simple bar chart that lists project tasks vertically against 
the project's time frame, listed horizontally. 
 genetic algorithm  An artificial intelligence system that mimics the 
evolutionary, survival-of-the-fittest process to generate increasingly 
better solutions to a problem. 
 geocache  A GPS technology adventure game that posts on the Internet 
the longitude and latitude location of an item for users to find. 
 geocoding  Spatial databases is a coding process that takes a 
digital map feature and assigns it an attribute that serves as a unique 
ID (tract number, node number) or classification (soil type, zoning 
category).  
 geocoin  A round coin-sized object that is uniquely numbered and 
hidden in geocache. 
 geographic information system (GIS)  Stores, views, and analyzes 
geographic data, creating multidimensional charts or maps. 
 gigabyte (GB)  Roughly 1 billion bytes. 
 gigahertz (GHz)  The number of billions of CPU cycles per second. 
 GIS map automation  Links business assets to a centralized system 
where they can be tracked and monitored over time. 
 global positioning system (GPS)  A satellite-based navigation system 
providing extremely accurate position, time, and speed information. 
 goal-seeking analysis  Finds the inputs necessary to achieve a goal 
such as a desired level of output. 
 goods  Material items or products that customers will buy to satisfy a 
want or need. Clothing, groceries, cell phones, and cars are all examples 
of goods that people buy to fulfill their needs. 
 granularity  Refers to the level of detail in the model or the decision-
making process. 
 grid computing  A collection of computers, often geographically 
dispersed, that are coordinated to solve a common problem. 
 H 
 hackers  Experts in technology who use their knowledge to break 
into computers and computer networks, either for profit or motivated by 
the challenge. 
 hactivists  Have philosophical and political reasons for breaking into 
systems and will often deface the website as a protest. 
 hard drive  A secondary storage medium that uses several rigid disks 
coated with a magnetically sensitive material and housed together with 
the recording heads in a hermetically sealed mechanism. 
 hardware  Consists of the physical devices associated with a 
computer system 
 help desk  A group of people who respond to users' questions. 
 high availability  Occurs when a system is continuously operational at 
all times. 
 high-speed Internet cable connection  Provides Internet access using 
a cable television company's infrastructure and a special cable modem. 
 hot site  A separate and fully equipped facility where the company can 
move immediately after a disaster and resume business. 
 human resources ERP component  Tracks employee information 
including payroll, benefits, compensation, and performance assessment 
and ensures compliance with all laws. 
 hybrid cloud  Includes two or more private, public, or community 
clouds, but each cloud remains separate and is only linked by technology 
that enables data and application portability. 
 executive sponsor  The person or group who provides the financial 
resources for the project. 
 expert system  Computerized advisory programs that imitate the 
reasoning processes of experts in solving difficult problems. 
 explicit knowledge  Consists of anything that can be documented, 
archived, and codified, often with the help of IT. 
 extended ERP component  The extra components that meet 
organizational needs not covered by the core components and primarily 
focus on external operations. 
 extraction, transformation, and loading (ETL)  A process that extracts 
information from internal and external databases, transforms it using a 
common set of enterprise definitions, and loads it into a data warehouse. 
 extranet  An extension of an intranet that is only available to authorized 
outsiders, such as customers, partners, and suppliers. 
 extreme programming (XP) methodology  Breaks a project into 
four phases, and developers cannot continue to the next phase until the 
previous phase is complete. 
 F 
 fact  The confirmation or validation of an event or object. 
 failback  Occurs when the primary machine recovers and resumes 
operations, taking over from the secondary server. 
 failover  A specific type of fault tolerance, occurs when a redundant 
storage server offers an exact replica of the real-time data, and if the 
primary server crashes the users are automatically directed to the 
secondary server or backup server. 
 fault tolerance  A general concept that a system has the ability to 
respond to unexpected failures or system crashes as the backup system 
immediately and automatically takes over with no loss of service. 
  feasibility  The measure of the tangible and intangible benefits of an 
information system. 
 feedback  Information that returns to its original transmitter (input, 
transform, or output) and modifies the transmitter's actions. 
 fiber optic (or optical fiber)  Refers to the technology associated with 
the transmission of information as light impulses along a glass wire or fiber. 
  field  A characteristic of a table. 
  file transfer protocol (FTP)  A simple network protocol that allows the 
transfer of files between two computers on the Internet. 
 firewall  Hardware and/or software that guard a private network by 
analyzing incoming and outgoing information for the correct markings. 
 first-mover advantage  An advantage that occurs when a company 
can significantly increase its market share by being first to market with a 
competitive advantage. 
  flash memory  A special type of rewritable read-only memory (ROM) 
that is compact and portable. 
 folksonomy  Similar to taxonomy except that crowdsourcing 
determines the tags or keyword-based classification system. 
 forecasts  Predictions based on time-series information. 
 foreign key  A primary key of one table that appears as an attribute in 
another table and acts to provide a logical relationship between the two tables.  
 forward integration  Takes information entered into a given system and 
sends it automatically to all downstream systems and processes. 
  fourth-generation languages (4GL)  Programming languages that look 
similar to human languages. 
 fuzzy logic  A mathematical method of handling imprecise or subjective 
information. 

G.7
Glossary
 information redundancy  The duplication of data, or the storage of the 
same data in multiple places. 
 information richness  Refers to the depth and breadth of details 
contained in a piece of textual, graphic, audio, or video information. 
 information secrecy  The category of computer security that addresses 
the protection of data from unauthorized disclosure and confirmation of 
data source authenticity. 
 information security plan  Details how an organization will implement 
the information security policies. 
 information security policies  Identify the rules required to maintain 
information security, such as requiring users to log off before leaving for 
lunch or meetings, never sharing passwords with anyone, and changing 
passwords every 30 days. 
 informing  Accessing large amounts of data from different management 
information systems. 
 Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS)  The delivery of computer hardware 
capability, including the use of servers, networking, and storage, as a service. 
 input device  Equipment used to capture information and commands. 
 insiders  Legitimate users who purposely or accidentally misuse their 
access to the environment and cause some kind of business-affecting 
incident. 
 in-sourcing (in-house development)  Uses the professional expertise 
within an organization to develop and maintain its information 
technology systems. 
 instant messaging (sometimes called IM or IMing)  A service that 
enables “instant” or real-time communication between people. 
 Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE)  An 
organization that researches and institutes electrical standards for 
communication and other technologies. 
 intangible benefits  Difficult to quantify or measure. 
 integration  Allows separate systems to communicate directly with 
each other, eliminating the need for manual entry into multiple systems. 
 integration testing  Verifies that separate systems can work together 
passing data back and forth correctly. 
 integrity constraint  Rules that help ensure the quality of information. 
 intellectual property  Intangible creative work that is embodied in 
physical form and includes copyrights, trademarks, and patents. 
 intelligent agent  A special-purpose knowledge-based information 
system that accomplishes specific tasks on behalf of its users. 
 intelligent system  Various commercial applications of artificial intelligence.  
 interactivity  Measures advertising effectiveness by counting visitor 
interactions with the target ad, including time spent viewing the ad, 
number of pages viewed, and number of repeat visits to the advertisement. 
 intermediaries  Agents, software, or businesses that provide a trading 
infrastructure to bring buyers and sellers together. 
 Internet  A massive network that connects computers all over the world 
and allows them to communicate with one another. 
 Internet censorship  Government attempts to control Internet traffic, 
thus preventing some material from being viewed by a country's citizens. 
 Internet protocol TV (IPTV)  Distributes digital video content using IP 
across the Internet and private IP networks. 
 Internet protocol version 6 (IPv6)  The “next generation” protocol 
designed to replace the current version Internet protocol, IP version 4 (IPv4) 
 Internet service provider (ISP)  A company that provides access to the 
Internet for a monthly fee. 
 Internet use policy  Contains general principles to guide the proper use 
of the Internet. 
 hypertext markup language (HTML)  Links documents allowing users 
to move from one to another simply by clicking on a hot spot or link. 
 hypertext transport protocol (HTTP)  The Internet protocol web 
browsers use to request and display web pages using universal 
resource locators. 
 I 
 identity theft  The forging of someone's identity for the purpose of 
fraud. 
 IEEE 802.11n (or Wireless-N)  The newest standard for wireless 
networking. 
 implementation phase  The organization places the system into 
production so users can begin to perform actual business operations 
with it.  
 incident  Unplanned interruption of a service. 
 incident management  The process responsible for managing how 
incidents are identified and corrected. 
 incident record  Contains all of the details of an incident. 
 infographics (information graphics)  Displays information graphically 
so it can be easily understood. 
 information  Data converted into a meaningful and useful context. 
 information age  The present time, during which infinite quantities of 
facts are widely available to anyone who can use a computer. 
 information architecture  The set of ideas about how all information in 
a given context should be organized. 
 information cleansing or scrubbing  A process that weeds out and 
fixes or discards inconsistent, incorrect, or incomplete information. 
 information compliance  The act of conforming, acquiescing, or 
yielding information. 
 information cube  The common term for the representation of 
multidimensional information. 
 information ethics  Govern the ethical and moral issues arising 
from the development and use of information technologies, as well 
as the creation, collection, duplication, distribution, and processing of 
information itself (with or without the aid of computer technologies). 
 information governance  Refers to the overall management of the 
availability, usability, integrity, and security of company data. 
 information granularity  The extent of detail within the information 
(fine and detailed or coarse and abstract). 
 information inconsistency  Occurs when the same data element has 
different values. 
 information integrity  A measure of the quality of information. 
 information integrity issue  Occurs when a system produces incorrect, 
inconsistent, or duplicate data. 
 information management  Examines the organizational resource of 
information and regulates its definitions, uses, value, and distribution 
ensuring it has the types of data/information required to function and 
grow effectively. 
 information MIS infrastructure  Identifies where and how important 
information, such as customer records, is maintained and secured. 
 information privacy policy  Contains general principles regarding 
information privacy. 
 information property  An ethical issue that focuses on who owns 
information about individuals and how information can be sold and exchanged.  
 information reach  Measures the number of people a firm can 
communicate with all over the world. 

Glossary
G.8
 maintenance phase  The organization performs changes, corrections, 
additions, and upgrades to ensure the system continues to meet its 
business goals.  
 management information systems  A business function, like 
accounting and human resources, which moves information about people, 
products, and processes across the company to facilitate decision making 
and problem solving. 
 managerial level  Employees are continuously evaluating company 
operations to hone the firm's abilities to identify, adapt to, and 
leverage change. 
 many-to-many relationship (M:N)  Between two entities in which an 
instance of one entity is related to many instances of another and one 
instance of the other can be related to many instances of the first entity. 
 market basket analysis  Analyzes such items as websites and 
checkout scanner information to detect customers' buying behavior and 
predict future behavior by identifying affinities among customers' choices 
of products and services. 
 market share  The proportion of the market that a firm captures. 
 mashup  A website or web application that uses content from more 
than one source to create a completely new product or service. 
 mashup editor  WYSIWYGs or What You See Is What You Get tools. 
 mass customization  The ability of an organization to tailor its products 
or services to the customers' specifications. 
 megabyte (MB or M or Meg)  Roughly 1 million bytes. 
 megahertz (MHz)  The number of millions of CPU cycles per second. 
 memory cards  Contain high-capacity storage that holds data such as 
captured images, music, or text files. 
 memory sticks  Provide nonvolatile memory for a range of portable 
devices including computers, digital cameras, MP3 players, and PDAs. 
 metadata  Details about data. 
 Metcalfe's Law  The value of a network increases as its number of 
users grows. 
 methodology  A set of policies, procedures, standards, processes, 
practices, tools, techniques, and tasks that people apply to technical and 
management challenges. 
 metrics  Measurements that evaluate results to determine whether a 
project is meeting its goals. 
 metropolitan area network (MAN)  A large computer network usually 
spanning a city. 
 microblogging  The practice of sending brief posts (140 to 200 
characters) to a personal blog, either publicly or to a private group of 
subscribers who can read the posts as IMs or as text messages. 
 middleware  Several different types of software that sit between and 
provide connectivity for two or more software applications. 
 MIS infrastructure  Includes the plans for how a firm will build, deploy, 
use, and share its data, processes, and MIS assets. 
 mobile business (or mbusiness, mcommerce)  The ability to 
purchase goods and services through a wireless Internet-enabled device. 
 model  A simplified representation or abstraction of reality. 
 modem  A device that enables a computer to transmit and receive data. 
 Moore's Law  Refers to the computer chip performance per dollar 
doubling every 18 months. 
 multiple-in/multiple-out (MIMO) technology  Multiple transmitters 
and receivers allow sending and receiving greater amounts of data than 
traditional networking devices. 
 multitasking  Allows more than one piece of software to be used 
at a time. 
 interoperability  The capability of two or more computer systems 
to share data and resources, even though they are made by different 
manufacturers.  
  intranet  A restricted network that relies on Internet technologies to 
provide an Internet-like environment within the company for information 
sharing, communications, collaboration, web publishing, and the support 
of business process. 
  intrusion detection software (IDS)  Features full-time monitoring tools 
that search for patterns in network traffic to identify intruders. 
 IP address  A unique number that identifies where computers are 
located on the network. 
 iterative development  Consists of a series of tiny projects. 
 K 
 key performance indicators (KPIs)  Quantifiable metrics a company 
uses to evaluate progress towards critical success factors. 
 kill switch  A trigger that enables a project manager to close the project 
before completion. 
 knowledge  Skills, experience, and expertise coupled with information 
and intelligence that creates a person's intellectual resources. 
 knowledge management (KM)  Involves capturing, classifying, 
evaluating, retrieving, and sharing information assets in a way that 
provides context for effective decisions and actions. 
 knowledge management system (KMS)  Supports the capturing, 
organization, and dissemination of knowledge (i.e., know-how) 
throughout an organization. 
 knowledge worker  Individuals valued for their ability to interpret and 
analyze information. 
 L 
 latitude  Represents a north/south measurement of position. 
 legacy system  An old system that is fast approaching or beyond the 
end of its useful life within an organization. 
 list generator  Compiles customer information from a variety of sources 
and segments it for different marketing campaigns. 
  local area network (LAN)  Connects a group of computers in proximity, 
such as in an office building, school, or home. 
 location-based services (LBS)  Applications that use location 
information to provide a service. 
  logical view of information  Shows how individual users logically 
access information to meet their own particular business needs. 
  longitude  Represents an east/west measurement of position. 
  long tail  Referring to the tail of a typical sales curve.  
 loyalty program  A program to reward customers based on spending. 
 M 
 magnetic medium  A secondary storage medium that uses magnetic 
techniques to store and retrieve data on disks or tapes coated with 
magnetically sensitive materials. 
 magnetic tape   An older secondary storage medium that uses a 
strip of thin plastic coated with a magnetically sensitive recording 
medium.  
 mail bomb  Sends a massive amount of email to a specific person or 
system that can cause that user's server to stop functioning. 
 maintainability (or flexibility)  Refers to how quickly a system can 
transform to support environmental changes. 

G.9
Glossary
 online transaction processing (OLTP)  The capturing of transaction 
and event information using technology to (1) process the information 
according to defined business rules, (2) store the information, and 
(3) update existing information to reflect the new information. 
 onshore outsourcing  Engaging another company within the same 
country for services. 
 open source  Refers to any software whose source code is made 
available free for any third party to review and modify. 
 open system  Consists of non-proprietary hardware and software based 
on publicly known standards that allows third parties to create add-on 
products to plug into or interoperate with the system. 
 operating system software  Controls the application software and 
manages how the hardware devices work together. 
 operational CRM  Supports traditional transactional processing for day-to-
day front-office operations or systems that deal directly with the customers.  
 operational level  Employees develop, control, and maintain core 
business activities required to run the day-to-day operations. 
 opportunity management CRM system  Targets sales opportunities by 
finding new customers or companies for future sales. 
 optimization analysis  An extension of goal-seeking analysis, finds 
the optimum value for a target variable by repeatedly changing other 
variables, subject to specified constraints. 
 opt out  Customer specifically chooses to deny permission of 
receiving emails. 
 output device  Equipment used to see, hear, or otherwise accept the 
results of information processing requests 
 outsourcing  An arrangement by which one organization provides a service 
or services for another organization that chooses not to perform them in-house.   
 P 
 packet  A single unit of binary data routed through a network. 
 packet footer  Represents the end of the packet or transmission end. 
 packet header  Lists the destination (for example, in IP packets the 
destination is the IP address) along with the length of the message data. 
 packet-switching  Occurs when the sending computer divides a 
message into a number of efficiently sized units of data called packets, 
each of which contains the address of the destination computer. 
 paradigm shift  Occurs when a new radical form of business enters the 
market that reshapes the way companies and organizations behave. 
 parallel implementation  Uses both the legacy system and new system 
until all users verify that the new system functions correctly. 
 partner relationship management (PRM)  Discovers optimal sales 
channels by selecting the right partners and identifying mutual customers. 
 passive RFID tags  Do not have a power source. 
 patent  An exclusive right to make, use, and sell an invention granted by 
a government to the inventor. 
 pay-per-call  Generates revenue each time users click on a link that 
takes them directly to an online agent waiting for a call. 
 pay-per-click  Generates revenue each time a user clicks on a link to a 
retailer's website. 
 pay-per-conversion  Generates revenue each time a website visitor is 
converted to a customer. 
 peer-to-peer (P2P) network  A computer network that relies on the 
computing power and bandwidth of the participants in the network rather 
than a centralized server. 
 performance  Measures how quickly a system performs a process 
or transaction. 
 multi-tenancy  A single instance of a system serves multiple customers. 
 multi-valued attribute  Having the potential to contain more than one 
value for an attribute. 
 mutation  The process within a genetic algorithm of randomly trying 
combinations and evaluating the success (or failure) of the outcome. 
 N 
 national service providers (NSPs)  Private companies that own and 
maintain the worldwide backbone that supports the Internet. 
 nearshore outsourcing  Contracting an outsourcing arrangement with 
a company in a nearby country. 
 network  A communications system created by linking two or more 
devices and establishing a standard methodology in which they can 
communicate. 
 network access points (NAPs)  Traffic exchange points in the routing 
hierarchy of the Internet that connects NSPs. 
 network convergence  The efficient coexistence of telephone, video, 
and data communication within a single network, offering convenience 
and flexibility not possible with separate infrastructures. 
 network effect  Describes how products in a network increase in value 
to users as the number of users increases. 
 network operating system (NOS)  Operating system that runs a network, 
steering information between computers and managing security and users.  
 network topology  Refers to the geometric arrangement of the actual 
physical organization of the computers (and other network devices) in 
a network. 
 network transmission media  Refers to the various types of media 
used to carry the signal between computers. 
 network user license  Enables anyone on the network to install and 
use the software. 
 neural network  A category of AI that attempts to emulate the way the 
human brain works. 
 nonrepudiation  A contractual stipulation to ensure that ebusiness 
participants do not deny (repudiate) their online actions. 
 nonvolatile  Does not require constant power to function. 
 null-valued attribute  Assigned to an attribute when no other value 
applies or when a value is unknown. 
 O 
 object-oriented language  Languages group data and corresponding 
processes into objects. 
 offshore outsourcing  Using organizations from developing countries to 
write code and develop systems. 
 off-the-shelf application software  Supports general business 
processes and does not require any specific software customization to 
meet the organization's needs. 
 one-to-many relationship (1:M)  A relationship between two entities 
in which an instance of one entity can be related to many instances of a 
related entity. 
 one-to-one relationship (1:1)  A relationship between two entities in 
which an instance of one entity can be related to only one instance of a 
related entity. 
 online analytical processing (OLAP)  The manipulation of information 
to create business intelligence in support of strategic decision making. 
 online training  Runs over the Internet or on a CD or DVD, and 
employees complete the training on their own time at their own pace. 

Glossary
G.10
 private cloud  Serves only one customer or organization and can be 
located on the customers' premises or off the customer's premises.  
 product differentiation  An advantage that occurs when a company 
develops unique differences in its products with the intent to influence 
demand.  
 production  The process where a business takes raw materials and 
processes them or converts them into a finished product for its goods or 
services. 
 production and materials management ERP component  Handles 
production planning and execution tasks such as demand forecasting, 
production scheduling, job cost accounting, and quality control.  
 productivity  The rate at which goods and services are produced based 
upon total output given total inputs. 
 project  Temporary activity a company undertakes to create a unique 
product, service, or result. 
 project assumption  Factors considered to be true, real, or certain 
without proof or demonstration. 
 project constraint  Specific factors that can limit options including 
budget, delivery dates, available skilled resources, and organizational 
policies. 
 project deliverable  Any measurable, tangible, verifiable outcome, 
result, or item that is produced to complete a project or part of a project. 
 project management  The application of knowledge, skills, tools, and 
techniques to project activities to meet project requirements. 
 project management office (PMO)  An internal department that 
oversees all organizational projects. 
 project manager  An individual who is an expert in project planning and 
management, defines and develops the project plan, and tracks the plan 
to ensure the project is completed on time and on budget. 
 project milestones  Represent key dates when a certain group of 
activities must be performed. 
 project objective  Quantifiable criteria that must be met for the project 
to be considered a success. 
 project plan  A formal, approved document that manages and controls 
project execution. 
 project requirements document  Defines the specifications for 
product/output of the project and is key for managing expectations, 
controlling scope, and completing other planning efforts. 
project scope Describes the business needs and the justification, 
requirements, and current boundaries for the project.
 project scope statement  Links the project to the organization's overall 
business goals. 
 project stakeholder  Individuals and organizations actively involved 
in the project or whose interests might be affected as a result of project 
execution or project completion. 
 protocol  A standard that specifies the format of data as well as the 
rules to be followed during transmission. 
 prototyping  A modern design approach where the designers and 
system users use an iterative approach to building the system. 
 proxy  Software that prevents direct communication between a sending 
and receiving computer and is used to monitor packets for security 
reasons.  
 public cloud  Promotes massive, global, industrywide applications 
offered to the general public.  
 public key encryption (PKE)  Uses two keys: a public key that 
everyone can have and a private key for only the recipient. 
 personal area networks (PAN)  Provide communication over a short 
distance that is intended for use with devices that are owned and 
operated by a single user. 
 personal information management (PIM)  Software handles contact 
information, appointments, task lists, and email. 
 personalization  Occurs when a company knows enough about a 
customer's likes and dislikes that it can fashion offers more likely to 
appeal to that person, say by tailoring its website to individuals or groups 
based on profile information, demographics, or prior transactions. 
 PERT (Program Evaluation and Review Technique) chart  A graphical 
network model that depicts a project's tasks and the relationships 
between them.  
 pharming  Reroutes requests for legitimate websites to false websites. 
 pharming attack  Uses a zombie farm, often by an organized crime 
association, to launch a massive phishing attack. 
  phased implementation  Installs the new system in phases (for 
example, by department) until it is verified that it works correctly. 
 phishing  A technique to gain personal information for the purpose of 
identity theft, usually by means of fraudulent emails that look as though 
they came from legitimate sources. 
 phishing expedition  A masquerading attack that combines spam 
with spoofing. 
 physical security  Tangible protection such as alarms, guards, fireproof 
doors, fences, and vaults. 
  physical view of information  The physical storage of information on a 
storage device. 
 pilot implementation  A small group uses the new system until it is 
verified that it works correctly, then the remaining users migrate to the 
new system. 
 pirated software  The unauthorized use, duplication, distribution, or 
sale of copyrighted software. 
  planning phase  Establishes a high-level plan of the intended project 
and determines project goals. 
  Platform as a Service (PaaS)  Supports the deployment of entire 
systems including hardware, networking, and applications using a 
pay-per-use revenue model. 
  plunge implementation  Discards the legacy system and immediately 
migrates all users to the new system. 
 podcasting  Converts an audio broadcast to a digital music player. 
 portability  Refers to the ability of an application to operate on 
different devices or software platforms, such as different operating 
systems.  
 Porter's Five Forces Model  A model for analyzing the competitive 
forces within the environment in which a company operates, to assess 
the potential for profitability in an industry. 
  preventive maintenance  Makes system changes to reduce the chance 
of future system failure. 
  primary key  A field (or group of fields) that uniquely identifies a given 
record in a table.  
  primary storage  Computer's main memory, which consists of the 
random access memory (RAM), cache memory, and read-only memory 
(ROM) that is directly accessible to the CPU. 
  primary value activities  Found at the bottom of the value chain, these 
include business processes that acquire raw materials and manufacture, 
deliver, market, sell, and provide after-sales services. 
 privacy  The right to be left alone when you want to be, to have control over 
your personal possessions, and not to be observed without your consent.  

G.11
Glossary
 RFID reader (RFID interrogator)  A transmitter/receiver that reads the 
contents of RFID tags in the area. 
 RFID tag  An electronic identification device that is made up of a chip 
and antenna. 
 rivalry among existing competitors  One of Porter's five forces; high 
when competition is fierce in a market and low when competitors are 
more complacent. 
 router  An intelligent connecting device that examines each packet of data 
it receives and then decides which way to send it toward its destination.  
 S 
 safe mode  Occurs if the system is failing and will load only the most 
essential parts of the operating system and will not run many of the 
background operating utilities. 
 sales force automation (SFA)  Automatically tracks all the steps in the 
sales process. 
 sales management CRM system  Automates each phase of the sales 
process, helping individual sales representatives coordinate and organize 
all their accounts. 
 satellite  A space station that orbits the Earth receiving and transmitting 
signals from Earth-based stations over a wide area. 
 scalability  Describes how well a system can scale up or adapt to the 
increased demands of growth. 
 script kiddies or script bunnies  Find hacking code on the Internet and 
click-and-point their way into systems to cause damage or spread viruses. 
 scripting language  A programming method that provides for 
interactive modules to a website. 
 scrum methodology  Uses small teams to produce small pieces of software 
using a series of “sprints,” or 30-day intervals, to achieve an appointed goal. 
 search engine  Website software that finds other pages based on 
keyword matching. 
 search engine optimization (SEO)  Combines art along with science to 
determine how to make URLs more attractive to search engines, resulting 
in higher search engine ranking. 
 search engine ranking  Evaluates variables that search engines use to 
determine where a URL appears on the list of search results. 
 secondary storage  Consists of equipment designed to store large 
volumes of data for long-term storage. 
 secure hypertext transfer protocol (SHTTP or HTTPS)  A combination 
of HTTP and SSL to provide encryption and secure identification of an 
Internet server. 
 secure sockets layer (SSL)  A standard security technology for 
establishing an encrypted link between a web server and a browser, 
ensuring that all data passed between them remains private. 
 semantic web  A component of Web 3.0 that describes things in a way 
that computers can understand. 
 semi-passive RFID tags  Include a battery to run the microchip's 
circuitry, but communicate by drawing power from the RFID reader. 
 semistructured decision  Occurs in situations in which a few 
established processes help to evaluate potential solutions, but not enough 
to lead to a definite recommended decision.  
 sensitivity analysis  A special case of what-if analysis, is the study of 
the impact on other variables when one variable is changed repeatedly. 
 server  A computer dedicated to providing information in response to requests.  
 serviceability  How quickly a third party or vendor can change a system 
to ensure it meets user needs and the terms of any contracts, including 
agreed levels of reliability, maintainability or availability. 
 services  Tasks that customers will buy to satisfy a want or need. 
 Q 
 query-by-example (QBE) tool  Helps users graphically design the 
answer to a question against a database. 
 R 
 radio-frequency identification (RFID)  Uses electronic tags and labels 
to identify objects wirelessly over short distances. 
 random access memory (RAM)  The computer's primary working 
memory, in which program instructions and data are stored so that they 
can be accessed directly by the CPU via the processor's high-speed 
external data bus. 
 rapid application development (RAD) methodology (also called rapid 
prototyping)    Emphasizes extensive user involvement in the rapid and 
evolutionary construction of working prototypes of a system, to accelerate 
the systems development process. 
 rational unified process (RUP) methodology  Provides a framework 
for breaking down the development of software into four “gates.” 
 read-only memory (ROM)  The portion of a computer's primary storage 
that does not lose its contents when one switches off the power. 
 real simple syndication (RSS)  A web format used to publish 
frequently updated works, such as blogs, news headlines, audio, and 
video in a standardized format. 
 real-time communication  Occurs when a system updates information 
at the same rate it receives it. 
 real-time information  Immediate, up-to-date information. 
 real-time system  Provides real-time information in response 
to requests.  
 record  A collection of related data elements. 
 recovery  The ability to get a system up and running in the event of a 
system crash or failure that includes restoring the information backup. 
 reduced instruction set computer (RISC) chips  Limits the number of 
instructions the CPU can execute to increase processing speed. 
 redundancy  Occurs when a task or activity is unnecessarily repeated. 
 regional service providers (RSPs)  Offer Internet service by connecting 
to NSPs, but they also can connect directly to each other. 
 reintermediation  Steps are added to the value chain as new players 
find ways to add value to the business process. 
 relational database management system  Allows users to create, 
read, update, and delete data in a relational database. 
 relational database model  Stores information in the form of logically 
related two-dimensional tables. 
 relational integrity constraint  Rules that enforce basic and 
fundamental information-based constraints. 
 reliability (or accuracy)  Ensures a system is functioning correctly and 
providing accurate information. 
 reputation system  Where buyers post feedback on sellers. 
 requirements definition document  Prioritizes all of the business 
requirements by order of importance to the company. 
 requirements management  The process of managing changes to the 
business requirements throughout the project. 
 responsibility matrix  Defines all project roles and indicates what 
responsibilities are associated with each role. 
 return on investment (ROI)  Indicates the earning power of a project. 
 RFID accelerometer  A device that measures the acceleration (the rate 
of change of velocity) of an item and is used to track truck speeds or taxi 
cab speeds. 

Glossary
G.12
 spear phishing  A phishing expedition in which the emails are carefully 
designed to target a particular person or organization. 
 spyware  A special class of adware that collects data about the user 
and transmits it over the Internet without the user's knowledge or 
permission. 
 SSL Certificate  An electronic document that confirms the identity of a 
website or server and verifies that a public key belongs to a trustworthy 
individual or company. 
 standard packet format  Includes a packet header, packet body 
containing the original message, and packet footer. 
 static information  Includes fixed data that are not capable of change 
in the event of a user action. 
 statistical analysis  Performs such functions as information 
correlations, distributions, calculations, and variance analysis. 
 status report  Periodic reviews of actual performance versus expected 
performance. 
 strategic level  Managers develop overall business strategies, goals, 
and objectives as part of the company's strategic plan.  
 streaming  A method of sending audio and video files over the Internet 
in such a way that the user can view the file while it is being transferred. 
 streamlining  Improves business process efficiencies simplifying or 
eliminating unnecessary steps. 
 structured data  Data already in a database or a spreadsheet. 
 structured decision  Involves situations where established processes 
offer potential solutions. 
 structured query language (SQL)  Users write lines of code to answer 
questions against a database. 
 stylus  A pen-like device used to tap the screen to enter commands. 
 supplier power  One of Porter's five forces; measures the suppliers' 
ability to influence the prices they charge for supplies (including 
materials, labor, and services). 
 supplier relationship management (SRM)  Focuses on keeping suppliers 
satisfied by evaluating and categorizing suppliers for different projects.  
 supply chain  All parties involved, directly or indirectly, in obtaining raw 
materials or a product. 
 supply chain execution system  Ensures supply chain cohesion by 
automating the different activities of the supply chain. 
 supply chain management (SCM)  The management of information 
flows between and among activities in a supply chain to maximize total 
supply chain effectiveness and corporate profitability. 
 supply chain planning system  Uses advanced mathematical 
algorithms to improve the flow and efficiency of the supply chain while 
reducing inventory. 
 supply chain visibility  The ability to view all areas up and down the 
supply chain in real time. 
 support value activities  Found along the top of the value chain and 
includes business processes, such as firm infrastructure, human resource 
management, technology development, and procurement, that support 
the primary value activities. 
 sustainable MIS disposal  Refers to the safe disposal of MIS assets at 
the end of their life cycle. 
 sustainable MIS infrastructure  Identifies ways that a company can 
grow in terms of computing resources while simultaneously becoming 
less dependent on hardware and energy consumption. 
 sustainable, or “green,” MIS  Describes the production, management, 
use, and disposal of technology in a way that minimizes damage to the 
environment. 
 shopping bot  Software that will search several retailer websites and 
provide a comparison of each retailer's offerings including price and availability. 
 sign-off  Users' actual signatures, indicating they approve all of the 
business requirements. 
 single-tenancy  Each customer or tenant must purchase and maintain 
an individual system. 
 single-user license  Restricts the use of the software to one user at a time.  
 single-valued attribute  Having only a single value of each attribute of 
an entity. 
  site license  Enables any qualified users within the organization to 
install the software, regardless of whether the computer is on a network. 
Some employees might install the software on a home computer for 
working remotely. 
 slice-and-dice  The ability to look at information from different perspectives. 
 smart card  A device about the size of a credit card, containing 
embedded technologies that can store information and small amounts of 
software to perform some limited processing. 
 smart grid  Delivers electricity using two-way digital technology. 
 smartphones  Offer more advanced computing ability and connectivity 
than basic cell phones. 
 social bookmarking  Allows users to share, organize, search, and 
manage bookmarks. 
 social engineering  Hackers use their social skills to trick people into 
revealing access credentials or other valuable information. 
 social media  Refers to websites that rely on user participation and 
user-contributed content. 
 social media policy  Outlines the corporate guidelines or principles 
governing employee online communications. 
  social network  An application that connects people by matching 
profile information 
 social networking  The practice of expanding your business and/or 
social contacts by constructing a personal network. 
 social networking analysis (SNA)  Maps group contacts identifying 
who knows each other and who works together. 
  social tagging  Describes the collaborative activity of marking shared 
online content with keywords or tags as a way to organize it for future 
navigation, filtering, or search. 
  software  The set of instructions the hardware executes to carry out 
specific tasks. 
 Software as a Service (SaaS)  Delivers applications over the cloud 
using a pay-per-use revenue model. 
  software customization  Modifies software to meet specific user or 
business requirements. 
 software engineering  A disciplined approach for constructing information 
systems through the use of common methods, techniques, or tools.  
 software updates (software patch)  Occurs when the software vendor 
releases updates to software to fix problems or enhance features. 
 software upgrade  Occurs when the software vendor releases a new 
version of the software, making significant changes to the program. 
  source code  Contains instructions written by a programmer specifying 
the actions to be performed by computer software. 
  source document  The original transaction record. 
  spam  Unsolicited email. 
 spatial data (geospatial data or geographic information)  Identifies 
the geographic location of features and boundaries on Earth, such as 
natural or constructed features, oceans, and more. 

G.13
Glossary
 threat of substitute products or services  One of Porter's five forces, 
high when there are many alternatives to a product or service and low 
when there are few alternatives from which to choose. 
 time bombs  Computer viruses that wait for a specific date before 
executing instructions. 
 time-series information  Time-stamped information collected at a 
particular frequency. 
 To-Be process model  Shows the results of applying change 
improvement opportunities to the current (As-Is) process model. 
 tokens  Small electronic devices that change user passwords automatically. 
 traceroute  A utility application that monitors the network path of 
packet data sent to a remote computer. 
 transaction processing system (TPS)  The basic business system that 
serves the operational level (analysts) and assists in making structured 
decisions. 
 transactional information  Encompasses all of the information 
contained within a single business process or unit of work, and its 
primary purpose is to support the performing of daily operational or 
structured decisions. 
 transmission control protocol/Internet protocol (TCP/IP)  Provides 
the technical foundation for the public Internet as well as for large 
numbers of private networks. 
 twisted-pair cable  Refers to a type of cable composed of four (or 
more) copper wires twisted around each other within a plastic sheath. 
 typosquatting  A problem that occurs when someone registers 
purposely misspelled variations of well-known domain names. 
 U 
 unavailable  When a system is not operating or cannot be used. 
 unified communications (UC)  The integration of communication 
channels into a single service. 
 unit testing  Testing individual units or pieces of code for a system. 
 universal resource locator (URL)  The address of a file or resource on 
the web such as  www.apple.com . 
 unstructured data  Data that do not exist in a fixed location and can 
include text documents, PDFs, voice messages, emails, etc. 
 unstructured decision  Occurs in situations in which no procedures or 
rules exist to guide decision makers toward the correct choice. 
 up-selling  Increasing the value of the sale. 
 usability  The degree to which a system is easy to learn and efficient 
and satisfying to use. 
 user acceptance testing (UAT)  Determines if the system satisfies the 
user and business requirements. 
 user-contributed content (also referred to as user-generated 
content)  Content created and updated by many users for many users. 
 user documentation  Highlights how to use the system and how to 
troubleshoot issues or problems. 
 utility computing  Offers a pay-per-use revenue model similar to a 
metered service such as gas or electricity. 
 utility software  Provides additional functionality to the operating system. 
 V 
 value chain analysis  Views a firm as a series of business processes 
that each add value to the product or service. 
 variable  A data characteristic that stands for a value that changes or 
varies over time. 
 sustaining technology  Produces an improved product customers are 
eager to buy, such as a faster car or larger hard drive. 
 swim lane  Layout arranges the steps of a business process into a set 
of rows depicting the various elements. 
 switching costs  Costs that make customers reluctant to switch to 
another product or service. 
 synchronous communication  Communications that occur at the same 
time such as IM or chat. 
 system  A collection of parts that link to achieve a common purpose. 
 system clock  Works like a wristwatch and uses a battery mounted on 
the motherboard to provide power when the computer is turned off. 
 system restore  Enables a user to return to the previous operating system. 
 system software  Controls how the various technology tools work 
together along with the application software. 
 system testing  Verifies that the units or pieces of code function 
correctly when integrated. 
 systems development life cycle (SDLC)  The overall process for 
developing information systems, from planning and analysis through 
implementation and maintenance. 
 systems thinking  A way of monitoring the entire system by viewing 
multiple inputs being processed or transformed to produce outputs while 
continuously gathering feedback on each part. 
 T 
 table  Composed of rows and columns that represent an entity. 
 tacit knowledge  The knowledge contained in people's heads. 
 tag  Specific keywords or phrases incorporated into website content for 
means of classification or taxonomy. 
 tangible benefits  Easy to quantify and typically measured to determine 
the success or failure of a project. 
 taxonomy  The scientific classification of organisms into groups based 
on similarities of structure or origin. 
 technology failure  Occurs when the ability of a company to operate is 
impaired because of a hardware, software, or data outage. 
 technology recovery strategies  Focus specifically on prioritizing the 
order for restoring hardware, software, and data across the organization 
that best meets business recovery requirements. 
 teergrubing  Anti-spamming approach where the receiving computer 
launches a return attack against the spammer, sending email messages 
back to the computer that originated the suspected spam. 
 telecommunication system  Enables the transmission of data over 
public or private networks. 
 telecommuting (virtual workforce)  Allows users to work from remote 
locations such as a home or hotel, using high-speed Internet to access 
business applications and data. 
 terabyte (TB)  Roughly 1 trillion bytes. 
 test condition  Details the steps the system must perform along with 
the expected result of each step. 
 testing phase  Brings all the project pieces together into a special 
testing environment to eliminate errors and bugs and verify that the 
system meets all the business requirements defined in the analysis phase. 
 text mining  Analyzes unstructured data to find trends and patterns in 
words and sentences. 
 threat  An act or object that poses a danger to assets. 
 threat of new entrants  One of Porter's five forces, high when it is easy 
for new competitors to enter a market and low when there are significant 
entry barriers to joining a market. 

Glossary
G.14
 website name stealing  The theft of a website's name that occurs 
when someone, posing as a site's administrator, changes the ownership 
of the domain name assigned to the website to another website owner. 
 website personalization  Occurs when a website has stored enough 
data about a person's likes and dislikes to fashion offers more likely to 
appeal to that person. 
 what-if analysis  Checks the impact of a change in a variable or 
assumption on the model. 
 white-hat hackers  Work at the request of the system owners to find 
system vulnerabilities and plug the holes. 
 wide area network (WAN)  Spans a large geographic area such as a 
state, province, or country. 
 Wi-Fi infrastructure  Includes the inner workings of a Wi-Fi service 
or utility, including the signal transmitters, towers, or poles, along with 
additional equipment required to send a Wi-Fi signal. 
 Wi-Fi protected access (WPA)  A wireless security protocol to protect 
Wi-Fi networks. 
 wiki  A type of collaborative web page that allows users to add, remove, 
and change content, which can be easily organized and reorganized as 
required. 
 wire media  Transmission material manufactured so that signals will be 
confined to a narrow path and will behave predictably. 
 wired equivalent privacy (WEP)  An encryption algorithm designed to 
protect wireless transmission data. 
 wireless access point (WAP)  Enables devices to connect to a wireless 
network to communicate with each other. 
 wireless fidelity (Wi-Fi)  A means by which portable devices can 
connect wirelessly to a local area network, using access points that send 
and receive data via radio waves. 
 wireless LAN (WLAN)  A local area network that uses radio signals to 
transmit and receive data over distances of a few hundred feet. 
 wireless MAN (WMAN)  A metropolitan area network that uses radio 
signals to transmit and receive data. 
 wireless media  Natural parts of the Earth's environment that can be 
used as physical paths to carry electrical signals. 
 wireless WAN (WWAN)  A wide area network that uses radio signals to 
transmit and receive data. 
 workflow  Includes the tasks, activities, and responsibilities required to 
execute each step in a business process. 
 workplace MIS monitoring  Tracks people's activities by such 
measures as number of keystrokes, error rate, and number of 
transactions processed. 
 workshop training  Held in a classroom environment and led by an 
instructor. 
 World Wide Web (WWW)  Provides access to Internet information 
through documents including text, graphics, audio, and video files that 
use a special formatting language called HTML. 
 Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access (WiMAX)  A 
communications technology aimed at providing high-speed wireless data 
over metropolitan area networks. 
Z
 zombie  A program that secretly takes over another computer for the 
purpose of launching attacks on other computers. 
 zombie farm  A group of computers on which a hacker has planted 
zombie programs. 
 videoconference  Allows people at two or more locations to interact via 
two-way video and audio transmissions simultaneously as well as share 
documents, data, computer displays, and whiteboards. 
 virtual private network (VPN)  Companies can establish direct private 
network links among themselves or create private, secure Internet 
access, in effect a “private tunnel” within the Internet. 
  virtual reality  A computer-simulated environment that can be a 
simulation of the real world or an imaginary world. 
 virtualization  Creates multiple “virtual” machines on a single 
computing device. 
 vishing (or voice phishing)  A phone scam that attempts to defraud 
people by asking them to call a bogus telephone number to “confirm” 
their account information. 
 visualization  Produces graphical displays of patterns and complex 
relationships in large amounts of data. 
 virus  Software written with malicious intent to cause annoyance or damage. 
 voice over IP (VoIP)  Uses IP technology to transmit telephone calls. 
 volatile  Must have constant power to function; contents are lost when 
the computer's electric supply fails. 
 volatility  Refers to a device's ability to function with or without power. 
 vulnerability  A system weakness that can be exploited by a threat; for 
example, a password that is never changed or a system left on while an 
employee goes to lunch. 
 W 
 war chalking  The practice of tagging pavement with codes displaying 
where Wi-Fi access is available. 
 war driving  Deliberately searching for Wi-Fi signals from a vehicle. 
 warm site  A separate facility with computer equipment that requires 
installation and configuration. 
 waterfall methodology  A sequence of phases in which the output of 
each phase becomes the input for the next. 
  Web 1.0 (or Business 1.0)  Refers to the World Wide Web during its first 
few years of operation between 1991 and 2003. 
 Web 2.0 (or Business 2.0)  The next generation of Internet use—a 
more mature, distinctive communications platform characterized by new 
qualities such as collaboration, sharing, and free. 
 web accessibility  Means that people with disabilities—including visual, 
auditory, physical, speech, cognitive, and neurological disabilities—can 
use the web.  
  web accessibility initiative (WAI)  Brings together people from 
industry, disability organizations, government, and research labs from 
around the world to develop guidelines and resources to help make the 
web accessible to people with disabilities, including auditory, cognitive, 
neurological, physical, speech, and visual disabilities. 
  web browser  Allows users to access the WWW. 
 web conferencing (webinar)  Blends videoconferencing with 
document-sharing and allows the user to deliver a presentation over the 
web to a group of geographically dispersed participants. 
 web mining  Analyzes unstructured data associated with websites to 
identify consumer behavior and website navigation. 
 web-based self-service system  Allows customers to use the web to 
find answers to their questions or solutions to their problems. 
  website bookmark  A locally stored URL or the address of a file or 
Internet page saved as a shortcut. 

N.1
 Chapter 1 
 1. Thomas L. Friedman,  The World Is Flat (New York: Farrar, Straus 
and Giroux, 2005); Thomas Friedman, “The World Is Flat,”  www
.thomaslfriedman.com , accessed June 2010; Thomas L. Friedman, 
“The Opinion Pages,”  The New York Times, topics.nytimes.com/
top/opinion/editorialsandoped/oped/columnists/thomaslfriedman, 
accessed June 2010. 
 2. Interesting Facts,  www.interestingfacts.org , accessed June 15, 2010. 
 3. Robert Lenzer, “Bernie Madoff's $50 Billion Ponzi Scheme,”  Forbes, 
December, 12, 2008,  http://www.forbes.com/2008/12/12/madoff-
ponzi-hedge-pf-ii-in_rl_1212croesus_inl.html  . 
 4. Clive Thompson, “Do You Speak Statistics?”  Wired, May 2010, p. 36. 
 5. “Identity Theft Risk: BGSU Notifies Past, Current Students about 
Loss of Personal Information,”  The Toledo  Blade, June 27, 2007, 
 http://toledoblade.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID 5 /20070627/
NEWS08/70627020 , accessed June 26, 2010. 
 6. Ina Fried, “Apple Earnings Top Estimates,”  CNET News, October 11, 
2005,  http://news.cnet.com/Apple-earnings-topestimates/2100-
1041_3-5893289.html?tag 5 lia;rcol , accessed January 18, 2010. 
 7. Michael Arndt and Bruce Einhorn, “The 50 Most Innovative Companies,” 
 Bloomberg Businessweek, April 15, 2010,  http://www.businessweek
.com/magazine/content/10_17/b4175034779697.htm . 
 8. Jon Surmacz, “By the Numbers,”  CIO Magazine, October 2009. 
 9. Michael E. Porter, “The Five Competitive Forces That Shape Strategy,” 
The Harvard Business Review Book Series,  Harvard  Business Review, 
January 2008; Michael E. Porter, “Competitive Strategy: Techniques 
for Analyzing Industries and Competitors,”  Harvard Business Review, 
January 2002; Michael E. Porter,  On Competition, The Harvard 
Business Review Book Series (Boston: Harvard Business School 
Publishing, 1985); Harvard Institute for Strategy and Competitiveness, 
 http://www.isc.hbs.edu/ , accessed June 10, 2010. 
 10.–17. Ibid. 
 18. The Associated Press, “Postal Service Facing Losses of Historic 
Proportion,”  USA Today, March 25, 2009,  http://www.usatoday.com/
news/washington/2009-03-25-postal-woes_N.htm  .
 19. Porter, “The Five Competitive Forces That Shape Strategy”; Porter, 
“Competitive Strategy: Techniques for Analyzing Industries and 
Competitors”; Porter,  On Competition; Harvard Institute for Strategy 
and Competitiveness. 
 20. Yukari Iwatani Kane, “First-Day Sales of Apple's iPad Fall Short of 
Sky-High Hopes,”  The Wall Street Journal, April 6, 2010,  http://online
.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052702304017404575165621713345
324.html . 
 21. Porter, “The Five Competitive Forces That Shape Strategy”; Porter, 
“Competitive Strategy: Techniques for Analyzing Industries and 
Competitors”; Porter,  On Competition; Harvard Institute for Strategy 
and Competitiveness. 
 22. Joel Holland, “What's Your Problem?”  Entrepreneur, May 2010,  http://
www.entrepreneur.com/magazine/entrepreneur/2010/may/206150.html . 
23. Porter, “The Five Competitive Forces That Shape Strategy”; Porter, 
“Competitive Strategy: Techniques for Analyzing Industries and 
Competitors”; Porter, On Competition; Harvard Institute for Strategy 
and Competitiveness.
 24. “Apple Profit Surges 95 Percent on iPod Sales,” Yahoo! News,  http://
news.yahoo.com/s/afp/20060118/bs_afp/uscompanyearningsit_
060118225009 , accessed January 18, 2005; “Apple's IPod Success 
Isn't Sweet Music for Record Company Sales,” Bloomberg.com, 
 http://quote.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid 5 nifea&&sid 5 aHP5Ko1 
pozM0 , accessed November 2, 2005; Peter Burrows, “How Apple 
Could Mess Up Again,” BusinessWeek online,  http://yahoo
.businessweek.com/technology/content/jan2006/tc20060109_
432937.htm , accessed January 9, 2006;  www.apple.com/iphone , 
accessed June 7, 2007;  news.com.com/NikeiPod 1 raises
 1 RFID 1 privacy 1 concerns/2100-1029_3-6143606.html , 
accessed June 7, 2007. 
 25. Nick Leiber, Sommer Saadi, Victoria Stilwell, Joel Stonington, John 
Tozzi, and Venessa Wong, “2011 Finalists: America's Best Young 
Entrepreneurs,”  Bloomberg Businessweek, September 20, 2011. 
 26. Thomas L. Friedman, Hot, Flat, and Crowded: Why We Need a Green 
Revolution—and How It Can Renew America (New York: Farrar, 
Straus and Giroux, 2008). 
 27. “Special Report Salary Survey 2009: Staff and Entry-Level Positions,” 
 ComputerWorld Magazine,  http://www.computer world.com/s/salary-
survey/breakdown/2009/job_level/3 ; accessed June 27, 2010. 
 28. Ina Fried, “Adobe to Buy Omniture for $1.8 Billion,”  CNET News, 
September 15, 2009,  http://news.cnet.com/8301-13860_3-
10353733-56.html  . 
 29. Seidell, Streeter, “10 Best Things We'll Say to Our Grandkids,” 
 Wired Magazine, September, 21, 2009,   www.wired.com/culture/
culturereviews/magazine/17-10/st_best#ixzz0s65fFq1t  . 
 30. Friedman,  The World Is Flat; Friedman, “The World Is Flat”; Friedman, 
“The Opinion Pages.” 
 31. J. R. Raphel, “The 15 Biggest Wiki Blunders,”  PC World, August 26, 
2009,  http://www.pcworld.com/article/170874/the_15_biggest_ 
wikipedia_blunders.html  . 
 32. Peter S. Green, “Merrill's Thain Said to Pay $1.2 Million to Decorator,” 
 Bloomberg Businessweek, January 23, 2009,  http://www.bloomberg
.com/apps/news?sid 5 aFcrG8er4FRw&pid 5 newsarchive , accessed 
April 17, 2010. 
 33. “TED: Ideas Worth Spreading,”  http://www.ted.com/pages/view/id/5 , 
accessed June 21, 2010. 
 Chapter 2 
 1.  www.actionaly.com , accessed April 2012;  www.socialmedia
.biz/2011/01/12/top-20-social-media-monitoring-vendors-for-
business , accessed April 2012;  www.radian6.com , accessed April 
2012;  www.collectiveintellect.com , accessed April 2012. 
 2. Tom Davenport, “Tom Davenport: Back to Decision-Making Basics,” 
 BusinessWeek, March 11, 2008,  http://www.businessweek.com/
managing/content/mar2008/ca20080311_211319.htm . 
 3. Jeff Voth, “Texting and Other Bad Driving Decisions,”  http://
ca.autos.yahoo.com/p/1960/texting-and-other-bad-driving-
decisions ; “Breastfeeding While Driving,”  The New York Times, 
March 2, 2009,  http://parenting.blogs.nytimes.com/2009/03/02/ 
breastfeeding-while-driving/. 
 4. Ken Blanchard, “Effectiveness vs. Efficiency,” Wachovia Small 
Business,  www.wachovia.com , accessed October 14, 2009. 
 NOT E S 

Notes
N.2
 Chapter 3 
 1. Ingrid Lunden, “Pinterest Updates Terms of Service as It Preps an API 
and Private Pinboards: More Copyright Friendly,”  Tech Crunch, April 
2012; Chad McCloud, “What Pinterest Teaches Us About Innovation 
in Business,”  Bloomberg  Businessweek, May 2012; Courteney Palis, 
“Pinterest Traffic Growth Soars to New Heights: Experian Report,” 
 The Huffington Post, April 6, 2012. 
 2. Adam Lashinsky, “Kodak's Developing Situation,”  Fortune, January 
20, 2003, p. 176. 
 3. Clayton Christensen,  The Innovator's Dilemma (Boston: Harvard 
Business School, 1997). 
 4. Ibid. 
 5. Ibid. 
 6. Internet World Statistics,  www.internetworldstats.com , January 2010. 
 7.  info.cern.ch , accessed March 1, 2005. 
 8. Brier Dudley “Changes in Technology Almost Too Fast to Follow,”  The 
Seattle Times, October 13, 2005. 
 9. Max Chafkin, “Good Domain Names Grow Scarce,”  Inc., July 1, 2009, 
 http://www.inc.com/magazine/20090701/good-domain-names-
grow-scarce.html  . 
 10. Chris Anderson, “The Long Tail: Why the Future of Business Is Selling 
Less of More,”  http://www.longtail.com/2006 . 
 11. “Disintermediation,” TechTarget,  http://whatis.techtarget.com/
definition/0,,sid9_gci211962,00.html , accessed April 4, 2010. 
 12. “Reintermediation,”  www.pcmag.com ,  http://www.pcmag.com/
encyclopedia_term/0,2542,t  5 reintermediation&i  5 50364,00.asp , 
accessed April 4, 2010. 
 13. Scott McCartney, “You Paid What for That Flight?”  The Wall  Street 
Journal, August 26, 2010,  http://online.wsj.com/article/SB100014240
52748704540904575451653489562606.html  . 
 14. “The Complete Web 2.0 Directory,”  www.go2web20.net/ , accessed 
June 24, 2007; “Web 2.0 for CIOs,”  CIO Magazine, accessed June 24, 
2007,  www.cio.com/article/16807 ;  www.emarketer.com , accessed 
January 2006. 
 15. Ibid. 
 16. Tim O'Reilly, “What Is Web 2.0: Design Patterns and Business Models 
for the Next Generation of Software,”  www.oreillynet.com/pub/a/
oreilly/tim/news/2005/09/30/what-is-web-20.html , accessed June 
25, 2007; “Web 2.0 for CIOs.” 
 17. Ibid. 
 18. Ibid. 
 19. Joel Holland, “Risk It When You Are Young,”  Entrepreneur  Magazine, 
July 2010,  http://www.entrepreneur.com/magazine/
entrepreneur/2010/july/207174.html  . 
 20. O'Reilly, “What Is Web 2.0: Design Patterns and Business Models for 
the Next Generation of Software”; “Web 2.0 for CIOs.” 
 21. “Kiva—Loans that Change Lives,”  www.kiva.org , accessed April 10, 
2010. 
 22. O'Reilly, “What Is Web 2.0: Design Patterns and Business Models for 
the Next Generation of Software”; “Web 2.0 for CIOs.” 
 23. Tony Bradley, “Firefox 3.6 Becomes Number Two Browser as IE6 
Declines,”  PCWorld, September 1, 2010,  http://www.pcworld.com/
businesscenter/article/204698/firefox_36_becomes_number_two_
browser_as_ie6_declines.html  . 
 24. O'Reilly, “What Is Web 2.0: Design Patterns and Business Models for 
the Next Generation of Software”; “Web 2.0 for CIOs.” 
 25. Google Images,  http://www.google.com/images?hl 5 en&q 5 
social 1 network 1 image&wrapid 5 tlif12858857906612&um
 5 1&ie 5 UTF-8&source 5 univ&ei 5 Yg-lTJyNJYn6sAP0l9H-Dg&sa
 5. Rich Jaroslovsky, “Your Own Private Help Desk,”  Bloomberg 
 Businessweek, March 11, 2010. 
 6. “What Is Systems Thinking,”  SearchCIO.com ,  http://searchcio
.techtarget.com/definition/systems-thinking  , accessed March 13, 2010. 
  7. “French Trader in Scandal Ordered behind Bars,” MSNBC, February 8, 
2008,  http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/23065812/ . 
 8. Leigh Buchanan, “Letting Employees Battle It Out,”  Inc., October 1, 
2009,  http://www.inc.com/magazine/20091001/letting-employees-
battle-it-out.html . 
 9. “Put Better, Faster Decision-Making in Your Sights,”  www.teradata
.com ; “Neural Network Examples and Definitions,”   ece-www.colorado
.edu/~ecen4831/lectures/NNdemo.html , accessed June 24, 2007. 
 10. Sharon Begley, “Software au Naturel,”  Newsweek, May 7, 1995; Neil 
McManus, “Robots at Your Service,”  Wired, January 2003; Santa Fe 
Institute; Michael A. Arbib, ed.,  The Handbook of  Brain Theory and 
Neural Networks (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003); L. Biacino and 
G. Gerla, “Fuzzy Logic, Continuity and Effectiveness,”  Archive for 
 Mathematical Logic 41, no. 7. 
 11. Rachel King, “Soon That Nearby Worker Might Be a Robot,” 
 Bloomberg Businessweek, June 1, 2010,  http://www.business week.
com/ technology/content/jun2010/tc2010061_798891.htm  . 
 12. “Business Process Reengineering Six Sigma,”  www.isixsigma.com/
me/bpr/ , accessed May 10, 2010. 
 13. Michael Hammer,  Beyond Reengineering: How the Process- 
 Centered Organization Is Changing Our Work and Our Lives (New 
York: HarperCollins Publishers, 1996); Richard Chang,  Process 
Reengineering in Action: A Practical  Guide to Achieving Breakthrough 
Results, Quality Improvement Series (San Francisco: Pfeiffer, 1996). 
 14. Ibid. 
 15. Ibid. 
 16. “Business Process Reengineering Six Sigma”;  SmartDraw.com , 
 www.smartdraw.com , accessed May 11, 2010. 
 17. H. James Harrington,  Business Process Improvement  Workbook: 
Documentation, Analysis, Design, and Management  of Business 
Process Improvement (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1997); Hammer, 
 Beyond Reengineering; Michael Hammer and James Champy, 
 Reengineering the Corporation: A Manifesto for  Business Revolution 
(New York: HarperCollins Publishers, 1993). 
  18. Ibid. 
 19. Stever Robbins, “Tips for Mastering E-mail Overload,” Harvard 
Business School, October 25, 2009,  http://hbswk.hbs.edu/
archive/4438.html  . 
 20. Harrington,  Business Process Improvement Workbook; Hammer,  Beyond 
Reengineering; Hammer and Champy,  Reengineering the Corporation.  
 21. Ibid. 
 22. Phil Mansfield, “Bronx Graduate Trina Thompson Sues Monroe 
College for $70,000 over Unemployment,”  Daily News, August 3, 
2009,  http://www.nydailynews.com/ny_local/2009/08/03/2009-08-
03_student_.html#ixzz1174LU5KS  . 
 23. Stephen Baker, “What Data Crunchers Did for Obama,”  Bloomberg 
 Businessweek, January 23, 2009,  http://www.businessweek 
.com/technology/content/jan2009/tc20090123_026100.htm  ? 
chan 5 top 1 news_top 1 news 1 index 1 [-] 1 temp_top 1 story. 
 24. Secondlife.com, accessed May 28, 2007; “Linden Lab to Open 
Source Second Life Software,” Linden Lab, January 8, 2007,  sec-
ondlife.com/community/land-islands.php , accessed May 22, 2010; 
Irene Sege, “Leading a Double Life,”  The Boston Globe, October 25, 
2006, accessed June 22, 2010; James Harkin, “Get a (Second) Life,” 
 Financial Times, November, 17 2006, accessed June 15, 2010. 
25. www.darpa.mil accessed June 15, 2010.

N.3
Notes
 46. Gita Chandra, “14th Annual Webby Awards,”  http://www.webbyawards
.com/press/press-release.php?id  5 189 , accessed July 15, 2007.  
 Chapter 4 
 1. Charles Bryant, “Top 10 Things You Should Not Share on Social 
Networks,”  Howstuffworks, howstuffworks.com, accessed May 2012. 
  2. Michael Schrage, “Build the Business Case,”  CIO Magazine, March 15, 
2003,  http://www.cio.com/article/31780/Build_the_Business_Case_ 
Extracting_Value_from_the_Customer , accessed April 17, 2010. 
 3. Scott Berinato, “The CIO Code of Ethical Data Management,”  CIO 
Magazine, July 1, 2002,  www.cio.com , accessed April 17, 2010. 
 4. Peter S. Green, “Take the Data Pledge,”  Bloomberg  Businessweek, 
April 23, 2009. 
 5. Richard Mason, “Four Ethical Issues of the Information Age,” 
 Management Information Systems Quarterly 10, no. 1 (March 1986), 
 http://www.misq.org/archivist/vol/no10/issue1/vol10no1mason.html , 
accessed April 15, 2010. 
 6. Mike Brunker, “Online Poker Cheating Blamed on Employee,” MSNBC
.com, October 19, 2007,  http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/21381022/ , 
accessed April 15, 2010. 
 7. Brian Womack, “Google Ends Self-Censorship, Defies China 
Government (Update4),”  Bloomberg Businessweek, March 23, 2010, 
 http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid  5 newsarchive &sid  5 
aaE9Owm3d5Bg  . 
 8. Raymund Flandez, “Domino's Response Offers Lessons in Crisis 
Management,”  The Wall Street Journal, April 20, 2009, 
 http://blogs.wsj.com/independentstreet/2009/04/20/
dominos-response-offers-lessons-in-crisis-management/ . 
 9. “CBC Tells Journalists How to Behave on Facebook,”  ReportR
. net, August 3, 2007,  http://www.reportr.net/2007/08/03/
cbc-tells-journalists-how-to-behave-on-facebook/  . 
 10. Andy McCue, “Bank Boss Quits after Porn Found on PC,”  www
.businessweek.com , accessed June 2004. 
 11. Daniel Schorn “Whose Life Is It Anyway?”  CBS News  60 Minutes, 
July 16, 2006,  http://www.cbsnews.com/stories/2005/10/28/
60minutes/main990617.shtml  . 
 12. “Planned and Unplanned Downtime,” SAP,  http://help.sap.com/
saphelp_nw72/helpdata/en/45/17396792ef5d79e10000000a11466f/
content.htm  . 
 13. AMA Research, “Workplace Monitoring and Surveillance,”  www
.amanet.org  , accessed March 1, 2004; “2005 CSI/FBI Computer Crime 
and Security Survey,”  www.gocsi.com , accessed February 20, 2006. 
 14. Thomas Claburn, “Web 2.0. Internet Too Dangerous for Normal People,” 
 InformationWeek, April 1, 2009,  http://www.informationweek.com/news/
internet/web2.0/showArticle.jhtml?articleID  5 2 16402352&queryText 
 5 web%202.0%20security%20concerns . 
 15. Paige Baltzan, email received May 21, 2010. 
 16. Newcastle University, “Improving Password Protection with Easy to 
Remember Drawings,”  ScienceDaily, November 1, 2007,  http://www
.sciencedaily.com-/releases/2007/10/071030091438.htm  , accessed 
April 15, 2010. 
 17. Kim Zetter, “Lifelock's CEO Identity Stolen 13 Times,”  Wired, 
May 28, 2010,  http://www.wired.com/threatlevel/2010/05/
lifelock-identity-theft  . 
 18. Brian Grow, Keith Epstein, and Chi-Chu Tschang, “The New 
E-spionage Threat,”  BusinessWeek, April 10, 2008,  http://www.busi-
nessweek.com/magazine/content/08_16/b4080032218430.htm . 
 19. Brian Grow, “Hacker Hunters,”  BusinessWeek, May 30, 2005,  http://
www.businessweek.com/magazine/content/05_22/b3935001_
mz001.htm  . 
 5 X&oi  5 image_result_group&ct  5 title&resnum  5 1&ved 
 5 0CCIQsAQwAA &biw  5 1362&bih  5 530 . 
 26. “About Us,” LinkedIn,  http://press.linkedin.com/ , accessed April 3, 2010. 
 27. Daniel Pink, “Folksonomy,”  The New York Times, December 11, 2005, 
 http://www.nytimes.com/2005/12/11/magazine/11ideas1-21.html . 
 28. Daniel Nations, “What Is Social Bookmarking,”  About.com : Web 
Trends,  http://webtrends.about.com/od/socialbookmarking101/p/
aboutsocialtags.htm , accessed April 5, 2010. 
 29. Gary Matuszak, “Enterprise 2.0: Fad or Future,” KPMG International, 
 www.kpmg.com/Global/en/.../Enterprise.../Enterprise-2-Fad-or-
Future.pdf , accessed April 10, 2010. 
 30. Rachel Metz, “Changing at the Push of a Button,”  Wired, September 
27, 2004. 
 31. Wikipedia Statistics,  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Statistics , accessed 
April 15, 2010. 
 32. Wikipedia: The Free Encyclopedia,  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Wikipedia:About , accessed April 15, 2010. 
 33. “Banana Code Connects Consumers and Farm,”  DoleOrganic.com , 
 http://www.dole.com/NutritionInstituteLanding/NI_Articles/NI_ 
DoleDiet/NI_DoleDiet_Detail/tabid/1058/Default.aspx?contentid  5 
6328 , accessed April 19, 2010. 
 34. Caroline McCarthy, “Bloomberg Mistakenly Publishes Steve Jobs 
Obituary,”  CNET News, August 28, 2008,  http://news.cnet.com/8301-
13579_3-10027886-37.html , accessed April 19, 2010. 
 35. John Seigenthaler, “A False Wikipedia Biography,”  USA Today, 
November 29, 2005,  http://www.usatoday.com/news/opinion/
editorials/2005-11-29-wikipedia-edit_x.htm  . 
 36. Tim Berners-Lee, “Semantic Web Road Map,” October 14, 1998,  http://
www.w3.org/DesignIssues/Semantic.html  , accessed April 12, 2010. 
 37. Douglas MacMillan “Social Media: The Ashton Kutcher Effect,” 
 Bloomberg Businessweek, May 3, 2009,  http://www.businessweek
.com/technology/content/may2009/tc2009053_934757.htm  . 
 38. Beth Bacheldor, “From Scratch: Amazon Keeps Moving,”  Information 
Week, March 5, 2004; Gary Wolf, “The Great Library of Amazonia,” 
 Wired, October 23, 2003; “Amazon Company Information,”  Forbes, 
 www.forbes.com , September 2005; Rob Hof, “Amazon's Newest 
Product: Storage,”  BusinessWeek, March 13, 2006. 
 39. Eric Goldman, “Technology & Marketing Law Blog,” December 5, 
2005,  http://blog.ericgoldman.org/archives/2005/12/wikipedia_will
.htm , accessed April 15, 2010. 
 40. Kit Eaton, “Is Facebook Becoming the Whole World's Social 
Network?”  Fast Company, April 7, 2010,  http://www.fast company
.com/1609312/facebook-global-expansion-social-networking- 
privacy-world-phone-book-users  . 
 41. Jenna Ross, “Toughest College Test: No Cell Phone, No Facebook,” 
 StarTribune, March 13, 2010,  http://www.startribune.com/
entertainment/tv/87598062.html  . 
 42. Larry Greenemeier, “Sun's Diffie: Second Life to Become Prime Source 
of Intelligence,”  InformationWeek, May 17, 2007,  http://www.informa
tionweek.com/news/internet/showArticle.jhtml?articleID  5 199601513 . 
 43. Neil Vidyarthi, “City Council Member Booted for Playing Farmville,” 
 Social Times, March 30, 2010,  http://www.socialtimes.com/2010/03/
fired-playing-farmville/  . 
 44. Alissa Walker, “Theme Announced for 48 Hour Magazine, Over 6,000 
Contributors Have Two Days to Hustle,”  Fast  Company, May 7, 2010, 
 http://www.fastcompany.com/1640042/theme-is-announced-for-48-
hour-magazine?partner  5 rss . 
 45. Brian Eisenberg, “What Is Bubblegum Marketing?”  Beneath  the 
Cover, May 15, 2007,  http://www.beneaththecover.com/2007/05/15/
what-is-bubblegum-marketing/  . 

Notes
N.4
 Chapter 6 
 1.  www.webdesignerdepot.com , accessed April 2012;  flowingdata
.com/2011/12/21/the-best-data-visualization-projects-of-2011/  , 
accessed April 2012. 
 2. Julia Kiling, “OLAP Gains Fans among Data-Hungry Firms,” 
 ComputerWorld, January 8, 2001, p. 54. 
 3. Allan Homes, “The TJX Security Breach. This One's Different. 
Way Different,”  CIO Magazine, February 1, 2007,  advice.cio.com/
the-tjx-security-breach-this-ones-different-way-different  . 
 4. “America's College Startups: 2010,”  Inc. Magazine, 2010,  http://
www.inc.com/ss/cool-college-start-ups-2010  . 
 5. Mitch Betts, “Unexpected Insights,”  ComputerWorld, April 14, 2003, 
 www.computerworld.com , accessed September 4, 2003. 
 6. Jim Giles, “Data Sifted from Facebook Wiped after Legal Threats,” 
 NewScientist, March 31, 2010,  www.newscientist.com/article/
dn18721-data-sifted-from-facebook-wiped-after-legal-threats.html . 
 7.  www.zappos.com , accessed April 9, 2010. 
 8. “Data, Data Everywhere,”  The Economist,  www.economist.com/
specialreports/displayStory.cfm?story_id  5 15557443 . 
 9. Kiling, “OLAP Gains Fans among Data-Hungry Firms.” 
 10. Timothy Mullaney, “Netflix,”  BusinessWeek, May 25, 2006,  www.
businessweek.com/smallbiz/content/may2006/sb20060525_268860.
htm . 
 11.  www.google.com , accessed September 13, 2003. 
 12. Chris Wilson, “News Dots: The Day's Events as a Social Network,”  http://
labs.slate.com/articles/slate-news-dots/ , accessed March 29, 2010. 
 13. Maria Popova, “Data Visualization: Stories for the Information Age,” 
 Bloomberg Businessweek, August 12, 2009,  http://www.businessweek
.com/innovate/content/aug2009/id20090811_137179.htm . 
 14. Prashant Gopal, “Zillow Opens Online Mortgage Marketplace,” 
 BusinessWeek,  April 3, 2008,   http://www.businessweek.com/lifestyle/
content/apr2008/bw2008043_948040.htm . 
 15. Katie Cassidy “Barack Obama: “iPad Distracts from the Message,” 
 Sky News, May 10, 2010. 
 16. Ericka Chickowski, “Goldman Sachs Sued for Illegal Database 
Access,”  Darkreading.com , May 11, 2010,  http://www.darkreading
.com/database_security/security/attacks/show Article.jhtml?articleID
 5 224701564&cid 5 nl_DR_DAILY_2010-05-12_htm . 
 17. www.bls.gov  accessed June 15, 2010.
 18.  222.rtd-denver.com  accessed June 15, 2010.
 Chapter 7 
 1.  www.ironman.com , accessed January 14, 2008. 
 2. “Top 23 U.S. ISPs by Subscriber: Q3 2010,” ISP Planet,  http://www
.isp-planet.com/research/rankings/usa.html  . 
 3. Ibid. 
 4. “Bandwidth Meter Online Speed Test,”  CNET Reviews, http://reviews
.cnet.com/internet-speed-test/, accessed June 2010; “Broadband 
Technology Overview,”  www.corning.com/docs/opticalfiber/wp6321
.pdf , accessed February 1, 2008. 
 5. Ibid. 
 6. Ibid. 
 7. Ibid. 
 8. Ibid. 
 9.  http://www.savetheinternet.com/ , accessed May 15, 2010. 
 10. Ibid.
 11.  http://www.networksolutions.com/ , accessed May 16, 2010. 
 12.  www.godaddy.com , accessed May 16, 2010. 
 20. David Kravets, “Former Teen Cheerleader Dinged 
$27,750 for File Sharing 37 Songs,”  Wired, February 
26, 2010,  http://www.wired.com/threatlevel/2010/02/
former-teen-cheerleader-dinged-27750-for-infringing-37-songs/ . 
 21. Armen Keteyian “Digital Photocopier Loaded with Secrets,”  CBSnews
.com , April 15, 2010,  http://www.cbsnews.com/stories/2010/04/19/
eveningnews/main6412439.shtml  .  
 Chapter 5 
 1. Om Malik, “Pandora: Streaming Everywhere on Everything,”  Bloomberg 
Businessweek, January 12, 2010,  http://www.businessweek.com/
technology/content/jan2010/tc20100112_584610.htm . 
 2. “The Great 1906 San Francisco Earthquake,” USGS,  http://earthquake.
usgs.gov/regional/nca/1906/18april/index.php , accessed July 14, 
2010. 
 3. “Moore's Law,”  www.intel.com/technology/mooreslaw , accessed 
April 2, 2010; Electronics TakeBack Coalition, “Facts and Figures 
on E-Waste and Recycling,”  www.electronicstakeback.com , 
accessed April 3, 2010; “EPA Report to Congress on Server and Data 
Center Energy Efficiency,”  www.energystar.gov/ia/partners/prod_ 
development/downloads/EPA_Report_Exec_Summary_Final.pdf , 
accessed January 23, 2008. 
 4. Ibid. 
 5. Ibid. 
 6. “Switch on the Benefits of Grid Computing,”  h20338.www2.hp.com/
enterprise/downloads/7_Benefits%20of%20grid%20computing.pdf , 
accessed April 2, 2010; “Talking to the Grid,”  www. technologyreview
.com/energy/23706/  , accessed April 3, 2010; “Tech Update: What's 
All the Smart Grid Buzz About?”  www.fieldtechnologiesonline
.com/download.mvc/Whats-All-The-Smart-Grid-Buzz-About-0001 , 
accessed April 3, 2010. 
 7. Ibid. 
 8. Ibid. 
 9. “VMware-History of Virtualization.”  www.virtualizationworks.com/
Virtualization-History.asp , accessed January 23, 2008. 
 10. Rich Miller, “Google Data Center FAQ,”  www.datacenterknowledge
.com/archives/2008/03/27/google-data-center-faq/ , accessed 
April 1, 2010. 
 11. Ibid. 
 12. Agam Shah, “UPS Invests $1 Billion in Technology to Cut Costs,” 
 www.businessweek.com/idg/2010-03-25/ups-invests-1-billion-in-
technology-to-cut-costs.html , accessed April 4, 2010. 
 13. “Olympic Medals Made from E-Waste,” news.discovery.com/tech/
olympic-medals-made-from-e-waste.html, accessed April 4, 2010; 
Rob Delaney, “Olympic Champs Wear Old Trinitrons as Teck Turns 
Junk to Medals,”  Bloomberg Businessweek, February 3, 2010,
  http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid 5 newsarchive&sid 5 
az0yJ8scpCqQ . 
  14. Google Docs,  docs.google.com , accessed June 4, 2010. 
 15. Martin LaMonica, “The Journey of Juice, Inside the Electric Grid,” 
 CNET News,  August 24, 2010,  http://news.cnet.com/8301-11128_
3-20014393-54.html  . 
  16.  www.box.net , accessed April 2, 2010. 
 17. Goodwill Industries International, “Dell and Goodwill Expand Free 
Recycling Program to Include Microsoft Product,” April 21, 2010, 
 http://www.goodwill.org/press-releases/dell-goodwill-expand-
free-consumer-recycling-program-to-include-microsoft-products/ , 
accessed June 3, 2010. 
 18. One Laptop Per Child,  http://laptop.org/en/ , accessed June 5, 2010. 

N.5
Notes
 38. Chris Silva, Benjamin Gray, “Key Wireless Trends That Will Shape 
Enterprise Mobility in 2008,”  www.forrester.com , accessed 
February 12, 2008. 
 39. Julia Layton, “How Cell Phone Viruses Work,” How Stuff Works,  http://
electronics.howstuffworks.com/cell-phone-virus.htm/printable . 
 40. Michael Copeland, “Let the Helmet Make the Call,”  Fortune, February 
4, 2010,  http://money.cnn.com/galleries/2010/technology/1002/
gallery.football_helmets_sensors.fortune/index.html . 
 41. Google Earth, “Jane Goodall Institute-Gombe Chimpanzee Blog,”  http://
earth.google.com/outreach/cs_jgi_blog.html , accessed April 3, 2010. 
 42. RFID Security Alliance,  http://www.rfidsa.com/ , accessed June 15, 2010. 
 43. Ibid. 
 44. Ibid. 
 45. Alissa Walker, “The Technology Driving Denver's B-cycle Bike Sharing 
System,”  Fast Company, June 3, 2010,   http://www.fastcompany
.com/1656160/the-technology-driving-denvers-new-b-cycle-bike-
sharing-system?partner  5 rss . 
 46. Noam Cohen, “In Allowing Ad Blockers, a Test for Google,”  The  New 
York Times, January 3, 2010,  http://www.nytimes.com/2010/01/04/
business/media/04link.html  . 
 47. Julius Genachowski, “America's 2020 Broadband Vision,” The Official 
Blog of The Federal Communication Commission, February 17, 2010, 
 http://reboot.fcc.gov/blog/?entryId  5 172819 . 
  48. Al Sacco, “Foursquare Addresses Cheating Issue, Frustrates Legit Users,” 
 CIO Magazine, April 8, 2010,  http://advice.cio.com/al_sacco/10000/
foursquare_addresses_cheating_issue_frustrates_legit_users . 
 49. Ryan Singel, “FYI, Pandora Makes Your Music Public,”  Wired 
 Magazine, May 14, 2010,  http://www.wired.com/epicenter/2010/05/
pandora-privacy/#ixzz118uMDaUa  . 
 50. Rob Flickenger, “Antenna On the Cheap,” O'reilly Wireless DevCenter, 
July 2001,  http://www.oreillynet.com/cs/weblog/view/wlg/448 . 
 51. Hugo Miller, “AT&T Sparks User Backlash with End to Unlimited 
Plans,”  Bloomberg Businessweek, June 4, 2010,  http://www
.businessweek.com/news/2010-06-04/at-t-sparks-user-backlash-
with-end-to-unlimited-plans-update2-.html  . 
 52. Robert McMillian, “Domain Name Record Altered to Hack Comcast
.net,”  PC World, May 28, 2009,  http://www.pcworld.com/
businesscenter/article/146461/domain_name_record_altered_to_
hack_comcastnet.html  . 
 53. Clint Boulton, “Google Street View Accidentally Collected User Data 
via WiFi,”  eWeek, May 16, 2010,  http://www.eweek.com/c/a/Search-
Engines/Google-Street-View-Accidentally-Violates-User-Privacy-Via-
WiFi-290159/  . 
 54.  http://top10.com/broadband/news/2010/02/top_10_broadband_ 
gadgets/ , accessed June 2010. 
 55. C. G. Lynch, “GPS Innovation Gives Weather Bots a New Ride,” 
 CIO Magazine, May 9, 2007,  http://www.cio.com/article/108500/
GPS_Innovation_Gives_Weather_Bots_a_New_Ride . 
 56. Austin Carr, “ Kayak.com Cofounder Paul English Plans to Blanket 
Africa in Free Wireless Internet,”  Fast Company, May 12, 2010,  http://
www.fastcompany.com/1645485/kayak-cofounder-starting-initative-
to-blanket-africa-in-free-wirelessinternet  . 
 57. Chris Matyszczyk “Marathon Winner Disqualified for Wearing 
iPod,”  CNET News, October 11, 2009,  http://news.cnet.com/8301-
17852_3-10372586-71.html  . 
 58. Bob Sullivan, “Ding A Ling Took My $400,”  MSNBC.com , October 2, 
2009,  http://redtape.msnbc.com/2009/10/mary-coxs- consumer-
nightmare-began-with-poor-satellite-television-reception-
but-ended-up-costing-her-a-430-early-terminatio/comments/
page/2/ . 
 13. “IP Telephony/Voice over IP (VoIP): An Introduction,” Cisco,  http://
www.cisco.com/en/US/tech/tk652/tk701/tsd_technology_ support_
protocol_home.html , accessed April 24, 2010; “VoIP Business 
Solutions,”  www.vocalocity.com , accessed January 21, 2008. 
 14. Ibid. 
 15. Ibid. 
 16.  http://www.google.com/tv/ , accessed April 30, 2010. 
 17. Internet 101,  http://www.internet101.org/ , accessed April 5, 2010. 
 18. ViVu: Better Than Being There,  http://vivu.tv/vivuweb/ , accessed May 
4, 2010. 
 19. Boston Digital Bridge Foundation,  http://www.digitalbridgefoundation
.org/ , accessed May 18, 2010. 
 20. The Liberty Coalition, “Carnivore—DCS 1000,” July 27, 2006,  http://
www.libertycoalition.net/node/247  . 
 21. “A Science Odyssey,” PBS,  http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/aso/databank/
entries/btmarc.html  . 
 22. “Rip Curl Turns to Skype for Global Communications,”  www
.voipinbusiness.co.uk/rip_curl_turns_to_skype_for_gl.asp July 07, 
2006, accessed January 21, 2008; “Navigating the Mobility Wave,” 
 www.busmanagement.com , accessed February 2, 2008; “Sprint Plans 
Launch of Commercial WiMAX Service in Q2 2008,”  www. intomobile.
com , accessed February 10, 2008; Deepak Pareek,  WiMAX: Taking 
Wireless to the MAX (Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 2006),  wimax.com , 
accessed February 9, 2008. 
 23. Ibid. 
 24. Ibid. 
 25. http://www.computer.org/portal/web/computingnow/news/could-
hackers-take-your-car-for-a-ride, accessed June 25, 2010.
 26. “Rip Curl Turns to Skype for Global Communications,” www
.voipinbusiness.co.uk/rip_curl_turns_to_skype_for_gl.asp July 07, 
2006, accessed January 21, 2008; “Navigating the Mobility Wave,” 
www.busmanagement.com, accessed February 2, 2008; “Sprint Plans 
Launch of Commercial WiMAX Service in Q2 2008,” www. intomobile
.com, accessed February 10, 2008; Deepak Pareek, WiMAX: Taking 
Wireless to the MAX (Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 2006), wimax.com, 
accessed February 9, 2008. 
 27. Ibid. 
 28. Ibid. 
 29. Ibid. 
 30. Ibid. 
 31. Ibid. 
 32. “Upward Mobility in Africa,”  BusinessWeek, September 24, 2007, 
 http://www.businessweek.com/magazine/content/07_39/b4051054.
htm . 
 33. V. C. Gungor, F. C. Lambert, “A Survey on Communication 
Networks for Electric System Automation, Computer Networks,” 
 The International Journal of Computer and Telecommunications 
 Networking, May 15, 2006, pp. 877–97. 
 34. Mohsen Attaran, “RFID: an Enabler of Supply Chain Operations,” 
 Supply Chain Management: An International Journal 12 (2007), 
pp. 249–57; Michael Dortch, “Winning RFID Strategies for 2008,” 
 Benchmark  Report, December 31, 2007. 
 35. Damian Joseph, “The GPS Revolution,”  Bloomberg BusinessWeek, 
May 27, 2009,  http://www.businessweek.com/innovate/content/
may2009/id20090526_735316.htm  . 
 36. Natasha Lomas, “Location Based Services to Boom in 2008,” 
 Bloomberg Businessweek, February 11, 2008,  http://www.business-
week.com/globalbiz/content/feb2008/gb20080211_420894.htm  . 
 37. Ibid. 

Notes
N.6
Quality Management, April 2003,  www.sqmmagazine.com , accessed 
November 14, 2003. 
 6. Agile Alliance Manifesto,  www.agile.com , accessed November 1, 2003. 
 7. “Software Costs,”  CIO Magazine,  www.cio.com , accessed December 
5, 2003. 
 8. IBM Rational Unified Process,  http://www-01.ibm.com/software/
awdtools/rup/ , accessed January 2010. 
 9.  http://books.google.com/googlebooks/library.html , accessed March 
15, 2010. 
 10. Jose Martinez, “Lesson in Fraud: NYU Employee Submitted $409K in 
Fake Expenses Using Receipts from Garbage,”  Daily News, December 
23, 2009. 
 11.  CIO Magazine, June 1, 2006; “The Project Manager in the IT 
Industry,”  www.standishgroup.com ; Johnson,  My Life Is  Failure; 
McGraw, “Making Essential Software Work.” 
 12. Karl Ritter, “Bill Murray Faces DUI after Golf-Cart Escapade in 
Sweden,”  The Seattle Times, August 22, 2007,  http://seattletimes
.nwsource.com/html/entertainment/2003848077_webmurray22.html  . 
 13. Edward Yourdon,  Death March: The Complete Software  Developer's 
Guide to Surviving “Mission Impossible” Projects (Upper Saddle River, 
NJ: Prentice Hall PTR, 1999). 
 14. “Baggage Handling System Errors,”  www.flavors.com , accessed 
November 16, 2003. 
 15. “Overcoming Software Development Problems,”  www.samspublishing
.com , accessed October 2005. 
 Appendix A 
 1. “Electronic Breaking Points,”  PC World, August 2005. 
 2. Tom Davenport, “Playing Catch-Up,”  CIO Magazine, May 1, 2001. 
 3. “Hector Ruiz, Advanced Micro Devices,”  BusinessWeek, January 10, 
2005. 
 4.  www.powergridfitness.com , accessed October 2005. 
 5. Denise Brehm, “Sloan Students Pedal Exercise,”  www.mit.edu , 
accessed May 5, 2003. 
 6. Margaret Locher, “Hands That Speak,”  CIO Magazine, June 1, 2005. 
 7.  www.needapresent.com , accessed October 2005. 
 8. Aaron Ricadela, “Seismic Shift,”  Information Week, March 14, 2005. 
 9.  www.mit.com , accessed October 2005. 
 10. “The Linux Counter,”  counter.li.org , accessed October 2005. 
 Appendix B 
 1. Andy Patrizio, “Peer-to-Peer Goes Beyond Napster,”  Wired, 
February, 14, 2001,  http://www.wired.com/science/discoveries/
news/2001/02/41768 , accessed January 2009. 
 2. Intel in Communications, “10 Gigabit Ethernet Technology Overview,” 
 http://www.intel.com/network/connectivity/resources/doc_library/
white_papers/pro10gbe_lr_sa_wp.pdf , accessed January 2009. 
 3. Cisco, “TCP/IP Overview,”  http://www.cisco.com/en/US/tech/tk365/
technologies_white_paper09186a008014f8a9.shtml  , accessed 
January 2009. 
 4. Ibid. 
 5. “IPv6,”  www.ipv6.org , accessed January 2009. 
 6. Cisco, “TCP/IP Overview.” 
 7. Cisco, “Network Media Types,”  http://www.ciscopress.com/articles/
article.asp?p 5 31276 , accessed January 2009. 
 8. Ibid. 
 9. Ibid. 
 59. Associated Press, “Woman Has 911 Meltdown over McNuggets,” 
MSNBC.com, March 4, 2009,  http://www.msnbc.msn.com/
id/29498350/ . 
 60.  http://www.citysense.net/ , accessed June 2010. 
 Chapter 8 
 1. Carmine Gallo, “Delivering Happiness the Zappos Way,”  Bloomberg 
Businessweek, May 12, 2009,  http://www.business week.com/ 
smallbiz/content/may2009/sb20090512_831040.htm  . 
 2. James P. Womack, Daniel Jones, and Daniel Roos,  The Machine  That 
Changed the World (New York: Harper Perennial, 1991). 
 3.  www.kiva.com , accessed April 10, 2010. 
 4. “Post Office Losses Reach $4.7B for Year,” CBS News, August 5, 
2009,  http://www.cbsnews.com/stories/2009/08/05/national/ 
main5216012.shtml  . 
 5. “Harley-Davidson on the Path to Success,”  www.peoplesoft.com/ 
media/success , accessed October 12, 2003. 
 6. “Integrated Solutions—The ABCs of CRM,”  www
.integratedsolutionsmag.com , accessed November 12, 2003. 
 7. “Barclays, Giving Voice to Customer-Centricity,”  crm.insightexec.com , 
accessed July 15, 2003. 
 8. “Nice Emotions,”  http://www.nice.com/smartcenter-suite xs , 
accessed March 10, 2010. 
 9. “Customer Success,”  www.rackspace.com , accessed June 2005. 
 10. The Balanced Scorecard,  www.balancedscorecard.org , accessed 
February 2008. 
 11. Timothy Keiningham and Lerzan Aksoy “When Customer Loyalty 
Is a Bad Thing,”  Bloomberg Businessweek, May 8, 2009, 
 http://www.businessweek.com/managing/content/may2009/
ca2009058_567988.htm ; “Sprint Plans Launch of Commercial 
WiMAX Service in Q2 2008,”  www.intomobile.com , accessed 
February 10, 2008. 
 12. Chi-Chu Tschang, “Contaminated Milk Sours China's Dairy Business,” 
 BusinessWeek, September 26, 2008,  http://www.businessweek.com/
globalbiz/content/sep2008/gb20080926_543133.htm . 
 13. Frank Quinn, “The Payoff Potential in Supply Chain Management,”; 
William Copacino and Jonathan Byrnes, “How to Become a Supply 
Chain Master,”  Supply Chain Management  Review,  September/
October, 2001;  www.manufacturing.net , accessed June 12, 2003. 
 14. “Bridgestone/Firestone Tire Recall,”  About.com , August 9, 2000, 
 http://usgovinfo.about.com/blfirestone.htm . 
 15.  http://www.walmart.com/cp/An-Introduction-to-Walmart
.com/542413 , accessed May 2010. 
 Chapter 9 
 1. “Four Steps to Getting Things on Track,”  Bloomberg  Businessweek, 
July 7, 2010,  http://www.businessweek.com/idg/2010-07-07/
project-management-4-steps-to-getting-things-on-track.html  . 
 2. “Overcoming Software Development Problems,”  www.samspublishing
.com , accessed October 2005. 
 3.  www.ted.com , accessed June 15, 2010. 
 4. Antony Savvas, “Oklahoma Department of Corrections Leaks Personal 
Data from Website,”  ComputerWeekly.com, April 2008,  http://www
.computerweekly.com/Articles/2008/04/18/230353/Oklahoma-
Department-of-Corrections-leaks-personal-data-from.htm  . 
  5.  CIO Magazine, June 1, 2006; “The Project Manager in the IT 
Industry,”  www.si2.com , accessed December 15, 2003; Jim Johnson, 
 My Life Is  Failure (Boston: Standish Group International, 2006), 
p. 46; Gary McGraw, “Making Essential Software Work,”  Software 

C-1
Photo Credits
Chapter 7
Page 251 (left): © Corbis—All Rights Reserved RF; p. 251 (middle): 
© Corbis—All Rights Reserved RF; p. 251 (right): © Corbis—All Rights 
Reserved RF.
Chapter 8
Page 298 (left): © Ethan Miller / Getty Images; p. 298 (middle): 
© BananaStock / PunchStock RF; p. 298 (right): © Noah 
Berger / Bloomberg via Getty Images; p. 318 (top): www.
dontbuydodgechryslervehicles .com; p. 318 (bottom): Courtesy of 
www.jetbluehostage.com.
Chapter 9
Page 342 (left): ©Jason Reed / Ryan McVay / Getty Images RF; 
p. 342 (middle): © BananaStock / Jupiterimages RF; p. 342 (right): 
© Janis Christie / Getty Images RF; p. 362 (bottom), p. 377:  Used with 
permission from Microsoft.
Appendix A
Page A.3 (left): © Royalty-Free / Corbis; p. A.3 (right): © Stockbyte / 
PunchStock Images RF; p. A.4, A.5 (RAM): © Nick Rowe / Getty Images 
RF; p. A.4, A.8 (TV): © Digital Vision / Getty Images RF; p. A.4, A.8 (printer): 
© Image Club RF; p. A.4, A.9 (cords): © Royalty-Free / Corbis RF; p. A.4 
(composite): © Getty Images / Photodisc RF; p. A.4, A.6 (CD ROM): 
© Daisuke Morita / Getty Images RF; p. A.4, A.5 (disc composite): © Don 
Bishop / Getty Images RF; p. A.4, A.7 (mouse): © Stockbyte / PunchStock 
Images RF; p. A.4, A.7 (keyboard): © Stockbyte / PunchStock Images RF; 
p. A.10: © Digital Vision / Getty Images RF.
Chapter 1
Page 3 (left): © Digital Vision / Getty Images RF; p. 3 (middle): © Digital 
Vision / Getty Images RF; p. 3 (right): © John Lund / Sam Diephuis / Blend 
Images LLC RF.
Chapter 2
Page 43 (left): © JGI/Blend Images/Getty Images RF; p. 43 (middle): © 
Steve Cole/Getty Images RF; p. 43 (right): © Steve Cole / Getty Images RF.
Chapter 3
Page 91 (left): © John Lund / Marc Romanelli / Blend Images LLC RF; 
p. 91 (middle): Courtesy of Pinterest.com; p. 91 (right): AFP / Getty 
Images; p. 112: © Punchstock / Digital Vision RF; p. 115 (top): © Radius 
Images / Corbis RF; p. 115 (bottom): Fotosearch / Getty Images RF.
Chapter 4
Page 137 (left): Bernhard Lang / Getty Images; p. 137 (middle): Comstock 
/ Jupiterimages RF; p. 137 (right): altrendo images / Getty Images RF.
Chapter 5
Page 174 (left): © AP Photo / Jeff Chiu; p. 174 (middle): © Mike Margol / 
PhotoEdit; p. 174 (right): Courtesy of Pandora Media, Inc.; p. 191: 
Reproduced with permission of Bloomberg Businessweek Magazine.
Chapter 6
Page 211 (left): Image Source / Getty Images RF; p. 211 (middle): Maciej 
Frolow / Getty Images RF; p. 211 (right): C. Zachariasen / PhotoAlto; p. 212: 
Courtesy of Hotels.com; p. 213 (top): © 2012 InSinkErator, InSinkErator® 
is a division of Emerson Electric Co. All rights reserved.; p. 213 (bottom): 
Courtesy of SC Johnson; p. 236: Courtesy of NCR.
P H O T O  C R E DIT S


I.1
Index
 A 
 ABC,  132 
 Aberman, Rich,  105 
 AbsolutePoker.com,  145 
 Acceptable use policy (AUP),  146, 147 
 Access,  A.14 
 Accessibility,  183–184 
 Accounting,  10–12 
 Accounting and finance ERP components,  323 
 Accuracy,  185 
 Actionly.com,  43–44 
 Active RFID tags,  275 
 Adams, Douglas,  41 
 Adaptive computer devices,  A.8 
 Adidas,  338 
 Administrator access,  184 
 Adobe,  35, A.14 
 Advanced encryption standard (AES),  159 
 Advanced Micro Devices (AMD),  A.2 
 Adware,  150, 153–154 
 AdWords,  186 
 AES (advanced encryption standard),  159 
 Affiliate programs,  101 
 Africa,  293–294 
 Agent-based modeling,  62–63 
 Agile methodologies (software development), 
 352–353 
 Agile MIS infrastructure,  177, 183–185 
 AI (artificial intelligence),  60–64 
 Air Force Cyber Command,  165 
 Airspan Networks,  251 
 Albertson's,  20 
 Alibi Network,  363 
 Altec Lansing Technologies,  30 
 Altman, Eli,  97  
 ALU (arithmetic-logic unit),  A.2–A.3  
 Amazon EC2 (Elastic Compute Cloud),  197  
 Amazon Web Services (AWS),  199  
 Amazon.com,  5, 20, 53, 63, 73, 98, 103, 104, 111, 
113, 117, 126–127, 192, 194, 299, 307, 314   
 AMD (Advanced Micro Devices),  A.2 
 American Dairy Inc.,  333 
 American Express,  97, 275 
 American Family Immigration History Center,  223  
 Analysis phase (SDLC),  346 
 Analytical CRM,  312 
 Analytical information,  55, 214–216 
 Analytics,  40 
 Anderson, Chris,  98, 346 
 Anderson, Tom,  5 
 Ansari X,  89 
 Anti-spam policy,  148 
 Anticybersquatting Consumer Protection Act 
(1999),  97 
 Antivirus software,  160 
 AOL,  106, 255 
 API (application programming interface),  117 
 Apple Computer Inc.,  16–17, 23, 30–32, 95, 
118, 185, 187, 193, 204, 271 
 Apple TV,  263 
 Appleton Learning,  33 
 Applets,  96 
 Appleyard, David,  166 
 Appliance,  A.9 
 Application programming interface (API),  117 
 Application service provider license,  A.14 
 Application software,  A.13–A.14 
 Aristotle,  108 
 Arithmetic-logic unit (ALU),  A.2–A.3 
 ARPANET,  95–96 
 Artificial intelligence (AI),  60–64 
 As-Is process models,  66, 68, 70 
 Asia,  364 
 Asset tracking,  275 
 Associate programs,  101 
 Association detection,  235–236 
 Asynchronous communications,  113 
 AT&T,  106, 142, 254, 255, 257, 271, 290, A.11 
 AT&T Wireless,  142 
 Attributes,  221, C.2–C.3 
 Audacity,  133 
 Audi,  38 
 Augmented reality,  63 
 AUP (acceptable use policy),  146, 147 
 Authentication,  157 
 Authorization,  157 
 Automatic vehicle location (AVL),  275–276 
 Automation,  72–73 
 AutoTrader.com,  97 
 Availability,  184–185 
 Avatar (film),  5 
 AVL (automatic vehicle location),  275–276 
 AWS (Amazon Web Services),  199 
 Axelbank, Gary,  77 
 B 
 BabyCare,  333 
 Back-office processes,  64 
 Back orders,  307 
 Backdoor programs,  154 
 Background Draw-a-Secret (BDAS),  158 
 Backup,  178 
 Backup and recovery plan,  178, 179, 183 
 Backward integration,  300, 301 
 Balanced scorecard,  325 
 Bandwidth,  255–256 
 Banner ad,  101 
 Bar code scanner,  A.7 
 Barclays Bank,  312 
 Barker, Brandee,  125 
 Barn Raisers,  82 
 Barnes & Noble,  103 
 BBN Technologies,  295 
 BCP (business continuity planning),  181 
 BDAS (Background Draw-a-Secret),  158 
 BEA,  370 
 Beckham, David,  40 
 Behavioral grouping,  82 
 Belkin,  30 
 Benchmarking,  52–53 
 Benchmarks,  52–53 
 Bentium,  165 
 Berlin Wall,  4 
 Berners-Lee, Tim,   120, 346 
 Best Buy,  232, 337 
 Bezos, Jeffrey,  5, 126–127, 346 
 BI;  see Business intelligence 
 Bianchini, Gina,  126 
 Bike-sharing programs,  287–288 
 Binary digit,  256 
 Biometrics,  159 
 Bit,  256 
 Bit rate,  256 
 BitTorrent,  171, 259 
 Bizrate.com,  86, 104 
 Black-hat hackers,  153 
 BlackBerrys,  269, 271 
 Blair, Tony,  40 
 Blockbuster,  34, 99 
 Blogs and blogging,  116–117, 132 
 Bloomberg,  17 , 118 
 Bloomberg Businessweek,  164 
 Bloomberg.com,  104 
 Bluetooth,  268 
 Bookmarking,  114, 115 
 Booz Allen Hamilton,  164 
 The Bork Bill,  144  
 Boston College,  134 
 Boston Digital Bridge Foundation,  266 
 Botti, Chris,  289 
 Bottlenecks,  73 
 Boxee,  263 
 Box.net,  205, 245 
 BPL (broadband over power line),  257, 258 
 BPM (business process management) 
systems,  77 
 BPR (business process reengineering),  75–76 
 Bradesco,  291 
 Brainstorming,  345–346 
 Brand Keys,  125 
 Branson, Richard,  346 
 Brazil,  291, A.12 
 Brick-and-mortar business,  103 
 Brin, Sergey,  40, 346 
 Broad business strategies,  22 
 Broadband,  256, 289 
 Broadband modem,  257 
 Broadband over power line (BPL),  257, 258 
 Browser software,  A.14 
 B2B (business-to-business),  102 
 B2C (business-to-consumer),  102 
 Buffalo, New York, Police Dept.,  167 
 IN DEX 

Index
I.2
 Cisco,  53, 95, 97 
 Citibank,  61, 100 
 CitySense,  295 
 CKO (chief knowledge officer),  15 
 Clayton, Glenn,  33 
 Clearwire,  270 
 Clerico, Bill,  105 
 Click-and-mortar business,  103 
 Click-fraud,  145 
 Click performance,  44 
 Click-through,  101 
 Click-to-talk,  316 
 Clickstream data,  101–102, 150 
 Client,  176, B.4 
 Client/server networks,  B.4 
 Climate change,  9 
 Clinton, Bill,  346 
 Clock speed,  A.4 
 Cloud bursting,  199 
 Cloud computing,  174–175, 195–199, 263 
 Cloud fabric,  196 
 Cloud fabric controller,  196 
 Cluster analysis,  234–235 
 CMS (content management systems),  108 
 CNN.com,  104 
 Coaxial cable,  B.8–B.9 
 COBIT (control objects for information and 
related technology),  348 
 Codd, Edgar (E. F.),  C.7 
 Cohen, Bram,  171 
 Cold sites,  180 
 Collaboration,  111–113 
 Collaboration systems,  111 
 Collaborative demand planning,  308 
 Collaborative engineering,  308 
 Collective intelligence,  111–112 
 College Hunks Hauling Junk,  58 
 Columbus, Christopher,  3 
 Comcast,  106, 255, 259, 262 
 Communication devices,  A.3, A.9 
 Communication software,  A.14 
 Communications, asynchronous vs. 
synchronous ,  113 
 Communications Assistance for Law 
Enforcement Act (1994),  144 
 Community cloud,  199 
 Compact disk-read-only memory (CD-ROM) 
drives,  A.6–A.7 
 Compact disk-read-write (CD-RW) drives,  A.6 
 Competitive advantages,  15–17, 365 
 Competitive analysis,  44 
 Competitive click-fraud,  145  
 Competitive intelligence,  17 
 Complex instruction set computer (CISC) 
chips,  A.3 
 Composite entities,  C.6 
 Computer-aided software engineering (CASE),  348 
 Computer Fraud and Abuse Act (1986),  144 
 Computers,  187 
 categories of,  A.9–A.12 
 defined,  A.2 
 Computerworld,  34 
 Conde Nast,  134 
 Business strategy,  15–27 
 choosing business focus,  22–23 
 generic,  22–23 
 identifying competitive advantages,  15–17 
 Porter's Five Forces Model,  18–21 
 value chain analysis,  23–27 
 Business-to-business (B2B),  102 
 Business-to-consumer (B2C),  102 
 BusinessWeek,  17 , 164, 165 
 Buyer power,  18–19, 21 
 Byrd, Robert,  40 
 C 
 Cable,  257, A.10, B.3, B.8–B.9 
 Cable & Wireless Worldwide,  255 
 Cable Communications Act (1984),  144 
 Cable modems,  257 
 Cache memory,  A.5 
 Call centers,  315 
 Call scripting systems,  316 
 Campaign management systems,  314 
 CAN-Spam Act (2003),  144 
 Canada,  261 
 Canadian Broadcasting Company (CBC),  149 
 Capacity,  186 
 Capacity planning,  186 
 Carbon emissions,  189 
 Cardinalities,  C.6, C.7 
 Carfax,  102 
 Carnegie Mellon University,  89 
 Carnivore,  267 
 Cartography,  276 
 CASE (computer-aided software engineering),  348 
 CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Company),  149 
 CBS,  132 
 CD-ROM (compact disk-read-only memory) 
drives,  A.6–A.7 
 CD-RW (compact disk-read-write) drives,  A.6 
 Celebrities, social media used by,  125 
 Cell phones,  206, A.14 
 Cellular communication systems,  271–272 
 Center for American Progress,  9 
 Central processing unit (CPU),  A.2–A.4 
 Certificate authority,  159 
 Change agent,  345 
 Charles Schwab,  95 
 Charlesschwab.com,  104 
 Chen, Peter,  C.4 
 Chief information officer (CIO),  15 
 Chief knowledge officer (CKO),  15 
 Chief privacy officer (CPO),  15 
 Chief security officer (CSO),  15 
 Chief technology officer (CTO),  15 
 China,  4, 6, 17, 39, 40, 147, 165, 168, 332–334, 
363, 364, A.12  
 China Mengniu Dairy,  333 
 Chip line width,  A.4 
 Chipless RFID tags,  275 
 Christensen, Clayton M.,  94 
 Cicero,  170 
 CinemaNow,  263 
 CIO (chief information officer),  15 
 CISC (complex instruction set computer) chips,  A.3 
 Bugs,  349 
 Bullwhip effect,  305–306 
 Burton, Tim,  314  
 Bus topology,  B.5 
 Bus width,  A.4 
 Bush, George W.,   82 
 Business 2.0;  see Web 2.0 (Business 2.0) 
 Business continuity planning (BCP),  181 
 Business-critical integrity constraints,  224 
 Business driven ethics and security, 143; 
 see also Ethics; Information security 
 domain squatting/cyber squatting,  97 
 employee information theft,  57 
 ewaste,  188–189 
 at Facebook,  225 
 geoblogging,  282 
 inappropriate data handling,  10 
 planning for the unexpected,  354 
 Business driven MIS,  5–15 
 at Apple,  30–31 
 business intelligence,  8, 10 
 car black box hacking,  270 
 classic car company,  321 
 data,  6–8 
 data manipulation,  9 
 and departmental companies,  11–12 
 disaster recovery,  184 
 at Google,  186 
 Google Print Library Project,  361 
 information,  8  
 and information age,  5–10 
 and Jobs' obituary,  118 
 knowledge,  10 
 at  Real People magazine,  218 
 streamlining email,  74 
 Business-facing processes,  64 
 Business focus, choosing,  22–23 
 Business impact analysis,  182 
 Business intelligence (BI),  6, 8, 10, 227–229 
 data marts,  228–231 
 data mining,  231–232, 234–235 
 data warehousing,  227–228 
 ERP components for,  324 
 supporting decisions with,  237–238 
 visual,  238–239 
 Business intelligence dashboards,  239 
 Business models: 
 defined,  101 
 for ebusiness,   101–105 
 Business process improvement,  72–73 
 Business process management (BPM) 
systems,  77 
 Business process model,  66 
 Business process modeling,  66–71 
 Business process reengineering (BPR), 
 75–76 
 Business processes,  23, 64–77 
 evaluating,  64–66 
 leveraging,  76, 77 
 MIS for improving,  71–77 
 models,  66–71 
 Business requirements,  346, 356, 371–372 
 Business rules,  C.3 

I.3
Index
 operational,  54–56 
 strategic,  56–60 
 Decision support systems (DSSs),  55–60 
 Decryption,  159 
 Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency 
(DARPA),  95, 165 
 Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency 
(DARPA) Grand Challenge,  88–89 
 Dell, Michael,  5, 126 
 Dell Computers,  5, 38, 95, 99, 208, 334, 338, 
A.12, A.14 
 Delta Produce,  33  
 Demand planning systems,  306 
 Denial-of-service attack (DoS),  154 
 Denver B-cycle,  287–288 
 Denver International Airport (DIA),  370 
 Departmental companies,  11–12 
 Dependency,  361 
 Design phase (SDLC),  348 
 Desktop computers,  A.11 
 Desktop publishing software,  A.14 
 Desmos,  33 
 Development phase (SDLC),  348 
 DeWolfe, Chris,  5 
 DIA (Denver International Airport),  370 
 Dial-up access,  257, A.10 
 Diamandis, Peter,  346 
 Dickerson, Ryan,  222 
 Differentiation,  22  
 Diffie, Whitfield,  129–130 
 Digg,  113, 133 
 Digital certificates,  159–160 
 Digital Darwinism,  94 
 Digital dashboards,  59–60 
 designing,  88 
 iGoogle,  85 
 Digital divide,  266  
 Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC),  95, B.6 
 Digital rights management,  141 
 Digital subscriber line (DSL),  256–257, A.10 
 Digital video disk (DVD),  A.6–A.7 
 Digital video disk-read/write (DVD-RW),  A.6 
 Ding-A-Ling,  294 
 Dionisopoulos, Kosta,  33 
 Disaster recovery cost curve,  180 
 Disaster recovery plans,  179–180, 183 
 Discovery prototyping,  352 
 Disintermediation,  99 
 Disk image software for data recovery,  A.13 
 Disk optimization software,  A.13 
 Disruptive technologies,  94–97 
 Distributed denial-of-service attack (DDoS),  154 
 DivX,  263 
 DNS (domain name system),  259–260, 291 
 DNS cache poisoning,  291 
 DoD;  see U.S. Department of Defense 
 Dole Organic,  118 
 Domain name hosting (web hosting),  96 
 Domain name system (DNS),  259–260, 291 
 Domain squatting,  97 
 Domino's Pizza,  148 
 Dong Lizhong,  332–333 
 DoS (denial-of-service attack),  154 
 Customer satisfaction,  50, 52 
 Customreceipts.com,  363 
 Cyber squatting,  97 
 Cyberbullying,  145 
 Cybermediation,  100 
 Cybersyndrome.3322.org,  164–165 
 Cyberterrorism,  160 
 Cyberterrorists,  153 
 Cyberwar,  160 
 Cycle time,  74 
 D 
 DARPA (Defense Advanced Research Projects 
Agency),  95, 165 
 DARPA Grand Challenge,  88–89 
 Data,  6–7 
 for business driven MIS,  6–8 
 for departments,  12 
 inappropriate data handling,  10 
 manipulating,  9 
 for political micro-targeting,  81–82 
 in social media sector,  43 
 Data centers,  193–195 
 Data dictionary,  220 
 Data-driven websites,  224–227 
 Data element,  220 
 Data field,  220 
 Data governance,  219 
 Data hosting services,  245 
 Data inconsistency,  216 
 Data integrity issues,  216–217 
 Data management software,  A.14 
 Data marts,  228–231 
 Data mining,  231–232, 234–235, 243–244, 
246–247 
 Data-mining tools,  232 
 Data models,  220, C.2 
 Data quality audits,  230 
 Data rate,  256 
 Data redundancy,  223 
 Data visualization,  239, 242–243 
 Data warehouses,  227–229, 247 
 Database management system (DBMS), 
219, C.1;  see also Relational database 
management systems 
 Databases,  219 
 defined,  C.1 
 designing,  C.1–C.9 
 illegal access to,  244 
 relational,  C.1–C.3 
 Davis, Todd,  161 
 DBMS (database management system),  219, C.1 
 DCS1000,  267 
 DDoS (distributed denial-of-service attack),  154 
 Death March (Edward Yourdon),  366 
 DEC (Digital Equipment Corporation),  95, B.6 
 Decision making,  43–64 
 analytics for,  40 
 and artificial intelligence,  60–64 
 business intelligence support for,  236–238 
 challenges in,  45–48 
 managerial,  55–56 
 metrics for,  48–53 
 Confidentiality,  141, 365 
 Connectivity services, 120;  see also Networks 
 Consolidation,  60 
 Consumer protection, with ebusiness,  108, 109 
 Consumer-to-business (C2B),  102, 103 
 Consumer-to-consumer (C2C),  102, 103 
 Contact centers,  315, 316 
 Contact management CRM systems,  315 
 Content creator,  224 
 Content editor,  224 
 Content filtering,  159 
 Content management systems (CMS),  108 
 Content providers,  104 
 Contracts, outsourcing,  365 
 Control objects for information and related 
technology (COBIT),  348 
 Control panel,  A.12 
 Control unit,  A.2–A.3 
 Convergence, network,  260–262 
 Conversion,  345 
 Conversion rates,  52 
 Cookies,  101, 150 
 Copyright,  119, 141, 361 
 Core business processes,  64, 66 
 Core ERP components,  320, 322–324 
 Cornwall, Duchess of,  40 
 Corporate social responsibility,  188 
 Corrective maintenance,  350 
 Cost leadership,  22 
 Counterfeit software,  141 
 Couric, Katie,  125 
 Course management software,  A.14 
 CPO (chief privacy officer),  15 
 CPU (central processing unit),  A.2–A.4 
 Crackers,  153 
 Craigslist,  113 
 Crash-proof software,  A.13 
 Credit card data,  220 
 Critical path,  361 
 Critical success factors (CSFs),  49–50 
 CRM;  see Customer relationship management 
 CRM analysis technologies,  311 
 CRM predicting technologies,  311 
 CRM reporting technologies,  311 
 Croom, Charles E.,  164–165 
 Cross-selling,  314 
 Crowdsourcing,  112–113 
 Cryptography,  159 
 CSFs (critical success factors),  49–50 
 CSO (chief security officer),  15 
 CTO (chief technology officer),  15 
 C2B (consumer-to-business),  102, 103 
 C2C (consumer-to-consumer),  102, 103 
 Cubes (data),  229–230 
 Customer-facing processes,  64 
 Customer loyalty,  331–332 
 Customer order cycle time,  307 
 Customer relationship management (CRM), 
 309–317 
 benefits of,  311–317 
 challenges of,  317–318 
 ERP components for,  324 
 future of,  319, 327–328 

Index
I.4
 Etymotic Research,  30 
 Eudora,  A.14 
 Europe,  364 
 Ewaste,  188–189, 203, 208 
 Exabyte (EB),  A.6 
 Executive information system (EIS),  56–57, 59 
 Expedia.com,  97 
 Expert systems,  61 
 Explicit knowledge,  112 
 Extended ERP components,  320, 322, 324–325 
 Extraction, transformation, and loading (ETL), 
 228–229 
 Extranets,  264, 265 
 Extreme programming (XP) methodology,  353 
 ExxonMobil,  335 
 F 
 Facebook,  6, 25, 113, 125, 128–129, 149, 190, 
214, 225, 267, 277 
 Facts,  5 
 Failback,  178 
 Failover,  178 
 Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions 
Act (2003),  144 
 Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA),  142 
 Family Education Rights and Privacy 
Act (1974),  144 
 FastEthernet,  B.6 
 Fault tolerance,  178 
 FBI (Federal Bureau of Investigation), 
 165–166, 267 
 FCC;  see Federal Communications Commission 
 FCRA (Fair Credit Reporting Act),  142 
 Feasibility,  355 
 Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), 
 165–166, 267 
 Federal Communications Commission (FCC), 
 259, 262, 289 
 FedEx (Federal Express),  17, 66, 74, 316 
 Feedback,  14 
 Fiber-optic cable,  B.8–B.9 
 Fidelity,  104 
 Fields,  C.7 
 50 Cent,  126 
 File and data recovery software,  A.13 
 File Transfer Protocol (FTP),  B.8 
 Finance,  11–12 
 Financial metrics,  52 
 Finkelstein, Clive,  C.4 
 Firestone Tire Company,  334  
 Firewalls,  160 
 Firm infrastructure,  24 
 First-mover advantage,  17 
 FirstGov.gov,  120, 121 
 Five Forces Model;  see Porter's Five Forces 
Model 
 Flash memory,  A.5 
 Flexibility,  185 
 Flickr,  97, 104, 111, 114, 117, 133 
 Focused business strategies,   22–23 
 Folksonomy,  114, 115 
 Ford,  334 
 Forecasts,  236 
 Embedded operating system,  A.12 
 Emergency,  181 
 Emergency Alert System,  182 
 Emergency notification services,  182 
 Emergency preparedness,  181 
 Emerson,  213 
 Emotion-detection software,  316 
 Employee monitoring policy,  149–151 
 Employee relationship management (ERM),  319 
 Encrypt data software,  A.13 
 Encryption,  159 
 Energy consumption,  189–190 
 English, Paul,  293–294 
 Enterprise application integration (EAI),  301 
 Enterprise application integration (EAI) 
middleware ,  301 
 Enterprise architect,  176 
 Enterprise MIS,  298–328, 341–365 
 customer relationship management, 
 309–317 
 developing software,  345–361 
 enterprise resource planning,  319–329 
 future of,  327–328 
 outsourcing projects,  361–365 
 project planning,  360–361 
 supply chain management,  302–308 
 and systems development life cycle, 
 345–350 
 Enterprise Rent-A-Car,  337 
 Enterprise resource planning (ERP),  319–329 
 benefits of,  320, 322–324 
 challenges of,  327 
 future of,  327–328 
 Enterprise systems,  301 
 Entities,  221, C.2 
 Entity-relationship diagrams (ERDs),  C.2, C.4–C.7 
 Entry barriers,  20 
 Epolicies,  145 
 Eprocurement,  324–325 
 Equifax,  142 
 ERDs (entity-relationship diagrams),  C.2, C.4–C.7 
 ERM (employee relationship management),  319 
 ERP;  see Enterprise resource planning 
 Eshops,  102, 103 
 Estes, Matthew,  333 
 Estimated time enroute (ETE),  276 
 Estimated time of arrival (ETA),  276 
 Estores,  102, 103 
 ETA (estimated time of arrival),  276 
 Etailers,  102, 103 
 ETE (estimated time enroute),  276 
 Ethernet,  B.6 
 Ethical computer use policy,  145, 146 
 Ethics, 141–150;  see also Business driven 
ethics and security 
 developing information management policies , 
 145–150 
 information ethics,  141–145 
 setting boundaries,  170–171 
 unethical websites,  363 
 ETL (extraction, transformation, and loading), 
 228–229 
 Etrade,  104 
 Dot-com,  102 
 Downtime,  151–153 
 DPW (Dubai Ports World),  334 
 Dr Pepper/ Seven-Up Inc.,  278 
 DreamWorks Animation,  191 
 Drill-down,  60 
 Drucker, Peter,  48, 50 
 DSL (digital subscriber line),  256–257, A.10 
 DSSs (decision support systems),  55–60 
 Du Yanjun,  333 
 Dual boot,  A.12 
 Dubai Ports World (DPW),  334 
 Dumpster diving,  155 
 DVD (digital video disk),  A.6–A.7 
 DVD-ROM drives,  A.6 
 DVD-RW (digital video disk-read/write),  A.6 
 Dynamic catalog,  224 
 Dynamic information,  224 
 Dynamic scaling,  197 
 E 
 E-espionage,  164–165 
 E-Pass,  275 
 EAI (enterprise application integration),  301 
 EAI (enterprise application integration) 
middleware ,  301 
 Earthlink,  106, 255 
 EB (exabyte),  A.6  
 eBay,  52, 98, 103, 104, 111, 117, 166 
 Ebooks,  A.9–A.10 
 Ebusiness,  94–109 
 advantages of,  98–101 
 business models for,  101–105 
 challenges of,  108–109 
 disruptive technologies and,  94–97 
 ERP components for,  324–325 
 MIS tools for,  106–108 
 Ebusiness model,  101–105 
 EC2 (Elastic Compute Cloud),  197 
 Ecommerce,  96 
 Economic Policy Institute,  17 
 Edge matching,  276 
 EDI (electronic data interchange),  305 
 Ediscovery,  145 
 Edmunds,  104 
 Effectiveness: 
 with ebusiness,  100–102 
 MIS metrics,  50–53 
 Efficiency MIS metrics,  50–53 
 Egovernment,  120, 121 
 802.11 (Wi-Fi standard),  269 
 EIS (executive information system),  56–57, 59 
 Elastic Compute Cloud (Amazon EC2),  197 
 Electronic Communications Privacy 
Act (1986),   144 
 Electronic data interchange (EDI),  305 
 Electronic discovery,  145 
 Electronic waste;  see Ewaste 
 Elevation of privilege,  155 
 Elogistics,  324 
 Email,  106 
 Email privacy policy,  147–148 
 Email software,  A.14 

I.5
Index
 Hotmail,  101 
 Hotspots,  268 
 Hsieh, Tony,  298 
 HTC EVO 4G phones,  292 
 HTML (hypertext markup language),  96 
 HTPPS (secure hypertext transfer protocol),  266 
 HTTP (hypertext transfer protocol),  96, B.8 
 Hub (switch or router),  B.3 
 Hulu,  259 
 Human resource management,  24 
 Human resources,  11–12 
 Human resources ERP components,  324 
 Hummer,  38 
 A Hundred Monkeys,  97 
 Hunt, Corrine,  203 
 Hybrid cloud,  199 
 Hybrid topology,  B.5 
 Hypertext markup language (HTML),  96 
 Hypertext transfer protocol (HTTP),  96, B.8 
 Hyundai,  38 
 I 
 IaaS (Infrastructure as a Service),  197 
 IBM,  63–64, 95, 99, 132, 353, 362, A.12 
 ICANN (Internet Corporation for 
Assigning),  260 
 Identified visitors,  102 
 Identity theft,  156–157, 167 
 Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence 
Act (1998),  144 
 IDS (intrusion detection software),  160–161 
 iGoogle,  85 
 IKEA,  134 
 IMing (instant messaging),  106–107 
 Implementation phase (SDLC),  349 
 Inbound logistics,  23 
 Incident management,  182 
 Incident records,  182 
 Incidents,  182 
 India,  3, 4, 39, 164, 332, 363–364 
 Influencers, finding,  44 
 Infographics (information graphics),  211–212, 
238–239 
 Infomediaries,  104 
 Information,  6–8 
 analytical,  55 
 for business driven MIS,  7–8 
 quality of,  214–219 
 transactional,  54 
 Information accuracy,  52 
 Information age,  5–10 
 Information architecture,  108 
 Information cleansing,  230–232 
 Information compliance,  144–145 
 Information ethics,  141–145 
 Information governance,  144, 219 
 Information granularity,  214, 215 
 Information graphics (infographics),  211–212, 
238–239 
 Information inconsistency,  216 
 Information integrity,  224 
 Information integrity issues,  216, 217 
 Information management,  144 
 Goodall, Jane,  282 
 Goods,  12, 13 
 Goodwill Industries International,  208 
 Google,  31, 40, 85, 86, 103–104, 117, 125, 
147, 185, 186, 192–194, 198, 203–204, 
235, 259, 263, 288, 291, 361 
 Google Analytics,  43, 44 
 Google Cloud Connect,  199 
 Google Dashboard,  235 
 Google Earth,  277, 282 
 Google Latitude,  288 
 Google Maps,  288, 291 
 Google Print Library Project,  361 
 Gore, Al,  41, 118 
 Gowalla,  277 
 GPS (global positioning systems),  275–276 
 Granularity,  57 
 Great Britain,  267 
 Green MIS,  187 
 Grid computing,  189–192 
 Griffin Technology,  30 
 Groupware,  A.14 
 The Guardian,  242 
 H 
 Hackers,  153, 165–166 
 Hactivists,  153 
 Handheld computers,  A.11 
 Hard drives,  A.6 
 Hardware,  176, A.1–A.12 
 central processing unit,  A.2–A.4 
 communication devices,  A.9 
 computer categories,  A.9–A.12 
 input devices,  A.7–A.8 
 output devices,  A.8–A.9 
 primary storage,  A.4–A.5 
 secondary storage,  A.5–A.7 
 Hardware key logger,  150 
 Harley-Davidson,  309 
 Harley's Owners Group (HOG),  309 
 Harvard Business School,  325 
 Harvard University,  295, 361 
 Health Insurance Portability and Accountability 
Act (HIPAA, 1996),  144 
 Help desk,  349 
 Hernandez-Rebollar, Jose L.,  A.9 
 Hewlett-Packard,  53, 95, 150, A.12 
 High availability,  184 
 High-speed Internet cable connections,  257 
 HIPAA (Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act, 1996),  144 
 Hitler,  40 
 Hits,  102 
 Hoaxes,  155 
 HOG (Harley's Owners Group),  309 
 Hogan, Hulk,  335 
 Holden, Jeff,  31 
 Home Depot,  95 
 Homeland Security Act (2002),  144 
 Hosting,  244 
 Hot, Flat, and Crowded (Friedman),  34 
 Hot sites,  180 
 Hotels.com,  212 
 Foreign key,  222, C.9 
 Forrester Research,  97 
 Fortune magazine,  34 
 48 Hour Magazine,  130 
 Forward integration,  300, 301 
 Foursquare,  133, 277, 289 
 Fourth-generation languages (4GL),  349 
 France,  332 
 Freedom of Information Act (1967, 1975, 1994, 
1998),  144 
 Friedman, Nick,  58 
 Friedman, Thomas,  3–4, 34, 39–40 
 Frito-Lay,  17, A.2 
 Front-office processes,  64 
 FTP (File Transfer Protocol),  B.8 
 Fuzzy logic,  62 
 G 
 Gantt chart,  361, 362 
 The Gap,  63, 103 
 Gates, Bill,  5, 6, 41, 118, 346 
 GB (gigabyte),  A.5, A.6 
 Genachowski, Julius,  289 
 General Motors Corporation,  89, 95, 276, A.11 
 Generic business strategies,  22–23 
 Genetic algorithms,  62 
 Geoblogging,  282 
 Geocache,  276 
 Geocoding,  276 
 Geocoin,  276 
 Geographic information,  276 
 Geographic information system (GIS),  276–277 
 George Air Force Base (California),  89 
 Geospatial data,  276 
 Germanotta, Stefani Joanne Angelina,  5 
 Germany,  333, 368 
 Gerson, Dan,  251 
 GHz (gigahertz),  A.3 
 Gigabit Ethernet,  B.6 
 Gigabyte (GB),  A.5, A.6 
 Gigahertz (GHz),  A.3 
 GIS (geographic information system),  276–277 
 GIS map automation,  276 
 Gladwell, Malcolm,  41, 346 
 Global positioning systems (GPS),  275–276 
 Globalization,  3–4 
 Barclays Bank,  312 
 competitive landscape,  17 
 cultural blunders,  365 
 floating data centers,  194 
 global databases,  233 
 Google's China operations,  147 
 iYogi.net help desk,  53 
 mobile phones,  273 
 nonprofits,  110 
 Goal-seeking analysis,  56 
 Godin, Seth,  41, 346 
 Goebel, Jennifer,  294 
 Goldman, Eric,  128 
 Goldman Sachs,  244 
 Gombe National Park,  282 
 Gomez.com,  86 
 Good Charlotte,  126 

Index
I.6
 Kiva,  110 
 Kiva Mobile Fulfillment System (Kiva MFS),  307 
 Kiva Systems,  63 
 KM (knowledge management),  111 
 KMS (knowledge management system),  111 
 Knight, Philip,  345 
 Knowledge,  6, 10 
 for business driven MIS,  10 
 explicit and tacit,  112 
 Knowledge management (KM),  111 
 Knowledge management system (KMS),  111 
 Knowledge workers,  10, 112 
 Koblin, Aaron,  242 
 Kodak,  134 
 KPIs (key performance indicators),  49–51 
 KPMG,  333 
 Kroger,  20 
 Kurtz, Paul B.,  164 
 Kutcher, Ashton,  125 
 L 
 Lady Gaga,  5 
 LANs;  see Local area networks 
 Laptop computers,  A.11 
 Larking, Daniel,  165 
 Latitude,  276 
 LBS;  see Location-based services 
 Legacy systems,  301, 345 
 Legend, John,  126 
 Lending Tree,  97, 243 
 Level3,  254 
 Levi Strauss,  100 
 Levie, Aaron,  205 
 Levitt, Steven,  41, 346 
 LifeLock,  161 
 Lin, Alfred,  298 
 Lin, John,  30 
 LindeX,  83 
 LinkedIn,  114, 126, 149 
 LinkExchange,  298 
 Linux,  A.12, A.13 
 List generators,  313 
 Liu, Roger,  333 
 Live Help,  100 
 Local area networks (LANs),  254, 255, B.2, B.3 
 Location-based services (LBS),  277, 279, 283–284 
 Logical view (databases),  223 
 Logistics, inbound and outbound,  23 
 Long tail,  98, 99 
 Longitude,  276 
 Loopt,  277 
 Lord, William T.,  165 
 Lotus,  A.14 
 Lowermybills.com,  243 
 Loyalty programs,  19 
 Luberoff, Eli,  33 
 Lulu.com,  97, 99–100 
 Luo Yunbo,  332 
 Lutz, Bob,  116 
 M 
 M (megabyte),  A.5, A.6 
 Mac OS X,  A.13 
 Internet Corporation for Assigning Names and 
Numbers (ICANN),  260 
 Internet Crime Complaint Center,  165 
 Internet protocol (IP),  B.7 
 Internet Protocol TV (IPTV),  262, 263 
 Internet protocol version 6 (IPv6),  B.7–B.8 
 Internet service providers (ISPs),  106, 290 
 Internet use policy,  146–147 
 Interoperability,  B.6 
 Intranets,  263–264 
 Intrusion detection software (IDS),  160–161 
 Intuit,  95 
 Inventory cycle time,  307 
 Inventory turnover,  307 
 IP (Internet protocol),  B.7 
 iPad,  23, 31, 269 
 iPhones,  31, 269, 271, 280 
 iPods,  30–31, 187, 294 
 Ipreo,  244 
 IPTV (Internet Protocol TV),  262, 263 
 IPv6 (Internet protocol version 6),  B.7–B.8 
 Ireland,  364 
 Ironman Triathlon World Championship,  251–252 
 ISO,  204 
 ISPs (Internet service providers),  106, 290 
 Israel,  364 
 Iterative development,  352–353 
 iTunes,  204, 259 
 i2,  327, 329, 345 
 iYogi.net,  53 
 J 
 Jackson, Warren,  293 
 Jagger, Mick,  335 
 James, Josh,  35 
 Jane Goodall Institute,  282 
 JetBlue Airways,  3, 38, 337 
 Jobs, Steve,  16, 41, 118, 289 
 Johnson, Derek,  25 
 Johnson & Johnson,  95 
 JoinAfrica,  293–294 
 Jordan, Chris,  242 
 Joystick,  A.7 
 K 
 Kaplan, Robert,  325 
 Karmaloop.com,  133 
 Karp, David,  125, 126 
 Kate Spade,  30 
 Kayak.com,  293 
 KB (kilobyte),  A.6 
 Kelkoo,  100 
 Kennedy, John F.,  40, 119 
 Kennedy, Robert F.,  40, 119 
 Kerin, Dimitar,  130 
 Key logger software,  150 
 Key performance indicators (KPIs),  49–51 
 Key trapper software,  150 
 Keyboard,  A.7 
 Kia,  38 
 Kill switch,  360 
 Kilobyte (KB),  A.6 
 Kilowatt Sport input device,  A.7, A.8 
 Information management policies,  145–150 
 acceptable use,  146, 147 
 email privacy,  147–148 
 ethical computer use,  145–146 
 information privacy,  146 
 social media,  148–149 
 workplace monitoring,  149–150 
 Information MIS infrastructure,  177–182 
 Information privacy policy,  146 
 Information property,  144 
 Information reach,  98 
 Information richness,  98 
 Information secrecy,  156 
 Information security, 151–161;  see also 
Business driven ethics and security 
 databases,  224 
 e-espionage,  164–165 
 for networks,  266–267 
 and Oklahoma state database,  347 
 people for,  155 
 protecting intellectual assets,  151–154 
 technology for,  156–160 
 Information security plan,  155 
 Information security policies,  155 
 Information technology monitoring,  150 
 Information theft, 57, 280;  see also  
Identity theft  
 Information vandalism,  119 
 Informing,  238 
 Infosys,  364 
 Infrastructure: 
 firm,  24 
 MIS;  see MIS infrastructure 
 Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS),  197 
 In-house development,  4, 361 
 Inner Mongolia Yili Industrial Group,  333 
 Innovation: 
 emotion-detection software,  316 
 News Dots,  237 
 NFL crash pads,  281 
 password doodling,  158 
 robots,  63 
 Stamps.com,  21 
 unethical websites,  363 
 virtualization,  193 
 and Web 1.0 vs. 2.0,  113 
 The Innovator's Dilemma (Christensen),  94 
 Inovant,  146 
 Input devices,  A.3, A.7–A.8 
 Insiders,  155 
 In-sourcing,  4, 361 
 Instant messaging (IMing),  106–107 
 Intangible benefits,  355 
 Integrations,  300, 327–328 
 Integrity constraints,  224 
 Intel,  95, 132, 187, 263, 270, A.2, A.12, B.6 
 Intellectual assets, protecting,  151–154 
 Intellectual property,  141 
 Intelligent agents,  62 
 Intelligent systems,  60 
 Interactivity,  100  
 Intermediaries,  99 
 Internet,  95, 96 
 Internet cable connections,  257 

I.7
Index
 Nelson, Willie,  289 
 Nestlé,  218 
 Net neutrality,  259 
 NET Virtua,  291 
 Netflix Inc.,  5, 34, 97, 99, 104, 111, 143, 234, 
248, 259, 263, 336 
 Netscape,  4, 96, A.9, A.14 
 Network access points (NAPs),  254 
 Network access technologies,  255–257 
 Network convergence,  260–262 
 Network effect,  117 
 Network interface card (NIC),  B.3 
 Network operating system (NOS),  B.4 
 Network protocols,  258–260 
 Network providers,  254–255 
 Network topologies,  B.5 
 Network transmission media,  B.9–B.10 
 Network user license,  A.14 
 Networking, with Business 2.0, 113–115; 
 see also Social networking 
 Networks,  176, 253–267, B.1–B.5 
 access technologies,  255–257 
 architecture,  B.3–B.4 
 benefits of,  263–265 
 categories of,  254 
 challenges with,  266–267 
 convergence,  260–262 
 Ethernet,  B.6 
 network providers,  254–255 
 neural,  61–62, 86 
 protocols,  258–260, B.6 
 topology,  B.5 
 wireless,  267–280 
 NetZero,  106, 255 
 Neural networks,  61–62, 86 
 New England,  204 
 New York Public Library,  361 
 The New York Times,  242 
 News Corp.,  125 
 News Dots,  237 
 Nextel,  270 
 NFL (National Football League),  281 
 NIC (network interface card),  B.3 
 Nice Systems,  316 
 Niche markets,  98 
 NIIT,  364 
 Nike,  345 
 Ning,  125, 126 
 NIST (National Institute of Standards and 
Technology),  195 
 Nokia,  127, 134, 270, 283 
 Nonrepudiation,  146 
 Norton, David,  325 
 NOS (network operating system),  B.4 
 NSPs (national service providers),  254 
 NTT,  254 
 Nucleus Research,  88 
 Null-valued attributes,  C.3 
 O 
 Obama, Barack,  81–82, 125, 244 
 Obama administration,  125 
 Object-oriented languages,  349 
 Microblogging,  117 
 Microcomputers,  A.11 
 Microprocessors,  A.2 
 Microsoft,  5, 53, 63, 95, 96, 111, 117, 133–134, 
164, 192, 194, 208, 298, A.12, A.14 
 Microsoft Windows,  A.13 
 Middleware,  301 
 Milk contamination (China),  332–334 
 Minicomputers,  A.11 
 Minority Report (film),  169 
 MIS;  see Management information systems 
 MIS infrastructure,  173–195 
 agile,  177, 183–185 
 and the environment,  187–189 
 information,  177–182 
 sustainable,  177, 189–199 
 M:N (many-to-many relationship),  C.5–C.6 
 Mobile business,  121 
 benefits of,  278–280 
 challenges of,  280–284 
 Mobile technologies,  267, 282, 283 
 Model,  54 
 Modem,  256 
 Monroe College,  77 
 Moore, Gordon,  187–188 
 Moore's Law,  187 
 Moree, Stephen J.,  164 
 Mosaic,  A.9 
 Motorola,  132, 270, 271 
 Mouse,  A.7 
 Mozilla,  111 
 Mozy,  245 
 MS-DOS,  A.13 
 MSN.com,  104 
 Mulhern, John F. “Jack,”  164–165 
 Multi-tenancy,  196 
 Multi-valued attribute,  C.2–C.3 
 Multiagent systems,  62–63 
 Multitasking,  A.12 
 Murray, Bill,  365 
 Music Genome Project (MGP),  174 
 My Docs Online,  245 
 Mysimon.com,  86 
 MySpace,  5, 113, 125, 336 
 MySQL,  A.14 
 N 
 Nagel, Brian,  166 
 NAPs (network access points),  254 
 Napster,  16, 174, B.3 
 NASA,  A.11 
 National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration,  274 
 National Football League (NFL),  281 
 National Institute of Standards and Technology 
(NIST),  195 
 National Semiconductor,  66 
 National service providers (NSPs),  254 
 National Weather Service,  293 
 Nearshore outsourcing,  363 
 Needapresent.com,  A.9 
 Neeleman, David,  337 
 Neiman Marcus,  22 
 Macworld,  30 
 Magnetic medium,  A.6 
 Magnetic tape,  A.6 
 Mail bombs,  148 
 Mainframe computers,  A.11 
 Maintainability,  184, 185 
 Maintenance phase (SDLC),  350 
 Malicious code,  155, 165 
 Management information systems (MIS),  1, 12–14 
 business driven;  see Business driven MIS  
 as a department,  14 
 efficiency and effectiveness metrics,  50–53 
 to enhance DSS,  53–60 
 enterprise;  see Enterprise MIS 
 green,  187 
 to improve business processes,  71–77 
 sustainable, 187;  see also Sustainable MIS 
infrastructure  
 in value chain,  24 
 Managerial decisions,  46–49 
 Managerial level,  46 
 Managerial support systems,  55–56 
 Manchester Airport (England),  60 
 MANs;  see Metropolitan area networks 
 Mantovani, Andres,  166 
 Many-to-many relationship (M:N),  C.5–C.6 
 Mapping, 66;  see also  Business process 
modeling 
 Mapquest,  104 
 Marafatsos, Christos,  33 
 Marconi, Guglielmo,  267 
 Market basket analysis,  236 
 Market share,  49 
 Marketing,  11–12, 23, 313–315 
 Marketing campaign tracking,  44 
 Martin, James,  C.4 
 Mashup editors,  117–118 
 Mashups,  117–118 
 Mass customization,  98 
 Mass text messaging,  25 
 MasterCard,  61, 275 
 Matsushita,  60 
 MB (megabyte),  A.5, A.6 
 Mbusiness,  121 
 McCain, John,  82 
 McDonald's,  291–292, 294–295, 314 
 MCI,  254 
 Mcommerce,  121 
 Megabyte (MB, M, Meg),  A.5, A.6 
 Megahertz (MHz),  A.3 
 Memory cards,  A.5 
 Memory sticks,  A.5 
 Mercedes-Benz,  38 
 Merrill Lynch,  40 
 Metadata,  220 
 Methodology,  351 
 Metrics,  48–53 
 critical success factors,  49–50 
 efficiency and effectiveness,  50–53 
 key performance indicators,  49–51 
 Metropolitan area networks (MANs),  255, B.2, B.3 
 Mexico,  335 
 MGP (Music Genome Project),  174 
 MHz (megahertz),  A.3 

Index
I.8
 threat of substitute products/services in, 
 18–21 
 in value chain analysis,  25, 27 
 POS (point-of-sale),  A.7 
 Powergrid Fitness,  A.7 
 Presentation graphics software,  A.14 
 Preventive maintenance,  350 
 Preventive security software,   A.13 
 Priceline.com,  104 
 Primary key,  221–222, C.7–C.8 
 Primary storage,  A.3, A.4–A.5 
 Primary value activities,  23, 24 
 Privacy,  15, 141, 144, 147–148, 281–284 
 Privacy Act (1974),  144 
 Private cloud,  199 
 PRM (partner relationship management),  319 
 Procter & Gamble (P&G),  95, 303 
 Procurement,  24 
 Product differentiation,  20 
 Production,  13 
 Production and materials management ERP 
components,  324 
 Productivity,  13, 14 
 Program Evaluation and Review Technique 
(PERT) chart,  361 
 Programming software,  A.14  
 Progressive Insurance,  76 
 Project,  48, 346 
 Project management,  346, 355–359 
 Project Management Institute,  346 
 Project manager,  346 
 Project plan,  346, 360 
 Project planning,  359–361 
 Project planning diagrams,  359–361 
 Project scope,  346 
 Project stakeholders,  361 
 Protocols,  258, B.3, B.6 
 Prototypes,  353 
 Prototyping,  352 
 Proxy,  258 
 P2P (peer-to-peer) networks,  262, B.3 
 Public cloud,  199 
 Public key encryption (PKE),  159 
 Pure-play businesses,  103 
 Q 
 Q-Tip,  126 
 QBE (query-by-example) tool,  219–220 
 Quantum,  95 
 QuarkXpress,  A.14 
 Query-by-example (QBE) tool,  219–220 
 Qwest,  254, 257 
 R 
 Rackspace,  319 
 RAD (rapid application development) 
methodology ,  353 
 Radio-frequency identification (RFID),  274, 275, 
283–284 
 Random access memory (RAM),  A.4–A.5 
 Rapid application development (RAD) 
methodology ,  353 
 Passwords,  158, 281 
 Pay-per-call,  105 
 Pay-per-click,  105 
 Pay-per-conversion,  105 
 Payless,  23 
 PayPal,  4 
 PB (petabyte),  A.6 
 PC World,  40 
 PDA (personal digital assistant),  A.11 
 Peer-to-peer (P2P) networks,  262, B.3 
 Pelago Inc.,  31 
 Peng Yong,  165 
 Penn, BJ,  126 
 Pentagon,  164 
 People magazine,  125 
 Perform,  316 
 Performance,  186 
 Personal area networks (PANs),  268 
 Personal computers,  A.11 
 Personal digital assistant (PDA),  A.11 
 Personal information management (PIM) 
software ,  A.14 
 Personalization,  98, 316–317 
 PERT (Program Evaluation and Review 
Technique) chart,  360 
 Petabyte (PB),  A.6 
 P&G (Procter & Gamble),  95, 303 
 Pharming,  157 
 Pharming attacks,  157 
 Philippines,  364 
 Philips Petroleum,  95 
 Phishing,  156–159 
 Phishing expeditions,  156 
 Physical security,  150 
 Physical view (databases),  222 
 PIM (personal information management) 
software ,  A.14 
 Pinterest,  91–93 
 Pirated software,  141, 168 
 PKE (public key encryption),  159 
 Plagiarism,  119 
 Planning phase (SDLC),  345 
 Platform as a Service (PaaS),  198 
 P&O,  334 
 Podcasting,  107, 133 
 Point-of-sale (POS),  A.7 
 Poison Ivy,  165 
 Polaroid,  19, 94 
 Political micro-targeting,  81–82 
 Polymorphic viruses and worms,  154 
 Pop-up ads,  101 
 Popbox,  263 
 Portability,  184, 185 
 Portals,  104 
 Porter, Michael,  18, 22, 28, 34, 39 
 Porter's Five Forces Model,  18–21, 39 
 in airline industry,  20–21 
 buyer power in,  18–21 
 rivalry among existing competitors in, 
 18, 20, 21 
 supplier power in,  18–21 
 and supply chain management,  303, 305 
 threat of new entrants in,  18–21 
 O'Brien, Conan,  40 
 Off-the-shelf application software,  345 
 Office Depot,  208 
 Offshore outsourcing (offshoring),  4, 363 
 Oklahoma state database,  347 
 OLAP (online analytical processing),  55 
 OLPC (One Laptop Per Child),  208 
 OLTP (online transaction processing),  54 
 Olympic Games, Winter 2010,  203 
 Omniture,  35 
 OMR (optical-mark reader),  A.7 
 One Laptop Per Child (OLPC),  208 
 One-to-many relationship (1:M),  C.5 
 One-to-one relationship (1:1),  C.4 
 O'Neal, Shaquille,  125 
 Online analytical processing (OLAP),  55 
 Online marketplaces,  104 
 Online training,  349 
 Online transaction processing (OLTP),  54 
 Onshore outsourcing,  363 
 Oooooc,  97 
 Open source,  111 
 Open sourcing,  4, 111 
 Open system,  111 
 Operating system software,  A.12, A.13 
 Operational CRM,  312–316 
 Operational decisions,  46–49 
 Operational level,  46 
 Operational support systems,  54–56 
 Operations,  23, 100 
 Operations management,  11–12 
 Opportunity management CRM systems,  315 
 Optical-character reader,  A.7 
 Optical fiber,  B.9 
 Optical-mark reader (OMR),  A.7 
 Optical medium,   A.6–A.7 
 Optimization analysis,  56 
 Oracle,  95, 102, 327, 329, A.14 
 Oracle Financials,  37 
 Osbourne, Ozzy,  335 
 Outbound logistics,  23 
 Output devices,  A.2, A.8–A.9 
 Outsourcing,  3, 4, 361–365 
 Oxford University,  361 
 P 
 PA Consulting,  338 
 PaaS (Platform as a Service),  198 
 PacifiCorp,  190 
 Packet,  258 
 Packet footers,  258 
 Packet headers,  258 
 Packet-switching,  B.4 
 Packet tampering,  155 
 Page, Larry,  346  
 Palmerino, Enrico,  33 
 Pandora,  174–175, 289 
 PANs (personal area networks),  268 
 Paradigm shift,  96 
 Partner relationship management (PRM),  319 
 Passikoff, Robert,  125 
 Passive RFID tags,  275 
 Passman, Jordan,  32–33 

I.9
Index
 Shopzilla.com,  86  
 Shrek films,  191 
 SHTPP (secure hypertext transfer protocol),  266 
 Siebel,  327, 329 
 Sign-off,  348 
 Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP),  B.8 
 Simple Network Management Protocol 
(SNMP),  B.8 
 Sinbad (actor),  40 
 Single tenancy,  196 
 Single user license,  A.14 
 Single-valued attribute,  C.2–C.3 
 Site license,  A.14 
 Skype,  262, 265, 269 
 Slate,  237 
 Slice-and-dice,  60 
 Smart cards,  158 
 Smart grids,  192 
 Smartphones,  271, A.11 
 Smith, Dylan,  205  
 SMTP (Simple Mail Transfer Protocol),  B.8 
 SNA (social networking analysis),  113 
 Sneakware,  150 
 Sniffer,  155 
 SNMP (Simple Network Management 
Protocol),  B.8 
 Social bookmarking,  114 
 Social engineering,  155 
 Social media,  113–114 
 Social media policy,  148–149 
 Social media sector,  43 
 Social networking, 113–114, 116;  see also 
 specific networking sites 
 by celebrities,  125–126 
 safety tips for using,  137–140 
 Social networking analysis (SNA),  113 
 Social networks,  113 
 Social ROI,  44 
 Social tagging,  114–115 
 Socializr,  97 
 Soden, Michael,  149–150 
 Software,  176, A.1, A.12–A.13 
 application,  A.13–A.14 
 developing,  345–361 
 pirated,  141 
 system,  A.12–A.13 
 Software as a Service (SaaS),  197–198 
 Software customization,  345 
 Software engineering,  348 
 Software patches,   A.14 
 Software updates,  A.14 
 Software upgrades,  A.14 
 Sony,  94, 95, 132, 263, 292 
 Sony Music Entertainment,  126 
 Source code,  111 
 Source documents,  55 
 South Africa,  364 
 South Korea,  17, 332 
 Soviet Union,  4 
 Spam,  148 
 Spam blogs,  155 
 Spatial data,  276 
 Spear phishing,  156 
 S 
 SaaS (Software as a Service),  197–198 
 SABRE Airline Solutions,  B.3 
 Safe mode,  A.12–A.13 
 Safeway,  20 
 Salary surveys,  35 
 Sales,  11–12, 24 
 Sales force automation (SFA),  314–315 
 Sales management CRM systems,  315 
 Salesforce.com,  198 
 Samsung,  270, 283, 292 
 Sanlu,  333 
 SAP,  102 
 Sarbanes-Oxley Act (2002),  144 
 Sarkozy, Nicolas,  125 
 Satellite access,  A.10 
 Satellite communication systems,  272–273, B.10 
 Satellites,  272–273 
 Satyam,  364 
 SC Johnson,  213 
 Scalability,  184–186 
 ScanR,  193 
 SCEM (supply chain event management),  308 
 Schmidt, Eric,  118 
 Schwartz, Jonathan,  116 
 SCM;  see Supply chain management 
 ScorAscore,  32–33 
 Scott, Dave,  251 
 Script kiddies (script bunnies),  153 
 Scripting language,  349 
 Scrubbing, information,  230 
 Scrum methodology,  354 
 SDLC (systems development life cycle), 
 345–350, 357 
 Search engine optimization (SEO),  105 
 Search engine ranking,  105 
 Search engines,  105 
 Searches,  247–248 
 Sears,  95 
 Second Life,  83–84, 129–130, 338 
 Secondary storage,  A.3, A.5–A.7 
 Secure hypertext transfer protocol (SHTPP, 
HTTPS),  266 
 Secure sockets layer (SSL),  266–267 
 Security;  see Information security 
 Seigenthaler, John,  40 
 Seigenthaler, John, Sr.,  119 
 Selling chain management,  308 
 Semantic Web,  120 
 Semipassive RFID tags,  275 
 Semistructured decisions,  48 
 Sensitivity analysis,  56 
 Sentiment analysis,  44 
 SEO (search engine optimization),  105 
 Servers,  176, A.11, B.4 
 Service,  24 
 Service providers,  104, 254–255 
 Serviceabilty,  187 
 Services,  13 
 SFA (sales force automation),  314–315 
 ShadowCrew,  166 
 Shell Oil,  60 
 Shopping bots,  62, 85–86 
 Rapid prototyping,  353 
 Rational unified process (RUP) methodology, 
 353–354 
 Raw visit depth,  102 
 Read-only memory (ROM),  A.5 
 Real People magazine,  218 
 Real Simple Syndication (RSS),  117 
 Real-time communication,  106–107 
 Real-time information,  216 
 Real-time systems,  216 
 Recording Industry Association of America,  167 
 Records,  221, C.7 
 Recovery,  178 
 backup and recovery plan,  178, 179 
 disaster recovery plan,  179–180 
 project,  342–344 
 Reduced instruction set computer (RISC) 
chips,  A.3 
 Redundancy,  73 
 Reengineering,  74–76 
 Regional service providers (RSPs),  254 
 Reidenberg, Joe,  142 
 Reintermediation,  100 
 Reiser, Paul,  40 
 Relational database management systems, 
 219–224 
 Relational database model,  220, C.1–C.2, 
C.7–C.9 
 Relational integrity constraints,  224 
 Reliability,  184, 185 
 Reputation system,  111 
 Requirements definition document,  348 
 Requirements management,  348 
 Resource sharing,  263–264 
 Response time,  52 
 The Restaurant Maloney & Porcelli's,  363 
 Return on investment (ROI),  50 
 Reuters,  338 
 RFID;  see Radio-frequency identification 
 RFID accelerometer,  275 
 RFID reader/RFID interrogator,  274 
 RFID tags,  274–275 
 RIM,  271 
 Ring topology,  B.5 
 RISC (reduced instruction set computer) 
chips,  A.3 
 Rivalry among existing competitors,  18, 21 
 Robots,  63, 85–86, 293, 307 
 ROI (return on investment),  50 
 Roku,   263 
 ROM (read-only memory),  A.5 
 Romm, Joseph,  9 
 Routers,  B.4 
 Rovi,  263 
 Rowdii,  97 
 Royal Canadian Mounted Police,  166 
 RSPs (regional service providers),  254 
 RSS (Real Simple Syndication),  117 
 Rubber Sheeting,  276 
 RUP (rational unified process) methodology, 
 353–354 
 Russia,  168, 364 
 Ruth, Babe,  335 

Index
I.10
 ThinkLite,  33 
 Third-generation (3G),  272 
 Thompson, Trina,  77 
 Threat of new entrants,  18–21 
 Threat of substitute products or services,  18–21 
 3G (third-generation),  272 
 Throughput,  52 
 Tiffany & Co.,  23 
 Time-series information,  236 
 Timeliness of information,  216 
 TiVo,  263 
 T.J. Maxx,  103, 220 
 TJX Co.,  220 
 To-Be process models,  66, 68, 70 
 Tokens,  158 
 T1 lines,  257 
 Tong, Eric,  30 
 Torvalds, Linus,  A.12 
 Toshiba,  292 
 Touch pad,  A.7 
 Touch screen,  A.7 
 Toyota,  338 
 Toys “R” Us,  335 
 TPS (transaction processing system),  54–57, 59 
 Traceroute,  258 
 Trackur.com,  149 
 Transaction brokers,  104 
 Transaction processing system (TPS),  54–57, 59 
 Transaction speed,  52 
 Transactional information,  54, 214–216 
 Transmission control protocol (TCP),  B.7 
 Transmission control protocol/Internet protocol 
(TCP/IP),  258, 259, B.7–B.8 
 Trek,  287 
 Triple constraint,  357, 358 
 Trojan-horse virus,  154 
 Trust, consumer,  108, 109 
 Tumblr,  125, 126 
 Twisted-pair cable,  B.9 
 Twitter,  117, 125, 148, 149, 249, 277 
 Twitter analytics,  44 
 U 
 UAE (United Arab Emirates),  334 
 UC (unified communications),  260 
 Ultimate Fighting Championship,  126 
 Unavailable systems,  184 
 Unidentified visitor,  102 
 Unified communications (UC),  260 
 Uninstaller software,  A.13 
 Union Bank of California,  181 
 Unique visitor,  102 
 United Arab Emirates (UAE),  334 
 United Kingdom Ministry of Defense and 
Army,  300 
 United Parcel Service (UPS),  202 
 United States,  261, 267, 270, 287, 335, 363, 364 
 U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics,  245 
 U.S. Department of Defense (DoD),  88, 274, 
275, B.7 
 U.S. Department of Homeland Security,  170 
 U.S. Postal Service,  21, 308 
 U.S. Secret Service,  57, 166 
 Support value activities,  24 
 Sustainable MIS,  187 
 Sustainable MIS disposal,  188 
 Sustainable MIS infrastructure,  177, 189–199 
 cloud computing,  195–199 
 grid computing,  189–192 
 virtualized computing,  192–193 
 Sustaining technologies,  94 
 Swim lane,  68 
 Switching costs,  18 
 Symantec,  134 
 Synchronous communications,  113 
 System availability,  52 
 System clock,  A.12 
 System restore,  A.13 
 System software,  A.12–A.13 
 Systems, 12–14;  see also  specific systems 
 Systems development life cycle (SDLC), 
 345–350, 357 
 Systems software,  A.12–A.13 
 Systems thinking,  14 
 T 
 T-Mobile,  132, 261 
 Tables,  C.7–C.9 
 Tablet computers,  A.11 
 Tacit knowledge,  112 
 Tags,  114 
 Taiwan,  17 
 Tangible benefits,  355 
 Tanzania,  282 
 Tartan Racing,  89 
 Tatango,  25 
 Tax policies,  108, 109 
 Taxonomies,  108 
 TB (terabyte),  A.5, A.6 
 TCP (transmission control protocol),  B.7 
 TCP/IP;  see Transmission control protocol/
Internet protocol 
 TCS,  364 
 Technology: 
 dependence on,  118 
 for information security,  156–160 
 Technology, Entertainment, Design (TED),  41, 346 
 Technology development,  24 
 Technology failures,  182 
 Technology recovery strategies,  182 
 Teck Resources Ltd.,  203 
 TED (Technology, Entertainment, Design),  41, 346 
 Telecommunication protocols,  B.6–B.8 
 Telecommunication systems,  B.1 
 media for,  B.9–B.10 
 protocols for,  B.6–B.8 
 Telecommuting,  257 
 Telnet Protocol,  B.8 
 Telstar,  267 
 Terabyte (TB),  A.5, A.6 
 Test conditions,  349 
 Testing phase (SDLC),  349 
 Text messaging,  25 
 Text mining,  234 
 Text protect software,  A.13 
 Thain, John,  40 
 Splogs (spam blogs),  155 
 Spoofing,  155 
 Spotlight Analysis,  82 
 Spreadsheet software,  A.14 
 Sprint,  254, 270, 271 
 Sprint Nextel,  127 
 Spyware,  150, 153–154, A.13 
 SQL (structured query language),  220 
 SRM (supplier relationship management),  319 
 SSL (secure sockets layer),  266–267 
 SSL Certificate,  266 
 Stamps.com,  21, 308 
 Standard packet formats,  258 
 Stanford Racing Team,  9 
 Stanford University,  361 
 Staples,  63, 208, 307 
 Star topology,  B.5 
 Starbucks,  39, 116 
 Start-ups: 
 College Hunks Hauling Junk,  58 
 Rackspace,  319 
 Rylaxer,  222 
 Tatango,  25 
 TED,  346 
 viruses,  179 
 ViVu,  265 
 WePay,  105 
 Static information,  224 
 Statistical analysis,  236 
 Stealthware,  150 
 Stickiness,  102 
 Stone, Biz,  125 
 Storage: 
 primary,  A.3–A.5 
 secondary,  A.3, A.5–A.7 
 Strategic decisions,  47–49 
 Strategic level,  46 
 Strategic support systems,  56–60 
 Strategy Analytics,  127 
 Streaming,  272 
 Streamlining,  73–74 
 Structured data,  234 
 Structured decisions,  46 
 Structured query language (SQL),  220 
 StumbleUpon,  114–115 
 Stylus,  A.7 
 Success metrics,  48–53 
 SunPass,  275 
 Super Bowl advertising,  5 
 Supercomputers,  A.11 
 Supplier power,  18–21 
 Supplier relationship management (SRM),  319 
 Supply chain,  19, 302–305 
 Supply chain event management (SCEM),  308 
 Supply chain execution systems,  305 
 Supply chain management (SCM),  302–308 
 benefits of,  303–307 
 challenges of,  307 
 ERP components for,  324 
 future of,  308, 327–328 
 Supply chain planning systems,  305 
 Supply chain visibility,  305–306 
 Supply chaining,   4 

I.11
Index
 Wireless MANs (WMANs),  269–271 
 Wireless media,  B.9–B.10 
 Wireless networking standard 802.11,  269 
 Wireless networks,  267–280, 293, B.5 
 benefits of,  278–280 
 business applications of,  274–277 
 categories of,  267–273 
 security of,  289–290 
 Wireless technologies,  4, 267 
 Wireless WANs (WWANs),  270–271 
 WLANs (wireless LANs),  268–269 
 WMANs (wireless MANs),  269–271 
 Word length,  A.4 
 Word processing software,  A.14 
 WordPerfect,  A.14  
 Workflow,  71 
 Workplace MIS monitoring,  150 
 Workplace monitoring policy,  149–150 
 Workshop training,  349 
 Workstation computers,  A.11 
 Workstations,  A.11 
 World Health Organization (WHO),  B.11 
 The World Is Flat (Friedman),  3–4, 39 
 World Triathlon Corporation (WTC),  251–252, 286 
 World Wide Web (WWW),  96 
 Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave 
Access (WiMAX),  251, 270–271 
 Worms,  154 
 WPA (Wi-Fi Protected Access),  282 
 WTC (World Triathlon Corporation),  251–252, 286 
 WWANs (wireless WANs),  270–271 
 WWW (World Wide Web),  96 
 Wynne, Michael W.,  164 
 X 
 Xbox 360,  263 
 Xcel Energy,  192 
 Xerox,  95, B.6 
 XP (extreme programming) methodology,  353 
 Y 
 Yahoo!,  104, 117, 194 
 Yahoo! Connected TV,  263 
 Yale University,  203 
 Yankee Group,  131 
 Yourdon, Edward,  366 
 YouTube,  111, 113, 148, 259, 267, 317, 336 
 Yuuguu,  97 
 Z 
 Zappos,  5, 63, 227, 298–299, 307 
 Ziff-Davis,  134 
 Zillow.com,  104, 243–244 
 Zombie farms,  157 
 Zombies,  157 
 Zoomr,  97 
 Zuckerberg, Mark,  5 
 The Wall Street Journal,  371 
 Walmart,  23, 38, 52, 95, 99, 215–216, 275, 
303, 334–335 
 Walton, Sam,  335 
 WANs;  see Wide area networks 
 WAPs (wireless access points),  292–293 
 War chalking,  282 
 War driving,  282 
 Warden, Peter,  225 
 Warm sites,  180 
 Warping,  276 
 Waterfall methodology,  351 
 Web 1.0, 96;  see also Ebusiness 
 Web 2.0 (Business 2.0),  109–113 
 advantages of,  109–113 
 for capacity planning,  186 
 challenges of,  118–119 
 collaboration tools with,  116–118 
 networking communities with,  113–115 
 Web 3.0,  119–121 
 Web-based self-service systems,  316 
 Web browsers,  96 
 Web conferencing,  108 
 Web logs,  116, 150 
 Web mining,  234 
 Webby Awards,  132 
 Webinars,  108 
 Website bookmarks,  114 
 Website personalization,  316–317 
 Websites: 
 data-driven,  224–227 
 unethical,  361 
 WEP (wired equivalent privacy),  282 
 WePay,  105 
 Weyco,  151 
 What-if analysis,  55–56 
 White-hat hackers,  153 
 WHO (World Health Organization),  B.11 
 Wi-Fi (wireless fidelity),  268–269 
 Wi-Fi networks,  268–269, 293–294 
 Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA),  282 
 Wide area networks (WANs),  254, 255, B.2, B.3 
 Wikipedia,  40, 111, 117, 128, 134, 185 
 Wikis,  117, 132, 134 
 Williams, Robbie,  40 
 WiMAX (Worldwide Interoperability for 
Microwave Access),  251, 270–271 
 WiMAX technology,  251, 270, 271 
 Windows Azure,  199 
 Winfrey, Oprah,  125 
 Wipro,  364 
 Wire media,  B.8–B.9 
 Wired equivalent privacy (WEP),  282 
 Wired magazine,  36 
 Wireless (LMCS),  A.10 
 Wireless access points (WAPs),  292–293 
 Wireless fidelity (Wi-Fi),  268–269 
 Wireless LANs (WLANs),  268–269 
 Universal resource locators (URLs),  96 
 University of Michigan,  361 
 University of Pennsylvania,  293 
 University of Southern California,  134 
 UNIX,  A.13 
 Unstructured data,  234 
 Unstructured decisions,  48 
 Up-selling,  314 
 UPS (United Parcel Service),  202 
 URLs (universal resource locators),  96 
 USA Patriot Act (2001, 2003),  144 
 Usability,  52, 184, 187 
 User-contributed (-generated) content,  111 
 User documentation,  349 
 Utility software,  A.12–A.13 
 UUNet/WorldCom,  254 
 V 
 Value chain,  24, 27 
 Value chain analysis,  23–27, 39 
 “Vanity URLs,”  125 
 Variable,  7–8 
 Verisign,  266 
 Verizon,  254, 272, 290 
 Video Privacy Protection Act (1988),  144 
 Video résumés,  133–134 
 Videoconferencing,  107, 265 
 Viral marketing,  101 
 Virtual businesses,  103 
 Virtual data centers,  193–195 
 Virtual private networks (VPNs),  264 
 Virtual reality,  63, 64 
 Virtual teams,  83 
 Virtual workforces,  63–64, 257 
 Virtualization,  192–193, 204, 263, 264 
 Viruses,  153–154, 281, 283 
 Visa,  61, 146 
 Vishing (voice phishing),  156 
 Visit depth,  102 
 Visual business intelligence,  238–239 
 Visual images,  211 
 Visualization,  59, 239, 242–243 
 Visualization tools,  239 
 ViVu,  265 
 Vogue,  125 
 Voice over IP (VoIP),  261–262 
 Voice phishing,  156 
 Volatility,  A.5 
 VPNs (virtual private networks),  264 
 VUDU,  263 
 VuRoom,  265 
 W 
 Wachira, Grace,  273 
 Wadhwani, Dinesh,  33 
 Wales, Jimmy,  40 
 Walgreens,  63, 308 


www.mhhe.com
ISBN 978-0-07-337689-9 
MHID 0-07-337689-2
www.domorenow.com
www.mhhe.com/baltzan
 ~StormRG~

