Business 
Models for 
E-Commerce
Zinovy Radovilsky

Business Models 
for E-Commerce
Zinovy Radovilsky
California State University, East Bay

Business Models for E-Commerce
Copyright © Cognella Academic Publishing 2015
www.cognella.com
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any
means—electronic, mechanical, photocopy, recording, or any other
except for brief quotations, not to exceed 400 words, without the prior
permission of the publisher.
ISBN-13: 978-1-63157-208-1 (e-book)
Collection ISSN: 2156-8200 (electronic)
www.businessexpertpress.com
Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks
or registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and
explanation without intent to infringe.
A publication in the Business Expert Press Supply and Operations 
Management collection
Cover and interior design by S4Carlisle Publishing Services Private Ltd., 
Chennai, India 

Preface....................................................................................................v
Chapter 1	
What is ­E-Commerce?.......................................................1
Chapter 2	
Business Models for ­E-Commerce....................................19
Chapter 3	
Demand-Side Models......................................................45
Chapter 4	
Supply-Side Models.........................................................75
Chapter 5	
Collaborative Models.....................................................111
Index..................................................................................................139
Contents


E-commerce is mushrooming in both business-to-business and business-­
to-consumer sectors. It shakes the foundation of most industries, leads 
to entirely new kinds of businesses, and directly affects both our careers 
and the way we live. One of the most significant changes is the manner in 
which companies conduct business. Specifically, how they manage their 
resources, connect and communicate with customers, and negotiate and 
outsource from suppliers.
In many cases, the management of enterprise resources is based on 
­e-commerce systems and applications. ­E-commerce may be defined in a 
variety of ways: as a technological tool for web development, as an online 
transaction between a buyer and a seller, or as an activity that adds value 
to business customers and consumers. The main goal of this book is to 
explain in a systematic way the managerial aspects of various ­e-commerce 
models and applications, as well as to demonstrate their value-added 
capabilities.
Business Models for E-Commerce provides a detailed description and 
analysis of ­e-commerce business models, including their components, 
classification, and performance results. This book also presents manage­
rial aspects of various ­up-to-date ­e-commerce models. Among them are:
• Demand-side ­e-commerce models associated with selling 
goods, services, and information to business customers and 
consumers.
• Supply-side ­e-commerce models used for purchasing and 
outsourcing from suppliers.
• Collaborative commerce models involved in sharing 
information and business data, and also providing collaborative 
decisions for new product design and development.
• Mobile commerce models that employ wireless devices and 
wireless communication for buying, selling, and collaborating 
online.
Preface

vi	
PREFACE
• Electronic payment models used for making payment 
transactions via the Internet.
• Electronic services employed for supporting and facilitating 
­e-commerce.
Business Models for E-Commerce provides methodology and practical 
examples of selecting and implementing ­e-commerce business models 
and associated online applications. It also emphasizes managerial aspects 
of enterprise resources planning (ERP) systems, which are considered an 
integral part of ­e-commerce management today.
I hope that after reading this book you will not only gain knowledge 
but also develop essential skills required for managing ­e-commerce mod­
els and applications. You will obtain a clear understanding of the current 
development and future trends in ­e-commerce. All this will better prepare 
you to take on responsibilities in managing and improving ­e-commerce 
models and applications.
Sincerely, 
Zinovy Radovilsky

1.1  The Internet ERA
In 2005, the CNN channel conducted a survey of the most important 
global innovations in the past quarter century. What do you think was 
the top-rated innovation? What would you rate as innovation #1? You are 
correct—the Internet was voted as the most important innovation in the 
past quarter century along with other important inventions like the cell 
phone, the personal computer, fiber optics, ­e-mail, and others[1].
The Internet’s infrastructure is networked computing that connects 
computers and other electronic devices by telecommunication networks. In 
the recent years, the Internet has become a global phenomenon that has 
profoundly changed the nature of communication between people and busi­
nesses. It has also become a major distribution channel, where transactions to 
purchase goods and services are made. The Internet has profoundly changed 
economics, markets, and even industry structures in many countries[2].
The World Wide Web, commonly abbreviated as WWW or the Web, 
is one of the main ways of accessing and utilizing information over the 
Internet. It is an information-sharing model that is built on top of the 
­Internet  [3]. The Web employs the Hyper-Text Transmission Protocol 
(HTTP), the main tools used in the Internet, to transmit Internet-based 
documents (data). It also uses browsers like Internet Explorer and Firefox 
to access and view documents called web pages (web sites) that are linked to 
each other via hyperlinks. Web documents also contain graphics, sounds, 
text, and video. The Internet, not the Web, is also used for ­e-mail, instant 
messaging, and file transferring (using file transfer protocol or FTP)[3].
The growth of Internet-related activities has been tremendous from the 
last decade of the 20th century to the modern time (see Figure 1.1) [4]. The 
number of Internet domain hosts (companies and consumers that have 
CHAPTER 1
What is ­E-Commerce?

2	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
their own web pages and provide web site service to others) has grown, at an 
accelerated rate, from less than 10 million hosts in 1995 to near 550 million 
hosts in 2007[3]. This number will certainly continue to grow in the future.
What drives people and organizations to increase their utilization of 
the Internet and World Wide Web? Why is it so popular today? The an­
swers to these questions can be quite clear if we consider the Internet as 
an incredible medium that provides:
• Rich sources of information and news for different subjects 
that may not be available in other media.
• Quick access to this information and news at any time and 
at any place in the world, provided Internet access may be 
established.
• Easy search, selection, and retrieval of information and news.
• Easy communication and information sharing.
• Extensive business opportunities in terms of selling, buying, 
transacting, and communicating on the Internet.
The last point is in the core of developing commercial solutions on the 
Internet called “e-commerce.”
1.2  E-Commerce and ­E-Business Definitions
E-commerce has become a significant element in the modern global eco­
nomic environment. “E-commerce” is defined as the use of a computer 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
19951996 1997199819992000 2001200220032004 200520062007
Host Number, mln
Figure 1.1  Internet hosts’ growth

	
What is ­E-Commerce?	
3
network, primarily the Internet, to buy and sell products, services, infor­
mation, and communication. However, ­e-commerce may also be con­
sidered as an application of technology using the Internet. It may also 
represent another aspect of being a tool for increasing efficiency and low­
ering costs in organizations. The three definitions of ­e-commerce are sum­
marized in Table 1.1.
All aspects of ­e-commerce are important and deserve in-depth expla­
nation. In this chapter and other chapters of this book, we will concen­
trate on the business side of ­e-commerce, considering ­e-commerce as a 
business phenomenon (second definition), and as a tool that adds value 
to business and customers (third definition).
As we mentioned before, ­e-commerce communication and transac­
tions are predominantly done through Internet-based web sites. These 
online web sites may be used to sell products through electronic store­
fronts, provide customer service, disseminate information, provide busi­
ness intelligence (for example, create recommendations of what products 
to purchase), and many other possible value-added offerings or activities 
(see Figure 1.2). Sometimes, the ­e-commerce web sites are available only 
to internal customers or employees of an organization, and are not to 
anyone outside the organization. Enterprise Intranet is usually an orga­
nization’s internet, which is accessible to employees of this organization 
and other responsible parties using the secure login environment. This is 
done to protect the organization’s sensitive information, and not allow 
Table 1.1  Definitions of ­E-Commerce
E-Commerce 
aspects
E-Commerce definitions
Technology
E-commerce is the application of technology used to automate 
and improve business transactions utilizing predominantly 
Internet-based web sites.
Business
E-commerce is used to provide the capability of buying and 
selling products, services, and information on predominantly 
Internet-based web sites.
Value
E-commerce is a tool that may be used by business customers 
and consumers to create value in the Internet-based transactions 
by increasing efficiency and cutting costs while improving the 
quality of goods and services.

4	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
all kinds of online “intruders” to access this information (see ­Figure 1.2). 
Companies are also required, in many cases, to have protected and safe 
connections between their web sites and those of their suppliers, dis­
tributors, logistics and financial services, and many others. Enterprise 
Extranet uses internet technology to establish a private network connec­
tion between a company’s ­e-commerce web site and its external suppliers, 
service, and information providers (see Figure 1.2). In some cases, an 
extranet may be regarded as a part of the company’s intranet that is ex­
panded to users outside the company.
In many cases, instead of “e-commerce” the term “e-business” is used. 
Are these terms different or the same? In general, these terms are, in fact, 
different. “E-business” is a broader concept than “e-commerce,” in that 
it does not only represent commercial applications of buying and selling. 
It is also associated with servicing customers and collaborating between 
business partners, as well as conducting Internet-related business transac­
tions within or outside an organization. However, in modern practice, 
these two terms are used interchangeably, and become almost like syn­
onyms. Most ­e-business web sites contain ­e-commerce-related activities 
like selling or buying online. At the same time, many ­e-commerce web 
sites have elements of collaboration with customers or business partners, 
as well as online service and support. In this book, we will be using the 
term “e-commerce” to designate both commercial and business activities, 
i.e., ­e-business and ­e-commerce on the Internet.
1.3  History and Current Development 
of E-Commerce
The “life” of ­e-commerce as a business system is relatively short as com­
pared with many other existing business and management systems. 
Figure 1.2  E-commerce networking
,QWUDQHW
+XPDQ5HVRXUFHV
3URMHFW0DQDJHPHQW
.QRZOHGJH
0DQDJHPHQW
6XSSOLHUV
6HUYLFHV

([WUDQHW
,QWHUQHW
2QOLQH
6WRUH
DQG
6HUYLFH


	
What is ­E-Commerce?	
5
­E-commerce started around 1995, and since then has had an interesting 
and sometimes turbulent history.
The proliferation of Internet-based computer technology in the last 
five years of the 20th century triggered extensive development of differ­
ent kinds of ­e-commerce tools and applications. Many new ­e-commerce 
companies were born at that time. Their intention was to sell products 
to business and individual consumers, outsource/buy products from 
businesses, or provide a virtual environment to facilitate the exchange 
of products and services between the companies. It was a time of “ir­
rational exuberance,” when every day several Internet-based companies 
started their ­e-commerce business online with great expectations of soon 
becoming a publicly traded company and earning a tremendous amount 
of cash after its initial public offerings (IPO) in the stock market. The 
notion behind this was that the stock market would quickly appreciate 
almost any new ­e-commerce development. This was the era of the so 
called “dot-com bubble” of ­e-commerce. The term evidently came from 
the point that most of these companies had an Internet name of their web 
site ending with “.com.”
By the year 2000, the dot-com bubble reached its peak, from which 
started an almost freefall of the dot-com stock prices, overall customer 
excitement and expectation, and venture investments in ­e-commerce. 
Between 2000 and 2003, a significant number of dot-com companies 
closed, were acquired, or merged with other businesses. The many reasons 
for this crash of the dot-com bubble have been well documented in vari­
ous literature sources. However, the main reason for the disappearance of 
these companies was their inability to be profitable and to provide value 
to their customers. “If it does not make cents, it does not make sense.” 
Many companies were created by bright computer professionals who 
knew how to design and start a technologically advanced ­e-commerce 
solution. However, these professionals had little to no ability to provide 
an efficient and effective business-related model for their solutions.
At the end of the crash in 2001–2002, a new trend appeared evi­
dent within ­e-commerce—a trend of developing and implementing 
­e-commerce solutions that were not only more business-oriented and 
­targeted the need to provide significant value to the customers but also 
by doing that, be more financially sound, i.e., profitable. This designated 

6	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
a new era of ­e-commerce that had some major differences with the previ­
ously used “dot-com” approach in ­e-commerce (see Table 1.2).
The table clearly depicts the main differences between the old and 
new approaches to ­e-commerce. Instead of old ­e-commerce decisions 
being based on technology innovations and revenue emphasis, the 
new ­e-commerce development is mostly based on the need to develop 
a solid business model that would emphasize value-added offerings for 
the customers and profits for the company. According to some literature 
sources  [5], more than 60% of all ­e-commerce companies were profit­
able in 2004 as opposed to only 10% of them being profitable in 2001. 
Instead of the entrepreneurial nature of most dot-com companies and 
pure online strategies (doing all business online), the new ­e-commerce 
development is mostly associated with traditional firms. These firms range 
from large companies like IBM and GE to a myriad of small and mid-size 
enterprises (SME) who embrace an ­e-commerce strategy as a part of the 
overall business strategy. In this case, it may be called a mixed or “click-
and-brick” strategy. Finally, during the ­e-commerce evolution, many 
special standards regulating its activities and communication through 
­e-commerce have been developed or improved. For example, XML 
(eXtensible Markup Language) and XBML (business XML) computer 
languages were developed to improve communication between different 
­e-commerce web sites. The Electronic Product Code (EPC) was created 
to recognize the product being sold or delivered using mobile commerce 
equipment.
A new changing trend in ­e-commerce is associated with utiliza­
tion of the Internet-related technology and software for improving 
Table 1.2  Dot-Com and New ­E-Commerce compared
“DOT-COM” ­E-Commerce
New ­E-Commerce
Technology-driven
Business-driven
Revenue growth emphasis
Earning and profits emphasis
Venture capital financing
Traditional financing
Pure online strategies
Mixed “click-and-brick” strategies
Entrepreneurial
Traditional firms
Lack of standards
Stronger regulation/standards

	
What is ­E-Commerce?	
7
communication, information sharing, collaboration, and functionality of 
the Web, which is commonly defined as Web 2.0. Web 2.0 means pro­
liferation of connectivity and interactivity of web-delivered content that 
allows users to—besides obtaining information from a web site—own the 
data on the Internet, gain control over this data, and add value to the web 
site as they use it. The key Web 2.0 applications and services include[6]:
• Blog (web-log)–a webpage consisting of brief user opinions, 
views, and information, or links (also called posts), arranged 
chronologically within a menu-driven format.
• Wiki–a webpage or set of web pages that can be easily edited 
by anyone who is allowed access. A well-known example is 
Wikipedia, the free Internet encyclopedia.
• Podcast–audio recordings, usually in MP3 format, of 
talks, interviews and lectures, which can be played either 
on a desktop computer or on a wide range of handheld 
MP3 devices.
• Multimedia sharing–services that facilitate the storage and 
sharing of multimedia content such as video (YouTube), 
photos (Flickr), and podcasts (Odeo).
• Social networking–professional and social networking sites 
like facebook.com and myspace. com that facilitate meeting 
people, finding like minds, and sharing content.
• RSS–a family of formats which allow users to find out about 
updates to the content of RSS-enabled websites, blogs or 
podcasts without actually having to go and visit the site. 
Information from the website (typically, a new story’s title 
and synopsis, along with the originating website’s name) 
is collected within a feed (which uses the RSS format) and 
‘piped’ to the user in a process known as syndication.
1.4  E-Commerce Growth
Since its creation, ­e-commerce has experienced steady growth with an in­
creasing rate of growth in the first decade of the 21st century. Survey after 
survey conducted by a variety of companies has indicated an accelerating 

8	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
volume of transactions in business-to-consumer (B2C) and particularly in 
business-to-business (B2B) ­e-commerce. In 2003–2005, more than 70% 
of companies in the United States have experimented with purchasing on­
line; and around 15–20% of their total spending was being channeled via 
the Internet[7, 8]. According to the U.S. Census Bureau, B2B ­e-commerce 
covers more than 20% of all business transactions in the U.S.A[9].
Although B2B sales continue to dwarf B2C sales, many retailers now 
see online sales as their best opportunity for new growth. The estimates 
made by different consulting firms[10] show that by the end of 2012, the 
sales through ­e-commerce will be between 210 and 340 billion dollars 
(see Figure 1.3). The average growth of retail ­e-commerce is estimated to 
be from 12% to 14% annually[11]. In addition, the proportion of retail 
­e-commerce in the total U.S. retail sales is predicted to grow from ap­
proximately 4% in 2006 to 13% in 2010[11].
The implementation of ­e-commerce also varies across the globe. The 
highest level of ­e-commerce sales as a proportion of the total sales is in 
­Australia, South Korea, and France—with more than 16% of the total sales 
in 2004, United States—more than 13%, and Japan—around 9%[12].
Figure 1.3  Comparative estimates: U.S. retail ­e-commerce sales, 
(billions)[10]
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
240
260
280
300
320
340
360
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
eMarketer
Forrester
Jupiter

	
What is ­E-Commerce?	
9
The projected ­e-commerce growth raises the interest of researchers 
to understand how effective and efficient this ­e-commerce implementa­
tion has been, and what influences ­e-commerce results in manufacturing 
and service organizations. Despite the evident increase in importance of 
­e-commerce and effectiveness of its implementation, until recently little 
research has been undertaken to investigate factors that influence the 
results of ­e-commerce solutions. This knowledge not only has potential 
benefits for organizations considering ­e-commerce implementation but 
also for those organizations that have already engaged in such implemen­
tations, because it can provide them with an understanding of how to 
facilitate and improve their implementation processes.
1.5  Main Characteristics, Dimensions, 
and Types of ­E-Commerce
The main characteristics of ­e-commerce are its pervasiveness and inexo­
rability. Pervasiveness of ­e-commerce means its persistent development 
and proliferation in business and non-profit organizations of various 
sizes. Inexorability of ­e-commerce represents its inevitable and unstop­
pable nature in terms of the high rates of growth that were described in 
the previous section. Inexorability also means that ­e-commerce tends to 
transcend geographical, cultural, and political differences of nations and 
countries and enables common business information and web sites for the 
entire world. Finally, inexorability represents the ability of ­e-commerce 
to change the business environment, and create completely new business 
relations. ­E-commerce development has completely revitalized different 
industries including jewelry, banking, telecommunications, hotels, real 
estate, software, and many others[13].
If you ask yourself why ­e-commerce development is so pervasive and 
inexorable, the answer should come from the simple fact that ­e-commerce 
can be a rich source of value for organizations that employ it. This value 
comes from ­e-commerce disintermediation, which means an act of tak­
ing out an intermediary organization used for channel delivery of prod­
ucts and services. For example, direct sales of computers through the 
Internet by Dell or Hewlett-Packard (HP) eliminates any intermediate 
organizations like distributors and retailers. This leads to reduced cost 

10	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
of product delivery to the customers and increased profits. At the same 
time, ­e-commerce re-intermediation facilitates creation of third party 
organizations that provide virtual environments for connecting buyers 
and sellers or, generally, business partners for transactions on the Internet. 
The creation of companies like eBay or Amazon is a typical example of 
­e-commerce re-intermediation.
Organizations may have various levels of ­e-commerce implementa­
tion. The differentiation between these organizations is based upon three 
dimensions[14]:
• Products and services produced and sold by an organization 
that can range from traditional physical to fully digitized 
products (services).
• Processes established in the organization that can also vary 
from physical to fully digitized (online) processes.
• Agent, which is an organization itself, ranging from a traditional 
“brick-and-mortar” firm to a virtual online organization.
Pure ­e-commerce organizations are characterized by their products/
services and processes being completely digitized, as well as the whole 
organization being a digital agent company. These organizations are also 
known as virtual or pure-play ­e-commerce companies. An example of 
such an organization is www.YouTube.com, a famous online site for up­
loading, storing, and sharing videos worldwide. It is a pure ­e-commerce 
company, because all its products/services, like video play lists or sub­
scriptions, are digitized; its processes like video search, creating video play 
lists, etc. are also digitized; and, finally, this organization is a virtual (com­
pletely online) digital agent.
Partial ­e-commerce organizations are those organizations that may 
have some physical ­e-commerce dimensions like physical products or 
processes. For example, Amazon purchases and stores books (physical 
products) that it then sells online. The company also organizes a logistics 
(physical) process of book delivery to the customers. However, Amazon 
also sells many digital products (like videos and music) and provides a 
variety of digitized processes. In this case, Amazon is a typical partial 
­e-commerce organization.

	
What is ­E-Commerce?	
11
“Click-and-mortar” organizations are companies that conduct 
some ­e-commerce activities, for example, selling computers, printers, or 
software through ­e-commerce channels like HP or Gateway, but provide 
their primary business in the physical world. Contrary to that, “brick-
and- mortar” organizations perform all their business without the In­
ternet by selling their physical products in stores or conducting processes 
by means of physical agents only. The number of “brick- and-mortar” 
companies have significantly shrunk over the years as ­e-commerce prolif­
eration has grown in a variety of traditional companies.
E-commerce organizations are also differentiated by the transactions 
and interactions they make. One of the common types are the Business-
to-Business (B2B) ­e-commerce organizations that provide transactions, 
communication, and interactions between business partners. B2B 
transactions may include selling products and services to businesses, 
outsourcing from suppliers, logistics, and distribution of products to 
companies, financial transactions, and others. B2B transactions may be 
done on the downstream of the organization’s supply chain, i.e., from 
raw materials, to manufacturing organizations, and then to distribution 
and retail (see Figure 1.4). B2B can also be done on the upstream of the 
company supply chain, for example purchasing materials from suppli­
ers, or outsourcing a logistics provider for a manufacturing organization 
(see Figure 1.4).
Suppliers 
Logistics 
Transportation 
Logistics     
Transportation 
Logistics 
Transportation 
Production 
Retail 
Distribution 
     Customer 
Figure 1.4  B2B and B2C ­E-commerce

12	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
Another very common type is Business-to-Consumer (B2C) 
­e-commerce organizations which provide transactions, communication, 
and interactions with consumers (end users). These organizations can 
be manufacturing, distribution, retail, or other companies that sell their 
products or services to consumers online. B2C transactions and interac­
tions are done on the downstream of the organization’s supply chain (see 
Figure 1.4).
Since the beginning of the ­e-commerce era, both B2B and B2C trans­
actions have experienced consistent growth in revenues. These revenues 
are derived from selling products and services online to business custom­
ers or end consumers. They also include revenues from financial transac­
tions via the Internet.
The volume of transaction revenues in B2B ­e-commerce is substan­
tially larger than that of B2C. For example, in 2004 the B2B transaction 
revenues in U.S.A were around $1,812 billion or 93% of all ­e-commerce 
revenues. At the same time, the revenues from B2C ­e-commerce transac­
tions were $130 billion, which was just 7% of the total business-related 
­e-commerce transactions[9].
Besides B2B and B2C transactions, ­e-commerce transactions and in­
teractions may have other types:
• Consumer-to-Consumer (C2C) ­e-commerce is used in 
organizations that provide private sales and auctions between 
individual consumers.
• Peer-to-Peer (P2P) ­e-commerce allows networked peer 
computers to share data and processing with each other 
directly; can be used in C2C, B2B, and B2C ­e-commerce.
• Government-to-Business (G2B) and Government-to-
Consumer (G2C) ­e-commerce enable government 
organizations to provide information, interaction, 
business, and services to companies and consumers 
respectively.
• Business-to-Business-to-Consumer (B2B2C) ­e-commerce 
organizations provide some products or services to client 
businesses that maintain their own customers. eBay, for 
example, provides a virtual marketplace to its customers 

	
What is ­E-Commerce?	
13
(business and individuals) that sell products through eBay 
to their own customers.
• Mobile Commerce (M-commerce) makes possible ­
e-commerce transactions and activities to be conducted in 
a wireless environment, for example, buying products and 
services from a web site on a cell phone.
• Location-based Commerce (L-commerce) provides 
m-commerce transactions targeted at individuals in specific 
locations and at specific times, like navigation systems in cars.
• Intra-business ­e-commerce includes all internal 
organizational activities that involve the exchange of goods, 
services, or information.
• Collaborative Commerce (C-commerce) creates an 
environment where individuals or groups communicate or 
collaborate online.
Many of these transactions types, including mobile and location-based 
commerce, collaborative commerce, and business-to-business-to-consumer 
commerce will be discussed in this book.
1.6  Value Creation in ­E-Commerce
As previously mentioned, the main reason for the growth and prolifera­
tion of ­e-commerce (pervasiveness and inexorability) is its ability to create 
value for an organization that implemented the ­e-commerce solutions, 
for the customers of this organization, and for its partners and suppliers. 
Value creation represents the potential or expected and actual monetary 
and non-monetary results of utilizing an ­e-commerce business model. 
The main monetary results of value creation include revenue enhance­
ment through sales growth and price differentiation, and cost reduction 
related to cost of goods sold, operating costs, and asset intensity reduction 
(see Figure 1.5).
Revenue enhancement is the first aspect of value creation. ­E-commerce 
develops a new online channel for selling a company’s products and ser­
vices along with existing traditional channels. This potentially generates 
additional sales volume through this channel, and, at the same time, can 

14	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
facilitate product sales through the existing channels. For example, a con­
sumer may use Walmart’s web site to purchase a variety of products that can 
be then sent to a nearby store for customer pickup. At the same time, while 
coming to the store for the pickup, the consumer may potentially end up 
buying some more products from the company. In this case, the channels do 
not cannibalize, but rather complement each other and provide higher sales 
volumes and revenues. The revenue increase may be also associated with 
the ability to quickly adjust prices depending on customer segments (for 
example, repeat customers will pay a higher price than new customers will) 
or by increasing prices through building the company’s brand name recog­
nition on the Internet. In addition, ­e-commerce can enable quick matching 
of customer demand with existing supply of products, and, thus, provide 
better knowledge of what prices need to be established and promoted.
Besides the opportunity of increased revenue, ­e-commerce is also an 
important source of cost reduction. This is the second aspect of value 
creation through ­e-commerce (see Figure 1.5). The cost of goods sold 
through online web sites may be reduced by providing a direct selling 
channel to the customers and reducing the need for intermediaries like 
wholesalers and retailers. Taking out the intermediaries can reduce the 
cost of sales up to 25–30%. At the same time, by using ­e-commerce for 
outsourcing materials, components, and services, companies can reduce 
process and transaction costs associated with outsourcing. ­E-commerce 
enables companies to simplify outsourcing processes and reduce related 
Figure 1.5  Creating monetary value in ­E-commerce

	
What is ­E-Commerce?	
15
costs. Finally, ­e-commerce creates opportunities for asset intensity reduc­
tion, which means (a) reducing capital costs by effective, speedy disposi­
tion (selling) of unnecessary or old equipment as well as excess or obsolete 
inventory, and (b) more effectively using existing space by reducing in­
ventory clutters with ­e-commerce.
The results of the survey conducted among the companies that im­
plemented ­e-commerce solutions[15] revealed that more than 61% of 
respondents stated that implemented ­e-commerce solutions increased 
or significantly increased revenues. At the same time, 58% of those re­
sponding achieved a decrease or significant decrease in costs through the 
implementation of ­e-commerce solutions. According to the survey re­
sults, the most important cost categories that were reduced appeared to be 
transactional cost specifically in terms of paperless transactions, admin­
istrative cost associated with reduction of purchasing procurement per­
sonnel, inventory cost, and reduction of prices of materials and services. 
All this represents typical cost savings results associated with ­e-commerce 
implementation.
The non-monetary value creation may incorporate a variety of tan­
gible and intangible results relevant to ­e-commerce development:
Improved customer satisfaction through providing more choices of 
products, services, and information.
Customization and personalization of product and service offering.
Improved quality of products and services.
Faster delivery schedules.
Extended hours of work (24 hours, 7 days a week).
Global outreach of products, services, and information.
Permanent access to information.
According to the survey  [15], organizations that implemented 
­e-commerce presented relatively evenly distributed answers about the 
benefits of ­e-commerce implementation, which are shown in Table 1.3.
However, responses to the question of drawbacks and problems in 
implementing ­e-commerce solutions demonstrated that the three most 
critical problems in ­e-commerce implementation were high costs of im­
plementation, data security, and low liquidity (not enough buyers and 
sellers), which covered 66.7% of responses (see Table 1.4).

16	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
1.7  Chapter Summary: Managerial Aspects 
of ­E-Commerce
	 1.	 E-commerce has become a significant element in the modern global 
economic environment. It represents the use of a computer network, 
primarily the Internet, to buy and sell products, services, informa­
tion, and communication. ­E-commerce is also an application of 
technology using the Internet. In addition, it is a tool for increasing 
efficiency and lowering costs in organizations.
	 2.	 The main characteristics of ­e-commerce are its pervasiveness and 
inexorability. Pervasiveness of ­e-commerce means its persistent de­
velopment and proliferation in business and nonprofit organizations 
of various sizes. Inexorability of ­e-commerce represents its inevitable 
and unstoppable nature in terms of the high rates of growth that 
were described in the previous section.
	 3.	 e-commerce can be a rich source of value for organizations that em­
ploy it. ­E-commerce disintermediation means an act of taking out 
Table 1.3  Benefits of implementing ­E-commerce solutions
Main benefits of implementing ­E-commerce 
­solutions in organizations
Number of 
­responses (%)
Shorter procurement cycle
13.3%
Improve communication and relationships with suppliers
13.3%
Improve communication and relationships with customers
12.6%
Better reliability and control of purchase orders
11.9%
New channel of marketing and sale with global outreach
10.4%
Reduce inventory level and cost
8.9%
Eliminate or reduce the number of middlemen
8.9%
Reduce purchase prices
7.4%
Table 1.4  Drawbacks and problems in ­E-commerce implementation
Main drawbacks and problems in implementing ­
E-commerce solutions in organizations
Number of 
responses (%)
High costs of implementing ­e-commerce solutions
26.7%
Data security
26.7%
Not enough buyers and/or sellers online
13.3%
Poor integration with internal “back-office” systems
8.9%
Low return on investment and/or long payback period
6.7%
Not enough speed of connection/bandwidth problems
6.7%

	
What is ­E-Commerce?	
17
intermediary organizations used for channel delivery of products 
and services though ­e-commerce supply chain. At the same time, 
­e-commerce re-intermediation facilitates creation of third party orga­
nizations that provide virtual environments for connecting buyers and 
sellers or generally, business partners for transactions on the Internet.
	 4.	 Organizations may have various levels of ­e-commerce implemen­
tation. Pure ­e-commerce organizations are characterized by their 
products/services and processes being completely digitized. Partial 
­e-commerce organizations are those organizations that, besides digi­
tal products and processes, may have some physical ­e-commerce di­
mensions like physical products or processes. “Click-and-mortar” 
organizations are companies that conduct some ­e-commerce activi­
ties, but provide their primary business in the physical world.
	 5.	 E-commerce organizations are also differentiated by the transactions 
and interactions they make. The most common types are Business-to-
Business (B2B) and Business-to-Consumer (B2C) e-commerce trans­
actions. Besides B2B and B2C transactions, e-commerce transactions 
and interactions may have other types: ­consumer-to-consumer 
(C2C), business-to-business to-consumer (B2B2C), government-to-
business (G2B), mobile commerce (­M-commerce), Location-based 
Commerce (L-commerce), and some others.
	 6.	 Value creation in ­e-commerce represents the potential or expected 
and actual monetary and non-monetary results of utilizing an 
­e-commerce business model. The main monetary results of value 
creation include revenue enhancement through sales growth and 
price differentiation, and cost reduction related to cost of goods sold, 
operating costs, and assets intensity reduction. The non-­monetary 
value creation may incorporate a variety of tangible and intangible 
results relevant to ­e-commerce development like improved customer 
satisfaction and quality, faster delivery schedules, extended hours of 
work, global outreach, and permanent access to information.
References
1.	 Cable Network News (CNN), “Top 25 Innovations: The Internet Ranked 
No 1, Changed the World,” March 1, 2005, retrieved from www.cnn
.coml2005lTECHl01l03lcnn25.top25.innovationslindex.html.

18	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
2.	 Drucker, P., Managing in the Next Society, Truman Talley Book, New 
York, 2002.
3.	  “The Difference between the Internet and the World Wide Web,” 
Webopedia, February 29, 2008, retrieved from www.webopedia.com.
4.	 Internet Domain Survey, “Number of Hosts Advertised in the DNS,” 
Internet System Consortium (ISC), January 2008, retrieved from 
www.isc.org/index.pl?/ops/ds.
5.	 Mullaney, T.J., “E-biz Strikes Again,” Business Week, Special Report -- 
­E-Biz, May 10, 2004, retrieved from www.businessweek.com.
6.	 Anderson, P., “What is Web 2.0? Ideas, Technologies, and Implications 
for Education,” JISC Technology and Standard Watch, February 2007, 
1–63.
7.	 Bednarz, A., “Analyst Firm Predicts ­E-business Upswing”, Network 
World, September 1, 2004.
8.	 Juniper Media Metrix, “The Forecast for ­Business-to-Business 
e-­commerce”, DM Review, Jan. 17, 2006, retrieved from www
.­DMreview.com.
9.	 U.S. Census Bureau, “e-commerce 2004,” May 25, 2006, retrieved 
from www.census.govlestats.
10.	 E-Business News, “US Retail ­e-commerce Set for Growth,” February 2008, 
retrieved from www.ebusinessnews. infol?action=read&article=684.
11.	 “Forrester Research US eCommerce Forecast: Online Retail Sales 
to Reach $329 by 2010,” September 19, 2005, retrieved from www
.internetadssales.com.
12.	 eMarketer, “Report on Europe ­e-commerce: B2B and B2C,” July 2003, 
retrieved from www.emarketer.com/Report.aspx?b2b_b2c_euro_jul03.
13.	 Special Report-E-biz, “E-biz Strikes Again,” BusinessWeek, May 
10, 2004, retrieved from www.businessweek.com/magazine/con­
tent/04_19/b3882601.htm.
14.	 Whinston, A, Choi, S.Y., and Stahl, D. O., The Economics of 
­Electronic Commerce, 1st McMillan Technical Publishing, 1997.
15.	 Radovilsky, Z. and V. Hegde. Factors Influencing ­e-commerce 
­Implementation: Analysis of Survey Results, Journal of Academy of 
Business and Economics, Vol. IV, No.1, 2004, p. 29–37.

2.1  Why E-Commerce Business Model?
As we described in the previous chapter, the structure of e-commerce 
in organizations have completely changed in the last several years. In 
the early years of e-commerce development, it was predominantly 
­technology-driven and largely based on venture capital financing. Today 
e-commerce development is mainly business-driven and financed by tra­
ditional sources. E-commerce applications are used by companies to in­
crease and sustain their competitive advantage and as a way to produce 
more revenues/profits and reduce cost.
Generating successful performance results through e-commerce is 
based on a company’s ability to develop an efficient e-commerce business 
model. A well-established business model can facilitate the company’s 
competitive advantage and influence its monetary results. Successful uti­
lization of e-commerce business models by IBM, Apple, Dell and many 
other companies have triggered interest in understanding components 
of their e-commerce business models. However, there is still a variety of 
views in terms of what an e-commerce business model means for an or­
ganization, how many of these models exist today and how they are clus­
tered. According to one of the researchers, “Business models are perhaps 
the most discussed and least understood aspect of the web. There is so 
much talk about how the web changes traditional business models. But 
there is little clear-cut evidence of exactly what this means.”[1].
Existing academic sources are quite fragmented in terms of defin­
ing and developing e-commerce business models. Many researchers 
CHAPTER 2
Business Models for 
E-Commerce

20	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
concentrate on clustering e-commerce models in several groups to de­
fine their common characteristics. However, the number of groups and 
their descriptions vary significantly. Some researchers tried to develop an 
overall definition of e-commerce business models regardless of clustering 
or grouping them. In this case, the business model definition is usually 
limited to the extent of describing value and revenue generating opportu­
nities without recognizing other important components of e-commerce 
business models like supporting resources or value-added e-commerce 
processes.
Through existing literature sources, we have identified and analyzed 
modern approaches in defining and grouping e-commerce business mod­
els. This analysis allowed us to recognize that the definition of components 
used in e-commerce business models should be based upon answering the 
following questions:
• What is the need (value proposition) in creating e-commerce 
solutions?
• What are value-added e-commerce offerings (activities) 
including products, processes, and their relationships?
• How are the value proposition and value-added offerings 
supported by the company’s resources?
• How does the company want to generate revenue and reduce 
cost through e-commerce?
• What value will be created by developing this e-commerce 
model?
The main goals of this chapter are to:
• Define and present a comprehensive set of components used 
in developing and/or improving any e-commerce business 
model in an organization in order to provide a sustainable 
competitive advantage and successful value creation through 
e-commerce.
• Identify and present a new taxonomy of e-commerce business 
models based on the set of components and predetermined 
classification criteria.

	
Business Models for E-Commerce	
21
2.2  Defining E-Commerce Business Models
Before explaining e-commerce business models and their components, it is 
important to understand the meaning of the term “e-commerce business 
model.” It is interesting to point out that a Google search for ­“e-commerce 
business model” would produce more than one million links to the sites that 
define, explain, and analyze business models. This shows popularity of the term 
“business model” and indicates a variety of views on how to define this term.
In academic sources, the term “business model” is commonly defined 
as a tool/method by which a company would like to generate revenue/
profit and serve the customer needs. This definition is correct in terms of 
considering revenue/profit generation as a part of an e-commerce business 
model. However, the described definition is limited in its emphasis on just 
revenue/profit creation. This does not reflect the fact that an e-commerce 
business model may be used to create and sustain a company’s competitive 
advantage. In addition, these definitions do not consider cost reduction as 
an important factor, along with revenue, in generating a company’s profit­
ability and cost effectiveness. Finally, the described definition does not ad­
dress the issue of e-commerce products and processes, as well as how this 
business model affects customer satisfaction and overall company results.
A variety of authors attempted to identify and explain general ele­
ments (components) of e-commerce business models. Laudon and 
Traver[2] ­define eight key ingredients/components of an e-commerce busi­
ness model. These key components included:
• Value Proposition–defines how to fulfill the needs of 
customers.
• Revenue Model–describes how the company earns revenue and 
produces profit.
• Market Opportunity–refers to the company’s intended 
marketplace.
• Competitive Environment–refers to other companies operating 
in the same marketplace.
• Competitive Advantage–achieved by a company through 
e-commerce solutions.
• Market Strategy–a plan on how to enter a new market and 
attract new customers.

22	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
• Organizational Development–describes how the company will 
organize the work.
• Management Team–employees of the company that make the 
business model work.
This extended definition is a step forward in identifying and explain­
ing e-commerce business models. However, the extended definition does 
not include very important elements of e-commerce models such as 
value-added e-commerce offerings (products and processes), supporting 
resources, and value creation through e-commerce.
In a similar way, Rayport and Jaworski[3] present four main compo­
nents of e-commerce business models:
• Value proposition–market segments, customer benefits and 
unique resources.
• Online offering–ordering scope, products, processes, and their 
mapping.
• Resource system–select and align company resources.
• Revenue models–a variety of ways to earn money in 
e-commerce solutions.
The four components are well described and associated case studies 
are provided. However, detailed analysis of these components reveals their 
main limitations. First, the construction of the four components fits well 
for the B2C e-commerce models. However, these components would not 
be sufficient to describe B2B models related to suppliers, for example, 
electronic procurement and strategic sourcing of suppliers. Secondly, the 
described components do not address the cost model, which is a critical 
factor in successful management of various e-commerce models. Finally, 
the four components do not include description of value creation–a very 
important element of showing potential results in developing or improv­
ing e-commerce business models.
Overall, the provided analysis shows that existing definitions of 
­e-commerce business models lack comprehensiveness in terms of present­
ing a full scope of components that need to be employed for developing 
or improving e-commerce business models. Also, existing taxonomies of 
­e-commerce models are not supported by underlying classification criteria.

	
Business Models for E-Commerce	
23
2.3  Components of 
E-Commerce Business Models
To overcome the issues in defining and 
grouping e-commerce business models, 
we introduce a comprehensive set of com­
ponents that may be employed to develop 
any e-commerce business model/applica­
tion for any type (sector) of e-commerce, 
i.e., B2B, B2C, C2C, and others (see 
­Figure 2.1)[4].
In addition to previously explained 
components such as value proposition, 
online offering, resource system, and rev­
enue models, we added two new compo­
nents, cost model and value creation, and 
enhanced other components (that will 
be explained in the next section of this chapter). This is done to make 
the e-commerce model development more comprehensive and to em­
brace all types of e-commerce applications/solutions. The components 
in ­Figure 2.1 are logically connected with each other in a sequence that 
defines their position in the set.
The components of an e-commerce business model and main ques­
tions that need to be answered in order to develop or improve these mod­
els are listed in Table 2.1.
Table 2.1  Main questions for components of E-commerce 
business model
Component
Key questions
Value Proposition
Who are the target customers and what are their benefits?
Value-added 
E-commerce 
Offerings
What value-added offerings (value-added activities) including 
e-commerce products/services and e-commerce processes are 
involved in fulfilling the value proposition?
Supporting 
Resources
What resources are required to support the value proposition, 
e-commerce products/services and processes?
Revenue and 
Cost Models
How does the company generate revenue and reduce costs 
through its e-commerce model(s)?
Value Creation
What monetary and non-monetary value (results) is created 
through the e-commerce business model?
Figure 2.1  Components 
of E-commerce business 
models
9DOXH3URSRVLWLRQ
6XSSRUWLQJ5HVRXUFHV
9DOXH±DGGHG(FRPPHUFH
2IIHULQJV
5HYHQXH&RVW0RGHOV
9DOXH&UHDWLRQ

24	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
Value Proposition
The development and/or improvement of e-commerce business models 
start with identifying the need of creating an e-commerce model-value 
proposition (Table 2.1). The value proposition represents the way an 
organization attains competitive advantage through e-commerce. It is 
also based upon unique values that the organization offers to its custom­
ers through e-commerce. The value proposition describes two main ele­
ments: (1) customers (target market segment) that will be using these 
e-commerce solutions; and (2) core customer benefits.
The target market segment is a function of many variables. The key 
decision variables are frequently represented by market size, for example, 
significant dollar size of the market or high percentage of growth rates. The 
bigger the market size, the more opportunities a company has to build an 
e-commerce model in this market. The market segment may be associated 
with consumer demands that are not met for convenience-oriented custom­
ers, low-, mid-, and high-end price customers, business customers in de­
mand-side models, or even suppliers. Finally, a target market segment may 
be derived from an insufficient level of competition in a target market. If 
there is a market with insufficient sales (competition) of products/services 
for convenience-oriented or low- price customers, then it will be a very 
good target market segment for developing an e-commerce business model.
Core customer benefits are multiple benefits that the company may 
offer to its target segments through e-commerce. It is usually associated 
with the following benefits:
• Less expensive products and services; more deep discounts
• Ability to choose the best quality products and services
• Easy access to products, services, and information
• More choices of products, services, and information
• Customization and personalization
• Removal of intermediaries
Value-added E-commerce Offerings
Value-added e-commerce offerings or simply value-added activities 
represent a set of e-commerce products/services, processes and their 

	
Business Models for E-Commerce	
25
relationships, which are required to fulfill the value proposition (mar­
ket segments and core customer benefits) of an e-commerce model. The 
value-added offerings include three main elements: (1) product and ser­
vice offerings, (2) e-commerce processes, and (3) relationships between 
products/services and processes.
The product and service offerings are based on a specific scope of 
offerings, which refers to a number of categories of products, services, 
and information that a company offers online. The scope of e-commerce 
offerings may be clustered into three groups:
• Category-specific dominance refers to companies that focus 
exclusively on one product category, a category killer (like 
YouTube.com is specializing on upload streaming and 
downloading movies).
• Cross-category dominance represents an extension of product 
offerings from a single category to additional product 
categories (HP.com sells Hewlet-Packard computers and 
related categories of electronic equipment after making a 
name for itself as a printer manufacturer).
• Metamarkets are e-commerce companies with cross-category 
dominance and many unrelated clusters of products. For 
example, Amazon.com sells books, CDs, toys, and other 
product categories that are not always related to each other.
For product and service offerings, a model presented by Alter[5] may 
be used to describe these offerings by utilizing three dimensions: degree 
of tangibility, degree of customization, and degree of digitization (see 
­Figure 2.2). Degree of tangibility represents a company’s offering of tan­
gible products (books, computers, etc.) or intangible products/services 
(payment transactions, order tracking, etc.), or both through e-commerce 
solutions. Degree of customization designates an ability of a company to 
provide standardized/commodity products (like antiques, auction items, 
etc.), or customized products/services (computers, reports, etc.), or some 
combination of the two. Degree of digitization means that a company 
can offer either physical products or digital products/ services or a combi­
nation of physical and digital products.

26	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
The product/service description in a three dimensional space clearly 
explains the impact of e-commerce on the value proposition. For exam­
ple, if a company would like to sell online software as a service (SaaS), 
then the value-added dimensions will be as follows. First, the value will 
be added by a digitized e-commerce solution distributed online. Second, 
the value will be maintained by providing the service online, and, third, 
this online service may be fully customized.
An e-commerce process is a group of related online activities that uses 
information and other resources to deliver value to customers, whether 
they are end consumers, business customers, or suppliers. As can be seen 
from Table 2.2, value-added e-commerce processes may consist of cus­
tomer processes, supplier, and internal organizational processes.
The customer-related processes define e-commerce processes that the 
company may want to establish or modify to add value to its custom­
ers (see Table 2.2). Examples of such processes, like online information 
search, checkout process and others, are listed in Table 2.2. An example 
of a typical customer process (buying computes from Dell’s web site) is 
shown in Figure 2.3. The supplier-related processes are associated with 
a set of processes that may be needed in certain e-commerce business 
models like (e-procurement, e-reverse auctions, etc.) to providing value 
by facilitating supplier selection, outsourcing from suppliers, and supplier 
support. By doing all this, the company always adds value to its custom­
ers. Finally, the internal organizational processes provide technology, 
3URGXFW
6HUYLFH
3K\VLFDO
'LJLWDO
&RPPRGLW\
&XVWRPL]HG
'HJUHHRI'LJLWL]DWLRQ
'HJUHHRI7DQJLELOLW\
'HJUHHRI
&XVWRPL]DWLRQ
Figure 2.2  E-commerce products and services (Alter[5])

	
Business Models for E-Commerce	
27
content development, update, online maintenance and support that af­
fect the value offering to the customers (see Table 2.2).
The customer process in Figure 2.3 also demonstrates relationships 
between products/services and e-commerce process. This process should 
effectively walk the customers through the entire purchase-decision cycle 
and encourage the customer to continually revisit the process.
Supporting Resources
The third component required in developing or improving an e-­
commerce business model is based on a set of resources that supports 
the e-­commerce model’s value proposition and online value-added of­
ferings (see Figure 2.1). A company should always consider identifying 
resources that would add value to e-commerce development and differ­
entiate the company from its competitors. These unique resources could 
be e-commerce technology, brand name, and quality of products and ser­
vices. They can also represent distribution networks, supplier networks, 
personnel, integrated software, an ERP system, outsourcing, and other 
Table 2.2  Value-added E-commerce processes
Process type
Main value-added processes
Customer Processes
Information search
Product offerings
Evaluation of alternatives
Purchase decision
Checkout process
Order tracking
Post-sales service and support
Need recognition (reminders, gifts, etc.)
Supplier Processes
Information search
Supplier selection
Outsourcing supplies
Supplier performance
Supplier relations
Supplier support
Checkout process
Order tracking
Internal Organizational Processes
Technology update
Content development and update
Online maintenance and support

28	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
resources. The quality and appropriateness of e-commerce resources are 
based upon their ability to be unique in providing competitive advantage. 
Strong links should exist between resources and the value proposition. In 
addition, strong complementary and supporting links should also exist 
among the resources in the system. The quality and appropriateness of 
resources can be assessed based upon the following criteria:
• Uniqueness of the resource system
• Strong links between resources and value proposition
• Strong links (complementation and support) among the 
resources in the system
• Providing sustainable advantage
To identify resources needed to successfully develop an e-commerce 
business model, a company needs to:
• Establish core benefits of the value proposition, as discussed 
in this section 
• Identify resources that relate to each benefit
• Recognize the extent to which the firm can provide these 
resources
• Find partners (if necessary) who can successfully complete 
identified resources
+RPH
'HOOFRP
6HOHFW
&XVWRPHU
7\SH
6HOHFW
/LQH
3URGXFW
6HOHFW
&RPSXWHU
7\SH
3URGXFW
6HOHFW&RPSXWHU
0RGHO)DPLO\
6HOHFW
0RGHO
1XPEHU
6HOHFW%HVW
&RQILJXUD
WLRQ
6HOHFW
WLRQ
&XVWRPL]D
&RQILJXUHWKH6\VWHPRU
&KHFN&RQILJXUDWLRQ

6HOHFW
$FFHVVRULHV
:DUUDQW\
&KHFN
RXW
$GG2UGHUWR
6KRSSLQJ&DUW
(QWHU
6KLS
,QIR
(QWHU
3D\PHQW
,QIR
6XEPLW
2UGHU
6LJQLQ([LVWLQJ
&XVWRPHURU
&UHDWH1HZ$FFRXQW
Figure 2.3  Typical e-commerce process

	
Business Models for E-Commerce	
29
Revenue and Cost Models
The fourth component of the e-commerce business model is revenue and 
cost models (see Figure 2.1). The revenue model describes how a com­
pany will generate revenue/profit through e-commerce to build and sus­
tain a competitive advantage. Examples of revenue models are presented 
in Table 2.3. A company developing or improving an e-commerce model 
needs to identify which revenue/profit model or combination of mod­
els is going to be employed in order to achieve a competitive advantage 
and fulfill the value proposition. For example, IBM may employ online­ 
­product/service sales, subscription fees for their online services and licens­
ing fees for the software they sell to the customers. An online company 
like www.bizrate.com provides comparison of products and services, and 
their respective prices, from different online sellers along with their In­
ternet links. The company may receive affiliate fees from these sellers for 
referring customers to their web sites (see Table 2.3).
Table 2.3  Revenue and cost models
Revenue/cost model
Description
Revenue model
Product, Service, or 
Information Sales
Sales through retail, wholesale sites or pay-per-use 
information
Transaction Fees
Charging a fee or taking a percentage of the transaction 
sum for facilitating a customer-seller transaction
Subscription Fees
Subscriber fees for magazines, newspapers or other 
information/service businesses
Advertising
Charging fees for selling adds, sponsoring links and 
sponsoring sites
Affiliate Fees
Companies receive commissions for referring customers to 
other sites
Licensing Fees
Fees generated from the licensing of content (software 
applications)
Cost model
Direct or Indirect 
Material/ Resource Cost
Reduction of direct/indirect material costs through lower 
unit price, less inventory stock, on-time delivery, etc.
Cost Due to Paperless 
Environment
Reduction or elimination of paper transactions
Administrative Expenses
Reduction of human resources due to e-commerce 
solutions
Quality Cost
Reduction or elimination of costs associated with incorrect 
design, rework, repair, excessive warranty payments, etc.

30	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
The cost model emphasizes ways that a company uses for reducing 
cost through an e-commerce business model. It is important to point 
out that for demand-side e-commerce (e-tailing, auctions, etc.), both rev­
enue and cost models are relevant. However for supply-side e-commerce 
­(e-procurement, reverse auctions, etc.), the revenue generation aspect 
may not be relevant because companies do not generate revenues through 
outsourcing. The benefit of the e-commerce system is derived from its 
cost reduction. In this case, the cost model becomes the only model for 
supply-side e-commerce. For example, Hong Kong-based Cathay Pacific 
Airways developed an electronic procurement (e-procurement) web site 
for the maintenance department to generate purchase requisitions of 
components needed to service airplanes. These requisitions seamlessly go 
to the purchasing department, which generates purchase orders and sends 
them electronically to the required vendor. The Cathay Pacific cost model 
would be to reduce administrative expenses, provide a paperless environ­
ment, and reduce the cost of quality.
Value Creation
The fifth and final component of the e-commerce business model (see 
­Figure 2.1) is value creation. This was discussed in detail in Chapter 1. 
Value creation represents the potential/expected monetary and non-
monetary results of utilizing an e-commerce business model, i.e., an 
­output of the ­e-commerce model development. The main monetary 
value creation includes:
• Revenue enhancement through volume growth and price 
differentiation
• Cost reduction related to cost of goods sold, operating costs, 
and asset intensity reduction through reducing the cost of 
working capital and/or fixed assets.
The non-monetary value creation may incorporate a variety of tan­
gible and intangible results relevant to e-commerce development such as:
• Improved quality of products and services
• Faster delivery schedules

	
Business Models for E-Commerce	
31
• Improved customer satisfaction
• Global outreach of products, services, and information
• Permanent access to information
2.4  Classification of E-Commerce Models
Classification Groups
The described set of components provides a comprehensive solution for 
developing a new, or improving an existing e-commerce business model. 
These components may be used to develop a variety of e-commerce mod­
els to fulfill various customer needs and market segments.
The classification of e-commerce models can be based upon clustering 
them into four classification groups, depending on their association with 
customers and suppliers, and on their service/ support role in e-commerce 
(Figure 2.4). These four groups contain the following definition:
• Demand (sell)-side models that provide e-commerce 
solutions to the organization’s customers
• Supply (buy)-side models that are concerned with online 
outsourcing and supplier relationships
• Collaborative commerce (c-commerce) models that establish 
online collaboration between an organization and its 
customers, or an organization and its suppliers
Figure 2.4  Classification of E-commerce Business Models
6XSSOLHUV
&XVWRPHUV
6XSSO\%X\±6LGH
'HPDQG6HOO±6LGH
&ROODERUDWLYH&RPPHUFH
&±FRPPHUFH
(SURFXUHPHQW
5HYHUVH$XFWLRQ
(VRXUFLQJ
([FKDQJH
6WRUHIURQW
)RUZDUG$XFWLRQ
,QIRPHGLDU\$IILOLDWH
&ROODERUDWLYH'HVLJQ
&ROODERUDWLYH3ODQQLQJ
(±VHUYLFH
:HE3RUWDO0RELOH6HUYLFH
(SD\PHQW(ORJLVWLFV
,63:HE+RVWLQJ(',

32	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
• E-service models–a variety of models that provide different 
kinds of online services to its customers to support and 
enhance the previous three groups of e-commerce models.
The models specified in each classification group in Table 2.4 are typi­
cal examples of e-commerce development in this group. However, they 
do not represent an exhaustive list of all possible model solutions avail­
able today. It is an ongoing process of creating new, and refining existing 
models, in order to fulfill customer’s needs in the online business envi­
ronment. However, the five components of e-commerce business models 
described in the previous section should always be employed to create 
new or improve existing models in each of these groups.
Description of E-commerce Models
Brief descriptions of the models in each of the four classification groups 
are provided in Table 2.4. The table also contains examples of web sites 
based on each of the models.
The demand (sell)-side e-commerce models are designed by orga­
nizations (sellers) to provide selling opportunities on the downstream of 
supply chains, i.e., from the organization to its customers. The most com­
mon model in this group of e-commerce models is storefront, an online 
selling directly to consumers (B2C) or business customers (B2B) with 
established fixed and discounted prices. A direct-selling online without 
using an intermediary (retailer, for example) is also called e-tailing.
The forward auction model is an online auction in which ­shoppers 
make bids for products and services, and the highest bidders wins the items. 
The item prices are not fixed but rather dynamically change ­depending on 
the bids. During the auction, the price of the auctioned product changes 
in an ascending order until the highest price will win the auction. The 
­infomediary/affiliate models, sometimes called information brokers, are 
used to sell aggregated information. This aggregated information include 
online search, content, advertisement, and sponsored links to the affiliated 
sites, or selling research reports/papers to the customers.
The supply (buy)-side e-commerce models are established by or­
ganizations to enable outsourcing (buying) from their suppliers on the 

	
Business Models for E-Commerce	
33
upstream of the supply chains. One of the common models in this group is 
reverse auction (tender) model. In this model a buyer (buying organiza­
tion) creates a request for quote (RFQ) and invites potential suppliers to 
submit bids, and then, using the online auction process, selects usually 
the lowest bidder. The price during the auction process is dynamically 
changing in descending order until the lowest price wins the customer. In 
this case the price change is the reverse of the ascending price trend in the 
forward auction, and, that is how this model got the term “reverse auc­
tion.” In most cases, reverse auctions are used for business outsourcing, 
i.e., B2B type of e-commerce. However, reverse auctions for consumers 
also exist, for example, in a famous company Priceline.com. An individ­
ual through Priceline.com can invite airlines to bid on his air ticket price 
(also called “Name your own price”).
E-procurement with electronic catalogs is also a common type of 
supply-side e-commerce. In this case, buyers do purchasing/procurement 
online based upon criteria established in the organization (or outsourced 
from a third party provider) electronically. In this case, the catalogs iden­
tify a list of suppliers, their respective products and associated prices. The 
e-sourcing model is used for online sourcing of suppliers. This may in­
clude identifying and comparing perspective suppliers, selecting suppli­
ers, and negotiating contract terms with them.
The exchange model is built upon creation of a virtual electronic 
marketplace, where buyers and sellers can meet together to transact 
business online. A public exchange is run by an electronic intermediary 
company that facilitates electronic transactions between buyers and sell­
ers and remains impartial (does not favor any part). A private exchange 
is designed and run by an individual company that invites other buyers 
and sellers to do online business. A consortia exchange is created by 
a group of buyers that opens an electronic (virtual) marketplace and 
invites potential suppliers to do business online. Main exchange func­
tions are:
• Matching buyers and sellers in a virtual marketplace
• Aggregating product/service offerings from sellers
• Facilitating transactions (seller evaluation, information 
search, additional services, etc.)

34	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
Table 2.4  Description of E-Commerce business models
Groups
Models
Brief description
Example
Demand-side
(Sell-side)
E-commerce
Storefront
A seller opens an electronic marketplace to sell its products/services to the business 
customers or end consumers
Dell.com
Forward Auction
A seller opens a seller-centric auction online to sell new, used, overstocked, 
obsolete products or hard to move commodities
Auctions.yahoo.com
Infomediary/
Affiliate
Selling aggregated information on products, services and research reports/ papers 
online. This model may also provide purchase opportunities from other affiliated 
sites
Google.com
Supply-side
(Buy-side)
E-commerce
Reverse Auction
A buyer opens an electronic marketplace and invites potential suppliers to bid on 
the announced request for quotation (RFQ)
Procure.com
E-procurement with 
Catalog
A buyer utilizes an electronic marketplace to do purchasing/outsourcing online
Oracle iProcurement
E-sourcing
Strategic sourcing online; locating and selecting appropriate suppliers, and 
negotiating contracts with them
Ariba.com
Exchange
A company creates an electronic marketplace where buyers and sellers can meet 
online to do business
Insure.com

	
Business Models for E-Commerce	
35
Groups
Models
Brief description
Example
Collaborative 
commerce 
E-services
Collaborative
Design
E-design/ Collaborative Product Commerce (CPC)-Provides online capabilities for 
design partners to sharing information, drawing, and other data on new product 
design and development
Dassault Systems for 
collaborative e-design and 
CPC
Collaborative
Planning
Collaborative Planning, Forecasting, and Replenishment (CPFR)-Suppliers and 
retailers collaborate in their planning and demand forecasting to optimize flow of 
materials along the supply chain
Logility.com for CPFR
Web Portal
A web site that provides a starting point (gateway) to other resources on the 
Internet or an intranet
Yahoo.com
Mobile
Service/M-commerce
Provides wireless service to conduct any type of e-commerce (B2B, B2C, etc.) 
through wireless Internet
Wireless trading at Charles 
Schwab Financial
E-payment
Allows payments and money transactions using any e-commerce business model
Verisign.com
E-logistics
Provides logistics/transportation capabilities for online businesses
UPS.com
ISP/ Web Hosting
Internet Service Provider (ISP) provides companies with access to the Internet. 
They also enable web hosting–A service that provides Internet users with 
online systems for storing information, images, video, or any content accessible 
via the web
Hostway.com
EDI
Electronic Data Interchange (EDI)–Third parties provide EDI services that enable 
organizations with different computer equipment and software to connect for 
business transactions, for example, orders and invoices
EDI-Service.com

36	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
The Collaborative Commerce (c-commerce) group of models 
uses Internet-based technologies to collaboratively plan, design, de­
velop and manage products and services through their life cycle. The 
­c-­commerce models are directly associated with the two described groups 
of e-­commerce models, demand-side and supply-side e-commerce. 
­C-­commerce provides a virtual environment to improve products and 
their delivery to the customers in the case of demand-side e-commerce. 
Collaborative models also improve relationship and communication with 
suppliers in the supply-side e-commerce models (see Figure 2.4). The 
­E-design/­Collaborative Product Commerce (CPC) models provide on­
line capabilities for design partners to share information, drawings, and 
other data on new product/service design and development. The Col­
laborative Planning, Forecasting, and Replenishment (CPFR) models 
are used by suppliers and retailers to collaborate in their planning and de­
mand forecasting to optimize flow of materials along the supply chain. In 
this case, business partners—manufacturers, suppliers, distributors—all 
have real-time access to point-of-sale order information.
The E-service group of models contains a variety of different electronic 
services used to provide value-added online services to different parts of the 
e-commerce processes on both the demand and supply sides. One of the 
very popular e-service models is the web portal, which is a web site that 
provides a starting point (gateway) to other resources on the Internet or 
an intranet. The web portals typically provide personalized capabilities to 
their users from a number of different sources. The portals are also known 
as “Enterprise Information Portals” (EIP). Common types of portals are:
• Public portals that provide gateways to other resources to all 
customers.
• Corporate (enterprise) portals, also known as enterprise 
information portals (EIP); they may be developed for internal 
company’s use, for customer access, or for supplier access.
• Publishing (vertical) portals for connecting to various 
sources of publishing information.
Mobile service or mobile commerce (m-commerce) models repre­
sent any e-commerce solution done in a wireless environment, especially 

	
Business Models for E-Commerce	
37
via the Internet. Mobile devices create an opportunity to deliver new 
services to existing customers. This relatively new and growing area of 
e-­commerce models may be employed for financial applications like wire­
less banking and bill payment. M-commerce models are also used for 
intrabusiness and enterprise applications of supporting mobile employees 
and dispatching. They are also employed in supply chain management for 
vehicle and product location and monitoring systems.
In the next six chapters, we will discuss and analyze the described 
e-commerce business models including demand-side and supply side e-
commerce, collaborative commerce, mobile commerce, e-payment and 
other services.
2.5  Measuring Results of E-Commerce Models
To measure results of development and further implementation of 
­e-­commerce business models various monetary (financial) and non-­
monetary measurements may be used. There may be several purposes for 
using those measurements. The measurements may be employed for getting 
support and investments for starting a new, or for the continuation of an 
existing e-commerce project. Measures may be needed to identify the prog­
ress of work on the e-commerce project or to determine whether benefits 
were achieved from investments in the e-commerce project. Below, we pro­
vide detailed information about those measurements and their calculations.
Monetary Measures
Monetary measurements are used to identify and analyze financial results 
of implementing e-commerce models. They may be also used at the stage 
of designing and developing the e-commerce model as expected (future) 
financial results. Among those measurements are:
• Revenue–Gross revenue generated by the e-commerce sale.
• Cost–Overall costs generated by the e-commerce model 
including operational cost of production use; cost to 
maintain, enhance, and support the online system; direct 
staff cost; management cost; and overhead cost. The cost 

38	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
can be also identified as comparative costs of web site versus 
traditional business practice.
• Profits–Gross profit generated by the online sale through a 
specific e-commerce model.
Return on Investment (ROI) defines the business value of e-­commerce 
model. It is identified as an expected savings divided by investments in 
e-commerce, equal to some percentage figure:
	
ROI 5 (Gains-Investment Cost) / Investment Cost	
(1)
This measure is a very popular indicator of how efficient and effective the 
implementation of an e-commerce business model will be.
Payback is a measurement of how long it will take the e-commerce 
investment to pay for itself:
	
Payback 5 Investment Cost / Savings	
(2)
Usually measured in months or years, it is another very important indica­
tor of how successful e-commerce implementation will be.
Figure 2.5  Calculation of Monetary Measures

	
Business Models for E-Commerce	
39
Net Present Value (NPV) is cash flows less cash outflows of 
­e-­commerce model expressed in today’s dollars. Cash inflows may include 
cost reductions as well as revenue increases, and represents the expected 
benefits of e-commerce
	
=
5 S
1
NPV c,t,d
c i
d
(
)
( )/(1
)t i
i 0
n
( ) 	
(3)
where
c(i) is cash flow,
t is unit time when the investment return is expected
d is discount rate.
NPV shows how much the current investment will be worth in the future 
at a given discount rate.
Internal Rate of Return (IRR) or Hurdle Rate is the rate at which 
the present value of cash inflows equals cash outflows, i.e., the rate at 
which NPV is equal to zero. Expressed in percentage terms, this value 
must exceed the minimum rate of return the management will accept. 
This measurement tells how efficient the investment in the e-commerce 
model might be as opposed to investing money in a bank account with a 
predetermined rate of return. For example, if the bank’s rate of return is 
6% and IRR is 24%, then investing in the e-commerce model is 4 times 
more efficient. An Excel spreadsheet presented in Figure 2.5 shows calcu­
lations of ROI, payback, NPV and IRR.
Suppose that the initial investments in designing and developing the 
e-commerce business model are going to be done in 2007 in the amount 
$1,284,000. This will require additional costs for maintaining the sys­
tem in the subsequent years, when the model will be implemented (see 
cost numbers in Figure 2.5). The e-commerce model will “go live” at the 
beginning of 2008, and thus, there will be no income/profit and sav­
ings in the previous year. However, in the subsequent years (2008–2010), 
the e-commerce model will be expected to provide the savings listed in 
the spreadsheet in C7:E7. For each year, the annual income is the differ­
ence between profit and savings on one side and investment and costs on 
the other side in this year. In 2007, though, the number is just negative 

40	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
representing initial investments. Let us assume that we are going to ana­
lyze this investment decision for a period of 3 years, and required rate of 
return will be 5%.
T﻿he average income per year is the average of annual incomes in 
2008–2010. The Excel formula for that would be 5 AVERAGE(C9:E9). 
The payback may be calculated as the ratio between initial investments 
and average income per year:
	
Payback 5 1,284,000/708,133 5 1.8 years.
T﻿his number indicates that the initial investments in the e-commerce 
model will be recovered in about one year and 10 months. The ROI in 
this case will be opposite to payback, i.e., a ratio between the average an­
nual income and initial investments:
	
ROI 5 (708,133/1,284,000)*100 5 55%
T﻿his number tells us that for every dollar invested in the e-commerce 
business model, the return will be approximately 55 cents. To identify 
NPV, we can employ one of the Excel functions, =NPV(), which takes 
into consideration required rate of return and investment results in 
2007–2010:
	
5 NPV(B12, B9:E9) 5 $616,728
Finally, the IRR value may be calculated by using another Excel func­
tion, 5IRR():
	
5 IRR(B9:E9, B12) 5 31%
T﻿his number tells that the investment in e-commerce model will be 
6 times more efficient than just the required rate of return of 5%.

	
Business Models for E-Commerce	
41
2.6  Chapter 2 Summary: Managerial Aspects 
of E-Commerce Business Models
	 1.	 In general, business model is defined as a method or tool by which a 
company would like to generate revenue/profit and serve the customer 
needs. E-commerce business model should be identified by five main 
components: value proposition, value added e-commerce offerings, 
supporting resources, revenue and cost models, and value creation.
	 2.	 Value proposition represents the way an organization attains 
competitive advantage through e-commerce. It is also based upon 
unique values that the organization offers to its customers through 
e-­commerce. The value proposition is based on two main elements: 
(1) target market segment (customers) that will be using these 
­e-commerce solutions and (2) core customer benefits that can be 
offered to the customers by through e-commerce.
	 3.	 Value-added e-commerce offerings or simply value-added activi­
ties represent a set of e-commerce products/services, processes and 
their relationships, which are required to fulfill the value proposition 
(market segments and core customer benefits) of an e-commerce 
model. The value-added offerings include three main elements: 
(1) product and service offerings, (2) e-commerce processes, and 
(3) relationships between products/services and processes.
	 4.	 Supporting resources is a set of resources that sustain the e-­
commerce model’s value proposition and online value-added e-­
commerce offerings.
	 5.	 Revenue model describes how a company will generate revenue/profit 
through e-commerce to build and sustain a competitive advantage. 
A company developing or improving an e-commerce model needs 
to identify which revenue/profit model or combination of models is 
going to be employed. Cost model emphasizes ways that a company 
uses to reduce cost through an e- commerce business model.
	 6.	 Value creation represents the potential/expected monetary and 
non-monetary results of utilizing an e-commerce business model, 
i.e., an output of the e-commerce model development (discussed in 
­Chapter 1).

42	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
	 7.	 T﻿he classification of e-commerce models can be based upon cluster­
ing them into four classification groups, depending on their asso­
ciation with customers and suppliers, and on their service/support 
role in e-commerce. These four groups are: (1) demand (sell)-side 
models that provide e-commerce solutions to the organization’s cus­
tomers; (2) supply (buy)-side models that are concerned with online 
outsourcing and supplier relationships; (3) collaborative commerce 
(c-commerce) models that establish online collaboration between an 
organization and its customers, or an organization and its suppliers; 
(4) e-service models-a variety of models that provide different kinds 
of online services to its customers to support and enhance the previ­
ous three groups of e-commerce models.
	 8.	 T﻿he models specified in each classification group are typical exam­
ples of e-commerce development in this group. However, they do 
not represent an exhaustive list of all possible model solutions avail­
able today. It is an ongoing process of creating new, and refining 
existing models, in order to fulfill customer’s needs in the online 
business environment. The five components of e-commerce business 
models described in the previous section should always be employed 
to create new or improve existing models in each of these groups.
	 9.	 To measure results of development and further implementation of 
e-commerce business models various monetary (financial) and non-
monetary measurements may be used. These measurements may be 
employed for getting support and investments for starting a new, or 
for the continuation of an existing e-commerce project. Measures 
may be needed to identify the progress of work on the e-commerce 
project or to determine whether benefits were achieved from invest­
ments in the e-commerce project.
	10.	 Return on Investment (ROI) defines a business value of e-commerce 
model. It is identified as an expected savings divided by investments 
in e-commerce, equal to some percentage figure. This measure is a 
very popular indicator of how efficient and effective the implemen­
tation of an e-commerce business model will be.

	
Business Models for E-Commerce	
43
References
1.	 Rappa, M., “Business Models on the Web,” Digital Enterprise, May 
10, 2005, digitalenterprise.org/models/ mod- els.html.
2.	 Laudon, K. and C.G. Traver, e-commerce: Business, Technology, Society, 
Pearson/Addison Wesley, Boston, 2003.
3.	 Rayport, J. and B. Jaworski, Introduction to e-Commerce, McGraw-
Hill/Irwin, New York, 2004.
4.	 Radovilsky, Z., “Defining Components and Taxonomy of e-com­
merce Business Models,” Journal of Academy of Business and Econom­
ics, Vol. V, No. 3, 2005.
5.	 Alter, S. Information Systems: The Foundation of E-Business, Prentice 
Hall, Upper Saddle River, 2002.


CHAPTER 3
Demand-Side Models
3.1  Demand-Side E-Commerce Models
As described in the previous chapter, the demand (sell)-side e-commerce 
models are designed by organizations (sellers) to provide selling opportu­
nities on the downstream side of supply chains, i.e., from the organization 
to its customers. These are one of the most common types of e-commerce 
models in practice. The reasons for them to be the most common may be 
associated with the principles by which these models are designed. First, 
they are “for-profit” models used to generate additional revenue/profit for 
a “click-and mortar” company or as a main source of generating revenue/
profit for a pure e-commerce company. Second, because of their “for-
profit” nature, these models’ components like value proposition and value 
creation can be easily established. This allows the company to see a need 
to make investments into e-commerce development. Finally, sufficient 
capabilities exist to develop these e-commerce models including existing 
company’s web sites, e-commerce development software, and a variety of 
hosting companies to which design and development can be outsourced.
T﻿he classification of demand-side e-commerce models may depend on 
their configuration established in relation to sellers and their customers. 
One-to-many configuration (one seller— many customers) in Figure 3.1A 
is defined as an individual company that provides online sales to busi­
ness customers (B2B) or end consumers (B2C). This configuration may 
include:
• Selling products and services from a storefront (for example, 
walmart.com), which is an online store to sell directly to 
consumers (B2C) or business customers (B2B). In this case, 
the storefront uses fixed and discounted prices listed in an 
online electronic catalog.

46	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
• Selling via a forward auction (for example, dellauction.
com), where shoppers make bids for a product or service, and 
the highest bidder wins the product. The auction also uses 
electronic catalogs, but prices are not fixed. They dynamically 
change in ascending order while the auction is in progress.
• Selling through an infomediary/affiliate online store. The 
store is used to sell aggregated information by providing 
search, content, advertisement, and sponsored links to the 
affiliated sites (google.com) or selling research reports/papers 
to their customers (gartner.com).
Many-to-many configuration (many sellers and many customers) 
in Figure 3.1B is defined by a web-based marketplace, in which many 
companies sell to businesses (B2B) or directly to customers (B2C), for 
example through ebay.com. Different configurations of demand-side 
­e-commerce may require various elements and managerial consideration 
in order to reach desired results. We will discuss them in this chapter.
Another important classification of the demand-side e-commerce 
models is associated with the delivery channels, through which products 
and services come to the customers. Direct selling and auctioning (see 
Figure 3-2A) represents a direct online channel to business customers or 
end consumers. In this case, intermediaries like wholesalers or retailers 
are eliminated. The typical example of direct selling and auctioning is 
Dell Computers, which does not sell its products in retail stores, and 
uses Dell’s online capabilities for direct selling to business customers and 
consumers.
Direct selling to business customers (Figure 3.2B) is associated with 
selling products and services online to an established network of business 
$2QH±WR±0DQ\&RQILJXUDWLRQ
%0DQ\±WR±0DQ\&RQILJXUDWLRQ
%X\HU
6HOOHU
%X\HU
%X\HU
6HOOHU
6HOOHU
$XFWLRQ
6HOOHU
%X\HU
%X\HU
%X\HU
Figure 3.1  Demand-side E-commerce relationship

	
Demand-Side Models	
47
customers that in turn distribute those products to the end consumers. 
For example, Specialized, a well-known biking company, has created an 
online storefront (specialized.com) for its business partners (dealers). This 
online storefront became the ultimate source of information and pur­
chasing for the Specialized dealers. The storefront help dealers quickly 
$'LUHFW6HOOLQJDQG$XFWLRQLQJ
'HOOFRP
,QWHUQHW
&XVWRPHUV
&XVWRPHUV
%%
%&
'HOOFRP
,QWHUQHW
&XVWRPHUV
&XVWRPHUV
%%
'HOOFRP
,QWHUQHW
&XVWRPHUV
&XVWRPHUV
%%
%&
%'LUHFW6HOOLQJWR%XVLQHVV&XVWRPHUV
6SHFLDOL]HG
FRP
,QWHUQHW
'HDOHUV
&XVWRPHUV
&XVWRPHUV
%&
%%
6SHFLDOL]HG
FRP
,QWHUQHW
'HDOHUV
&XVWRPHUV
&XVWRPHUV
%&
%%
&&RPSOHPHQWDU\6HOOLQJDQG$XFWLRQLQJ
5(,FRP
,QWHUQHW
6WRUHV
&XVWRPHUV
&XVWRPHUV
%&
%&
5(,FRP
,QWHUQHW
6WRUHV
&XVWRPHUV
&XVWRPHUV
%&
%&
Figure 3.2  E-Commerce channels

48	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
order bikes and research for new and updated bike models, which overall 
reduces ordering costs and improves relationship between the company 
and its dealers.
Complementary selling and auctioning (Figure 3.2C) represents an 
online channel of selling products and services to business customers and 
end consumers, which is a complementary channel to the existing tradi­
tional distribution/retail channels. The complementary channel may be 
used with direct selling to the customers. However, the customers can 
receive the order directly to their residential or business location, or pick it 
up at a local store. For example, REI (a major retailer of recreational equip­
ment) sells its products through the online storefront, www.REI.com. 
Customers can receive orders directly at home or pick them up in a nearby 
REI store. In case of the in-store delivery, the customers would reduce 
their online cost of purchase by the amount of shipping and handling.
The establishment of the online selling channel in organizations, 
which already used traditional “on-the-ground” distribution channels, 
raises a question about the relationships between these channels. Some 
practitioners and researches considered online storefront as a cannibalizing 
Table 3.1  Pricing options in demand-side E-commerce[2]
Pricing Option
Source of Value
Examples of market 
segments
Precision
Determine the highest 
price that has little or 
no impact on purchase 
decision
Test prices continuously 
to better understand 
market and the zone of 
price indifference
Commodity products:
• Bikes, books, jewelry etc.
Adaptability
Change prices frequently 
in response to market 
conditions, inventory 
levels, etc.
Prices can be changed 
quickly and frequently 
and in response to 
Internet-monitored 
conditions
Consumer products with:
• Short life cycle (electronics),
• Perishable (food)
• Fluctuating demand
Segmentation
Divide customers into 
different classes and offer 
a different price for each 
segment
Easily identify which 
segment a buyer belongs 
to and create barriers 
between segments
Products in which customer 
profitability varies widely:
• Credit cards, mortgages
• Products with special offers

	
Demand-Side Models	
49
channel that would reduce volume and benefits of well-established tradi­
tional selling channels. In general, there is always a possibility of channel 
conflict if a company uses multiple distribution channels. However, a 
number of examples of firms using both online and “on-the-ground” sales 
channels in the same company proved to be non-cannibalizing. More­
over, different channels could help each other to increase selling volumes 
and improve relationships with customers. This has been proven in the 
case of REI’s approach of sending products purchased online to the stores 
for a pickup. Not only has this approach increased the online sales by pro­
viding less costly options to the customers, it also facilitated the growth of 
about 1% of in-store sales (see the case on REI at the end of the chapter). 
The customers, while coming to the store to pick up online purchase, may 
end up buying more products from the store. Another possibility is for 
the customers to first search for the products online, and then come to 
the store to purchase them.
In general, the ways to resolve the channel conflict between online 
and traditional channels can be as follows[1]:
• Let the established distributors handle e-business fulfillment 
to the customers. For example, Cisco Systems, a well-known 
networking company, sells all its products through a huge 
network of Cisco distributors and re-sellers, all of whom order 
their products from Cisco online.
• Provide online services/portals to intermediaries (distributors, 
retailers) and encourage them to use these services. 
Distributors and re-sellers use Cisco extranet enterprise portal 
for all their purchase needs including online information, 
purchase, accounting service, contract negotiations, and other 
business activities.
• Sell some products online only. Other products may be 
advertised online but sold exclusively offline. For example, 
Specialized provides online selling of bike accessories to the 
customers (gloves, helmets, t-shirts, etc.). However, their main 
products, bikes, are sold exclusively through the dealers.
• Do not sell online but offer information, catalogs, promotion, 
customer service online, etc.

50	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
3.2  Value-Added Offerings and Value Creation 
in Demand-Side E-Commerce
Why has the number of online storefronts increased dramatically in the 
last five years? What are the main value-added elements and benefits of this 
e-commerce model? As we discussed in Chapter 2, value-added e-commerce 
offerings represent products/services, processes, and their relationships 
that add value to the customers and the company that established these 
offerings. Sell-side e-commerce creates a new channel of marketing and 
product sales with global outreach. The value added here is the capabil­
ity of showing and promoting products and services to potentially unlim­
ited number of customers on the global scale. The online store in most 
cases can be used at any time of the day or week (24/7). It may be 
accessed from home or workplace, which adds extensive convenience to 
the customer. An online storefront consolidates all current product and 
sales information and search capabilities online, allowing the customers 
to find quickly needed products or services and other related informa­
tion (product descriptions and comparisons, associated services, etc.). In 
addition, the demand-side e-commerce model is based on direct orders 
from business customers or end consumers, which adds value to the cus­
tomers by reducing their purchase price and allowing customization of 
their orders. The direct order model also eliminates extra costs (margins) 
paid to an intermediary company like wholesaler or retailer.
Another very important value-added e-commerce offering is the ability 
of demand-side e-commerce to provide price differentiation online for 
various products and customer segments. The price may be different for 
a new customer versus a repeat customer, small business customer versus 
large volume customer, international customer versus domestic customer, 
and so on. All these can be incorporated into online storefront decisions, 
which add value to both the company and its customers. An e-commerce 
web site may also be an efficient way of testing different pricing options for 
various market segments. Table 3-1 provides three typical pricing options 
used online and how these create value in specific market segments[2]:
Another value-added offering is the ability to provide paperless processes, 
which speeds up the order fulfillment process and reduces transaction costs. 
The e-commerce storefront may be connected to the internal computer-based 

	
Demand-Side Models	
51
system like ERP (enterprise resources planning, see Chapter 10). This con­
nection provides an opportunity to coordinate order taking and order 
­execution, as well as order planning with other internal (back-end) systems 
like inventory, accounting, human resources, etc.
The monetary value creation in demand-side e-commerce is related 
to revenue/profit growth, cost reduction, and asset intensity reduction 
(see Chapters 1 and 2). Revenue/Income growth is associated with in­
creased sales through a new e-commerce distribution channel, and price 
differentiation for different market segments. According to an estimate, 
the average income growth attributable to e-commerce may be around 
5–10% of the total income growth[3]. Cost reduction is realized through 
lowering inventory cost by employing direct customer order, which may 
reduce the inventory cost by 5 to 15% on the average. The cost reduc­
tion may also be due to providing paperless transactions that reduce the 
total inventory cost by 1–3%[4]. In addition, the distribution cost may be 
reduced by elimination of intermediaries, which is estimated to be around 
20–30% of the total distribution/logistics cost. Finally, the company can 
benefit from asset intensity reduction through selling obsolete commodi­
ties (machines, equipment, extra space, etc.) in forward auctions, or cut­
ting inventory cost by selling overstocked and obsolete inventory.
3.3  Elements of Demand-Side E-Commerce
A demand-side e-commerce model should contain a variety of elements 
that allow customers to easily make their orders, pay for them, and obtain 
necessary customer service and support. On the other hand, companies 
need to provide a secure environment for the online transactions, and inte­
grate their online storefront with internal (back-end) management systems 
for quick and effective fulfillment of the customer orders. Overall, a typical 
demand-side e-commerce model may consist of the following elements:
• Electronic catalog represents an online searchable database 
with a collection of products or services that may be 
purchased on line. The product/service price may be fixed 
for a regular e-commerce storefront, or may be dynamically 
created for a forward auction web site.

52	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
• Configuration tool, along with electronic catalogs, is used 
to customize a product or service order according to the 
customer needs.
• Auction tool is also employed with electronic catalogs for 
conducting the online auctions, i.e., providing the customer 
with a bidding process on a timely basis, identifying the 
auction winner or canceling unsuccessful auction, etc.
• Order processing is established to complete the customer 
order by usually employing an electronic shopping cart and 
associated checkout process.
• Payment processing allows a customer to pay for his/her 
order online using appropriate electronic payment methods. 
For a consumer (retail e-commerce), these are usually online 
payment by a credit card or online accounts established by 
a third-party provider like PayPal. For B2B customers, the 
payment options may be wider, including not only credit card 
and PayPal, but also electronic transfer of funds, purchasing 
cards, electronic letter of credit, etc.
• Integration with internal processes provides connections of the 
storefront data with internal computer-based management systems 
like inventory, marketing, order management, etc. This is done 
to provide a quick and effective process of moving the customer 
order through the production and distribution for its successful 
fulfillment, i.e., receipt by the customer in a timely manner.
• Security system is employed for providing security and 
privacy of customer connection, ordering, and payments. It is 
also used to provide security of customer and company data 
stored in the e-commerce web site.
• Customer service may provide a variety of options in 
managing online customer needs including information 
content, customer support and maintenance (answering 
customer questions, resolving problems with orders, etc.), 
financial support, and others.
In general, the web-based elements and architecture for B2B demand-
side e-commerce are similar to those of B2C e-commerce. However, 

	
Demand-Side Models	
53
online selling processes in B2B storefronts are usually more complicated 
than B2C. These are due to the following reasons:
• Business customers may require registration to special private 
stores.
• Large volume of transactions may require automation of input.
• Large customers may get customized catalogs and prices.
• Payment systems may be based not only on credit cards, 
but also on other options like electronic transfer of funds, 
purchasing cards, electronic letter of credit, etc.
• Order fulfillment process (order-to-market) may need to be 
very fast.
We will describe below the main elements of demand-side e-­commerce 
model.
Electronic Catalogs
An electronic catalog is the virtual equivalent of a traditional product 
catalog. The electronic catalog contains a database of products and ser­
vices that the company sells online, and search capabilities for finding 
appropriate products and services. In addition, the electronic catalog in­
cludes written description and photos of products along with information 
about various promotions, discounts, payment methods, and methods of 
delivery.
The electronic catalog contains substantially more advantages than 
its paper equivalent. These advantages are based on the ease of updat­
ing such catalogs, and thus, providing the customer with up-to-date 
product information. The electronic catalog is directly integrated with 
the customer ordering system, including shopping cart and checkout 
process. It may also be integrated with back-end enterprise systems like 
inventory, order management, accounting, and others. Another major 
advantage of the electronic catalog versus its paper counterpart is the 
ability of the former to provide extensive search capability. This capa­
bility allows the customers to quickly find necessary products, compare 
them, and then select the right one for purchase. The electronic catalog 

54	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
is also a paperless environment, which provides long-term cost sav­
ings based on elimination of printing, shipping, and handling costs of 
paper catalogs.
Electronic catalogs may substantially differ from one another depend­
ing on the specific features and elements incorporated into them. The 
catalog’s classification may be based on three main parameters presented 
in Table 3.2: degree of ownership, dynamics of the presented informa­
tion, and degree of customization[5]:
An example of the electronic catalog from REI.com is presented in 
Figure 3-3 (see the case on How REI Scaled e-commerce Mountain at the 
end of this chapter). This catalog is very typical to demand (sell)-side 
storefronts. It is an internal catalog with the products sold by REI. It is 
also a static catalog, where products are presented by their textual descrip­
tions and static pictures. In addition, it is a mostly ready-made catalog, 
in which the same catalog with limited customization options is offered 
to any consumer.
Despite the fact that the catalog’s customization options are limited, 
they do exist. For example, Figure 3.3 shows that the color of the back­
pack demonstrated on this webpage may be adjusted according to a cus­
tomer choice. This tells you that the catalog does have some minimal 
Table 3.2  Classification of catalogs
Classification 
parameter
Types of 
catalogs
Description
Degree of 
ownership
Internal
Catalog and product there belong to the 
organization that sells them
External
Hosted by suppliers or third-party 
organizations
Dynamics of 
the information 
presentation
Static
Presented by textual description and static 
picture
Dynamic
Presented by motion pictures, animation, and/
or with sound; content may change frequently
Degree of 
customization
Ready-made
Sellers offer the same catalog to any customer 
without possible options
Customized
Customized content, pricing, and display 
depend upon customer characteristics

	
Demand-Side Models	
55
customization choices. In general, however, a customized catalog con­
tains a variety of product or service options that enable a customer to 
customize his/her product/service order.
T﻿he catalog customization may be done in several ways. One of them 
is to enable online product configuration, which is particularly useful to 
sell multiple combinations of products online. The e-commerce prod­
uct configuration tool (software) defines the available product options 
and accessories, and determines the product’s price from the options cho­
sen. The configuration tool may establish rules that define the require­
ments for certain categories of products, allow more than one choice for 
a given category, or do not allow certain combinations of options for 
specific products. A typical example of extensive product configuration is 
Dell’s web site that enables substantial configuration of product offerings 
within each product group like desktops, notebooks, accessories, etc. For 
example, the product configuration tool, built-in to the Dell’s electronic 
catalog, provides a variety of customized options including computer pro­
cessor, operating system, LCD panel, memory (RAM), hard drive, optical 
drive (CD/DVD drive), and others (see Figure 3.4). The final product 
price also depends on the chosen configuration.
Figure 3.3  REI Electronic catalog (from www.REI.com)

56	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
T﻿he configuration tools require the following:
• Database search based on multiple criteria (by product title, 
product family, product number, etc.).
• Online product configuration intelligence that would prohibit 
wrong configurations and suggest correct combinations of 
products.
• Full integration with the catalog, shopping cart, pricing and 
other elements of a seller-oriented model.
• Download configurations to the buyers’ systems.
T﻿he online configuration intelligence is done by special intelligent 
agents–a software tool that can perform routine tasks that require intel­
ligence. You can find detailed information about intelligent agents and 
their usage at the following site: www.agentland.com.
T﻿he second option of product customization is to provide a variety 
of online choices. This may be done by packaging a specific product, that 
may not be configured otherwise, with complementary products or ser­
vices, and then sell this combination as one product offer. Companies like 
Figure 3.4  Dell’s configuration (from www.dell.com)

	
Demand-Side Models	
57
eBay, Overstock.com, and others enable online auctions with a big vari­
ety of the same product offerings. For example, a Canon picture camera, 
besides being auctioned as an individual product, can be also packaged 
together with a variety of other associated products like car battery char­
ger, high capacity data disk, or cleaning kit, etc. All these online selling 
combinations may represent customized choices for the consumers.
Order Processing
Order processing in the demand-side e-commerce model may involve a 
variety of elements. They include electronic shopping cart, checkout pro­
cess using electronic shopping cart and payment systems. Order process­
ing may also involve order confirmation online and through an e-mail, 
order tracking by connecting to the logistics carrier that handles the order 
shipment and delivery. In addition, the order processing system may ex­
port all order and payment information to the internal back-end system 
like order management and accounting.
Electronic shopping cart or simply shopping cart (S-Cart) is a vir­
tual shopping cart that keeps track of the items visitors have ordered and 
allows them to add, remove items, and change the quantities of these 
items. The shopping cart (S-cart) usually resides on the seller’s site (see 
Figure 3-5). It is integrated with the seller’s catalog, configuration tool, 
and other elements of the demand-side e-commerce.
In the B2B environment, a customer (large customers, in particular) 
may need to maintain order information on its own site in order to inte­
grate this information with the internal purchasing or enterprise resource 
planning (ERP) system. In this case, a shopping cart that is called buyer 
shopping car (B-cart) resides on the buyer’s system (see Figure 3-5) rather 
than on the seller’s storefront site. This creates interoperable interface be­
tween the seller’s storefront and customer’s internal purchasing system.
When a visitor decides to purchase the items online, the shopping cart sends 
the order information into the checkout process, which involves several steps:
• Requires a customer to provide shipping address and other 
appropriate information (place of residence for tax purposes, 
e-mail address, delivery requirements, etc.)

58	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
• Calculates the total price for the purchased item including 
shipping and handling fees, and applicable taxes
• Provides a method of payment (credit card, third party 
payment system like PayPal, or variety of other payment 
methods for B2B selling), and requires the customer to 
submit his/ her payment information
• Requires the customer to verify all presented shipping and 
payment information before final order submission
• Generates an order confirmation with a confirmation number, 
e-mails the confirmation information to the customer, and 
provides tracking information.
Involving a variety of steps, this checkout process may be quite exten­
sive and time-consuming. Online sellers may require filling information 
on 3 to 5 consecutive web pages before the process is completed. Some­
times, an online seller deliberately withholds tax and shipping informa­
tion until the customer is at the end of the checkout process. The rational 
of this is that anticipation would make an illusion of lower overall prices 
for the product.
To improve the checkout process, e-commerce sellers introduced a 
checkout process with a very limited number of pages. Some online sell­
ers provide a single-page shopping cart and checkout process using the 
&DWDORJ
(OHFWURQLF
%X\HU
6KRSSLQJ
&DUW
6KRSSLQJ
&DUW
&XVWRPHUV
&XVWRPHUV
6HOOHU
Figure 3.5  S-Cart and B-Cart

	
Demand-Side Models	
59
software like Macromedia Flash (see information in www.adobe.com/
products/flash/flashpro). For example, in Figure 3-6 you can see a single 
webpage with both shopping cart (check-in and checkout dates, and room 
choices) and checkout process (name, address, credit card information, 
etc.) for the Watergate Hotel[6]. By clicking on “Finish Reservation“(see 
Figure 3-6), the completed input information will be verified and ac­
cepted by the system. The customer would see the whole information 
again, and would be required to click on the Submit button to submit 
the reservation.
Another improvement in the checkout process is possible through 
“one-click shopping cart.” This approach originated by Amazon is used 
by many other online sellers. When using the “one- click shopping cart” 
approach, a customer establishes an online account, which contains 
this customer’s name, home address, and payment information. After 
selecting product(s) for purchase and submitting them to the checkout 
process, the customer’s address and payment information along with 
prices and shipping and handling appear on the checkout page. This 
saves times, and the quickness of the checkout process increases cus­
tomer satisfaction.
Figure 3.6  One-page Shopping Cart and Checkout Process

60	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
In some online B2B selling sites, the process of retrieving payment 
information (billing, credit card, etc.) is done offline in order to validate 
potentially high volume payments through the company’s secure con­
nections. After validation, the product order is sent to the seller. Some 
business customers do the shopping process and checkout offline using 
downloadable catalogs and buyer shopping carts (B-carts). All these re­
duce checkout time and make the whole process more secure.
Integration with Internal Systems
To provide quick, high-quality online transactions of online customer 
orders, a company’s e-commerce demand-side should be integrated with 
its internal computer management system. It is specifically important for 
B2B online sites with large volumes of sales and complex payment sys­
tems. Integration of the online storefront order information should be 
done with:
• Order Management for validating and accepting order 
receipts and processing them further for production
• Accounts Receivable for accumulating order payment 
information
6WRUHIURQW
ZLWK
&XVWRPL]HG
&DWDORJV
6XSSO\&KDLQ
3ODQQLQJ
(53
&RQILJXUDWRU
(53
2UGHUV
'DWDEDVH
3DUWV
,QYHQWRU\
'DWDEDVH
3URGXFW
&DWDORJ
6XSSOLHUV
Figure 3.7  E-Fulfillment Process

	
Demand-Side Models	
61
• Manufacturing and Supply Chain Planning for processing 
order information through the production process that 
involves getting required materials from suppliers, actual 
order execution/production, and finally order distribution to 
the customers (shipping and handling)
• Inventory Control for checking on-hand materials, parts, 
components, and finished good inventory for shipment.
The seller may provide customer order information directly to sup­
pliers. This speeds up the outsourcing process and enables quick delivery 
of final products to customers. E-fulfillment is an online process that 
provides collaboration between sellers and suppliers in order to facilitate 
and speed-up production and delivery of customer orders. According 
to the e-fulfillment process, the seller makes order information directly 
available to suppliers. This may be done by giving the supplier’s direct 
access to the seller’s back-end (ERP) system. In this case, the supplier 
quickly identifies the order’s needs, produces it, and ships directly to the 
customer.
The e-fulfillment process is explained in Figure 3-7. A customer se­
lects the configure function and uses the Configurator options to config­
ure a product. The customer completes the configuration and requests 
a price quote. The Configurator (via Enterprise Resource Planning sys­
tem) returns the price of the product configured by the customer. Then, 
the customer using the checkout process orders the product. The cus­
tomer’s order information is transferred into the Orders Database. The 
Supply Chain Planning ERP module checks the Parts Inventory Database 
(for product availability) and generates a plan to produce the customer’s 
order and the list of parts needed to fulfill the customer order. The ERP 
software also updates the Parts Inventory Database. The customer order in­
formation and list of parts is electronically sent to a supplier. In addition, 
the supplier may have real-time access to the Parts Inventory Database 
and to the product and parts demand forecasts. The supplier, based on 
the customer order information, completes the product and sends it to 
the customer. The supplier also updates the Parts Inventory Database, and 
if necessary, may contractually be required to replenish parts that have 
fallen below appropriate levels.

62	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
3.4  Software for Demand-Side E-Commerce
Main Characteristics
The heart of developing demand-side e-commerce is development soft­
ware. This software should be able to create a variety of features used in 
demand-side models like user registration, logons, search options, search­
able database of products, customization and configuration options. The 
demand-side development software may also be used to place online 
orders, utilize shopping carts and checkout processes including order 
tracking capabilities, payment, shipping, and tax calculations. Finally, the 
software should provide secure process transactions, site analysis, report­
ing tools, product data imported from other web sites or internal systems, 
documentation and support, and integration with internal computerized 
management systems.
The software industry provides a great variety of solutions associated 
with the demand-side e-commerce models. Despite common design and 
development principles, these solutions differ from each other in terms 
of functionality, ways of distribution to the customers, prices, and other 
characteristics. Table 3.3 shows examples of some popular storefront de­
velopment software including Microsoft Office Live (former Microsoft 
Commerce Manager), eBay Stores , Yahoo Merchant Solutions, Store­
front.net, and Oracle iStore. In addition, Table 3.3 provides the main 
characteristics, benefits, and limitations of these software applications.
Examples of Demand-Side E-commerce Software
Microsoft’s Office Live is one of the most inexpensive and easy-to-use 
solutions enabling sellers, specifically in small start-up companies, to cre­
ate quickly an online store without using any special programming tools. 
This online web site may be used to sell products anywhere and in associa­
tion with any other web site like eBay, Amazon, or other major electronic 
marketplace. It is also a hosted solution, which means that the devel­
oped solutions, product database, and all related information are physi­
cally located on the Microsoft’s servers. Microsoft also provides support 
and maintenance of the online solutions. However, these solutions lack 

	
Demand-Side Models	
63
important features of demand-side e-commerce like providing promo­
tions and cross-selling of products, connections with internal ERP system 
(if it is not Microsoft-based) and suppliers.
The eBay Stores and Yahoo!Merchant Solutions are also relatively 
inexpensive, but more functionality-rich solutions. They are hosted so­
lutions that do not require any programming for development and im­
plementation. For example, Yahoo! Merchant provides the full-range of 
capabilities (see http://smallbusiness.yahoo.com/ecommerce/features.
php) for a product catalog with up to 50,000 products for sale, shopping 
cart and checkout, customer service, marketing and product promotion, 
payment system and order processing, shipping, and handling options, 
and online statistics. In addition, the demand side e-commerce model 
has the ability to be integrated with the inventory management system, 
QuickBooks accounting packages, UPS online tools, etc. However, 
Yahoo! Merchant Solutions allows creating their solutions only for selling 
products on Yahoo Shopping, which prohibits sellers from marketing and 
selling their products in other electronic marketplaces. The same concept 
of limited usage on the Internet is maintained by eBay Stores.
Storefront.net is a software package that contains tools used to de­
velop and implement an online storefront. It is usually not a hosted solu­
tion, and needs to be purchased and installed on the seller’s site. It also 
requires programming resources for developing storefront pages. How­
ever, Storefront.net provides more flexibility and customization in store­
front design, which makes it more appropriate for a small and mid-size 
companies involved in developing more sophisticated e-commerce web 
sites. Despite these benefits, Storefront.net is still standalone software, 
which does not provide sufficient capabilities of integration with internal 
ERP functions and external suppliers.
Oracle iStore is a set of solutions for creating global B2B and B2C 
demand-side e-commerce models. It provides an extensive set of devel­
opment tools, and it is a part of the Oracle’s ERP software called the 
­E-Business Suite. Thus, iStore is well-integrated with the other back-order 
Oracle applications including Inventory, Order Management, Shipping, 
Accounts Receivable, Customer Relationship Management (CRM), Sup­
ply Chain Planning, and some others.

64	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
Table 3.3  Examples of demand-side software
Product
Software 
distribution
Main benefits
Main 
limitations
Microsoft Office 
Live
Online hosted 
solutions
-Needed features for 
startups 
-Easy to use 
-Inexpensive 
-May be used with 
any web site
-Limited design 
flexibility 
-Lack of important 
features like product 
promotions, cross 
selling, etc.
-Limited or no 
connection to 
internal ERP system 
and suppliers
eBay Stores
Online hosted 
solutions
-Easy to implement 
-Extensive set 
of storefront 
development 
features 
-Some integration 
with internal 
customer system
Limited design 
flexibility 
-Only for selling on 
eBay 
-Limited 
integration with 
internal ERP 
functions and 
suppliers
Yahoo!
Merchant
Solutions
Online hosted 
solutions
-Easy to implement 
-Extensive set 
of storefront 
development 
features 
- Some integration 
with internal 
customer systems
-Limited design 
flexibility 
-Only for selling on 
Yahoo 
-Limited 
integration with 
internal ERP 
functions and 
suppliers
Storefront.
net
Sold to the 
customers via web 
site or by ground 
distribution
- Flexibility in 
storefront design 
and development 
-Variety of 
sophisticated design 
tools
-More expensive 
than hosted 
solutions
-Limited or no 
integration with 
internal ERP 
functions and 
suppliers
Oracle
iStore
Sold online or by 
ground distribution
-Comprehensive 
tools for developing 
sophisticated 
e-commerce 
demand-side 
-Full integration 
with internal ERP 
system and suppliers
-Very expensive
-Complex 
implementation; 
time- and 
money-consuming
-Requires 
resources for using 
development tools

	
Demand-Side Models	
65
The detailed process and integration of systems used in processing the 
order to its fulfillment and payment (order-to-fulfillment-to payment) 
is shown in Figure 3.8. As seen from Figure 3-8, the process involves 
eight steps and requires integration of iStore with five other ERP mod­
ules: Inventory, Order Management, Shipping, Accounts Receivable, and 
General Ledger (GL).
Drawbacks and Problems in Demand-Side Implementation
Design, development, and implementation of demand-side e-commerce 
models are generally associated with possible drawbacks and problems. 
First, the implementation could be complex and cost a sufficient amount 
of money. The total cost of ownership (TCO) includes software develop­
ment and/or licensing fees, hardware, installation, implementation, train­
ing, and support. Components of the storefront budget development and 
their proportion in the total TCO may be seen in Table 3.4[7].
Besides high costs, there are may other problems. The demand-side 
e-commerce model may not be properly integrated with the company’s 
back-end computer systems and suppliers’ systems, which in most cases 
reduces speed of transaction and increases transaction costs. Even if a 
company creates a great web site, there are may be not enough customers 
(buyers) to generate steady online sale. Customers may also have security 
concerns in terms of passing proprietary information to sellers. Business 
order  
iStore 
Customer submits  
order 
Order Management 
Check and book 
Shipping 
Pick, pack, and  
ship order 
Inventory 
Update inventory 
Order Management 
Track order status  
Accounts Receivable 
Process payment 
Accounts Receivable 
Generate invoice 
Accounts Receivable/GL 
Update accounts 
Figure 3.8  Order-to-fulfillment-to-payment process

66	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
customers could have some resistance to buying online due to some gen­
eral human “conservatism,” not being sufficiently computer-savvy and 
not being trained well enough or sufficiently exposed to the technology. 
All these factors should be taken into consideration while designing, de­
veloping, and implementing an e-commerce site.
3.5  Measurements of Demand-Side E-Commerce
The financial measurements of demand-side e-commerce are similar to 
those of other e-commerce models (see explanations in Chapter 2). Specifi­
cally, while planning implementation of a new site or redesign of an existing 
web site, the seller wants to know how quickly the investments in the site’s de­
sign and development can be recovered, and how profitable this e-commerce 
solution may be. In this case, the seller may calculate the company’s return 
on investments (ROI), payback, net present value of invested money, internal 
rate of return (IRR), and average profits. These measures are frequently used 
to estimate future results of implementing demand-side e-commerce solu­
tions. An example of calculating these measures is presented in Table 3.5.
Return on Investment (ROI) describes the business value of 
e-­commerce business models (see Chapter 2 for details). It is defined as 
an expected gross profit divided by investments in e-commerce, equal to 
some percentage figure (for example ROI = 40% or 50%). The numera­
tor of the ROI can refer to profit, cost reduction, or savings derived from 
operational improvements associated with e-commerce implementation. 
This measure is a very popular indicator of how efficient and effective the 
implementation of e-commerce will be based upon future implementa­
tion of a specific e-commerce business model.
Table 3.4  Components of storefront budget
COMPONENTS
PROPORTION OF COST 
IN TCO, %
Software Licenses
21
Hardware
18
Hosting
11
Content Design and Development
18
Marketing
6
System Development and Maintenance
26
Total
100

	
Demand-Side Models	
67
The ROI analysis in Table 3-5 is provided for the e-commerce imple­
mentation in 2007, and then its subsequent usage in the three consecutive 
years, 2008–2010. According to the sales forecast, the company, for which 
we estimate ROI, is going to increase its revenue by 10% annually in 
2008–2010. At the same time, the overall cost would represent 75% of the 
revenue, and, thus, a gross profit margin of 25%. The initial investments 
in purchasing the e-commerce software (software license) in 2007 will be 
$865,000, which, according to the data in Table 3-4, represents 21% of 
the total budget. Using the proportions of the budget elements in Table 
3-4, we can identify components of initial investment in e-commerce de­
velopment. For example, hardware and Internet infrastructure (including 
hosting) is 29%, which will be $1,194,524 (865,000/0.21)*0.29). Using 
the same logic, we can identify estimated costs for other budget elements 
including consulting fees (18%), additional staff and customer support 
(26%), and advertising (6%). The model would “go live” in 2008, then for 
the next three years would require additional expenditures in infrastruc­
ture, staff and service, and advertising. The total investments in 2007 and 
expenditures in 2008–2010 are summarized for each year (see Table 3-5).
Besides expenditure, the demand-side e-commerce site is going to 
generate in 2008-2010 income through increased sale (we consider 5%) 
and savings by reducing inventory cost (5% of the total cost) and creating 
paperless environment (1% of the total cost). The total income and saving 
are also summarized for each year (see Table 3-5). The annual profit for 
each year will be the difference between income and savings on one side 
and investment and costs on the other side in this year. In 2007, though, 
the number is just a negative number representing initial investments. 
Let us assume that we are going to analyze this investment decision for a 
period of 3 years, and the required rate of return will be 5%.
The average income per year of $2,569,478 is the average of annual 
profits in 2008–2010. It represents 10.8% of the average annual gross 
income. The payback may be calculated as the ratio between initial invest­
ments and average annual income:
Payback 5 4,199,048/2,569,478 5 1.6 years.
This number indicated that the initial investments in the e-commerce 
model would be recovered in about one year and 7 months.

68	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
Table 3.5  ROI analysis of demand-side E-commerce
Para meter 
Used
2007
2008
2009
2010
Revenue, COGS, and gross income, $
Total revenue from sales (forecast)
0.10
85,950,000
94,545,000
103,999,500
Total cost of goods sold (COGS)
0.75
64,462,500
70,908,750
77,999,625
Gross income
0.25
21,487,500
23,636,250
25,999,875
Investment and costs, $
Software licensing fees (21% of the total investment), 
vendor- based information
0.21
865,000
Hardware and infrastructure including hosting (29% of 
the total cost)
0.29
1,194,524
1,194,524
1,194,524
1,194,524
Consulting fees including content development (18% of 
the total cost)
0.18
741,429
370,714
370,714
370,714
Additional staff and customer support (26% of the total 
cost)
0.26
1,070,952
1,070,952
1,070,952
1,070,952
Advertising (6% of the total cost)
0.06
247,143
247,143
247,143
247,143
Total investment and costs
1.00
4,119,048
2,883,333
2,883,333
2,883,333
Income and savings, $
Income through increased sale (5-10% of gross income)
0.05
1,074,375
1,181,813
1,299,994
Inventory cost reduction (5-15% of COGS)
0.05
3,223,125
3,545,438
3,899,981

	
Demand-Side Models	
69
Saving from paperless sales (1-3% of COGS)
0.01
644,625
709,088
779,996
Total income and savings
0
4,942,125
5,436,338
5,979,971
Annual profit, $
-4,119,048
2,058,792
2,553,004
3,096,638
Period, years
3
Required rate of return, %
5%
Average income per year, $
2,569,478
Average income as a % of gross income
10.8%
Payback, years
1.6
ROI, %
62%
Net present value (NPV), $
2,697,475
Internal rate of return (IRR), %
36%

70	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
The ROI in this case will be opposite to payback, i.e., a ratio between 
the average annual income and initial investments:
ROI 5 (2,569,478/4,199,048)*100 5 62%
This number tells that for every dollar invested in the e-commerce 
business model, the return will be 62 cents. The IRR number of 36% tells 
that the investment in e-commerce model will be more than 7 times more 
efficient than the required rate of return of 5%.
Besides the financial measurements used to estimate the long-term 
effect of implementing demand-side e-commerce model, there is also a 
need to establish operating measurements that will reflect the short-term 
results of already implemented e-commerce solutions. In this case, several 
operating measurements may be employed:
• Total sales (revenue) from the storefront (R), which is the 
revenue in dollars from the web site measured on a daily, 
weekly, monthly, quarterly, and annual basis.
• Total costs (C), representing the total cost of products sold 
at the storefront combined with the storefront support and 
maintenance.
• Total gross profit (GP), the difference between the total 
sales and total costs of products and storefront support and 
maintenance, GP = R-C.
• Number of visitors (N). The number of customers that visit 
the storefront per unit time (month, year, etc.)
• Average Sale (AS), the average amount that a customer spent 
per sale, AS = R/N.
• Buy to Visit Ratio (BV), the average percentage of web site 
visits resulted in sales, %.
3.6  Chapter 3 Summary: Managerial Aspects 
of Sell-Side E-Commerce
	 1.	 Demand (sell)-side e-commerce models are designed by organiza­
tions (sellers) to provide selling opportunities on the downstream 

	
Demand-Side Models	
71
side of supply chains, i.e., from the organization to its customers. 
These are one of the most common types of e-commerce models in 
practice.
	 2.	 Direct selling and auctioning represents a direct online channel 
to business customers or end consumers. Direct selling to business 
customers is associated with the selling products and services online 
to established network of business customers that in turn distrib­
ute those products to the end consumers. Complementary selling 
and auctioning represents an online channel of selling products and 
services to business customers and end consumers, which is comple­
mentary to the existing traditional distribution/retail channels.
	 3.	 Some practitioners and researches considered online storefront as 
a cannibalizing channel that would reduce volume and benefits of 
well-established traditional selling channels. In general, there is al­
ways a possibility of channel conflict if a company uses multiple 
distribution channels. However, a number of examples of firms 
using both online and “on-the-ground” sales channels in the same 
company proved to be non-cannibalizing. Moreover, different chan­
nels could help each other to increase selling volumes and improve 
relationships with customers.
	 4.	 The value added capabilities of demand-side e-commerce involve 
creating new channel of marketing and product sales with global 
outreach. The online store in most cases can be used at any time 
of the day or week (24/7). An online storefront consolidates all cur­
rent product and sales information and search capabilities online, 
allowing the customers to find quickly needed products or services and 
other related information (product descriptions and comparisons, 
associated services, etc.). Another value-added offering is the ability 
to provide paperless processes, which speeds up the order fulfillment 
process and reduces transaction costs. The e-commerce storefront 
may be connected to the internal computer-based system like ERP 
(enterprise resources planning). This connection provides an oppor­
tunity to coordinate order taking and order execution, as well as 
order planning with other internal (back-end) systems like inven­
tory, accounting, human resources, etc.

72	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
	 5.	 Demand-side e-commerce provides price differentiation online for 
various products and customer segments. The price may be different 
for a new customer versus a repeat customer, small business cus­
tomer versus large volume customer, international customer versus 
domestic customer, and so on. All these can be incorporated into 
online storefront decisions, which add value to both the company 
and its customers. An e-commerce web site may also be an efficient 
way of testing different pricing options for various market segments.
	 6.	 An electronic catalog is the virtual equivalent of a traditional product 
catalog. The electronic catalog contains a database of products and 
services that the company sells online, and search capabilities for find­
ing appropriate products and services. In addition, the electronic cata­
log includes written description and photos of products along with 
information about various promotions, discounts, payment methods, 
and methods of delivery. A customized catalog contains a variety of 
product or service options that enable a customer to customize his/ 
her product/service order. The e-commerce product configuration 
tool (software) defines the available product options and accessories, 
and determines the product’s price from the options chosen.
	 7.	 Order processing in the demand-side e-commerce model may in­
volve a variety of elements. They include electronic shopping cart, 
checkout process using electronic shopping cart and payment sys­
tem. Order processing may also involve order confirmation online 
and through an e-mail, order tracking by connecting to the logistics 
carrier that handles the order shipment and delivery. In addition, the 
order processing system may export all order and payment informa­
tion to the internal back-end system like order management and 
accounting.
	 8.	 Integration of the online storefront order information should be done 
with Order Management for validating and accepting order receipts 
and processing them further for production; Accounts Receivable 
for accumulating order payment information; Manufacturing and 
Supply Chain Planning for processing order information through 
the production process that involves getting required materials from 
suppliers; and Inventory Control for checking on-hand materials, 
parts, components, and finished good inventory for shipment.

	
Demand-Side Models	
73
	 9.	 E-fulfillment is an online process that provides collaboration between 
sellers and suppliers in order to facilitate and speed-up production 
and delivery of customer orders. According to the e-­fulfillment pro­
cess, the seller makes order information directly available to suppliers.
	10.	 Demand-side software, which is in the heart of e-commerce de­
velopment, should be able to create a variety of features used in 
demand-side models like user registration, logons, search options, 
searchable database of products, customization and configuration 
options. The software may also be used to place online orders, utilize 
shopping carts and checkout processes including order tracking ca­
pabilities, payment, shipping, and tax calculations.
	11.	 The software industry provides a great variety of solutions associated 
with the demand-side e-commerce models. Despite common design 
and development principles, these solutions differ from each other in 
terms of functionality, ways of distribution to the customers, prices, 
and other characteristics. Among the popular e-commerce software 
for demand-side e-commerce are Microsoft Office Live (former 
­Microsoft Commerce Manager), eBay Stores, Yahoo Merchant Solu­
tions, Storefront.net, and Oracle iStore.
References
1.	 Turban, E., King, D., Lee, J.K., and D. Viehland, Electronic Commerce: 
A Managerial Perspective 2006, Prentice Hall, 4th Edition, 2006, p. 598.
2.	 Baker, W., Mam, M., and C. Zawada, “Price Smarter on the Net,” 
Harvard Business Review, Vol. 79, No. 2, February 2001.
3.	 eMarketer, “Upsales to Drive Retail e-commerce,” March 12, 2008, 
retrieved from www.emarketer.com.
4.	 Advantage Business Media, “The Evolution of e-commerce,” January 
10, 2008, retrieved from www.imomag.com.
5.	 Turban, E., King, D., Lee, J.K., and D. Viehland, Electronic Commerce: 
A Managerial Perspective 2006, Prentice Hall, 4th Edition, 2006, p.51.
6.	 Prince, M., “Online Retailers Turn to New Shopping Carts to Drive 
Sales,” www.wsj.com, November 9, 2004.
7.	 Laudon, K. and C.G. Traver, e-commerce: Business, Technology, Society, 
­Pearson/Addison Wesley, Boston, 2003, p.211.


CHAPTER 4
Supply-Side Models
The need to stay competitive in the global environment requires compa­
nies to reduce cost and improve management of cost savings processes. 
One of the main ways to reduce purchasing costs and improve efficiency 
of supply chain management is to utilize supply- side e-commerce mod­
els. Supply-side e-commerce or electronic procurement (e-procurement) 
represents a variety of activities related to procure supplies over the 
­Internet. E-procurement enables to automate many buying/procurement 
functions. Through implementing supply-side e-commerce, companies 
expect to better control inventory, reduce costs, and increase efficiency of 
order processing.
Supply-side e-commerce is one of the major elements of the modern 
procurement systems in organizations. According to CAPS Research[1], 
more than 77% of organizations use supply-side e-commerce tools for 
34% of purchasing of the organizations’ spend. At the same time, more 
than 92% of companies employ supply-side e-commerce for purchasing 
order processing. In this paper, we present various aspects of managing 
supply-side e-commerce models.
4.1  Modern Supply-Side E-Commerce
Traditional Procurement System and Its Problems
Procurement is a purposeful set of activities (processes) of obtaining 
goods and services for specific production or service needs. From the stra­
tegic standpoint, procurement involves several major elements:
• Supplier selection also called strategic sourcing includes 
researching and gathering information about perspective 
suppliers, and their background analysis of suppliers. 

76	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
This is done to identify and potentially negotiate contracts 
with suitable suppliers that can satisfy company’s 
requirements in various materials supplies.
• Supplier contacts are used to send supplier-related 
requirements to appropriate suppliers. Depending on the 
company’s needs and level of specificity, these requirements 
may be sent in a different format including request for 
information (RFI), request for proposal (RFP), or request for 
quote (RFQ).
• Contract negotiation and renewal involves a legal 
process of negotiating and using the terms of relationships 
with suppliers. These incorporate supplier and customer 
responsibilities, product specifications, delivery schedules, 
payment options, etc.
• Supplier relationships are based on managing and updating 
supplier information, measuring supplier performance results, 
and maintaining relations with suppliers.
• Procurement process is characterized by operational activities 
of acquiring and fulfilling material supplies and services to a 
company.
As a part of the procurement process, purchasing departments are 
responsible for supplying (outsourcing) direct materials, which are core 
to the company’s product offering, i.e., raw materials, parts, components 
and sub-assemblies, and machinery. They are also responsible for out­
sourcing indirect materials required to operate a business. The indirect 
materials include various office equipment and supplies, MRO (main­
tenance, repair, and operations) parts and materials, services (janitorial, 
garden, etc.), and other related expenses.
A procurement process for typical indirect materials may consist of 
the following steps (see Figure 4.1):
	 1.	 A requestor creates a purchase requisition to buy specific materi­
als. The requisition may require an approval from the immediate 
­supervisor/department manager. Then, it is delivered to the purchas­
ing department via e-mail or fax.

	
Supply-Side Models	
77
	 2.	 The requisition is reviewed and approved by the purchasing depart­
ment. It may also require an approval from the accounting/finance 
department.
	 3.	 The requisition information is used to create a purchase order (PO) 
that is sent to the supplier usually via e-mail or fax.
	 4.	 The supplier receives and acknowledges PO, and then prepares for 
the delivery of the items according to PO.
	 5.	 The supplier delivers the items that are ordered by the customer.
	 6.	 The supplier also creates an invoice sent to the customer’s accounting 
department (accounts payable). At the customer site, the accuracy of 
the invoice is checked and compared with the original PO and received 
products. This is called a three-way matching process, i.e., the informa­
tion from PO, received order, and supplier’s invoice should match.
	 7.	 After the approval from the required authority, the payment to the 
supplier is made.
Most of the described activities (see Figure 4.1) are performed by 
manual data entry using a huge amount of paperwork and utilizing fax or 
e-mail. With existence of numerous processes and sub-processes, there are 
multiple points of failure. Many errors are caused by the inaccuracy of POs 
and invoices. Purchase order returns, error corrections, and re-submissions 
of the paperwork cause delays in order processing and order delivery.
One more problem of the traditional procurement is maverick pur­
chasing, which is a process of acquiring goods and services from suppliers 
(1) 
Requestor/
Requisition 
(2)  
Approval 
(3)  
Purchase
Order 
(4) 
Supplier 
(7) 
Payment
(5) 
Items 
(6) 
Invoice 
Figure 4.1  Traditional procurement process

78	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
that are outside of a preferred supplier list. During a calendar year, busi­
ness units may require goods and services that need urgent delivery or 
special goods, for which there are no preferred suppliers. To satisfy these 
requests, the purchasing departments may do outsourcing from previ­
ously unknown (local) suppliers without going through a normal process 
of selecting suppliers and negotiating/bidding appropriate prices. This 
“maverick” purchase means that a department buys an item in an ad-hoc 
fashion, which results in paying a higher premium for that item.
The problems with a huge amount of procurement errors and 
­paperwork, maverick purchasing, and overall level of purchasing/procure­
ment costs can be substantially reduced with introduction of supply-side 
e-commerce applications .
What is Supply-side E-commerce?
Supply-side e-commerce or e-procurement is a growing area of 
­e-­commerce models. It provides direct and efficient purchasing process 
linkages between the requesters (employees) and suppliers, enabled by a 
new class of Internet-networked solutions (see Figure 4.2).
Supply-side e-commerce fundamentally restructures the way organiza­
tions practice traditional procurement activities in terms of automating and 
simplifying many buying transactions. These include supplier selection, con­
tact negotiation, price bidding, supplier relations, and others. For the actual 
procurement process, supply-side e-commerce is characterized by a number 
of integrated and automated activities like using electronic catalogs of sup­
plied products, creation and sending of purchase orders (POs), controlling 
item receipts, automatic three-way matching, identifying, and analyzing 
procurement spend, etc. The main distinguishing points between supply-
side e- commerce and traditional procurement are presented in Table 4.1.
Internet 
Internet 
Suppliers 
Purchasing
Department 
Requester
(Employee) 
Figure 4.2  General structure of supply-side E-commerce system

	
Supply-Side Models	
79
Table 4.1: Supply-side E-commerce versus traditional procurement
Element of procurement
Traditional procurement
E-Procurement
Sourcing
• Extensive paperwork
• Time- and money consuming process
• Hard to identify and evaluate all potential sources, and 
select the most appropriate suppliers
• Reduce unnecessary paperwork
• Select the most appropriate suppliers
• Lower both capital and personnel resources
Contract Negotiation
• Long contract negotiation time
• Substantial resources involved in contract negotiation
• Shorten contract negotiation time
• Reduce resources involved in contract negotiation
Requisition
• Long procurement processing time
• Frequent inaccuracies in transactions in terms of 
purchase order, invoice and payment errors
• Hard to control quantity and quality of supplied and 
received items
• Maverick buying
• Shorten procurement processing time
• Reduce or completely eliminate errors in purchase order, 
invoice, and payment
• On-time payments to suppliers can be ensured
• Improve control of quantity and quality of supplied and 
received items
• Reduce or eliminate maverick buying
Catalogs
• Utilize paper catalogs that lengthen and complicate the 
way to search and order goods and services
• Time- and money-consuming order process
• Online catalogs simplify the way to order goods and services
• Reduce procurement cycle time and associated resources
Purchase Order (PO)
• Paper PO can increase procurement cycle time and 
errors due to huge amount of paperwork
• Electronically transmitted Pos reduce procurement cycle 
time and improve procurement accuracy
Procurement
Intelligence
• Limited capability of comparing and evaluating suppliers
• Limited information for prices comparison between 
suppliers
• Provide detailed information for comparing and evaluating 
suppliers
• Provide buyers with price comparison and industry analysis

80	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
Historical Overview
Supply-side e-commerce (e-procurement) has a long history of develop­
ment. The first attempt to automate procurement operations and improve 
relationships with suppliers happened in early 1970s with the develop­
ment of electronic data interchange (EDI) systems.
EDI provides the capability to exchange any standardized data or 
documents such as purchase order, invoice, delivery schedule, contract 
information, etc. from one computer system to another via electronic 
wired connections called value-added network (VAN). The transfer of 
documents and data is based on agreed message standards, and can be 
exchanged via EDI between two parties or trading partners as long as 
both sides have implemented EDI and made appropriate preparations. 
This system was able to overcome many deficiencies of the traditional 
procurement process in terms of communication speed, multiple errors 
and paperwork, inaccuracies of order submissions, and others.
Despite the benefits, EDI implementation was rather complex, costly, 
and unaffordable by most small- and medium-size companies. EDI 
­required specific hardware, software, and end-user training. It also in­
volved a major business process restructuring for adapting to standard­
ized electronic forms and procedures. EDI was a complicated system to 
operate requiring significant resources and training for employing and 
supporting the system. The EDI system was predominately used for one-
to-one communication (one buyer-one supplier). Thus, in case of many 
suppliers, the EDI system needed to be installed separately for each sup­
plier. EDI is still used today in a number of companies, predominately for 
procurement between large buyers and their large suppliers.
As e-commerce became a factor of business environment in mid-
1990s, a new version of electronic procurement started to be actively 
used in various companies. The proliferation of supply-side e-commerce 
was associated with development and implementation of several Internet-
based procurement software types. One of them was online software for 
procurement of goods through electronic catalogs, specifically used for 
indirect material procurement. The second software tool was electronic 
reverse actions used by buyers to organize and conduct an online bidding 
process to select a supplier with the lowest price. The third software tools 

	
Supply-Side Models	
81
were exchanges (e-marketplaces). These provided an electronic forum, in 
which a large numbers of buyers and sellers can meet online and exchange 
information and bids, and, thus, expand opportunities for suppliers and 
reduce the purchase price for buyers.
Supply-side e-commerce systems experience a gradual evolution into 
a more sophisticated, efficient and well-accepted system for process­
ing, measuring, and improving companies’ procurement through the 
­Internet-enabled software applications. This is based on extensive func­
tionality of modern supply-side e-commerce applications, less expensive 
pricing and more efficient delivery models, as well as developed catalogs 
and supplier networks.
In the recent time, supply-side e-commerce became one of the major 
enablers for supply chain management (SCM). One of the surveys on 
SCM[2] revealed that supply-side e-commerce tools are among the leading 
factors driving the progress in supply chain development. The surveyed 
companies responded that e-procurement systems along with supplier 
­relationship management and business-to-business exchanges represent 
the main information technology tools used to advance SCM. The supply-
side e-commerce advantages in SCM include the following[3, 4]:
• Providing an improved information and communication 
technology to SCM.
• Reducing transaction time and increasing quality and 
accuracy of SCM transactions.
• Reducing cost of purchasing/outsourcing function inside the 
supply chain organizations.
• Increase sales/revenues to final customers in supply chain.
4.2  Supply-Side E-Commerce Models
Supply-side e-commerce, providing direct and efficient procurement 
linkages between business customers (buyers) and suppliers, is enabled 
by a group of Internet-networked models. These models differ by the 
type of relationships existing in a model and by model functionality (see 
Figure 4.3). Many-to-one (company-centric) relationships are based on 
a single buyer’s initiative to establish an online procurement site to deal 

82	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
with suppliers. For example, a company may create an online environ­
ment to identify and select suppliers, and negotiate purchasing contracts 
with them. Many-to-many relationships (see Figure 4-3) are organized 
by several buying organizations (customers) that establish relationships 
with suppliers via an online exchange. These buying organizations are not 
competing on main materials (specifically, indirect materials) and services 
they outsource from suppliers. Thus, the buying organizations can aggre­
gate their procurement needs, and negotiate through the exchange better 
deals with suppliers.
Based on procurement elements and their functionality, there are four 
main types of supply-side e-commerce (e-procurement) models:
• E-sourcing is used for online strategic sourcing and selection 
of suppliers including identifying and comparing perspective 
suppliers, selecting suppliers, and negotiating contract terms 
with them.
• Electronic reverse auction (e-RA) is a common type of 
supply-side e-commerce. According to this model, a buyer 
(buying organization) creates a request for quote (RFQ) and 
invites potential suppliers to submit bids, and then, using the 
online auction process, selects the lowest-priced bidder. The 
price during the auction process is dynamically changing in 
descending (reverse) order until the lowest supplier price wins 
the auction.
• E-procurement with electronic catalogs is another very 
common supply-side e-commerce model. In this case, a buyer 
(buying organization) develops an electronic marketplace 
to do procurement utilizing available electronic catalogs of 
suppliers’ products and/or services. These catalogs are usually 
0DQ\±WR±2QH5HODWLRQVKLS
6XSSOLHU
6XSSOLHU
6XSSOLHU
%X\HU
6XSSOLHU
0DQ\±WR±0DQ\5HODWLRQVKLS
6XSSOLHU
6XSSOLHU
([FKDQJH
%X\HU
%X\HU
%X\HU
Figure 4.3  E-commerce relationship

	
Supply-Side Models	
83
used to outsource indirect materials, and sometimes—direct 
materials. They may be also employed for outsourcing labor 
resources and services.
• Electronic exchange (also called e-tendering) has many-to-
many type of relationships. In this case, a company (buyer) or 
group of companies creates an electronic marketplace, where 
buyers and sellers can meet to do online business. Usually, 
a buying organization posts an RFQ, to which suppliers 
respond. Then, an online negotiation process between the 
buyer or group of buyers, and suppliers takes place, until the 
supplier who meets RFQ requirements with the lowest price 
is selected.
We will discuss in detail each supply-side e-commerce model in the 
next four sections.
4.3  E-Sourcing
In the early 21st century, the e-sourcing applications and solutions 
showed a significant surge in sales and amount of companies that uti­
lized the ­e-sourcing software solutions. E-sourcing is defined as the use 
of Web-based applications, decision-support tools, and associated services 
to identify, evaluate, negotiate, and configure purchases and supplier rela­
tionships that will effectively support supply chain and other business op­
erations[5]. At the same time, e-sourcing is the application of technology 
tools to the strategic sourcing process to enable faster cycle times, improved 
cost performance, and increased competitive advantage by reducing sup­
ply redundancies, increasing speed and flexibility, and maximizing the 
combined organizational benefits of centralization and decentralization. 
Information is transparent and available in real time internally within the 
buying organization and with external supply stakeholders[6].
According to several authors[5, 7], e-sourcing involves four sequential 
processes displayed in Figure 4.4.
The first process consists of identifying company’s strategic needs for 
outsourcing goods and services, and developing an associated ­e-sourcing 
strategy. The second process (see Figure 4) is used to evaluate potential 

84	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
suppliers in terms of their availability and applicability to the estab­
lished e-sourcing strategy. This process also includes searching and pre-­
qualifying suppliers using applicable e-sourcing software and online 
supplier resources. In the third process, the company negotiates and 
establishes contracts with suppliers using Internet-based software and 
tools. Finally, the fourth sequential process provides online supplier 
­relationship management (SRM) to maintain supplier relationships and 
measure supplier performance.
The effective e-sourcing platform[5] is based on utilizing several major 
core elements of e-sourcing system including:
• Negotiation—providing various negotiation tools like 
auctioning, RFP, RFQ, RFI, bid-ask, weighted scores, and 
others.
• Collaboration—incorporating collaborative tools like 
massaging, net meetings, collaborative workspaces, and 
portals that enable effective interaction between buyers, 
sourcing teams, and suppliers.
• Project management—identifying activities, time, and 
resources for e-sourcing projects; tracking e-souring project 
completion; and developing ways to optimizing project 
performance.
• Knowledge management—maintaining a data repository 
of all product specifications and changes, sourcing activities, 
and external market information, including part obsolescence 
and alternatives. Access to such information can help 
manufacturers avoid faulty product designs and supply 
shortages, and drive part standardization.
• Document management—utilizing an online exchange of all 
documents related to sourcing decisions. These documents 
may include bill of materials information, computer-aided 
'HYHORS
(VRXUFLQJ
6WUDWHJ\
(YDOXDWH
6XSSOLHUV
1HJRWLDWH	
(VWDEOLVK
&RQWUDFWV
3URYLGH
6XSSOLHU
5HODWLRQVKLS
Figure 4.4  Main E-Sourcing processes

	
Supply-Side Models	
85
design drawings and charts, various requisition information, 
purchase orders, receipts, etc. The e-sourcing system should 
contain an advance search engine to be able to retrieve quickly 
required information.
• Analytics—providing quantitative and statistical tools 
to identify and analyze performance results of various 
steps of e-sourcing. It may include assessing performance 
measurements of bidding and auction results, product 
costing, procurement spend, supplier performance, sourcing 
optimization, and others.
Most of the companies that implemented e-sourcing strategy employ 
it to negotiate with existing and new suppliers a wide range of goods. 
These include MRO materials, standard production parts, raw materials, 
and IT equipment. The companies also use e-sourcing for custom parts, 
sub assemblies, and transportation services. In general, any size company 
(large, medium- and small size corporation) can utilize elements of e-
sourcing. However, strong candidates for e-sourcing implementation will 
be companies that[7]:
• Currently are unable to drive best practice strategic sourcing 
across all materials and services on a global basis, but may 
achieve best practices in some sourcing categories and/or 
geographies.
• Frequently “reinvent the wheel” with respect to their sourcing 
practices.
• Suspect that their negotiation processes do not succeed in 
driving total cost of ownership to the lowest possible level.
• Perceive the supplier response process as cumbersome, time 
consuming and largely non-collaborative.
E-sourcing provides a variety of value-added elements to companies’ 
procurement processes[7]. The utilization of these processes in e-sourcing 
software promotes sourcing best practices. E-sourcing software applica­
tions are based on companies’ best practices, which are then made available 
for use across all product categories. E-sourcing extends collaboration on 

86	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
sourcing activities. Web-based sourcing applications can be made acces­
sible to all appropriate individuals across departments, business units, and 
company and geographic boundaries. The latter enhances a company’s 
ability to identify, evaluate, and negotiate with new and foreign sources 
of supply: E-sourcing increases the efficiency of sourcing processes. 
Through online automation, the sourcing process speeds up individual 
tasks and cuts sourcing cycle time, reduces error rates and mistakes, and 
improves process flows. E-sourcing improves sourcing decisions by con­
tributing to the completeness, accuracy, and ability to retrieve and analyze 
sourcing information. Finally, e-sourcing improves the skills of sourc­
ing professionals. Many e-sourcing applications can be adapted as offline 
simulation engines by using a company’s own historical data to provide a 
highly relevant training environment.
Overall, e-sourcing utilization in companies has shown to reduce 
sourcing cycle times by 25 to 50%, cut time-to-market cycles 10 to 15%, 
reduce on the average materials and sourcing costs by 5 to 15%, and 
­reduce sourcing administration cost by around 60%[5, 7].
Besides the evident advantages, the companies face a number of issues 
in implementing and using e-sourcing. It remains a fragmented, labor-­
intensive, and lengthy process for most companies. These companies often 
base e-sourcing strategies on sending information that is incomplete, im­
perfect, and may not be used for thorough and accurate analyses.­ Many 
firms lack organizational structures or IT infrastructures that sufficiently 
support the development and standardization of e-sourcing strategies on 
an enterprise-wide basis. Most companies continue to support a portion 
of the sourcing process using a disconnected mix of phone calls, faxes, 
e-mails, snail-mail, and basic spreadsheet applications. These increase the 
procurement costs and time associated with sourcing.
4.4  Electronic Reverse Auctions
Electronic reverse auction (e-RA) is one of the major models of supply-
side e-commerce. A research provided by CAPS[8] showed that percent­
age of larger firms (over $100 million spend) using electronic e-RAs is at 
least 35% and probably over 50%. This percentage is lower for smaller 
firms and service organizations. The amount of spend that goes through 

	
Supply-Side Models	
87
the electronic reverse auction is around 5-10% of a company’s total out­
sourcing expenses. However, some companies are already using e-RAs for 
more than 25% of the total outsourcing expenses[8]. The efficiency of 
e-RAs will continue to drive their use in the future.
In electronic reverse auctions, a buyer (buying organization) creates 
an RFQ and invites potential suppliers to submit bids. Then, using the 
online auction process, the buyer selects the lowest-price bidder (supplier) 
to negotiate the purchasing contract.
The e-RA process may be administered from a company’s web site or 
outsourced from an intermediary e-commerce organization. In the first 
case, the company acquires auction-related software. Then, the company 
uses this software internally to establish an online site for conducting 
reverse auctions with suppliers. In the second case, which is more popular 
with small- and middle-size enterprises (SAME), a company outsources 
the whole e-RA process from an online provider, who hosts the e-RA.
The bidding process itself may last from half an hour to about an 
hour. However, the e-RA preparation may take more time usually mea­
sured in weeks (sometimes up to 4-6 weeks in a large corporation). 
A typical e-RA process is presented in Figure 4.5.
It consists of several steps:
 1. The buying organization, or simply the buyer, prepares an RFQ with 
a detailed description of required product(s) and projected prices. 
In addition, the buyer prepares the e-RA rules identifying the date, 
time, and auction duration as well as bidding requirements, price 
visibility, and others.
 2. This RFQ and auction rules are sent out to perspective suppliers 
that may participate in the e-RA bidding. The selection of suppli­
ers may be done through online sources containing an extensive list 
of prospective suppliers for each category of products and services. 
The qualified suppliers are companies that can potentially provide 

,VVXH5)4
	H±5$
5XOHV

6HOHFW
4XDOLILHG
6XSSOLHUV

3UHSDUH
H±5$
(YHQW 

&RQGXFW
H±5$

,GHQWLI\
%HVW
6XSSOLHU
Figure 4.5  Reverse auction process

88	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
necessary products with good quality, on-time delivery, and com­
petitive prices.
	 3.	 The preparation for e-RA involves several elements. The buyer 
­receives and evaluates the suppliers’ proposals in terms of their appli­
cability and prices. According to the price evaluation, the buyer will 
establish a reserve price, which is a maximum (highest) price that 
the buyer is willing to pay for the product. The expectations are that 
during the auction this price will go down from the reserve price. 
Also, a ceiling price is defined as a maximum bid a bidder (supplier) 
can submit during the event. In addition, a range of bidding decre­
ments (an amount by which a bidder can lower it bid at one time) 
is established. The buyer may provide a testing of the e-RA software, 
and may train the bidders on how to participate in e-RA and utilize 
its rules. Finally, the buyer sends to the suppliers the date, time, and 
duration of e-RA, a link to buyer’s e-auction web site, and their user 
name and password.
	 4.	 The buyer conducts e-RA, which usually lasts from one-half to one 
hour. During the online auction, bids are ranked using the online 
auction system, and bidders receive instant feedback on their rank. 
Rank position 1 has the lowest prices of bidding.
	 5.	 Upon completion of the auction, a bidder with the lowest price is 
notified of winning the auction. The buyer may engage the winning 
supplier in further contract negotiation. Sometimes, the buyer noti­
fies two lowest-price winners, and then tries to negotiate the terms 
with either one of them, or select the best supplier out of the two 
alternatives.
Before developing a reverse auction process, a company may need 
to understand which products can be good candidates for the online 
reverse auction. In general, is it possible to outsource any product 
or service through the online e-RA? The answer to this question is 
“no.” The practice of e-RA in a variety of companies enabled to de­
fine ­biddable requirements or conditions for conducting successful 
e-RAs. One of the main requirements is the need for a product/item to 
be clearly defined through its design characteristics, terms, and RFQ 
specifications. Any vague specification may be interpreted differently 

	
Supply-Side Models	
89
by each perspective supplier, which may influence his or her ability to 
provide fair price definition. Another important condition is a strong 
likelihood that the current price the buyer pays for a product is suf­
ficiently higher than the market price, which makes the e-RA event 
cost effective. In addition, an important biddable requirement is to 
purchase the product/item(s) in large volumes, which provides more 
opportunities for lowering the prices. A critical requirement for con­
ducting a successful e-RA is an existence of sufficient number of quali­
fied suppliers that are willing to participate in an e-RA. A reverse 
auction become useless if there is only one or two suppliers that are 
willing to do bidding online. Finally, one more condition is that the 
switching costs from changing suppliers should be acceptable. The 
winning bidder may not be the current supplier of the product, and 
thus, the company needs to estimate the cost associated with switching 
to the new supplier. This cost should not offset the benefits of lowering 
the purchase price.
Examples of products/services that may be good candidates for online 
e-RAs are listed below:
• Packaging materials
• Plastic-molded pieces
• Made-to-order printed circuit boards
• Machines and equipment for manufacturing organizations
• Capital equipment for the labs
• Grocery products in large volumes
The value-added offerings in reverse auction may be considered for 
both parts of e-RA: buyers (buying organizations) and suppliers. Gener­
ally, the e-RA environment is somewhat biased to buyers. They originate 
and conduct e-RAs, and thus expect the online bidding process to re­
duce the purchase prices, which potentially may be detrimental to sup­
pliers. At the same time, by posting RFQ online, the buyers may reach 
to the worldwide community of suppliers, and thus, generate a better 
pool of prospective suppliers. The e-RA process enables price and supplier 
­visibility through the auction process, which provides a buyer with more 
insights into bidding price levels. The actual online auction process takes 

90	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
a short time and does not require any paper work. It is a truly paperless 
environment. In addition, e-RA is a well-documented quality process. In 
case of any potential disagreements and conflicts, the stored online infor­
mation can be easily retrieved and presented.
If an online e-RA favors buyers, are there any benefits for suppliers 
participating in the process? The answer is “yes.” Even with somewhat 
biased approach toward the buyer, suppliers can find several important 
value-added offerings in e-RA participation. A supplier could gain a cus­
tomer or customers by winning the online reverse auction. While prepar­
ing to and participating in the auction, suppliers may better understand 
their products’ cost structure and how much they can earn by providing 
lower pricing during the auction bidding. Even if suppliers lost the auc­
tion, they can perform a post-event analysis to better understand the rea­
sons they did not win. Suppliers also get constructive feedback from the 
buyer. All these benefits will help suppliers to improve their products’ cost 
structure and be better prepared for the next e-RA or negotiations with 
prospective customers.
e-RAs create substantial value and are among the most cost-efficient 
e-commerce solutions for buyers (customers). According to CAPS Re­
search[8], the price paid through e-RA may be reduced on the average by 
around 15% as opposed to traditional outsourcing. However, in some 
companies price reduction through e-RAs may be up to 90%. Value cre­
ation in electronic reverse auctions may be also associated with substantial 
reduction of outsourcing cycle time, which may decrease in RA of up to 
90%. In addition, the error reduction due to a better accuracy of out­
sourcing and bidding records can range from 30 to 90%[8].
Despite benefits, online e-RAs are not free from a variety of draw­
backs and problems. They may be potentially expensive, specifically for 
small- and mid-size companies. A buying organization needs to make 
sure that the price savings generated through RA would offset auction 
costs. Any supplier can be potentially a winner in RA, and thus, the role 
of ­supplier-customer partnerships may be diminished. This may be detri­
mental to the company’s long-term outsourcing results. In addition, e-RAs 
focus on price only lowers opportunities to differentiate between suppliers 
with such intangibles as quality, on-time delivery, and customer service.

	
Supply-Side Models	
91
e-RAs may also be detrimental to suppliers. If suppliers do not do 
their “homework” and come unprepared for an online e-RA, the com­
petitive and quick bidding may adversary affect their ability to be profit­
able. A supplier might win a contract by substantially lowering its price 
below the supplier cost, which leads later to the ultimate loss of profit. 
The supplier always needs to know its break-even price, and never let the 
over-excitement to prevail during the auction bidding process. Another 
common problem for supplier is security concerns in terms of reveal­
ing its price to competition. In addition, as the number of e-RA sites 
­increases, suppliers will not be able to trace all these sites.
One of the ways to reduce the level of problems in online RAs is 
to apply a more up-to-date way of doing e-RAs through expressive bid­
ding[9]. Expressive bidding is much like a traditional request for proposal 
(RFP), but with a twist. The twist is that it allows—and encourages—
suppliers to answer an RFP with a variety of possibilities. Suppliers can 
suggest different specifications, terms, conditions, product and service 
combinations, and prices. This ultimately creates a deal that is better for 
both sides. In other words, while a straightforward RFP follows a simple 
question-and-answer model, expressive bidding creates an opportunity 
for an open-ended conversation between buyers and suppliers. By moving 
beyond the “lowest-price-wins,” suppliers have the opportunity to pres­
ent options that are more valuable to the buyers. The difference between 
reverse auction and expressive bidding are presented in Table 4.2.
Table 4.2  Reverse auction vs. expressive bidding
Reverse auction
Expressive bidding
Main approach-“lowest price wins”
Moves beyond price by encouraging 
suppliers to bid RFQ/RFP with a variety of 
possibilities
e-RA is a very constrained process based 
on RFQ specifications with usually one 
variable-price.
Suppliers can present more valuable options 
(options that the buyer may not have even 
realized existed). For example, suppliers 
may suggest different specifications, 
terms, conditions, product and service 
combinations, and prices
No conversation between buyer and 
suppliers
Creates an opportunity for an open-ended 
conversation between buyers and suppliers

92	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
The unrestrained savings from expressive bidding can on the average 
top 30%, which is double that of current best practices in e-RA[9]. How­
ever, expressive bidding does contain several major drawbacks:
• It is hard to establish supplier evaluation criteria based upon 
multiple requirements.
• Sourcing employees need to be properly trained to accept the 
unconventional supplier selection process.
• High switching cost to expressive bidding including new 
types of auction technology and software, implementation, 
training, consulting, etc.
4.5  Electronic Procurement With Catalogs
E-procurement with electronic catalogs is the purposeful activity of pur­
chasing materials and other resources online utilizing electronic catalogs. 
These catalogs contain products for online purchasing from predeter­
mined suppliers. The catalogs’ prices are usually fixed, but discount prices 
are also available, particularly for larger procurement volumes.
The e-procurement with catalogs system consists of three main 
groups of online software applications. The Ordering group includes 
applications associated with the procure-to-pay process, i.e., developing 
­product/service requisitions, electronically developing purchase orders 
(POs) of these product/service requisitions and electronically submitting 
them to the supplier, and getting back product/service receipts. The next, 
Reporting and Analysis group of applications includes electronic pay­
ments to suppliers, and also recording and analyzing their performance. 
Finally, Supplier and Catalog Management group consists of applica­
tions supporting the main process, i.e., supplier management (supplier 
information, contact personnel, supplier product updates, etc.), supplier 
scheduling (scheduling supplier shipments and receipts), and catalog con­
tent management.
Catalog content management involves developing, updating, and 
maintaining online purchasing catalogs for the e-procurement processes. 
This online catalog may be filled with the purchased or outsourced items/
services from the company’s internal inventory system (a part of the core 

	
Supply-Side Models	
93
ERP system), or information from the third-part organizations like MRO 
(maintenance, repair and operations) or Corporate Express with a num­
ber of indirect material items. The online catalog may also include links to 
the external public catalogs used for direct or indirect purchasing.
The e-procurement with catalogs offers access to a variety of elements 
in the online e-procurement process. A customer (internal buyer) can ini­
tiate the creation of a purchase requisition, search for or select items from 
the catalog or a supplier web site. The customer can view and ­respond to 
PO notifications, identify a requisition status, or simply view the compa­
ny’s latest purchasing news. The customer can also review the company’s 
purchasing policies. The procure-to-pay process consists of the following 
activities (see Figure 4.6):
• Creating a material/resource requisition. For example, a 
production department can use the iProcurement system to 
purchase parts and components for the final assembly, or an 
accounting department can purchase new desktops for the 
department.
• Seeking requisition approval (if required by the systems) from 
a direct supervisor/manager.
&UHDWLQJDQG$SSURYLQJ
3XUFKDVH5HTXLVLWLRQ
(±SURFXUHPHQW
&UHDWLQJ$SSURYLQJ
DQG6HQGLQJ3XUFKDVH2UGHU
&RUH3XUFKDVLQJ
5HFHLYLQJ2UGHUVDQG
±ZD\0DWFKLQJ
(SURFXUHPHQW
,QYRLFH3D\PHQW
$FFRXQWV3D\DEOH
Figure 4.6  Online Procure-to-Pay 
Process

94	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
• Sending the approved requisition to the purchasing 
department for final approval and subsequent creation of PO.
• Sending PO to the supplier.
• Receiving supplier confirmation and invoice for payment.
• Receiving requested products/services from the supplier.
• Checking the receipt with PO and invoice for matching 
(3-way match).
• Paying for the receipt (in accounts payable).
E-procurement with catalog provides a variety of value-added offer­
ings for both buyers (customers) and suppliers. Among the value-added 
offerings for buyers are:
• The e-procurement system consolidates and standardizes 
multiple applications of customer purchasing into one 
integrated system with the same online web site for all 
customers.
• The system provides paperless purchasing environment.
• Customers can quickly identify and select required materials 
and services for purchase/ outsourcing.
• The e-procurement web site provides full information on 
policies and procedures of outsourcing.
• The system facilitates greater empowerment for end users 
(customers) in terms of doing procurement.
• Supplier performances is closely monitored.
• The e-procurement system provides analysis, tracking, and 
control of spending (payables).
The value-added benefits for suppliers may be different from those for 
buyers. For suppliers, they include:
• Sales through additional online channels of selling.
• Expanded market reach worldwide; identifying and building 
relationship with new buyers worldwide.
• Lowered costs for sales and marketing activities.

	
Supply-Side Models	
95
• Shortened selling cycle by quickly receiving buyers 
information.
• Increased ability to monitor buyer information.
• Improved analysis, tracking, and control of receivables.
The value creation (benefits) of e-procurement with electronic cata­
logs is associated with lowering the procure-to-order cycle time and cost, 
reducing prices of materials, and lowering maverick purchases. Some 
quantitative benefits of e-procurement with catalogs are presented in 
Table 4.3[10, 11].
As any other model, e-procurement with electronic catalog does 
­contain a number of issues. These include the following:
• The buying organizations may have problems or delays 
in changing the procurement structure or modifying 
the existing procurement processes to fit e-procurement 
system.
• The e-procurement software may be expensive for small 
and mid-size companies, and would require a lengthy 
implementation process.
• Suppliers may be reluctant to adopt the idea of e-procurement 
because of the necessity of dealing with more than one 
marketplace, high training costs associated with switching to 
e-procurement, turbulence in this new industry, the high risk 
of compromising sensitive data.
Table 4.3  Value Creation in E-procurement with catalogs
Traditional/
Manual
E-procurement 
with catalogs
Requisition-to-order cycles
20.4 days
3.8 days
Requisition-to-order cost
$56
$23
Reduction of price of direct and indirect 
materials and services
—
10–20%
Price savings on maverick purchase 
brought into compliance
—
7.3%

96	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
4.6  Electronic Exchanges
The exchange model or e-tendering is built upon the creation of a vir­
tual electronic marketplace, where buyers and sellers can meet together to 
transact business online. A public exchange is run by an electronic inter­
mediary company that facilitates electronic transactions between buyers 
and sellers and remains impartial (does not favor any part). A private 
exchange is designed and run by an individual company that invites other 
buyers and sellers to do online business. A consortia exchange is created 
by a group of buyers that opens an electronic (virtual) marketplace and 
invites potential suppliers to do business online.
An exchange is a many-to-may supply-side e-commerce model. 
It includes a variety of sellers that provide their supplier catalogs to per­
spective customers-buyers. Buyers, on the other hand, use the online ex­
change for sourcing to locate perspective suppliers, sending RFP or RFQ, 
and then either organize an online auction, use bid-ask systems or direct 
negotiation with suppliers to identify the best supplier for outsourcing. 
The fundamental exchange functions are:
• Matching buyers and sellers in a virtual marketplace
• Aggregating product/service offerings from sellers
• Facilitating transactions (seller evaluation, information 
search, additional services, etc.)
An electronic exchange provides a variety of online software tools to 
fulfill these functions. Among them: online collaboration between part­
ners, electronic sourcing tools and catalogs, e-RAs, electronic RFQ and 
RFP, online negotiations, supplier performance analysis, and others. The 
benefits and issues of electronic exchanges are described in Table 4.4.
4.7  Benefits, Returns, and Future Development
Supply-side E-commerce benefits
The main benefits of the supply-side e-commerce models come from 
their ability to make procurement order processing more efficient by 

	
Supply-Side Models	
97
reducing the order time, lowering number of errors and redundancies in 
the process, and improving relationships with suppliers. The utilization 
of supply-side e-commerce process also leads to overall inventory cost 
reduction, paperless environment, and decrease or complete elimination 
of maverick buying.
According to a survey results[12] the most important cost categories 
reduced by implementing supply-side e-commerce appeared to be trans­
actional cost due to paperless environment, administrative cost associated 
with reduction of purchasing procurement personnel, inventory cost, and 
reduction of prices of materials and services All this represents typical cost 
savings results associated with supply-side e-commerce implementation. 
According to the survey respondents, main benefits of implementing 
­supply-side e-commerce solutions were[12]:
• Shorter procurement cycle
• Improved communication and relationships with suppliers
• Better reliability and control of purchase orders
• Reduced inventory level and cost
• Decreased number of intermediaries
• Reduced purchase prices
Table 4.4  Benefits and issues of electronic exchanges
Buyer
Seller
Benefits
• Lower transaction costs
• Better prices
• Increased IT effectiveness
• 24/7 ordering from suppliers
• Better supply sources
• Quantity discounts
• Faster deliveries and ease of 
purchase tracking
• New sales channel and improved 
marketing
• Lower transaction costs
• Access to new revenue potential
• Increased IT effectiveness
• 24/7 selling
• Reduced processing errors
Issues
• Unreliable unknown suppliers
• Buyer-supplier partnerships may be 
diminished
• Initial investment may be high
• Quality of goods and services may 
be lower
• Security concerns
• Increased competition for either 
prices or value-added services
• No long-term relationships with 
buyers

98	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
According to another survey by Aberdeen Group[10], the implementa­
tion of supply-side e-commerce models led to the following benefits:
• Reduced off-contract (“maverick”) spending by 64%.
• Reduced prices by 7.3% for spend brought back onto 
contract.
• Reduced requisition-to-order cycles by 66%.
• Reduced requisition-to-order costs by 58%.
• Increased total spend under management of procurement 
group by 20%.
• Each new dollar brought under management can yield 5% to 
20% cost reductions.
Many companies have successfully implemented supply-side 
­e-­commerce models. For example, IBM has achieved impressive results 
in implementing supply-side e-commerce models[13]. The company was 
able to reduce the order processing time from 30 days to only 1 day. IBM 
also reduced the level of maverick buying from 30% to less than 2%. At 
the same time, the contract negotiation time reduced from 6–12 months 
to only 30 days with a minimum number of six pages per contract. All 
this enabled to improve satisfaction of internal customers (managers and 
other employees that were involved in procurement) from 40 to 85%[13].
In general, reduction of material and other costs associated with the 
supply-side e-commerce models can substantially influence the compa­
ny’s bottom line in terms of profit margin. For example, lets assume that 
the cost of indirect materials through the implementation of an supply-
side e-commerce model, for example e-RA, was reduced by three points 
from 35% to 32% or 8.6% ((35-32)/35 5 0.086 5 8.6%). Then, the 
profit margin can increase from the original 6% to 9% (three points up), 
or 50% ((9-6)/6 5 0.5). Thus, the increase in profit through the more ef­
ficient online supply-side e-commerce may be almost 6 times higher than 
the reduction of costs (50% versus 8.6%).
Return on Investments (ROI)
The ROI analysis of supply-side e-commerce is similar to that of demand-
side e-commerce described in previous Chapter 3. However, the main 

	
Supply-Side Models	
99
difference is that the supply-side e-commerce models do not generate 
profit, but rather reduce costs associated with purchasing/procurement 
activities. Thus, the main savings will potentially come from reducing 
a variety of costs like direct and indirect material costs. The financial 
measurements of supply-side e-commerce are similar to those of other 
e-commerce models (see explanations in Chapter 2).
The ROI analysis of supply-side e-commerce can be effectively used 
for planning implementation of a new or redesign of existing supply-side 
e-commerce system. For example, a company may want to know how 
quickly they can recover investments in supply-side e-commerce design 
and development, and how profitable this supply-side e-commerce sys­
tem may be. Calculations of ROI along with payback, net present value 
(NPV) of invested money, and internal rate of return (IRR) are presented 
in Table 4.5.
The ROI analysis is provided for the supply-side e-commerce imple­
mentation in 2007, and then its subsequent usage in the three consecu­
tive years, 2008–2010. The data presented in the table are fictitious, and 
are not taken from a specific company. The initial investments in pur­
chasing the e-procurement software (software license) in 2007 will be 
$250,000, which may be considered as 21% of the total budget. Using 
the proportions of the budget elements in Table 4.5, the company can 
identify other components of the initial investment in e-procurement 
development. For example, hardware and Internet infrastructure (includ­
ing hosting) is 29%, which will be $345,238 (250,000/0.21)*0.29) in 
2007. In the subsequent years (2008-2010), the hardware cost will be 
gradually reduced, because the company won’t extensively invest in hard­
ware, but will continue paying for hardware maintenance and hosting. 
The company can identify estimated costs for other budget elements like 
consulting fees including content development and training (18%), ad­
ditional staff and customer support (26%), and advertising (6%). The 
model would “go live” in 2008, then, for the next three years would re­
quire additional ­expenditures in infrastructure maintenance and training, 
staff and support, and advertising. The total investments in 2007 and 
expenditures in 2008–2010 are summarized for each year (see Table 4.5).
The ROI analysis is provided for the supply-side e-commerce imple­
mentation in 2007, and then its subsequent usage in the three consecutive 
years, 2008-2010. The data presented in the table are fictitious, and are not 

100	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
Table 4.5: ROI analysis of supply-side E-Commerce system
Parameter used 
in calculations
2007
2008
2009
2010
Investment and costs, $
Software licensing fees (21% of the total investment)
0.21
250,000
Hardware and infrastructure including hosting (29% of the 
total cost)
0.29
345,238
172,619
115,079
86,310
Consulting fees including content development and training 
(18% of the total cost)
0.18
214,286
214,286
214,286
214,286
Additional staff and customer support (26% of the total cost)
0.26
309,524
309,524
309,524
309,524
Advertising (6% of the total cost)
0.06
71,429
71,429
71,429
71,429
Total investment and costs
1,190,476
767,857
710,317
681,548
Annual outsourcing of materials, $
Direct materials cost (forecast)
4,600,000
4,370,000
4,151,500
Indirect materials cost (forecast)
5,920,000
5,624,000
5,342,800
Savings, $
Direct materials cost reduction (10–15% of the direct cost)
0.10
460,000
437,000
415,150
Indirect materials cost reduction (20–25% of the indirect 
cost)
0.20
1,184,000
1,124,800
1,068,560
Total savings
0
1,644,000
1,561,800
1,483,710

	
Supply-Side Models	
101
Annual profit, $
-1,190,476
876,143
851,483
802,162
Period, years
3
Required rate of return, %
5%
Average income per year, $
843,263
Payback, years
1.4
ROI
71%
Net present value (NPV), $
1,056,384
Internal rate of return (IRR)
51%

102	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
taken from a specific company. The initial investments in purchasing the 
­e-­procurement software (software license) in 2007 will be $250,000, which 
may be considered as 21% of the total budget. Using the proportions of the 
budget elements in Table 6, the company can identify other components of 
the initial investment in e-procurement development. For example, hard­
ware and Internet infrastructure (including hosting) is 29%, which will be 
$345,238 (250,000/0.21)*0.29 in 2007. In the subsequent years (2008-
2010), the hardware cost will be gradually reduced, because the company 
won’t extensively invest in hardware, but will continue paying for hardware 
maintenance and hosting. The company can identify estimated costs for 
other budget elements like consulting fees including content development 
and training (18%), additional staff and customer support (26%), and adver­
tising (6%). The model would “go live” in 2008, then, for the next three years 
would require additional expenditures in infrastructure maintenance and 
training, staff and support, and advertising. The total investments in 2007 
and expenditures in 2008-2010 are summarized for each year (see Table 4.5).
The implemented e-procurement system is going to generate in 
2008–2010 savings through reduction of direct material costs (we con­
sider this reduction as 10% of direct costs) and indirect material costs 
(considered as 20% of the indirect cost). The annual income for each 
year will be a difference between cost savings on one side and investment 
and costs on the other side in this year. Let’s assume that the company is 
going to analyze this investment decision for a period of three years, and 
required rate of return will be 5%.
The average income per year of $843,263 is the average of the an­
nual incomes in 2008-2010. The payback may be calculated as the ratio 
­between initial investments and average annual income:
Payback 5 1,190,476/843,263 5 1.4 years.
This number indicated that the initial investments in the e-­procurement 
system would be recovered in about one year and five months.
The ROI in this case will be opposite of the payback, i.e., a ratio 
­between the average annual income and initial investments:
ROI 5 (843,263/1,190,476)*100 5 71%

	
Supply-Side Models	
103
This number tells that for every dollar invested in the e-commerce 
business model, the return will be 71 cents. The IRR may be calculated 
using the Excel function IRR. The IRR number of 51% tells that the 
investment in the e-commerce model will be 10 times more efficient than 
just the required rate of return of 5%.
Supply-side E-commerce Software
The e-commerce industry offers a variety of different supply-side 
­e-­commerce software and solutions. Approximately 50 to 70 software 
companies produce supply-side e-commerce applications and systems. 
These software companies may be grouped into several categories de­
pending on their functionality, level of integration, and software distribu­
tion. According to software functionality, the software may have: (1) a 
narrow scope of supply-side e-commerce functions, for example RFP/ 
RFQ tools only; (2) a wider scope of functionality like a combination of 
e-sourcing or e-RA tools; and (3) full supply-side e-commerce function­
ality that includes e-sourcing, e-RA, e-procurement with catalogs, and 
electronic exchanges. The level of integration is defined by stand-alone 
supply-side e-commerce software packages, and supply-side e-commerce 
software being a part of an integrated enterprise resource planning (ERP) 
system. Finally, software distribution can be done by selling software 
through the vendor’s web site, third party reseller/provider, or as a host­
ing solution. In the last option, the supply-side e-commerce software is 
installed and maintained by either the vendor or provider, and the buying 
organization gets the access to the software functionality via the Internet. 
Examples of supply-side e-commerce software are presented in Table 4.6.
Future Development
In more than 10 years of evolution, supply-side e-commerce models 
have become one of the major tools of modern purchasing/procurement 
systems. From a simple online RFQ or e-RA, supply- side e-commerce 
has been transformed into more integrated strategic and tactical systems 
used for a great variety of procurement functions described in this chap­
ter. However today, the information technology, buyers’ expectations, 

104	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
Table 4.6  Examples of popular supply-side E-commerce software
Product/Company
Functionality
Level of Integration
Software Distribution
Ariba
Provides various e-procurement solutions like Procure-to-
Pay and Buyer, as well as functional solutions like Travel 
and Expenses and Contract Compliance
Stand-alone
Sold to the customers via web site or 
online hosted solution
IBM eProcurement
Contains a wide range of procurement and outsourcing 
solutions including outsourcing design and personnel
Stand-alone
Mostly sold to the customers via 
ground distribution or online hosted 
solution
Oracle iProcurement
Enables a web-based shopping system that allows 
employees to create, manage, and track their own orders 
while the purchasing department retains central control
Stand-alone or as an integrated 
part of the Oracle ERP software
Sold as a part of the integrated Oracle 
ERP system or as a standalone system. 
May be also online hosted solution
PurchasingNet
Provides e-procurement and e-payables solutions to 
financial services, media and publishing, professional 
services, manufacturing, retail, and other industries
Stand-alone
Sold to the customers via website or 
as a hosted solution
SAP E-procurement
Execute the operational activities of procurement, 
including requisitioning, ordering, receiving, and 
financial settlement. With SAP’s Supplier Relationship 
Management (SRM), the company can integrate catalog-
based requisitioning with your traditional procure-to-pay 
process and gain the benefits of e-procurement without 
losing your back-end enterprise resource planning 
processes
Stand-alone or as an integrated 
part of the SAP ERP software
Sold as a part of the integrated SAP 
Business Suite or as a standalone 
system. May be also online hosted 
solution

	
Supply-Side Models	
105
and suppliers’ capabilities have matured to the point where supply-side 
e-commerce models require further development for providing more 
­efficient ways of satisfying customer needs in online procurement. Based 
on several researches and modern practice of supply-side e-commerce[14, 
15, and 16], the main directions of modern supply-side e-commerce develop­
ment can be summarized as following:
• Providing e-procurement with catalogs for direct material 
procurement as well as for services and other resources in the 
company, for example, for recruiting employees or procuring 
information resources.
• Employing supply-side e-commerce optimization tools 
used to identify the best utilization of online reverse 
auction, e-sourcing and e-procurement tools. Optimization 
is also employed to define the best number of suppliers, 
procurement spend, and negotiation/approval policies.
• Utilizing software as a service (SaaS) technology for 
providing supply-side e-commerce tools and services to the 
customers according to their demand (on-demand supply-side 
e-commerce).
• Developing and implementing inexpensive supply-
side e-commerce solutions for small- and medium-size 
companies.
4.8  Chapter 4 Summary: Managerial Aspects 
of Supply-Side E-Commerce
	 1.	 Supply-side e-commerce or e-procurement is a growing area of 
­e-commerce models. It provides direct and efficient purchasing process 
linkages between the requesters (employees) and suppliers, enabled by 
a new class of internet-networked solutions. Supply-side ­e-­commerce 
fundamentally restructures the way organizations practice traditional 
procurement activities in terms of automating and simplifying many 
buying transactions. These include supplier selection, contact nego­
tiation, price bidding, supplier relations, and others.

106	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
	 2.	 Supply-side e-commerce, providing direct and efficient procure­
ment linkages between business customers (buyers) and suppliers, 
is enabled by a group of internet-networked models. Many-to-one 
(company-centric) relationships are based on a single buyer’s initia­
tive to establish an online procurement site to deal with suppliers. 
Many-to-many relationships are organized by several buying orga­
nizations (customers) that establish relationships with suppliers via 
an online exchange.
	 3.	 Based on procurement elements and their functionality, there are 
four main types of supply- side e-commerce (e-procurement) models:­ 
e-sourcing, electronic reverse auction (e-RA), e-procurement with 
electronic catalogs, and electronic exchange (e-tendering).
	 4.	 E-sourcing is the use of Web-based applications, decision-support 
tools, and associated services to identify, evaluate, negotiate, and 
configure purchases and supplier relationships that will effectively 
support supply chain and other business operations. Management of 
the e-sourcing process involves: (1) identifying company’s strategic 
needs for outsourcing goods and services; (2) evaluating potential 
suppliers using applicable e-sourcing software and online supplier 
resources; (3) negotiating and establishing contracts with suppliers 
using Internet-based software and tools; and (4) providing online 
supplier relationship management (SRM) to maintain supplier 
­relationships and measure supplier performance.
	 5.	 E-sourcing provides a variety of value-added elements to companies’ 
procurement processes like promoting souring best practices and 
increasing the efficiency of sourcing processes. Besides the evident 
advantages, the companies face a number of issues in implementing 
and using e-sourcing. It remains a fragmented, labor-intensive, and 
lengthy process for most companies.
	 6.	 Electronic reverse auction (e-RA) is one of the major models of 
supply-side e-commerce, in which a buyer (buying organization) 
creates a request for quote (RFQ) and invites potential suppliers 
to submit bids. Then, using the online auction process, the buyer 
selects the lowest-price bidder (supplier) to negotiate the purchas­
ing contract. The e-RA process may be managed from a company’s 

	
Supply-Side Models	
107
web site or outsourced from an intermediary e-commerce organi­
zation. The bidding process itself may last from half an hour to 
about an hour. However, the e-RA preparation may take more time 
usually measured in weeks (sometimes up to 4-6 weeks in a large 
corporation).
	 7.	 Not every product or service can be outsourced through the ­online 
e-RA. A company that uses e-RA needs to establish biddable 
­requirements for conducting successful e-RAs. The main require­
ments include clear product/item definition, current price is higher 
than the market price, purchasing in large volumes, and sufficient 
number of qualified suppliers.
	 8.	 e-RAs create substantial value in terms of lowering purchase price, 
and are among the most cost-efficient e-commerce solutions for buy­
ers (customers). Online e-RAs, however, are not free from a variety 
of drawbacks. They may be potentially expensive, specifically for 
small- and mid-size companies. e-RAs focus on price only lowers 
­opportunities to differentiate between suppliers with such intangi­
bles as quality, on-time delivery, and customer service. e-RAs may 
also be detrimental to suppliers. If suppliers do not do their “home­
work” and come unprepared for an online e-RA, the competitive 
and quick bidding may adversary affect their ability to be profitable.
	 9.	 E-procurement with electronic catalogs is the purposeful activity of 
purchasing materials and other resources online utilizing electronic 
catalogs. These catalogs contain products for online purchasing from 
predetermined suppliers. The catalogs’ prices are usually fixed, but 
discount prices are also available, particularly for larger procurement 
volumes.
	10.	 E-procurement with electronic catalogs consolidates and standard­
izes multiple applications of purchasing and provides paperless pur­
chasing environment. Customers can quickly identify and select 
required materials and services for purchase/outsourcing. The e-
procurement web site provides full information on policies and pro­
cedures of outsourcing. The system facilitates greater empowerment 
for end users (customers) in terms of doing procurement. Supplier 
performances are closely monitored and analyzed.

108	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
	11.	 Value creation (benefits) of e-procurement with electronic catalogs 
is associated with lowering the procure-to-order cycle time and 
cost, reducing prices of materials, and lowering maverick purchase. 
However, the buying organizations may have problems or delays in 
changing the procurement structure or modifying the existing pro­
curement processes to fit e-procurement system. The e-procurement 
software may be expensive for small and mid-size companies and 
would require a lengthy implementation process.
	12.	 Electronic exchange is a many-to-may supply-side e-commerce 
model. It includes a variety of sellers that provide their supplier cata­
logs to perspective customers, i.e., buyers. Buyers, on the other hand, 
use the online exchange for sourcing to locate perspective suppliers, 
and then either organize an online auction, use bid-ask systems, or 
direct negotiation with suppliers to identify the best supplier for 
outsourcing. The fundamental exchange functions are: (1) matching 
buyers and sellers in a virtual marketplace; (2) aggregating product/
service offerings from sellers; and (3) facilitating transactions (seller 
evaluation, information search, additional services, etc.).
	13.	 The ROI analysis of supply-side e-commerce is similar to that of 
demand-side e-commerce described in Chapter 3. However, the 
main difference is that the supply-side e-commerce models do not 
generate profit, but rather reduce costs associated with purchasing/
procurement activities. Thus, the main savings will potentially come 
from reducing a variety of costs like direct and indirect material costs. 
The financial measurements of supply-side e-commerce like ROI, 
payback, and IRR are similar to those of other e-commerce models. 
The ROI analysis of supply-side e-commerce can be effectively used 
for planning implementation of a new or redesign of ­existing supply-
side e-commerce system.
	14.	 The e-commerce industry offers a variety of different supply-side 
­e-commerce software and solutions. These software companies may 
be grouped into several categories depending on their functionality 
(modules like e-sourcing, E-RA, exchanges, etc. used in the soft­
ware), level of integration (stand-alone or integrated with other 
applications software), and software distribution (selling software 
through the web site or hosting it as a service).

	
Supply-Side Models	
109
References
1.	 CAPS Research, “Focus on eSourcing and eProcurement: 2007 
Report,” CAPS Research, November 13, 2007, p.1–12.
2. Poitier, C. C. and Quinn, F. J., “A Survey of Supply Chain Prog­
ress,” Supply Chain Management Review, September/October, 2003, 
p.1–10.
3.	 Essig, M. and Arnold, U., “Electronic Procurement in Supply Chain 
­Management: An Information Economics- Based Analysis of Elec­
tronic Markets,” Journal of Supply Chain Managements. November, 
2001, p.12–19.
4.	 Phillips, P. and Piotrowicz, W., “E-Procurement: How Does It Enhance 
­Strategic Performance,” Kent Business School, Working Paper #116, 
April, 2006, p.1–33.
5.	 Minahan, T., Howarth, F., and Vigoroso, M., “Making e-Sourcing 
Strategic: From Tactical Technology to Core Business Strategy,” 
Aberdeen Group, ­September, 2002, p.1–182.
6.	 Flynn, A., “Developing and Implementing E-Sourcing Strategy,” 
CAPS ­Research, September, 2004, p.1–31.
7.	 Brooks, J. and Favre, D., “A Case of eSourcing: The Strategic Side of 
Procurement,” Accenture, 2003, p1–16.
8.	 Beall, S., Carter, C., Carter, P., Germer, T., Hendrick, T., Jap, S., 
Kaufmann, L., Maciejewski, D., Monczka, R., and Petersen, K., “The 
Role of Reverse Auctions in Strategic Sourcing,” CAPS Research, 2003, 
p. 1–88.
9.	 Raudabaugh, J., “Collaborative Sourcing through Expressive Bid­
ding,” Inside Supply Management, Vol. 16, No. 3, March, 2005, 
p.3–5.
10.	  Aberdeen Group, “E-Procurement Benchmark Report: Less Hype, 
More Results,” Aberdeen Group, December, 2004, p.1–8, Available at: 
www.perfect.com.
11.	 Neef, D., E-Procurement: From Strategy to Implementation, Prentice-
Hall, 2001.
12.	 Radovilsky, Z. and Hegde, V., “Factors Influencing e-commerce 
Implementation: Analysis of Survey Results”, Journal of Academy of 
Business and ­Economics, Vol. IV, No.1, 2004, p.29–37.

13.	 Pike, T., “Retail E-procurement 2002: Minimizing Cost and Im­
proving Productivity, IBM Executive Strategy Report, 2002, p.1–7.
14.	 Duffy, R., “E-Tools Optimization,” CAPS Research: Critical Issues Re­
port, July, 2007, p.1–27.
15.	 Hill, S., “Making a Comeback: Supplier Management Issues ­Revive 
­E-sourcing Market,” Manufacturing Business Technology, October 11, 
2007, available at: www.mbtmag.com/article/CA6488812.html?nid
=3436.
16.	 Varmazis, M., “Tool Kit for E-procurement,” Purchasing, July 14. 
2007, available at: www.purchasing.com/article/CA6458523.html

CHAPTER 5
Collaborative Models
Deloitte Consulting conducted a survey of 300 business leaders to identify 
their companies’ results of using e-commerce solutions and, specifically, 
their intentions to implement and utilize collaborative online solutions[1]. 
The survey’s findings showed that almost 75% of companies considered 
collaboration as a top executive priority. Companies, which had already 
linked their business processes with other organizations/partners, were 
showing 70% higher profitability than those organizations that did not 
integrate with trading partners. These numbers have jumped by about 
20% from a survey of collaborative commerce done less than two years 
ago. About 33% of large enterprises were conducting pilot programs, and 
45% of the surveyed companies were planning for a pilot program in 
­collaborative commerce[1].
The survey findings clearly demonstrated the significance of col­
laborative commerce as one of the major e-commerce business models. 
Understanding the management implications of the development and 
implementation of this model is quite important.
5.1  What is Collaborative Commerce?
Collaborative commerce or c-commerce is the use of internet-based tech­
nologies that enable companies to collaboratively plan, design, develop, 
and manage products and services through their life cycle. Many compa­
nies today establish online collaboration by leveraging their e-commerce 
technologies in order to facilitate enterprise business processes. Compa­
nies participating in collaborative commerce provide new rules of engage­
ment by sharing decisions, capabilities, and information with each other.
Harley Davidson created an e-commerce enterprise portal to provide bet­
ter collaboration with its suppliers in terms of forecast sharing, standardizing 

112	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
contract and other documentation, and checking and measuring supplier 
performance[2]. This is a typical example of collaborative efforts in the sup­
ply-side e-commerce realm. However, c-commerce models may also be used 
for providing collaboration and information sharing between a selling com­
pany and its customers. Some demand-side storefronts contain tools for col­
laborating in real time with customers (e-service collaboration) by answering 
their direct questions or providing other customer support and service.
In general, companies use the Internet to work collaboratively with 
suppliers and customers for a variety of processes including: planning 
and forecasting resources, supply chain management, product design 
and development, manufacturing, logistics/distribution, and services. 
­Collaboration can be done both externally, i.e., between organizations, 
and internally or within the divisions of the same organization.
The existing trend of growth and proliferation in online collaboration 
is based on a driving force (driver) and the enablers of the c-commerce 
models. They are presented in Figure 5.1.
The Driver of using c-commerce is simply a set of benefits (value cre­
ation) derived through the online collaboration. The c-commerce models 
may affect all elements of monetary value creation including revenue growth, 
cost reduction, and asset intensity reduction. The c-commerce model called 
Product Lifecycle Management (PLM) can positively influences the prod­
uct lifecycle value-creation in terms of quicker product introduction (time-
to-market), faster recovery of investments, higher returns/profits, and larger 
market share (see a discussion of PLM in section 5.3 of this chapter).
0$,1'5,9(5
9DOXH&UHDWLRQ
(1$%/(56
5XOHVRI
(QJDJHPHQW
&ROODERUDWLYH


7HFKQRORJLHV
&ROODERUDWLYH


3URFHVVHV
Figure 5.1  C-commerce driver and enablers

	
Collaborative Models	
113
The value creation may not be realized without the C-commerce ­Enablers 
including rules of engagement, technologies, and processes. The main 
Rules of Engagement in c-commerce are:
• Transferring traditionally disparate data sources related to 
different organizations into the aligned and linked data 
sources and linked collaborating partners.
• Establishing common designs and standards for successful 
linkage and communication between the collaborating partners.
• Providing secure access to the information shared by the 
collaborating partners. It needs to be clarified that the 
collaborating participants may not necessarily get access to 
all online information, but only to the portion that they are 
associated with or responsible for.
Collaborative technologies provide an essential backbone to suc­
cessful online collaboration (see Figure 5.1). They are also a part of 
c-commerce enablers. The collaborative technologies include a variety 
of e-commerce software and tools required to establish and maintain 
appropriate collaborative rules of engagement and associated collabora­
tive processes in the Internet-based virtually distributed environment. 
These software and tools including groupware, collaborative commu­
nication tools, and collaborative suites are described in Section 5.6 of 
this chapter.
Collaborative processes (see Figure 5.1) represent a part of e-­
commerce enablers that are actually used to deliver collaboration for the 
business partners. These processes may include:
• Sharing and negotiating forecasting and replenishment 
between customers and suppliers.
• Collaborative management of documents and database 
information.
• Managing change in the database records for collaborating 
partners.
• Internal collaboration of different divisions in an 
organization.
• Providing online service and support for customers.

114	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
We will discuss these and other collaborative processes in the fol­
lowing sections of this chapter. Also, read the case on Boeing’s Product 
Lifecycle Management (at the end of this chapter) to understand what 
specific drivers—rules of engagement, technologies, and processes—were 
used in this company for collaborative development of a new airplane.
5.2  C-Commerce Models
Collaborative models include different industries and business functions. 
Despite their variety in business and management today, c-commerce 
models can be clustered into four main c-commerce model groups: col­
laborative design and development, collaborative planning and execution, 
collaborative manufacturing, and collaborative service.
The Collaborative Design and Development model is based on 
developing strategic Internet-based relationship, communication, and 
information/data sharing between a company and its partners on new 
product design and development. Within this model group, the Elec­
tronic Design (E-design) models provide online tools for collaborative 
design and development of new products through outsourcing from de­
sign firms. In this case, a company that designs a new product outsources 
elements or complete product design to one or several partners, which 
may be geographically distributed. At the same time, these partners are 
directly connected through an online collaborative environment to the 
main customer that integrates the design elements into the new product. 
The Collaborative Product Commerce (CPC) models provide online ca­
pabilities for design partners to share information, drawings, configura­
tion, change management, and other capabilities used in new product 
design and development. CPC may include e-design tools as a part of its 
online collaborative environment. We will discuss CPC in detail in the 
next section of this chapter. Finally, the Product Lifecycle Management 
(PLM) models enable participants to control, share, and manage product-
related data online as part of a product’s design, development, and im­
provement efforts through the entire product’s life cycle (see ­section 5.4 
of this chapter).
The Collaborative Planning and Execution model is associated with 
tactical (usually, shortterm) collaboration with suppliers and customers in 

	
Collaborative Models	
115
terms of Internet-based coordination of the company’s supply chain. This 
type of collaboration has several applications:
• Collaborative Planning, Forecasting, and Replenishment 
(CPFR) is an Internet-based model that enables suppliers and 
retailers to collaborate on planning and demand forecasting 
in order to optimize the flow of materials along the supply 
chain. A CPFR is used, for example, in Wal-Mart, for on-time 
product and service delivery to the Wal-Mart stores. Business 
partners—manufacturers, suppliers, distributors—all have real-
time access through CPFR to the point-of-sale (POS) order 
information (see section 5.5 in this chapter).
• The E-fulfillment models (discussed in Chapter 3) provide 
customer order information and associated materials 
information to suppliers in order to speed up the outsourcing 
process and for quick delivery of final products to customers.
The Collaborative Manufacturing or C-manufacturing model in­
volves using online information technology and communication systems 
Figure 5.2  Example of C-Service Customer Support

116	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
to facilitate sharing of manufacturing expertise, facilities, and resources in 
order to support an integrated manufacturing environment. Cisco Systems, 
a leading manufacturer of telecommunication equipment and products 
(switches, routers, modems, etc.) is a good example of a c-manufacturing 
company. All of Cisco’s production is outsourced through virtual connec­
tions with a number of company’s suppliers. The company provides an inte­
grated product and process development including customers and suppliers. 
The established flexible manufacturing system is distributed over networks 
of cooperating supplier facilities and teamwork among geographically and 
organizationally distributed teams. In addition, the company implemented 
a support system for collaboration with business suppliers and customers.
The Collaborative Service (C-service) model is based on processes 
for selling, managing, and delivering services and customer support using 
web-enabled applications. The c-service tools are also used for managing 
(automating) human resources processes and information in services. The 
applications of c-service may include customer support in buying prod­
ucts online, service proposal management, service resource allocation and 
scheduling, project management for service development projects, and 
even knowledge management online.
An example of c-service customer support is presented in Figure 5.2. 
It is taken from the IBM’s WebSphere C-commerce software tools[3]. A 
customer wanted to buy a pair of skates online, and, in order to choose 
the right product, sought help through the online Customer Care instant 
messaging tool. Switching to this tool, enabled the customer to have a live 
chat with a customer care representative who was able to provide service 
advice for the product selection, prices, complementary products, deliv­
ery options, etc. (see Figure 5.2).
5.3  Collaborative Product Commerce
As discussed previously, Collaborative Product Commerce (CPC) in­
cludes the collaborative product design, development, and management 
over the Internet throughout its lifecycle. This model enables all par­
ticipants to work together from any geographically distributed location 
with full data security and control through the role-based workflow. This 
workflow allows participants to identify their roles in the collaborative ef­
forts and work on their part of the joint projects according to their roles.

	
Collaborative Models	
117
CPC is based on a variety of internet-based tools and software. These 
enable an organization to react more effectively to customers, suppliers, 
and market dynamics. For example, it may quickly address any change in 
the original design based on a customer request, and quickly adjust the 
product to fit this request.
The parameters and elements of CPC have been clearly identified in 
the article Collaborative Product Commerce: Creating Value across the 
Enterprise[4]. According to the article, CPC consists of four main ele­
ments that are described below.
CPC’s Document Management and Vaulting enables all shared 
data to be stored in and retrieved from a single repository or data vault. 
Figure 5.3 shows that a collaborative repository of data consists of three 
main blocks: bill of materials (BOM) with a product development tree, 
computer aided design (CAD) graphics files, and documents with prod­
uct design and other information. Although elements of product design 
may be physically separated into different databases (tables), they are logi­
cally connected to each other using the concept of a relational database, 
which makes them work like one integrated data repository. Any new 
design elements, changes, updates, or modifications are introduced in 
the integrated data depository and properly filed with respective version 
numbers and update status.
Internal and external users can check in or modify information of 
the common data repository based on their assigned privileges and re­
sponsibilities (see Figure 5.3). In addition, the data management system 
allows the internal cross-functional collaboration of marketing, engineer­
ing, production, purchasing/procurement and other functional teams as 
well as external cross-functional collaboration between these teams and 
external suppliers and customers.
CPC’s Change Management Tools are employed to enable collabo­
rating users and teams to change, modify, and update documents and 
designated parts in the online product design and development process. 
These tools are the following:
• Electronic Workflow is used to automate the routing of 
changes for approvals. For example, a designer who made 
some changes in the product design characteristics would be 
required to send these changes for approval (correction change 

118	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
request) to the project manager and other collaborating team 
members working on the product design. Another electronic 
workflow may include employees seeking approvals for a 
request for quote (RFQ). This RFQ may be used to find 
appropriate suppliers. In addition, a workflow may be an 
engineering change order (ECO) to request changes to an 
existing product design.
• Notification is used for letting distributed team members 
know that an action must be taken for a specific request 
made by a collaborating team member. In the case of the 
previous example of the designer who made some product 
design changes, notification will be sent to all collaborating 
team members requiring them to review and comment on the 
proposed changes.
• Subscriptions connect data objects (drawings, charts, etc.) 
and documents in the CPC’s integrated data depository with 
specific collaborating users or departments. This association 
is done according to the users’ responsibility and roles in a 
specific collaborative project.
Figure 5.3  Document management and vaulting[5]

	
Collaborative Models	
119
• Visualization enables each participant in a collaborating team 
to view an engineering document or existing document changes.
• Red-line Markup provides each person or team involved in 
a collaborative project the capability to add comments to an 
engineering document.
An example of an online web site with some Change Management 
Tools like correction action request, ECO, and RFQ is shown in Figure 5.4.
Product Structure Management enables a structured uniform ap­
proach to design and management of a product structure—a sequence 
and order of materials, parts, and components used to produce a finished 
product. The product structure is directly associated with a Bill of Mate­
rials (BOM), which is a list of quantities of all subassemblies, intermedi­
ate parts and raw materials that go into a finished product. In practice, 
several functions in an organization, for example engineering, purchasing/
procurement, and manufacturing, may establish their versions of the 
BOM to manage operations within each function. For example, a pro­
curement manager may create a BOM to initiate the ordering of materi­
als, even while a manufacturing engineer is creating a separate BOM to 
launch the development of prototype tooling. Not surprisingly, this can 
Figure 5.4  CPC’s change management tools.[5]

120	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
result in serious problems with accuracy, reconciliation, and version con­
trol. It could also result in a significant waste of money and effort. CPC’s 
Product Structure Management allows several BOMs to be consolidated 
into one master document and making configuration management easier 
and substantially more accurate.
An example of an integrated BOM is shown in Figure 5.5. This in­
cludes the BOM structure as well as other capabilities associated with the 
product structure management like sourcing, purchasing, cost account­
ing, custom modifications, supplier access to the BOM file, and others. 
Thus, the BOM web site may serve as an integrated BOM environment 
for managing different functions including engineering, purchasing/­
procurement, and manufacturing.
Configuration Management creates associations between compo­
nents and assemblies, and allows customization of products according to 
specific customer needs. It also mandates the development of a portfolio 
management strategy focused on the joint development of product and 
process strategies. CPC addresses the challenge of configuring products 
Figure 5.5  Integrated BOM[6]

	
Collaborative Models	
121
to specific market needs. Essentially, the CPC-based Configuration Man­
agement system creates associations between components and assemblies, 
which help determine the range of permutations that a product can have.
Configuration Management capabilities also help to minimize non­
standard product configurations and help control component prolifera­
tion. Configuration Management is particularly powerful when deployed 
in conjunction with a portfolio management strategy. These are used to:
• Define the approval rules associated with new products.
• Promote standard product configurations that leverage 
existing product platforms.
• Introduce ways of shortening development times.
• Identify ways of reducing the development cost of derivative 
products.
The presentation of CPC elements demonstrates the significant ca­
pabilities of this c-commerce model. We summarized CPC value-added 
offerings and potential results (value creation) in Table 5.1.
5.4  Product Lifecycle Management
Product Lifecycle Management (PLM) represents an integrated 
­c-commerce model and software system that enables product manage­
ment throughout its life cycle from product design and development to 
Table 5.1  CPC value-added offerings and value creation
Value-Added Offerings
Value Creation
Integrated environment with one online data 
repository
Collaborative processes that reduce product 
development cycle and associated costs 
Establish collaborative processes that improve 
design quality and customer satisfaction
Online cross-functional collaboration Add, 
modify, and update data online that will 
be immediately visible to all collaborative 
elements
Real-time collaboration with partners 
Establish a consolidated product structure 
document
Lower overall supply chain costs
Faster time to market
Improved quality of design and 
reduced level of design errors and 
defects
More satisfied customers
Improved management of product 
design and development

122	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
product “demise” and discontinuation. As an integrated model, PLM is 
built around the collaboration of product-related information both inter­
nally in companies, and with collaborating suppliers and customers. As a 
software system, PLM includes a variety of software tools and applications 
used in managing products through their lifecycle. PLM incorporates the 
previously discussed systems and tools of e-design and collaborative prod­
uct commerce (see Figure 5.6).
In the words of one of the VPs from Dassault Systèmes, a major PLM 
vendor, “PLM is really what we call the relational design. It is the fact 
that each time you make one modification, you are able to propagate the 
change along the lifecycle of the product and also able to measure the real 
impact of the change you are making.”[7].
PLM as a c-commerce model and software system consists of a num­
ber of modules:
• Collaborative Product Design is a set of c-commerce solutions 
that enable collaboration for new product design and development 
(e-design), product configuration and customization, product 
change management and, finally, integrated product structure 
and BOMs. All these solutions represent the elements of CPC 
discussed in the previous sections of this chapter.
• Direct Material Sourcing solutions include managing input 
from and communication with suppliers in terms of a new 
product’s parts and components throughout the product 
lifecycle. These applications may incorporate identifying and 
negotiating with suppliers (e-sourcing), outsourcing materials 
through electronic reverse auctions (e-RA), or e-procurement 
with catalogs (see Chapter 4).
&ROODERUDWLYH
3URGXFW
&RPPHUFH
&3&
(GHVLJQ
3URGXFW
/LIHF\FOH
0DQDJHPHQW
3/0 
Figure 5.6  PLM and CPC

	
Collaborative Models	
123
• Customer Needs Management is a set of c-commerce 
solutions used to assess customer demand and customer 
requirements for the new product design, customer service 
and support. They are based on a Customer Relationship 
Management (CRM) module, which includes Order 
Management, Sales Management, Customer Management, 
Customer Service and Support, and others. Information 
obtained from customers will be transferred to other PLM 
systems, for example, Collaborative Product Design and 
Direct Material Sourcing.
• Product Data Management (PDM) may be a separate system 
of solutions that is concerned with maintaining a logical history 
and data repository of all product information, including product 
design requirements, changes, updates, and modifications. These 
solutions include a Product Design and Development Database, 
Product Structure Management, and Product Change 
Management. PDM could also be a part of a CPC system.
• Product Portfolio Management is a system of analytical 
tools and solutions that optimize and facilitate the decision-
making process in collaborative product design, development, 
and maintenance through the lifecycle. The system includes 
applications of Project Management associated with 
scheduling, budgeting, and controlling new product design 
and development. The system also provides a variety of tools 
for analyzing and improving current design and development 
like Business Analytics, Knowledge Management, and 
Business Intelligence. Finally, the system includes a Quality 
Management system used for identifying, controlling, and 
continuously improving quality during the product lifecycle.
What are the value-added offerings provided by this and other PLM 
systems to the customers? Why is this system more advantageous and 
popular today than CPC? Besides the traditional collaborative design 
(e-design) and product structure and change management used in CPC, 
PLM provides a completely new environment and set of processes for col­
laborative commerce. These environment and processes include managing 

124	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
the entire lifecycle of a product through design, introduction, growth, and 
demise. PLM is a systems approach that establishes the integration with 
customers and suppliers in terms of collaborative design, development, 
maintenance, and improvement of products. PLM additionally provides 
processes and tools for effective and efficient management of the product 
lifecycle by incorporating project management, analytical/business intel­
ligence, and quality improvement.
The rising interest in PLM and the resulting increase in the number of 
PLM systems and software are associated with a significant value creation 
it offers. In general, companies pursue PLM for revenue/profit growth 
and faster time-to-market. However, they also seek efficiencies through 
PLM in areas like faster engineering changes, design cost reduction, and 
accurate order taking with minimum errors. Figure 5.7 depicts results of a 
survey, in which managers involved in implementation and utilization of 
PLM identified important PLM performance measurements[8].
The successful implementation of PLM can lead to the following 
benefits:
• Reduced time to market—by reducing design errors and by using 
state-of-the-art capabilities for virtual development and testing.
• Lower total development cost—by cutting non-value added 
time that highly trained professionals spend chasing down 
information and through the appropriate reuse of existing 
parts, assemblies, and tooling.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Engineering
change cycle
Time to
Important PLM Performance Measurements (% of Respondents) 
market
Design cost
reduction
Engineering
productivity
Accurate
order
taking
Compliance Warranty
cost, 
service
Successful
NPI rate
Figure 5.7  Survey results of PLM value creation[8]

	
Collaborative Models	
125
• Better cost at launch—by more effectively involving key 
influencers of product cost, such as manufacturing and 
suppliers.
• More appeal for customers—by including customer 
requirements and market performance in product 
development and improvement processes.
• Fewer unexpected and costly surprises—by providing the 
visibility that comes from connecting supply chain partners, 
often in real-time, to change and issue management systems, 
companies can sharply reduce the number of unexpected 
delays and cost overruns.
• Improved service/service parts profitability—by including 
service sooner in the product development and change 
processes.
• Optimized IT spending—by rationalizing the myriad systems 
that have evolved to manage specific aspects of the product 
lifecycle.
Besides the evident benefits, PLM is not free from limitations and 
problems. Among the most common problems in implementing and 
using PLM are the following:
• Lack of defined and universally agreed-upon standards
• Technical problems involving integration with the internal 
systems
• Security and privacy concerns (lack of trust) over who has 
access to and control of information stored in a partner’s 
database
• Internal and external resistance to information sharing and to 
new approaches
• Lack of internal skills to conduct collaborative commerce
• Cost of implementing c-commerce software
Examples of popular PLM software companies and their respective 
products are listed in Table 5.2. The evaluation of these and other PLM 
companies, and their applicability for specific customer needs may be 

126	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
found in several sources including online web sites like PLM Evaluation 
Center, www.plmevaluation.com.
Most of these solutions are being used by large companies involved in 
new product design and development and PLM. However, many small 
and mid-size enterprises (SME) also use PLM. The major PLM attrac­
tion for SME customers stems from the rapidly growing variety of solu­
tions specifically designed for fast and easy deployment and rapid ROI. 
Even small, family-run firms find easy justification. One of the common 
ways of implementing PLM in a small or mid-size company is to utilize 
PLM-in-a-box—modular prepackaged solutions that target specific PLM 
type functions and are quick and easy to install. These modular solutions, 
typically designed to facilitate collaboration and data access, help support 
business process issues in outsourcing design and development from glob­
ally distributed suppliers.
5.5  Collaborative Planning, 
Forecasting, and Replenishment
Collaborative Planning, Forecasting and Replenishment (CPFR) is a 
business practice that combines the intelligence of multiple trading part­
ners in the planning and fulfillment of customer demand. CPFR enables all 
partners in the supply chain to communicate forecasts using information-
sharing collaborative applications, ensures the right amount of raw ma­
terials from suppliers, and provides on-time delivery of finished goods to 
the customers. In contrast to PLM, which is predominantly long-term 
collaboration through the product lifecycle, CPFR is a tactical short-term 
decision making process. It provides integration of suppliers, producers, 
Table 5.2  Examples of PLM vendors
Company
Product
Oracle Corporation
Agile PLM Solutions
IBM
IBM PLM Solutions
IFS
IFS PLM
Dassault Systemes
ENOVIA-Collaborative PLM
Arena Solutions
Arena PLM
SAP AG
SAP PLM

	
Collaborative Models	
127
and customers in a supply chain in terms of tactical planning, forecasting, 
and replenishment of goods and services.
A core assumption of CPFR is that each organization will enter the 
details of the joint business plans into their online planning systems, 
and then share the results on a regular basis as market conditions change 
and logistical problems occur. Each company may manage thousands of 
products distributed across thousands of locations, and thus it is not fea­
sible for planners to compare these plans manually and determine which 
changes are significant. Instead, an online CPFR system exchanges and 
compares each value using thresholds that planners have set. If changes 
in one plan or differences between them exceed the threshold, the CPFR 
system alerts the planner to the problem. Forecast revisions are exchanged 
on a regular—usually weekly—basis.
Trading partners share their plans for future events, and then use an 
exception-based process to deal with changes or deviations from plans. By 
working on issues before they occur, both partners have time to react. A 
supplier can build inventory well in advance of receiving a promotional 
order and carry less safety stock at other times. A retailer can alter the 
product mix to reduce the impact of supply problems. In short, both sides 
win, and the consumer ultimately benefits from lower prices.
Since the publication of the Voluntary Inter-industry Commerce 
Standards (VICS) Association guidelines for CPFR in 1998 and their 
revision in 2004 (see www.vics.org) as well as Universal Code Council 
(UCC) standards, a huge number of companies have implemented the 
process. One of the first companies to implement CPFR was Wal-Mart. 
Other retailers including Target, Best Buy, Home Depot, and others fol­
lowed the retail market leader. Besides the retail industry, CPFR has been 
&2//$%25$7,9(
3/$11,1*
&2//$%25$7,9(
)25(&$67,1*
&2//$%25$7,9(
5(3/(1,6+0(17
25'(5
*(1(5$7,21
6WHS )URQW
HQG
$JUHHPHQW
6WHS -RLQW
%XVLQHVV3ODQ
6WHS &UHDWH
6DOHVIRUHFDVW
6WHS ,GHQWLI\
([FHSWLRQV
6WHS 5HVROYH
([FHSWLRQV
6WHS &UHDWH
2UGHUIRUHFDVW
6WHS ,GHQWLI\
([FHSWLRQV
6WHS 5HVROYH
([FHSWLRQV
6WHS 2UGHU
*HQHUDWLRQ
DQG
'HOLYHU\
([HFXWLRQ
Figure 5.8  CPFR process steps

128	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
implemented in manufacturing and service companies ranging from high 
technology home appliance and chemical industries to banks and insur­
ance companies.
The CPFR process is divided into nine steps[9] (see Figure 5.8):
Steps 1–2	
Collaborative Planning: Participating companies 
identify executive sponsors, agree to confidentiality 
and dispute resolution processes, develop a scorecard to 
track key supply chain metrics relative to success crite­
ria, and establish any financial incentives or penalties. 
These activities are usually done on a yearly basis and 
are subject to periodic revision. The project teams de­
velop plans for promotions, inventory policy changes, 
store openings/closings, and product changes for each 
product category. The plan is usually developed on a 
quarterly or semi-annual basis.
Steps 3–5	
Collaborative Forecasting: Trading partners share con­
sumer demand forecasts, and identify exceptions that 
occur when partners’ plans do not match, or change 
dramatically. They resolve exceptions by determining 
causal factors, adjusting plans where necessary. All these 
steps are done on a monthly and weekly basis.
Steps 6–8	
Collaborative Replenishment: Based on the estab­
lished sales forecast, trading partners create and share 
order forecasts, i.e. replenishment plans for bringing 
items to stores (in the case of retail collaboration) or 
other business organizations or customers. Results 
data (orders, shipments, on-hand inventory) is shared, 
and forecast accuracy problems, overstock/understock 
conditions, and execution issues are identified and re­
solved. All these steps are performed on a weekly or 
daily basis.
Step 9	 	
Order Generation and Delivery Execution: The final 
step in the CPFR process is to generate new purchase 
orders from customers (retailers), and control their on-
time delivery by all trade partners.

	
Collaborative Models	
129
Step 1 ensures that each company has an adequate commitment to collab­
oration, and that all parties are aligned around common goals. The front-end 
agreement might be reviewed on an annual basis. Step 2 applies good category 
management principles to create a joint plan for going to market. This would 
typically be revised quarterly, or semi-annually. What makes CPFR unique is 
that this joint business plan is used to control the day-to-day activities of man­
ufacturing, delivering, and selling products. That is where Steps 3–9 come in.
CPFR is a visionary framework for aligning supply and demand across 
a network of trading partners. However, many companies have found it 
difficult to implement the full scope of the CPFR model. Most successful 
projects have focused on just one part of the CPFR model at a time–the 
one that offers the highest ROI for the particular trading relationship. 
There are three variations on this “CPFR Lite” approach[9]:
• Manufacturers and retailers in highly promoted channels have 
zeroed in on collaborative planning to synchronize supply 
and demand where the volatility (and opportunity for out-
of-stocks or overstocks) is greatest. European retailers across 
many channels have adopted this model.
• Manufacturers and retailers in everyday low price channels 
who have access to high quality POS forecasts have adapted 
their demand planning processes to support collaborative 
forecasting initiatives. Discounters and hypermarkets have 
primarily adopted this model.
• Manufacturers, retailers and suppliers who have relied on 
continuous replenishment program processes in the past are 
evolving to collaborative replenishment initiatives, such as 
co-managed inventory. Grocery stores have primarily adopted 
this model.
Based on the CPFR principles and applications, we can now summa­
rize its main value-added offerings. The CPFR system enables the trading 
partners in the supply chain to use the information-sharing environment, 
match demand forecast with supply capabilities, provide visibility of cus­
tomer demand and supplier capacity, and, finally, develop common plan­
ning and replenishment forecasts for all members of the supply chain.

130	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
The CPFR value creation (benefits) is usually associated with an in­
crease in sales of a product category, reduced store-level inventory, increase 
in forecast accuracy, better communication with suppliers and customers, 
and the ability to optimize production and capacity. Numerous case stud­
ies of CPFR projects document in-stock percentage improvements from 
2–8% for products in stores, accompanied by inventory reductions of 
10–40% across the supply chain[10]. For example, CPFR at Nabisco noted 
over a 50% increase in category sales. Wal-Mart and Sara Lee reported a 
14% reduction in store-level inventory with a 32% increase in sales[10].
Examples of popular CPFR software companies are listed in Table 5.3.
5.6  Collaboration-Enabling Software Tools
Besides PLM and CPFR collaborative models, the industry today pro­
vides a variety of electronic software tools to facilitate collaboration be­
tween business partners. Groupware is a collaborative software system 
that integrates work on a single project by several concurrent users at 
separated workstations. Groupware supports collaboration over the In­
ternet and among groups of people who share a common task or goal; it 
provides a way for groups to share resources and information.
The groupware systems tools may be divided into three categories de­
pending on the level of collaboration. Electronic Communication Tools 
facilitate sharing information by providing a common environment to 
send and receive information using electronic tools like e-mail, faxing, 
and voice mail. These tools also incorporate an Online File System that 
allows collaborating on various document and graphics files, their de­
velopment, changes, and modifications. The system allows collaborating 
Table 5.3  Examples of CPFR vendors
Company
Product
i2 Technologies, Inc.
i2 Supply Chain Collaboration
JDA Software Group, Inc.
Marketplace Collaborative Planner
Logility, Inc.
Voyager Collaborate
SAP AG
SAP Advanced Planner and Optimizer (APO)
Manugistics (Now part of JDA 
Software Group)
Manugistics NetWORKS Collaborate

	
Collaborative Models	
131
team members to retrieve and modify file information according to the 
role in collaboration. Another tool that may be used for collaborative 
communication is Screen-Sharing software that enables group mem­
bers, even in different locations, to work on the same document, which is 
shown on the PC screen of each participant.
Electronic Conferencing Tools also facilitate the sharing of informa­
tion, but in a more interactive way. One of these tools is Web Conferenc­
ing, which is conducted on the Internet with as few as two and as many 
as thousands of people. It allows users to simultaneously view the subject 
of the conference like documents, graphics, video, etc. Interaction takes 
place via messaging or a simultaneous phone teleconference. Data Con­
ferencing is a virtual meeting, in which geographically dispersed groups 
work on documents together, and can exchange computer files during 
videoconferences. Video/Audio Conferencing (Instant Video) is a video 
chat room that allows users to chat in real time, seeing and hearing each 
person communicating. Among other electronic conferencing tools are 
Online Discussion Forums, and Electronic Meeting Systems (EM)—a 
conferencing system built into a room.
Collaborative Management Tools facilitate and manage group ac­
tivities. The Group Decision Support System is an interactive ­computer-
based system that facilitates the solution of semistructured and unstruc­
tured problems by a group of decision makers. The Project Management 
System is an online system that schedules, tracks, and charts the steps in 
a project. The Workflow System is used for collaborative management of 
tasks and documents within a knowledge-based business process. Finally, 
the Knowledge Management System is associated with collection, orga­
nization, management, and sharing of information between collaborating 
partners.
The groupware market is well represented by a variety of software products. 
Among the most popular groupware applications are: Microsoft Windows 
Meeting Place, Microsoft SharePoint, GoToMeeting, Novell GroupWise, 
WebEx, and Oracle Collaboration Suite on Demand. For example, Oracle 
Collaboration Suite consists of groupware applications used for:
• Content Service–which is a secure content management 
solution that extends the value of content by making it 

132	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
accessible to all workers while reducing business risk and 
facilitating regulatory compliance
• Real-time Collaboration–an integrated solution for the 
enterprise. Real-Time Collaboration accelerates business 
processes by enabling individuals, teams and entire 
organizations to detect presence and collaborate instantly
• Unified Messaging–a unified inbox for email, calendar, 
voicemail, faxes, and threaded discussions helps users manage 
information overload and increase productivity. Enterprise-
wide Web and mobile access supports today’s diverse work 
styles and information needs
• Workspaces–a team-based view to track and manage content 
and communications in the context of the business process. 
Workspaces provide a single place to capture, organize and 
view documents, meetings, tasks, email, discussions and 
announcements related to any project or process.
The main value-added offerings provided by the groupware software are 
enabling business customers to establish direct business communication/
collaboration and access to the information sources (documents, graphs, 
meetings, etc.). The groupware tools create the environment and pro­
cesses for online management of distributed team members, knowledge 
management, sharing of information, and e-training. The groupware 
tools also establish direct customer relationships and loyalty, and generate 
sales leads.
The value creation with the groupware applications may be derived 
from saving time and money by reducing or eliminating travel require­
ments, shortening product development and sales cycles, and improving 
the project’s productivity. An example of calculating savings from install­
ing a groupware application with web meeting is presented in Table 5.4. In 
this table, we assumed that only 20% of all meeting participants needed to 
travel to other company sites. We also assumed that, after the web meeting 
application is implemented, 40% participants of those who traveled before 
will still continue to travel, and 60% will use the Internet meeting tool.
The ROI analysis of the web meeting implementation (similar to 
those done in Chapters 3 and 4) is presented in Table 5.5.

	
Collaborative Models	
133
Table 5.4  Web Conference Savings
Conference Costs (Without Web Meeting):
Number of meeting participants
30
Average meetings per month/per participant
2
Number of participants traveling, %
20%
Cost of travel (average travel of 3 days):
Hotel ($120/day *3 days)
360
Air fare
550
Per-diem ($60/day*3 days)
180
Car rent ($30/day*3 days)
90
Misc.
100
Total cost per travel, $
1,280
Conference costs per months, $
15,360
Annual conference costs, $
184,320
Conference Cost (After Implementing Web Meeting):
Proportion of travel remained, %
40%
Annual conference travel costs, $
73,728
Net savings on conference costs, $
110,592
Table 5.5  ROI Analysis of Web Meeting
2007
2008
2009
2010
Investment and costs, $
Software licensing fees
7,500
Hardware and infrastructure 
(server equipment)
3,500
700
700
700
Installation and consulting fees
3,000
Additional staff (systems 
administration)
65,000
65,000
67,500
69,500
Customer support
1,500
1,700
2,000
IT overhead costs (5% of all 
other costs)
3,360
3,495
3,610
Total investment and costs
79,000
70,560
73,395
75,810
Income and savings, $
Net savings on conference costs
110,592
110,592
110,592
Savings on admin support (10% 
of costs)
11,059
11,059
11,059
(Continued)

134	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
2007
2008
2009
2010
Total income and savings
121,651
121,651
121,651
Annual profit, $
-79,000
51,091
48,256
45,841
Period, years
3
Required rate of return, %
5%
Average income per year, $
48,396
Payback, years
1.6
ROI, %
61%
Net present value (NPV), $
50,502
Internal rate of return (IRR), %
39%
Table 5.5  ROI Analysis of Web Meeting (Continued)
5.7  Chapter 5 Summary: Managerial Aspects 
of Collaborative Commerce
	 1.	 Collaborative commerce or c-commerce is the use of Internet-based 
technologies that enable companies to collaboratively plan, design, 
develop, and manage products and services through their life cycle. 
Many companies today establish online collaboration by leveraging 
their e-commerce technologies in order to facilitate enterprise busi­
ness processes. Companies participating in collaborative commerce 
provide new rules of engagement by sharing decisions, capabilities, 
and information with each other.
	 2.	 The main driver of using c-commerce is simply a set of benefits 
(value creation) derived through the online collaboration. The 
c-commerce models may affect all elements of monetary value 
creation including revenue growth and cost reduction. The value 
creation may be realized with the c-commerce enablers including 
rules of engagement, collaborative technologies, and collaborative 
processes.
	 3.	 The Electronic Design (E-design) contains online tools for collab­
orative design and development of new products through outsourc­
ing from design firms. Using this model, a company that designs a 
new product outsources elements or complete product design to one 
or several partners, which may be geographically distributed. These 

	
Collaborative Models	
135
partners are directly connected through an online collaborative en­
vironment to the main customer that integrates the design elements 
into the new product.
	 4.	 The Collaborative Product Commerce (CPC) models provide on­
line capabilities for design partners to share information, drawings, 
configuration, change management, and other capabilities used in 
new product design and development. CPC may include e-design 
tools as a part of its online collaborative environment. The CPC 
applications consists of four main elements: (1) Document Man­
agement and Vaulting that enables all shared data to be stored in 
and retrieved from a single database (data vault); (2) Change Man­
agement Tools that allow collaborating users and teams to change, 
modify, and update documents and designated parts in the online 
product design and development process; (3) Product Structure 
Management that facilitates a structured uniform approach to de­
sign and management of a product structure—a sequence and order 
of materials, parts, and components used to produce a finished prod­
uct; and (4) Configuration Management that creates associations 
between components and assemblies, and allows customization of 
products according to specific customer needs
	 5.	 Product Lifecycle Management (PLM) represents an integrated c-
commerce model and software system that enables product manage­
ment throughout its life cycle from product design and development 
to product “demise” and discontinuation. As an integrated model, 
PLM is built around the collaboration of product-related informa­
tion both internally in companies, and with collaborating suppli­
ers and customers. As a software system, PLM includes a variety of 
software tools and applications used in managing products through 
their lifecycle. PLM incorporates tools of e-design and collaborative 
product commerce.
	 6.	 PLM provides a completely new environment and set of processes 
for collaborative commerce. These environment and processes in­
clude managing the entire lifecycle of a product through design, in­
troduction, growth, and demise. PLM is a systems approach that 
establishes the integration with customers and suppliers in terms of 
collaborative design, development, maintenance, and improvement 

136	
BUSINESS MODELS FOR E-COMMERCE
of products. PLM additionally provides processes and tools for ef­
fective and efficient management of the product lifecycle by incor­
porating project management, analytical/business intelligence, and 
quality improvement.
	 7.	 The rising interest in PLM and the resulting increase in the number 
of PLM systems are associated with a significant value creation it 
offers. In general, companies pursue PLM for revenue/profit growth 
and faster time-to-market. However, they also seek efficiencies 
through PLM in areas like faster engineering changes, design cost 
reduction, and accurate order taking with minimum errors.
	 8.	 Collaborative Planning, Forecasting and Replenishment (CPFR) 
is a business practice that enables all partners in the supply chain to 
communicate forecasts using information-sharing online collabora­
tive applications. It ensures the right amount of raw materials from 
suppliers and provides on-time delivery of finished goods to the 
customers. In contrast to PLM, which is predominantly long-term 
collaboration through the product lifecycle, CPFR is a tactical short-
term decision making process. It provides integration of suppliers, 
producers, and customers in a supply chain in terms of tactical plan­
ning, forecasting, and replenishment of goods and services.
	 9.	 The CPFR value creation (benefits) is usually associated with an in­
crease in sales of a product category, reduced store-level inventory, 
increase in forecast accuracy, better communication with suppliers 
and customers, and the ability to optimize production and capacity.
	10.	 Groupware is a collaborative software system that integrates work 
on a single project by several concurrent users at separated work­
stations. Groupware supports collaboration over the Internet and 
among groups of people who share a common task or goal; it pro­
vides a way for groups to share resources and information. The 
groupware market is well represented by a variety of software prod­
ucts including popular applications like Microsoft Windows Meet­
ing Place, Microsoft SharePoint, GoToMeeting, Novell GroupWise, 
WebEx, and Oracle Collaboration Suite on Demand.
	11.	 The groupware applications enable business customers to establish 
direct business communication/collaboration and access to the infor­
mation sources (documents, graphs, meetings, etc.). The groupware 

	
Collaborative Models	
137
tools create the environment and processes for online management 
of distributed team members, knowledge management, sharing of 
information, and e-training. The groupware tools also establish di­
rect customer relationships and loyalty, and generate sales leads. The 
value creation with the groupware applications may be derived from 
saving time and money by reducing or eliminating travel require­
ments, shortening product development and sales cycles, and im­
proving the project’s productivity.
References
1.	 Gaudin, S., “The Emergence of Collaborative Commerce,” 
December 3, 2003, available at: itmanagement.earthweb.com.
2.	 Sullivan, Laurie, “Ready to Roll,” InformationWeek, March 3, 2004, 
available at: www.informationweek.com.
3.	 WebSphere Commerce, “Collaborative Content Management,” April 
2007, available at: www-306.ibm.com/software/genservers/commerce/
collabman.
4.	 True, M. and Izzi, C., “Collaborative Product Commerce: Creat­
ing Value across the Enterprise,” ASCET— Supply Chain, May 16, 
2002.
5.	  OneSpace.net Demo, www.cocreate.com, April 2007.
6.	 Arena PLM Solutions, app.bom.com, April 2007.
7.	 Day, M., “Is PLM a new PDM?” www.CADdigest.com, January 7, 
2004.
8.	 Ausura, B. and Day, M., “The ‘New’ Product Lifecycle Management 
systems: What are these PLM systems?” Vision Magazine, January 
2003.
9.	  Collaborative Planning, Forecasting and Replenishment, Version 2.0 
as ­approved by the Voluntary Inter-industry Commerce Standards 
(VICS) Association, June 2002.
10.	
Introduction to Collaborative Planning, Forecasting, and Replenish­
ment (CPFR), available at www.cpfr.org, March 2006.


A
Ariba, 104
Asset intensity reduction, 13, 15, 
30, 51
B
Blog, 7
“Brick-and-mortar” organizations, 11
Browsers, 1
Business model, 13
Business-to-business (B2B), 7–8, 11
Business-to-Business-to-Consumer 
(B2B2C), 12–13
Business-to-consumer (B2C), 
7–8, 11, 12
C
C-commerce—see Collaborative 
Commerce
Ceiling price, 88
“Click-and-mortar” organizations, 11
Collaborative Commerce 
(C-commerce), 13, 31, 
111–134
C-commerce Enablers, 113
Change Management Tools, 117
Collaborative Design and 
Development, 114
Collaborative Management 
Tools, 131
Collaborative Manufacturing, 115
Collaborative Planning, 
Forecasting, and 
Replenishment (CPFR), 35, 
36, 115, 126–130
Collaborative Product Commerce 
(CPC), 36, 114, 116–121
Collaborative Service, 116
Collaborative technologies, 113
Configuration Management, 120
Document Management and 
Vaulting, 117, 118
E-design, 35, 114, 122
Electronic Communication 
Tools, 130
Electronic Conferencing Tools, 131
Groupware, 130
Product Lifecycle Management 
(PLM), 112, 114
Product Structure Management, 
119, 120
Rules of Engagement, 113
Collaborative Planning, Forecasting, 
and Replenishment (CPFR), 
35, 36, 115, 126–130
Steps, 128
Universal Code Council (UCC), 127
Voluntary inter-industry commerce 
standards, 127
Collaborative Product Commerce 
(CPC), 35, 36, 114, 116–121
Change Management Tools, 117
Configuration Management, 
120–121
Document Management and 
Vaulting, 117, 118
Product Structure Management, 
119, 120
Consumer-to-Consumer (C2C) 
e-commerce, 12
Core customer benefits, 24
Cost model, 41
Cost reduction, 14, 51
D
Demand (sell)-side e-commerce 
models, 31, 32, 45
Complementary selling and 
auctioning, 48
Delivery channels, 46
Direct selling and auctioning, 46
Direct selling to business 
customers, 46
Drawbacks and Problems 
in Demand-Side 
Implementation, 65
Index

140	
INDEX
Elements, 46
Financial measurements, 66, 70
Price differentiation, 50
Software, 65, 66
Value-added offering, 50
Value creation, 45, 50
Direct materials, 83
Dot-com bubble, 5
E
eBay Stores, 62, 63, 64
E-business, 4
E-Commerce (Electronic commerce)
Benefits, 15
Characteristics, 9–10
Cost reduction, 13
Definitions, 2–3
Demand-side e-commerce, 30
Dimensions, 10
Disintermediation, 9–10
Growth, 6
History and current 
development of, 4–7
Inexorability, 9
Internet, 1–2
Managerial aspects of, 16–17
Networking, 4
Pervasiveness, 9
Re-intermediation, 10
Revenue enhancement, 13
Supply-side e-commerce, 75–108
Types of, 11
Value creation, 13–16
E-commerce business 
model, 19–42
Classification, 20
Components, 21
Definition, 21
Revenue and cost models, 23
Supporting resources, 23
Value-added offerings, 24–32
Value creation, 30–31
Value proposition, 20, 21
E-design—see Electronic 
Design
E-fulfillment, 60, 61, 115
Electronic catalog, 45, 51, 53
Configuration tool, 56, 57
Customized, 53, 54, 55
Product configuration, 55
Electronic Data Interchange 
(EDI), 35, 80
Electronic Design (E-design), 36, 114
Electronic Exchange, 83, 96
Consortia exchange, 96
Private exchange, 96
Public exchange, 96
Electronic service
Business and consumer blogs, 7
Enterprise Extranet, 4
Enterprise Intranet, 3
Enterprise Resource 
Planning (ERP)
Relational database, 117
E-procurement—see Supply 
(buy)-side e-commerce
E-procurement with electronic 
catalogs—see Supply 
(buy)-side e-commerce
E-service—see Electronic Service
E-sourcing, 33, 82, 83–86
Expressive bidding, 91
F
Forward auction, 32, 46
G
Google, 34, 46
Government-to-Business (G2B) 
e-commerce, 12
Government-to-Consumer 
(G2C) e-commerce, 12
H
Hyper-Text Transmission Protocol 
(HTTP), 1
I
IBM, 104, 126
Indirect materials, 76
Inexorability of e-commerce, 9
Infomediary/affiliate, 32, 46
Internal Rate of Return 
(IRR), 39
Internet, 1–2
Intra-business e-commerce, 13
iProcurement, 34, 93, 104
iStore, 62, 63, 64

	
INDEX	
141
L
L-commerce—see Location-based 
Commerce
Level of integration, 103
Location-based Commerce 
(L-commerce), 13
M
Many-to-many configuration, 46
M-commerce—see Mobile Commerce
Microsoft Office Live, 62, 64
Mixed/“click-and-brick” strategy, 6
Mobile Commerce (M-commerce), 
6, 13, 36
Monetary Results (value creation)—see 
Value Creation
Monetary value in E-commerce, 14
Multimedia sharing, 7
N
Net present value (NPV), 39, 
69, 134
Non-monetary, 15
O
One-to-many configuration, 45
Oracle, 34, 64, 104, 126, 131
ERP, 63
iProcurement, 104
iStore, 63, 64
Order processing, 52, 57
P
Partial e-commerce organization, 10
Payback, 38, 40, 69, 99, 134
PayPal, 52
Peer-to-Peer (P2P) e-commerce, 12
Pervasiveness of e-commerce, 9
Podcast, 7
Portal, 35, 49, 84, 111
Procurement—see Traditional 
Procurement
Product configuration—see Electronic 
Catalog
Product Lifecycle Management 
(PLM), 112, 114
Customer Needs 
Management, 123
Direct Material Sourcing, 122
Product Data Management 
(PDM), 123
Product Portfolio 
Management, 123
Pure e-commerce organization, 10
Pure-play e-commerce companies, 10
R
Return on Investment (ROI), 38, 42, 
66–70, 98–103, 129
Revenue enhancement, 13
Revenue Model, 21, 29
Reverse Auction, 33, 34, 86, 91
RSS, 7
S
SAP, 104, 126, 130
Shopping cart, 52, 53
Buyer shopping cart, 57, 60
Electronic shopping cart, 57
One-click shopping cart, 59
Single-page shopping cart, 58–59
Social networking, 7
Software distribution, 103
Storefront, 34, 45, 63, 64
Supply (buy)-side e-commerce, 
32–33, 75–108, 78
Ceiling price, 88
Electronic Data Interchange 
(EDI), 35, 80
Electronic exchange, 83, 96
Electronic reverse auction 
(e-RA), 86–92
E-procurement, 26, 78, 79
E-procurement with electronic 
catalogs, 82–83, 92–95
E-sourcing, 82, 83–86
Expressive bidding, 91
Reserve price, 88
T
Target market segment, 24
Traditional Procurement, 75–78
V
Value-added 
offerings, 20, 22–23
Customer-related process, 26
Degree of customization, 25

142	
INDEX
Degree of digitization, 25
Degree of tangibility, 25
Internal organizational process, 26
Supplier-related processes, 26
Value creation, 13, 22, 23, 30–31, 
41, 90
Monetary, 13, 14, 23
Non-monetary, 13, 23
Value proposition, 20–21, 41
W
Web 2.0, 6–7
Web pages, 1
Wiki, 7
World Wide Web (WWW), 1
Y
Yahoo! Merchant, 63, 64
YouTube.com, 10

Business Models 
for E-Commerce
Zinovy Radovilsky
Dr. Zinovy Radovilsky is Professor of Management in 
the College of Business and Economics at California 
State University, East Bay. He has more than 20 years 
of experience in teaching operations and supply chain 
management courses. Dr. Radovilsky has been a busi-
ness consultant to leading U.S. companies and organi-
zations and has done extensive research in the areas of 
enterprise resource planning (ERP), e-commerce busi-
ness models and management, quality management, 
and quantitative business methods. He published a 
number of papers in international and domestic peer-
reviewed journals. Dr. Radovilsky is also a managing 
editor of two research journals
For further information, a 
free trial, or to order, contact: 
sales@businessexpertpress.com
www.businessexpertpress.com/librarians
THE BUSINESS 
EXPERT PRESS
DIGITAL LIBRARIES
EBOOKS FOR 
BUSINESS STUDENTS
Curriculum-oriented, born-
digital books for advanced 
business students, written 
by academic thought 
leaders who translate  real-
world business experience 
into course readings and 
reference materials for 
students expecting to tackle 
management and leadership 
challenges during their 
professional careers.
POLICIES BUILT 
BY LIBRARIANS
• Unlimited simultaneous 
usage
• Unrestricted downloading 
and printing
• Perpetual access for a 
one-time fee
• No platform or 
maintenance fees
• Free MARC records
• No license to execute
The Digital Libraries are a 
comprehensive, cost-eﬀ ective 
way to deliver practical 
treatments of important 
business issues to every 
student and faculty member. 

