www.ebook3000.com

Business  
Plans  
In A Week
Iain Maitland

Iain Maitland heads up Property Alerts news and information 
websites which include UK Property Alerts, London Property 
Alerts and International Property Alerts. He regularly 
produces business plans for UK and overseas property 
syndicates and consortia.
www.ebook3000.com

Business  
Plans  
In A Week
Iain Maitland

First published in Great Britain in 1996 by Hodder Education
This edition published in 2016 by John Murray Learning
Copyright © Iain Maitland 1996, 1998, 2002, 2012 and 2016
The right of Iain Maitland to be identified as the Author of the Work has been 
asserted by him in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
Database right Hodder & Stoughton (makers)
The Teach Yourself name is a registered trademark of Hachette UK.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in 
a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, 
mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior written 
permission of the publisher, or as expressly permitted by law, or under terms 
agreed with the appropriate reprographic rights organization. Enquiries 
concerning reproduction outside the scope of the above should be sent to the 
Rights Department, John Murray Learning, at the address below.
You must not circulate this book in any other binding or cover and you must 
impose this same condition on any acquirer. 
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data: a catalogue record for this title is 
available from the British Library.
ISBN 9781473609396
eISBN 9781444158793
1
The publisher has used its best endeavours to ensure that any website 
addresses referred to in this book are correct and active at the time of going 
to press. However, the publisher and the author have no responsibility for the 
websites and can make no guarantee that a site will remain live or that the 
content will remain relevant, decent or appropriate.
The publisher has made every effort to mark as such all words which it 
believes to be trademarks. The publisher should also like to make it clear that 
the presence of a word in the book, whether marked or unmarked, in no way 
affects its legal status as a trademark.
Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher to trace the copyright 
holders of material in this book. Any errors or omissions should be notified 
in writing to the publisher, who will endeavour to rectify the situation for any 
reprints and future editions.
Typeset by Cenveo® Publisher Services.
Printed and bound in Great Britain by CPI Group (UK) Ltd., Croydon, CR0 4YY.
John Murray Learning policy is to use papers that are natural, renewable 
and recyclable products and made from wood grown in sustainable forests. 
The logging and manufacturing processes are expected to conform to the 
environmental regulations of the country of origin.
Carmelite House
50 Victoria Embankment
London EC4 0DZ
www.hodder.co.uk
www.ebook3000.com

Contents
Introduction 
2
Sunday  
4
Understanding business plans
Monday  
22
Making preparatory notes
Tuesday  
36
Composing the commercial section
Wednesday  
52
Compiling the financial section
Thursday  
70
Adding the appendices
Friday  
86
Submitting a business plan
Saturday  
104
Presenting a business plan
7 × 7 
117
Answers 
123

2
Introduction
All businesses, big and small, established or soon to start, 
need to know where they are going, both commercially and 
financially, over the coming months and years. The easiest way 
to achieve that know-how is to put together a business plan.
What is a business plan?
This is a document that sets out what the business does, or 
plans to do, where it wants to go, and how it is going to get 
there, and when. In many ways, it provides a summary of 
where your business is now, where you want it to be and a 
framework for going from ‘here’ to ‘there’ successfully.
A business plan has many uses. As often as not, it is only ever 
produced when the business needs to raise finance and a 
bank asks to see one. It can be used to attract investment in a 
business, perhaps from a would-be partner. It can also be used 
to encourage assistance in other ways: to show a prospective 
landlord, for example, that this is a solid and growing, here-to-
stay business.
Surprisingly few entrepreneurs put together a business plan 
just for their own use – and perhaps this is a contributory factor 
in so many business failures. If a business does not have a 
clear idea of what it’s doing and where it’s going, and a firm 
grasp of its finances, especially its profit margins and cash flow, 
it is certainly making it harder for itself to achieve its goals.
What does it consist of?
A business plan usually comprises two, or sometimes three, 
sections:
A commercial section will set out what the business does, 
the products or services it provides, who’s involved with the 
business, the market it operates in and where it wants to go in 
the months and years ahead.
www.ebook3000.com

3
A financial section sets out these commercial activities and 
objectives in financial terms. It will look at the current financial 
circumstances, including a profit budget and a cash-flow 
forecast along with past and projected accounts, and detail any 
financial requirements.
Appendices may comprise a third and final section. These 
will feature a mix of documents from independent third 
parties which back up and clarify what’s been included in the 
commercial and financial sections. You might find agreements 
with suppliers in here.
How to write it
First time around, the idea of putting together a business plan 
can be daunting. It should not be. If you are running, or are 
planning to set up, a business, all the information you need 
should be known to you or be readily available. If it isn’t, it’s 
about time it was!
As with writing all documents or reports, the best way to 
approach a business plan is to break everything down into 
smaller parts you can do one at a time. That’s why doing a 
business plan in a week is ideal – you can set aside some time 
each day to do each part in turn.
This book takes you step by step through the whole process, 
cutting through the theory and the waffle, to show you how to 
put together a successful business plan in just seven days…
Iain Maitland

4
Sunday
Understanding 
business plans
www.ebook3000.com

SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
5
Today we will begin by taking an overview of business 
plans. We’ve already seen that a business plan comprises 
a commercial section, a financial section and, sometimes, 
appendices as well. It would be helpful, before we start 
writing anything down, even in note form, to consider what 
we might want to include in each of these sections.
We’ve talked, too, of the uses of a business plan and the fact 
that it’s often only put together on request – from a bank, a 
would-be investor or a prospective supplier, for example. 
However, the greatest, and most often overlooked, use is 
actually for the business itself.
How we present a business plan – its key features – is 
important as well. Whether we are submitting a plan by 
email or in writing, it has to create the correct, professional 
impression. Some banks, for example, will expect us to fill in 
a ready-made form which they’ll provide. In this case, we may 
need to employ someone with neat handwriting if ours is a 
spider’s crawl! So, to start us off, we will look more closely at 
these three areas in particular…
l contents
l uses
l key features.

6
Contents
Not surprisingly, all business plans are different, but most of 
them will contain three main sections:
l a commercial section
l a financial section
l appendices.
The commercial section
In this first section, we would normally include some 
preliminary materials such as a title page, contents page and 
introduction. These would then be followed by text about our 
business, products and services, team, market and overall 
objectives. The names and order of these subjects and the 
precise information given about them may vary from one 
plan to another, but they should all be covered in some detail 
somewhere in this section.
The financial section
Equally important, if not more so in some instances, the 
financial section of a business plan will usually incorporate a 
profit budget and cash-flow forecast indicating the estimated 
profits and ongoing cash position within the firm over a given 
period of time. These will often be accompanied by past or 
projected – or both – annual accounts, such as a profit and loss 
account and a balance sheet, plus details of current financial 
circumstances and requirements.
Appendices
This final section comprises photographs, samples, letters, 
forms, documents and other items from independent sources 
which verify and occasionally add to all of the statements, 
financial facts and figures laid down in the commercial and 
financial sections. In many respects, these appendices can 
be viewed as the foundation of a successful business plan: 
www.ebook3000.com

SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
7
without them, the preceding text may be seen as little more 
than unsubstantiated and biased opinions.
 Here is a checklist of what we might include in our business 
plan:
1 Commercial section
l title page
l contents page
l introduction
l the business
l products and services
l the team
l the market
l objectives
2 Financial section
l profit budget
l cash-flow forecast
l past accounts
l future accounts
l current financial circumstances
l financial requirements
3 Appendices
l photographs
l samples
l letters
l forms
l documents
l other items
Uses
We may compile a business plan for various reasons. Most often, 
it will be used to:
l raise finance
l attract investment
l encourage assistance
l improve performance.

8
Raise finance
If we need funds to start, buy or expand a firm in some way, 
a plan may be sent to a prospective lender such as a bank 
manager, charitable trust, venture capital house or even family 
or friends who have savings or redundancy money available. 
Hopefully, we can convince the relevant parties both that we 
have a viable proposal and that we will be able to make capital 
and interest payments on time.
Attract investment
Similarly, the business plan could be used to attract investment 
and would, in this case, be written to highlight the firm’s 
forthcoming activities and potential profits and the possible 
rewards and risks for would-be investors. Such a plan may be 
forwarded to wealthy individuals and to organizations such as 
venture capital institutions which specialize in investing in 
up-and-coming companies, especially those trading in new 
and innovative activities.
Encourage assistance
Sometimes, we need help from other people and organizations 
in order to trade successfully and prosper. Perhaps we want a 
prospective landlord to grant a lease to us, a supplier to enter 
into a sole agency agreement for our town or a fellow trader to 
allow us to use their storage and distribution facilities. These 
parties may be more willing to do what we want if they have 
been given a plan which outlines both our requirements and 
intentions and the mutual benefits arising from them.
Improve performance
Even if we do not require external finance, investment or 
assistance, it is still a good idea to draw up a business plan 
anyway, for our own internal use. Preparing commercial and 
financial sections (and appendices where appropriate) enables 
us to assess our business in an objective manner. We may 
get to know it better, along with its individual strengths and 
www.ebook3000.com

SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
9
weaknesses, and be able to set more realistic objectives as a 
consequence of this increased knowledge and understanding.
 Just as significant, a business plan provides us with a 
commercial and financial framework against which we can 
regularly compare our performance to see if we are on course 
to achieve our objectives. Possible problems such as rising 
costs and imminent cash shortfalls can hopefully be spotted 
and resolved well in advance. If reviewed and amended at 
monthly intervals, our plan enables us to monitor, control and 
improve the overall performance of our business. For many, 
this is the most important function of a business plan.
Key features
We now have an overview of what a business plan is, what it 
contains and how we can use it. Next, we need to think about 
those key features that distinguish a successful business 
plan from an unsuccessful one. Obviously, we will wish to 
incorporate these into the plan that we are going to write.
 Ideally, our business plan will be:
l well researched
l adapted
l attractive
l understandable
l realistic
l well supported.

10
Well researched
A successful business plan is researched fully, and is only 
completed once all the commercial, financial and supporting 
information that may need to be included in it has been gathered 
together. The plan should create the strong impression that the 
writer knows everything there is to know and can prove it with 
independent, backup information.
 As soon as the reader thinks of something they wish to 
see, they should be able to find it. And if they want proof of a 
statement, it should be readily available from an independent 
source in the appendices.
Adapted
Of course, not all of the facts and figures that we are going 
to collect should be put into the plan – otherwise it might 
run to tens or even hundreds of pages! Its content, structure, 
emphasis and length must vary according to what our 
particular reader wants to know about and how much time they 
have to read it. When writing, look at what the reader will be 
thinking – in essence – ‘What’s in it for me?’ Show them! For 
example, a bank wishes to know about commercial activities 
but only in relation to likely profits, cash flow and financial 
www.ebook3000.com

SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
11
requirements. They want to get their money back, with interest, 
and on time. A prospective landlord, on the other hand, may 
want to learn about how our business and activities might affect 
other tenants, but little else.
 However much information we want to incorporate – and 
there is no right or wrong length for a business plan – we must 
try to keep it as brief and to the point as we can. Always asking 
‘Is this relevant?’ before noting anything down should help us 
to achieve this. The reader will only have a certain amount of 
time to study our plan, and needs to be able to do it swiftly. 
We can assist them in doing this by omitting superfluous and 
repetitive material.
Attractive
Whether it’s being submitted online or as hard copy – 
whichever the reader wants – a winning business plan 
must have a smart and professional appearance, especially 
if it is being sent out to raise finance, attract investment 
or encourage assistance in some way. This will give us an 
efficient, businesslike image and should put the reader in a 
more favourable mood towards both us and the proposition 
that we are making. Clearly, the business proposal itself must 

12
still be a viable one if it is to be accepted, but it obviously helps 
to get the reader on our side as far as possible.
 If a hard-copy business plan, it should be put inside a 
clean and classy-looking file or folder: this not only creates a 
professional impression but also protects the material from 
becoming torn and dirty as it is being passed around. We 
should choose a file which matches our image – colourful and 
jazzy if we are artistic, plain and dark if we are methodical 
and serious. For easy identification, it is a good idea to place a 
white sticker on the front of the file and type (or write neatly) 
the title of the plan on it along with our name, address, phone/
fax number, email address and/or website, and the date. A 
business logo adds a classy touch, too:
KALEIDOSCOPE
A
BUSINESS PROPOSAL
BY
TOM HUDSON
2,THE COTTAGES, NEWTOWN, 
SUFFOLK FE7 3BH
TEL/FAX: 01394 770512
E-MAIL:THUDSON@NVC.COM
DATE: 1 MAY 2016
 To emphasize our professionalism, a hard-copy plan needs 
to be on top-quality, A4 paper, perhaps selecting white or 
another shade if we want to co-ordinate colours to achieve a 
particular style and image. The text should be typed, rather than 
handwritten and amateurish, and should be set out carefully. 
We ought to include generous margins at the top, sides and 
bottom of each page, plenty of headings and subheadings, 
short paragraphs of similar length, and bullet points where 
appropriate. These all help to improve the overall appearance, 
making it easier to read, and give the reader sufficient room in 
which to note comments and queries.
www.ebook3000.com

SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
13
 Here is an example of what we should be aiming for:
 We should always submit clean, fresh printouts rather than 
photocopies which would create the impression that this is 
little more than a circular being sent out to everyone. (We can, 
however, put extra, clean copies of the plan at the back of our 
file or folder if we know that several people will wish to study it.) 
The text must be free from any spelling mistakes, typing errors 
or inaccuracies such as incorrectly added figures. These will 
confuse and muddle the reader and damage our reputation. 
We need to check, check and check again – and then retype,  
if necessary.
Understandable
Our language must match the reader’s knowledge and 
understanding of the subject matter. We should use clear, 
simple words and phrases when addressing a lay person 
About Kaleidoscope
Its purpose
Kaleidoscope is being set up to meet the needs of those 
families who wish to hire rather than buy nursery 
goods and equipment, typically overnight and on an 
occasional basis.
Its location
It will be based in a newly built, 500-square-metre 
showroom alongside our home. This is within two minutes’ 
walking distance of the town’s only health centre, St 
John’s Playgroup and Eyke Primary School (see ‘Appendix 
2: Eyke Map’ on pages 3–4 of the appendices).
Its products and services
Initially, we will stock the following goods:
Moses baskets 
baby-bouncers
carrycots 
baby-walkers
cribs 
highchairs

14
who may be bewildered by trade jargon. Likewise, we should 
incorporate technical expressions where appropriate when 
writing to an expert who might otherwise feel patronized. 
The key to success here is to think carefully about what our 
reader knows and to pitch our language at the right level. It 
is important that we do not automatically assume they are as 
familiar with the subject as we are – this is rarely the case.
 Whatever we have to say, we must ensure that we use 
specific words and phrases, rather than vague ones such as 
‘good’, ‘nice’, ‘better than’ and ‘cheaper than’, which will be 
defined differently by each reader. For example, ‘£33.95’ is 
understood clearly, whereas ‘a good price’ means nothing.
 Humorous comments and statements must be avoided at all 
times, too. What we find funny may be interpreted in another 
way by a person with an alternative sense of humour. Our joke 
could be seen as flippant and, when finance or investment is 
being sought, humour is often considered inappropriate.
Realistic
Obviously, we need to sound 100-per-cent confident and 
enthusiastic about our firm and its prospects – after all, if we 
are not, we cannot expect the reader to be either! Nevertheless, 
we must not get too carried away, as this may make us sound 
naïve and could undermine what we are stating. Most readers 
will possess some knowledge of what we are writing about, and 
will be able to distinguish between facts and fantasy.
 Our statements and financial figures need to be sensible and 
achievable. We should base them on solid, reliable evidence 
such as past income and expenditure and definite sales orders. 
Prospective difficulties must be addressed fully rather than 
being glossed over or ignored completely. We should identify 
and then explain clearly how we are going to overcome, or 
at least cope with, them. By not referring to them, we simply 
appear evasive or incompetent. It is sensible to deal in detail 
only with the immediate future, namely the coming year: the 
longer ahead we look, the more speculative our comments 
become. Our reader is more interested in reality than hopes 
and dreams.
www.ebook3000.com

SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
15
Well supported
A successful business plan always backs up its commercial 
and financial sections with independent evidence in its 
appendices. Our comments alone will not be accepted at face 
value, especially if money is involved. We therefore have to be 
willing and able to prove everything we say is true by supplying 
additional, verifying material from reputable sources, and, 
ideally, independent ones.

This page intentionally left blank 
www.ebook3000.com

SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
17
Summary
At the end of our first day of work on our 
business plan, we should have a clear idea of 
what we are going to produce. We will know 
whether we are putting together a plan to 
raise finance, attract investment, encourage 
assistance and/or improve the performance  
of our business.
From here, we will have worked out whether 
we are going to produce a commercial section 
and a financial section and appendices; and 
what we will include within each of these 
sections. The commercial section contains the 
facts, the financial section contains the figures 
and the appendices contain the proof; all of 
which confirms that we are showing the reader 
facts and figures, not opinions and guesswork.
There’s more to a business plan than just the 
facts, the figures and the proof, however. We 
want to deliver a plan in the way the reader 
wants to receive it, whether that’s online or 
offline. We want to tell them what they want 
to know – the ‘What’s in it for me?’ We need to 
show that we are well informed, professional 
and know what we are doing. A successful 
business plan is well researched, adapted, 
attractive, understandable, realistic and well 
supported. Remember, it’s not just what we 
say, it’s how we say it!

This page intentionally left blank 
www.ebook3000.com

SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
19
Fact-check [answers at the back]
 We can check our understanding of what we’ve covered today by 
answering these multiple-choice questions and then comparing our 
answers with those at the end of the book.
1. What would we expect to see 
included in the commercial 
section?
a) Information about the  
business 
o
b) The profit budget 
o
c) The cash-flow forecast 
o
d) Information about products  
and services 
o
2. What would we expect to find  
in the financial section?
a) The profit budget 
o
b) Samples 
o
c) The overall objectives 
o
d) Annual accounts 
o
3. What would we expect to see  
in the appendices?
a) Financial requirements 
o
b) Samples 
o
c) Photographs 
o
d) Letters 
o
4. What are the main uses of a 
business plan?
a) Advertising 
o
b) To raise finance 
o
c) To improve performance 
o
d) Marketing 
o
5. What do we provide to prove  
we know ‘everything there is  
to know’?
a) Letters of support from 
employees 
o
b) Plenty of opinions and  
thoughts on the subject 
o
c) Our curriculum vitae 
o
d) Independent, backup 
information 
o
6. What does the reader really 
want to know?
a) Our life story and successes  
to date 
o
b) How the product we’re  
selling is made 
o
c) ‘What’s in it for me?’ 
o
d) As much as possible about 
everything 
o
7. What might a ‘smart and 
professional’ plan include 
appearance-wise?
a) A clean and classy-looking  
folder 
o
b) Handwritten text, corrected 
where relevant 
o
c) Quality A4 paper 
o
d) Detailed and dense text 
o

20
8. What type of language should 
we use in the plan?
a) Words and phrases suited  
to the reader’s know-how 
o
b) Humorous comments, 
whenever possible 
o
c) Specific language 
o
d) Vague words and phrases, 
when in doubt 
o
9. What should we do about 
‘prospective difficulties’ we’ve 
identified in advance?
a) Ignore them completely 
o
b) Mention them vaguely 
o
c) Address them fully 
o
d) Wait and see if the reader  
spots them 
o
10. Our plan should give the  
reader the strong impression 
that it is…?
a) A work in progress 
o
b) Well researched 
o
c) Realistic 
o
d) Well supported 
o
www.ebook3000.com

This page intentionally left blank 

22
monday
Making 
preparatory 
notes
www.ebook3000.com

SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
23
Now we start the proper work. We’ve got a clear idea of what 
we’ve got to put in our commercial and financial sections and 
our appendices – so let’s go and get it. Much of the information 
we need will be readily available ‘in-house’; it’s in our heads or 
we can get it from our work colleagues or books and records, 
past accounts, and so on. As we’ll see in a minute, asking 
yourself lots of questions is a good place to begin.
We may not have everything we need to know and include 
in-house. This is especially true when it comes to putting 
together the appendices – remember, the material in here 
needs to back up the facts in the commercial section and 
the figures in the financial section. As important, it needs 
to be from independent sources. We need to contact these 
independent sources – banks, customers, and so on. What 
they have to say is as important as what we have to say.
The chances are that we are going to generate a great deal 
of information that could go into this business plan. What we 
need to do is to be able to pull out the key facts and figures 
and to decide what we’ll discard. We also need to decide 
what’s going to be included in the appendices and what will be 
left out. We’ve lots to do today. Let’s crack on with…
l conducting internal research
l using external sources
l accumulating appropriate information.

24
Conducting internal research
Much of the information we need to put into our business plan 
can be obtained relatively easily, from in-house sources:
l our own knowledge
l our colleagues
l books and records.
Our own knowledge
More often than not, our understanding of the business will 
be greater than anyone else’s. We may have established the 
firm and perhaps now sell the goods, recruit the team, deal 
personally with customers, and so on. Who else knows as 
much as us? Probably nobody! We should therefore draw 
upon our own background knowledge and information before 
proceeding further.
 One of the best ways of doing this is to ask ourselves lots 
of questions. Our answers will generate plenty of preparatory 
notes that we can use as the basis of our plan. Here are some 
questions to start us off:
l What is our business?
l What does it do?
l Where is it located?
www.ebook3000.com

SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
25
l What are the premises like?
l What equipment, machinery and vehicles do we have?
l What do we sell?
l What are our products and services?
l What are our rivals’ goods and services?
l Who works for the firm?
l What are their backgrounds?
l What do they do?
l What are their strengths and weaknesses?
l Who are our customers?
l How much do we know about them?
l Who are our competitors?
l What do we know about them?
l What is the marketplace like?
l How much do we know about it?
l What are our personal goals?
l What are our business objectives?
l How have we been doing financially?
l What are our finances like now?
l What will our finances be like in the future?
l What cash will be available?
l What profits will we make in the future?
l How can we prove all this information?
Our colleagues
In a larger business with various departments for purchasing, 
production, marketing, administration, personnel and so 
forth, some of the data required for the plan may have to be 
obtained by approaching our work colleagues. Whoever we 
talk to, we do need to be able to distinguish between opinions 
and facts. Generally, facts are better than opinions, unless the 
latter come from independent, reputable sources – which our 
colleagues are not!
Books and records
Whatever the size of our firm, the books and records that 
we have accumulated so far will be invaluable to us when 
we are composing our business plan. In particular, we will 

26
find it helpful to refer to previous annual accounts, purchase 
agreements, sales records and orders, and the like. Details 
can be taken from these and referred to in the text of the 
plan, with key documents being placed in the appendices for 
verification.
 Normally, most of the facts that we need for the commercial 
and financial sections of our business plan will be available 
in-house. However, we need to remember that everything we 
write about has to be proven, and this usually means obtaining 
supporting data from outside the firm. Our word alone is not 
enough: other people’s carries more weight.
Using external sources
There are many external sources of information and advice 
available to us. We should consider all of them, and then 
approach those which are most likely to be of assistance. The 
following are usually worth contacting:
banks 
solicitors
customers 
agents
suppliers 
associations
competitors 
government
accountants 
media
  
Internet
Banks
As our bank is probably going to receive our plan, it is sensible 
to get in touch with them beforehand to find out exactly what 
they want from us and how they want it. Some banks provide 
ready-made business plan, profit budget and cash-flow 
forecast forms for us to complete and submit as hard copies 
or online, and can supply guidance on how to fill these in 
correctly. Pamphlets and booklets on general business issues 
and specific details on financial matters are available, too. 
These all make useful background reading.
www.ebook3000.com

SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
27
Customers
Those people and firms who buy our goods and services are 
an excellent source of advice. They can tell us all we need to 
know – and to write – about them, including their location, 
characteristics, wants and needs. In addition, they can give us 
opinions about our firm and our goods and services which may 
be useful additions to our appendices. Their comments about 
our rivals might be revealing as well.
Suppliers
Our suppliers will obviously be able to provide facts and figures 
about the raw materials, component parts and stocks that 
we are purchasing from them, along with further, helpful 
information about mutual customers, competitors and the 
marketplace. Although some of their additional comments 
may be biased, these will usually contain one or two points of 
use to us.
Competitors
Many small businesses compete amicably against each other, 
with the overall aim of surviving against larger companies 
trading nearby. If we can establish friendly relationships, we 
may be able to draw on their knowledge of goods, services, 
customers and the market. Clearly, we may find out more 
about them as well, which will enable us then to write about 
them with greater accuracy.
Accountants
Costly though they are, an accountant can often put us in touch 
with potential financiers, provide advice on all money matters, 
help us to write our financial section, and give our business 
plan a greater veneer of respectability. It is usually wise to 
choose an accountant on the basis of recommendations from 
fellow traders we can trust. We need to be aware of the likely 
costs involved in using them, and evaluate these alongside the 
possible benefits.

28
Solicitors
We could approach a solicitor for guidance on legal issues 
that we need to refer to in our plan – partnership agreements, 
contracts of sale, freehold deeds, leasehold agreements 
and planning permission, among other items. As with an 
accountant, we should make our choice from personal 
recommendations and compare the expense against the 
advantages of referring to them. Evidently, they are invaluable 
in some instances.
Agents
Business transfer agents who specialize in selling going 
concerns will be able to supply data about businesses for 
sale, what to look for and how to value them, as well as 
information about freehold and leasehold properties, and how 
to agree rents – all potential text for the different sections of 
our plan. Similarly, estate agents can comment on freehold 
and leasehold premises, prices, rents and rates in our region, 
which may be of some value to our business plan.
Associations
Local chambers of commerce or trade run by business 
people in the community can be a good source of off- and 
on-the-record advice about what is happening in the area. 
Representative associations in our trade or industry can 
provide or verify much of the commercial information needed. 
Membership of a nationwide, small-business association 
confers many benefits for members, including an advisory 
service on most business issues.
Government
Our local council can be a helpful source of information on such 
subjects as low-cost finance and grants available, planning 
permission procedures and forthcoming developments. 
Some councils even employ small-business advisers who can 
www.ebook3000.com

SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
29
assist in the writing of business plans. A variety of statistics, 
surveys and reports are continually being produced by national 
government and supplied through its departments. Many of 
these contain useful background details for our plan.
Media
Newspapers, magazines and websites may have included 
articles about our business, products, services, employees, 
customers and competitors at some time in the past. We may 
find it beneficial to refer to these once more when compiling 
our commercial section in particular. Copies of recent articles 
could then be placed within the appendices to support any 
comments made. Don’t forget to search for information online, 
via www.google.com etc.
 Here are some other sources of potential use to us:
architects
printers
surveyors
insurance brokers
illustrators
libraries
photographers
market research companies
Accumulating appropriate 
information
We now need to start sorting through the mass of information 
that has come to us from all the different sources, making 
notes which subsequently can form the basis of our business 
plan. We could use these headings:
l The business
l Products and services
l The team
l The market
l Objectives
l Finance
l Appendices

30
The business
Under this heading, we could jot down notes about our 
firm or business idea, including whatever we think is most 
relevant in our situation. Typically, we might write about its 
history, activities and current position, location and premises, 
equipment, machinery and vehicles. It is up to us to decide 
what our reader wants to see and to include it.
Products and services
Here, we might note down information about the numbers and 
types of products and services that we offer, along with their 
main features and selling points. It is important to make notes 
too about rival goods and services, comparing and contrasting 
these with our own. We need to be especially realistic at this 
point, being aware of our shortcomings and how we are going 
to deal with them.
The team
Beneath this heading, we should focus on ourselves as well 
as on our colleagues and employees, as appropriate. In 
particular, we should note our individual careers to date, skills, 
knowledge, experiences, strengths and weaknesses, and how 
we all fit together to form a good team.
www.ebook3000.com

SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
31
The market
Here, we should concentrate on our customers – their 
numbers, types, locations and purchasing habits. We need 
to make notes about our competitors, too – numbers, types, 
locations, activities, strengths and weaknesses. We could 
also take a broader look at the marketplace itself, especially 
its size, changes and developments taking place, and future 
prospects.
Objectives
It is a good idea for us to write out our personal and business 
objectives for the short, medium and long term – for the next 
year, three years and thereafter. We must be cautious, though: 
a lender will want to see that we are not being over-optimistic.
Finance
If we are planning to include a financial section for a bank or 
whoever, we should sketch out some preliminary notes about 
our finances to date, likely future sales, costs and profits, and 
possible forthcoming cash flow into and out of our account, as 
well as our current financial circumstances and requirements. 
If we are trying to raise finance, these notes are essential – 
indeed, as important as all of the other notes put together.

32
Appendices
Below this final heading, we should make a note of those items 
which we can put in to back up our statements. Here is a list, 
in no particular order, of what we might decide to include:
l press cuttings
l certificates/diplomas
l map
l partnership-agreement documents
l property particulars
l photographs of equipment
l company-formation documents
l product samples
l sales records
l suppliers’ price lists
l sales orders
l our price lists
l quotes/estimates of costs
l sales literature
l competitors’ price lists
l annual accounts
l competitors’ sales literature
l proof of security
l accountant’s/solicitor’s comments
l curricula vitae.
 Of course, this does not mean we have to include all of these 
items – we should consider them all carefully, and then select 
the relevant ones, placing them in the most appropriate order, 
section by section.
www.ebook3000.com

33
SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
Summary
Today should have been a hectic day and we 
should be feeling tired but happy – we’ve now 
got lots of information, notes and materials 
that we can use in our business plan. There 
may seem to be too much of it and we may not 
quite know what to do next, but everything 
is now in place ready to be cut, shaped and 
trimmed into the perfect business plan.
This may be a good time to just reflect on 
what we’ve done today to make sure we have 
covered everything. A common mistake made 
by successful entrepreneurs who’ve set up and 
run a business from scratch by themselves is 
to assume that they have all the knowledge 
needed to put into a winning business plan. 
But others – customers, suppliers, etc. – may 
tell us one or two things we didn’t know.
Similarly, we need other people and firms to 
provide us with the backup materials for the 
appendices. We should, therefore, check that 
we have referred to colleagues, books and 
records and used external sources to add to 
and verify the information we have gathered 
together. We can then organize all of this into 
sections – about the business, products and 
services, team, market, objectives,  
finance and appendices.

This page intentionally left blank 
www.ebook3000.com

SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
35
Fact-check [answers at the back]
 Let’s double-check what we’ve covered today by answering these 
multiple-choice questions. We can then compare what we’ve put with  
the correct answers at the end of the book.
1. Who should know our business 
best?
a) Us 
o
b) Our employees 
o
c) Our bank manager 
o
d) Our customers 
o
2. What information do we want 
from our colleagues?
a) Facts 
o
b) Opinions 
o
c) Figures 
o
d) Hearsay 
o
3. What books and records should 
we be accessing for research 
purposes?
a) Diaries 
o
b) Sales records 
o
c) Christmas card lists 
o
d) Annual accounts 
o
4. What might we ask our 
customers about?
a) Themselves 
o
b) Their finances 
o
c) Us 
o
d) Our plans 
o
5. What might we use an 
accountant for?
a) To help us write the  
commercial section 
o
b) To find sources of finance 
o
c) To help us with the financial 
facts and figures 
o
d) To compile the appendices  
for us 
o
6. What might our solicitor deal 
with?
a) Partnership agreements 
o
b) Profit budgets 
o
c) Freehold and leasehold  
matters 
o
d) Cash-flow forecasts 
o
7. Business transfer agents can 
provide us with information 
about…
a) Businesses for sale? 
o
b) Business valuations? 
o
c) Sources of finance? 
o
d) Online marketing? 
o
8. What headings would we 
include when making notes 
about the business?
a) Activities 
o
b) Location 
o
c) Premises 
o
d) Finances 
o
9. What headings would we 
include when making notes 
about the market?
a) History 
o
b) Customers 
o
c) Staff 
o
d) Competitors 
o
10. What headings would feature 
among those for notes about 
our finances?
a) Staff 
o
b) Costs 
o
c) Profits 
o
d) Cash flow 
o

36
TuESday
Composing 
the 
commercial 
section
www.ebook3000.com

SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
37
Today we’re going to get down to doing some writing. It doesn’t 
have to be perfect as it’s not going to be ‘set in stone’ at this 
stage. But we do want to start taking all of that preparatory 
work and materials and sorting it all into some sort of order.
We will start with the commercial section. This is, in many 
ways, the driving force of our business plan as it sets out what 
it is, what it does, where it is going and when. All the other 
parts of the plan really back up this first section. The main 
headings in the commercial section are ‘Our business’, ‘Our 
products and services’, ‘Our team’, ‘The market’ and ‘Our 
objectives’. Before we get going on any writing, we may want 
to just sort our notes and materials into these areas.
Whether we are submitting the plan online or as hard copy, 
according to the recipient’s wishes, being able to write it on 
screen in the first instance is ideal as we can edit it easily, move 
text around, trim it down and so on. We are just going to draft 
everything without worrying too much about style and phrasing. 
For now, we will sketch out the contents under these headings…
l the preliminaries
l our business
l our products and services
l our team
l the market
l our objectives.

38
The preliminaries
The commercial section should begin with:
l a title page
l a contents page
l an introduction.
The title page
This should simply repeat the information given on the file or 
folder in which the business plan is being submitted. Restating 
its title plus our name, address, telephone/fax number, email 
address and/or website and the date of compilation will ensure 
that the plan is instantly recognizable if it is separated from  
its file.
The contents page
Whoever is studying our business plan will wish to be able to 
find relevant topics promptly. Thus, a precise and accurate list 
of contents must be included showing the order of the various 
subjects we have dealt with and the respective pages to be 
referred to. We need to draft the contents page and number all 
of the pages after we have completed the entire plan. If we do 
it any earlier, we will then inevitably think of two or three other 
items which need to be put somewhere in the text. Renumbered 
pages – with ‘11a’ and ‘11b’ slotted in and ‘12’ rewritten as ‘13’ 
and so on – look sloppy and convey a slapdash image. We must 
avoid this at all costs.
The introduction
We should never underestimate the significance of an introduction: 
it can mean the difference between success and failure. Bankers, 
prospective investors and other interested parties will probably 
be busy, with little time to study every business plan sent to 
them. Their initial impression of our plan therefore will decide 
whether it receives either their full, undivided attention or  
no more than a cursory glance before rejection.
www.ebook3000.com

SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
39
 To convince the recipient that our plan deserves to be 
studied, we should broadly summarize the text. We might say 
what our business is selling, who our customers are and what 
objectives we have. Most important of all to the reader, we 
must then explain what it is that we want them to do for us – 
provide finance, supply goods or whatever.
 Ideally, we will also point out what is in it for them if they do 
help us – after all, that, more than anything else, is going to 
persuade them to read on! Remember the phrase, ‘What’s in it 
for me?’ That’s what most readers are thinking as they read.
 As with the contents page, we should write the introduction 
once we have finished the rest of the plan – otherwise we will 
only have to redo it if we subsequently decide to change the 
order of the subjects. Looking at each section in turn, ‘Our 
business’, ‘Products and services’ and so forth, we should 
sum them up in one or two sentences. If these are all then 
put together and trimmed to remove vague and repetitive 
comments, we should have a first-rate introduction which is 
both brief and informative.
Our business
With our earlier notes to hand, we can start writing about the 
business, in particular:
l its background
l its location
l its premises.
The background
If the business has been trading for some time, we should 
set out its track record to date – when, where and why it 
was launched, how it has progressed to reach its current 
position, its achievements and the obstacles overcome. If we 
are buying a business, we should say why it is for sale – and 
the reason should be the real one, which may not necessarily 
be the same as that given by the vendor! On the other hand, 
we could be getting ready to start a business from scratch. 
If so, we must supply background information about our 

40
ideas instead – what made us think of this business, why we 
believe it will be successful, how, where and when we will 
start trading. Everything we write down should be supported 
by substantiating evidence – balance sheets, profit and loss 
accounts, a business transfer agent’s details, an accountant’s 
letter, newspaper and magazine clippings and the like.
The location
We should write about the location, too – the reasons for basing 
the business there, its advantages, and its disadvantages and 
how we are working to overcome them. We must also mention 
any anticipated changes taking place in the locality, such as 
a new factory or road, and state how we will deal with the 
opportunities and challenges that arise as a result.
 An excellent way of supporting this text is to slot a map into 
the appendices. On this, we should highlight the locations of 
our business, suppliers, customers, competitors and other key 
data such as influential neighbours and any attractions which 
draw people into the area, such as free car parks. Sometimes, 
it can be helpful to include two maps: one a close-up of the 
firm and its immediate vicinity; the other a map of the town or 
trading region.
The premises
If we are buying a property, we should note the asking price, 
the amount of capital we have to invest, why we want to buy 
instead of rent and what we will do if the business fails. We 
must be realistic here. If we are renting, we should refer to 
any premium we will have to pay, the amount and frequency of 
rental payments, service charges and the date of the next rent 
review. Again, we must say what we will do with the lease if the 
business is unsuccessful.
 Next, we should specify the dimensions of our premises and 
the internal and external layouts, plus the equipment, machinery 
and vehicles used. We need to explain whether these are owned 
or leased, how long they will last, when we will need to replace 
them and what they are and will be worth.
www.ebook3000.com

SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
41
 Again, it is essential that we substantiate everything we have 
stated to prove it is all true. We might think about putting in 
the estate agent’s particulars, a copy of the freehold deeds or 
leasehold agreement, the solicitor’s and surveyor’s reports, 
and photographs and diagrams of equipment, machinery and 
vehicles, as appropriate.
Our products and services
Going on with this section, we should concentrate on detailing 
our products and services as appropriate – more specifically:
l their main features
l their unique selling points.
The main features
We must state what our products and services are and 
how they contribute towards our stock and sales levels. We 
should outline what these products look like, how they work 
and what they can be used for. With services, we must state 
what they involve us doing for customers. It may be a good 
idea to explain how we make or buy our goods – production 
processes, output and quality control, suppliers, terms and 
conditions of sale.
 We should also mention our prices plus any discounts 
offered for bulk buys or prompt payments, saying why goods 
and services are priced at that level, and showing them to be 
competitively priced and profitable. It is important to write about 
advertising and selling methods, too – how we advertise and sell 
our products and services, why our choices are effective, who 
sells our goods, how they are distributed, and so on.
 We then have to decide what verifying documents should be 
included in the appendices. It is useful to put in photographs, 
illustrations and newspaper cuttings – even samples of our 
goods, if there is room for them. As relevant, we could also 
include production schedules, suppliers’ price lists, letters 
or invoices stating costs, our price guide and advertising and 
promotional materials.

42
The unique selling points
If our products and services are to sell, they must have some 
obvious advantages over competing goods. Thus, we should 
provide a short list of our main rivals, with brief descriptions 
of each of them. We need to put the same type of information 
about our rivals into the appendices as we did for our own 
products and services – photos, price lists and sales and 
advertising literature are a must. Adding samples is a sound 
idea as well, as appropriate.
 It is important to highlight the advantages that our goods 
have over competing ones and how these will be maintained. 
Being realistic, we must also refer to any disadvantages that 
our products and services may have, explaining how we intend 
to remedy them. A timetable showing when the changes and 
improvements will be made may be a useful addition to the 
business plan.
Our team
When composing the commercial section, we must never 
forget to detail the most important ingredient of any business: 
the people within it – that means us! Therefore, we should 
make sure that we include one or two paragraphs about:
l ourselves
l colleagues and employees.
Ourselves
It is often said that most financiers and investors are primarily 
backing the people involved, with money and assistance 
being provided on the strength of their personalities, skills, 
knowledge, experiences and finances. Every statement we 
make about ourselves must indicate that we have what it takes 
to be successful!
 It is probably best to approach this part of the text in a 
chronological order, working forward from, briefly, our school 
or college days through our career or business history up 
to the present time. We need to verify our comments with a 
www.ebook3000.com

SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
43
curriculum vitae, photocopies of certificates and diplomas, 
press cuttings and even congratulatory letters about our work 
from former employers or satisfied customers. Let’s not hide 
our light under a bushel!
Colleagues and employees
We should describe our business colleagues in the same 
way that we wrote about ourselves, outlining their careers to 
date, drawing in personalities, skills and so forth, and saying 
what they’ll be doing for the firm. If we are jointly controlling 
a business, it is sensible to discuss the key points of our 
partnership agreement, how much capital is being introduced 
by each person, the salaries to be paid, how profits and losses 
will be shared out, the length of the partnership and how it can 
be dissolved.
 We can then refer to our key employees, such as managers, 
detailing their past and present jobs plus future roles in the 
business. After this, we could list the remaining employees, 
perhaps by name, job title and duties. If there are many of 
them, it is wiser to state the numbers employed in each 
department instead. We must not forget to mention the wages 
we pay to them, either per employee or per department. If we 
have to buy in any services that cannot be done in-house, we 
should refer to these here as well, along with a note of the 
expenses involved.
 Relevant documents for our appendices would include 
curricula vitae of key personnel, copies of certificates and 
diplomas, partnership agreements and company-formation 
documents plus written estimates of likely professional fees – 
in short, anything that will back up what we have just put down 
in writing.
The market
Ever conscious of our preparatory notes, we can press ahead 
and write about the marketplace, and most notably:
l the customers
l the competitors.

44
The customers
If there are not too many of them, we should supply key 
customers’ names and addresses, either here or in the 
appendices, as appropriate. Alternatively, we can identify 
them generally in terms of sex, age, income and occupation 
(or a combination of these). It is sensible to say how many 
there are, where they are located and how much, and when 
and why, they will buy from us. We can then discuss the 
market as a whole plus our share of this. It is advisable to 
explain how these circumstances may change in the future, 
and how we will deal with these developments.
 We should substantiate the comments we have made about 
our customers by incorporating documents such as sales 
records, orders and a map showing where they are. It is wise 
to support our statements about the market by obtaining 
matching assessments from reliable, independent sources: 
chambers of commerce, trade associations and the like.
The competitors
We ought to supply a thumbnail sketch of each competitor in 
terms of their history, activities, location, premises, goods, 
customers and market share. Being realistic, we need to say how 
they are better than us and how we intend to cancel out these 
advantages. Also, we should state how they are less successful 
than we are and what we are going to do to keep ahead of them.
 As always, we have to back our comments with hard 
evidence. We should slip into the appendices a website address 
if appropriate, any newspaper cuttings about their recent 
activities, successes and failures, a map showing where they 
are based, photographs of their premises, and sales literature, 
too. We must prove that what we have stated is a true and fair 
assessment and not just our personal, biased opinion.
Our objectives
The recipient now has all the key commercial details. However, 
we still have some important information to put across and it can 
make the difference between our success or failure. We need to 
www.ebook3000.com

SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
45
set out our objectives – our plans and intentions for the next year, 
three years and beyond. The key to success is to be realistic. All 
of the good work done so far will be undone if we get too carried 
away. We conclude this commercial section – and today’s work – 
by setting out our objectives. We can divide these as follows:
l the short term
l the medium term
l the long term.
The short term
The short term covers the next year; it is the immediate future. 
These goals are easy to set out as we have already talked 
about them in the commercial section. Read back over what 
has been written so far. It is a good idea to write them down 
so that we can prioritize them in their order of importance 
to us. It is essential that these are all achievable. Too many 
entrepreneurs seek to impress by ‘talking big’, deliberately 
exaggerating what they expect to achieve in order to impress. 
But most banks, for example, have heard it all before. They are 
more interested in reality than pipedreams.
 The recipient will be interested in facts and figures. So we 
should take each of our goals and show how it will be achieved. 
If we say we are aiming for a certain turnover, we should refer 
to our financial forms to show how we will build up to this.

46
 Whenever we write anything, we must always think how we 
can back it up. A comment or assurance that is not supported 
in any way is not worth making. Anyone can say, ‘I’ll have the 
biggest business in town next year’, but this is meaningless 
unless it is supported by hard facts and figures.
The medium term
This period of time covers the two years after the first year – 
the second and third year in business. It is an often overlooked 
fact that most businesses fail in the first three years, and 
most of those in the first year itself. In light of this, we should 
be toning down any thoughts we might have about world 
domination! It is sensible to have sown the seeds of later 
success in our short-term goals.
 In the medium term, we should be looking to build cautiously 
on these short-term goals. What many entrepreneurs do wrong  
is to leap from ‘starting up’ to, say, ‘owning a chain of shops’ in 
the medium term. But a lot needs to happen in between for this to 
be realized. Taking a shop as an example, we should be thinking 
about learning ‘what’s what’ in that first year. In the medium term, 
we should be thinking about testing new lines, with a view to 
opening a second shop in due course. However, we should not do 
this until we are ready to do so.
The long term
The long term begins in three years – and goes on indefinitely! 
It is sensible here to sketch out our overall goals – to have 
several shops, for example. But we need to couch these in 
realistic and cautious terms. In business, three years is a long 
time and most recipients will know that all sorts of things can 
happen in that time. They will want to see where we are going 
in general terms, but will not expect us to back it up with facts 
and figures as it is too far away. We should keep these goals in 
proportion to what is happening now. If we are seeking funds 
to start a shop, having one or two other shops nearby sounds 
realistic. A shop in every town all over the country is not.
www.ebook3000.com

47
SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
 If the reader isn’t interested in seeing a financial section – 
perhaps a would-be landlord just wants to check that our 
commercial activities won’t clash with those of our fellow 
tenants – then we will conclude the text here. Being concise, 
we could possibly remind the recipient what it is we want from 
them, and how this will both help us to reach our objectives 
and benefit them as well. Tell them what’s in it for them.

This page intentionally left blank 
www.ebook3000.com

SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
49
49
Summary
We should now have completed the basics of the 
commercial section; we have taken the mass 
of information and material we have gathered 
together and sorted it into some order. What we 
want to include is now in place and in the right 
order and all it needs is a tweak and a tidy before 
it’s ready for submission to the bank, a would-be 
lender or whoever.
It’s worth checking that we have included 
everything and are happy with it. The 
preliminaries should include a title page, 
a contents page and an introduction. ‘Our 
business’ should cover its background, location 
and premises. ‘Products and services’ should 
describe their features and main selling points. 
‘Our team’ should include sections on ourselves, 
our colleagues and our employees. ‘The market’ 
should touch upon the market, customers and 
competitors. ‘Our objectives’ should be broken 
down into the short, medium and long term.
Going over what we’ve written at this stage 
is helpful. Already, we will probably see text 
where we’ve written a little too much or possibly 
repeated ourselves. The reader wants to read 
what we’ve written quickly – so we need to 
just include the key facts and state them as 
succinctly as we can. We’ve a little editing to do 
as and when we reread –but not yet. We need to 
go on and put together our financial section first.

This page intentionally left blank 
www.ebook3000.com

SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
51
1. What should we include in 
the preliminary part of the 
commercial section?
a) Title page 
o
b) Curriculum vitae 
o
c) Contents page 
o
d) Introduction 
o
2. When should we write the 
introduction?
a) First of all 
o
b) As we go along 
o
c) At the end 
o
d) Not at all 
o
3. Which of these sections should 
feature in ‘Our business’?
a) Background 
o
b) Marketing 
o
c) Objectives 
o
d) Location 
o
4. What should we include when 
writing about our products’ and 
services’ main features?
a) Prices 
o
b) Selling methods 
o
c) Weaknesses 
o
d) Sales levels 
o
5. What should we cover when 
writing about our products’ and 
services’ unique selling points?
a) Rival goods and services 
o
b) Our products’ and services’ 
shortcomings 
o
c) Costs of selling our products 
and services 
o
d) Timetable of improvements  
for what we sell 
o
6. ‘Our team’ section should 
feature information about…?
a) Ourselves 
o
b) Our solicitor 
o
c) Our accountant 
o
d) Our employees 
o
7. What should we include  
when writing about our 
customers?
a) Their numbers 
o
b) Their locations 
o
c) Our market share 
o
d) Our business objectives 
o
8. What should we include in 
our comments about our 
competitors?
a) Thumbnail sketches of each 
competitor 
o
b) Their strengths and 
weaknesses 
o
c) Our strengths and  
weaknesses 
o
d) Our customer database 
o
9. Our short-term objectives 
cover what period of time?
a) Just the next month 
o
b) Only the next quarter 
o
c) Up to the next year 
o
d) Up to the next three years 
o
10. Which term(s) should best 
describe our long-term 
objectives?
a) Realistic 
o
b) Full of facts and figures 
o
c) Detailed and specific 
o
d) Cautious 
o
Fact-check [answers at the back]
 We can check Tuesday’s work by answering these multiple-choice 
questions. We can then see the correct answers at the end of the book.

52
WEdnESday
Compiling  
the  
financial 
section
www.ebook3000.com

SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
53
It’s numbers day today – we are putting together the financial 
section of the plan. This is the part of the plan that would-be 
lenders and investors are going to look at most closely – they 
want to know what we want to borrow and how and when we 
are going to pay it back with interest. All of our numbers have 
to make sense, add up and be backed up.
It’s tempting, if we are not using a business plan to raise 
finance, to exclude the financial section. This is a mistake that 
some entrepreneurs make. To be blunt, every entrepreneur 
should be putting together various financial documents and 
monitoring them and updating them regularly. How much 
profit have we made this past quarter? Will we have sufficient 
cash in place for the rent at the end of next month? These 
sorts of figures need to be at our fingertips.
We also need to be conscious of the difference between ‘profit’ 
and ‘cash flow’. A shopkeeper may feel successful because there 
is always ready cash in the till but this does not mean the shop 
has sufficient sales to be truly profitable long term. Similarly, a 
small manufacturer may make lots of sales but takes so long 
to get paid that it doesn’t have enough cash to pay its own bills. 
We need to produce various documents which reveal…
l a profit budget
l a cash-flow forecast
l annual accounts
l financial requirements.

54
The profit budget
This budget is concerned with how profitably the firm is trading 
(or not) – an example of a profit-budget form is shown in Table 1.  
The budget can be broken down into various parts and tackled 
accordingly:
l sales
l direct costs
l overheads
l profits
l explanatory notes
l supporting documents.
Sales
We have already anticipated our sales income for the coming 
year and commented on it in our commercial section. We 
should now write out our estimated monthly sales in the 
budget boxes across the form. It is important that we record 
these sales when we expect them to be made rather than 
paid for as we are concentrating here on whether or not the 
business is making sufficient money. The timings of income 
and expenditure and their effects on our cash resources are 
looked at later when we tackle the cash-flow forecast.
Direct costs
Direct – or ‘variable’ – costs fluctuate directly in line with 
the number of goods produced and sold: the higher the level 
of sales, the higher the direct costs – and vice versa. There 
are two main categories of direct cost: ‘materials’ covers 
expenditure on raw materials, component parts, packaging 
and deliveries, while ‘wages’ refers to the sums paid to 
production-line workers, sales representatives and the like. 
We need to note the monthly amounts involved here in the 
appropriate budget columns. Deducting direct costs from sales 
leaves us with our ‘gross profit’.
www.ebook3000.com

SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
55
Table 1: Profit budget form
Month:
Month:
Month:
Month:
Month:
Month:
Totals:
Budget Actual Budget Actual Budget Actual Budget Actual
Budget Actual Budget Actual Budget Actual
Sales
Less: materials
           wages
Gross profit
Overheads: salaries
Rent, rates, water
Insurance
Repairs, renewals
Heat, light, power
Postage
Printing, stationery
Transport
Telephone
Professional fees
Depreciation
Interest charges
Other
Total overheads
Trading profit

56
Overheads
These are those fixed items of expenditure such as rent and 
rates which have to be paid come what may, however many 
goods are being produced or sold. We need to add up the 
estimated annual cost of each category of overhead, divide 
the total by 12 and place the resulting monthly figures in the 
correct boxes. Remember, we are focusing here on profit, 
not cash flow. Totting up the various entries in the monthly 
columns gives us our ‘total overheads’. Subtracting these from 
our gross profit leaves us with our ‘trading profit’.
Profits
Our gross and trading profit figures are very important to 
us. The gross profit figure shows how efficiently we are 
buying, manufacturing and selling goods. Our ‘gross profit 
margin’ can be calculated by dividing gross profit by sales and 
multiplying by 100. The resulting figure can then be compared 
with the trade average and conclusions can be drawn about 
our performance. The trading profit figure, in turn, tells us 
if the business is truly profitable, and, if so, whether or not 
satisfactory levels of profit are being achieved.
Explanatory notes
The profit budget is only as good as its explanatory notes. After all, 
we may know why we have included certain figures, but the bank 
or whoever else is studying it might not – so we need to tell them. 
Thus, we should put ‘1’, ‘2’, ‘3’ next to ‘Sales’, ‘Materials’, ‘Wages’ 
and so on, and attach one or two typed A4 sheets which set out 
each item on a point-by-point basis and explain how we arrived at 
our figures. We have to convince the reader that what we’ve put 
will be correct. Here are two examples of what we could write:
10 Postage
We have budgeted to spend £20 per week on general 
correspondence with existing and prospective customers. 
This is in line with last year’s spending – see ‘Appendix 6, 
Annual Accounts’, pages 13–14.
www.ebook3000.com

SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
57
11 Printing/stationery
Westbridge Printing will supply us with their standard 
pack of letterheads, compliment slips, business cards 
and envelopes at a cost of £520. Refer to ‘Appendix 7, 
Miscellaneous Quotes’, pages 15–22.
Supporting documents
Wherever possible, figures and explanatory notes must 
be backed up by hard, independent evidence. We need to 
accumulate items such as sales orders, suppliers’ price lists, 
estimates and quotations as we go along, referring to them in 
our notes and including them in our accompanying appendices. 
Ideally, everything we mention here should be verified in the 
appendices by another person or organization of some standing.
The cash-flow forecast
It is essential that a business not only makes a profit but always 
has enough cash reserves available to pay the bills and keep 
trading comfortably. A business can be profitable on paper but 
still fail because it does not get enough cash in on time to pay 
its bills. Cash flow is often as important as profitability.
 A cash-flow forecast shows how money flows into and out of 
a firm over a given period of time. An example of a typical form 
is shown in Table 2. The forecast can be viewed in several ways, 
but the following elements must be involved in its completion:
l receipts
l payments
l balances
l supplementary notes
l backup materials.
Receipts
Incomings will probably derive from three main sources: capital 
introduced by us, cash from sales made, and cash from debtors 
(those people or organizations which owe us money). We need 

58
Table 2: Cash-flow forecast
Month:
Month:
Month:
Month:
Month:
Month:
Totals:
Budget Actual Budget Actual Budget Actual Budget Actual Budget Actual Budget Actual Budget Actual
Receipts: capital
Cash from sales
Cash from debtors
Total receipts (A)
Payments: creditors
Salaries, wages
Rent, rates, water
Insurance
Repairs, renewals
Heat, light, power
Postage
Printing, stationery
Transport
Telephone
Professional fees
Capital payments
Interest charges
Other
VAT payable
Total payments (B)
Net cash flow (A-B)
Opening bank balance
Closing bank balance
www.ebook3000.com

SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
59
to note the relevant amounts in the appropriate budget boxes 
according to when we expect the money to be received. We 
ought to be rather pessimistic here as it will often be much 
later than anticipated. Totting up each month’s budgeted 
receipts enables us to complete our ‘total receipts’ line.
Payments
Most of the relevant information here can be lifted from our 
profit budget but amended to take account of the timings of 
outgoings – which will hopefully occur after incomings so that 
a healthy cash flow is maintained at all times. Adding up each 
month’s budgeted payments then allows us to write out the 
‘total payments’ line.
Balances
If we deduct our total monthly receipts from payments, we will 
be left with our ‘net cash-flow’: and this should be a positive 
rather than a negative sum if we are operating a cash-conscious 
firm. As relevant, we then add or subtract this amount to or from 
our ‘opening bank balance’, which gives us our ‘closing bank 
balance’, for the month. This figure then becomes the opening 
bank balance for the next month, and so on across to the ‘totals’ 
column on the right-hand side of the form.
Supplementary notes
All too often, banks are sent a highly detailed forecast and are 
then expected to interpret it correctly without any help. Evidently, 
this is difficult to do, and will not put the reader in a good mood 
towards us. As with the profit budget, we should therefore note, 
‘1’, ‘2’, ‘3’ and so forth down the side of the form and explain the 
figures point by point on attached A4 sheets of paper.
Backup materials
Similarly, we need to prove as far as possible that what we 
have forecasted will actually happen over the coming months. 
The best way of doing this is to refer to backup materials, such 

60
as loan agreement forms, letters from debtors and suppliers’ 
terms of sale, and to include these in the appendices. Our 
own word and opinions are not enough proof: we need to 
substantiate these with comments and statements from other, 
independent people and firms.
Annual accounts
Having spent some time calculating our finances over the next 
year, it is a good idea to look at where we will be financially at 
that time. We can do this by drawing up two statements from 
the data accumulated so far:
l a profit and loss account
l a balance sheet.
The profit and loss account
This financial statement summarizes the sales, total costs and 
profits or losses of a firm over a specific period of time, usually 
one year. This statement is easy to put together as almost all 
of the relevant information can be taken from our profit budget. 
We must remember, however, to deal only with invoiced 
income and expenditure here – when the bills are actually paid 
is disregarded. As appropriate, one or two explanatory notes 
may need to be added for clarification purposes.
 Here is an example of a profit and loss account:
Sales
368,327
Opening stock
42,322
Purchases
127,400
Closing stock
44,170
Cost of sales
125,552
Gross profit
242,775
www.ebook3000.com

SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
61
Overheads:
Salaries/wages
67,528
Rent/rates/water
36,240
Insurance
5,750
Repairs/renewals
2,300
Heat/light/power
1,060
Postage
1,030
Printing/stationery
1,260
Transport
1,241
Telephone
860
Depreciation
752
Total
118,021
Net profit
124,754
The balance sheet
Our second statement shows our firm’s assets and liabilities at 
a given time and indicates how its activities have been funded. 
Normally, a balance sheet will be drawn up at yearly intervals 
alongside a profit and loss account. Much of the data contained 
within it can be lifted from our profit-budget and cash-flow 
forecast forms.
 Here is an example of a balance sheet:
Fixed assets  
 
159,600
Current assets:
Stock 
32,300
Debtors 
5,750
Cash 
5,620
 
 
43,670

62
Current liabilities: 
Overdraft 
2,600
Creditors 
9,720
 
 
12,320
Net current assets 
 
31,350
Net assets 
 
190,950
Funded by:
Owners’ capital 
 
45,000
Bank loan 
 
45,000
Profit 
 
100,950
 
 
 
190,950
 ‘Fixed assets’ are those permanent items of long-term 
value, such as land, buildings, equipment and machinery.  
Of greater day-to-day concern are the ‘current assets’, which 
are the ever-changing items, such as stock, debtors and 
cash, that come and go during trading. ‘Current liabilities’, 
such as a bank overdraft and debts to suppliers, need to 
be settled in the near future, usually within 12 months. 
Subtracting current liabilities from current assets leaves us 
with our ‘net current assets’ (or ‘net current liabilities’ as the 
case may be). Adding or deducting these to or from our fixed 
assets produces our overall ‘net assets’ (or again, possibly, 
‘net liabilities’).
 Under or alongside these figures, we need to show what 
the firm’s activities have been ‘funded by’. Here, we might 
incorporate items such as our own capital, bank loans and 
profit from our profit and loss account. The total sum should 
be the same as that for net assets – hence the word ‘balance’ 
in the term ‘balance sheet’. Again, we might add one or two 
supplementary comments at the bottom of the statement, just 
to clarify or expand on entries, as necessary.
www.ebook3000.com

SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
63
Financial requirements
If the business plan is being prepared for a prospective lender, 
this is their need-to-know information. We have to tell them 
exactly what it is we want from them. They will want to know 
about:
l the finance needed
l the repayment schedule
l the security available.
The finance needed
First, we must say what it is we want – a loan from the bank 
or investment from a would-be partner, as examples. We also 
need to state the exact amount. It is a good idea to ask for a little 
more than we might need rather than a little less. We should 
allow for an extra 10 per cent or so to allow for a margin of error 
in our calculations. A lender will not be impressed if we have to 
go back and ask for more in a month or two’s time.
 We should also state what we intend to use the money for 
(even if we think it might be obvious from what we have said 
before). We might need it to build an extra showroom alongside 
our existing premises, for example. We must remember to say 
when we need it. This might be before the business starts, for 
example.
 A lender will also want to know how much we are putting 
in ourselves. Most lenders want to see some financial input 
from a prospective borrower as it shows their commitment to 
the business. If we are not committed to our business idea, we 
cannot really expect anyone else to be! As a rule, most lenders 
would expect an entrepreneur to put in the same amount of 
money as they are asking to borrow.
The repayment schedule
We should state when we are planning to repay our 
borrowings. This might be over 12 months or could be as 
long as 60 months for many borrowings. It is sensible to 

64
err on the side of caution. Too many entrepreneurs try to 
impress by promising repayments within 12 months. This puts 
unnecessary pressure on them and can damage relations with 
the lender if they cannot meet such a tight schedule.
 We should also show the lender how we are going to make 
repayments. Our promises are meaningless without those hard 
facts and figures. We need to refer here to our profit budget, 
our cash-flow forecast and our projected annual accounts. We 
should have a margin of error built in so that we can still make 
repayments even if someone is late in paying us.
The security available
We will almost certainly want to make repayments from our 
business profits. But we need to address the worst-case 
scenario. How will we make repayments if everything goes 
wrong? This is the question that every reputable lender will 
ask. We need to be able to answer it convincingly. For example, 
we need to look to make repayments from selling assets or 
even remortgaging our home. As always, we need to back up 
what we are saying. If we have equity in our house, we need to 
get a valuation from estate agents and show our most recent 
mortgage statement.
www.ebook3000.com

SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
65
Summary
We have spent Wednesday putting together 
the financial section of our business plan. Our 
reader will, in particular, want to see a profit 
budget outlining sales, direct costs, overheads 
and profits, along with explanatory notes and 
supporting documents. They will also want to 
see a cash-flow forecast detailing receipts, 
payments and balances, plus supporting  
notes and backup materials.
Whatever the main purpose of writing our 
business plan, we will also want to use these 
documents for ourselves. Is our business 
running at a profit, now and in the future? We 
may perhaps have a ‘cash-rich’ business that 
feels profitable but is making less profit than 
we thought when we crunch the numbers. 
Alternatively, we may, on paper, have a very 
profitable business but we can now see that, if 
we don’t get some of the overdue cash in soon, 
we might struggle to pay the next quarter’s rent!
Often, the annual accounts, in the form of a 
profit and loss account and a balance sheet, will 
reveal many ‘home truths’. We may, in the light 
of these, want to think again about our financial 
requirements in terms of the finance needed 
and the proposed repayment schedule. Some 
entrepreneurs try to pay back too much too 
soon. See what the numbers tell you.

This page intentionally left blank 
www.ebook3000.com

SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
67
Fact-check [answers at the back]
 We can check our knowledge of what we’ve worked through today by 
answering these multiple-choice questions and then comparing what  
we put with the answers at the end of the book.
1. What should a profit budget 
reveal about a firm’s finances?
a) Whether it is trading  
profitably 
o
b) When it is short of cash 
o
c) Whether it has plenty  
of cash 
o
d) Whether it is trading  
at a loss 
o
2. Which figure tells us if our firm 
is truly profitable?
a) The bank account balance 
o
b) The gross profit figure 
o
c) The trading profit figure 
o
d) The gross profit margin 
o
3. What should a cash-flow 
forecast reveal about a firm’s 
finances?
a) The firm’s cash position at  
any given time 
o
b) When it has plenty of cash 
o
c) When it is short of cash 
o
d) The firm’s profit or loss  
position at any given time 
o
4. What might we find in the 
cash-flow forecast’s backup 
materials?
a) Loan agreement forms 
o
b) Suppliers’ terms of sale 
o
c) Our own comments and 
statements 
o
d) Comments and statements 
from independent sources 
o
5. What period of time would 
a profit and loss account 
normally cover?
a) One month 
o
b) One quarter 
o
c) Six months 
o
d) One year 
o
6. What should the contents of 
a profit and loss account be 
based upon?
a) Invoiced income and 
expenditure 
o
b) Estimated cash incomings  
and outgoings 
o
c) Actual cash incomings and 
outgoings 
o
d) Opening and closing bank 
balances 
o
7. What does the balance sheet 
show?
a) Opening and closing bank 
balances 
o
b) Assets and liabilities 
o
c) Profits and losses 
o
d) Opening and closing cash 
positions 
o
8. What should we include  
when writing about the  
finance needed?
a) How much we want to borrow o
b) What we intend to use it for o
c) How much we are putting in 
ourselves 
o
d) When we expect to come  
back to ask for more 
o

68
9. As a rule of thumb, how 
much would a lender expect 
us to invest in relation to the 
proposed borrowings?
a) Twice as much 
o
b) About the same 
o
c) Half as much 
o
d) Nothing at all 
o
10. What do we need to refer to 
when setting out the proposed 
repayment schedule?
a) Our profit budget 
o
b) Our cash-flow forecast 
o
c) Our profit and loss account o
d) Our bank account statements o
www.ebook3000.com

This page intentionally left blank 

70
THuRSday
Adding the 
appendices
www.ebook3000.com

SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
71
Today we are going to sort out the appendices. This is a 
relatively easy task. On one side, we have our commercial 
and financial sections. On the other, we have a big pile of 
materials and documents that are going to back up all of the 
key facts and figures given in the commercial and financial 
sections.
What we have to do is to go back through the commercial 
section and, as and when we come across something that 
needs to be backed up by an independent source, we then go 
through the mass of backup materials to find something to 
support it. We can then repeat the process with the financial 
section. We will probably want to tweak and tidy these 
sections as we go along.
Once we have our appendices in some sort of order, we will 
probably want to tidy them up further so that these are, like 
the commercial and financial sections, presented in a clear, 
professional manner. None of this is difficult. It just takes 
time. There’s lots to do today…
l selecting the documents
l preparing the documents
l completing the appendices.

72
Selecting the documents
When we wrote our commercial and financial sections, we 
considered those documents which supported our various 
comments and details. We now need to read back over 
what we stated so that we can pick the right documents for 
inclusion in our appendices. Let’s consider again:
l our business
l our products and services
l our team
l our market
l our finances.
Our business
Here, we might want to have copies of annual accounts, 
the business transfer agent’s particulars, an accountant’s 
assessment and any positive newspaper and magazine 
cuttings about our firm. A map might also be put in to indicate 
the firm’s location and surroundings. With regard to the 
premises, equipment, machinery and vehicles, we might 
enclose photographs or scale drawings (or both), the estate 
agent’s details, copies of the freehold deeds or leasehold 
agreement, the solicitor’s comments, a surveyor’s report, and 
copies of planning-permission documents, sales documents 
and hire-purchase agreements, as relevant. Copies of our 
website pages may be useful additions, too.
Our products and services
To substantiate and enhance the data given about our goods 
and services, we could incorporate samples or photographs 
as appropriate, production schedules, suppliers’ price lists, 
independent test results plus our own price guides, sales 
literature, and advertising and other promotional materials. 
We might then put in the same (or abbreviated) information 
about our rivals’ products and services.
www.ebook3000.com

SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
73
Our team
The information that we gave about our team – us, our 
colleagues and our employees – can be backed up by 
including curricula vitae, copies of certificates and diplomas, 
newspaper, magazine or online features, and copies of either 
the partnership-agreement or company-formation documents, 
as relevant. It is important to support any legal papers with a 
solicitor’s letter explaining these. Estimates of professional 
fees to be incurred for work done externally rather than in-
house would be useful additions, too.
Our market
To back up the details provided about our customers, 
competitors and the marketplace, we should think about 
putting in a map highlighting their respective locations, 
along with customer sales records, orders and any research 
findings we have obtained about our customers. For our 
competitors, we could include materials similar to those used 
to substantiate facts and figures about our business – press 
cuttings, photographs and whatever else is available and 
relevant. Trade association reports about the marketplace may 
be helpful additions as well.

74
Our finances
Here, it would be a good idea to include proof of any capital 
available, quotes and estimates of costs and overheads, letters 
or other documentation from creditors and debtors confirming 
payment dates, and proof of security that can be put forward as 
and when loan facilities are provided. Not surprisingly, much 
of the supporting evidence we might put here will already have 
been included elsewhere – in customers’ sales orders, for 
example.
 We have talked a lot about what we should place in our 
appendices – and rightly so, because they are of crucial 
importance. It may be beneficial at this point to look at the 
following checklist, ticking off those items we intend to 
incorporate, and perhaps adding others, as relevant to us:
l annual accounts
l business transfer/estate agent’s particulars
l accountant’s comments
l newspaper/magazine cuttings and/or online features about 
the business, products, team, etc.
l photographs/drawings of premises, equipment, machinery, 
products, etc.
l copies of freehold deeds/leasehold agreement, plus 
solicitor’s comments
l surveyor’s report
l copies of planning permission
l sales documents/hire-purchase agreements
l website pages
l product samples
l production schedules
l suppliers’ price lists
l independent test results
l our price guides, sales, advertising and promotional 
literature
l data on rival goods and services
l curricula vitae
l copies of partnership-agreement/company-formation 
documents, with solicitor’s comments
www.ebook3000.com

SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
75
l customer-sales records and orders
l customer-research findings
l data about competitors
l trade-association reports
l proof of capital
l quotes/estimates of costs and overheads
l creditors’/debtors’ letters
l proof of security
l anything else you can think of that’s relevant to you.
Preparing the documents
Some of our documents may be complex and lengthy in nature, 
and the reader will need help to find the key information in 
them. To assist the reader here, let’s take a look at what we 
can do to improve our:
l external documents
l internal documents.
External documents
The external documents that we are going to put in our 
appendices might come from a wide variety of different 
sources, such as these:
accountants 
European government
business transfer agents 
media
estate agents 
solicitors
chambers of commerce 
suppliers
colleges and universities 
surveyors
customers 
trade bodies
local government 
the Internet
national government
 Wherever possible, we should try to include the original 
documents, unless they are especially valuable or difficult 
to replace. The originals are always more believable than 
photocopies, which have sometimes been used to disguise 
altered documentation. Copies of the originals should be 
retained for our own records, though.

76
 It is sensible to study each externally supplied item in turn –  
sales literature, accounts, press clippings or whatever – to 
decide which parts are most relevant to our text and of interest 
to the reader. Highlight these areas with a marker pen to focus 
the reader’s attention on them and away from other, less 
relevant information.
 Where necessary, be prepared to add an explanatory 
comment at the side or bottom of a page – a definition of a 
trade expression, an interpretation of a set of figures, or the 
date of an unmarked magazine article. We must always bear in 
mind who is reading our business plan and amend our text to 
suit them – after all, they may not know as much as we do, or 
indeed anything about our activities at all.
 With lengthier items such as a lease or trading accounts for 
several years, it can be useful to attach a summary of the key 
facts, for easy reference. This should be set out on a point-
by-point basis, and be as brief and concise as possible. Hard 
facts, rather than opinions, should be put across: the reader 
can reach an opinion of their own.
Internal documents
Some of the documents that are going into the appendices 
will come from in-house sources or will be put together by 
outsiders acting upon our instructions. We might obtain such 
assorted documents from:
l our own books and records
l our website
l the finance department
l the purchasing department
l the personnel department
l the production department
l the marketing department
l the administration department
l printers
l photographers
l illustrators.
www.ebook3000.com

SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
77
Existing documents
It is advisable again to put in the originals, even if they are 
scruffy and perhaps completed in an idiosyncratic manner. 
Obviously, a messy set of sales records is not ideal, but at least 
they are real and believable, and far better than those which 
look false and artificial because they have been rewritten in a 
new book. And again, we need to highlight key areas, and add 
explanatory notes and a summary of important facts, if necessary, 
to make the reading that much easier for our recipient.
New documents
There will be materials which we can personally compose for 
this business plan – most notably, curricula vitae, scale drawings 
of our premises and a summary of customer research findings. 
Perhaps we surveyed our customers to discover their purchasing 
habits and opinions. It is sensible to make sure that these 
documents match the overall, professional image of the rest of 
the plan, being attractive, easy to understand, realistic and so 
on. The dos and don’ts of writing a commercial and a financial 
section apply just as much to the appendices, whenever possible.
 Remaining items that may be prepared for us upon our 
suggestions might include photographs or illustrations (or 
both) of business premises and goods, sales, advertising 
and promotional material, and legal documents such as 
partnership agreements. Evidently, we need to make it 
absolutely clear what we want and why, but after that we 
should allow ourselves to be guided by the photographer, 
illustrator or whoever. After all, we will be paying for their 
expertise, so we should certainly make the most of it.
Completing the appendices
Now that we have selected and prepared our documents, we 
must complete the appendices by deciding upon their:
l individual order
l overall position
l general accessibility.

78
Individual order
It is advisable to put the documents in the same order that 
they were referred to in the commercial and financial sections. 
Thus, the reader can simply look at each in sequence, referring 
back to an earlier item as and when required. Avoid the 
temptation to bring neater and more attractive items to the 
front and hide other, messy documents at the back, since this 
will only bewilder and confuse the reader.
Overall position
If we have relatively few documents to include, our appendices 
can be placed after the commercial and financial sections, 
all together in the same file. On the other hand, should 
there be many lengthy or bulky items, it is better to put them 
in a separate file or folder. Ideally, this should be marked 
‘Appendices’, and will match the main file in order to uphold 
that essential, professional image.
General accessibility
We must provide a list of our appendices somewhere to help 
the reader who wants to dip in and out as appropriate. If our 
appendices have been slotted in at the back of the main file, we 
can detail numbers, titles and pages for the various documents 
at the bottom of our contents page.
www.ebook3000.com

SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
79
 If, however, we have placed our appendices in a second file 
or folder, we could add something along the lines of ‘Our 
appendices are in the accompanying file’ to the contents page 
and then affix a list of numbers, titles and pages to the front 
of this backup folder. It all makes it that much easier for the 
reader to find their way around!
 Just to add that final touch, we can attach white page-number 
stickers to the top right corner of each page of the appendices –  
‘Appendix 6: Estate Agent’s Letter: Page 17’, ‘Appendix 6: 
Continued: Page 18’ and so forth. This enables the reader to 
find the exact page they want, almost instantly.

This page intentionally left blank 
www.ebook3000.com

SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
81
Summary
We’re now at the stage of the week where 
our business plan is falling nicely into place. 
We have been through our commercial and 
financial sections again and decided what we 
need to put into the appendices to back up our 
stated facts and figures. (We’ve probably also 
seen one or two parts of the text where we can 
trim and tidy things up a little.)
What we focused on doing today was to select 
the right documents to support our comments 
about our business, products and services, 
team, market and finances. Hopefully,  
these are from independent sources, where 
possible – the more independent, the better.
To create a professional image, we have also 
prepared our external and internal documents 
so that they may be found and read easily. 
This plan is being written for our reader so 
we want them to be able to check forwards 
and backwards, cross-referencing everything 
quickly. We have completed the appendices 
by sorting out their individual order, overall 
position and general accessibility for  
the reader.

This page intentionally left blank 
www.ebook3000.com

SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
83
Fact-check [answers at the back]
 Let’s double-check what we’ve done today by working through these 
multiple-choice questions. When we have answered them, we can check 
the correct answers at the end of the book.
1. What might we include to back 
up what we’ve written in the 
‘Our business’ section?
a) A map of the location and 
surroundings 
o
b) A scale drawing of the 
premises 
o
c) Curricula vitae for ourselves 
and employees 
o
d) Samples of rivals’ products o
2. What might be seen in the ‘Our 
team’ section of the appendices?
a) Company-formation  
documents 
o
b) A partnership agreement 
o
c) Curricula vitae 
o
d) Birth certificates 
o
3. What might we include to 
support what we’ve put in the 
‘Our market’ section?
a) Suppliers’ price lists 
o
b) A leasehold agreement 
o
c) Customers’ sales records 
o
d) Customers’ sales orders 
o
4. When it comes to externally 
produced documents, what 
should we include in the 
appendices?
a) Originals, where possible 
o
b) Only photocopies 
o
c) Only summaries of key facts o
d) Our opinions of them,  
whenever possible 
o
5. What sort of information might 
we write into the sidebars of a 
detailed document?
a) A definition of a trade 
expression 
o
b) Our phone number 
o
c) An artistic doodle to catch  
the eye 
o
d) The date of an unmarked 
magazine article 
o
6. What can we do to improve 
messy and unclear, internally 
produced documents for the 
appendices?
a) Highlight key points with a 
marker pen 
o
b) Add explanatory comments, 
where relevant 
o
c) Attach a summary of  
key facts 
o
d) Nothing – leave them messy 
and unclear 
o
7. What documents might 
we create personally and 
specifically for this business 
plan’s appendices?
a) Photographs of our goods 
o
b) Business cards 
o
c) Customer research findings o
d) Scale drawings of our 
premises 
o

84
8. In what order should we put 
our appendices?
a) Alphabetical order 
o
b) As referred to in the 
commercial and financial 
sections 
o
c) Neatest at the front,  
messiest at the back 
o
d) No particular order at all 
o
9. Where should lengthy and 
bulky appendices be placed?
a) All together after the 
commercial section 
o
b) All together after the 
commercial and financial 
sections 
o
c) Individually, as they are 
referred to in the commercial 
and financial sections 
o
d) In a separate file or folder, 
marked accordingly 
o
10. What can we do to make our 
appendices more readily 
accessible to the reader?
a) Provide a contents list  
upfront 
o
b) Number and title each 
appendix, as relevant 
o
c) Attach numbered and titled 
white stickers to each  
appendix 
o
d) Exclude the lengthiest and 
bulkiest ones 
o
www.ebook3000.com

This page intentionally left blank 

86
FRIday 
Submitting  
a business 
plan
www.ebook3000.com

SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
87
Today we want to approach the reader, whether that’s a bank 
or a would-be investor, about our business plan. If the plan 
is all ready to go, we may want to submit it straightaway and 
arrange a meeting in a week or so to discuss it. If we think it 
could still do with a tweak or two, we may want to get in touch 
with the reader to say it’s on its way soon.
Nowadays almost everyone has a computer and we will almost 
certainly – except where a bank has asked us to fill in one of 
their ready-made forms – have prepared everything on screen, 
usually in word.doc format. Many entrepreneurs assume they 
will simply submit everything as an email attachment. That’s 
not always ideal – we cannot, as an example, always include 
samples of our goods easily online! And copying and attaching 
lots of material for our appendices is not an easy task.
As we will have done with all parts of the plan, we should ask 
ourselves what the reader wants. The chances are that, even 
if we submit online, they will want a hard copy so that they can 
sit and read through it, and make notes in the margins etc. 
Rather than expect them to print everything off, it’s better if 
we do it for them. So, today, we are going to work through…
l writing an introductory letter
l delivering the plan
l preparing for a meeting.

88
Writing an introductory letter
It is courteous to send an introductory letter, either by post or 
by email, ahead of, or with, a business plan which is going to 
be studied by someone from outside our organization, such 
as a bank or would-be investor. As a first point of contact, this 
letter should convey an impression of smooth professionalism. 
If we can achieve this, the recipient may be more inclined, 
or even keen, to read our entire plan. Thus, we need to think 
carefully about the letter’s:
l appearance
l contents
l style.
Appearance
If the letter is posted separately in advance of a plan being 
delivered in person, then we need to begin by considering 
the envelope. A scruffy, dog-eared one with a misspelled 
name or address is not going to put the reader in a favourable 
mood towards us. We need to choose a top-quality envelope 
which matches the enclosed paper, rather than a nondescript 
buff one. The recipient’s correct name, job title, address and 
postcode should be printed carefully in the centre of the front 
of the envelope. A rubber stamp of our firm’s name or logo, 
imprinted at the top left opposite the first-class stamp, adds a 
classy touch.
 Letterheaded and watermarked A4 paper is a must if we 
want to be taken seriously. Similarly, a typed letter is more 
formal and professional in appearance than a handwritten  
one; the text itself has to look neat and easy to read. 
Generous margins to the top, sides and bottom of the page 
are helpful, as are short paragraphs of equal length. Tidy 
and error-free text is just as important: incorrectly spelled or 
missed-out words make us look careless and amateurish – we 
should always rewrite a letter rather than post it off with  
any flaws.
www.ebook3000.com

SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
89
Contents
At the top of the page, we should have our letterhead, 
incorporating the firm’s name, address, telephone number, fax 
number, email address and/or website and logo, as relevant. 
Next, we should type in the date of our letter, putting ‘17 May 
2016’ rather than ‘17th May 2016’ or an abbreviation such as 
‘17-5-16’ or ‘17/5/16’ which looks sloppy. Under this, we need 
to detail the reader’s name, job title and address. If in any 
doubt, we should check these out – especially their sex, their 
initials and the precise spelling of their surname. Making a 
mistake here could irritate or cause offence.
 Following on, we must greet the reader by name, rather than 
by ‘Dear Sir’ or ‘Dear Madam’, which conveys the unfortunate 
impression that this is no more than a circular being sent out 
to anybody and everyone! Below our greeting of ‘Dear Mr di 
Carlo’, ‘Dear Ms Thomson’ or whatever, we can indicate the 
subject matter of the letter by putting ‘Re:’ and a heading which 
sums up what we are writing about. We could underline this for 
emphasis if we wish.
 Then we come to the main part of our letter. Typically, we 
might say who we are and what our business is, if the recipient 
is likely to be unaware of these points. Moving on, we can then 
explain the plan itself and say why we have drawn it up and sent 
it (or why we are going to send it) to them. It can be helpful to 
outline what will happen next – the plan will arrive tomorrow, 
we will make an appointment to see them in a week’s time, or 
whatever. We need to keep this brief and to the point. It is an 
introductory letter, and no more. All of the key information is in 
the business plan, so we do not have to repeat anything here.
 After this, we should end our letter with ‘Yours sincerely’ or 
the less formal ‘Kind regards’ or ‘Best regards’, as preferred. 
It is sensible to provide a clear, readable signature rather than 
one adorned with swirls and embellishments or a rushed 
and careless squiggle – neither type will impress. Finally, 
we should add our name and job title, if relevant. ‘Enc.’ or 
‘Enclosure’ can also be put on a letter if it is being submitted 
with the business plan itself.

90
Style
As with the commercial and financial sections of our plan, the 
letter has to be clear and easy to understand. We must use 
language to suit the recipient – perhaps technical for a fellow 
expert, and simplified for a non-specialist. Short words, phrases 
and sentences tend to be unambiguous and are less likely to be 
misinterpreted. In-house slang, local expressions and personal 
quirks all increase the possibility of misunderstandings.
 It is worth stressing here that the letter must be concise. We 
are simply introducing ourselves and our business plan – not 
trying to give our life history or details of all the ins and outs of 
the plan. We should therefore check over what we have written, 
asking ourselves whether the points we have made are relevant 
to the recipient. If they are not, we must eliminate them. Then, 
we need to consider whether we have set out those key points 
as briefly as we can, watching out for waffle or repetition.
 Here is a checklist we can use when writing our letter:
l a top-quality envelope, matching the paper
l the correct name, job title, address and postcode of the 
recipient on the envelope
l a rubber stamp of our firm’s name or logo
l a first-class stamp; it’s a first-class proposal!
l Letterheaded and watermarked A4 paper
l typed, not handwritten; we’re professionals!
l neat and easy-to-read text, using suitable language
l tidy, error-free text, concise and to the point
l the date
l the reader’s name, job title and address – correct again!
l a personal greeting – not ‘Dear Sir’ or ‘Dear Madam’
l the subject matter, ‘Re:’
l the main text – who we are, what our business is, etc.
l ‘Yours sincerely’ or similar
l a clear, readable signature
l our name and job title
l ‘Enclosure’, if appropriate.
 It may be useful to look at a simple example of a good 
introductory letter:
www.ebook3000.com

SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
91
Gayther Plumbing and Heating Services
76 The Road, Padbury, Sussex ME12 3BB
Tel/Fax: 01724 994312
Email: gayther@nvc.com
14 July 2016
Mr B. Stone
The Manager
Padbury Bank plc
72 High Street
Padbury
Sussex
ME11 6BT
Dear Mr Stone
Re: Brightwell’s
I am a self-employed plumber who wishes to buy the 
Brightwell’s shop at 64 High Street, Padbury.
As I require some financial assistance to purchase and develop 
this going concern, I am writing to ask if Padbury Bank would 
consider helping me. A business plan detailing all relevant 
information is enclosed for your attention.
I have booked an appointment for 11 o’clock on 22 July so that 
we can discuss this matter in more detail.
I look forward to meeting you.
Yours sincerely,
John Gayther
John Gayther
Enclosure

92
Delivering the plan
Many people spend ages putting together a first-rate 
business plan but then fail to deliver it properly. It needs to 
reach the recipient in an excellent condition in order to create 
that professional image we are seeking to convey. Just as 
important, it must arrive on time, especially if we are going to 
the bank in a week or so: they have to be given sufficient time 
to study the material in depth, think of questions and draw 
conclusions before our meeting. There are various ways of 
delivering our plan:
l by post
l in person
l via an intermediary
l via email.
By post
Posting the business plan may be a necessity – perhaps we 
are trying to raise finance to start a business some distance 
from where we live, and are approaching an investor in that 
area. If so, we need to make sure that it is wrapped securely – 
an apparently obvious point but it is not unknown for plans 
with bulky appendices to burst apart during transit. Not only 
does this put across a rather shabby image, but it could also 
damage the business plan itself, making it difficult to read. It 
is also sensible to send it by registered post so that delivery is 
guaranteed on a particular day. A registered delivery has an 
aura of importance about it, too – just what we want!
 Submitting our business plan by post is probably not the 
ideal method of delivery, though – after all, once it is out of our 
hands, we have lost control and something could go wrong. 
Even if nothing goes wrong, we will still be worrying about it for 
a day or so and making unnecessary (and potentially irritating) 
phone calls to check its safe arrival.
www.ebook3000.com

SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
93
In person
Clearly, the safest way of getting our plan to the person in an 
excellent condition and on time is to give it to them personally. 
If we speak to their secretary or whoever in advance, our neat 
and tidy file or folders can be taken in when we know that 
they are free and perhaps have an hour or so available to look 
through our material. 
 Making sure that we ourselves appear equally neat and 
presentable, we should do no more at this point than introduce 
ourselves, explain why we are here and hand across the plan. 
We should end by saying that we look forward to hearing 
from them shortly or that we will make (or have made) an 
appointment to see them in a week’s time. This may be wiser, 
especially if we want a reasonably prompt decision.
 Of course, it is not always easy to simply say ‘hello’, hand 
over the business plan and then withdraw as we ought to do 
at this stage. We may be drawn into a conversation we are ill 
prepared for, or could be asked questions that we have not yet 
thought of or thought through. We might not put across the 
right image, and could even make fools of ourselves if we are 
nervous and tense.

94
Via an intermediary
Perhaps it is most sensible to leave our file or folders with an 
intermediary such as a receptionist, the recipient’s secretary 
or personal assistant, or another responsible member of their 
staff. This way, we can present it in a professional manner, 
and know it has arrived and when it is likely to be seen by that 
recipient. Thus, we avoid the problems of packaging, postal 
damage or loss, and any potential embarrassment from a 
face-to-face encounter we have not prepared for fully.
Via email
These days many entrepreneurs will be looking to submit 
their business plan by email and, if this is how the reader 
wants to receive it, you can send in your plan as, typically, a 
word.doc attachment with, as relevant, a separate file for the 
appendices. However, it is important to double-check what 
the reader wants. Some banks, for example, still want you 
to fill in a form they provide and then hand that in. There are 
other issues with submitting a business plan by email – some 
entrepreneurs produce lavish plans in various formats which 
are not always easy to download on older systems. Also, 
appendices rarely comprise neat, A4 typed sheets that can be 
copied and attached easily. Sometimes, the ‘old-fashioned’ 
ways – a neat and tidy, hard-copy plan with appendices in a 
separate, bulkier file – can be the best.
www.ebook3000.com

SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
95
Preparing for a meeting
Ideally, our business plan stands alone, containing all of 
the commercial and financial information and supporting 
materials necessary for the recipient to reach a decision – 
hopefully in our favour! Nevertheless, in most cases we will be 
expected to attend a meeting to discuss the plan and answer 
any questions relating to it. By arranging this meeting for 
a week or so after the plan has been delivered, we give the 
recipient a chance to read it, and ourselves sufficient time to 
prepare for this meeting.
 When preparing, we should consider three areas in particular:
l our approach
l their questions
l our answers.
Our approach
We must make certain that our appearance is appropriate 
for the meeting. Smart dress is generally a sensible choice 
because it acknowledges the importance of the occasion, 
and shows our respect for the recipient of the business 
plan. Obviously, it does also depend largely on individual 
circumstances, though. If we know and are on friendly 
terms with the person, then we can wear whatever would 
be considered acceptable by them – ‘smart but casual’, 
for example. At the same time, however, we need to feel 
comfortable. A thick jacket, itchy new top, tight trousers and 
pinched shoes will feel uncomfortable and may distract us 
from the conversation.
 How we speak is often regarded as being as important as 
our appearance. We must ensure that we are heard clearly, 
achieving this by holding up our head, opening our mouth wide 
and speaking out in a firm, strong voice. We need to sound 
confident, sure of our facts and enthusiastic, too – if we are 
not, they won’t be either. Speaking slowly to emphasize key 
points can be a good idea as well.
 Some thought should be given to our manner during the 
meeting. We must avoid seeming brash and overconfident, or 

96
nervous and servile at the other extreme. Ideally, we should 
be friendly and sincere and ready to answer any questions in a 
polite and positive way. We can help to convey this impression by 
looking interested throughout, leaning forward and maintaining 
eye contact and remaining fairly still at all times.
Their questions
Not surprisingly, our main worry when we are preparing to 
meet whoever has received our business plan concerns the 
questions we are likely to be asked. Generally, these questions 
fall into two broad categories:
 l those arising from the contents of the plan, and
 l  those relating to the recipient’s knowledge of external 
factors, which we may not know about.
Any questions regarding what we put in the commercial and 
financial sections will probably be asked to check facts, clarify 
vague or confusing text, or deal with any omissions. For 
example, we may not have mentioned a competitor that the 
recipient is aware of and respects. A good way of anticipating 
these questions is to let a trusted colleague see the plan and 
prepare dummy questions for us to answer. It is also sensible 
to read fully through the business plan just before the meeting 
to remind ourselves of exactly what we stated and why.
www.ebook3000.com

SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
97
 Most of the questions raised will simply seek confirmation 
of or further information about what we have stated – Why 
did we put this or that? Is this realistic? What would happen 
if that payment was not received on time? – and so forth. We 
should be able to handle these comfortably if we know what 
we are doing, have anticipated the questions in advance and 
thought of our replies. Unfortunately, there may be one or two 
questions dealing with issues we do not know about, such as a 
new competitor who is to start trading soon. These are harder 
to predict and handle, and so we need to think about how we 
are going to answer any tricky questions before we go into  
that meeting.
Our answers
When we are asked a question during the meeting, our answer 
should be an honest one even if it reveals a problem or a lack 
of knowledge about something. The recipient will not expect 
this to be a perfect proposal – simply because such a proposal 
doesn’t exist – and may be happy to help address a difficulty 
or add to our understanding. They will certainly be more 
impressed by our honesty than by a waffly response or an 
obvious lie which would damage our reputation.
 If a problem becomes apparent, we should face it, outline 
our plans for tackling it (or at least coping with it) and then 

98
ask for the recipient’s opinion. ‘What do you think?’ flatters the 
recipient, puts them in a positive mood towards us and may 
even produce a possible solution. Should we be unaware of 
the answer to a particular question, we should say something 
like, ‘I’m sorry, I don’t know, but I’ll find out and let you know’. 
Alternatively, we could reply with ‘I’m sorry, I don’t know. What 
information do you have?’ if it seems likely that the recipient 
understands the situation.
 Generally, everything we say during this meeting must be 
brief and to the point – we should adopt the attitude that the 
recipient’s time is valuable and that we do not want to waste any 
of it. Our comments and responses must be easy to understand, 
too – we should use simple words, sentences and phrases 
which are suited to the recipient’s level of knowledge and 
understanding of the subject matter.
 Naturally enough, what we have to say has to be realistic 
rather than hopeful – most banks and other would-be investors 
have heard it all before and will be distinctly unimpressed by 
pipe dreams. We should refer, when necessary, to backup 
materials in the appendices. Again, a bank wants hard facts, 
not ifs, buts and maybes.
www.ebook3000.com

SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
99
Summary
We should be able to look back over what we’ve 
done today and say to ourselves that we have 
found out how the reader wanted to receive our 
business plan and that we have delivered it in 
that format; whether that is online or offline. 
The reader may, for example, have wanted the 
basic plan sent by email with appendices being 
brought in later to a meeting. If so, that is how 
we should have done it.
Generally, we have, today, written an 
introductory letter with appropriate appearance, 
contents and style. We have then delivered the 
plan by post, in person, via an intermediary  
or online. Job done? Nearly, but not quite!
We will usually have to attend a meeting 
to discuss the business plan and answer 
any questions that the reader may have. As 
such, we have prepared for a meeting by 
contemplating our approach and anticipating 
the recipient’s questions and our answers. It 
is a good idea to show our business plan to 
someone we know and trust and who can act 
as if they are the reader. They will produce 
some questions and we need to be sure  
we can answer these effectively.

This page intentionally left blank 
www.ebook3000.com

SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
101
Fact-check [answers at the back]
 We can check Friday’s work by answering these multiple-choice 
questions. We can then compare what we’ve put with the correct answers 
that are given at the end of the book.
1. When writing an introductory 
letter, what can we include  
so that it stands out from  
the crowd?
a) A top-quality envelope 
o
b) A rubber-stamped business  
logo 
o
c) Headed and watermarked  
A4 paper 
o
d) Neatly handwritten text, 
carefully corrected where 
relevant 
o
2. When writing our greeting, 
what should we use? 
o
a) ‘Dear Sir’, if a man 
o
b) ‘Dear Madam’, if a woman 
o
c) ‘Dear Sir or Madam’, if we  
are not quite sure 
o
d) Their correct title and name o
3. Style-wise, what does our 
introductory letter need  
to be?
a) Warmly humorous, but not  
too amusing 
o
b) Clear and easy to  
understand 
o
c) Concise, with key points only o
d) Full of impressive technical 
details 
o
4. How should a business plan  
be posted?
a) By first class post 
o
b) Well wrapped 
o
c) Not too bulky 
o
d) By registered post 
o
5. What is the main aim of 
delivering a plan by hand?
a) To hand over a plan in  
excellent condition 
o
b) To tell whoever we meet 
as much about the plan as 
possible 
o
c) To impress whoever we  
meet with our know-how  
and expertise 
o
d) To ask for money while  
we’ve got the chance 
o
6. When it comes to delivering our 
plan by email, what should be 
our main concern?
a) That we deliver it in an  
impressive format, such  
as pdf 
o
b) That the reader thinks we are 
computer literate 
o
c) That we showcase the best  
bits of our business 
o
d) That we deliver the business 
plan in the way the reader  
most wants to receive it 
o
7. What should our approach 
to a meeting to discuss the 
business plan include?
a) Dressing smartly to suit  
the occasion 
o
b) Speaking slowly and in a  
clear voice 
o
c) Providing technical  
information to impress 
o
d) Being friendly and sincere 
o

102
8. What are the best ways to 
prepare to answer questions 
about the plan?
a) Read through the plan  
ourselves to identify possible 
questions 
o
b) Ask a trusted colleague to  
read the plan and ask us 
questions 
o
c) Wait for the reader to ask 
questions and have a go at 
them on the spot 
o
d) Wait for the reader to ask 
questions and ask that we  
can respond to them later  
in writing 
o
9. How should we respond  
to a question we can’t 
immediately answer?
a) Make something up and  
sound as convincing as 
possible 
o
b) Waffle vaguely to distract  
them 
o
c) Say we don’t know but will  
find out 
o
d) Say we don’t know and ask  
for their thoughts 
o
10. What does the person we’re 
meeting expect us to be like?
a) Forceful and ready to argue  
our case to get the money 
o
b) Brief and to the point 
o
c) Full of trade jargon to show  
we know what’s what 
o
d) Realistic 
o
www.ebook3000.com

This page intentionally left blank 

104
SaTuRday
Presenting  
a business 
plan
www.ebook3000.com

SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
105
We come to the last day of the week: our plan has been 
submitted to the reader, in the way they want it, and we 
can sit back and wait for the thumbs-up. Yes? Maybe, 
but not necessarily!
It may be that a decision – hopefully a positive one – will 
be made purely on the basis of what we have sent in. But, 
especially if we are not known to the reader or there are 
various questions that need to be answered, we may well 
have to attend a meeting to discuss what’s in the plan.
Having submitted our business plan to the bank or 
whoever, we need to be ready to present it to them at a 
meeting where they will ask questions and we will have 
to answer. Make or break? Possibly – but if we are well 
prepared, we should be well placed to get whatever it 
is we want. Remember, if the meeting is taking place, 
the reader should be close to acceptance, subject to one 
or two questions. They would not waste their time on 
a meeting if they were planning to say no. Even so, we 
still have some work to do…
l attending a meeting
l receiving a response
l reviewing our activities.

106
Attending a meeting
If the meeting that we arranged a week or so ago is going 
ahead, this is a very good sign: it indicates that the recipient 
has studied the plan and is in favour of it, or is at least open 
to persuasion. If they were unimpressed, we would almost 
certainly have heard from them by now with a rejection letter, 
email or phone call.
 We can view the meeting as involving three distinct stages:
l the beginning
l the middle
l the end.
The beginning
Perhaps the most important piece of advice to be given here –  
and it is not always followed – is simply to turn up on time. 
There is nothing more likely to annoy the recipient than being 
kept waiting. If they are, they may be in a rotten mood and we 
will have less time to discuss our plan. Some entrepreneurs go 
so far as to make the journey the day before to see how long it 
takes to get there!
 Even if we do not feel it, we should try to appear calm 
and confident when we walk in, introducing ourselves to the 
receptionist or whoever is going to announce our arrival to  
www.ebook3000.com

SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
107
the recipient. We must be prepared to smile, make eye contact 
and shake hands with the recipient when we come face to face 
with them. Small talk about the weather and our journey may 
have to be made as well.
 When entering the room, we should wait to be shown to our 
seat rather than sitting down straight away: we may choose the 
wrong seat, which would be embarrassing for us. We should 
also decline politely any offer of a drink or biscuit. These are all 
potential dangers to us: we could splutter, choke or cough over 
them, which is distracting and even at times humiliating. It is 
best to sit there smiling, waiting for them to start talking.
The middle
However long the meeting lasts – perhaps 15 to 30 minutes – most 
of the time will be taken up by the recipient working through the 
business plan and asking questions about the commercial section, 
financial section and so on. Hopefully, we will have anticipated all 
of the questions and can answer them succinctly, either providing 
an explanation, promising to find out about something, or asking 
the recipient what they know about a particular subject.
 It is often a sensible idea to take a notebook and pen or a 
laptop into the meeting with us. Not only does this give us 
something to do with our hands which we might otherwise 
wave about nervously, but it also makes us look professional. 
We can jot down useful points made by the recipient, add notes 
about any other work we have to do, and so forth.
 Perhaps surprisingly, we should have a hard copy of the 
business plan with us, too. It is not unknown for a would-
be investor to pull apart a plan and circulate extracts of it 
to colleagues for their opinions. Sometimes, these are not 
returned in time for our meeting. If we have full and complete 
information to hand, then it all helps to make us seem very 
professional and in control.
The end
Hopefully, a decision will be made towards the end of the 
meeting, or an indication of the likely decision will at least be 
given, subject to confirmation by the recipient’s superiors in 

108
some cases. If, however, it is not forthcoming, we should not 
press for it as this can cause embarrassment or even offence. 
We should simply allow the recipient to draw the meeting to 
a conclusion, thank them for seeing us, smile and leave in a 
pleasant and friendly manner.
 After the meeting, we could send a polite letter to the 
recipient thanking them again for meeting us and stating that 
we look forward to hearing from them within a certain length of 
time, typically one to two weeks at most. This is courteous and 
it puts a time limit on their decision. After all, if they are going 
to reject it, we want to take the plan elsewhere, and soon!
Receiving a response
If a decision has not been announced by the close of our 
meeting – perhaps because the business plan has to be 
forwarded to someone else for approval – we would expect to 
receive either a formal, written response or a more informal 
phone call from the recipient within the following week or  
so. We then need to deal with the consequences of one of  
the following:
l rejection
l acceptance.
Rejection
A plan which is turned down and returned to us by a potential 
source of finance, investment or assistance should not just be 
delivered automatically to the next name and address on our 
list of prospective lenders or whoever. There may be room for 
improvement. We should try to discover why it was rejected 
by studying the letter of rejection. Or we can phone or email 
the recipient for an explanation, if that would be considered 
acceptable – in some instances, it will be: after all, we should 
be entitled to a short explanation after all the time and effort 
we have put into our plan. However, to obtain a full and honest 
explanation, we must maintain our professionalism and not 
attempt to persuade them to change their mind. Their decision 
has been made, and that’s that.
www.ebook3000.com

SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
109
 It may be that they think the proposition is not a viable one 
or at least is not for them. In either case, we should take note 
of their comments, sit down and review carefully our whole 
plan and its future prospects. At best, we will probably need to 
make some changes and improvements to it. At worst, it may 
be best not to proceed at all. Only we can decide what to do.
 Hopefully, we will decide to continue and send the revised 
business plan elsewhere – to a lender who has a better 
knowledge of our market, or an investor who is also prepared 
to become involved in the day-to-day running of the firm, 
or whoever. Prior to resubmitting it, however, we should 
replace any pages which have become torn or grubby, remove 
references included for the last recipient’s benefit, and amend 
outdated text, facts and figures. We need to convince the new 
recipient that the plan has been written especially for them, 
and that they are the first person to receive it,
Acceptance
At some stage, and perhaps even the first time around, our 
proposal will be accepted and we will be offered a loan from a 
bank, capital from a partner or a leasehold agreement from a 
landlord, or whatever it is we wanted. We can now celebrate, 
albeit briefly, before getting down to business again to expand, 
diversify or whatever, and go on to greater success in the 
future. But note: this does not mean we put away our business 
plan and forget all about it – in fact, quite the opposite.

110
Reviewing our activities
We are now going to look back over the week and review our 
activities day by day. Let’s just remind ourselves what we studied 
each day:
Sunday
Understanding business plans
Monday
Making preparatory notes
Tuesday
Composing the commercial section
Wednesday
Compiling the financial section
Thursday
Adding the appendices
Friday
Submitting a business plan
Saturday
Presenting a business plan
Sunday
On Sunday, we found out all we needed to know about business 
plans:
l They usually contain commercial and financial sections, and 
are supported by appendices which verify and enhance these.
l They can be used to raise finance, attract investment, 
encourage assistance and improve performance.
l A successful business plan is well researched, adapted, 
attractive, understandable, realistic and backed up by 
independent evidence.
www.ebook3000.com

SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
111
Monday
During Monday, we made some preparatory notes by conducting 
internal research, using external sources and accumulating 
appropriate information. This meant:
l drawing on our own extensive knowledge
l talking to our colleagues in other departments
l referring to company books and records
l contacting outside individuals and organizations such as 
banks, accountants, solicitors and the media
l approaching other external bodies as diverse as architects, 
photographers and market research companies
l jotting down notes under the headings ‘The business’, 
‘Products and services’, ‘The team’, ‘The market’, ‘Objectives’, 
‘Finance’ and ‘Appendices’.
Tuesday
This was the day that we composed the commercial section of 
the plan. We included various ingredients:
l the preliminaries – title page, contents page, introduction
l our business – background, location, premises
l our products and services – features, selling points
l our team – ourselves, colleagues, employees
l the market – customers, competitors
l our objectives – short, medium and long term.
Wednesday
On Wednesday, we compiled the financial section of our 
business plan. We incorporated:
l a profit budget outlining sales, direct costs, overheads and 
profits, with explanatory notes and supporting documents
l a cash-flow forecast detailing receipts, payments and 
balances, with supplementary notes and backup materials
l annual accounts in the form of a profit and loss account and 
a balance sheet
l our financial requirements, and in particular the finance 
needed, the repayment schedule and the security available.

112
Thursday
During Thursday, we added appendices to our commercial 
and financial sections. We selected and prepared documents 
before completing these appendices. This involved:
l picking the right documents to substantiate the information 
given about our business, products and services, team, 
market and finances
l tidying up external documents to make them easy to look at
l producing internal documents which were understandable 
and simple to study
l putting the documents in the right order and position, and 
making them accessible.
Friday
This was the day that we dealt with submitting a business plan 
to a recipient. We considered:
l writing an introductory letter, paying special attention to its 
appearance, contents and style
l delivering the plan, either by post, in person, via an 
intermediary or by email
l preparing for a meeting with the recipient, with particular 
emphasis on our approach, their questions and our answers.
Saturday
Today we have had our busiest day. We have looked at 
how to present a business plan to the recipient, and have 
contemplated:
l attending a meeting, viewing this in terms of its beginning, 
middle and end
l receiving a response, discussing how to respond to a 
rejection or acceptance of our proposal
l all our activities to date, reviewing these on a step-by-step 
basis.
www.ebook3000.com

SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
113
Summary
Writing a business plan is a key skill and 
to acquire it in a week is a considerable 
achievement – even more so if we go on and 
put together a successful plan that raises  
the finance or whatever it is we need.
However, it is important that we do not, once 
we have got the money, put away the plan and 
forget all about it as so many entrepreneurs 
are inclined to do. The fact is that the plan’s 
most important role is yet to come. We need to 
keep working on it, continually comparing our 
budgeted and actual performances, especially 
with regard to profits and cash flows.
We need to learn from our errors and build on 
our successes so that we can make constant, 
ongoing use of this essential business tool, 
amending and developing it as and when 
necessary. Our plan can help to keep us in 
business, to improve and grow, and to make 
more sales and profits – everything we need to 
do this is here in front of us in our business plan.
We have come to the end of the week but this 
should not be the end of our business plan. 
Instead, this should be the beginning of our use, 
week in and week out, of our business plan.

This page intentionally left blank 
www.ebook3000.com

SaTuRday
FRIday
THuRSday
WEdnESday
TuESday
monday
Sunday
115
Fact-check [answers at the back]
 Almost done! We just need to go over our final day’s work by answering 
these multiple-choice questions. We can then, for the final time, compare 
our answers with those provided at the end of the book.
1. When we enter the room for 
a meeting about our business 
plan, what should we do?
a) Wait to be shown to a seat 
o
b) Sit in the seat nearest to us o
c) Accept their offer of a sweet o
d) Smile and wait for the 
conversation to begin 
o
2. What should we take into the 
meeting with us?
a) A packet of cigarettes 
o
b) A notebook and pen 
o
c) A copy of the business plan o
d) Previously unsubmitted  
parts of the plan 
o
3. What should we do at the end 
of the meeting?
a) Ask them for a decision now o
b) Request at least an 
assessment of the proposal o
c) Tell them how long they’ve  
got to make up their mind 
o
d) Thank them and leave 
o
4. What should we do if the plan 
is rejected?
a) Tell them they’ve made a 
mistake and explain why 
o
b) Ask them politely for the 
reasons why 
o
c) Deliver the plan as soon as 
possible to the next name  
on your list 
o
d) Review the plan and rewrite  
it accordingly 
o
5. Before resubmitting the plan 
elsewhere, what do we need  
to do?
a) Make changes based on 
feedback from any earlier 
rejection 
o
b) Amend outdated material 
o
c) Keep all the previous 
references for the previous 
reader’s benefit 
o
d) Replace torn and grubby  
pages 
o
6. What do we do when our plan 
has been accepted?
a) Celebrate, albeit briefly as  
we have work to do 
o
b) Dispose of our business  
plan 
o
c) Begin using our commercial 
section regularly 
o
d) Start using our financial 
section regularly 
o
7. Now that the business plan  
has ‘done its job’, what is the 
most likely future use for it 
on an immediate and ongoing 
basis?
a) No use at all 
o
b) To raise further finance 
o
c) To attract further investment o
d) To improve business  
performance 
o

116
8. Which parts of the commercial 
section should we be reviewing 
regularly on, say, at least a 
quarterly basis?
a) Our profit budget 
o
b) Our market 
o
c) Our objectives 
o
d) Our cash-flow forecast 
o
9. Which parts of the financial 
section should we be reviewing 
most regularly on, say, a 
monthly basis?
a) Our annual accounts 
o
b) Our profit budget 
o
c) Our cash-flow forecast 
o
d) Our objectives 
o
10. When should we refer to the 
appendices to help improve 
business performance?
a) Not at all 
o
b) When we review and update  
the commercial section 
o
c) As we review and update  
the financial section 
o
d) When we want to produce 
another successful  
business plan 
o
www.ebook3000.com

117
7 × 7
1 Seven key ingredients
●
●Remember your business plan is primarily for you – to 
clarify what you are doing, where you are going and how you 
are going to get there. It’s a valuable working document.
●
●Include commercial and financial sections for your own 
immediate and ongoing use and always keep them up-to-
date on at least a monthly basis.
●
●Think ‘what’s in it for me?’ when writing a business plan for 
other people, to raise finance etc. The ‘me’, of course, is the 
person reading it. Whatever you write, think about what it is 
they want to know.
●
●Take advice. As an entrepreneur, you’re probably used to 
doing everything yourself. Talk to others who may be able 
to help though; the local authority, for example, may direct 
you towards the availability of grants and soft loans. Feeding 
expert opinion into your plan also makes it more impressive 
to the reader. 
●
●‘Show don’t say’ – at school, you were probably told to ‘show 
your workings’ when you did a maths test; it could get you 
extra marks. It’s the same with a business plan for a third 
party – don’t just say sales are going to be so much and 
profits will be this much, show those workings!  
●
●Offer independent proof – everything you include in your 
commercial and financial sections, when shown to a would-
be lender or whoever, should be backed up by evidence from 
respected third parties.
●
●Be prepared to revise and re-work your plan so that it 
anticipates a changing set of circumstances. Staff come and 
go, products and services need to be improved, customers 
and competitors may change, your medium-term goals are 
now your short-term goals etc. Your business plan should be 
ever-changing; just like the business world. 

118
2 Seven mistakes to turn into 
successes
●
●Avoid seeing things only from your viewpoint – for example, 
when raising funds, you might want to know how much you 
can borrow and at what rate. They want to see the security 
you’re offering and how you’ll pay it back.
●
●Don’t be too optimistic – you need to be especially realistic 
with sales figures; too many are based more on hope than 
expectation.
●
●Try not to look too far ahead – budgets, forecasts and 
objectives over the next six to 12 months are likely to be 
more accurate than those over three to five years.
●
●Talk ifs, buts and maybes rather than assuming everything 
will happen exactly as planned. It never does.
●
●Don’t be afraid to refer to possible downsides – it’s a good 
idea to have a range of responses for handling different 
worse-case scenarios. 
●
●Expect the unexpected – it happens! What would you do if, 
say, a rival ceased trading? What can you learn and how 
could you benefit from that?
●
●Avoid talking about your own thoughts and views and 
opinions – it’s far better to have someone else, who the 
reader knows and respects, to say it. 
3 Seven matters to keep an eye on
●
●As a small business owner, you need to keep a constant eye 
on the money – a ‘profitable’ business can become a ‘failed’ 
business if income is slow to arrive and expenditure has to 
be paid earlier. The extra costs of additional borrowings, 
overdrafts etc, can bite into hard-earned profits.
●
●Check what income is coming in this month and decide if 
that’s a ‘definite’ or a ‘maybe’.
●
●Check what expenditure needs to be paid out this month 
to see if you have the money in place to pay on time; if 
not, what will be the effects of late payments (reputation, 
financial penalties, late supplies etc)?
www.ebook3000.com

119
●
●Know what your bank balance is at any given time – what is 
it right now?
●
●Often, for a small business, ‘cash’ is as important as ‘profit’ 
so it can keep going – but a business that has plenty of ready 
cash, such as a shop, may not be profitable. You need to 
watch your margins all the time. 
●
●What’s your gross profit figure as you go along? Check your 
gross profit margin too – is that holding steady, increasing 
or – be warned, take action – even slipping?
●
●What’s your trading profit – again, how is that doing? Going 
up? Staying the same? Down? What are you going to do 
about that? 
4 Seven tasks to do every month
●
●Fill in the ‘actual’ sections of your profit budget: sales, direct 
costs, overheads, profits.
●
●Decide whether, in the light of this month’s entries, you need 
to rework the ‘estimates’ in the profit budget.
●
●Complete the ‘actual’ receipts, payments and balances of 
your cash-flow forecast.
●
●Re-do the ‘estimates’ of your cash-flow forecast if you feel 
existing ones are less likely to be accurate moving forward. 
●
●Check whether anyone else, such as your bank etc, may 
wish to see existing or revised documents.
●
●If existing or revised documents are to be sent out, check 
over notes and supporting materials to see if these need to 
be added to or revised.
●
●Draft a profit and loss account and a balance sheet to check 
progress is on course; assess performance to date and any 
changes that need to be made. 
5 Seven ‘now and then’ spot 
checks
●
●Now and then, stop and look around you comparing where 
you are and what you have with what the business plan said 
where you’d be at this time.

120
●
●How’s the business doing – are its location and premises 
still well-suited to your needs?
●
●What about your products and services – what are their main 
features and unique selling points now? Are these changing?
●
●How’s the team doing – you, your colleagues, your 
employees? Happy? Working hard? Achieving the goals?
●
●Is the market – customers, competitors – changing? How 
are you keeping ahead of the game?
●
●Are you achieving your short-term objectives and should you 
be changing your medium- and long-term objectives? 
●
●How are the finances – sales, costs, profits, cash flow and 
current balances? Are they as you expected at this ‘spot 
check’?
6 Seven jobs to do each quarter
●
●Complete a full profit and loss account showing sales, direct 
costs and gross profit as well as overheads and net profit.
●
●Identify and work out why any variances between estimated 
and actual figures have taken place.
●
●Take steps to correct those areas of variance and monitor 
matters more closely.
●
●Draw up a balance sheet showing fixed and current assets 
as well as current liabilities to identify net assets (or losses).
●
●Identify how this has been funded – owners’ capital, bank 
loan etc.
●
●Check if this is how you expected the balance sheet to look 
at this time and, where there are variances, why these are 
there and how you can keep matters on track in the future. 
●
● Re-read your business plan – all sections – and update it as 
and where appropriate. 
 7 Seven trends for tomorrow
●
●Recognize that the only constant in business is ‘change’ and 
the most successful businesses anticipate and act before 
rather than act afterwards. Your business plan helps you to 
do that.
www.ebook3000.com

121
●
●Go through your plan regularly, at least quarterly, to identify 
those areas where changes are coming; is a key member 
of staff set to retire, are certain product parts becoming 
obsolete, is a major supplier likely to merge with another. 
Are you prepared? What will you do?
●
●Remember that the economy, markets and businesses often 
ebb and flow and there are peaks and troughs that take 
place regardless of how well you are doing personally. You 
should never assume that the good times will last – nor that 
the bad times will either.
●
●Work through the worst-case scenarios. It’s always wise to 
keep planning ahead to anticipate a range of scenarios and 
to be prepared for all of them. Let’s say you are a business 
with heavy borrowings – mortgages, overdrafts etc – and you 
expect interest rates to rise, perhaps 0.5 to 1.0 per cent or 
more. Rework your budgets and cash flows on this basis and 
identify how your business will handle such rises. 
●
●If your business plan is produced, at least in part, to raise 
finance, be aware that traditional lending, i.e. via high street 
banks, is being replaced by crowdfunding – raising money 
online from a range of strangers – and that ‘what’s in it for 
me?’ is now ‘what’s in it for me, me, me, me, me?’; lots of 
people, all possibly with different wants and needs.
●
●Be aware that more and more business is now taking place 
online and you need to be computer-savvy, and able to 
complete a range of business plan formats that might be 
presented to you by a would-be lender or investor and others. 
●
●Remember that the world is now a smaller place thanks 
to the internet. You may be dealing with overseas lenders 
and investors who may want different information from you 
so be prepared to go back to your original materials and 
documents to deliver a revised plan based on what they want. 

This page intentionally left blank 
www.ebook3000.com

123
Answers
Sunday: 1a & d; 2a & d;  
3b, c & d; 4b & c; 5d;  
6c; 7a & c; 8a & c; 9c;  
10b, c & d
Monday: 1a; 2a & c;  
3b & d; 4a, b & c;  
5b & c; 6a & c; 7a & b;  
8a, b & c; 9b & d;  
10a, b & c
Tuesday: 1a, c & d; 2c;  
3a & d; 4a, b & d;  
5a & d; 6a & d;  
7a, b & c; 8a, b & c;  
9c; 10a & d
Wednesday: 1a, b & d; 2c;  
3a, b & c; 4a, b & d;  
5d; 6a; 7b; 8a, b & c;  
9b; 10a, b & c
Thursday: 1a & b;  
2a, b & c; 3c & d;  
4a; 5a & d; 6a, b & c;  
7a, c & d; 8b;  
9d; 10a, b & c
Friday: 1a, b & c; 2d;  
3b & c; 4b, c & d; 5a;  
6d; 7a, b & d; 8a & b;  
9c & d; 10b & d
Saturday: 1a & d; 2b & c;  
3d; 4b & d; 5a, b & d;  
6a, c & d; 7d; 8b & c;  
9b & c; 10b, c & d

ALSO AVAILABLE IN THE 
‘IN A WEEK’ SERIES
APPRAISALS • BRAND MANAGEMENT • BUSINESS PLANS • CONTENT 
MARKETING • COVER LETTERS • DIGITAL MARKETING • DIRECT 
MARKETING • EMOTIONAL INTELLIGENCE • FINDING & HIRING 
TALENT • JOB HUNTING • LEADING TEAMS • MARKET RESEARCH 
• MARKETING • MBA • MOBILE MARKETING • NETWORKING 
• OUTSTANDING CONFIDENCE • PEOPLE MANAGEMENT 
• PLANNING YOUR CAREER • PROJECT MANAGEMENT 
• SMALL BUSINESS MARKETING • STARTING A NEW JOB 
• TACKLING TOUGH INTERVIEW QUESTIONS • TIME MANAGEMENT
For information about other titles 
in the ‘In A Week’ series, please visit 
www.teachyourself.co.uk
www.ebook3000.com

