Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Business
Intelligence
and the Cloud
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Wiley & SAS Business 
Series
The Wiley & SAS Business Series presents books that help senior-
level managers with their critical management decisions.
Titles in the Wiley & SAS Business Series include:
Activity-Based Management for Financial Institutions: Driving Bottom-
Line Results by Brent Bahnub
Bank Fraud: Using Technology to Combat Losses by Revathi 
Subramanian
Big Data Analytics: Turning Big Data into Big Money by Frank 
Ohlhorst
Branded! How Retailers Engage Consumers with Social Media and 
Mobility by Bernie Brennan and Lori Schafer
Business Analytics for Customer Intelligence by Gert Laursen
Business Analytics for Managers: Taking Business Intelligence beyond 
Reporting by Gert Laursen and Jesper Thorlund
The Business Forecasting Deal: Exposing Bad Practices and Providing 
Practical Solutions by Michael Gilliland
Business Intelligence Applied: Implementing an Effective Information and 
Communications Technology Infrastructure by Michael S. Gendron
Business Intelligence in the Cloud: Strategic Implementation Guide by 
Michael S. Gendron
Business Intelligence Success Factors: Tools for Aligning Your Business in 
the Global Economy by Olivia Parr Rud
CIO Best Practices: Enabling Strategic Value with Information Technology,
second edition, by Joe Stenzel
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Connecting Organizational Silos: Taking Knowledge Flow Management 
to the Next Level with Social Media by Frank Leistner
Credit Risk Assessment: The New Lending System for Borrowers, Lenders, 
and Investors by Clark Abrahams and Mingyuan Zhang
Credit Risk Scorecards: Developing and Implementing Intelligent Credit 
Scoring by Naeem Siddiqi
The Data Asset: How Smart Companies Govern Their Data for Business 
Success by Tony Fisher
Delivering Business Analytics: Practical Guidelines for Best Practice by 
Evan Stubbs
Demand-Driven Forecasting: A Structured Approach to Forecasting,
second edition, by Charles Chase
Demand-Driven Inventory Optimization and Replenishment: Creating a 
More Efﬁcient Supply Chain by Robert A. Davis
The Executive’s Guide to Enterprise Social Media Strategy: How Social 
Networks Are Radically Transforming Your Business by David Thomas 
and Mike Barlow
Economic and Business Forecasting: Analyzing and Interpreting 
Econometric Results by John Silvia, Azhar Iqbal, Kaylyn Swankoski, 
Sarah Watt, and Sam Bullard
Executive’s Guide to Solvency II by David Buckham, Jason Wahl, 
and Stuart Rose
Fair Lending Compliance: Intelligence and Implications for Credit Risk 
Management by Clark R. Abrahams and Mingyuan Zhang
Foreign Currency Financial Reporting from Euros to Yen to Yuan: A 
Guide to Fundamental Concepts and Practical Applications by Robert 
Rowan
Health Analytics: Gaining the Insights to Transform Health Care by 
Jason Burke
Heuristics in Analytics: A Practical Perspective of What Inﬂuences Our 
Analytical World by Carlos Andre Reis Pinheiro and Fiona McNeill
Human Capital Analytics: How to Harness the Potential of Your 
Organization’s Greatest Asset by Gene Pease, Boyce Byerly, and Jac 
Fitz-enz
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Implement, Improve and Expand Your Statewide Longitudinal Data 
System: Creating a Culture of Data in Education by Jamie McQuiggan 
and Armistead Sapp
Information Revolution: Using the Information Evolution Model to Grow 
Your Business by Jim Davis, Gloria J. Miller, and Allan Russell
Killer Analytics: Top 20 Metrics Missing from your Balance Sheet by 
Mark Brown
Manufacturing Best Practices: Optimizing Productivity and Product 
Quality by Bobby Hull
Marketing Automation: Practical Steps to More Effective Direct Marketing
by Jeff LeSueur
Mastering Organizational Knowledge Flow: How to Make Knowledge 
Sharing Work by Frank Leistner
The New Know: Innovation Powered by Analytics by Thornton May
Performance Management: Integrating Strategy Execution, Methodologies, 
Risk, and Analytics by Gary Cokins
Predictive Business Analytics: Forward-Looking Capabilities to Improve 
Business Performance by Lawrence Maisel and Gary Cokins
Retail Analytics: The Secret Weapon by Emmett Cox
Social Network Analysis in Telecommunications by Carlos Andre Reis 
Pinheiro
Statistical Thinking: Improving Business Performance, second edition, 
by Roger W. Hoerl and Ronald D. Snee
Taming the Big Data Tidal Wave: Finding Opportunities in Huge Data 
Streams with Advanced Analytics by Bill Franks
Too Big to Ignore: The Business Case for Big Data by Phil Simon
The Value of Business Analytics: Identifying the Path to Proﬁtability by 
Evan Stubbs
Visual Six Sigma: Making Data Analysis Lean by Ian Cox, Marie A. 
Gaudard, Philip J. Ramsey, Mia L. Stephens, and Leo Wright
Win with Advanced Business Analytics: Creating Business Value from 
Your Data by Jean Paul Isson and Jesse Harriott
For more information on any of the above titles, please visit 
www.wiley.com.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Business
Intelligence
and the Cloud
Strategic Implementation 
Guide
Michael S. Gendron
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Cover image: © iStockphoto.com/teekid
Cover design: Michael Rutkowski
Copyright © 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or 
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, 
recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of 
the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission 
of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee 
to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 
(978) 750-8400, fax (978) 646-8600, or on the Web at www.copyright.com. 
Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions 
Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 
748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have 
used their best efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or war-
ranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book 
and speciﬁcally disclaim any implied warranties of merchantability or ﬁtness for a 
particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales representa-
tives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may 
not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional where 
appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of proﬁt 
or any other commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental, 
consequential, or other damages.
For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, 
please contact our Customer Care Department within the United States at (800) 
762-2974, outside the United States at (317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley publishes in a variety of print and electronic formats and by print-on-
demand. Some material included with standard print versions of this book may not 
be included in e-books or in print-on-demand. If this book refers to media such as 
a CD or DVD that is not included in the version you purchased, you may download 
this material at http://booksupport.wiley.com. For more information about Wiley 
products, visit www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
Gendron, Michael S., 1957–
  Business intelligence and the cloud : strategic implementation guide / 
Michael S. Gendron.
   1 online resource. — (Wiley & SAS business series)
Includes index.
  Description based on print version record and CIP data provided by publisher;
resource not viewed.
  ISBN 978-1-118-85974-2 (pdf) — ISBN 978-1-118-85984-1 (epub) — 
ISBN 978-1-118-63172-0 (cloth) — ISBN 978-1-118-91524-0 (obook)  
1. Information technology—Management.
2. Cloud computing.
3. Business intelligence.
I. Title. 
HD30.2
658.4’72028546782—dc23
2013047042
Printed in the United States of America
10   9   8   7   6   5   4   3   2   1
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
This book is dedicated to the reviewers who added 
important insights, making each chapter more 
relevant. I am forever grateful for their perseverance 
and unwavering support during this project. Their 
knowledge and background added much that will 
assist the readers in maximizing their understanding 
of business intelligence, Big Data, mobile, 
and the cloud.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
ix
Contents
Foreword
xiii
Preface
xvii
Acknowledgments
xxi
Part One: The Foundation............................................................1
Chapter 1: A History of How We Got to Cloud Computing
3
The Rise of Cloud Computing
4
Conclusion
19
Notes
21
Chapter 2: Characteristics and Service Models 23
Introductory Concepts
24
A Cloud Implementation
29
Deﬁning Cloud Computing
30
Conclusion
44
Notes
44
Chapter 3: Deployment Models
47
Important Considerations
49
Public and Private Clouds
54
Examples of Cloud Computing
55
Private Clouds in Context
60
Hybrid Clouds
63
Community Clouds
65
Conclusion
66
Notes
67
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
x
▸ C O N T E N T S
Part Two: Cloud Economics ....................................................... 69
Chapter 4: Strategic Measurement:
TCO, ROI, OPEX/CAPEX
71
Total Cost of Ownership
72
Financial Measurements
76
Conclusion
85
Notes
87
Chapter 5: Cloud Adoption: Are Your Organization 
and Its Stakeholders Ready to Adopt Cloud 
Computing?
89
Regulatory Inﬂuence
90
The Effects on Your Organization
91
The Effects on External Stakeholders
103
Conclusion
105
Notes
106
Chapter 6: Service Level Agreements
107
The Traditional or Typical Telecom SLA QOS
108
Introducing the Cloud SLA
109
SLA Types
110
Cloud Use Cases
110
SLA by Type of Service and Deployment
113
Anatomy of a Standardized SLA
113
Negotiating the Cloud SLA
116
Conclusion
125
Notes
126
Part Three: Business Intelligence and the Cloud....................127
Chapter 7: Business Intelligence: The Interaction of Business 
Intelligence and Cloud Computing
129
BI Strategy
130
Objectives for a BI Project
132
The Analytics Cycle
134
Conclusion
147
Notes
148
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
C O N T E N T S
◂
xi
Chapter 8: Big Data’s Effects on BI Efforts 
in the Cloud
149
Deﬁning Big Data
151
Managing Big Data
158
Conclusion
168
Notes
169
Chapter 9: Mobile Computing Intersection: The Intersection 
of Mobile, Cloud, Big Data, and Business 
Intelligence
171
Deﬁning Mobile Computing
174
Mobile in the Enterprise
175
Mobile and the Consumer Experience
186
Conclusion
187
Notes
187
Conclusion
189
Glossary
193
About the Author
207
Index
209
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
xiii
Foreword
In 1991 ADNET Technologies was cofounded with a vision of bridging 
the gap between information technology (IT) and business—essen-
tially, making IT real for businesses. Michael Gendron and I ﬁrst met 
several years ago when he was working on his book Business Intelligence 
Applied: Implementing an Effective Information and Communications 
Technology Infrastructure. He was (and still is) a professor of informa-
tion systems at Central Connecticut State University. It was imme-
diately apparent that we shared a common vision to bridge the gap 
between IT and business.
In the past 30 years we have seen the rise and fall of an array 
of technologies. Are we now in the process of witnessing the fall of 
the personal computer as tablets and smartphones take over? I will 
leave that for history to tell, but what is certain is that technology 
changes at a rapid pace. As the speed of technology changes, so does 
the speed of business and competition. As technology has become 
part of the DNA of business, the speed of technological change has 
naturally affected the rate at which businesses change. The effects 
have been widespread, including leveling the playing ﬁeld between 
large and small companies. If technology is changing at such a rapid 
pace that even large companies have difﬁculty staying abreast of the 
change, how can small companies possibly compete? What chance do 
they have in this ever-changing world of technology? The answer is 
the cloud. The book you are reading makes that point.
While ever more powerful devices with easier-to-use operating 
systems and applications have made their way from the corporate 
workplace into our homes, the real game changer has been the rapid 
adoption of the Internet and the widespread availability of high-speed 
broadband service. What was not realistically possible (i.e., affordable) 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
xiv
▸
F O R E W O R D
back in 2000 is suddenly common. The planets aligned, so to speak, 
and the “cloud” was born.
Having maintained responsibilities in both the technical and the 
business worlds, I have seen ﬁrsthand the disconnection between the 
two. My career has been dedicated to bridging the gap between IT 
(what is possible) and business (the reason IT exists). The author and 
I share the same drive and vision, as is evident in this book.
Over time, IT has shifted from merely automating manual pro-
cesses and being viewed as an “expense to be managed” to a business 
driver. The chief information ofﬁcer has morphed from a techni-
cal guru with minimal business knowledge to a technically savvy 
business strategist with more of a direct line to becoming the chief 
executive ofﬁcer. In my experience consulting with organizations on 
technology strategy, it is generally the case that the gap between IT 
and business needs has not been fulﬁlled. As a result, we spend a lot 
of time attempting to educate our clients on the very topics covered 
in this book.
Michael Gendron has done an excellent job of providing the 
reader with a solid foundation of what the cloud is and how it came 
about. He provides the reader with the background of the cloud as 
well as an overview of some of the more important underlying tech-
nologies that drive the cloud, such as virtualization. This discussion 
provides the reader with the necessary foundation to begin to fully 
engage in discussions on cloud computing.
Once the foundation has been set, the three dimensions of cloud 
computing are explored, starting with the essential characteristics. 
What is the cloud? What are the service models? What are the deploy-
ment models? Why do I care? These questions are answered in depth 
and with an eye toward the business reader to begin to bridge the gap 
between IT and business. Michael continually builds on the founda-
tion set earlier, weaving through the multitude of terms and concepts 
that face the reader in the real world—cutting through the hype and 
myths to simplify what may at ﬁrst seem complicated.
The old adage “you can’t manage what you don’t measure” still 
applies and has certainly not been forgotten here. As the reader will 
discover, the decision to move to cloud computing is not always clear-
cut; it depends on a multitude of factors. Measurement of the ﬁnancial 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
F O R E W O R D
◂
xv
effects of such a move, both short-term and long-term, must be con-
sidered. How do we measure the ﬁnancial impact of the cloud? How 
do we balance the ﬁnancial consequences with performance (service 
level agreements)? How does our staff ﬁt into the overall equation? 
Total cost of ownership and the measurement of results are given 
due importance in making decisions. Examples are used to help put 
the various concepts into context so that the reader can gain a better 
understanding of how the pieces of the puzzle ﬁt together.
The puzzle is completed in this book with a solid discussion of 
current trends and how businesses can beneﬁt from those trends. The 
Big Data, mobile computing, and business intelligence discussions not 
only educate the reader on each of these trends but also highlight the 
intersection of these trends with cloud computing.
IT must be an integral part of an organization’s strategy and stra-
tegic planning process. This book meets the challenge by presenting 
the material from a strategic implementation perspective. Michael 
Gendron has a unique talent for maintaining the technological 
strength of a topic while making it clearly understandable to the busi-
ness reader—successfully bridging the gap between IT and business.
I highly recommend this book for any manager looking to gain a com-
petitive advantage through the strategic application of technology.
EDWARD D. LAPRADE
President and CEO
ADNET Technologies
Farmington, CT
www.thinkADNET.com
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
xvii
Preface
Here is a not-too-unreal scenario in today’s C-suite meeting: Sally, 
the chief information ofﬁcer of a large company, was at a meeting the 
other day and was asked by the president of the company, “I keep 
reading about business intelligence, business analytics, Big Data, and 
mobile and cloud computing in the trade journals. But it is all so con-
fusing. Can you give us 10 minutes right now and explain how these 
things can help our business?”
Sally realizes that she is not prepared to answer this question and 
turns to Sue, the manager of technical services, and says, “Sue, you’ve 
recently been to a conference in Atlanta on Big Data and mobile. Can you 
shed some light on this?” Sue does a great job of ﬁelding the question, 
but a realization that more background is needed slowly sinks in during 
the question-and-answer session after her impromptu presentation.
Talking after the meeting, Sue and Sally realize they need to explore 
the intersection among Big Data, mobile and cloud, and business intel-
ligence (BI) so they can propose a solution that will engage the orga-
nization in these technologies. They ponder this intersection knowing 
that the budget process is about to be upon them. They need to jump-
start their understanding so they can justify their budget requests.
Organizational managers are called upon to understand Big Data, 
BI, mobile and cloud computing, and to craft business and informa-
tion technology (IT) strategies based on these technologies. The entire 
IT ecosystem is being disrupted with new offerings and lower tech-
nology prices that affect virtually every business decision. Managers 
are required to justify their projects based on total cost of owner-
ship, return on investment, and capital versus operational expense. 
Books, trade journals, web sites, and consultants abound that will 
tell you how to use these technologies, and these are a great resource. 
However, it is helpful to have a book that provides explanations in an 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
xviii
▸
P R E F A C E
easily digestible way so that C-suite members, managers, and staff can 
obtain the background necessary to deploy the technologies that will 
bring the greatest competitive return. This book is just such a resource.
Before we delve into the history of how we evolved to cloud com-
puting, it will be helpful if we discuss this book’s strategic orientation. 
This book takes the position that all projects considered for funding 
by an organization must be weighed against one another before fund-
ing decisions are made (see Figure P.1). It does not matter whether 
they are capital projects (e.g., building a new building or getting new 
computers for all the employees) or operational projects (e.g., repair-
ing the parking lot or maintaining a software application written in-
house). All projects must be considered based on the value each brings 
to the organization and its customers; the organization must ask what 
value each project can reasonably expect to yield. For example, will 
an information and communication technology (ICT) project bring 
better market share and thus greater proﬁt, or will a building renova-
tion have a greater effect? All projects’ return on investment and their 
alignment with the business strategy must be considered much as you 
would when purchasing stocks for an investment portfolio.
Implementing a cloud computing strategy at its core is an ICT proj-
ect. Even though cloud computing is primarily a technology-focused 
Figure P.1
Projects Must Compete for Funding
Capital
Projects
Operational
Projects
Available
Resources
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
P R E F A C E
◂
xix
business orientation, at its core it is ICT. Therefore, organizations must 
consider the ICT value proposition when considering whether to fund 
a cloud computing project. The ICT value proposition is the value that 
any technology implementation (including a cloud computing imple-
mentation) will bring to the organization or its customer.
Here are some basic terms to aid in the discussion:
Information technology (IT). The hardware used to process 
data and to enable business processes. This is really just the tech-
nology, but it is often used to mean the information systems.
Information systems (IS). IT plus software, people, and the 
actual business processes. This is everything IT, plus the soft side. 
The terms IT and IS are often used synonymously, but they really 
are different.
Information and communications technology (ICT). This is 
IT, IS, and the communications technologies (e.g., leased lines, 
routers, switches, etc.) that are used to connect them. This is a 
new term being used in both business and academia.
To maximize the beneﬁt of ICT, your organization must believe 
that ICT resources are not only being used to support the business’s 
internal processes but are also being dedicated to projects that create 
value (e.g., to increase market share, enhance customer relationships, 
add to the customer’s perception of value). Gone are the days when 
the IT department can ask, “What is my budget this year?” Rather, 
the question must be, “How can we use technology to support the 
organization’s value proposition(s), and how much is the organiza-
tion willing to spend to do so?”
Things have changed; we can no longer build ICT using a “ﬁeld of 
dreams” approach—if we built it, they will use it. Rather, we must use 
a decided approach to expending an organization’s scarce resources 
on ICT projects. Otherwise, we will continue to see business units 
develop “shadow IT” to solve their problems.
The projects selected for funding must support the organization’s 
value proposition, and shadow IT must be avoided. Fuller treatment 
of the topic of ICT value can be found in the author’s previous book, 
Business Intelligence Applied: Implementing an Effective Information and 
Communications Technology Infrastructure.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
xxi
Acknowledgments
I want to acknowledge those who helped me create this book. First, 
I want to thank those who have written about the topics covered 
in this book before I did; there are too many to list here, but they 
created the intellectual capital that formed the foundation for this 
work. I also want to thank my family for its support and understand-
ing while I created this work. Last, I want to thank the reviewers who 
spent countless hours reading everything written in these pages. The 
reviewers and their comments about this work are as follows:
Providing innovative services to customers in an era 
when technology is being redeﬁned with a new paradigm 
of IT economics is a game changer for every business. 
Reviewing this book helped clarify the message on the 
emerging trends of analytics and driving maximum busi-
ness value.
—Larry Carvalho, Principal Consultant, Robust Cloud
Reviewing this book was not a chore; it was a fun learn-
ing experience. The book is a signiﬁcant addition to our 
understanding of the present and future impact of cloud 
computing.
—William Holstein, Professor of Strategy and 
Information Technology, Lorange Institute of 
Business, Zurich; D. Hollins Ryan Professor, Retired, 
College of William and Mary; Distinguished Service 
Professor Emeritus, SUNY Albany
In providing IT advisory services to our clients we are 
often required to go deep into speciﬁc areas of technology 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
xxii
▸
A C K N O W L E D G M E N T S
in seeking solutions to business problems. This book was 
a good reminder that we must not lose focus on how all 
these technologies interact.
—Edward Laprade, President and CEO, 
ADNET Technologies
Simply stated, my thoughts while reviewing this book 
were simply to show, and add, additional data to the 
myriad of examples of cloud, mobility, and BI. The ranges 
of ideas are seemingly inﬁnite—and it was a pleasure to be 
a sounding board!
—Christopher Luise, Executive Vice President, 
ADNET Technologies
Michael Gendron presents a well-written path to manag-
ing the complexity of organizations understanding and 
implementing true cloud strategies. Beyond the marketing 
hype, this book is a must read for the practitioner and 
helps set the right framework.
—Chad Mattix, Principal Consultant, 
Transformation and Global Solutions
This book is invaluable to segments of the IT and non-IT 
communities that are struggling with the implications of 
the explosion of corporate Big Data.
—Fred Wergeles, Competitive Intelligence 
Consultant, Fred Wergeles and Associates
The following companies were involved in the creation of this 
book:
Adnet Technologies
Intel Strategy
Fred Wegeles & Associates
CompuCom
RobustCloud
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
1
PART
ONE
The Foundation
The convergence of cloud and the exponential 
rise in data are [sic] creating unprecedented 
opportunities for IT professionals, but [sic] it 
also is leading to an ever-increasing knowledge 
and skills gap in the IT industry.
—Tim Horton*
T
here is much confusion over what cloud computing is. In Part 
One we review the technological history that brought us to cloud 
computing; then attributes and deﬁnitions of cloud computing are 
brought together to create a uniﬁed deﬁnition. We conclude by deﬁn-
ing cloud delivery mechanisms and public, private, hybrid, and com-
munity clouds. In Parts Two and Three we will move into a discussion 
of how cloud computing can be used to deliver business intelligence.
*Tim Horton is the head of the Cloud Computing Centre of Excellence at Cork Institute 
of Technology in Ireland; this quote is from the biographical information on his 
LinkedIn proﬁle.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
3
C H A P T E R 1
A History of How 
We Got to Cloud 
Computing
C
loud computing is not just a technical orientation, a set of com-
puter architectures, or computing standards developed by the 
technocrats of the twenty-ﬁrst century. It is a new way to deliver 
information systems (IS) that require new business policies; it is a 
strategic orientation driven by changes in technology that enable 
rapid business innovation. Cloud computing is enabled by many tech-
nologies, but more important than the technologies, cloud computing 
is a new way to deliver IS and information technology (IT). Many of 
the old ways (if you can call ﬁve years ago “old”) are still around and 
are needed. However, the organization that wants to be competitive 
has to closely examine cloud computing as a strategic initiative.
The decision to build and fund a cloud computing strategy is one 
that must be driven by the highest levels of your organization. Making 
the decision to move from a traditional in-house technology strategy 
(possibly a “bare metal server approach”) to a cloud computing strat-
egy represents substantial exposure for the organization in the form 
of risk and expense, but the beneﬁts of a successful cloud comput-
ing strategy will far outweigh that risk and expense. Those beneﬁts 
include the potential for greater innovation, faster time to market, 
greater market share, and greater customer loyalty.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
4
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
In this chapter, a brief history is given to introduce how the 
evolution of technology has brought us to cloud computing. Special 
attention is given to service-oriented architecture and why it is impor-
tant, and to virtualization and why the reader should care about it. This 
brief history will set the stage for Chapter 2, which will deﬁne cloud 
computing and its delivery models and describe how those models ﬁt 
into an organization. Cases are given for many of the difﬁcult concepts 
so the models of delivery for cloud computing services can be under-
stood. These topics provide the foundation for understanding how cloud 
computing can help an organization attain its strategic orientation.
THE RISE OF CLOUD COMPUTING
As already said, cloud computing is a business model and a new way 
to deliver IS and IT. That new delivery is through a “pay as you go” 
model. To understand how we got to cloud computing, it is helpful to 
understand the historical evolution of these foundational technolo-
gies. Understanding the history informs us about the pitfalls made by 
others and gives us a foundation on which to base our forward-looking 
strategies. Reviewing this history will help us understand how cloud 
computing creates business strategy. (This history will be an overview 
of some of the major technology antecedents to cloud computing, not 
a detailed technical review.)
Computing Hardware
Changes in computing hardware have been a large driving force 
in how IS and IT are delivered to the user. In early computing, the 
mainframe was largely the “computer in the backroom” approach, in 
which the users did not have any direct access. Today, the users have 
direct access and have more processing power on their desks than 
what was in those early mainframes. In this section, we will examine 
some of the trends in the last 60 years.
Early Computing and the Mainframe
Through the 1950s and 1960s, large corporations adopted main-
frame computers to process their data. The integrated circuit (IC) was 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
A H I S T O R Y  O F  H O W W E G O T  T O  C L O U D C O M P U T I N G
◂
5
developed in 1958 by John Kirby and Robert Noyce.1 In the ensuing 
years, the IC was reduced in size and cost, making it the technology 
that would eventually enable the creation of the microcomputer and 
minicomputer. Before the IC, discrete transistors were the building 
blocks for mainframes. Terms such as business intelligence (BI) and Big 
Data had not been conceived yet, nor was there the need for technol-
ogy to support them. The mainframe was created to support large 
organizations in their need to process their data.
By today’s standards, these early systems were difﬁcult to use. 
They had no direct human interface (i.e., no terminal or keyboard) 
but were given data and programs through hard wiring, punch cards, 
or paper tape. The IBM 402 (see Figure 1.1) was such a machine, but 
many other examples also existed.
In these early days of modern computing, “IBM and the seven 
dwarfs” dominated the computer industry; the “seven dwarfs” were 
Burroughs, Control Data Corporation, General Electric, Honeywell, 
National Cash Register (NCR), RCA, and UNIVAC. In the early 1970s, 
General Electric sold its computer business to Honeywell, and RCA 
sold to Sperry. The remaining companies became known as “IBM and 
the BUNCH”; BUNCH was an acronym for Burroughs, UNIVAC NCR, 
Control Data Corporation, and Honeywell. These companies formed 
the foundation of modern mainframe computing.
Mainframes remain in use today; they provide big iron process-
ing power in organizations that process large amounts of data. These 
Figure 1.1
IBM 402 
Source: IBM 402 photo courtesy of Stahlkocher. Control panel 
photo taken by Chris Shrigley in May 2003.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
6
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
machines are powerful and able to handle large amounts of data 
quickly. This makes them especially suitable for things like back-end 
processing to support a government need to handle its tax returns 
quickly or an organization’s need to process a large inventory in an 
enterprise resource planning system. Mainframes are good at moving 
large amounts of data and processing them quickly so other users and 
other systems (perhaps personal computer–based systems) can further 
process the information. The mainframe exists as the right tool to do 
the right job. It’s a matter of engineering and architecture: A personal 
computer (PC) using a high-end graphics card is better at displaying 
images and streaming video than a mainframe, but a mainframe is 
better at processing large amounts of transaction-oriented data.
It is important not to confuse mainframes with supercomputers. 
Both are good at handling a large amount of data quickly, but they 
have different purposes. Supercomputers are fast at processing data 
and performing scientiﬁc number crunching. Mainframes are good at 
moving large amounts of data and processing large numbers of busi-
ness transactions quickly. This is summarized in Table 1.1. With the 
emergence of cloud computing, multiple servers can be used in uni-
son to approach or even exceed the processing power of a mainframe, 
but it is a matter of architecture, cost, and business beneﬁt.
Minicomputers
Through the mid-1960s, a class of computers emerged called mini-
computers. In 1970, the New York Times proposed the deﬁnition of a 
minicomputer as a machine costing less than $25,000. Those machines 
had to have both input and output devices, at least 4,000 words of 
memory, and be capable of running programs in a computer language 
such as Fortran or Basic. The minicomputer was built differently from 
Table 1.1
Mainframes and Supercomputer Attributes
Mainframe
Supercomputer
◼Handles large amounts of data quickly
◼Good at processing a large number of 
business transactions quickly
◼Handles large amounts of data quickly
◼Good at processing data and perform-
ing scientiﬁc number crunching
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
A H I S T O R Y  O F  H O W W E G O T  T O  C L O U D C O M P U T I N G
◂
7
the mainframe and brought computing power to smaller organiza-
tions that could not make the investment for a big iron mainframe, 
but that still had the need to process more data than a human could 
do in a reasonable amount of time. These machines did not normally 
have input and output devices for each staff member in the organiza-
tion and were mainly used for batch processing. As the minicomputer 
and its software evolved, and as ICs made devices more accessible, 
some small and medium-size businesses were able to deploy the mini-
computer with individual terminals for staff members, but this was 
expensive and often not cost-effective.
Microprocessor-Based Computers and the PC
As the use of mainframes and minicomputers became common, 
users began to develop the need to process their own information—
especially considering the large amount of information they needed 
to handle to do their jobs effectively. Mainframes were too unwieldy 
and not accessible to the normal staff member in an organization, and 
minicomputers were too expensive for each staff member to have one.
The development and pricing of the IC, along with other tech-
nology trends, made PCs accessible to more people and made small 
scalable servers a reality. The ﬁrst PCs were introduced in the 1970s 
by manufacturers like Coleco, Radio Shack, Commodore, and Atari. 
For several years, PCs from these and other manufacturers were 
largely seen as “hobbyist” computers. There was also a doubling of the 
number of transistors on a processor chip approximately every two 
years that caused evolutionary developments in processing power 
and capacity; this phenomenon was known as Moore’s Law.2
By the late 1970s, the need for all staff members to have access 
to computing power was better understood. In 1981, IBM announced 
the PC, and in the same year Microsoft introduced MS-DOS under 
contract with IBM. There are varied accounts of how MS-DOS was 
created, ranging from it being a spin-off of the earlier Quick and Dirty 
Operating System (QDOS) to it being copied from Gary Kildall’s CP/M 
operating system. Microsoft founder Bill Gates convinced IBM to let 
Microsoft retain the rights to MS-DOS and to market it separately 
from the IBM PC. Subsequently, in 1985, Microsoft introduced the 
ﬁrst version of Windows. Coincident with these events, Steve Jobs 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
8
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
introduced the Apple Macintosh (Mac) computer in 1984. The Mac, 
too, evolved through multiple hardware and software versions. This 
series of events began the revolution toward desktop computing.
Networking and HTML
While mainframes, minicomputers, and desktop PCs were coming 
into vogue, another phenomenon was occurring: People were devel-
oping ways to connect computers so they could transfer messages to 
one another. In 1969, the development of ARPANET (which some say 
is the grandparent of the Internet) began. ARPANET is the network 
of the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA). DARPA 
is a branch of the federal government that specializes in “the techno-
logical superiority of the U.S. military and preventing technological 
surprise from harming our national security by sponsoring revolu-
tionary, high-payoff research bridging the gap between fundamental 
discoveries and their military use.”3 ARPANET was built primarily to 
give researchers access to mainframes that were too far away from 
their work locations to make frequent access convenient. ARPANET 
was the ﬁrst large-scale packet-switched network, and it eventually 
gave way to the TCP/IP protocol and the Internet.
ARPANET was built to connect four locations: (1) the University 
of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), (2) the Stanford Research Institute, 
(3) the University of California, Santa Barbara, and (4) the University 
of Utah. ARPANET carried its ﬁrst message on October 29, 1969, from 
UCLA to the Stanford Research Institute. ARPANET grew, and in 1970 
it reached the East Coast by including the technology company Bolt, 
Beranek and Newman. By 1981, ARPANET had grown to 213 locations, 
and it began to acquire approximately one new location every 20 days.
In the meantime (around 1975), a transatlantic satellite link 
was added to ARPANET, and the Norway Seismic Array was brought 
online. In 1983 ARPANET was split and the military maintained its 
own network, MILNET, for unclassiﬁed communications. The com-
bination of networks for unclassiﬁed military and civilian trafﬁc was 
called the Defense Data Network.
In 1985, the National Science Foundation (NSF) began a pro-
gram to coordinate its projects over the National Science Foundation 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
A H I S T O R Y  O F  H O W W E G O T  T O  C L O U D C O M P U T I N G
◂
9
Network (NSFNET). This name was also given to a group of nation-
wide networks that were constructed from 1985 to 1995. NSFNET 
was initially created to link the nation’s NSF-funded supercomputers, 
but through collaboration between the NSF and industry partners, 
the NSFNET became a major part of the Internet. This backbone was 
connected to a number of regional networks that enabled smaller 
regional and campus networks to connect to one another through 
the NSFNET.
The federal law that appropriated the funds for the NSFNET was 
interpreted to mean that commercial trafﬁc was not allowed. In order 
to make the appropriate use of the NSFNET known to those connect-
ing to it, the NSF developed an acceptable use policy (AUP). The AUP 
restricted commercial use even though several commercial Internet 
service providers (ISPs) were connected to the NSFNET. A number of 
the early NSFNET industry partners (notably, Merit, IBM, and MCI) 
created the Commercial Internet Exchange to connect many of the 
private ISPs, relieving the restrictions imposed by the NSF AUP. 
The NSFNET became a transitional network between ARPANET and the 
Internet as we know it today.
Simultaneous to the ARPANET, NSFNET, and Internet transi-
tion, standards for local area networks (LANs) were developed. LANs 
were built to allow computers within organizations to share data and 
devices such as printers. In the 1970s, there were a number of com-
peting standards—Ethernet, Token Ring, and ARCNET, to name a few 
of the major ones—and all of these technologies had proponents and 
a place in the market. With the proliferation of desktop PCs, easy-
to-use (compared to the mainframe and minicomputer) operating 
systems like CP/M and MS-DOS bringing computing power to the 
desktop, and the user’s need to share devices and data, the implemen-
tation of LANs grew.
Parc is a Xerox company that describes itself as a technology plat-
form pioneer.4 Robert Metcalfe and others at Xerox Parc developed 
Ethernet in the early 1970s, and it was patented in 1975. Because 
of its ability to adapt to the PC market and its low cost, Ethernet 
has become the de facto standard for desktop PC and server inter-
connectivity. Ethernet has been standardized through the Institute 
of Electrical and Electronics Engineers 802 working group and has 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
10
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
evolved from the slow (by today’s standards) form of connectivity it 
initially allowed to the advanced networking we use today.
Another development was the creation of hypertext transfer 
protocol (HTTP) and hypertext markup language (HTML) by Tim 
Berners-Lee. Berners-Lee saw the ability to use the newly formed 
Internet and its supporting protocols and technologies to commu-
nicate marked-up text. The proposal and development of HTTP and 
HTML occurred in the late 1980s and early 1990s, with the ﬁrst web 
site ever deployed being that of the European Organization for Nuclear 
Research in 1991. Berners-Lee went on to create the World Wide 
Web Foundation (later to be called the World Wide Web Consortium 
[W3C]) to launch transformative programs that build local capacity to 
utilize the Web for positive change.5 The evolution of HTTP and HTML 
directly contributed to the ability to deliver cloud computing services.
All of these technologies—and many others—have converged to 
provide the Internet communications infrastructure that is in place 
today. Companies like Level3.com provide Internet connectivity; 
AT&T, Verizon, Clear.com, and many others provide mobile connec-
tivity; hardware manufacturers like Cisco provide WiFi and other 
communication devices; the plain old telephone system has evolved 
into a digital communication medium; and numerous other compa-
nies and providers deliver technologies that converge today to create 
a global infrastructure that enables us to work (and play) virtually 
anywhere in the developed world.
Bandwidth
Bandwidth is the rate at which a computer network can transfer infor-
mation between devices. In this case we are speciﬁcally discussing 
bandwidth sold to businesses that allows them to make connections 
in their information and communication technology (ICT) infra-
structures. Bandwidth is often measured in bits per second or some 
denomination thereof (e.g., megabits per second, gigabits per second).
As computing platforms developed and the Internet emerged, 
the cost of bandwidth declined dramatically. The bandwidth 
marketplace has been inundated with ambitious (some say overambi-
tious) network construction, bankruptcies, and dramatic price declines 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
A H I S T O R Y  O F  H O W W E G O T  T O  C L O U D C O M P U T I N G
◂
11
through 2004. By 2005, the wholesale bandwidth market had stabi-
lized, with prices largely holding at the 2004 level.6 The prices on the 
more popular transmission routes experienced the greatest decline 
and subsequent stabilization. Today there is still constant economic and 
marketplace pressure on bandwidth price structure.
The decreased cost of communication has enabled cheap tele-
phone calls and inexpensive data transmission. This has fueled the 
cloud computing revolution and is a large reason that cloud comput-
ing has become ubiquitous.
Computing Platforms
With this brief review of the evolution of computers, minicomputer 
operating systems, and networks completed, we can move on to the 
effect they had on computing platforms and information systems. It is 
probably fair to say that these technologies created a “perfect storm” 
so that current computing platforms and information systems could 
exist.7 Three computing platforms have signiﬁcantly contributed to 
moving us toward cloud computing: (1) clustering and grid comput-
ing, (2) service-oriented architecture, and (3) virtualization.
Clustering and Grid Computing
For a long time, humanity has understood the advantage of cluster-
ing. An example of this is the way we process language and how that 
is used in natural language processing (NLP) by computers to make 
interactions between humans and machines more humanlike. NLP—a 
ﬁeld of computer science, artiﬁcial intelligence, and linguistics—refers 
to software that allows a computer to interact with another com-
puter using spoken human language. NLP creates clusters of sound 
in human language that can be easily understood, analyzed, and pro-
cessed by computers.
Clustering can also be seen in the way an Internet search engine 
delivers its content, grouped by category or cluster. Clustering is a 
way to group things to make classiﬁcation easier as well as a way 
to group computer resources together to maximize their functioning. 
Clustering is therefore useful in many venues.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
12
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
Computer clusters are architecture rather than a type of computer. 
Many types of computers can be clustered together to maximize their 
use and productivity—think of the adage “the whole is greater than 
the sum of its parts” applied to computer technology. These clusters 
can be as simple as two PCs loosely connected so they can share a task 
or provide backup for each other should one go down. Alternatively, 
it can be as elegant as a supercomputer composed of a linked set of 
smaller computers. Clusters are also used to group computer memory 
and disk drives, which is often referred to as pooling.
All computer clusters have one thing in common: They all appear 
to the user to be one device rather than a number of interconnected 
devices. Clusters are created with software or hardware that orches-
trates the functioning of the cluster to make it appear as one system. 
A common use of clustering (still very much in use today) is the load-
balancing cluster used to deliver web services to a group of users (see 
Figure 1.2).
 The cluster consists of a load balancer, which acts as the orchestra-
tor between the user and the servers of the web site. In this example, 
behind the load balancer are four servers that each offer up the same 
web site when requested by a user. The load balancer monitors and 
distributes the workload of each server. In this way, the load balancer 
Figure 1.2
Load-Balancing Cluster
Web Server
Web Server
Web Server
Web Server
Load Balancing
Cluster
Load
Balancer
User
User
User
User
User
User
User
User
User
User
User
User
User
User
Internet
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
A H I S T O R Y  O F  H O W W E G O T  T O  C L O U D C O M P U T I N G
◂
13
acts as middleware, or the orchestrator that manages the servers so their 
functioning can be maximized. To the user, it appears that he or she is 
interacting with one web site when in fact there may be a number of 
web servers that stand ready to deliver the requested web site. It’s up 
to the load balancer to determine which available web server actually 
does the task.
An architecture that seems similar is grid computing. Grid comput-
ing platforms have a number of distinguishing characteristics and are 
compared to cluster computing platforms in Table 1.2. What largely 
distinguishes a grid from a cluster is that a cluster appears as one sys-
tem to the user, whereas a grid is true distributed processing. Both 
clusters and grids use middleware to orchestrate a common task. In 
our example of cluster computing, the common task was seamlessly 
delivering a web site to the user. A grid may be used to work on parts 
of the same problem. A typical grid is shown in Figure 1.3, with one 
computer that distributes a workload to a number of other computers 
attached to the Internet.
Service-Oriented Architecture
When service-oriented architecture (SOA) entered the scene, we had 
already seen all the network standards, grid and cluster computing 
architectures, and other changes to business and technology that we 
have discussed thus far. SOA is a software engineering technique 
Table 1.2
Grid and Cluster Computing Characteristics
Cluster Computing Platforms
Grid Computing Platform
Interconnected, and look like one system 
to the user
Loosely interconnected, and resources do 
not appear to be one system
Administered using middleware to appear 
as one system
Administered using middleware that 
distributes the workload across systems 
connected to the grid
May be proprietary or have open standards
Often has open standards
Normally has a local or proprietary 
connection
Can exist on a local or proprietary connec-
tion or can interconnect using the Internet
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
14
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
directed toward designing and building computer software services 
that interoperate. It was a new way to build computer software that 
allowed IS developers to build software from components of a busi-
ness process rather than needing to “reinvent the wheel” each time 
software was created. This let each organization that provided a ser-
vice do what it did best, and most cost-effectively.
SOA is a complex but extremely useful and efﬁcient architecture for 
software development, and many people believe that it was the direct 
predecessor of cloud computing. Although it is a somewhat technical 
discussion, we will review some of the concepts that underlie SOA:
◼SOA is based on a set of loosely coupled services. An exam-
ple of this is a web site that uses a service from one vendor 
to provide shopping cart functionality and uses a service from 
another vendor (e.g., a bank) to provide credit card validation.
◼Each service in an SOA application communicates and exchanges 
data in well-deﬁned formats or protocols, often XML. These 
well-deﬁned formats and protocols allow for standardization 
and interoperability.
◼SOA can be seen as orchestration of services from different 
organizations or vendors. In the example of a web site with 
Figure 1.3
A Typical Internet-Based Grid
Computer
Computer
Middleware
Orchestrating Workload
Computer
Computer
Internet
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
A H I S T O R Y  O F  H O W W E G O T  T O  C L O U D C O M P U T I N G
◂
15
a shopping cart and credit card validation, there would be an 
orchestrating layer (perhaps the user interface of the web site) 
that calls and interacts with the services (i.e., the shopping cart 
and credit card validation).
◼Two standards, both based on XML, were initially used to 
describe the services. Web services description language (WSDL) 
was frequently used to describe the service itself, and simple 
object access protocol (SOAP) was frequently used to exchange 
information between the orchestration layer and the services it 
calls. Other standards exist (i.e., REST) today.
◼A hallmark of SOA is the ability to reuse services from one 
application in another. In our example, any web site that 
wanted to use the shopping cart functionality could do so, with 
proper authorization from the service provider.
◼A common implementation of SOA is the web services approach. 
In that approach there is a service provider that exposes a ser-
vice so the service consumer can access it.
◼Service consumers consume the offerings of a service provider 
through a software wrapper, which can be a web site, an appli-
cation, or other software that orchestrates the consumption of 
the services.
◼Services are often provided on a pay-as-you-go basis (e.g., each 
credit card validation transaction is charged a fee).
IBM provides a convenient conceptual model that describes the 
SOA architecture as the interaction of three primary parties:
1. The service provider, who publishes a service description and 
provides implementation for it.
2. The service consumer, who consumes (uses) the service.
3. The service broker, who, if present, maintains a service registry 
describing the service. Today, the broker is often referred to as 
the managed service provider.
SOA provides key elements that we see in today’s cloud com-
puting environments, including software reuse, a pay-as-you-go (or 
metered use) model, and orchestration. These are very similar to the 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
16
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
cloud computing software-as-a-service (SaaS) model, which we will 
discuss in Chapter 2.
Virtualization
In the earlier stages of computing discussed in this brief historical 
review, hardware was a single resource—one mainframe meant one 
mainframe, one server meant one server, and one storage device 
meant one storage device. There was time slicing (i.e., multiple con-
current operations) on mainframes and minicomputers, but that did 
not carry forward to the PC. Eventually, we understood that treating 
each resource individually did not use it effectively; each device had 
excess capacity that could not be used.
The solution to that problem was virtualization. In computing, 
virtualization means creating copies of something that all share the 
same physical resource. For example, suppose you have a server 
(a single resource) and know that that server is being used to only 20 
percent of its capacity. It is possible, through virtualization software 
like VMware or Microsoft Hyper-V, to take the single resource and 
make it appear like many copies of the same or similar resource.8 Each 
copy will execute on the single server, but to the user each copy will 
appear to be its own dedicated resource.
Three types of virtualization are common: (1) hardware virtual-
ization, (2) desktop virtualization, and (3) application virtualization. 
These share the following attributes:
◼Each virtual instance shares the same hardware. For example, 
one physical server can be made to look like many physical serv-
ers (e.g., a VMware solution); one physical server can be made 
to provide computing power for many desktops or application 
(e.g., Microsoft Hyper-V, Citrix, XenDesktop, and XenApp).
◼Virtualization consolidates servers to improve utilization and cost-
effectiveness; by maximizing the use of the existing resources, 
the existing hardware can be used more cost-effectively. This 
also enables an organization to decrease its carbon footprint. 
The environment and the organization both beneﬁt from lower 
energy consumption.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
A H I S T O R Y  O F  H O W W E G O T  T O  C L O U D C O M P U T I N G
◂
17
◼A major advantage of virtualization is that the infrastructure 
becomes more scalable. The existing hardware can have more 
virtualized instances added and dropped as needed. This is 
especially helpful when multiple users are sharing the same 
physical resource; this is discussed more in the next point.
◼Resource sharing often drives virtualization and makes it effec-
tive. The fact that multiple users can access the same physi-
cal resource and have it appear that each has his or her own 
resource makes virtualization attractive. Add to this the ability 
to charge a user by the amount of each resource consumed, 
and you have an effective business model.
◼Virtualization is normally autonomous and based on demand. 
A virtualized infrastructure in which you purchase the com-
puting resource (e.g., disk or compute power) will sense your 
usage and scale those resources as needed. As those resources 
are added or removed, the amount charged is adjusted. This 
represents a utility model, not unlike the local electric or tele-
phone utility that charges you for what you consume.
◼There are unique security issues in a virtualized environment 
that do not exist in a nonvirtualized infrastructure. For exam-
ple, in a nonvirtualized environment, each resource may map 
to one IP address; moving this same environment to a virtual-
ized infrastructure means that each physical resource may have 
many virtualized resources that it supports, each with its own 
IP address.
Today we see a mix of nonvirtualized environments, virtualized 
hardware, and virtualized desktop or application infrastructures 
implemented. To summarize: hardware virtualization mainly involves 
making one device appear like many copies of that same (or a similar) 
device. Desktop virtualization involves making one device (i.e., a server) 
deliver the entire desktop to multiple client devices simultaneously; 
application virtualization involves delivering a speciﬁc application 
or set of applications (over a web browser or through another client) 
to users. An example of each is shown in Figure 1.4. Desktop hardware 
in a virtualized environment can be less expensive, and centralizing 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Users
Users
Server 1
Server 3
Server 2
Server 4
NONVIRTUALIZED 
ENVIRONMENT
Each user working 
with each physical 
server
Users
Server 4
Server 3
Server 1
Server 2
VIRTUALIZED 
SERVER 
ENVIRONMENT
Each user working on 
the same physical 
server appearing as 
four individual 
servers
Users
NETWORK
VIRTUALIZED 
DESKTOP 
ENVIRONMENT
Each user having 
their entire desktop 
delivered over the 
network; processing 
occurs at the server
VIRTUALIZED 
APPLICATION 
ENVIRONMENT
Each user has 
applications delivered 
over the network; 
processing occurs at 
the server
NETWORK
NETWORK
NETWORK
Figure 1.4 Virtualized Server, Desktops, Application
18
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
A H I S T O R Y  O F  H O W W E G O T  T O  C L O U D C O M P U T I N G
◂
19
desktop and application delivery can make management of these 
resources easier and cheaper.
Cloud Computing
Cloud computing evolved from, and has been built on, the technolo-
gies discussed in this chapter. At the start of this chapter, a case was 
made that cloud computing is a new way to deliver IT and IS, and 
to do business; it is not just a technical orientation. Moving appli-
cations to a cloud rather than having them deployed on bare metal 
servers takes a decided approach that is fundamentally different and 
can require a change in an organization’s strategic orientation. This is 
especially true when an organization decides to move from delivering 
all information systems from its in-house technologies and staff to an 
external cloud vendor. The recent history of technological innovation 
has prepared us to deliver IT via the cloud through infrastructure-
as-a-service (IaaS), platform-as-a-service (PaaS), and software-as-a-
service (SaaS). These are discussed in Chapter 2.
CONCLUSION
Looking back over the changes in computing technologies during the 
last 60 or so years, it is easy to see how we arrived at cloud com-
puting. Functionalities that we think of today as commonplace—like 
OneClick shopping at Amazon.com, MyLowes at Lowes.com, and 
online credit authorization—were unheard of before the Internet, 
HTTP, the World Wide Web, and now cloud computing.
There are many versions of history, and the one presented here is 
based on the author’s own experience in the computing industry as 
well as some reference materials to assist with dates and other specif-
ics when the timeline might be blurred in his memory. This history 
is an accurate representation of how we got to cloud computing and 
what it took to get us there. Hardware, networking, data communica-
tions, and software architecture have evolved, and they have come 
together to bring us to where we are today: the delivery of IT and IS 
using a cloud computing approach. We are standing at a precipice: 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
20
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
cloud computing has emerged as the dominate way to deliver IT and 
IS when resource utilization structures must be managed.
Gone are the “ﬁeld of dreams” days when we built ICT with the 
hope that the users would ﬁnd a way for it to add value to the orga-
nization and its customers. Today we must ask what the objectives of 
an ICT project are, how the project can add value, and what resources 
the organization has to apply to that project.
Before we leave the discussion of how we evolved to cloud 
computing, it is appropriate to talk about how our current global 
economic crisis has affected that evolution. The recent ﬁscal crisis is 
a major socioeconomic force on technical developments that have 
pushed us to a greater source of elasticized value with new IT and IS 
delivery models like cloud computing. It has created a realization that 
businesses must be more aware of their own budgets and the effect 
of technology on them—in short, businesses need to ﬁnd more eco-
nomical ways to deliver IT and IS. Cloud computing is the next step in 
computing evolution and will be here to stay. As organizations move 
from traditional data centers to consuming cloud services, this new 
way to deliver IT will only become more prevalent.
The historical overview given in this chapter sets the stage for 
understanding how we got to where we are today, with cloud comput-
ing as the inevitable outgrowth of many factors. However, Chapter 1 
has only set the stage. That stage is necessary for understanding how 
and why cloud computing makes sense. The rest of this book will 
deﬁne cloud computing, deal with speciﬁc issues affected by cloud 
computing, and discuss the strategic implementation of cloud-based 
solutions. As pressure increases to deliver IT and IS in a way that 
supports business agility, it is more important than ever that IT and 
IS staff, managers, and the C-suite have the tools to understand and 
build what is expected. In addition, the growth of social and mobile 
technology adoption is adding information overload and creating a 
need for more IT and IS resources to run enterprises and build busi-
ness intelligence. This book introduces the strategy-oriented concepts 
and tools required to create cloud-based infrastructure that fulﬁlls the 
ICT value proposition and builds business intelligence.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
A H I S T O R Y  O F  H O W W E G O T  T O  C L O U D C O M P U T I N G
◂
21
NOTES
1. M. Wright, “The Planar IC: Revolution Underestimated,” Edn 51, no. 9 (2006): 38; 
and M. Wright, “Miniaturization Enables Innovation—Past, Present, and Future,” 
Edn 51, no. 20 (2006): 172–86, http://0-search.proquest.com.www.consuls.org/doc
view/222434808?accountid=9970.
2. “Moore’s Law Inspires Intel Innovation,” Intel, www.intel.com/content/www/us/
en/silicon-innovations/moores-law-technology.html.
3. “About,” DARPA, www.darpa.mil/About.aspx.
4. “Parc Today,” Parc, www.parc.com/about.
5. “Frequently Asked Questions,” World Wide Web Foundation, www.webfoundation
.org/faq.
6. E. Schoonover, “Wholesale Bandwidth Prices Stabilize,” Business Communications 
Review 36, no. 7 (2006): 14–17.
7. The perfect storm, in colloquial terms, is a set of circumstances that when brought 
together create the environment for a speciﬁc effect. The term is often used to 
describe weather patterns that come together to create the environment for a par-
ticularly strong storm. A business or ﬁnancial example is the use of the term for the 
recent global ﬁnancial crisis.
8. VMware, www.vmware.com/; and “Microsoft Hyper-V Server 2012,” Microsoft, 
www.microsoft.com/en-us/server-cloud/hyper-v-server/default.aspx.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
23
C H A P T E R 2
Characteristics
and Service 
Models*
C
loud computing means many things to many people. The Internet, 
its protocols, and its standards are the technical basis for cloud com-
puting, but the discussion must include the entire organization. 
In many ways, cloud computing is a technological occurrence, but as 
emphasized in Chapter 1, cloud computing is a new way of delivering 
IS and IT. Our historical review showed that cloud computing is the 
evolutionary product and convergence of many technologies, includ-
ing the Internet and its growth. In this chapter we will discuss an 
overview of the ﬁrst two dimensions of cloud computing: the essen-
tial characteristics and the service models. The third dimension, the 
deployment models, will be covered in Chapter 3.
The plain old telephone system (POTS) has been depicted as a 
cloud for many years because a person would pick up the phone and 
*Some of the material presented in this chapter has also appeared in M. Gendron, 
Business Driven Data Communications, ed. R. Horan (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson 
Education, 2013); and M. Gendron, “Deﬁning Cloud Architectures: What Attributes 
Should an Application or Service Have from the Business and Consumer Perspectives?”  
presented at the Athens Institute for Education and Research, Athens, Greece, 2012. 
These materials are reproduced by permission of the respective copyright holders.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
24
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
dial but not know what route the call would take to its destination. 
The Internet has the same quality: a user enters a web address with-
out knowing what route the data will follow from the user’s desktop 
computer to the server being contacted. This phenomenon is the basis 
for representing the Internet as a cloud symbol. The next evolutionary 
step, cloud computing, moves services from the data center, desktop, 
or other on-premises computers to a cloud. As in POTS, when things 
are moved to a cloud, where things reside and how connections are 
handled are unknown to the user.
The basic architecture and other characteristics of the cloud 
have evolved from a confusing mix of deﬁnitions and technical 
approaches to a current view that is much more stable and clear. 
Businesses can plan their infrastructures with more conﬁdence 
now that the different cloud computing approaches are reasonably 
sound. Organizations can focus on a detailed analysis of alterna-
tives, economic pros and cons, and issues of the ﬁt between technol-
ogy and business needs rather than on uncertainties about whether 
cloud computing is just a fad. Major industry and government 
organizations are settling on approaches and deﬁnitions that place 
cloud computing in a position to offer real solutions to real business 
problems. Part of that solution will be technology that will assist 
organizations of all kinds to deal with the explosive growth in IT 
infrastructure and data.
INTRODUCTORY CONCEPTS
In order to start the discussion of cloud computing dimensions, 
the stage needs to be set by reviewing some introductory concepts, 
including abstraction, hosted versus cloud applications, and LAN ver-
sus cloud applications. Understanding these things will help as we 
move into a discussion of the dimensions of cloud computing.
Layers of Abstraction
Cloud computing is deﬁned by layers of abstraction; businesses may 
not know the speciﬁc technologies that are employed in the cloud, 
but they know the service they want performed. An analogy would 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S  A N D  S E R V I C E  M O D E L S
◂
25
be a homeowner contracting for furnace repair; the homeowner may 
not know or care what brand of tools the repair person uses, but he 
or she needs to feel comfortable that the repairperson knows how 
to ﬁx the particular brand of furnace. The furnace repair is the ser-
vice being purchased, but the tools and other methods are abstract 
from the person who is requesting the repair service. The same is true 
of cloud computing. An organization may purchase a service from 
a cloud-based vendor, but the organization will probably not know 
much about the technology used by the vendor. All the organiza-
tion really cares about is whether the cloud vendor can deliver the 
requested service. (Some employees might want or need to know the 
technical details, but they are probably in the minority in your orga-
nization and among the technical staff.)
When purchasing services from a cloud vendor, the user does not 
necessarily know what technologies are driving the service that he 
or she is consuming. An organization signs a contract to purchase a 
service, such as shopping cart and credit card processing, but normally 
that contract does not include the speciﬁc technical details of the 
cloud infrastructure. The user consumes a service, possibly through 
some type of application program interface (API), and the service 
vendor communicates with the necessary underlying systems and 
databases to obtain the desired results—for example, a ﬁlled shopping 
cart and an authorized or declined credit card. The services are said to 
be abstract, as shown in Figure 2.1.
Hosted Applications versus Cloud Computing
What is the difference between hosted applications and cloud comput-
ing? Hosted applications have been around since the beginning of the 
Internet and are referred to as client-server computing. A client (e.g., a web 
browser or an e-mail client) is used to access the hosted application, giving 
the users access to remote servers. These hosted applications were rela-
tively easy for business and consumers to understand. As software clients 
evolved, the concepts of object-oriented programming—service-oriented 
architecture (SOA) and software-as-a-service (SaaS)—also evolved, thus 
making cloud computing applications and services more abstract. These 
concepts introduced a level of abstraction that has capitalized on Internet 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
26
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
protocols, allowing them to be combined in new and unique ways to 
offer many new services. This has also led to a lack of deﬁnition of cloud 
computing and some confusion in the marketplace.
Steve Ballmer, the chief executive ofﬁcer (CEO) of Microsoft, 
gave perhaps the best description of the different between hosted 
servers and cloud computing when he answered this question: Why 
have hosted servers not historically been called cloud computing? He 
postulated that hosted servers are not called cloud computing because 
they have not been restructured to include scaling, fault tolerance, 
geo-replication, and security in an environment where information is 
being shared across the cloud. He implied that the restructuring must 
occur because things are happening outside the ﬁrewall.1
Since Ballmer gave that explanation in 2008, it is safe to say that 
today we have seen much of this restructuring and the further deﬁni-
tion of cloud computing to include a number of essential characteris-
tics and service and deployment models.
Figure 2.1
Cloud Computing Abstraction—Shopping Cart and Credit Card Processing
Example
Users/Developers
Credit Card
Processing
Service
Bank
Legacy Internal
System
Service Interfaces (API)
Provided by Cloud Vendor
The user sees the service 
interfaces, the technology that 
lies behind them is abstract to
the user/developer.
Shopping Cart
Processing
Service
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S  A N D  S E R V I C E  M O D E L S
◂
27
Corporate LAN-Based versus Cloud-Based Applications
Let’s take the example of an application offered by a company’s data 
center to remote users over the Internet. It does not matter what the 
application is; it could be a web site, a payroll application, or some-
thing that supports another business process. In outward-facing cor-
porate LAN-based applications offered from the organization’s data 
center, the company must maintain an internal infrastructure with 
various servers, ﬁrewalls, and other technologies to create, enable, 
and support the application. The company must also have a connec-
tion to the Internet that allows remote users to access the applica-
tion. The organization must maintain the technology and the staff 
that supports it. This approach to offering the application to remote 
users is resource-intensive (i.e., it costs money).
What happens when this application is moved into the cloud? Can 
resource requirements be reduced and application uptime increased? 
Can the attributes of cloud computing cause the deployment and con-
tinued operation of that application to be cheaper, thus increasing 
return on investment (ROI) and decreasing total cost of ownership 
(TCO)? Answering those questions is the substance of this book.
Moving the corporate LAN-based application to the cloud yields 
both advantages and disadvantages. One advantage worth mention-
ing here (because it is the substance of much of the discussion of cloud 
computing) is that by purchasing the necessary services from one or 
more cloud vendors, an organization can reduce the local resources 
necessary for the deployment of that application. This decrease in 
resources (i.e., it costs less, at least initially, therefore there is less risk 
to the organization) potentially decreases the development or deploy-
ment time for new applications while also increasing innovation and 
experimentation. The organization can consume the resources it 
needs as the demand for the application changes and pay for only the 
resources it actually uses, potentially reducing the costs of application 
deployment. The change to ROI and TCO are so important that they 
are discussed in greater detail elsewhere in this book. Here a simpli-
ﬁed example is given.
Examples of a corporate LAN-based deployment and a cloud-
based deployment are shown in Figure 2.2. Two different designs are 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
28
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
shown for an application. The corporate LAN-based application runs 
on the corporate LAN and is offered to remote users over the Internet. 
The cloud-based application resides on the Internet (or on a public, 
private, or hybrid cloud), and the user accesses it directly over the 
Internet. Typically, the corporate LAN is greatly scaled back when 
applications are deployed to a cloud. The infrastructure necessary to 
maintain the application and associated services is obtained through 
cloud service providers, affecting ROI and TCO.
In any discussion of corporate-LAN installations and their con-
nection to cloud-based applications, response time should be consid-
ered. “With rising data volumes,” Larry Carvalho, principal consultant 
at Robust Cloud, explains, “Internet connectivity is not always ade-
quate for meeting the service level agreements that users have come 
to expect based on their experiences with in-house data centers. 
While the beneﬁts of using cloud infrastructure are very high, it [a 
cloud infrastructure] does not automatically come with a network 
capable of delivering the entire spectrum of advantages.”2 In those 
cases, an organization can avoid Internet connectivity and directly 
connect (e.g., with a T1 or T3 leased line purchased from a telecom-
munications carrier) to the cloud provider.
Geo
replication
Geo
replication
Application
Server
Application
Server
Database
Server
Database
Server
Load Balancing
Server
Load Balancing
Server
Security
Server
Security
Server
Remote
User
Remote
User
Remote
User
Remote
User
Remote
User
THE INTERNET
THE INTERNET
Corporate LAN
Corporate LAN-based Application
Cloud-based Application
Remote
User
Remote
User
Remote
User
Figure 2.2
Cloud versus Corporate LAN Applications
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S  A N D  S E R V I C E  M O D E L S
◂
29
There is crossover among corporate LAN, hosted, and cloud 
applications. In reality, these are not as discrete as presented here, 
but their presentation here allows the distinction among them to be 
understood. When implemented, the corporate LAN, hosted, and 
cloud applications are often used in concert to support the business 
processes of the enterprise.
A CLOUD IMPLEMENTATION
Before deﬁning cloud computing dimensions, we will look at 6waves’s 
implementation of cloud-based games on Facebook. This quote gives 
a perspective on cloud-based applications, and 6waves cloud imple-
mentation serves as a good reference example:
6waves, a venture-backed company, is the leading inter-
national publisher of gaming applications on the Facebook 
platform. Through partnerships with top developers, 
6waves aims to publish the next generation of social 
games to cover every genre, language, and platform. To 
date, we [6waves] have over 30 million monthly active 
players playing our games and applications, a number that 
continues to grow daily.3
This quote shows why many organizations move to the cloud. 
Global partnerships, a large elastic user base, and the need to cover 
every platform (some of which are still unknown), language, and 
genre are a few of the reasons that organizations move to cloud com-
puting—and they are all business reasons, not technology reasons.
6waves uses the following technologies to support its ICT value 
propositions and enable its gaming applications: Amazon’s Elastic 
Compute Cloud, Simple Storage Service, Elastic Block Store, and 
Elastic Load Balancing. Cosmos Tong, the system administrator for 
6waves, described in an interview how the services ﬁt into the com-
pany’s architecture. “As the games we publish are relatively indepen-
dent,” he said, “we group servers of different games into separate AWS 
[Amazon Web Services] accounts and use [Elastic Load Balancing] to 
set up load balancing and AWS security groups to control access.” 
He further stated that using AWS simpliﬁes the deployment of new 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
30
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
games. This saves 6waves time and money. An overview of the archi-
tecture is shown in Figure 2.3.
DEFINING CLOUD COMPUTING
Cloud computing can be deﬁned along three dimensions: (1) essen-
tial characteristics, (2) service models, and (3) deployment models. 
Dimensions one and two are discussed in this chapter, and the third 
dimension is addressed in Chapter 3.
Dimension One: Essential Characteristics
In 2008, Larry Ellison, the CEO of Oracle, said that cloud computing 
can be deﬁned as “everything we already do.” He added that cloud 
computing will just “change the wording on some of our ads.”4 Others 
have made similar comments, but the understanding and implemen-
tation of cloud computing has grown past the sound bites and buzz-
words. As we have proceeded to better understand cloud computing 
and provide deﬁnitions that businesses can appreciate, standardized 
Facebook
User
Facebook
User
Facebook
User
Facebook
User
Facebook
User
Amazon Elastic
Compte
Amazon Elastic
Block Storage
Amazon Simple
Storage Service
Amazon Elastic
Load Balancing
6Wave Development
Team
Figure 2.3
6waves Use of Cloud Computing
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S  A N D  S E R V I C E  M O D E L S
◂
31
deﬁnitions have emerged from organizations like the U.S. National 
Institute of Standards and Technology.
The substance of cloud computing has gone beyond the media 
hype. Cloud computing may be a term that repackages what the Internet 
has already enabled, but in reality the term has come to have an addi-
tional, and somewhat speciﬁc, meaning.
It is possible to look at cloud computing from a technical per-
spective. In 2009, the Object Modeling Group announced a collabo-
ration with leading technology standards development organizations 
to coordinate and communicate standards for cloud computing. The 
organizations that participated in this collaboration are the following: 
the Distributed Management Task Force, the Open Grid Forum, the 
Storage Networking Industry Association, Open Cloud Consortium, 
and the Cloud Security Alliance.”5
As a result, the Cloud Standards Wiki (www.cloud-standards.org)
was formed. This group has proposed a framework for the techni-
cal details of cloud computing. This is important work that creates 
technical standards to support the business model of cloud comput-
ing. However, beyond the technical frameworks, there are business 
and consumer dimensions. The deﬁnition given here includes those 
dimensions and is an amalgamation of the information proposed by 
Gartner, Microsoft’s Steve Ballmer, the National Institute of Standards 
and Technology, and others.
Cloud computing solutions are offered by many vendors; in fact, 
there is a large amount of confusion, or at least a lack of understanding, 
about what the term cloud computing really means. Even though the 
technologies that underlie cloud computing are normally standards-
based, cloud computing itself does not have any industry-ratiﬁed stan-
dards (e.g., by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers). 
The Object Modeling Group and others are working on this.
Gartner has highlighted the following ﬁve characteristics of cloud 
computing:
◼Service-based. Being service-based means that consumer 
concerns are abstracted from service provider concerns through 
interfaces that are well-deﬁned. In other words, the person 
using or buying the service is concerned not with how the ser-
vice is delivered (i.e., what speciﬁc technologies are used to 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
32
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
deliver the service) but rather with the correct functioning of 
the service. The interface to the service hides the implementa-
tion details and enables a completely automated response by 
the service provider to the consumer of the service. The service 
could be considered ready to use or “off the shelf” because the 
service is designed to serve the speciﬁc needs of a set of consum-
ers, and the technologies are tailored to that need rather than 
the service being tailored to how the technology works. The 
articulation of the service feature is based on service levels and 
ICT outcomes (e.g., availability, response time, performance 
versus price, clear and predeﬁned operational processes) rather 
than on technology and its capabilities. In summary, handling 
a business need (e.g., contract management solutions from 
companies like Sopima) is more important than how the tech-
nologies are used to ﬁll the need.
◼Scalable and elastic. The service can scale capacity up or 
down as consumer demands change and can do it at the maxi-
mum speed, which may be seconds for some services and 
hours for others. Scaling refers to a system or network ability 
to adapt and continue to provide services as demand changes. 
This change may be measured as an increase or decrease in the 
number of users, as calls to the service, or as some other change 
in demand. Scaling should occur gracefully, if not automati-
cally. In other words, the service should respond to changing 
demand by changing available resources. In an ideal situa-
tion, the user will not experience any slowdown as the service 
responds to the changing demand.
Elasticity is a trait of shared pools of resources, whereas 
scalability is a feature of the underlying infrastructure and soft-
ware platforms. Elasticity is associated not only with scale but 
also with an economic model that enables scaling in both direc-
tions—adding or removing resources as needed—in an auto-
mated fashion.
◼Shared resources. Services share a pool of resources (i.e., 
hardware, software, and communications equipment) to build 
economies of scale, maximizing efﬁcient deployment. The 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S  A N D  S E R V I C E  M O D E L S
◂
33
underlying infrastructure, software, and platforms are shared 
among the consumers of the service (usually unknown to the 
consumers), enabling unused resources to serve multiple needs 
for multiple consumers, with all working at the same time.
◼Metered by use. Service utilization metrics must be collected 
to enable resource allocation. Metered use can also enable 
multiple payment models. Those models can be used to create 
different pricing plans including pay as you go, subscriptions, 
ﬁxed plans, and even free plans. Payment plans must be based 
on usage, not on the cost of the equipment. The amount of the 
service used by the consumers can be measured in terms of 
hours, data transfers, or other use-based attributes.
◼Internet technologies. The service is delivered using Internet 
identiﬁers, formats, and protocols, such as URLs, HTTP, ISPs, 
and web-oriented architectures. Many examples of web tech-
nology exist as the foundation for Internet-based services. Some 
cloud-based examples include Google’s Gmail, Amazon’s book 
sales, eBay’s auctions, and Lolcats’s picture sharing. All of these 
examples use Internet and web technologies and protocols.6
Ballmer of Microsoft has indicated that in order to be considered 
cloud computing, vendors’ services should include three additional 
attributes:
◼Fault tolerance. Hardware or software failure is probably 
inevitable. A fault-tolerant system will adapt to failure and 
have sufﬁcient capacity and redundancy to respond to faults. 
The user will experience minimal interruption in service. 
Cloud-based services should offer fault tolerance to its users 
and developers so that (1) when hardware failure occurs, the 
service is automatically moved to other hardware, and (2) 
when software errors occur, the system either automatically 
corrects the error or does extensive reporting so the user can 
correct the error.
◼Geo-replication. Geo-replication is a way to improve response 
time and the user experience by distributing servers across a 
network geographically so the content is closer to the user. 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
34
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
It can also be used to provide backup and to allow orga-
nizations to run replicated data centers so the organiza-
tion can choose where to run applications based on the cost 
of doing so (e.g., the cost of electrical power). In a geo-rep-
licated system, content is replicated and kept up-to-date 
across a number of distributed servers. In cloud computing, 
it might mean having geo-replicated services that appear in 
every major country. However, it should be noted that with 
today’s fast network and Internet access (normally mea-
sured in milliseconds), geo-replication to attain a speed 
advantage is probably necessary only in the most speed-
sensitive applications (e.g., time-critical calculations that allow 
access to the International Space Station, or some types of con-
trolled nuclear experiments).
◼Security. Security exists at the physical and IS/IT levels. At 
the physical level, the data center and the assets used within it 
must be protected from intrusion and attempts at destruction. 
IS/IT technologies, policies, and safeguards must exist that pre-
vent unauthorized and/or malicious attempts to change data or 
interrupt the functioning of the system. IS/IT security includes 
computing and network security. Cloud computing must 
encompass both physical and IS security.7
These essential characteristics have been proposed by industry 
leaders concerned with deﬁning cloud computing and are an impor-
tant part of dimension one. In addition to the essential characteristics 
from noted industry experts, two more have been offered by the 
National Institute of Standards and Technology:
◼Broad network access. Services offered from a cloud vendor 
are available over a network and accessed through standard 
mechanisms (e.g., application program interfaces) that pro-
mote access through a thin or thick desktop client and/or a 
mobile device (e.g., tablet, mobile phone, laptop).
◼On-demand self-service. The service provider must allow the 
users to set up and change the services they purchase as they wish, 
without needing to know the underlying technologies and with-
out the direct intervention of the service provider.8 In addition to 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S  A N D  S E R V I C E  M O D E L S
◂
35
Internet
Technologies
REQUIRED
OPTIONAL/DESIRED
Shared
Resources
Scalable and Elastic 
Infrastructure
Fault
Tolerant
Services-
based
Broad Network 
Access
Metered Use,  with Pay As You Go
On-demand Self-service
Geo-replication
Security
Metered
Use
Figure 2.4
Cloud Essential Characteristics
the industry experts and government agency mentioned so far, 
there are also many standards bodies—such as the Institute of 
Electrical and Electronics Engineers, the Object Modeling Group, 
Cloud-Standards, and the International Telecommunication 
Union—involved in the discussion of the essential characteristics 
of cloud computing. All of these organizations have their place 
in creating a marketplace for cloud technology and are involved 
in setting standards that deﬁne both the underlying technologies 
of cloud computing and the business characteristics. Currently, 
cloud computing is rife with standards (e.g., TCP/IP, UDDI, REST, 
SOAP, and XML) that deﬁne the underlying technologies, but 
what is important is bringing to business some deﬁnitions that 
all can agree on.
The essential characteristics discussed previously are divided into 
those characteristics that are required and those that are optional or 
desired within a cloud implementation (see Figure 2.4):
◼Required for cloud computing
◼Internet technologies use. Technologies such as TCP/IP, 
HTTP, UDDI, REST, and SOAP are used.
◼Services-based. A service provider offers a set of services to 
be consumed.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
36
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
◼Scalable and elastic. The service offerings scale to the con-
sumer’s demand and are ﬂexible.
◼Shared resources. The service provider pools its resources, 
making that pooling transparent to the consumer of the 
services.
◼Fault tolerance. The infrastructure can detect and react to 
faults, both on a hardware and a software level.
◼Broad network access. Services are available over the net-
work and are accessible through a standardized interface 
(e.g., API).
◼Metered use. Utilization must be monitored in a cloud 
environment so that resource pools can be adjusted to 
accommodate user demand. That adjustment can be done 
automatically via the cloud itself (i.e., autonomously), or it 
can be done manually.
◼Optional/desired characteristics:
◼Metered use, with pay as you go. A private cloud may 
offer services to its local users without charge, but a public 
cloud service provider will provide scalable and elastic ser-
vices with metered use, which will be based on the resources 
consumed, and then charge based on that metered use. 
Metered use exists in the private cloud setting, but primarily 
to monitor utilization and adjust available resources; a charge 
is not common in the private cloud.
◼Geo-replication. Because of today’s fast network access, 
geo-replication is not needed very often, but when it is, the 
cloud infrastructure should provide it.
◼On-demand self-service. In many cases, the service pro-
vider may offer consumers the ability to set up and change 
service contracts themselves, but in other cases this may not be 
appropriate (e.g., a long-term contract for service provision-
ing, or cloud implementations in which resource allocation is 
under the control of someone else, like the IT department).
◼Security. Strong security is expected and essential in all 
cases, but in some settings (e.g., a LAN), security may not be 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S  A N D  S E R V I C E  M O D E L S
◂
37
Quicken
Sales Force
Google Apps
Redhat
Snaplogic
McAfee
Softchoice
Amazon Web 
Services
Microsoft
Azure
INFORMATION-
AS-A-SERVICE
APPLICATION-
AS-A-SERVICE
INTEGRATION-
AS-A-SERVICE
SECURITY-AS-
A-SERVICE
MANAGEMENT-
AS-A-SERVICE
TESTING-AS-A-
SERVICE
SaaS
PaaS
IaaS
STORAGE-
AS-A-
SERVICE
DATABASE-
AS-A-SERVICE
COMPUTE-
AS-A-
SERVICE
PLATFORM-AS-A-SERVICE
Service Model
Underlying
Services
Example
Providers
PROCESS-AS-A-SERVICE
NETWORK-
AS-A-
SERVICE
Figure 2.5
Service Delivery Models and Underlying Services
as strong or as necessary. Responsibility for all security is not 
automatically passed to cloud providers, and the consumer 
still must maintain an appropriate level of security (e.g., if a 
consumer wants to secure ﬁles placed on Dropbox, he or she 
should probably encrypt them before transfer).
The breakdown of essential characteristics into those that are 
required and those that are optional or desired is used as a frame-
work so that the characteristics can be easily understood. Any par-
ticular organization might break these down differently—that is okay, 
since the industry has not yet settled on what is required and what is 
optional/desired.
Dimension Two: Service Models
There is a considerable agreement about the service models used by 
cloud computing. Cloud computing service models refer to how ser-
vices are delivered to the user. Each delivery system has a number 
of underlying services that it offers, and these are made available by 
service providers in three ways: (1) infrastructure-as-a-service (IaaS), 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
38
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
(2) platform-as-a-service (PaaS), and (3) software-as-a-service (SaaS). 
Not all service providers offer all underlying services, but they do offer 
a combination of services to ﬁll a business need. Figure 2.5 shows the 
services that exist within the cloud grouped by service model. Note 
that this diagram is extensible as necessary to adapt to new service 
offerings.
Services are used by developers to create applications that solve 
business problems, and they are consumed by the users of these appli-
cations. These services might be used independently as a cloud-based 
application (e.g., Salesforce) or together to create several cloud-based 
applications. The user is normally unaware of where these services 
exist, but rather just knows that they are accessible. The list of ser-
vices given next is not exhaustive but rather representative of what 
is currently available. Undoubtedly, as soon as this service list is pub-
lished, some clever developer will envision new and innovative ways 
to implement technology that solves unrealized business problems.
The National Institute of Standards and Technology provides 
good deﬁnitions for service models.9 To those deﬁnitions we add a 
representative list of services.10 The list of service models and their 
underlying services are as follows:
◼Software-as-a-service. A SaaS provider offers the consumer 
the ability to use the provider’s applications running on the ser-
vice provider’s cloud infrastructure. The applications are acces-
sible from various client devices through either a thin interface 
(e.g., a web browser) or a program interface. The consumer 
does not manage or control the underlying cloud infrastruc-
ture (e.g., network, servers, operating systems, storage, or indi-
vidual application capabilities), with the possible exception of 
limited user-speciﬁc application conﬁguration settings. Some 
representative underlying services are the following:
◼Application-as-a-service. Any application that is delivered 
through a browser or specialized client to an end user’s PC. 
Salesforce falls into this category, and so do Google Apps, Google 
Docs, Google Calendar, and Gmail. Applications delivered as 
a service may use other services (e.g., storage, or computing) 
from their own private cloud or from another service provider.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S  A N D  S E R V I C E  M O D E L S
◂
39
◼Integration-as-a-service. The features traditionally found 
in enterprise application integration but delivered as a service. 
Cloud integration services are offered by companies such as 
SnapLogic, Boomi, and Cast Iron Systems. Integration-as-a-
service offers solutions and services that assist companies in 
their quest to integrate in-house and cloud-based solutions 
and may be referred to as a hybrid cloud. Cloud integrators 
provide consulting, training, and service solutions within 
vertical markets or horizontally across business processes.
◼Security-as-a-service. “Rather than acquiring your own 
security software tools and the technical expertise to admin-
ister them internally, you contract with security vendors to 
have a turnkey service of virus defense, ﬁrewall management, 
and e-mail ﬁltering. Outsourcing cyber security eliminates 
much of the labor and infrastructure, while still giving you the 
state of the art in anti-virus, ﬁrewall, and spam-ﬁghting tech-
nologies.”11 Virus defense, ﬁrewall, management, and e-mail 
ﬁltering is offered by vendors such as McAfee and Symantec, 
and services like identity management are offered through 
directory services such as Accenture (www.accenture.com).
◼Management-as-a-service. An on-demand service allows 
the management of other cloud services. Some examples 
include asset, topology, resource utilization, virtualization, 
uptime management, and governance systems. The company 
Softchoice offers IT asset management as a service.
◼Testing-as-a-service. The ability to test applications through 
cloud-delivered testing algorithms that can test web sites, 
applications, and other software that do not require an on-
premises footprint to carry out the testing. Hewlett-Packard 
offers quality management solutions that, according to the 
company, uses “a service model that accelerates the imple-
mentation of your quality center of excellence.”12
◼Information-as-a-service. Any cloud-based service that 
provides an application programming interface (API) or any 
other similar method that allows an application to consume 
information. Examples include providers that offer credit 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
40
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
card veriﬁcation. These providers will allow you to pass credit 
card details to them for veriﬁcation of the card number and 
the amount of purchase. Some service providers will also 
process the bank transactions necessary to secure funds from 
the bank issuing the credit card. Quicken is an example of 
this. In addition to many other credit card processing pro-
viders, numerous information providers offer information or 
services such as stock prices and address veriﬁcation.
◼Process-as-a-service. This supports business processes 
through combining other services to create meta-applications. 
The application at Salesforce (www.salesforce.com) deliv-
ers services over the cloud that supports the customer rela-
tionship management process of an organization. Salesforce 
offers the following applications: Sales Cloud, to support sales 
processes; Service Cloud, to support customer service pro-
cesses; Chatter, to support collaboration among colleagues in 
real time; and Force, as a cloud platform for custom applica-
tion development.
◼Platform-as-a-service. A PaaS service provider offers the con-
sumer the capability to deploy consumer-created or acquired 
applications onto the service provider’s cloud infrastructure. 
The consumer does not manage or control the underlying cloud 
infrastructure—including network, servers, operating systems, 
or storage—but has control over the deployed applications and 
possibly conﬁguration settings for the application-hosting envi-
ronment. PaaS is a subscriber-based service delivered to cus-
tomers. It typically includes application, interface, and database 
development, along with storage, testing, and other technolo-
gies. PaaS delivers its services from cloud-based hosted data 
centers, offering a cloud-based infrastructure to organizations 
so they can deploy their own applications. Those applications 
may consume the underlying services of other service provid-
ers. A few examples are:
◼Red Hat. Red Hat delivers PaaS solutions “that can be 
deployed or offered through a public or private cloud to build, 
deploy and manage applications across their lifecycle.”13
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S  A N D  S E R V I C E  M O D E L S
◂
41
◼Microsoft Azure. The Microsoft Azure platform offers 
Windows-based tools and resources to an organization so it 
can deploy its applications on the Azure cloud infrastructure 
and deliver them over the Internet.
◼Heroku. Heroku provides PaaS for Ruby on Rails, Node.JS, 
Clojure, Java, Python, and Scala.
◼Engine Yard. Engine Yard delivers PaaS that supports Ruby 
on Rails, PHP, and Node.JS.
◼Infrastructure-as-a-service. An IaaS service provider offers 
the consumer the capability of provision processing, storage, 
networks, and other fundamental computing resources in 
which the consumer is able to deploy and run software, which 
can include operating systems and applications. The consumer 
does not manage or control the underlying cloud infrastructure 
but has control over the operating systems and deployed appli-
cations and possibly limited control of select networking com-
ponents (e.g., host ﬁrewalls). IaaS is delivered in two ways:
◼As an off-site hosting arrangement. However, some people 
do not see that as true cloud computing, since it is really just 
housing the equipment in someone else’s data center. This 
arrangement refers to actually providing data-center-as-a-
service. The difference between this approach and the one 
described next is that rather than having a service exposed 
for the consumer to use, the consumer will place the servers 
in someone else’s data center and connect to the infrastruc-
ture. The data center’s infrastructure will then attach to the 
Internet. This service is often referred to as dedicated hosting,
and companies such as Lunarpages and Go Daddy offer these 
dedicated solutions.
◼In a service model, like other services described in this chap-
ter, in which the user is not familiar with the underlying 
technologies, but rather just the interfaces to the services 
being offered. Some examples are:
◼Storage-as-a-service. Also known as disk on demand,
this is the ability to utilize storage that physically exists 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
42
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
at remote locations but logically appears as local storage 
to any application that requires it. Storage-as-a-service is 
a low-level cloud computing service often consumed by 
other services in this list. Amazon S3 is a cloud-based stor-
age service that is available to web sites and other appli-
cations to provide remote storage. Storage-as-a-service 
is economical for the consumer because the initial capi-
tal expenses and the ongoing operational expenses are 
borne by the provider. The consumer pays for the stor-
age used and the transactions that store and retrieve data. 
For example, the products Dropbox and AllwaySync use 
Amazon S3 to allow consumers to store data in the cloud 
and retrieve it at will.
◼Database-as-a-service. This allows developers and con-
sumers to use the database services of a provider on a 
pay-as-you-go basis rather than incurring up-front capi-
tal expenses. Database-as-a-service providers frequently 
offer a number of different database management systems 
(DBMS) so the application can utilize the one that best ﬁts. 
The same service provider might offer MS-SQL, MYSQL, 
and Oracle. It is possible that database-as-a-service provid-
ers will offer the DBMS and either offer the storage them-
selves or use a storage-as-a-service provider. For example, 
Amazon’s offering of its relational database service pro-
vides a MYSQL DBMS stored in the Amazon cloud using 
Amazon S3 (a storage-as-a-service offering).
◼Compute-as-a-service. In this service, the provider 
allows the user to have computing power on demand 
within the service provider’s infrastructure. The key to 
successful computing-as-a-service is scalability (the abil-
ity to change computing power as the need for it changes) 
and elasticity (scalability with an economic model that 
enables an increase or a decrease of computer services). 
In addition, the service should scale autonomously by 
changing computing power as an application or an orga-
nization requires. Many service providers sell this service, 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S  A N D  S E R V I C E  M O D E L S
◂
43
including major providers like Amazon Web Services 
and AT&T.
◼Network-as-a-service. This provides functionalities 
to network users or the network itself. The function-
alities help the network work well and provide things 
like domain name resolution (e.g., changing a name like 
www.gendron.info to 205.144.171.13) and Dynamic 
Host Conﬁguration Protocol (DHCP), which allows client 
computers in a LAN to request certain protocol param-
eters that allow them to connect. Other things on a 
LAN—like e-mail, printing, and ﬁle sharing—can also be 
network-as-a-service.
These service models (IaaS, Paas, and SaaS) and their underlying 
services are used to develop or deploy applications. This list of ser-
vices is a good starting place for businesses and consumers to under-
stand what is offered within the service models. The discussion in 
this section has given examples of the types, breadth, and depth of 
services that are offered. By using cloud-based services individually 
or combining them in unique and innovative ways, the organization 
can build robust applications at relatively low initial cost to enhance 
an organization’s competitive positioning and deliver value.
Dimension Three: Deployment Models
The National Institute of Standards and Technology has developed a 
widely accepted set of deployment models for cloud computing envi-
ronments. These are:
◼Private cloud
◼Public cloud
◼Hybrid cloud
◼Community cloud
Each cloud has a number of services that are available to 
users through a service contract over the Internet. These deployment 
models are covered in Chapter 3.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
44
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
CONCLUSION
In this chapter we reviewed the dimensions of cloud computing:
◼Dimension one: essential characteristics
◼Dimension two: service models
◼Dimension three: deployment models
A thorough treatment of essential characteristics and service mod-
els was given in this chapter, and so was an introduction to deploy-
ment models. Essential characteristics and service models form the 
basis for understanding cloud computing deployment model, which 
are more fully discussed in the next chapter.
The essential characteristics and services models are what differ-
entiate true cloud computing environments from the commonplace 
usage of calling the Internet the cloud. In common parlance, “the 
cloud” has become anything that can be accessed remotely via 
the Internet. However, true cloud computing deployments must 
have the essential characteristics and service models discussed in this 
chapter and the deployment models discussed in the next one.
It gets confusing. We call the Internet the cloud, and vendors like 
Western Digital have their new My Cloud14 product. Many products 
and services are accessible over the Internet, and they all appear as 
cloud computing. However, for those in business, it is important to 
understand and distinguish between “cloud” and “cloud computing.” 
Devices and services available as “cloud” are often useful to solve 
business problems, but they could be different than “cloud computing.” 
This chapter and Chapter 3 make the deﬁnition of cloud computing
clear. Undoubtedly, we will continue to call many things cloud. That is 
okay, but if you are managing a technical project or making decisions 
about cloud resource expenditures, it is important to know the differ-
ence between cloud and cloud computing because of the cost, resources, 
and skills necessary to maximize your organization’s investment in 
these technologies.
NOTES
1. Steve Ballmer, Steve Ballmer on Cloud Computing [video], September 29, 2009, http://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=ODE8-D-ABb0 (video is no longer available).
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S  A N D  S E R V I C E  M O D E L S
◂
45
2. Larry Carvalho, How Direct-Access Solutions Can Speed Up Cloud Adoption (Gigaom Pro 
and Equinix, 2012).
3. Amazon Web Services, “AWS Case Study: 6 Waves Limited,” 2011, http://aws
.amazon.com/solutions/case-studies/6waves.
4. Larry Ellison, Larry Ellison—What The Hell Is Cloud Computing? [video], Septembet 25, 
2008, www.youtube.com/watch?v=0FacYAI6DY0.
5. Object Modeling Group, “Major Standards Organizations Collaborate to Further 
Adoption of Cloud Standards,” 2009, www.omg.org/news/releases/pr2009/07-13-
09.htm.
6. Gartner, “Gartner Highlights Five Attributes of Cloud Computing,” June 23, 2009, 
http://www.gartner.com/it/page.jsp?id=1035013.
7. Ballmer, Steve Ballmer on Cloud Computing [video].
8. National Institute of Standards and Technology, The NIST Deﬁnition of Cloud Computing,
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-145/SP800-145.pdf.
9. Ibid.
10. David Linthicum, Cloud Computing and SOA Convergence in Your Enterprise: A Step-
by-Step Guide. (Boston: Addison-Wesley, 2010). Many of the underlying services 
were originally identiﬁed by Linthicum and have been expanded or adapted for use 
in this list.
11. McAfee, “Security-as-a-Service,” 2012, www.mcafee.com/us/products/security-as-
a-service/index.aspx.
12. Hewlett-Packard Development Company, “HP Testing-as-a-Service,” 2013, 
www8.hp.com/us/en/software-solutions/software.html?compURI=1173731#
.Un_GxOKmbQM.
13. Red Hat, “Platform-as-a-Service Solutions,” 2013, www.redhat.com/open-hybrid
-cloud/paas.
14. WD, “My Cloud,” 2013, www.wd.com/en/products/products.aspx?id=1140.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
47
C H A P T E R 3
Deployment
Models
T
he IT/IS landscape is changing. For many years we deployed IT/
IS in the local data center and on the user desktop. However, we 
have seen vast evolutionary changes in how IT is delivered to 
users. Some say that we are returning to the way of the mainframe, 
where all of the processing is occurring in the data center and the 
user has a dumb terminal on his or her desk that does not do much 
more than display the results that a mainframe spews out. That is 
simply not true. We are doing much of the processing in locations 
other than the desktop; large transaction processing systems like book 
buying at Amazon or large database systems like the management 
of customer relationships at Salesforce are doing the processing, and 
they are delivering their results to the user to display. Following are 
some major differences between mainframe and cloud processing:
◼The digital connection that organizations have to other users 
and services from cloud providers that is enabled by the 
Internet.
◼The shared processing that occurs between the desktop and the 
cloud provider.
◼Changes in deployment of IT that affect the cost structure of 
operational and capital expenses (this might have the greatest 
effect on innovation and deployment).
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
48
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
Throughout this book, the terms a cloud and the cloud are used 
somewhat interchangeably. That is a bit at odds to what is often dis-
cussed in marketing literature as “moving to the cloud.” That phrase is 
a bit of a misnomer, but it sometimes makes sense in context. There 
is really not one cloud, although the Internet has been envisioned as 
such; organizations create their own public, private or hybrid clouds 
in a SaaS, a PaaS, or an IaaS service model, or they buy services from 
a cloud computing provider.
Another major change largely enabled by cloud computing is 
that applications are being designed and delivered at a pace that was 
unknown in the past. Time to market is critical for technology at 
the forefront of innovations and entrepreneurial efforts. All of these 
issues are occurring in the context of cloud computing. Clouds enable 
the developer to capitalize on connection, shared processing, accessi-
bility to an array of cloud service providers, and the ability to develop 
and deploy applications rapidly. Those applications are deployed in 
clouds in these ways:
◼Public cloud. The public cloud infrastructure is provisioned for 
open use by the general public. It may be owned, managed, or 
operated by a business, academic, or government organization or a 
combination of them. It exists on the premises of the cloud pro-
vider and is accessible over the Internet. Usage will be monitored 
by the cloud provider (metered use), and that will drive an eco-
nomic model that ranges from free to pay as you go.
◼Private cloud. In a private cloud, infrastructure is provisioned 
for exclusive use by a single organization comprising multiple 
consumers (e.g., business units). It may be owned, managed, or 
operated by the organization, a third party, or a combination of 
them, and it may exist on- or off-premises.
◼Hybrid cloud. The hybrid cloud infrastructure is a combina-
tion of public and private clouds. It is composed of two or more 
distinct cloud infrastructures (private or public) that remain 
unique entities but are bound together by standardized or pro-
prietary technology that enables data and application portabil-
ity (e.g., cloud bursting for load balancing between clouds).
These three deployment models form the basis of dimension 
three. There is a fair amount of overlap among these deﬁnitions, and 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
D E P L O Y M E N T  M O D E L S
◂
49
the differences are largely a matter of purpose (deployed for one orga-
nization or shared among many) rather than any other substantive 
variability. The interplay of public, private, and hybrid deployment 
models are shown in Figure 3.1.
Another type of cloud is the community cloud. This is provisioned 
for exclusive use by a speciﬁc community of consumers from organi-
zations that have shared interests or concerns (e.g., mission, security 
requirements, policy, or compliance considerations). A community 
cloud is built using public, private, or hybrid clouds. It may be owned, 
managed, or operated by one or more of the organizations in the 
community, a third party, or a combination of them, and it may exist 
on- or off-premises. Public, private, hybrid, and community clouds 
are discussed in more detail later.
IMPORTANT CONSIDERATIONS
The shift from traditional IT deployment to a cloud-based infrastruc-
ture requires substantial thought. To make the switch, the organiza-
tion’s IT department must shift its focus from assembling hardware 
components and building and installing software to establishing a 
scalable infrastructure of resources that internal users can consume. 
The effect this will have on your IT department and other staff must 
Figure 3.1
Cloud Computing Core Deployment Models
Service
Service
Service
Service
Service
Service
Service
Private
Cloud
Hybrid
Cloud
Public
Cloud
User
User
User
User
User
User
User
User
Service
Service
The Internet
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
50
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
be considered as your organization moves from a traditional LAN 
infrastructure to a cloud-based infrastructure. Some of the major con-
siderations are as follows:
◼OPEX vs. CAPEX. From an accounting perspective, when tech-
nology is purchased, it is normally capitalized, then expensed 
across its lifetime. This is referred to as a capital expense, or CAPEX. 
When services are purchased by an organization, they are nor-
mally considered an operational expense, or OPEX. Moving to the 
cloud will affect OPEX and CAPEX as well as the organization’s 
balance sheet and income statement. An example of this is covered 
in Chapter 4, along with other measures of ﬁnancial effects that 
must be considered when moving to a cloud-based infrastructure.
◼Personnel readiness in the IT department. Moving to a 
cloud-based infrastructure that delivers services to users may 
require a new skill set in the IT department. This may mean 
additional IT staff training and staff unavailability for other 
projects during that training. The existing infrastructure is 
often bare metal and often does not support the cloud attri-
butes discussed in Chapter 2. (Bare metal refers to operating sys-
tems being installed directly on the hardware; one instance of 
the operating system is installed per device [e.g., server or PC]. 
Compare this to virtualized environments. Moving from a 
bare metal environment to one in which multiple instances 
of operating systems, desktops, or applications share the same 
device may require the development of new skills within the IT 
department. The cloud approach can deliver economies of scale 
for your organization, but only with properly trained staff. This 
topic is more thoroughly covered in Chapter 6.)
◼Infrastructure adequacy. The current infrastructure of your 
organization may not be robust enough to handle the increased 
demand that cloud computing brings. That demand may come 
in the form of increased utilization of IT resources caused by 
organizational (or even the IT) staff ﬁnding new and innova-
tive ways to use technology, or an increased need for band-
width. Whatever the reason, the existing infrastructure will 
undoubtedly have to be enhanced to support the increased 
demand. With proper implementation, moving to a cloud-based 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
D E P L O Y M E N T  M O D E L S
◂
51
infrastructure will enhance the distribution of IT services, inno-
vation, time to market, and responsiveness to organizational 
and customer technology needs.
◼General staff knowledge. Your organization’s staff has prob-
ably been accustomed to requesting services from the current 
IT department. When requesting those services, the staff is 
also probably accustomed to it taking a long time and requir-
ing substantial justiﬁcation for new infrastructure. Moving to 
the cloud changes much of that, and with proper implementa-
tion and training, the staff can self-serve new IT services on 
demand. That change means that the staff can be more agile 
in its use of technology and potentially respond to customer 
demand more quickly. This new ability may result in substan-
tial innovation by the staff, but it may also mean that the staff 
needs training on the new abilities. General staff knowledge 
may have to be enhanced so the organization can maximally 
beneﬁt from a cloud computing implementation.
◼Service level considerations. When using external cloud 
providers, it is customary to have a service level agreement 
(SLA). It may be negotiated (i.e., a custom agreement between 
your organization and the provider that states what happens 
when a service is not provided as agreed) or standardized (e.g., 
you just signed up for an account on a cloud provider, such 
as Amazon Web Services, and you click okay to its terms and 
conditions). Whatever the agreement, your organization has 
expectations in order to meet the needs of its customers, but 
the reality is that your organization has relinquished control to 
another company—the cloud provider. It is important that your 
organization have an alternate plan in case the cloud provider 
does not deliver. This topic is so important that it is covered 
in detail in Chapter 5.
◼Core business functions versus innovation. When deploy-
ing a cloud infrastructure, an organization should consider two 
types of implementations: business IT cloud and user IT cloud. 
This can be by policy or actually separate clouds, but is often 
built from shared resources (see Figure 3.2).1 Business IT cloud 
supports the organization’s core business functions, and user 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
User
User
User
User
Business IT
Provides Core
Business Functions 
and is managed by 
speciﬁc business unit
(perhaps your IT
Department)
User  IT
Provides services that 
business users  can 
deploy themselves to 
support innovation 
Business and User Clouds 
Hardware and
Software that Creates the
Cloud Environment
(Possibly Shared)
Figure 3.2
Business and User IT Clouds
52
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
D E P L O Y M E N T  M O D E L S
◂
53
IT cloud provides cloud services to users that they can control 
and deploy IT as needed (see Table 3.1). These can be divided 
as follows:
◼Business IT cloud—core business functions. There should 
be a business unit within your organization (e.g., the IT depart-
ment) that is responsible for the organization’s core IT busi-
ness services. The monitoring and support for these services 
will occur with the responsible business unit. The necessary 
services may include the organization’s web site, an enterprise 
resource planning system, or other software to support the 
organization’s core business functions.
◼User IT cloud—where innovation occurs. The other 
type of implementation that should be available will sup-
port users in their creative processes and innovation. 
This cloud will be maintained by a business unit within 
the organization (probably the IT department) but should 
be under the user’s control. It may take a more sophis-
ticated user than the traditional ofﬁce worker to utilize 
these cloud services, but the user cloud should be in place 
to support increased innovation. This is a major consider-
ation when hiring new employees; their ability to inno-
vate using available technologies within your organization 
should be considered, for both technical and nontechnical 
positions.
Table 3.1
Integrated Clouds: The Business Cloud and the User Cloud
Business Cloud
User Cloud
Supports core business functions
Supports innovation and rapid deployment 
of applications
Is maintained by business unit to ensure 
that services are available to support core 
business functions
Is maintained by business unit to ensure 
that services are available to support 
innovation by users and rapid deployment 
of new applications
Is under business unit control
Is under user control
Based on http://assets.cio.com/documents/cache/pdfs/privatecloud.pdf.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
54
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE CLOUDS
Public and private clouds form the basis for cloud computing. Hybrid 
and community clouds (discussed later in this chapter) are built on 
private or public clouds. Public and private clouds are technically iden-
tical, except that the public cloud is provisioned for multiple organiza-
tions to share infrastructure, whereas a private cloud is deployed for 
one organization. Both types of clouds share the same essential char-
acteristics and service models. A major difference is that unless there 
is a charge-back arrangement in your organization, private clouds do 
not normally enforce pay-as-you-go billing.
Clouds are accessed much like a utility (e.g., electricity or tele-
phone). Consider what happens when placing a phone call outside 
your organization: You typically need to dial a number (e.g., 9) to 
access the public phone utility, and then you dial the phone number 
of the person you are trying to reach. Compare that with placing a 
phone call within your own organization: You dial an extension and 
are connected to a coworker using your own private phone system. 
Both connections allow a conversation, but one uses a public utility 
and the other uses a private utility.
Cloud computing is much like the phone system example. 
Accessing the public phone utility is much like the public cloud, and 
accessing the private phone system is much like the private cloud. 
Users can consume services in the public cloud and be billed for what 
they use, or they can operate a private cloud that offers services to its 
business units. Where they are located (on-premises or off-premises) 
is irrelevant.
Although this may be redundant, it is important that we summa-
rize the differences between public and private clouds. Public clouds 
operate in a service delivery fashion like private clouds, but there are 
a few big differences:
◼The public cloud will be a shared resource in which multiple 
users deploy their applications on the same infrastructure (i.e., 
multitenant). The applications are separate (i.e., secure from 
one another), but they share the same infrastructure, promot-
ing economies of scale.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
D E P L O Y M E N T  M O D E L S
◂
55
◼The public cloud will have metered use and payment by an 
economic model tied to that metered use. The economic model 
extends from “freeconomics” to premium. The private cloud 
will have metered use so that utilization can be monitored and 
infrastructure adjusted to support that utilization, but it will 
not normally have an associated payment model.
◼Location is irrelevant. It is possible to have a private cloud that 
is located on someone else’s infrastructure and have a dedi-
cated carrier circuit (e.g., a leased line) to that private cloud.
Amazon Web Services is a good example of a public cloud. 
It offers IaaS that allows the users to consume services-on-demand 
like storage, database, or computing. The consumer is billed based 
on the amount of resources consumed. Amazon’s economic model 
requires the users to pay for all the services they consume after a brief 
free period.
Sharing infrastructure gives economies of scale that allow cloud 
providers to charge less for the same usage than what a bare metal 
approach might cost. Normally, you can see dramatic changes to 
CAPEX and OPEX when moving an application from a non-cloud 
infrastructure to a public cloud. This might result in it being less 
expensive (and therefore less risky) for an organization to deploy new 
applications, and it therefore might increase innovation.
EXAMPLES OF CLOUD COMPUTING
Public and private clouds provide all of the service models: IaaS, 
PaaS, and SaaS. Following are examples of organizations that have 
deployed each.
An IaaS Example: Netﬂix Moves to Amazon
Web Services
IaaS provides a set of services on which users can run their operat-
ing systems, development environments, and applications. It can be a 
public or private cloud. What deﬁnes it is its ability to provide services 
that can be conﬁgured to develop or deploy applications.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
56
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
Netﬂix was founded in 1997 to provide movies on DVD through 
the regular mail to customers’ homes. The customers are allowed 
to use Netﬂix’s web site to browse the selection of movies and set 
up a personal queue for the movies they desire to have shipped to 
them. The movies in a customer’s personal queue are automatically 
shipped according to a schedule and corresponding fee chosen by the 
customer.
In January 2007, Netﬂix began offering subscribers the option of 
instantly watching movies on their PC. According to a press release 
by Netﬂix, “The introduction marks an important enhancement to 
the Netﬂix service. Subscribers will continue to receive DVDs by mail 
from the company’s market-leading catalog of over 70,000 titles and 
will have the additional option of instantly watching about 1,000 
movies and TV series on their PCs.”2 Other press releases announced 
that Netﬂix streaming services would be available on the Xbox 360 
(November 2008), Sony Bravia TV and Blu-Ray Disc Player (November 
2009), Playstation3 (November 2009), the iPad (April 2010), and the 
iPhone and iPod (August 2010). As device manufacturers adopted 
the Netﬂix streaming service, Netﬂix saw the need for a more agile 
and resilient infrastructure.
Netﬂix’s move to cloud computing was largely motivated by Netﬂix 
wanting to do what it does best, which it realized was not running 
data centers. Yuri Izrailevsky, the vice president of Cloud and Platform 
Engineering for Netﬂix, put it this way: Netﬂix must be good at many 
things, including content, personalization, device penetration, cus-
tomer service, and user interfaces. Netﬂix understood that operating 
a data center is not something it had to be good at. Izrailevsky added 
that “in fact, [running data centers is] a distraction for us.”3
Some of the other attributes of cloud computing that made it 
attractive for Netﬂix are the following:
◼Fault tolerance. Netﬂix realized that it needed a more 
fault-tolerant system than it currently owned. It saw Amazon 
Web Services as a clear leader in the cloud space and believed 
that Amazon had the capacity to support Netﬂix now and as 
it grew.
◼Increased innovation. In 2009, some of the Netﬂix soft-
ware moved to the Amazon cloud, and in 2010 the streaming 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
D E P L O Y M E N T  M O D E L S
◂
57
services moved there. This allowed Netﬂix to be innovative 
while attempting development in the cloud environment 
before making a full commitment to it.
◼Metered use, economics, and scalability. A critical compo-
nent of the decision to move to the Amazon cloud was the scal-
ability it offered: As the demand for resources changed (i.e., the 
demand for streaming movies, causing more or less infrastruc-
ture to be needed), the Amazon cloud could respond to those 
changes. Netﬂix was responsible only for the marginal cost of 
consumption and did not need to deploy or pay for infrastruc-
ture that might not be used.
◼Focus on core competencies. Netﬂix could concentrate on 
its core competencies and leave the running of the ICT infra-
structure, including data centers, to the experts in that area, 
Amazon.
The balance between CAPEX and OPEX was affected by the 
Netﬂix move to the Amazon cloud. Netﬂix was left with application 
development on an IaaS platform, but it did not have to manage the 
data centers that supported those applications. The move from an on-
premises infrastructure to a public cloud seems to be serving Netﬂix 
well. The Amazon Web Services cloud provides multiple services that 
allow Netﬂix to concentrate on its core competencies rather than 
managing data centers.
A PaaS Example: Sopima Moves to Microsoft Azure
PaaS provides a development and operating environment built around 
a speciﬁc operating platform. It can be a public or private cloud. What 
deﬁnes it is its ability to provide a uniﬁed development or deployment 
platform that can be conﬁgured to meet the user’s needs.
There are many PaaS providers. This example is based on 
Microsoft Azure. Here are some of the major considerations when 
deciding whether to move to an external PaaS platform:
◼The technologies supported by the PaaS provider.
◼How a PaaS implementation will affect time to market and 
innovation.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
58
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
◼Whether developing an application totally in-house or using 
cloud services makes sense (e.g., in terms of economics, staff, 
or training).
◼The effect on CAPEX and OPEX.
◼The type, sophistication, and service level required to support 
the application, and whether the PaaS provider can meet those 
needs.
Along with these considerations, the decision must be driven by orga-
nizational needs and the needs of the customers.
Sopima, a Finnish software company, used Azure to create an 
online contract bank. Sopima provides online cloud-based contract 
management solutions throughout the contract life cycle. Sopima’s 
support for the contract life cycle includes business development, 
administrative, production, and customer contracts. Sopima provides 
the following services:
◼Drafting the initial contract
◼Handling the negotiation of contract terms
◼Managing the acceptance and signing of contract
◼Handling the initial execution and follow-up
◼Providing ongoing analysis, reporting, and alerts
◼Managing renewal and termination of contracts
Sopima wanted to provide global online-accessible contract man-
agement tools but did not have an IT staff or infrastructure to provide 
this service, so it turned to the Microsoft Azure platform. Markus Mikola, 
a partner in Sopima, has stated that “as a small company in a time of 
recession, we [Sopima] have built a global solution with minimal invest-
ment. If we hadn’t used the Windows Azure platform, we wouldn’t 
have been able to launch this service [Sopima’s contract solution] at 
all.”4 In other words, Sopima might not have been able to surmount the 
barriers to entry (e.g., the necessary talent or the cost of building the 
necessary infrastructure). Those barriers might have prevented Sopima 
from building and launching a globally accessible service.
Sopima evaluated a number of cloud service vendors and in 
March 2009 selected the Microsoft Windows Azure platform. Sopima 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
D E P L O Y M E N T  M O D E L S
◂
59
did not want to administer individual parts of service-based products 
purchased from different vendors but rather wanted a PaaS approach 
that moved all ICT administration to a single vendor on a pay-as-you-
go basis. Sopima could have used an IaaS approach and implemented 
in the Amazon Web Services cloud or a SaaS approach like Google 
Apps, but in Sopima’s opinion, “neither provided the full-scale plat-
form and service management capabilities that the company [Sopima] 
was looking for.”5 After analyzing its needs and the services offered by 
various cloud vendors, Sopima chose a PaaS approach and decided to 
develop its application on Microsoft Azure.
Sopima uses Microsoft SQL Azure, a cloud-based relational data-
base platform built on Microsoft SQL server technologies, to manage 
contracts and contract information. Using SQL Azure, Sopima stores 
all deadline and project milestone reminders for users involved in the 
contract creation process. As part of the Windows Azure platform, 
SQL Azure provides automated management capabilities, including 
built-in data protection, self-healing, and disaster recovery—features 
that Sopima’s management found crucial for safeguarding customers’ 
data. “SQL Azure relieves Sopima of the database management aspect, 
which would otherwise require a huge investment of resources. Antti 
Makkonen, research and development leader at Sopima, estimates 
that they would have had to spend approximately $20,000 annu-
ally in server licensing and pay several support salaries amounting to 
roughly $300,000 in savings.”6 The selected PaaS approach thus saved 
Sopima substantial money.
A SaaS Example: Dunkin’ Donuts Uses Salesforce
SaaS provides the greatest amount of abstraction for the user because 
the applications are exposed to the user through a web site or a set 
of application program interfaces (API). The user can conﬁgure and 
combine the services to meet business needs but cannot directly 
deploy applications on the SaaS provider infrastructure.
In its most direct form, a SaaS application is delivered to 
the user via a web browser. There are many examples of SaaS 
applications—e-mail, social networking, picture sharing, and even 
business applications like customer relationship management—that 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
60
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
can be consumed with a normal web browser. SaaS services were dis-
cussed in Chapter 2. Our example here reviews the American coffee 
and doughnut chain Dunkin’ Donuts and its SaaS usage.
Dunkin’ Donuts has a Facebook fan base that is roughly the size 
of Hong Kong. It uses social media like Facebook and Twitter to con-
nect to its customers and to become part of their everyday lives. John 
Costello, the chief marketing ofﬁcer of Dunkin’ Donuts, explained 
that “being social is not just about winning fans and inﬂuencing 
followers. It’s about sharing content that inspires our customers 
and their friends, giving them the opportunity to engage with us.”7
Dunkin’ Donuts uses social media and Salesforce, both cloud services, 
to manage customer information and become part of social network 
conversations about its products. Being involved in these conversa-
tions helps Dunkin’ Donuts build brand loyalty.
With an estimated 7 million followers subscribed on Facebook 
alone, Dunkin’ Donuts decided to utilize Salesforce to provide a way 
to manage its customer relationships. Dunkin’ Donuts uses the fol-
lowing Salesforce products:
◼Sales cloud. This is a tool kit that allows an organization to 
manage social accounts like Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, and 
LinkedIn within the Salesforce service. Using this tool, the 
organization can manage information from fans who follow it 
on its social sites as well as manage the information the organi-
zation drives to social media sites.
◼Marketing cloud. This service aids the organization in its social 
marketing and provides Radian6, a social listening platform.
◼Salesforce platform. This platform brings together the vari-
ous services of Salesforce so the organization can build applica-
tions, share and store data, and deliver web sites quickly.
Dunkin’ Donuts uses the SaaS offerings of Salesforce to support 
its uniﬁed social media approach.
PRIVATE CLOUDS IN CONTEXT
For many organizations, the journey into cloud computing begins with 
a private cloud. That infrastructure provides a way for an organization to 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
D E P L O Y M E N T  M O D E L S
◂
61
standardize its business processes and deliver them as a service to 
their users. It also provides a new way to manage infrastructure 
so that resources are pooled, allowing resource allocation in a mat-
ter of hours rather than days or weeks and making the delivery of 
information systems better able to meet changing business needs. This 
shifts the focus from build-to-order solutions to the supply of applica-
tions and service on demand.
For other organizations, the foray into cloud computing begins 
with a public cloud deployment, which can allow an organization 
to test cloud computing without making a substantial investment in 
infrastructure. Whichever is chosen, the beneﬁts of cloud computing 
can be realized.
Using a private cloud computing implementation, let’s discuss pri-
vate cloud computing beneﬁts. A private cloud can be built in-house, 
or it can be hosted by a provider; location is irrelevant. What deﬁnes 
it as a cloud is that it has some combination of dimension one, essen-
tial characteristics, and dimension two, service models. The deﬁning 
characteristic of a private cloud is that it is deployed and intended to 
be used by one organization.
Resource allocation (i.e., based on metered usage and the infra-
structure automatically adjusting resources to changes in demand) is 
paramount to deﬁning a cloud infrastructure. Both public and pri-
vate clouds will meter use and adjust resources; what is different is 
that in the public cloud, resource changes are billed to the customer, 
whereas in the private cloud, billing based on resource consumption 
is unusual.
In 2009, CIO magazine cited RADLab of the University of 
California at Berkley as saying that on-premises infrastructure con-
ﬁgured as a cloud cannot really be called cloud computing because 
it cannot provide unlimited resources, “since there is inevitably 
some point at which additional resources are not available, as when 
an individual company runs out of room in its data center.”8 The 
ability to run out of resources exists in a private cloud as well as 
a public cloud; no organization has unlimited resources. Resource 
usage must be monitored, and additional resources must be added to 
the existing resource pools to ensure that the expected user demand 
can be met.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
62
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
Puma and Eucalyptus: A Private Cloud Solution
Eucalyptus is a private cloud solution that was adopted by Puma 
shoes to deliver its web sites and online marketing campaigns. Jay 
Basnight, the head of digital strategy at Puma, stated that “Puma
.com must be [as] reliable as our shoes.”9 Puma selected a cloud 
solution from Eucalyptus Systems to provide an on-premises infra-
structure that would meet its business needs. Because of the retail 
nature of Puma, it required a solution that would maximize response 
time for consumers; Puma realized that slow response time at its web 
site meant that consumers would abandon the Puma web site in favor 
of sites that were more responsive.
Puma decided that a private cloud, with dynamic resource allo-
cation, would meet the need for an agile, cost-effective, extensible, 
and manageable IT infrastructure. This was especially true consider-
ing the increased demand for collaborative web sites and because of 
Puma’s increased digital presence. Puma needed to roll out web-based 
applications quickly to support these business demands, and a private 
cloud was the chosen solution.
Before moving to a private cloud, Puma’s in-house IT infrastruc-
ture included various web environments and a number of dedicated 
servers that created a complex hosting environment. That environ-
ment was composed of multiple operating systems, application pro-
gram interfaces, and applications. “The result was a graveyard of 
apps and sites, some with administrative control and some without,” 
said Basnight. “Adding to the complexity, the relatively small group 
supporting interactive projects had to be ready at a moment’s notice 
for events that could require signiﬁcant IT support.”10 He added that 
Puma needs dynamic content management and IaaS. These things 
motivated the move to an on-site private cloud–based solution that 
automatically provisioned resources, scaled to meet the trafﬁc require-
ments at Puma’s web sites and allowing for more rapid deployment of 
marketing campaigns delivered through those web sites.
Today, Puma’s infrastructure is a scalable and agile private cloud 
that meets the company’s needs for rapid deployment of new applica-
tions and provides suitable response time to visitors at the web site. 
As you can see from the Puma private cloud example, there is little 
distinction between a public and private cloud implementation.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
D E P L O Y M E N T  M O D E L S
◂
63
HYBRID CLOUDS
Hybrid clouds are built using both public and private cloud deploy-
ments. With a hybrid arrangement, an organization has decided that 
its requirements will be best met by deploying both private and pub-
lic clouds to support its business needs. Perhaps a private cloud is 
used for application development, but the actual deployment occurs 
on a public cloud. Or an organization could run its web site on a pri-
vate cloud, but when that private cloud cannot handle the increase 
in demand (i.e., too many simultaneous visitors to the web site), the 
users can be automatically rerouted to the same web site on a public 
cloud. Sometimes organizations start as a pure public cloud but then 
decide that a hybrid cloud will serve its needs better, as in the case of 
Zynga, the company discussed next.
Zynga: A Hybrid Cloud Example
The editors of Wikibon, a professional community that attempts to 
solve business and technology problems through open-source shar-
ing of free advisory ideas, have stated that Zynga, a company that 
creates and operates social Internet games (e.g., Farmville or Words 
with Friends), is the “poster child for a company that moved from 
a pure public cloud model, using AWS [Amazon Web Services], to a 
hybrid model, choosing to complement Amazon with its own internal 
data center.”11 These statistics show the substantial scale of Zynga’s 
operation:
◼Zynga has more than 250 million active users globally.
◼Five new players join Zynga every second.
◼About 10 percent of the world’s Internet population plays 
Zynga games every month.
◼One in ﬁve Americans plays social games.
Zynga started operating with a dedicated hosted IT infrastructure, 
but its social games soon outpaced Zynga’s ability to add infrastruc-
ture fast enough to support user demand. Zynga found it necessary to 
move operations to Amazon Web Services. According to the Wikibon 
case study cited earlier, Zynga moved to Amazon “to accommodate the 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
64
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
rapid scale demands in the vertical growth phase of the company.” That 
vertical growth phase is the steep part of the traditional S-curve (i.e., 
the S-curve is a graphic tool that describes how technology payback  
changes as it matures) used to measure technology deployment, adop-
tion, and timing. For Zynga, this steep part came early in the deployment 
of its products. Zynga is deployed on Amazon because Amazon could 
provide the technology to keep up with user demand. Amazon Web 
Services specializes in building cloud infrastructure, whereas Zynga 
needed to concentrate on building games and fulﬁlling user needs. Early 
in Zynga’s history, this was a perfect match, with a balance between user 
demand and available IT infrastructure.
After its initial growth stage, Zynga began to level out. Once the 
Zynga staff had a better understanding of user demand, the com-
pany decided to build a private cloud to complement its Amazon 
cloud deployment. With a better understanding of the organiza-
tion’s IT needs and with more available ﬁnancial resources, there was 
impetus to move from a public cloud to a hybrid public and private 
model to change the mix of CAPEX and OPEX. This presents an 
interesting business life-cycle question: Should the mix of public and 
private cloud utilization change as the company matures? This is 
explored in Chapter 4.
This leaves another question: How does the Zynga hybrid cloud 
deliver success for the company and its customers? The answers can 
be found in a Networkworld interview with Allan Leinwand, the chief 
technical ofﬁcer for infrastructure at Zynga. He stated the following:
◼The Zynga hybrid cloud “works by combining the capacity of 
Amazon Web Service’s public cloud with the company’s custom-
built private cloud.”
◼Amazon handles spike demand when user requirement exceeds 
Zynga’s internal capacity.
◼The private cloud is optimized for Zynga’s business, and the 
public portion is more of a generic, scalable, and homogenous 
infrastructure.
◼The public and private portions are treated as one hybrid cloud 
and managed through the same software dashboard (i.e., a 
“single pane of glass” interface).
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
D E P L O Y M E N T  M O D E L S
◂
65
◼Interoperability at Zynga is handled through the private cloud 
having similar equipment as the public cloud (technically, they 
use the same hypervisor technologies). In addition, virtual 
machines are built so they can move between the private and 
public clouds using the common software dashboard.12
Zynga’s move from a pure public cloud implementation to 
hybrid one teaches us many lessons. Among them is that despite the 
increased innovation a public cloud can bring early in the business life 
cycle, there may come a time when an organization and its customers 
can be best served by the organization building its own infrastructure.
COMMUNITY CLOUDS
Community clouds are built around the other cloud deployment 
models (i.e., public, private, and hybrid) and represent afﬁnity groups. 
Community clouds provide ways for related groups of people or orga-
nizations to share technologies and data. The organizations have a 
common concern related to a speciﬁc issue: information sharing, 
regulatory compliance, or something else. Brandon Butler, an author 
for Networkworld, says, “Fundamentally, community clouds are not 
necessarily a new technology . . . rather, they’re a different way of 
congregating users under an umbrella of services.”13
Here are some examples of community clouds:
◼Information sharing. The “Chesapeake Regional Information 
System for our Patients” allows Maryland’s physicians and 
nurses to share information about their patients.
◼Gaming industry. IGT delivers a cloud service to game pro-
viders globally that provides a seamless experience on an indi-
vidual’s land-based, mobile, and online devices.
◼Regulatory compliance. In the United States, the Health 
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act regulates the 
sharing of health-care information along with a number of 
other things. Optum Health Cloud provides cloud services 
to the health-care industry with an eye on strict compliance 
with the act.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
66
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
◼Government. According to the federal government, “The 
Interior Business Center (formerly the National Business 
Center) is a federal shared services provider that offers business 
solutions to create efﬁciencies and economies of scale for the 
Department of the Interior as well as other federal agencies.”14
◼Financial services industry. SAVVIS (www.savvis.com/
ﬁnancial-services) provides cloud-based IaaS offerings to 
the ﬁnancial services industry.
Community clouds present opportunities for organizations to 
cooperate with one another through resource sharing while poten-
tially also competing in the marketplace. This requires a large amount 
of trust and organizational acceptance. Building that trust and getting 
that acceptance is perhaps the most difﬁcult part of creating commu-
nity clouds.
CONCLUSION
Cloud computing has a number of characteristics, some required and 
some optional. It also has a number of service models, which were 
covered in Chapter 2 and used in this chapter to discuss cloud com-
puting deployment models.
Cloud computing is built upon public and private clouds. The 
major difference between the public and private cloud is who the 
cloud is deployed for; the private cloud is deployed for a single orga-
nization, whereas the public cloud is built to be shared by multiple 
organizations. The hybrid cloud is built using both public and private 
clouds and is most often deployed to manage excess utilization of pri-
vate cloud resources. The community cloud is deployed to serve the 
needs of a speciﬁc group of organizations that share a common inter-
est or requirement, such as compliance or common industry needs.
Cloud computing deployment models offer organizations the 
opportunity to implement technologies, increase innovation, decrease 
time to market, and thus gain market share. These opportunities 
are offered in an environment in which the balance between CAPEX 
and OPEX is tilted in favor of an organization’s need to support a 
greater IT value proposition.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
D E P L O Y M E N T  M O D E L S
◂
67
NOTES
1. The notion of two major focuses of a private cloud was introduced and developed by 
Bernard Golden through a series of blog posts and articles (2009–2013) in CIO, an 
industry trade journal. That idea has been expanded in this book.
2. Netﬂix press release, January 16, 2007, https://signup.netflix.com/MediaCenter/Press.
3. AWS Case Study: Netﬂix [video], Amazon Web Services, http://aws.amazon.com/
solutions/case-studies.
4. Microsoft, “Sopima: Software Firm Launches Business Contract Service with Lean 
Staff, Low Investment,” November 17, 2009, www.microsoft.com/casestudies/
Case_Study_Detail.aspx?CaseStudyID=4000005881.
5. Ibid.
6. Ibid.
7. “America Runs on Dunkin’. Dunkin Runs on 7+ Million,” Dunkin’ Donuts, www
.salesforce.com/customers/stories/dunkin.jsp.
8. Bernard Golden, “Deﬁning Private Clouds,” CIO, May 14, 2009, www.cio.com/
article/492695/Defining_Private_Clouds_Part_One. RADLab was a demonstration 
project hosted at the University of California at Berkley that ended in 2001. For 
information on this project, see http://radlab.cs.berkeley.edu.
9. Eucalyptus Systems, “Case Study of Puma,” http://go.eucalyptus.com. Eucalyptus 
sells private and hybrid cloud solutions that are compatible with Amazon Web 
Services.
10. Ibid.
11. David Cahill, “Zynga Cloud Case Study: The Journey to a Real Private Cloud,” 
Wikibon, February 12, 2013, http://wikibon.org/wiki/v/Zynga_Cloud_Case_Study:_
The_journey_to_a_real_private_cloud.
12. Ibid.
13. Brandon Butler, “Are Community Cloud Services the Next Hot Thing,” Networkworld,
March 1, 2012, www.networkworld.com/news/2012/030112-are-community-cloud-
services-the-256869.html.
14. U.S. Department of the Interior, “Interior Business Center,” www.doi.gov/ibc/index
.cfm.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
69
PART
TWO
Cloud Economics
P
art One introduced concepts related to cloud computing. In this 
part we now begin the discussion of cloud economics and strategic 
measurement of cloud computing implementations. Measurement 
of cloud computing implementations is necessary for at least two rea-
sons: (1) all types of implementations, including business intelligence 
implementations, need to be justiﬁed before scarce IT resources are 
expended, and (2) once a cloud strategy is adopted and an infrastruc-
ture is implemented, the implementation must be continually moni-
tored so the organization can be sure that it continues to deliver an 
optimal return on investment. Gaining maximal return on the imple-
mentation of a cloud computing strategy is predicated on the ability 
to understand these metrics. The introductory concepts found in Part 
One are necessary so we have a common set of terms and language to 
support our discussion of strategic measurement.
Strategic measurement refers to establishing the metrics necessary to 
set, accomplish, and monitor a strategic orientation. These measure-
ments are as follows:
◼Understanding the ﬁnancial effect of implementing cloud infra-
structure (including business intelligence implementations).
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
70
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
◼Knowing how total cost of ownership (or operation), return on 
investment, and CAPEX/OPEX change when discussed in the 
context of cloud computing.
◼Measuring the performance and effects of cloud computing.
◼Understanding the effects of cloud computing on stakeholders 
and how to measure quality of services provided by cloud sup-
pliers (service level agreements).
◼Determining current technology and staff readiness for the 
move to cloud computing.
 These types of metrics, which will be covered in this section, are 
necessary for an organization’s C-suite to understand so that cloud 
computing deployments support enhanced business intelligence. 
These types of metrics can also be used during cloud implementations 
to ensure that an implementation is on track, enabling alignment 
with business and technology strategies so that economic beneﬁt can 
be maximized.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
71
C H A P T E R 4
Strategic
Measurement
TCO, ROI, OPEX/CAPEX
O
rganizations are bombarded with large amounts of data and 
need a way to convert them into actionable information to aid 
in decision making. That process is referred to as creating business 
intelligence (BI). Whether it is a decision to build a new parking lot 
or a decision to move the organization’s application to the cloud, it 
requires actionable information.
Commitment to a cloud strategy to support BI requires that a 
large amount of information be considered before the commitment 
of resources can be made. In this chapter, concepts and measures that 
provide effective ways to organize and review the multitude of data 
and information are discussed. Each of the concepts and indicators 
should be considered when determining whether a cloud infrastruc-
ture is the best choice. Speciﬁcally, we will examine these primary 
ﬁnancial concepts:
◼Total cost of ownership (TCO). This is a ﬁnancial estimate 
of the direct and indirect costs of owning something like cloud 
infrastructure. Understanding the TCO of existing infrastruc-
ture aids in knowing how businesses beneﬁt from that infra-
structure. It is also very useful when comparing various options 
being considered for funding. In the cloud space, we should 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
72
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
consider the total cost of ownership as well as another, newer 
meaning of TCO: total cost of operation.
◼Capital expense (CAPEX) and operational expense 
(OPEX). CAPEX refers to the way in which large purchases 
with an expected life of greater than one year are handled from 
an accounting perspective. The goal is to align the use of that 
large purchase with the income it generates. OPEX refers to 
items that are purchased by an organization and consumed 
during the current year.
◼Return on investment (ROI). This measure shows how well 
something performed ﬁnancially. It is especially useful when 
comparing options that each has an estimated ROI.
A cloud computing strategy is deﬁned as the use of technologies with 
the essential characteristics, service models, and deployment mod-
els discussed in Part One. A cloud strategy changes the job of the 
IT department from building solutions to providing services. It also 
promotes innovation, since the time that solution development takes 
and its cost can change dramatically when applications are moved to 
the cloud. This is especially true when an organization uses external 
service providers instead of building applications in-house.
TOTAL COST OF OWNERSHIP
Total cost of ownership (TCO) refers to determining all the costs involved 
in owning something. The costs will be speciﬁc to the project being 
considered and will vary among projects. A useful (non-ICT) TCO 
example is purchasing a car. This example will help explain what is 
meant by the total cost of owning something. At a minimum, the TCO 
for a car purchase should include the purchase of the car, the cost of 
insurance and maintenance, the probable cost of an accident (e.g., the 
rental of a car while yours is being repaired as well as the insurance 
deductible), and the eventual sale (or amount lost through deprecia-
tion) of the car. Together these constitute the TCO. Similar estimates 
must be made for the TCO of an ICT infrastructure investment.
It is possible to take this TCO example and morph it into the 
total cost of operation—the new TCO. The reality is that some cars 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
S T R A T E G I C  M E A S U R E M E N T
◂
73
are cheaper to own and run than others. Consider owning a high-
efﬁciency hybrid car versus a high-end luxury car. The cost of fuel is 
cheaper for the hybrid car, and the high-end car may require special-
ized maintenance. These factors make the high-end car more expen-
sive both to own and to operate. The notion of total cost of operation 
extends the basic TCO model to include operating costs. Throughout 
this book, TCO is assumed to be the total cost of both ownership and 
operation.
In any BI cloud implementation, TCO must be a ﬁnancial estimate 
that includes the direct and indirect costs related to the purchase of 
any capital item and the ongoing operation of that item. These consist 
of the following:
◼Direct costs. When ICT is purchased, direct costs include the 
purchase of the technology, installation, and maintenance. 
Depending on the implementation, direct costs may also 
include testing, the cost of facilities, and environmental (e.g., 
air-conditioning) and power conditioning.
◼Indirect costs. Indirect costs are not directly associated with 
the purchase of the asset but are real costs that are necessary 
for the implementation to be successful. These costs must be 
included in any ﬁnancial analysis of technology purchases. 
These indirect costs include training, an outage (either planned 
or unplanned), a security breach (e.g., physical breach, virus 
or malware breach), disaster preparedness and recovery, other 
development expenses, and eventual decommissioning.
◼Operating costs. The cost of operating a BI cloud-based 
infrastructure must include the operational costs of purchas-
ing services from cloud vendors. If your organization requires 
additional staff because of a cloud implementation, you should 
include that in the operation cost as well.
Table 4.1 lists basic examples of things to be considered during 
a TCO analysis. It is often easy to determine direct and operational 
costs; it is much harder to determine indirect costs. However, it is 
essential that any necessary and probable indirect costs be included in 
all ﬁnancial estimates.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
74
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
How TCO Changes in the Cloud
TCO changes when considering cloud infrastructure. The major 
changes to consider are listed here. There may be other consider-
ations based on your organization’s needs, but this is a good starting 
place:
◼Cloud infrastructure should enable increased innova-
tion. Increased innovation may mean an increase in demand 
for ICT infrastructure and thus an increase in the overall 
resources necessary to support the increased demand. These 
increases lead to extra personnel costs to support the infra-
structure and/or to increased technology costs.
◼A greater telecommuting experience might be enabled 
by cloud infrastructure because of the accessibility of 
applications. A cloud implementation can mean that any-
where there is an Internet connection and a suitable device 
(e.g., tablet, notebook, or smartphone), an employee can work. 
This too can lead to a need for greater resources. It can also 
mean that a different management culture has to be adopted in 
your organization.
◼Software licensing, hardware, and facility costs change 
when you move to a cloud infrastructure. The cost of 
Table 4.1
Total Cost of Ownership Examples
Direct Costs
Indirect Costs
Operating Costs
◼Purchase price
◼Maintenance
◼Installation
◼Upgrades
◼Training
◼Outage
◼Breach
◼Disaster preparedness
◼Disaster recovery
◼Floor space
◼Testing
◼Development
◼Decommissioning
◼Additional staff needed 
to support cloud 
implementation
◼Cost of services from 
cloud service and data 
providers
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
S T R A T E G I C  M E A S U R E M E N T
◂
75
these items will be lower initially, but TCO may be higher 
for the cloud implementation over time. The beneﬁts of a 
cloud implementation should be factored into the decision to 
move to a cloud-based infrastructure so the new ROI can be 
realized.
Build versus Buy
TCO changes in different scenarios. An organization may be inter-
ested in the TCO of building an in-house application versus buying 
the necessary services from external cloud providers. When infra-
structure and software are built in-house, there are extensive devel-
opment costs, time is lost to the development effort, there is a need 
for internal testing, and so on. When services are purchased, you may 
save many of these costs but gain the cost of integrating the external 
services with your internal processes and infrastructure. The deci-
sion to build or buy may be determined by the time value of having 
a working system now from a cloud provider versus having to wait 
for an internal development team to build the system. This example 
oversimpliﬁes the build-versus-buy decision, but it does point out 
some of the differences.
TCO is important and useful when comparing options, because 
some options cost more than others over their lifetime. If we had 
three options, each with different ownership and operating costs, 
we could have three very different multiyear TCOs. Although TCO 
is only one of the ﬁnancial measures that must be considered, it is 
very important. Some of the other major considerations are the ROI, 
time value of money, source of capital investment resources, effect on 
the company’s ﬁnancial statements, tax implications, internal rate of 
return, and net present value.
It is important that all ﬁnancial measures take the TCO perspec-
tive and not just analyze the start-up costs. Using TCO will give your 
organization a reasonable picture of how infrastructure purchases will 
affect the company’s ﬁnancial position over time. You must look at 
not just the ﬁrst-year costs but also the cost of operating the solution 
over its expected useful life.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
76
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
FINANCIAL MEASUREMENTS
Taking the TCO perspective just discussed, we will now discuss two 
major ﬁnancial measures that must be considered when adopting a 
cloud strategy: (1) operating expense (OPEX) versus capital expense 
(CAPEX) and (2) return on investment (ROI). If you use a total cost 
of ownership/operation perspective with the CAPEX/OPEX and ROI 
measures, you will have sufﬁcient background to understand mea-
sures not discussed in this chapter. CAPEX/OPEX and ROI will be 
discussed next. We will use two scenarios that will help explain 
these measurements and how a cloud computing strategy affects the 
organization.
◼Scenario 1. An organization purchases $200,000 in ICT and 
the necessary applications; both have an expected life of ﬁve 
years. If you were using straight-line depreciation for the infra-
structure and application purchase, the expenditure would be 
$40,000 per year, reducing the organization’s net income by 
that amount annually. This should match the expenditure to 
any revenue generated during the same period. Assume that 
there is $15,000 in start-up costs in year one, a yearly main-
tenance expenditure of $36,000, and $175,000 per year in 
personal costs to maintain the equipment (personal and main-
tenance are trended at 5 percent per year).
◼Scenario 2. If we move IS to an external cloud vendor, the 
expenses will differ. Assume that in order to develop the appli-
cation, we would need initial ICT that costs $30,000, incur 
setup up costs of $20,000, and have personnel costs of $75,000, 
ICT maintenance costs of $5,400, and cloud computing service 
costs of $110,000 (personnel, maintenance, and cloud services 
are trended at 5 percent per year).
Capital Expense (CAPEX) versus Operational
Expense (OPEX)
A major consideration when deciding to move IS to an external cloud 
provider is the trade-off that occurs between capital expense (CAPEX) 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
S T R A T E G I C  M E A S U R E M E N T
◂
77
and operational expense (OPEX). When operating an on-premises 
cloud, the same dramatic shift from CAPEX to OPEX may not be seen. 
The CAPEX/OPEX change is situational and must be computed for 
each scenario under consideration.
When large purchases like IT infrastructure are acquired, they are 
traditionally treated as CAPEX. This means that they are recorded as 
an asset on the balance sheet of the organization and depreciated over 
time. Conversely, when an organization is spending money to oper-
ate its business, it is normally expensed in the year that it is actually 
spent. Buying infrastructure for in-house installation is CAPEX, and 
buying services from a cloud vendor is OPEX.
There is a trade-off between CAPEX and OPEX that occurs when 
moving applications to an external cloud. This can be looked at as two 
models of funding an ICT implementation, each with different effects 
on the organization’s balance sheet and income statements:
◼In the CAPEX funding model, the organization needs cash (this 
can be from its own funds or borrowed) to purchase capital 
assets. A long-term commitment to that asset is created because 
the organization owns it. When the organization is done with the 
depreciated asset, it must decide what to do with it. During 
the useful life of the asset, the organization’s staff is responsible 
for managing it. This creates several ﬁnancial requirements 
(some would say disadvantages):
◼The cost of buying, maintaining, and disposing of the asset.
◼The cost of staff to run the asset.
◼A determination of how to keep the asset generating value 
because the organization has an investment in it.
◼In the OPEX funding model, there is no long-term commitment, 
and start-up cash will be substantially less. Your organization 
pays a fee to use the asset of an external cloud provider that 
owns it. This fee is normally based on a metered use basis 
(see Part One). It is up to the external cloud provider that 
owns the asset to determine how to keep it generating value. 
When the organization is done using the asset, it can just walk 
away from it and not be concerned with disposal. There is a 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
78
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
shift of responsibility and stafﬁng in a purely OPEX model. The 
organization’s staff becomes concerned with managing appli-
cations; the cloud service provider is concerned with managing 
the IT asset. This relationship creates the following ﬁnancial 
changes:
◼The asset is owned by someone else, and the organization 
can pay for what it consumes (i.e., through metered use) 
rather than making a long-term commitment to the asset.
◼The organization does not need staff to run the infrastructure, 
but instead can be concerned with operating applications.
◼The upfront capital needed to start a venture will be lower, 
but the TCO over the life of the project will be higher. This 
must be analyzed for each project to determine what makes 
sense. You should consider that the lower upfront cost could 
be a major driver of entrepreneurship and innovation for 
your organization.
The value of not having to make long-term ﬁnancial commit-
ments is important but can cost more than owning an asset. A short-
term rental car is a good example. Suppose you want to rent a car for 
a short period while on vacation. It is generally understood that the 
price paid to rent that car far exceeds what you could purchase it for, 
but the beneﬁt of having that car for a short time motivates you to pay 
a higher price. Consider how often you could go on vacation if every 
time you traveled you needed to purchase a car at your destination 
rather than rent it. That oversimpliﬁes the CAPEX/OPEX discussion, 
but there are a number of useful parallels. In the case of car rental and 
consuming cloud services, both are cheaper than purchasing the asset 
each time you need it, but over time the rental of the asset is usually 
more expensive than the purchase of it.
When an organization rents an application from an external cloud 
provider, there is a shift that occurs between CAPEX and OPEX. Few 
implementations are purely one or the other. For example, you do 
not sell the car you own so you can go on vacation and rent one. The 
organization that relies heavily on external cloud providers will prob-
ably still have some (albeit smaller) internal infrastructure that has to 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
S T R A T E G I C  M E A S U R E M E N T
◂
79
be managed. Nevertheless, a cost shift occurs that affects an organiza-
tion’s IT strategy and ﬁnancial position.
Generally, an analysis of CAPEX and OPEX is required when 
deciding whether to use an external cloud vendor on a metered use 
basis or build a solution in-house. An external cloud vendor’s services 
are normally able to be expensed in the current accounting period, 
whereas infrastructure that is purchased is normally capitalized.1
From a ﬁnancial perspective, analyzing ICT expenditures to determine 
whether building an in-house solution or consuming the services of 
a cloud vendor is better for your organization requires that you look 
at the effects of those decisions on your organization’s balance sheet, 
income statement, and tax situation. According to generally accepted 
accounting principles, when a business incurs an expenditure, it 
should be allocated over the entire period in which the expense will 
beneﬁt the company.2 It will be helpful to look at an example. The 
two scenarios given earlier are shown in Figure 4.1.
The example in Figure 4.1 shows the change is CAPEX and OPEX 
and how this affects the organization’s proﬁt-and-loss statement. In 
this example, we see the following changes when moving to an exter-
nal cloud infrastructure:
◼CAPEX and OPEX are very different in the two scenarios. This 
will affect both the organization’s balance sheet and its income 
statements.
◼The cash needs at start-up and throughout the life of the infra-
structure (ﬁve years) are different. The external cloud infra-
structure will cost less at start-up, but the ﬁve-year expenses 
will be more.
These changes can drive innovation and make the move to cloud 
services very attractive ﬁnancially. In addition, as the OPEX and 
CAPEX emphasis changes, so does the accumulation of assets on the 
company’s balance sheet. In scenario 2, the overall expenses will 
change, most things will be expensed, and few assets will be accumu-
lated, potentially making the balance sheet weaker.
The business life cycle shown in Figure 4.2 refers to what occurs 
to a business as it progresses from start-up through the growth and 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
80
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
Scenario One: In-House Infrastructure Budget
Year
Start-Up 
Costs
One
Two
Three
Four
Five
Capital Expenses
Initial
In-House
ICT
150,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
30,000
In-House
Setup
65,000
13,000
13,000
13,000
13,000
13,000
Annual Capital 
Expense (CAPEX)
43,000
43,000
43,000
43,000
43,000
Total 5-Year CAPEX
215,000
Operating 
Expenses
In-House Personnel
160,000
168,000
176,400
185,220
194,481
In-House ICT 
Maintenance
59,500
62,475
65,599
68,879
72,323
Annual Operating 
Expense (OPEX)
219,500
230,475
241,999
254,099
266,804
Total 5-Year OPEX
1,212,876
Expenses to the 
Proﬁt and Loss 
Statement
Annual Expenses
262,500
273,475
284,999
297,099
309,804
Total 5-Year Expenses →
1,427,876
Scenario Two: External Cloud
Year
Start-Up 
Costs
One
Two
Three
Four
Five
Capital Expenses
Initial
In-House
ICT
75,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
15,000
Figure 4.1
CAPEX versus OPEX
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
S T R A T E G I C  M E A S U R E M E N T
◂
81
Scenario Two: External Cloud
Year
Start-Up 
Costs
One
Two
Three
Four
Five
In-House
Setup
15,000
3,000
3,000
3,000
3,000
3,000
Annual Capital 
Expense (CAPEX)
18,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
Total 5-Year CAPEX
90,000
OPERATING 
EXPENSES
In-House Personnel
75,000
78,750
82,688
86,822
91,163
In-House ICT 
Maintenance
5,400
5,670
5,954
6,251
6,564
Cloud Computing 
Service
210,000
220,500
231,525
243,101
255,256
Annual Operating 
Expense (OPEX)
290,400
304,920
320,166
336,174
352,983
Total 5-Year OPEX
1,604,643
Expenses to the 
Proﬁt and Loss 
Statement
Annual Expenses
308,400
322,920
338,166
354,174
370,983
Total 5-Year Expenses →
1,694,643
Summary
Scenario One
Scenario Two
Total 5-Year CAPEX
215,000
90,000
Total 5-Year Opex
1,025,005
1,604,643
Total 5-Year Expenses 
to P&L
1,240,005
1,694,643
Year 1 Cash Needs
400,500
380,400
5-Year Expenses
1,240,005
1,694,643
Figure 4.1
Continued
All Capital Expense Items Use 5-Year Straight-Line Depreciation
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
82
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
maintenance stages and through shutdown. The business life cycle 
must be considered when implementing cloud infrastructure. Early in 
the cycle, many organizations are strapped for cash, and an external 
cloud implementation may be inviting, with its lower requirements 
for start-up cash and its heavy emphasis on OPEX. This also may be 
desirable for investors (especially venture capitalists), who can be 
concerned that if a business does not succeed, the investors will have 
a costly infrastructure to dispose of.
As a business progresses into the growth and maintenance phases, 
it may have more cash, and from an accounting perspective may not 
want the emphasis on an OPEX funding model. A later-stage business 
may want to develop internal assets and desire a greater emphasis 
on CAPEX. It could still implement a cloud infrastructure, but that 
might be an in-house private cloud or a hybrid cloud with an empha-
sis on CAPEX. Whatever the deployment model, the balance between 
CAPEX and OPEX should be considered, along with the ﬁnancial 
needs of the organization. Zynga, a company discussed in Chapter 3, 
is a good example of an organization that started out with a public 
cloud infrastructure and then moved to a hybrid cloud.
Figure 4.2
The Business Life Cycle
Start-Up
Growth and
Maintenance
Shutdown
May be cash strapped
External cloud services
inviting with lower start-up
cash needed
May be desirable for VC 
investors
Might have infrastructure
that needs to be disposed of
External cloud may be more
expensive over the
organization’s lifetime
The desire to strengthen the
balance sheet may be more
important than the
additional OPEX
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
S T R A T E G I C  M E A S U R E M E N T
◂
83
Return on Investment (ROI)
Return on investment (ROI) is an accounting valuation method. It is 
useful to compare the rate of ROI for various options, including ICT 
investments.3 In its simplest form:
ROI = Net income ÷ Book value of assets
However, ROI can be calculated in a number of ways, including 
the following:
ROI = (Net income + Interest) ÷ Book value of assets
It is possible to modify the formula to take into account many fac-
tors that inﬂuence cost and return. When undertaking a project, the 
ROI formula might be as follows:
ROI = (Gain from investment − Cost of investment) ÷ Cost of 
investment
The preferred calculation includes those values that are most 
meaningful to the organization. Someone in marketing may compare 
the ROI of various products by dividing the revenue that each product 
generates by its expenses. Similarly, an ICT manager choosing among 
systems may select different parameters.
Using our two scenarios, let’s assume that we can make estimates 
for expected revenue; these are shown in Figure 4.3.
In this example, ROI takes into account the costs associated with 
the proposed solutions and the expected gain from each solution (rev-
enue is the same for each scenario, but it is possible that it might be 
different in each). If you are able to quantify TCO and the expected 
gains, ROI is a good tool to assist with selecting the choice that pro-
vides the highest return. When using ROI this way, you would inter-
pret it as follows:
◼If ROI is negative, then the investment would cost more than it 
would generate. The organization would probably not under-
take the project unless it was required to meet regulatory 
requirements and it were choosing among solutions that had 
the least effect on ROI.
◼If ROI is being used to compare alternatives, the alternative 
with the highest ROI should be selected.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
84
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
Scenario One: In-House Infrastructure Budget
Year
One
Two
Three
Four
Five
Total
Annual
Capital
Expense
(CAPEX)
43,000
43,000
43,000
43,000
43,000
215,000
Annual
Operating 
Expense
(OPEX)
234,500
246,225
258,536
271,463
285,036
1,295,761
Total
Annual
Expenses
277,500
289,225
301,536
314,463
328,036
1,510,761
Return on 
Investment
−6.31%
−1.12%
4.33%
10.05%
16.04%
5.07%
Scenario Two: External Cloud
Year
One
Two
Three
Four
Five
Total
Annual
Capital
Expense
(CAPEX)
18,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
90,000
Annual
Operating 
Expense
(OPEX)
290,400
304,920
320,166
336,174
352,983
1,604,643
Total
Annual
Expenses
308,400
322,920
338,166
354,174
370,983
1,694,643
Return on 
Investment
−15.69%
−11.43%
−6.97%
−2.29%
2.61%
−6.33%
The ROI formula used here is ROI = (Gain from investment −Cost of investment) ÷ Cost of investment 
and is expressed as a percentage increase from the expense of the infrastructure.
Figure 4.3
Return on Investment
Expected 
Revenue 
from New 
Infrastructure
260,000
286,000
314,600
346,060
380,666
1,587,326
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
S T R A T E G I C  M E A S U R E M E N T
◂
85
Calculating ROI allows management to determine whether the 
percentage of return is acceptable before a project is undertaken. 
Suppose that an organization wanted to track its investment in an 
infrastructure upgrade. The business analyst could use the costs of 
the upgrade and estimate the additional gains obtained from the 
upgrade.
The ROI accounting valuation method has several limitations and 
overstates ROI for the following reasons:
◼Projects that take a long time to implement will overstate ROI. 
In fact, the longer the project, the larger the overstatement.
◼The lag between investment outlay and the realization of 
expected gains will cause estimates to be inaccurate because 
the timing of the investment and the timing of any gains are 
not considered in the calculation.
◼Organizations whose market share, income, and/or expenses 
grow faster will experience a lower ROI than slower-growing 
companies.4
Despite these limitations, ROI provides a good rough estimate 
and is a helpful tool to assist in understanding the ﬁnancial effect of 
various options. In our two scenarios we saw a very different ROI, 
CAPEX/OPEX, start-up cash needs, and total cost of ownership (or 
operation).
CONCLUSION
In this chapter, we introduced three important tools (TCO, ROI, 
CAPEX/OPEX) that can be used to determine the true cost and effect 
of using an external cloud provider. It is important to use these three 
tools so that your organization will understand the real ﬁnancial 
effects of moving to an external cloud provider for its ICT infrastruc-
ture needs.
A TCO perspective must be taken when considering CAPEX/
OPEX, ROI, and any other appropriate analysis for your infrastructure 
choices. CAPEX/OPEX analysis is important because it emphasizes the 
different expenses that are part of building internal infrastructure and 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
86
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
using an external cloud provider. The ROI metric is important because 
it shows how much revenue an investment will return.
Taken together, TCO, CAPEX/OPEX, and ROI form the basis for 
analyzing options and for determining how well your infrastructure 
is operating (both for internal infrastructure and for external cloud 
infrastructure). There are changes to these metrics that can be gener-
alized as follows:
◼TCO really becomes a mixture of ownership and operating costs 
when using an external cloud provider. This means that extra 
diligence is necessary to ensure that all expenses are considered 
and used in any analysis.
◼In terms of CAPEX/OPEX, an internal infrastructure normally 
means that something is capitalized over a number of years—
this is the CAPEX model. Using an external cloud provider 
means that your organization may have lower initial start-up 
costs but will probably have greater operating costs over the life 
of an application. This must be analyzed.
◼ROI provides an estimate of the return on an investment. ROI 
can be used to select among options when the expenses are 
known and revenue can be estimated for each option. ROI can 
also be used as a hindsight metric that uses known ﬁnancial 
results.
All the measurements discussed in this chapter and all the imple-
mentations discussed throughout this book should be undertaken to 
make a business more agile. Business agility is the ability of an enter-
prise to sense and react quickly to changes in its environment; those 
changes can be a competitor going out of business or introducing a 
new product, the loss or gain of signiﬁcant customers, new regulatory 
requirements, or something else.
Business intelligence is important in sensing these things, and 
cloud computing is important in responding to them. Cloud comput-
ing can enable an organization to reduce cycle time, increase innova-
tion, and react to changes more quickly. The organization that accepts 
the shift to greater agility is more likely to succeed in the marketplace.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
S T R A T E G I C  M E A S U R E M E N T
◂
87
NOTES
1. The actual analysis of CAPEX versus OPEX requires an accountant. This book is 
not making speciﬁc recommendations but rather is suggesting that the beneﬁts of 
CAPEX versus OPEX must be considered when moving IS to a cloud.
2. I want to thank Harlan Shakun, CPA, for reviewing the accounting language and 
the two scenarios in this section to ensure that they are correct from an accounting 
perspective.
3. Steven M. Bragg, Business Ratios and Formulas: A Comprehensive Guide (Hoboken, 
NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2002); and Ciaran Walsh, Key Management Ratios: Master 
the Management Metrics That Drive and Control Your Business, 3rd ed. (Harlow, UK: 
Financial Times Prentice Hall, 2002).
4. “Management Methods, Management Models, Management Theories,” Value-
Based Management, June 10, 2006, www.valuebasedmanagement.net/index.html.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
89
C H A P T E R 5
Cloud Adoption
Are Your Organization 
and Its Stakeholders 
Ready to Adopt Cloud 
Computing?
S
pecifying the parameters of deployment and service type is clearly 
the purview of designers and those who specify services. However, 
before deployment and services are speciﬁed, the need must be 
deﬁned and the effects of the delivery mechanisms must be under-
stood. These are business issues, and the decisions involved must be 
made in cooperation with managers who must identify the business 
needs. Decisions about cloud services affect your organization and the 
linkage between your organization and its stakeholders.
Successful usage of a cloud service requires that you understand 
its effects on your organization and its stakeholders. In this chapter, 
the major areas to be considered include the effects on the following:
◼Current IT staff
◼Current technology
◼Internal stakeholders (e.g., managers, users, and other organi-
zational staff)
◼External stakeholders (e.g., customers or suppliers)
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
90
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
An overview of these is shown in Table 5.1. Each of these effects 
will be discussed in turn in this chapter, and the next chapter will be 
dedicated to a discussion of how service level agreements affect cloud 
strategies.
REGULATORY INFLUENCE
Before proceeding to the speciﬁc issues that affect your organiza-
tion and its stakeholders, the regulatory inﬂuence must be discussed 
since it will affect all entities in the cloud arrangement. The type 
of business your organization is in and the regulations that govern 
that business will determine the regulatory inﬂuence on your organi-
zation and its stakeholders. An example of this is the Health Insurance 
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) in the United States. If 
your organization provides services that fall under this act, it is your 
responsibility to ensure the security and privacy of the health-care 
data you maintain. It is fairly obvious, but this also means that any 
cloud provider your organization selects for applications or content 
must also be compliant with HIPAA. What may be less obvious is that 
your suppliers who deal with health-care information must also be 
Table 5.1
The Effects of Using a Cloud Strategy
Effects on Non-IT Staff
Effects on IT Staff
Effects on External 
Stakeholders
◼Regulatory inﬂuence
◼Increased expectations 
in technical abilities of 
both current employees 
and the newly hired
◼Organizational cultural 
transformation—
potential for increased 
innovation
◼Increased organiza-
tional agility and its 
consequences
◼Increased expectations 
of IT staff
◼Regulatory inﬂuence
◼Different focus for the 
CIO
◼Changes in governance 
structure to support a 
cloud strategy
◼Changes in manage-
ment of IT resources
◼Need to assess staff 
readiness
◼Regulatory inﬂuence
◼New infrastructure 
expenses
◼Increased innovation 
and reduction in 
product cycle times
◼Changes in payment 
methods
◼Staff training
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
C L O U D A D O P T I O N
◂
91
compliant. This may present a new burden to those suppliers 
when they are suddenly required to participate in a new cloud 
arrangement.
As an example, let’s say your organization is a health mainte-
nance organization and you desire to move to a cloud provider for 
your IT. Here are a few considerations:
◼Your cloud must be compliant with HIPAA, which will entail an 
extra cost to audit cloud providers (e.g., your organization must 
audit all its external cloud providers to ensure compliance).
◼Your organization must meet HIPAA guidelines for patient 
security and privacy, and that may mean a new expense (e.g., 
encrypted high-speed connectivity to the cloud provider so that 
patient information can be securely transmitted).
◼If your cloud provides for patients (arguably, your customers) 
access to their health-care data, your organization must take 
reasonable precautions to ensure that the data is protected 
(e.g., authentication to your cloud, encryption during trans-
missions, secure e-mail).
◼Your suppliers (e.g., hospitals or doctors’ ofﬁces) who are con-
nected to the cloud solution will need to employ appropriate 
measures to ensure HIPAA compliance and your organization 
may need to audit them. This may be a new expense.
Moving to the cloud and deploying to your suppliers and cus-
tomers is not a zero-sum game. There are expenses and other con-
sequences that must be considered, since they affect the relationship 
among you, your staff, and your external stakeholders. These issues 
are not limited to health care in the United States; similar issues 
emerge whenever an industry (regulated or not) moves to the cloud.
THE EFFECTS ON YOUR ORGANIZATION
Moving any content or application to a cloud provider will affect your 
organization, from the management of IT to the operations staff. The 
focus of this book is BI, but the reality is that moving any content or 
application to a cloud provider has consequences. The effects on the 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
92
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
non-IT staff are considered ﬁrst in this section, and then the existing 
technology and the IT staff are discussed.
The Non-IT Staff
Cloud computing will affect your organizational staff. There are at 
least four areas that must be considered when you are determining 
whether moving to a cloud platform is appropriate for your organiza-
tion. Speciﬁcally, a cloud environment will cause the following:
◼New expectations in technical expertise of the organizational 
staff and the technologies it manages.
◼A transformed organizational culture.
◼Increased organizational agility that will speed up the innova-
tion cycle.
◼Expectations by the organizational staff that the IT department 
will be more responsive to its needs.
Cloud computing offers the potential for a new organizational 
culture and architecture that fosters innovation.1 That innovation 
architecture brings with it the hope of increased competitive advan-
tage as well as the concern that the existing staff might not be able 
to exploit these new technologies. The backbone of enhanced com-
petitive advantage is strategic in nature; thus, when an organization 
chooses the IT strategy of cloud computing, it must consider whether 
the existing organizational staff is ready for this challenge. It could be 
necessary to hire new staff or get the existing staff trained so that it 
can use the technologies.
New technologies, faster cycle times for innovations, and 
more rapid deployment of services call into question the readiness 
of the existing staff and its sheer sufﬁciency. Stafﬁng considerations 
become paramount to attain the maximal ROI of a cloud strategy.
Hiring new staff can cause changes in an organization that has 
adopted a cloud strategy. This hiring can be disruptive to the organi-
zation and its existing staff. If the new staff members are expected to 
deploy innovations, they must possess both the business and the tech-
nical skills that enable them to do so. That could effectively change 
the competencies that you look for in high-value new employees. 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
C L O U D A D O P T I O N
◂
93
This is especially important because these new staff members 
might come at a premium—for instance, they might demand 
higher salaries. The effect is that the budgeting and hiring processes 
might have to change. Stafﬁng considerations are summarized in 
Figure 5.1.
Organizational Transformation
Organizational transformation can be brought about through a cloud 
strategy, but this is a “chicken or egg” problem. Does the organization 
ﬁrst change its culture to one with a different risk proﬁle that fosters 
innovation, or does it ﬁrst implement a cloud strategy and assume that 
the cultural transformation will follow? The truth lies somewhere in 
between. It is probably not possible for your organization to stop oper-
ations and change to a culture that is more technically agile; rather, 
the transformation will occur over time, and it requires planning.
Organizations need to continue operations so they can make 
money to pay their expenses. But at the same time, they need to 
invest in their future. BI solutions and cloud computing can be a way 
to make that investment. Based on whether you see BI and cloud 
computing as “bleeding edge” or leading-edge technologies, your 
organization should expect to spend either 10 to 25 percent or 50 to 
75 percent of its IT budget on these expenses.2 These choices affect 
Figure 5.1
Stafﬁng Considerations
New Staff
%!
?
%

%  

#
?
% 

?
!

%	"
%!

%
$
%!
!

www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
94
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
your organization and its stakeholders. Recommendations for budget-
ing them are shown in Figure 5.2.
Increased Organizational Agility
In Chapter 4, we covered the increased organizational agility enabled 
by cloud computing. This brings about several issues that should be 
considered (see Figure 5.3):
◼Increased innovation. Innovation within the organization 
should increase as the staff realizes that IT services are available 
Figure 5.2
Budgeting for IT
LEADING EDGE
50-75%
LEADING EDGE
10-25%
TIME
TRAILING EDGE
10-25%
TRAILING EDGE
Figure 5.3
The Effect of Organizational Agility on IT
IT Request 
Prioritization
Increased IT
Resources
Increased
Innovation
Other Organizational and
Technical Issues
BUSINESS
AGILITY
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
C L O U D A D O P T I O N
◂
95
more quickly. This means that customer and staff requests for 
new services must be completed in a shorter time frame.
◼Increased IT resources. An increase in IT resources (e.g., 
staff, hardware, or software) may be required to meet the new 
requests to support innovations. As more new services are 
requested more quickly, an increase in the resources required 
to fulﬁll those requests must be available.
◼IT request prioritization. IT requests must be prioritized. 
Those that generate greater proﬁtability for the organization 
should be considered for implementation ﬁrst. This will affect 
the allocation of IT resources and may call for a more robust IT 
governance structure with a stronger portfolio management of 
projects.
◼Other organizational and technical issues. The organiza-
tion will be faced with a number of structural, cultural, and 
technical issues that must be considered. Many of these are 
covered in this book, but every organization is unique, and you 
must consider how a new technical and business strategy will 
affect your enterprise.3
An agile organization can adapt to changes in the market, includ-
ing customer demand and the emergence or elimination of competi-
tors, and can possibly develop new industry-changing technologies. 
Cloud computing enables these adaptations, but they may require 
changes in the organizational culture. This is really somewhat circular: 
As these changes occur, the organization becomes more agile, and 
as the organization becomes more agile, more changes in IT may be 
necessary.
The IT Department
When moving to a cloud strategy, management must consider the 
following effects on the IT department: (1) the job of the chief infor-
mation ofﬁcer (CIO), (2) the readiness the current IT staff, and (3) 
the ability of the current technology to handle the new requirements 
of the cloud infrastructure. These are shown in Figure 5.4 and are 
discussed next.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
96
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
The CIO
The CIO historically has a short life span at any one organization. A 
number of reasons for this have been posited, but what is constant 
is that the job of the CIO has changed substantially. At one time, the 
focus of the IT staff in most organizations was to build systems and 
solutions that support business processes. These solutions often took 
a long time to build, and the CIO was largely the senior technocrat of 
the organization.
In the past, CIOs needed business knowledge, but they needed 
technical knowledge more. These senior technocrats were concerned 
with “keeping the trains running on time” by making sure that e-mail 
ﬂow or the customer relationship management (CRM) system was 
functioning smoothly. However, that has changed. “I don’t think 
about that anymore,” said Stephen Potter, the CIO at World-Check. 
“I have virtually no one on my team thinking about that anymore. 
I spend much more of my time thinking about IT that can drive the 
business forward, which is really what I should be doing.”4 The CIOs’ 
position, which was largely reactive to meet organizational needs, has 
changed to a more proactive role that consists of looking for ways 
Figure 5.4
Pressures on the Existing IT Department
Changing Role of 
CIO and IT Staff
New
Governance
Structure
Delivery of
Services Rather
than Application
Creation
New IT
Management
Skill Set Needed
Selection of 
Cloud Deployment
Models
IT Staff
Readiness and
Sufﬁciency
IT Department
CIO
IT Staff
Existing Technology
Readiness
Selection of On- or Off-
Premises
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
C L O U D A D O P T I O N
◂
97
to deploy technology to support the competitive positioning of the 
company.
Successful implementation of a cloud strategy requires that the 
CIO be retooled to become the lead innovator in an organization on 
the forefront of new product development and managing change. 
This means that the CIO must have greater business knowledge than 
ever before and be less of the lead technocrat. CIOs must spend much 
more of their time considering how to implement IT solutions (includ-
ing BI solutions) that move the organization forward and assist it in its 
attempts to reach an enhanced competitive position.
The CIO must now make IT service delivery, rather than solu-
tion development, a priority. The job is no longer just about keep-
ing the existing systems running and providing new solutions; rather, 
the CIO must now ensure that users can innovate and create their 
own solutions by providing services ready to support enterprise-wide 
innovation. Innovation can be supported by an internal cloud infra-
structure or by an external cloud provider.
Governance Structure and IT Staff Skills
A strong governance structure must be put in place to ensure the inte-
gration of internal business processes and cloud services. That struc-
ture must foster innovation while also making sure that shadow (or 
unsanctioned) IT does not proliferate. This is not easy, especially in an 
organization that has a preexisting culture that has allowed shadow 
IT. The concomitant change in organizational culture, the new expec-
tations of the operational staff, the changed role of the CIO, and a 
host of other factors requires that the emphasis of the IT staff changes 
and that a governance structure (policy and procedures) is put into 
place that recognizes the shift caused by cloud computing. The CIO 
and the IT staff must realize that a governance structure that enables 
the empowerment of all staff is a substantial part of their job in any 
cloud deployment and that they must foster a climate that creates that 
empowerment.
The governance structure will have a different emphasis depend-
ing on whether an organization has signiﬁcant technology presence 
on-premises or uses cloud providers. In the on-premises governance 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
98
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
structure, there is much more emphasis on the local deployment of 
technology, including increased innovation using that technology. The 
IT staff with an on-premises infrastructure will be expected to man-
age the infrastructure and foster innovation at the same time. The 
staff must have intimate knowledge of the technologies it maintains 
along with the business knowledge that creates competitive advantage. 
The key to the success of this governance structure is a collaborative 
environment that welcomes all stakeholder input into the procure-
ment, deployment, and management of IT resources.
In situations in which the cloud infrastructure is off-premises, 
the IT staff members will probably need less technical background, 
since they are not responsible for managing the technical infrastructure 
of the cloud. They will still need to manage any local infrastructure, 
which could be as simple as Internet connectivity, a local area net-
work, and/or PCs and printers. The role of the IT staff will be focused 
less on technology and more on business. A collaborative governance 
structure is also essential in off-premise deployments. When there is 
minimal local infrastructure, the IT staff (or possibly the informatics 
staff) will be expected to have greater business knowledge so it can 
support innovation in the off-premises efforts of the enterprise.
The type of organization and whether implementations are on- or 
off-premises mandate different governance structures and skill sets 
in the IT staff. These are important considerations when moving to a 
cloud infrastructure.
IT Resource Management
Adopting a cloud strategy means that IT resource management 
changes. A new IT management skill set is needed. In a non-cloud 
environment, an organization requires appropriate technologies and 
an IT staff that can create and manage them. It also needs an opera-
tions staff that understands the business. To be successful, a business 
must be good at its core activities, but in today’s technological world 
it also needs to have an IT staff who understands the business and can  
manage technology. That begs the question, what are the necessary 
skills of the operations and IT staff, and are both needed?
Netﬂix has grappled with the question of having both an opera-
tions and an IT staff. The company decided that it wanted to do what 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
C L O U D A D O P T I O N
◂
99
it does best—managing customers and movies—instead of trying to 
do something it knows very little about; it left the IT infrastructure 
and associated staff to another company (Amazon Web Services). 
The question of whether it is more beneﬁcial to host your infrastruc-
ture in-house or to use a cloud provider must be considered. Your 
organization must take into account several important issues: (1) 
where the organization is in the business cycle, (2) the cost-effec-
tiveness of running its own infrastructure and staff, versus using a 
cloud provider, and (3) how an external cloud provider will affect its 
stakeholders.
Existing Technology Readiness
Before you proceed on a cloud strategy, it is important that your orga-
nization determine which applications or content will be moved to 
the cloud. Once that is done, you can determine which cloud deploy-
ment model(s) best ﬁts and whether the existing technology is up 
to the challenge. It is necessary that your organization thoroughly 
examine itself to determine the appropriate content or applications to 
move to the cloud and what new services or technologies will have 
to be purchased or deployed. That is not trivial, and it requires an 
honest look at your organization and its stafﬁng, existing technolo-
gies/applications, and resources.5
On-Premises versus Off-Premises and Cloud Deployments
If your organization is embarking on building a cloud environment, 
it needs to determine whether it will be done in-house or purchased 
from a cloud provider. An in-house cloud environment requires that 
the IT staff have the appropriate technical knowledge and skills. The 
IT staff also needs to empower the non-IT staff to access and deploy 
applications and content. A cloud environment calls into question the 
technical skills of your existing staff and the need for new staff. The 
staff skill set must be appropriate to the on-premises or off-premises 
deployment.
If your organization is building an external cloud environment, 
it has made the commitment to purchase services from a cloud pro-
vider. In that case the IT staff will not need the proﬁciency to run an 
in-house cloud, but it will need the business knowledge to maximize 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
100
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
ROI. The external cloud provider has become a partner in delivering 
services to your organization, and therefore you must make sure that 
the cloud provider is able and willing to provide them. This is espe-
cially true for any mission-critical services. Ways to cope with this 
new relationship are discussed in Chapter 6.
Cloud deployments have speciﬁc requirements, and these exist 
along the dimensions of service model (PaaS, IaaS, or SaaS), location 
of deployment (on-premises or off-premises), and deployment model 
(public, private, hybrid, or community). Here are two considerations:
◼Any cloud (the deployment and service models do not mat-
ter) that is deployed on-premises will require that your staff 
manage the deployment of the content or applications and the 
associated technology.
◼Any cloud (the deployment and service models do not mat-
ter) that is off-premises will require that your staff manage the 
content or applications while the cloud provider manages 
the technology.
The requirements for IaaS, PaaS, and SaaS vary by where the 
cloud is deployed (on-premises or off-premises). These are shown in 
Table 5.2, which lists the differences between on-premises and off-
premises across deployment models.
An example will serve to make the point. Where do you want 
to deploy your applications and content? Suppose your organiza-
tion wants to create a CRM solution. It has many choices, but in our 
example let’s say the organization has narrowed down its options to 
the following three:
1. Build the application. Build the CRM application internally 
and deploy it on the organization’s on-premises cloud or on an 
external cloud provider (e.g., Microsoft Azure or Amazon Web 
Services).
2. Buy the application. Buy a CRM solution and deploy it on 
the organization’s on-premises cloud or on an external cloud 
provider (e.g., Microsoft Azure or Amazon Web Services).
3. Use a cloud provider for the application. Use a cloud pro-
vider for the CRM solution (e.g., Salesforce) and either use the 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Table 5.2
Cloud Deployment Responsibility
Private Cloud Deployment
Public Cloud Deployment
Hybrid Cloud 
Deployment
Community 
Cloud 
Deployment
Deployed by 
your IT staff 
on-premises
◼Can be IaaS, PaaS, or SaaS.
◼Organization responsible for cre-
ation, deployment, and operation 
of the cloud infrastructure.
◼Organization responsible for 
delivery of appropriate cloud 
services.
By deﬁnition, you would not have a public 
cloud internal to your organization unless 
you were a cloud provider. The discussion in 
this chapter is from the perspective of your 
organization.
Has features 
of on- and 
off-premises
deployments.
Could have 
features of on- 
and off-premises 
deployments
based on whether 
your organization 
is just using a 
public cloud pro-
vider or you are 
integrating your 
organization’s 
cloud with the 
community cloud.
Deployed off-
premises using 
cloud provider(s)
◼Organization responsible for 
creation and deployment of 
applications and content.
◼Cloud provider responsible for 
technology and its operation.
◼Single tenant: Your organization 
has dedicated technology at the 
cloud provider’s location.
◼In an IaaS or a PaaS model (e.g., Amazon
Web Services or Microsoft Azure), the 
organization is responsible for content 
or application creation and deployment; 
the cloud provider is responsible for the 
technology and operation.
◼In a SaaS model (e.g. Salesforce or 
Dropbox), your organization is responsible 
for content; the cloud provider is respon-
sible for the application and operation.
◼Multitenant: Your organization shares 
technology with other users at the cloud 
provider’s location.
101
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
102
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
provider’s web portal to access the services (i.e., a totally off-
premises deployment) or build your own web portal and run it 
on your own cloud, which accesses the cloud provider’s applica-
tion program interface to process and store the CRM data (i.e., 
on-premises for the web portal but off-premises for the applica-
tion and data).
Before a decision can be made, you must answer this ques-
tion for each option: Where do you deploy the solution or content? 
On-premises has the advantages of control, but off-premises also has 
advantages, associated with your organization being able to concen-
trate on the CRM application and leave much of the technical man-
agement to the cloud provider. Each also has risks associated with the 
need for stafﬁng, control, and technical management. This must be 
assessed when deciding where and how to deploy solutions.
When an off-premises cloud is adopted, your organization trans-
fers responsibility for operation of the technology to the cloud pro-
vider. The off-premises cloud provider becomes a partner in the 
delivery of IT services; signiﬁcant issues about this are discussed in 
Chapter 6. In addition to the obvious technical issues, where the 
cloud is deployed changes the stafﬁng model (i.e., the type of staff 
and its technical competencies). An in-house cloud requires that the 
technical staff is able to manage it, whereas the off-premises cloud 
requires that the organization understand and accept the risk of hav-
ing an external business partner (the cloud provider).
Before we leave the topic of where the cloud is deployed, it 
should be noted that even when an external cloud solution is chosen, 
there will always be a need for local IT support. Whether that staff is 
the “lone ranger” that builds and operates its own IT or is the mega-
conglomerate that has a large IT staff, there will always be a need 
for someone to know and understand the in-house IT infrastructure. 
Cloud computing requires connectivity to the Internet, and at a mini-
mum someone needs to understand how that connection works.
IT Staff Readiness
The readiness of the existing IT staff to adopt a cloud strategy is largely 
determined by whether it can adapt to a culture of service delivery 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
C L O U D A D O P T I O N
◂
103
rather than application creation and whether it has the skill set nec-
essary to manage a cloud infrastructure. Understanding the cultural 
readiness of the IT staff is tantamount to realizing the ROI of a cloud 
initiative. This is a difﬁcult issue: Does the culture exist to maximize 
the investment in cloud computing? We have all been there—we 
have had an IT staff member who believes that IT should be operated 
by IT staff and that all other staff should be beholden to the IT staff to 
get things done. Such a difﬁcult IT staff member can be a problem. In 
a cloud environment, this attitude simply does not support a culture 
that maximizes ROI. Rather, the attitude must be one of empowering 
the operational staff to create content and deploy applications. If you 
are reading this book, you probably understand the difference and 
will at some point have to deal with a difﬁcult IT staff member.
The other important issue is IT staff skills. Does the IT staff pos-
sess the necessary technical skills to deploy a cloud solution? Training 
encompasses everything from technical knowledge about cloud 
deployment to special security requirements. There are many training 
outlets (e.g., the Cloud Credential Council at www.cloudcredential
.org), making it largely a matter of resources. In addition to consider-
ing the direct cost of training, you need to decide if your organization 
can spare the existing staff so that it can be trained.
THE EFFECTS ON EXTERNAL STAKEHOLDERS
The deployment of a cloud computing solution that requires external 
stakeholders to interact with it will place a burden on those stake-
holders. This includes the need for increased technology, changes in 
payment models, the training of a stakeholder’s staff, regulatory inﬂu-
ence, and an increased demand for innovation (see Figure 5.5). These 
are major effects on all external stakeholders, including customers 
and suppliers, which must be considered.
The Need for Increased Technology
When cloud technologies necessitate that external stakeholders’ 
infrastructure is able to integrate with them, the external stakeholders 
must be considered. Take the case of a company that deploys a supply 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
104
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
chain management solution in the cloud that requires its vendors to 
have technologies in-house (e.g., radio-frequency identiﬁcation and 
its associated technology) to allow the vendor to fulﬁll orders elec-
tronically. What happens to the vendor that provides a rare item but 
does not have the resources to interact with the cloud solution cost-
effectively? Do you stop doing business with that vendor? Do you 
provide it with some incentive to obtain the necessary technology? 
Do you source the item elsewhere, and if so, what effect does that 
have on your production?
Changes in Payment Models—Changing Costs
If your organization deploys content or applications to an external 
cloud provider, you will undoubtedly take on new expenses, prob-
ably in a metered use arrangement. This means that you will be 
paying to use someone else’s IT infrastructure. There will be bene-
ﬁts from the cloud computing deployment (e.g., increased innova-
tion in your organization, faster time to market, a shift in the burden 
Figure 5.5
Pressure on External Stakeholders
Need for
Increased
Technology
Change in
Payment
Models
Regulatory
Impact
Requests for 
Increased
Innovation
Training of Staff
External Stakeholders
Customers
Suppliers
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
C L O U D A D O P T I O N
◂
105
for maintaining the technology to the cloud provider), but they will 
come with increased cost. There are at least two issues that must be 
dealt with:
1. If your IT expenses increase, those resources must come from 
somewhere. Do you “take the hit to the bottom line,” pass the 
increase along to customers, negotiate with your suppliers for 
better rates, or charge suppliers to access your new cloud?
2. Suppliers will need to decide whether selling to your organiza-
tion is cost-effective. If not, they might need to either stop pro-
viding goods to you or increase the price of their goods.
Increased expenses and costs affect your organization as well as 
your customers and suppliers. Cost shifting will occur and must be 
managed.
The Training of Staff
As with any new deployment, whether it is new content or new appli-
cations, training is a large expense. It is no different when deploying 
to the cloud. Just as the staff of your organization will need training, 
so will the staff of your suppliers. Who pays for that training—your 
organization or the supplier?
Requests for Increased Innovation
The cloud can enable increased innovation along with a reduction in 
cycle times for new products. This means that external stakeholders 
may come to expect product changes, including innovations, at a 
quicker pace than your organization previously expected to deliver 
them. These new expectations must be managed.
CONCLUSION
There are a myriad of stakeholders who must be considered when 
deploying all IT. In this chapter, we have mentioned a few of the 
major ones. It is important to realize that all new initiatives affect all 
stakeholders, both internal and external. It does not matter what you 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
106
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
are providing to the stakeholders; it is important to manage expecta-
tions. One way to do this is to implement a service level agreement. 
The next chapter reviews the service level agreement with a focus on 
managing the relationship between your organization and the cloud 
provider, and how that relationship affects all stakeholders.
NOTES
1. T. Clohessy, T. Acton, and C. Coughlan, “Innovating in the Cloud,” International
Journal of Innovations in Business 2, no. 1 (2013): 29–41, http://0-search.proquest
.com.www.consuls.org/docview/1316057717?accountid=9970.
2. Michael S. Gendron, Business Intelligence Applied: Implementing an Effective Information 
and Communications Technology Infrastructure (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 
2013), 49–50.
3. Ibid.
4. Martin Tantow, “Cloud Computing: Impact on CIOs and the IT Team,” Cloud Times,
April 19, 2011, http://cloudtimes.org/2011/04/19/cloud-computing-impact-on
-cios-and-the-it-team.
5. Gendron, Business Intelligence Applied.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
107
C H A P T E R 6
Service Level 
Agreements
T
raditionally, the service level agreement (SLA) has been thought 
of as pertaining to technologies that require a particular qual-
ity of service (QOS) in order to ensure availability and response 
time on a network. QOS also applies to cloud computing but in that 
context must be expanded past availability and response time to include 
other business parameters, like data retention and drivers of busi-
ness continuity. The cloud SLA is essential so organizations know the 
minimum level of service they can expect and the providers know 
the minimum level of service they must provide. The SLA must also 
specify what occurs when a provider does not meet the SLA’s business 
parameters. The overarching purposes of the SLA are as follows:
◼Identify and deﬁne the customer’s needs.
◼Provide a framework for understanding.
◼Simplify complex issues.
◼Reduce areas of conﬂict.
◼Encourage dialogue in the event of disputes.
◼Eliminate unrealistic expectations.1
A typical SLA includes the following speciﬁcations: (1) service 
availability, (2) the length of time a provider has to rectify any issue 
with the service, and (3) service monitoring. These speciﬁcations 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
108
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
are set out in a number of measurable objectives and consequences 
in case they are not met. Typically, there are two types of QOS 
objectives: (1) operational (e.g., mean time between failures), and 
(2) service speciﬁc (e.g., availability or delay).2 Operational and service-
speciﬁc objectives are discussed next to describe a typical telecom-
munication’s SLA.
THE TRADITIONAL OR TYPICAL TELECOM SLA QOS
Asynchronous transfer mode (ATM) is a communication technology 
that often uses an SLA because ATM provides a strong set of QOS 
measures and is a good example for illustrating QOS. ATM QOS mea-
surable objectives include the following:
◼Operational objectives
◼Mean time between failures (MTBF). The average time 
allowed or expected between equipment failures.
◼Mean time to repair (MTTR). The average length of time 
it takes to repair equipment that has failed.
◼Mean provisioning time. The average time it takes to make 
new services available.
◼Service objectives
◼Availability. The amount of time that a service is available 
(or unavailable).
◼Trafﬁc parameters, delay, and output. The type of trafﬁc 
(e.g., constant, real-time), the speed of that trafﬁc, and the 
acceptable amount of delay during transmission.
◼Transmission errors. The acceptable number of errors dur-
ing transmission.
This is an oversimpliﬁcation of an ATM QOS, but it makes the 
point that there are different types of objectives, and they affect your 
organization and its stakeholders. For example, the mean time to 
repair a down service will indicate the provider’s ability to respond 
to a need quickly, whereas trafﬁc parameters may indicate whether a 
provided service can meet the need for the service (e.g., speed, delay, 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
S E R V I C E  L E V E L A G R E E M E N T S
◂
109
output). These objectives affect the organization, and if the ATM ser-
vice involves your customers or suppliers, they are affected, too.
ATM QOS gives a basis for understanding why we enter an SLA 
and how you could use an SLA in a cloud environment. Purchasing 
services from a cloud provider means that your organization is mov-
ing at least partial responsibility for IT or IS services to a cloud service 
provider. The cloud service provider becomes an extension of your 
organization and must be treated as such.
INTRODUCING THE CLOUD SLA
In order to meet the needs and expectations of your stakeholders in 
a cloud ecosystem, you must consider the cloud SLA. The cloud SLA 
determines how cloud services will be delivered and deﬁnes the ser-
vices that are provided. This is true whether your organization’s IT 
department is providing cloud service to your staff or you are pur-
chasing cloud services from an external provider. In the remaining 
sections of this chapter, we will focus on purchasing cloud services 
from an external provider, but the concepts can easily be used in an 
SLA internal to your organization.
If your organization is going to use an external cloud service pro-
vider, then the SLA must be considered. It is probably obvious, but a 
cloud provider will not be anxious to negotiate an SLA with an orga-
nization that signs up for an account unless that account is important 
to the provider (e.g., a large customer that is purchasing a substan-
tial amount). Typically, when an organization signs up to use a cloud 
provider’s services, it will agree to a standardized usage agreement 
and an SLA. However, if the services are important to your organiza-
tion, it is important that you understand the limitations of a standard 
usage agreement and negotiate an SLA speciﬁc to your organization, 
if possible. In order to understand what is necessary when purchasing 
cloud services and the SLA, the following will be covered ﬁrst:
◼Cloud SLA types
◼Cloud use cases
◼SLA by type of service and deployment
◼Anatomy of a standardized SLA
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
110
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
After covering these introductory topics, we will discuss how to 
negotiate the cloud SLA.
SLA TYPES
There are two major categories of SLAs:
◼Standardized. The standardized SLA (sometimes called a 
usage agreement, a customer agreement, or service terms) 
is the more frequent. It consists of standard language that is 
agreed to when you create a new account with a cloud pro-
vider. It is normally written in favor of the cloud provider.
◼Negotiated. The negotiated SLA is infrequent. It is negotiated 
between your organization and cloud provider, and uses met-
rics to determine QOS. This is not typical unless your organi-
zation is purchasing a large amount of services from a cloud 
provider.
Small and medium-size businesses (SMBs) will typically use the 
standardized SLA, whereas a large business has more inﬂuence to 
negotiate. The reality is that SMBs have less clout because of their 
lower buying power in the cloud marketplace. Nevertheless, it is 
important that SMBs understand the limitations of the standardized 
SLA so they are cognizant of the cloud provider’s impact on the SMBs’ 
operations and their stakeholders.
CLOUD USE CASES
There are many use cases of cloud-based services. Although the over-
riding sentiment is that individual or singular organizational accounts 
with a cloud provider will normally be met with a standardized SLA, 
the SLA must be understood in the context of use cases. If your cloud 
use case involves a mission-critical application, you must consider the 
SLA and its parameters. Typical use cases are shown in Figure 6.1 and 
detailed next:
◼End user → public cloud provider. Dropbox is a good SaaS 
example of an end user directly accessing a cloud application. 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
S E R V I C E  L E V E L A G R E E M E N T S
◂
111
Figure 6.1
Cloud Use Cases
Access
Access
End User
Cloud
Enterprise
Cloud
End User
Hybrid: Enterprise
Cloud
End
User
Supply Chain: Enterprise 
Cloud
Intranet: Totally
Private Cloud
Cloud
Provider
Access
Cloud
Enterprise
Maintain
Content
Cloud
Provider
SCM
Cloud
Provider
Enterprise
Access
Enterprise
Access
Supply Chain 
Private
Cloud
Hosted Internally or 
Externally
Enterprise
Access
Enterprise
Cloud
Access
Enterprise
The end user can set up an account, store ﬁles on Dropbox, and 
access them from anywhere.
◼Enterprise → public cloud → end user. Amazon Web 
Services provides IaaS, and Microsoft Azure provides PaaS. 
Your organization can deploy its applications and content to 
one of these services and then make them directly available to 
end users.
◼Hybrid: enterprise (private cloud) → public cloud 
provider → end user. Zynga and its relationship with Amazon 
Web Services was discussed in Chapter 3; this provides a good 
example of a hybrid cloud arrangement. Zynga deploys it appli-
cations on its own private cloud, and in a hybrid arrangement 
moves users to Amazon when Zynga’s cloud is at capacity, thus 
optimizing the user experience.
◼Supply chain: enterprise → public cloud provider →
enterprise. AXIT AG, an IT solutions company in Germany, 
and is an example of supply chain cloud services. It provides 
a cross-company platform for the management of logistics 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
112
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
services through SaaS offerings that connects the enterprises 
in a supply chain.
◼Intranet: private cloud. An organization can have a cloud 
deployed only for the use of its employees. It could be imple-
mented behind the ﬁrewall within the organization, or it could 
be a private cloud hosted by a cloud provider. What deﬁnes 
the intranet private cloud is not its location (i.e., on-premises 
or off-premises) but that it is available only to your organiza-
tion’s staff.
These typical use cases provide a basis for understanding the vari-
ous types of SLAs. Some considerations for SLA implementation are 
shown by use case in Table 6.1.
Whether the use of a standardized or negotiated SLA is important 
is largely based on the effect that moving your organization’s content 
or applications might have. That effect must be known and managed 
when you are choosing a cloud provider.
Table 6.1
Cloud Use Cases and SLA Considerations
Typical Use Cases
SLA Considerations
End user → public cloud provider
Normally this is a standardized SLA with 
individual user accounts.
Enterprise → public cloud → end user
An enterprise might negotiate an SLA for 
cloud services. However, the standardized 
SLA will be offered most frequently.
Hybrid: enterprise → public cloud 
provider → end user
Same as above.
Supply chain: enterprise → public cloud 
provider → enterprise
An enterprise will use the standardized 
SLA, or, if the enterprise is large enough, it 
may negotiate an individualized SLA with 
the cloud provider.
Intranet: totally private cloud
When an enterprise moves its intranet to a 
cloud provider, it will be presented with a 
standardized SLA. The enterprise may want 
to negotiate something stronger in order 
to protect its operation.
Based on: Cloud Computing Use Case Discussion Group, Cloud Computing Use Cases, July 2, 2010.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
S E R V I C E  L E V E L A G R E E M E N T S
◂
113
SLA BY TYPE OF SERVICE AND DEPLOYMENT
Use cases employ the various deployment models (private, pub-
lic, hybrid, and community). Each service model (IaaS, PaaS, and 
SaaS) and each deployment model has various SLA characteristics. 
This occurs because each provides different capabilities to your  orga -
nization, and the scope and scale of the services changes. Recommen-
dations for an SLA are shown in Table 6.2. However, objectives, metrics, 
and other SLA parameters must be considered as unique to your business 
and its needs.
ANATOMY OF A STANDARDIZED SLA
The Amazon Web Services customer agreement provides a good 
example of a standardized SLA. The concepts discussed in this sec-
tion are generally applicable to all cloud service models (IaaS, 
PaaS, and SaaS) and deployment types (private, public, hybrid, and 
community).
When you sign up for an account with Amazon Web Services, 
you are required to consent to a standardized agreement between 
Table 6.2
SLA by Service and Deployment Models
Service Models
IaaS
PaaS
SaaS
Deployment
Models
Private
Should consider negotiating a 
strong SLA, but standardized is 
usually offered.
Usually
standardized.
Public
SLA is usually standardized and largely in favor of 
the cloud provider, but for a very large purchaser, a 
negotiated SLA is usually possible.
Hybrid
SLA is dependent on type of hybrid cloud.
Community
SLA is normally negotiated between the consortium 
that provides the community cloud and the cloud 
provider.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
114
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
your organization and Amazon.3 The customer agreement contains 
the following sections that are pertinent to our discussion:
◼Use of service offerings
◼You may access and use the various cloud services speciﬁed 
in accordance with this customer agreement.
◼Your organization will adhere to all applicable laws, rules, 
and regulations in your legal jurisdiction and will adhere to 
Amazon’s acceptable use policy.
◼To get support beyond what is normally provided by Amazon 
free of charge, your organization must enroll and pay for 
extended support in accordance with Amazon’s support 
guidelines.
◼Security and data policy
◼Amazon will implement reasonable and appropriate mea-
sures to secure your organization’s content from accidental 
or unlawful access or disclosure.
◼Amazon adheres to a safe harbor program, as described in its 
privacy policy.
◼Your organization’s responsibilities
◼Development, content, operation, maintenance, and use of 
any content you deploy on the Amazon cloud service.
◼Technical operation of your content, including any calls that 
your applications make to Amazon’s application program 
interfaces (APIs).
◼Compliance with all Amazon policies, including the accept-
able use policy, and any applicable laws.
◼Any claims relating to your content.
◼Proper handling of any notices sent to you or your afﬁliates 
that your content violates a person’s rights, including notices 
pursuant to the Digital Millennium Copyright Act.4
◼Proper conﬁguration and use of the Amazon Web Services 
offerings; maintenance of your own appropriate security, 
protection, and content backup.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
S E R V I C E  L E V E L A G R E E M E N T S
◂
115
◼All actions that you permit, assist, or facilitate, including 
actions that you allow end users to take; assurance that end 
users’ actions as they pertain to your content on Amazon are 
consistent with this agreement.
◼All support to end users, unless a separate support agreement 
is in place.
◼Conditions for temporary suspension
◼You pose a security risk to Amazon’s service offerings.
◼Your content or operation may adversely affect any Amazon
service offering.
◼You subject Amazon, its afﬁliates, or any third party to any 
possible liability.
◼Your account with Amazon is fraudulent.
◼If your organization or your end user is temporarily suspended, 
you will still be responsible for any accrued and ongoing fees, and 
your content will not be erased solely because of termination.
◼Termination
◼Either your organization or Amazon can terminate for its 
convenience with a 30-day advance notice.
◼Amazon can terminate your organization’s service immedi-
ately upon notice under the following circumstances:
◼Any act or omission by your organization or your end user 
can result in temporary suspension (described earlier).
◼Amazon’s relationship with a third-party partner that pro-
vides technology used by Amazon’s services expires or 
somehow materially changes.
◼Amazon believes that providing a service could create sub-
stantial economic or technical hardship or create a mate-
rial security risk.
◼Proprietary rights
◼Your organization is responsible for and retains all licens-
ing of software and content deployed on Amazon’s systems. 
Licensing does not transfer to Amazon just because software 
or content is deployed on its hardware.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
116
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
◼All submissions to Amazon are governed by the terms of the 
Apache software license, unless another Amazon-supported 
license is speciﬁed when you submit your content.
A separate agreement speciﬁes the service terms for the various 
cloud services offered by Amazon Web Services. These include the 
following universal terms:
◼All content deployed on Amazon must be owned, licensed, or 
lawfully obtained by your organization.
◼It is your organization’s responsibility to comply with all tech-
nical documentation applicable to the Amazon services, includ-
ing the appropriate developer guides.
◼Your organization will make client information and other mate-
rial available to Amazon so it can verify your organization’s 
compliance with all applicable agreements and documentation.
In addition to the universal service terms, each of the Amazon cloud 
services (e.g., compute, database) has speciﬁc service terms that must be 
followed. The content and terms differ for each service, but the intent in 
all of them is that your organization will comply with all Amazon Web 
Services agreements and technical documentation. There are also some 
application-speciﬁc terms (e.g., how Microsoft software can be used).
Amazon also has an acceptable use policy and a set of privacy 
policies that must be followed. This presents a complicated set of 
documents that should be understood if your organization is going 
to deploy using the Amazon platform; the Amazon SLA is a typical 
standardized SLA for cloud services and provides a good example. 
Other providers’ standardized SLAs are similar across deployment and 
delivery models. The question that your organization must answer 
is whether the standardized SLA (which largely protects the cloud 
provider and sets responsibility largely with your organization) is ade-
quate for your deployment.
NEGOTIATING THE CLOUD SLA
Whether your IT department is providing services to your staff or you 
are purchasing cloud services from someone else, there are 10 steps 
that you should follow to create a relevant SLA:
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
S E R V I C E  L E V E L A G R E E M E N T S
◂
117
1. Understand roles and responsibilities.
2. Evaluate data policies and business policies.
3. Understand service and deployment model differences.
4. Identify critical performance objectives.
5. Evaluate security and privacy requirements.
6. Identify service management requirements.
7. Prepare for service failure management.
8. Understand the disaster recovery plan.
9. Develop an effective management process.
10. Understand the exit process.5
Each of these steps is described next, along with its effect on the 
organization.
Step 1: Understand Roles and Responsibilities
It is necessary to understand whether cloud services are being pro-
vided to internal and/or external stakeholders. Internal stakehold-
ers are individuals who are directly employed by your organization, 
whereas external stakeholders are individuals or organizations that 
provide or obtain services/goods to/from you. They can be categorized 
as cloud consumers or cloud providers.6 These two types of entities 
are the major actors in the cloud-computing SLA, but there are oth-
ers, such as the following:
◼Cloud carrier. The intermediary that provides connectivity 
between the cloud consumer and the cloud provider.
◼Cloud broker. When present, the organization that manages 
the use, performance, and delivery of cloud services. Accenture 
is an example of a cloud broker; it provides certiﬁcation of 
and access to cloud providers, along with service integration 
through a single pane of glass interface.7 This entity is some-
times referred to as a managed service provider.
◼Cloud auditor. A third party employed to conduct individual 
assessments of the cloud services used to audit the performance 
of cloud offerings.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
118
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
It is important that the roles of all entities in an SLA be determined. 
Various relationships exist among the entities, and there could be a 
number of SLAs. These create a set of direct and indirect relationships 
within a cloud ecosystem that must be understood when you consume 
cloud services—see Figure 6.2 for examples. Your organization’s ability 
to manage expectations among the stakeholders will depend on the SLA.
Step 2: Evaluate Data Policies and Business Policies
Two types of SLA policies are necessary for managing cloud arrange-
ments: data and business. Some of these policies may not be germane 
to your speciﬁc cloud ecosystem, but they are representative of the 
following issues that should be considered:
SLA Data Policies
◼Data preservation and redundancy. How any data in the 
cloud will be protected and maintained.
◼Data location. Where data are stored and how that storage 
location is made user-accessible; when data are moved, how 
your organization can verify data consistency. It may be illegal 
to have some data located in a different country; that could 
necessitate compliance with another country’s laws (e.g., the 
European Union’s privacy laws).
Figure 6.2
The Cloud Ecosystem and Its SLAs
SLA
SLA
SLA
SLA
SLA
Example with a broker that 
uses two cloud providers
Cloud
Broker
Cloud
Provider 1
Cloud
Provider 2
Cloud
Provider 1
Cloud
Provider 2
Cloud
Consumer
Cloud
Consumer
Example with direct connection 
to two cloud providers
Note: There can 
also be a number 
of SLAs for the 
cloud carriers that
provide
connectivity
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
S E R V I C E  L E V E L A G R E E M E N T S
◂
119
◼Data seizure. Data protection from illegal search and seizure; 
access to data if the cloud provider goes out of business.
◼Data privacy. Data protection in compliance with the appro-
priate laws to protect consumer privacy.
SLA Business Policies
◼Guarantees. Operational, service, and business objectives or 
measures with associated penalties when they are not met.
◼Acceptable use policy. Ways in which the services of the 
cloud provider can be used.
◼List of services not covered. The services covered by the SLA 
must be listed, along with the services offered by the cloud pro-
vider but not covered (i.e., the services contracted for must be 
speciﬁcally listed).
◼Excess usage. The amount of allowed usage and what occurs 
when that is exceeded (e.g., extra cost).
◼Activation. How a service is activated or triggered and when 
metered use charges are incurred (e.g., when an API is trig-
gered or a user logs in).
◼Payment and penalty models. How any payment is made 
and how you get credit when the service is unavailable or does 
not meet the agreed-upon objectives.
◼Governance or versioning. How services changes are made 
by the provider, what your involvement in those decisions is, 
and how you are informed of service changes so your organiza-
tion can adapt to them.
◼Renewals. How the contract is renewed so that both parties 
can negotiate better or more appropriate terms.
◼Transferability. If your organization sells its business, or for 
some other reason, how the current contract can be transferred.
◼Support. How support is accessed, how long it takes to respond 
to support requests, how support calls are prioritized, what is 
provided, and what it costs.
◼Planned maintenance. When the provider’s services will 
be unavailable because of maintenance and whether that 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
120
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
downtime will count against any service guarantees (e.g., 99 
percent uptime).
◼Subcontracted services. Details about subcontracted services 
(e.g., whether allowed at all or the details of an allowed sub-
contract). If the cloud provider is to act as a broker (i.e., use 
upstream providers), that should be speciﬁed along with the 
appropriate SLA guarantees.
◼Licensed software. If a third-party license is required (e.g., a 
Windows server license), that should be speciﬁed, along with 
who is responsible to purchase and patch that software.
◼Industry-speciﬁc standards. Especially in regulated indus-
tries like health care and ﬁnancial services, but also in general, 
industry standards and the responsibilities that lie with your 
organization and the cloud provider should be detailed.
◼Additional terms for different geographic regions. Any 
change of SLA terms caused by changes in geographic region 
or country.
Step 3: Understand Service and Deployment
Model Differences
As discussed in Part One, cloud services are delivered through service 
models. These service models have effects that must be considered, as 
follows:
◼IaaS delivers an infrastructure on which consumers can deploy 
their own applications and content. It provides relatively low-
level services, each with a speciﬁc set of metrics, including 
compute, network, and storage. These metrics will affect many 
areas of the SLA.
◼PaaS delivers a speciﬁc platform (e.g., Microsoft Azure) that 
can be used to develop applications and deliver content. PaaS 
metrics are not well standardized and vary among cloud 
PaaS providers. Care should be taken to review the available 
metrics, and negotiate/incorporate them into your cloud SLA.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
S E R V I C E  L E V E L A G R E E M E N T S
◂
121
◼SaaS delivers a software solution (e.g., Salesforce). There is a 
wide range of types of services and SLA guarantees offered by 
SaaS providers. You should expect guarantees like service avail-
ability (e.g., uptime expressed as a percentage) and application 
response time. There should also be language that outlines how 
data can be moved to another provider, if necessary.
Cloud deployment models also have certain SLA requirements:
◼The private cloud delivers services to your organization only, 
regardless of whether the cloud is on-premises or off-premises. 
The SLA requirements are similar to the infrastructure being 
provided by your own IT department.
◼The public cloud consists of services being provided on hard-
ware shared by multiple organizations. The SLA should be 
carefully reviewed to ensure that adequate measures are taken 
to protect the cloud provider’s perimeter (e.g., ﬁrewalls) and 
communication links (e.g., leased lines). Security, reliability, 
and performance risks posed by the multi-tenancy arrange-
ment should also be addressed.
◼The hybrid cloud provides for a combination of public and/or 
private clouds under one deployment model. The SLA require-
ments are similar to the private and public clouds, with the 
additional concern of integration between the various cloud 
models and providers. The SLA should cover service, data, and 
business integration.
◼The community cloud provides services to an afﬁnity group. 
SLAs must deal with the speciﬁc needs of the community that 
is being served (e.g., a health-care community cloud in the 
United States must comply with HIPAA).
Step 4: Identify Critical Performance Objectives
It is essential that your organization understand what it wants to 
accomplish with a cloud deployment and what SLA objectives it 
needs. An organization might initially consider availability, response 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
122
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
time, and other similar parameters, and it is true that these must be 
included. However, the parameters that will most affect your busi-
ness competitive positioning must be considered ﬁrst. The business 
processes that are core to your organization, and their need for IT 
services, must drive the parameters of the SLA.8 These can be under-
stood by reviewing the business processes of your organization and 
determining how a cloud environment could affect them.
The common performance objectives of availability and response 
time and their effects on competitive positioning might be as follows:
◼Availability is the percentage of uptime for a service. Service 
availability’s effect on customer retention is straightforward, 
considering the number of providers for virtually every tech-
nology; if a service is not available consistently, the customers 
may move to another provider. That is true even for the mega-
conglomerate Google; if it could not consistently provide search 
services, it would not be a market leader for very long.
◼Response time is the elapsed time between a service request 
and the completion of that request. If customers experience 
slow response times after requesting services from a public 
cloud they are likely to move to another provider; in the case 
of an on-premises cloud they might build shadow IT to solve 
their business problems.
These are just examples, but what is important is that your organi-
zation consider its business processes, the consequences of deploying 
those processes in a cloud ecosystem, and the effect of that ecosystem 
on competitive positioning.
Step 5: Evaluate Security and Privacy Requirements
Security in the cloud is basically the same as in any other IT infra-
structure. Security involves protecting digital assets (e.g., data, con-
tent, applications). When digital assets are implemented in an external 
cloud, there is an additional risk because your organization is depend-
ing on the cloud provider to deliver the required security.
The harm your organization would suffer if your data, content, or 
applications were compromised must be considered. This must drive 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
S E R V I C E  L E V E L A G R E E M E N T S
◂
123
the requirements (e.g., type of security, actions in the case of a breach, 
steps to detect data compromise) imposed on the cloud provider and 
your organization by an SLA.
It is necessary to consider any regulatory requirements when you 
negotiate security-related SLA parameters. For example, if your orga-
nization is a university that receives funds for an applicable program 
of the U.S. Department of Education, you are required to comply with 
the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA), which pro-
tects the privacy of students’ educational records. Ellucian is a com-
pany that provides educational management solutions in the cloud 
and must meet the FERPA guidelines. Your organization must con-
sider regulatory compliance appropriate to your industry.
Step 6: Identify Service Management Requirements
Cloud services must be managed in order to meet the organization’s 
goals. At a minimum, the SLA should incorporate parameters that 
ensure these management requirements:
◼Cloud services that are auditable so your organization can be 
sure it is meeting the SLA objectives.
◼Clear and concise reporting of metered use, performance, and 
problem notiﬁcation.
◼Change management, provisioning of new services, and appro-
priate testing.
◼Upgrade and licensing responsibilities.
This list is representative of the management requirements that 
should be included in an SLA to ensure that your organization can 
reach its stated goals, meet the needs of your customers, and maintain 
its competitive position.
Step 7: Prepare for Service Failure Management
Sometimes services are not, or cannot be, delivered as promised 
in an SLA. In order to avoid misunderstandings and to detail what 
occurs when services are not delivered as promised, it is necessary 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
124
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
to outline the remedies up front in the SLA. It is also common to 
have exclusions in an SLA in order to limit cloud provider liability 
in certain situations (e.g., scheduled or emergency outages, acts of 
force majeure, or Internet access issues outside the cloud provider’s 
control). Recognizing service failure occurs in one of two ways: 
(1) your organization sees the failure because of its own monitoring, 
or (2) the cloud provider monitors and reports it.
Step 8: Understand the Disaster Recovery Plan
In order to ensure business continuity, your SLA must codify disaster 
recovery procedures. Deploying to the cloud does not relieve your 
organization from having to implement disaster recovery locally. The 
cloud provider may take care of infrastructure and platform issues, 
but your organization is responsible for data and content.
Your organization, not the cloud provider, will generally interface 
with the customers. The organization’s disaster recovery procedures 
must specify what will occur in the event of a disaster and a related 
service outage. That includes how data and services are restored and 
how customers are dealt with. All of that must be part of the SLA 
so that you and the cloud provider understand how to proceed if a 
disaster occurs.
Step 9: Develop an Effective Management Process
The SLA relationship must be managed. The SLA is not an agree-
ment that you can execute and then just assume that services will be 
delivered as expected. The metrics that monitor your organization’s 
objectives and service requirements must be reviewed periodically. 
The status of those objectives should be discussed at periodic meetings 
(perhaps monthly or more frequently for mission-critical objectives), 
and actions should be taken if those objective or service requirements 
are not met. That way, the effect on your stakeholders can be realized, 
and any necessary corrective actions can be taken.
You should consider having the cloud provider be part of all sta-
tus meetings, since it is essential to understanding the SLA param-
eters and metrics and to developing appropriate responses to unmet 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
S E R V I C E  L E V E L A G R E E M E N T S
◂
125
metrics. The cloud provider can make its internal resources available 
(e.g., elevating a problem to a higher support team).
Step 10: Understand the Exit Process
 Every SLA should have an exit clause detailing the responsibilities 
of the cloud provider and your organization at the termination of the 
service (whether that is prematurely or at the end of the agreement). 
This exit clause must include the following procedures necessary to 
ensure business continuity for your organization:
◼Transmission and preservation of data and services held by the 
cloud provider.
◼Format for data transmitted to your organization (e.g., digital or 
hardcopy).
◼Associated fees for termination and data transmission.
◼Length of time the cloud provider will maintain your organiza-
tion’s data after termination.
◼Business continuity options during transition of services and 
data to a new cloud provider.
SLA Expectations
The SLA must be written to ensure that the expectations of your orga-
nization’s IT department, your operational staff, and the cloud pro-
vider are understood and will be met. A small organization may be 
forced into a standardized SLA, but whenever a negotiated SLA is 
possible it should be created from the perspective that all parties are 
on the same team. Whether the SLA is standardized or negotiated, 
the steps given above should be followed to increase the likelihood 
of success.
CONCLUSION
A strong business case is needed before committing to a cloud com-
puting project, and it must be supported by an equally strong SLA to 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
126
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
ensure that your organization gets acceptable returns (e.g., ROI, cus-
tomer satisfaction, business continuity). In most cases, a standardized 
SLA will be presented to your organization. The standardized SLA 
should be reviewed so your organization understands its responsibili-
ties and those of the cloud provider. When a negotiated SLA is exe-
cuted, your organization should closely follow the 10 steps detailed 
earlier. The needs of all the stakeholders will inﬂuence the decisions 
about the type of cloud deployment, service types, and SLA para-
meters. Once an SLA is executed, your organization must monitor the 
agreed-to performance metrics. In that way, ROI can be maximized.
Note: Cloud services offered via a negotiated SLA may cost more 
than a standardized SLA. You should compare the additional costs 
and consider how they will affect ROI.
NOTES
1. Christopher Luise, Adnet Technologies, personal communication, June 2013.
2. Daniel Putka Manoel Camillo Penna, and Vinicisu Prodocimo, “Service Level 
Management in ATM Networks,” Latin American Network Operation and 
Management Symposium, Quito Ecuador, October 10–11, 2011, www.lanoms.org
/2005/anaiscd/1999/5-3.pdf.
3. This section is meant to be a business commentary, not a legal opinion.
4. The Digital Millennium Copyright Act is a federal law that implements various trea-
ties of the World Intellectual Property Organization. The law criminalizes certain 
acts of production and dissemination of technology, devices, or services. It also 
makes it illegal to circumvent access controls implemented via digital rights man-
agement software.
5. This list represents a synthesis of the steps outlined in Cloud Standards Wiki, 
“Practical Guide to Cloud Service Level Agreements,” 2012.
6. National Institute of Standards and Technology, Cloud Computing, Reference 
Architecture, www.nist.gov/itl/cloud/refarch.cfm.
7. Pete Swabey, “Accenture’s ‘Cloud Broker’ Bid,” Information Age, April 29, 2013, 
http://www.information-age.com/it-management/outsourcing-and-supplier-
management/123457010/accenture-s-cloud-broker-bid.
8. Gendron, Business intelligence Applied.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
127
PART
THREE
Business 
Intelligence and 
the Cloud
I
n Parts One and Two, the foundation was laid for understanding 
how to extract the maximum beneﬁt from cloud computing. Part 
One provided a brief historical review and extensive deﬁnitions. 
Part Two covered the economic and strategic concepts necessary to 
understand cloud computing and how business intelligence (BI) ﬁts. 
Now we move on to discussing BI and how it is enhanced by cloud 
computing. This includes reviewing the topics of Big Data and mobile 
computing.
Gartner’s IT glossary deﬁnes business intelligence as “an umbrella 
term that includes the applications, infrastructure and tools, and best 
practices that enable access to and analysis of information to improve 
and optimize decisions and performance.”1 This glossary deﬁnes 
business analytics as “solutions used to build analysis models and sim-
ulations to create scenarios, understand realities and predict future 
states. Business analytics includes data mining, predictive analytics, 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
128
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
applied analytics and statistics, and is delivered as an application suit-
able for a business user.”2
These deﬁnitions will be incorporated into cloud strategy in Part 
Three as we deal with these issues:
◼What is business intelligence, what is business analytics, and 
what is the difference?
◼How does Big Data affect BI?
◼What is the intersection of BI and mobile computing?
NOTES
1. Gartner, 
“Business 
Intelligence,” 
IT 
Glossary, 
www.gartner.com/it-glossary/
business-intelligence-bi.
2. Gartner, 
“Business 
Analytics,” 
IT 
Glossary, 
www.gartner.com/it-glossary/
business-analytics.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
129
C H A P T E R 7
Business
Intelligence
The Interaction 
of Business Intelligence 
and Cloud Computing
S
everal months ago, the author was discussing BI at a conference 
when another attendee asked, “Can you use those two terms 
together—business and intelligence?” Not being one to be outdone, 
the author quickly answered, “You cannot have one without the 
other, at least if you want to be successful.” As you might imagine, 
that led to a long discussion of what BI is (or should be). The author 
continued to interject the notion that cloud computing must be at 
the core of BI today and that having BI that is not enabled by cloud 
resources is sort of like eating apple pie without vanilla ice cream: You 
are not getting the most out of the experience (at least, not from the 
author’s point of view!). BI needs the cloud to be most successful. This 
chapter explains why.
Enterprise applications, such as enterprise resource planning 
(ERP) and customer relationship management (CRM), have been rap-
idly advancing to include analytics that create BI. Our understanding 
of descriptive and predictive analysis has been expanded to include 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
130
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
cloud-based solutions. What for decades was known as decision sup-
port has grown to become business analytics and business intelligence and 
has become the cornerstone of business strategy. We once primarily 
discussed the analysis of databases and data warehouses, but today we 
discuss Big Data. There has been a surge in tools and techniques that 
have created the new discipline of data analytics, with data scientists at 
the center of enabling data-driven knowledge and strategy.
This has been fed by a new level of interest in ﬁnding actionable 
and competitive information through the combination of an organiza-
tion’s internal data with data commoditized by cloud data providers. 
Online analytical processing (OLAP) solutions that allow inquiry in 
real time rather than the periodic generation of reports are the norm. 
OLAP provides instantaneous access to data rather than the hindsight 
view of organizational performance provided by reports. These rapid 
changes in the technology have created a number of terms, concepts, 
and techniques that have to be understood to get the most out of the 
data. This chapter makes sense of these terms, concepts, and tech-
niques so that actionable information that supports managerial deci-
sions and competitive strategy can be created.
In the past decade the amount of data available to support deci-
sion making has exploded. We have all heard about this explosion, 
but what do we do about it? Organizations often do not have the 
ability to analyze it efﬁciently in-house. That is where cloud-based 
analytic solutions providers and cloud data providers come into the 
picture. These will be discussed as we move through the analytics 
cycle. Just like any innovation that is ﬁrst implemented in the cloud 
to minimize up-front organizational risk, BI can also be implemented 
using cloud providers.
BI STRATEGY
Organizations use the term business intelligence quite often; in fact, 
organizations are often abuzz with it. But have they carefully thought 
about what BI really is or why it is important? Basically, BI is some-
thing you create by asking the right questions of the right data 
using the right analytical tools. This requires knowing where your 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E
◂
131
organization is today, having a solid mission-driven BI plan, and using 
the BI that is created to improve your organization.
Successful BI requires that it be driven by your organization’s 
strategy. The path to successfully creating BI starts with knowing the 
questions you want to answer, then understanding how data can be 
used to answer those questions. The type of questions and desired 
outcomes are based on your type of organization: A for-proﬁt orga-
nization may want to enhance customer service to increase market 
share, whereas a government agency may want to better manage its 
budget to improve citizen perception of the agency. The organization’s 
mission, vision, and objectives are of central importance.
Before undertaking a BI project, your organization must ask how 
well it is currently using analytics to create BI and how well those 
efforts are aligned with the organization’s strategy. If your data are 
stored in spreadsheets or on hard copy, you may ﬁnd creating BI dif-
ﬁcult. If you are using a database-driven application (e.g., ERP or 
CRM), it may be a matter of determining what questions you want 
to ask and what you are going to do with the answers. Successful BI 
depends on the alignment of your organization’s mission, strategy, 
and objectives with its people, processes, and technology.
BI must take into account the internal value-producing activities 
of your organization (see Figure 7.1) and the external forces on your 
organization (see Figure 7.2).1 Taking stock in the internal valuing 
producing activities of your organization increases the likelihood that 
a BI strategy permeates the organization at all levels. Understanding 
external forces allows you to ask the right questions and share the 
Figure 7.1
Internal Value-Producing Activities  Adapted from M. E. Porter, The
Competitive Advantage of Nations (New York: Free Press, 1990).
Support
activities
Firm infrastructure and Senior (C-Suite) Management
Value
Human resources
Technology development
Procurement
Primary
activities
Inbound
logistics
Operations Outbound
logistics
Sales and 
marketing
Service
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
132
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
results with the correct parties so the BI project is based on the correct 
strategic goals and objectives.
Like any technology project, developing a BI solution involves 
risk for the organization, which can be in the form of initial resource 
outlay; effect on customers, suppliers, or staff; or something else. It is 
important that you know the consequences, beneﬁts, and objectives 
before taking that risk.
OBJECTIVES FOR A BI PROJECT
The BI project must be planned and based on business and IT strategy. 
It must also have speciﬁc objectives, such as to improve organizational 
performance, lower cost, produce superior products, or be more com-
petitive in the marketplace. This can be done through analytics like 
descriptive reports or with more elaborate schemes that include data 
mining and executive dashboards.
Figure 7.2
External Forces  The ﬁrst ﬁve forces were identiﬁed by Porter, The
Competitive Advantage of Nations. The sixth force was identiﬁed by D. R. Gnyawali and B. 
J. Park, “Co-Opetition and Technology Innovations in Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises: 
A Multilevel Conceptual Model,” Journal of Small Business Management 47, no. 3 (2009): 
308–30.
Your
Organization
Bargaining Power
of Customers
Threats /of New
Entrants
Bargaining Power
of Suppliers
Competitive
Rivalry
Co-opetition
Threat of Substitute
Products
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E
◂
133
Objectives are often crafted based on the skill set of the exist-
ing staff. This might be a mistake. Standardizing objectives and solu-
tions, then hiring the necessary staff or consultants or buying the 
needed solution, may be the best way to achieve the desired results. 
According to Ed Laprade, the CEO of ADNET Technologies, the debate 
of standardization can “sometimes almost be a religious one.”2 These 
thorny issues must be considered as objectives are set.
For more than 100 years, Graniterock—a Watsonville, California, 
provider of stone and quarried materials—has held stellar customer 
service as its biggest competitive differentiator.3 To further enhance its 
operations, Graniterock decided to implement a new Radio Frequency 
Identiﬁcation (RFID) system with tags and readers. As the RFID infra-
structure was being implemented, it became apparent that the exist-
ing BI solution had to be retooled because it was not suited to analyze 
the amount of data that would be generated by the new RFID system. 
The result was that a new BI infrastructure was created, with the 
objective of enhancing customer service by allowing customers direct 
access. Graniterock had to deal with the following issues:
◼An existing BI infrastructure that was not scalable or robust 
enough to handle the new data from the RFID system.
◼Increased costs because of the new BI infrastructure.
◼Increased data from the RFID solution.
◼Whether the BI solution could create ROI (often it does not, at 
least not directly).
◼The effect of the revamping of the BI solution on staff and 
customers.
◼Whether it would be possible to build a new BI solution that 
would support superior customer service
The Graniterock case highlights some important issues. It would 
have been better if Graniterock had understood these issues before it 
embarked on a BI project. A more thorough analysis of the compa-
ny’s existing systems before implementing the RFID solution would 
have made the entire implementation easier. Graniterock illustrates 
why it is important to create objectives before embarking on a BI 
project.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
134
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
Graniterock’s initial BI solution had grown organically alongside 
its ERP, whereas the new BI solution was an outgrowth of its RFID 
project. During the RFID project, the Graniterock staff quickly devel-
oped the objective of enhancing customer service through the new 
BI solution, and it was an important guide in the continued resource 
expenditure. Graniterock employees said it best: “From a customer-
service standpoint, more and more we’re realizing that we have all of 
this data that we can get in our customers’ hands.” That data fed into 
the BI project objectives. The moral is clear: A stated objective should 
guide all BI projects and should be decided before the sources of data 
are identiﬁed, not along the way.
THE ANALYTICS CYCLE
An analytics cycle describes how we collect, analyze, and distribute/
disseminate BI. A well-implemented analytics cycle creates BI that 
acts as a feedback loop, thus improving the cycle (see Figure 7.3). 
Each section of the analytics cycle is described later, but ﬁrst data 
types will be reviewed.
Figure 7.3
Analytics Cycle
COLLECT
ANALYZE
DISSIMMENATE
Database
Unstructured
Data
Data
Warehouse
Cloud
Data Provider
On-Premises
Analytic Tools
Cloud Provider 
Analytic Tools
Within
Organization
Outside
Organization
Feedback Loop So Collection, 
Analysis, and Dissemination Can
Be Improved. 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E
◂
135
Organizations hold everything from sales transactions to institu-
tional memory as data, which can be divided into two data types (see 
Figure 7.4):
1. Unstructured. This is a data set that does not have a pre-
deﬁned data model and does not ﬁt well into a relational table. 
It is usually text-heavy, and text-mining tools are often used to 
analyze it. It may contain discrete items like numbers, dates, 
and other facts, but not in a predeﬁned format. The ambiguous 
nature of unstructured data make them difﬁcult to store and 
analyze. A large proportion of available data is unstructured. 
E-mail is a good example of unstructured data.
2. Structured. This is data set whose format is predeﬁned and 
that potentially has a formal data model. Real-world items like 
product numbers and descriptions, suppliers’ addresses, cus-
tomer information and orders, and even the menu system on a 
web site are created digitally in predeﬁned formats.
Data Collection
Organizations are faced with an enormous amount of data from inter-
nal and external sources. It is important that you understand why 
Figure 7.4
Examples of Structured and Unstructured Data
Structured Data Example
Unstructured Data Example
XML, which has a deﬁned structure. This is a sample of XML from the menu system of author’s
website at www.gendron.info.
Email, which is freeform decided by the creator of the email.
This is a message to this book’s reader.
Dear Reader: This book provides a wealth of information about cloud compting, business intelligence
and strategy. I hope you enjoy it. Also, I like this picture of Stonehenge.
Regards,
Michael Gendron
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
136
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
you are collecting data and how those data support the objectives of 
your organization and its BI plan. As part of a BI plan, the ﬁrst step in 
data collection is to develop a set of objectives (e.g., what you want 
to accomplish or the BI you want to create) so you can decide which 
data will support those objectives. Once that is done, internal and 
external data sources can be reviewed, and their ﬁt into your objec-
tives can be understood.
Internal Sources of Data
Information exists in many forms. Some organizations still have ﬁl-
ing cabinets ﬁlled with orders and other information, while other 
organizations have adopted the use of spreadsheets. These forms 
of information are difﬁcult to manipulate into usable BI, but with 
effort it is possible. Organizations commonly have data stored in 
online transaction processing (OLTP) systems that record accounting, 
inventory, ﬁnancial, human resources, and other information. An 
OLTP often operates on an SQL database that is optimized to support 
the relationships among the data (e.g., with a common key like a 
social security number that allows records for the same person to be 
related).
These data are stored in databases and represent a wealth of infor-
mation that can be used to create BI. These are the structured data of 
the organization; they are often the input to BI applications and can 
be effectively analyzed. Here are some important concepts involved in 
storing structured internal data:
◼Data model. Speciﬁes how data are stored and the relation-
ships among those data. A data model is often referred to as a 
schema. An example is the schema that describes how airline 
reservation data is to be structured and stored.
◼Database. A repository of data typically organized according to 
a data model and structured in such a way that it can be que-
ried; for example, a database of all airline reservations that can 
be queried to determine seat availability.
◼Data management system. The system’s software that 
allows users and applications to interact with a database (e.g., 
MY-SQL, MS-SQL).
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E
◂
137
◼Data warehouse. Views of data that are often integrated 
across various databases within an organization and are used 
for reporting and analysis; for example, an airline reservation 
database that is combined with a food service database allowing 
the analysis of trends in food consumption by ﬂight patterns.
◼Online transaction processing (OLTP) systems. A type 
of information system that facilitates the processing of trans-
actions immediately and interactively (e.g., sales orders or 
inventory) and updates the appropriate databases (e.g., www
.amazon.com provides a front end to its OLTP that processes 
sales transaction).
Figure 7.5 shows the interaction of these data components.
It would be great if all information was structured and could 
be described by a data model. The fact is that most information is 
unstructured and large. Just think of the number of e-mails, memos, 
spreadsheets, LinkedIn pages, and Tweets generated worldwide 
on a daily basis. These hold valuable information but do not have 
the formatting requirement of a data model. These unstructured 
data are hard to store and even harder to analyze. These looser con-
sistency data are larger than the structured data your organization 
Figure 7.5
Interaction of Data Components
Database
Database
Database
Applications (Including OLTP) and Users Interact with DBMS
Data Warehouse Created
by Integrating Databases
Business
Intelligence
Data Model
Deﬁnes
Database
Data Model
Deﬁnes
Database
Data Model
Deﬁnes
Database
DBMS Allows Interaction and Manages Datbase
Business Analytics
Application
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
138
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
holds, but they can yield a wealth of information, if stored and ana-
lyzed properly.
One solution is to store these data in NoSQL (“not only” SQL) 
databases. NoSQL allows structured and unstructured data to be 
stored in the same database. The NoSQL database is optimized for 
record storage and retrieval, whereas the traditional SQL database is 
optimized to support relationships among data. NoSQL is designed to 
support large amounts of both structured and unstructured data.
External Sources of Data
Many cloud providers give access to their data via an application pro-
gram interface (API). These data can be combined with your own 
internal data or other cloud provider data to allow augmented analy-
sis. The combination of internal and external data creates an explosion 
of available data for analysis. For example, let’s assume your internal 
human resources database has people’s names and addresses, but you 
want to get more social information about your employees; you could 
use a LinkedIn or Facebook API to get the data that the employee 
have made available on those platforms. The idea of extended analy-
sis by combining data from different providers is part of the Big Data 
phenomenon. There are a number of cloud providers that allow API 
access to data that they store and make available as the data owner 
allows, some examples are:
◼LinkedIn, Facebook, Twitter, and Foursquare. These social 
media applications provide API access to data that they store, 
including location dependent data.
◼Salesforce. A suite of CRM applications provide access to your 
organization’s customer data.
◼Google Apps. This desktop productivity application provider 
has calendar, word processing, spreadsheet, and presentation 
functions.
There are also a number of providers that commoditize their own 
data and make them available via an API; some examples are:
◼InfoGroup. This source of business demographic information 
provides API searches of current local businesses (e.g., restau-
rants, shops, entertainment, sports, beauty parlors, and ﬁtness 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E
◂
139
centers). InfoGroup provides other companies (e.g., Topix and 
Google) with business details to be used in their services.
◼National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA).
NASA provides API access to data such as global rainfall mea-
surements and solar dynamics.
◼PolicyMap. This provider has collected and commoditized 
geographic information system data along with about 15,000 
indicators related to demographics, real estate, city crime rates, 
health, schools, and more. These data are made available via an 
API to organizations that want to incorporate PolicyMap data 
with other data and create custom analytics. A group called Citi 
Community Development created “a custom web-based appli-
cation that provides on-the-ﬂy congressional level statistics. . . . 
Citi Community Development and PolicyMap worked together 
to create a new interactive, web-based tool—My District Data—
that forges a critical link between federal decisions and local 
accountability.”4
There are numerous internal and external sources of data. It is 
important that your organization know its objectives for a BI project 
in order to be able to select the appropriate data. When a cloud data 
provider is used, the model changes as shown in Figure 7.6.
Data Analysis
With BI objectives in place and data sources selected, you can now 
decide how you are going to analyze the data. You can store all the 
data in-house and run the analysis there, or you can send the selected 
data to a cloud provider and run the analysis in-house or at a cloud 
provider; it’s a matter of meeting your organization’s needs and objec-
tives (see Figure 7.7). The choice of where applications and data will 
reside requires both technical and business decisions:
◼Data that have speciﬁc requirements (e.g., data governed by 
European Union privacy laws) may need to be stored on-prem-
ises or in a speciﬁc country.
◼The available technology may dictate that analysis be done 
off-premises because of the amount of computing power 
required.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
140
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
Figure 7.6
Cloud Data Provider BI
Database
and DBMS, OLTP etc.
Deﬁnes
Database
Data Aggregation Layer
Data Warehouse Created
by Aggregating Sources
Business
Intelligence
Cloud Data
Provider
Cloud Data 
Provider
Data Model
Deﬁnes
Database
Business Analytics
Application
Figure 7.7
BI Data and Application Location
Data Stored 
In-House
Data Stored at
a Cloud Provider
BI
Applications
In-House
BI
Applications
at Cloud 
Provider
Decide Where Data
and BI Applications Are
Located
Any Combination Is Possible 
Based on Organizational 
Needs and Objectives
◼Data may be purchased from a cloud provider and accessed via 
an API, necessitating a certain type of analysis.
◼Your organization may prefer an approach that lowers the 
ﬁnancial risk (i.e., lower upfront resource outlay or metered 
use) by deploying data and/or applications to a cloud provider.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E
◂
141
The analysis to create BI is limited only by the innovation, data, 
background, and statistical knowledge of the analyst. However, there 
are several major types of analysis that should be considered for the 
development of a BI solution. These can be used to create tools that 
support decision making (i.e., decision support tools or decision sup-
port systems). The types of analysis are as follows:
◼Descriptive reporting. Basic data queries that may involve 
tabular reports with averages, ratios, and totals. Normally a 
hindsight approach to analyzing historical data. An example 
would be a monthly sales report by region.
◼Online analytical processing (OLAP). The ability to quickly 
analyze complex data interactively to perform on-demand data 
modeling. OLAP provides these tools:
◼Data cube. A multidimensional arrangement of data that 
can be used to produce summaries, means, and other statis-
tics across dimensions. A data cube can have any number of 
dimensions. Each cell in the cube represents the computed 
statistic. OLAP arranges the data along the speciﬁed dimen-
sions (e.g., sales data by sales region, product type, and ﬁscal 
quarter; see Figure 7.8, which shows these three dimen-
sions). Statistical packages like SPSS and SAS, along with 
many other software solutions, support data cube analysis.
◼Slicing and dicing. The analysis of data at any speciﬁc point 
in the data cube across any dimensions.
◼Data mining. Discovering hidden relationships and using 
them to build predictive models. Data mining complements 
OLAP. For example, suppose that the sale of disposable baby 
diapers could predict the sale of beer. Why would that be 
true, and what should a grocery store do about it? In fact, at 
least one study shows this relationship to be true; it has been 
hypothesized that when fathers go out to buy diapers (perhaps 
on a late-night run), they also pick up beer. That suggests an 
important question: Should the diapers be moved closer to the 
beer to make access easier, or should they be moved far apart 
to force the customers to walk past other products they might 
buy? Data mining can discover the “beer and diapers” types 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
142
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
of relationships. Here are some basic ways that data mining 
does this:
◼Association discovery. The connection between diapers 
and beer is an example of association discovery. An associa-
tion between these two products has appeared frequently 
when grocery stores have done market basket analysis for a 
number of sales.
◼Sequence discovery. Used to show relationships over time. 
Suppose your grocery store has a customer loyalty pro-
gram that requires you to use an ID card to get discounts. 
Whenever you shop, you are tying each purchase you make 
to your ID card. Suppose you buy diapers one day and beer 
four days later. The grocery store now has a buying sequence 
that it can analyze. If that sequence happens often enough, 
then perhaps the grocery store should consider how it mar-
kets diapers and beer.
◼Clustering. Grouping records together by a similar attri-
bute. Suppose that to obtain your grocery store ID card, 
you had to state your gender and income level. The grocery 
store might ﬁnd that certain brands of diapers or beer cluster 
around one gender or the other and/or income levels. This 
would allow the store to market those products by targeting 
certain groups of individuals.
◼Classiﬁcation. Similar to clustering, but known before-
hand. A grocery store could segment sales data by gender to 
Figure 7.8
Data Cube Example
Product 1
Product 2
Product 3
Product 4
Product 5
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Sales Region 3
Sales Region 2
Sales Region 1
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E
◂
143
understand which gender purchases what brand of beer or 
diapers.
◼Unstructured data analysis. The analysis of data without a 
speciﬁc data model. It is often useful to uncover customer opin-
ions and preferences that an OLTP-driven analysis might not 
provide. The following tools are available for analyzing free-
form data:
◼Text mining. Techniques to extract information from text 
documents such as letters, e-mails, customer service logs, or 
feeds from social media services.
◼Natural language processing (NLP). NLP is embed-
ded in many text-mining tools and allows computers to 
determine meaning from text or human language input. 
It is an analytic tool that can assess sentiment in text (e.g., 
Twitter or Facebook posts). NLP should be included in all 
BI plans that analyze text or other human language input.
◼Web usage mining. A way to understand the path that 
users take through a web site. This can assist in optimizing 
web site layout, menus, and searches.
◼Unstructured data analysis is a large discipline with an expan-
sive number of methods and options available, such as the 
following:
◼Appliances to make sense out of social, Web, and application 
data offered by companies such as Precog.
◼Applications and services offered by companies that perform 
resume scanning, such as Sovren, to assist in matching can-
didates to particular jobs.
◼IBM’s Watson engagement advisor, which is a “combina-
tion of natural language processing, hypothesis generation 
& evaluation, and machine learning.”5
◼Predictive analysis. Using data to predict consumer behavior. 
Suppose you are a satellite TV provider and you want to under-
stand your market penetration in metropolitan and rural areas 
so you can predict consumer behavior and your target market. 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
144
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
You might create a graph (i.e., based on linear regression and 
best ﬁt) like the one shown in Figure 7.9. The graph suggests 
that the higher-income customers in metropolitan areas sub-
scribe longer than lower-income customers in the same areas, 
whereas lower-income customers in rural areas subscribe for 
longer periods and leave the service less quickly. Your organi-
zation might determine that your marketing resources are best 
targeted to lower-income rural people.
◼Knowledge management. Though not a speciﬁc mathemati-
cal or statistical technique, this is about managing knowledge 
generated and contained within your organization. In this type 
of system, knowledge is treated as an asset and is often tex-
tual information. It is useful for recall and mining. An example 
would be:
◼A consulting ﬁrm that requires employees to submit a sum-
mary of their experiences and solutions into a knowledge 
management system after each engagement so that future 
employees can look for solutions when they are working 
with new customers.
◼Information visualization. Used to show complex represen-
tations of data so they can be more easily understood and ana-
lyzed. Some major types of visual techniques are the following:
◼Geographic information system (GIS). Data-driven 
maps used to enhance an understanding of the geography 
and related data. For example, a map of weather patterns 
and the proposed locations of cell towers might give more 
information about optimal locations and be more informa-
tive than a graph. Or a map that shows the locations of auto-
mated teller machines for cash withdrawals might be more 
informative than a list by address.
◼Dashboard. A display of key indicators required to make a 
decision. Often includes the ability to click on an indicator 
and get more details. For example, a manager looking at a 
map of sales data by geographic region might be able to click 
on an area that appears to be performing poorly in order to 
see which store is the issue.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E
◂
145
These are the fundamental tools used to create BI. There are a 
number of vendors that provide tools, including statistical software 
vendors like SAS and SPSS. BI tools are also built into many applica-
tions, like Salesforce. The types of tools you need depend on your 
BI plan. As a decision support tool, BI aids in the understanding of a 
large amount of data. The tools can be used by themselves or in com-
bination to enhance decision making, improve customer service, and 
ultimately improve competitive positioning.
Data Distribution
As part of a BI plan, you must decide on the distribution of the intel-
ligence. This decision must be driven by the goals and objectives of 
the BI project, but that is just the beginning. Not only should you dis-
seminate the information, you must also provide a way for the users 
of the information to provide feedback about the quality, content, 
and format—this is called the BI feedback loop. In that way, the BI can 
improve over time.
Self-Service BI
Many BI tools are not very user-friendly, which can create problems 
when disseminating tools to end users. Self-service BI is a way to solve 
Dashed line represents
customers in metropolitan
areas
Solid line represents
customers in rural areas
How Long a Subscriber
Customer Income
Figure 7.9
Predictive analysis Example
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
146
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
that problem—it gives users the tools to ask questions and do analy-
sis on their own terms. “Self-service BI is technology that provides 
non-technical individuals who need data with the ability to gather 
and display meaningful information about the desired subject mat-
ter.”6 Before self-service BI is implemented, strategic decisions must 
be made and the BI plan must be created. The technical and business 
intricacies of cloud providers or on-premises software, identiﬁcation 
of data sources, and such must be addressed before a self-service BI 
application is made available. These signiﬁcant undertakings before 
deploying a self-service BI make it possible for the users to access 
complicated queries on their own terms.
The Primary and Preventative Care GIS is a public-sector self-
service BI solution.7 It allows authorized public health agencies to 
query health indicators from a statewide database by various geo-
graphic areas, to overlay the areas and indicators, and to incorporate 
local data on a thematic map. For example, if the number of patients 
with cancer was mapped along with the location of toxic waste sites, 
a relationship might become evident. If you also overlaid the num-
ber of oncologists, you could determine whether there are sufﬁcient 
numbers of them in the right locations. This mapping might cause a 
policy shift within the state.
Self-service BI is a way to reduce the effect of BI requests on 
an organization’s IT department. Nike was faced with this problem. 
According to Jimmy Lee, an architect at the company, Nike is creat-
ing self-service BI in response to the constantly changing needs of 
business users. With each new report “our users say, ‘We have more 
questions that we need answered.’ . . . Meanwhile, the complexity of 
the analysis that the business needs is growing, too. We’re having to 
do more complicated work—more data types, deeper questions—in a 
shorter amount of time.”8
Who Gets BI
The bottom line in distribution/dissemination is that BI has to get in 
the right hands for it to have an effect. It is not enough for BI to be cre-
ated; we have all seen the big reports that are generated every month 
and stored in case they are needed. That is not BI. BI creates views 
of your organization and its customers, suppliers, processes, and staff 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E
◂
147
that allow the organization to be managed better. Well-disseminated 
BI provides a way for consumers of the information to provide feed-
back so the BI system can grow more useful.
CONCLUSION
BI is a large topic with many facets that must be driven by an orga-
nization’s business and IT strategies. A BI plan must be in place to 
obtain the maximum from the investment in a BI deployment and 
must be driven by strategic objectives. You must consider the internal 
value-producing activities of the organization and the external forces 
that put pressure on your organization in order to obtain maximal 
outcomes.
The basic analytic cycle is to collect data, analyze it, and then 
distribute/disseminate it. There are many decisions to make through-
out this cycle, including whether to deploy in-house or use a cloud 
provider for software and data. The objectives of the BI project, the 
types of analysis, the necessary data elements, and the dissemina-
tion of the BI are all important decisions. Within each decision, many 
issues must be considered.
The ﬁnal part of the analytic cycle, distributing the BI, is probably 
one of the trickiest. Who gets the BI, how they get it (self-service or 
delivered by your BI department), and how they can give feedback 
to the system are all of paramount importance to the success of a BI 
plan. A successful BI plan can be instrumental in driving the success 
of a business.
The cloud is a game changer for BI—you no longer depend on just 
your own organization’s data stores. Data analysis takes on a whole 
new meaning when you can leave your data in the cloud (or use your 
local data store) and combine it with data from cloud providers. The 
cloud brings together storage, compute, and network services in ways 
that change the creation of BI. With providers offering software like 
IBM’s Business Analytics in the Cloud and Pentaho’s Data Integration 
and Business Analytics for Cloud Applications, your organization no 
longer needs to deploy a large expensive infrastructure in-house but 
can use cloud providers on a metered use basis. That allows your 
organization to manage the risk of BI projects. Cloud providers offer 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
148
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
a myriad of data from social media and CRM applications to business 
demographics and geographic data. Cloud data and business analytics 
providers allow a whole new generation of BI to be developed that 
provides your organization with new and better ways to manage its 
core business and interact with its supply chain.
A ﬁnal note: BI plans and systems can be resource-intensive (e.g., 
a manufacturing executive estimated to the author privately that its 
executive dashboard cost more than $5 million a year to maintain). 
Using a cloud approach can reduce the overall risk and some of the 
initial resource outlay. However, as with any project, the scope and 
scale of the BI project will dictate what longer-term resources are 
necessary.
NOTES
1. Gendron, Business Intelligence Applied.
2. Edward Laprade, ADNET Technologies, personal communication, July 10, 2013.
3. S. Swoyer, “BI Case Study: RFID Keeps Customer Service Stellar, ROI Strong,” Business
Intelligence Journal 10 (Fall 2005): 35–38, http://0-search.proquest.com.www.consuls.
org/docview/222643146?accountid=9970.
4. Policy Map, “Client Stories,” 2013, www.policymap.com/clientstories.html.
5. “IBM Watson Engagement Advisor,” IBM Watson Solution, IBM, May 2013, www-
03.ibm.com/innovation/us/watson/pdf/ibm_watson_engagement_brochure.pdf.
6. Ziff Davis, “Self Service Business Intelligence,” white paper, 2012, http://hosteddocs.
ittoolbox.com/zdwp_self_service_bi_v2.pdf.
7. Michael Gendron, “The PPCGIS: A Technical Overview of the Pilot Implementation,” 
paper presented at the Conference of the American Public Health Association, New 
York, 1996.
8. Pete Swabey, “Self-Service Business Intelligence,” Information Age, June 17, 2013, 
www.information-age.com/technology/information-management/123457131/
self-service-business-intelligence.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
149
C H A P T E R 8
Big Data’s Effects 
on BI Efforts 
in the Cloud
B
ig Data is a phenomenon that is created by the ubiquity of trans-
actions and devices that generate digital information in our 
society today. It is not just databases or data views created from 
large data stores. Globally, individuals generate a multitude of tweets, 
LinkedIn postings, Foursquare location data, Instagram images, and 
many other social factoids every second of the day. Walmart’s data 
store is estimated to be more than 2.5 petabytes—the result of keep-
ing the details of more than a million transactions per hour.1 Many 
web sites contain forums that allow purchasers to rate hotel rooms, 
airline ﬂights, or other products and services. Organizations have cus-
tomer service, sales, human resource, and other data in their OLTP 
stores. An estimated 90 trillion e-mails per year and a wealth of other 
memos and phone records are available for analysis. These existing 
sources amount to an almost overwhelming amount of information 
that can be stored, processed, and understood—that is, the Big Data 
phenomenon.
The cloud enables the coupling of data stores to create BI that can 
help organizations competitively. Big Data also affects the individual; 
for example, the individual can use existing data stores to research 
companies where they want to be employed or to ﬁnd out about an 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
150
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
organization’s customer service record, just as the enterprise can use 
these sources to uncover customers’ perceptions of their products. 
The uses of these data are limited only by the innovativeness of the 
person analyzing them and the resources available to do so (e.g., time, 
money, and computing power).
According to Gartner, Big Data exists along three dimensions 
(known as the three Vs):
1. Volume. The amount of data available.
2. Velocity. The speed at which data change.
3. Variety. The types of data available.
Organizations are faced with complexities and costs to extract the 
maximum BI from Big Data; they also reap beneﬁts by doing so. As 
the volume, velocity, and variety of data increase, the cost of man-
aging the data also increases. But so does the ability to create more 
complex and accurate BI. The complexity of suitable analytics goes 
from basic descriptive statistics (e.g., mean, ratio, and sums) to more 
predictive ones (e.g., data mining and regression) as there are larger 
amounts and more varied types of data to analyze (see Figure 8.1).
Volume, Velocity, Variety of Data
Small
Large
Predictive Analytic Accuracy
Complexity of Analytics
Descriptive
Predictive
As the volume, velocity, and variety of
data increases so does the ability to create
more accurate and complex BI; small
amounts of data can be used for
descriptive analytics while larger amounts
of data can be suitable for more predictive
analytics.
Figure 8.1
Data Characteristics and Type of Analytics
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
B I G D A T A ’ S  E F F E C T S  O N  B I E F F O R T S  I N  T H E  C L O U D
◂
151
Analyzing an organization’s customer service system might yield 
customer perceptions of the organization’s products and services, but 
analyzing online forums or social factoids is likely to greatly enhance 
the organization’s BI.
DEFINING BIG DATA
In recent years organizations have had to determine how they are 
going to respond to the Big Data paradigm to stay competitive. Never 
before have we had the amount or variety of data streaming into our 
organizations at such a speed as we do today. These characteristics 
of Big Data require an organization to develop and implement a BI 
plan, as was discussed in Chapter 7. For an organization to maintain 
a competitive position, it is important that sources of data, ways to 
analyze those data, and dissemination methods (e.g., self-service BI) 
are identiﬁed and put in place. This is all complicated by the Big Data 
phenomenon. This phenomenon goes beyond database structures, 
data warehouses, structured data, and unstructured data to the sheer 
volume, variety, and velocity of data available today.
The three dimensions (volume, velocity, and variety) combine to 
create Big Data (see Figure 8.2). Organizations face Big Data along 
any two or all three of these dimensions. Your BI plan must deal with 
the dimensions that occur in your data stream and put appropriate 
processes in place. The organization that has a high volume and high 
variety of data that change slowly (i.e., not high velocity) will deal 
with this differently from the way that an organization deals with 
a high volume and high variety of data with a high velocity. Each 
organization requires a BI plan tailored to the type of data stream it 
encounters. In order to help make those distinctions, the dimensions 
of Big Data will be discussed next.
High Volume
The amount of data that organizations create today can be some-
what overwhelming. This is driven by a number of forces. Technology 
has exploded in the past century, and it has become common to 
collect everything, from data about our business and who accesses 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
152
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
its data stores to biometric data. Some of the driving forces are the 
following:
◼Legal requirements. We have seen countries put laws into 
place that have the unintended consequence of mandating 
additional data collection. For example, laws to protect pri-
vacy may have the secondary effect of forcing organizations 
to collect, store, and report information on who accesses their 
data. These laws create the need for a completely new level 
of data collection and the staff to manage that data. Examples 
of such privacy laws are the Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act and the Fair Credit Reporting Act in the 
United States; and Article 8 of the European Convention on 
Human Rights in Europe. These laws were created to protect 
citizen privacy but also require a new layer of data collection 
that must be managed.
◼Need to understand customer perceptions. If a company 
is interested in knowing how current and potential customers 
view its products and services, it must be familiar with web 
sites that provide customer ratings. These are too many to list 
Big
Data
Big
Data
Big
Data
Big
Data
High
Velocity
High
Variety
High
Volume
Figure 8.2
Big Data
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
B I G D A T A ’ S  E F F E C T S  O N  B I E F F O R T S  I N  T H E  C L O U D
◂
153
here, but some examples are www.bookings.com and www
.hotel.com in the hotel industry, www.travelocity.com and 
www.kayak.com in the travel industry, and www.amazon
.com, which sells everything from books to lawn mowers.
◼Need to understand the social in social networking.
Besides the web sites that allow you to purchase products and 
services and then rate them, there are many social networking 
sites like Facebook, LinkedIn, and Foursquare, where people 
can express their opinions. Organizations are not exempt 
from involvement in social networks. That involvement is 
essential if an organization wants to understand customers’ 
perceptions.
Social media marketing allows companies to reach cus-
tomers through online venues such as Facebook and Twitter.
This marketing is different from other outlets like billboards, 
TV, radio, newspapers, and magazines. Online social media 
marketing allows two-way communication between the orga-
nization and its customers. It also adds to the Big Data phe-
nomenon whereby organizations need to analyze customer 
perceptions while also being part of the ongoing conversations 
about their products.
Coca-Cola provides a good example of being involved in 
social media with its Ambassador Program. The program sent a 
number of people around the world to places where Coca-Cola 
products are sold and then had the ambassadors’ blog about the 
experiences. These blogs added a substantial amount of content 
to social networks about Coca-Cola and allowed the company 
to both monitor and manage perceptions about its products. 
Today, Coca-Cola boasts a large social media presence that 
includes almost 70 million “likes” on Facebook, 287,000 follow-
ers on LinkedIn, and 94,000 followers on Twitter. This impres-
sive cloud-based social media presence was expensive to create 
and is expensive to maintain, but it allows Coca-Cola to be part 
of discussions about its products and maintain contact with its 
consumer base. This allows Coca-Cola to utilize social media to 
maintain its market share and would not be possible without 
cloud technologies.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
154
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
◼Maximization of existing data sources. The amount of data 
being generated through OLTP systems, e-mail, memos, phone 
records, and cloud data providers grows annually. Organizations 
must be aware of which sources of data are important and 
which should be analyzed.
Consider the organization that monitors Amazon’s Author 
Central so they understand how their books are selling and how 
they rank against other books. Author Central provides a dash-
board that shows sales by geographic region, using data pro-
vided by Nielsen BookScan (the part of the Nielsen Company 
that tracks print book sales). Now consider what Amazon or 
Nielsen must do to collect sales data on all books and correlate 
it to customer reviews—that epitomizes Big Data.
◼New uses for technology. New uses for technology are found 
every day. Grocery stores have been tracking our purchases 
for years with loyalty cards; at the grocery store we often use 
loyalty cards and scan product bar codes to determine prices. 
This creates a linkage between us and the products we buy, 
allowing the grocery store to target market. Today, some gro-
cery stores and even other retail stores are linking those loy-
alty cards and purchases to social media sites like Facebook or 
to customers’ e-mail addresses. That way the store can create 
linkages between the data from cloud data providers and their 
own data. This allows them to mine for customer preferences 
and social factoids.
Many other organizations are creating data linkages. For 
example, when we reserve an airline ﬂight through a carrier 
that uses the Sabre reservation system, the carrier has the ability 
to mine our reservations. Since Sabre manages about 40 percent 
of all ﬂights, that means a large portion of airline reservations 
can be compared and linked to cloud data sources, including 
social media sites like Facebook.2
◼Effects of mobile computing. No longer do you need to be 
tethered to a desktop to create data. Mobile devices allow data 
generation, storage, and analysis virtually anywhere and any-
time. This topic is so important that Chapter 9 is devoted to it.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
B I G D A T A ’ S  E F F E C T S  O N  B I E F F O R T S  I N  T H E  C L O U D
◂
155
These are just examples of the many forces that create Big Data. 
The ubiquity of the Internet, mobile devices, e-commerce, and 
desktop computing converge with other forces and technologies to 
yield Big Data. There are potentially billions of people and organi-
zations that can buy and sell books, reserve airline tickets, or post 
social factoids in real time, generating tremendous numbers of OLTP 
transactions, customer reviews, author rankings, and other informa-
tion. The result is high-volume, high-variety, high-velocity data that 
must be collected, stored, analyzed, turned into BI, and distributed. 
Organizations have a large number of data sources to select from 
when they want to create BI, and they must do so carefully to yield 
an appropriate return.
High Velocity
High-velocity data means that organizations are bombarded with a 
stream of data at a very fast rate. This relatively new phenomenon 
presents particular problems. As stated on the SAS web site, “Customer 
transactions, internal processes, changing market conditions and bur-
geoning social media add to the volumes of data that organizations 
must access and deal with each day. Traditional approaches, which 
apply analytics after data is stored, may provide insights too late.”3
Unlike never before, organizations have data ﬂowing into their 
data stores from a variety of sources at an unheard-of speed, and 
if those data drive critical decision making, you have the Big Data 
high-velocity problem. Event stream processing, which analyzes data 
as they are received is one way to deal with this problem. It ana-
lyzes high-velocity data in real time to shorten the time for critical 
decision making. Some examples of event stream processing are the 
following:
◼Fraud detection. Banks can scan each transaction (e.g., credit 
card charges or ATM and checking account withdrawals) as 
they are received to ensure they are legitimate.
◼Mining of social media for customers’ perceptions.
Organizations can perform real-time, on-demand analysis 
of social factoids as they are posted in order to understand 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
156
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
customer perceptions. The author has experienced this person-
ally: when he posted his perceptions about a recent mortgage 
closing to Facebook, the mortgage company contacted him 
within 20 minutes.
◼Personalized marketing. It is possible to target a market 
based on customers’ web site searches. Your organization could 
present targeted offers to customers as they search the web for 
products or services.
There have been many technical methods proposed to handle 
the high-velocity Big Data problem. One method is Apache Hadoop. 
Hadoop is an open-source framework that was derived from Google’s 
MapReduce and Google’s File System. Hadoop was designed to support 
running applications on large clusters of commodity hardware in a par-
allel computing environment. It is designed to manage lots of data, both 
structured and unstructured, and can be deployed on cloud provider 
platforms such as Amazon Web Services, Microsoft Azure, and Heroku. 
Hadoop deployment originally required the local coding of software to 
interface with data. However, some vendors have adapted their tools 
to support the Hadoop platform—Informatica, a data integration and 
services company, is a good example. These tools allow Hadoop to be 
integrated into the rest of the organization’s data management infra-
structure so that Hadoop does not become another data silo in the orga-
nization. Other software vendors like IBM, Oracle, and Microsoft, offer 
connectors or have retooled their software to interact with Hadoop.
Hadoop is not the only solution to the Big Data high-velocity 
problem. Some other examples are SAS, DataFlux, Oracle Fast Data 
Resources, and IBM InfoSphere. These solutions offer software 
engines that give the ability to analyze real-time data streaming into 
your organization. These vendors offer their own data management 
solutions as well as Hadoop connectors. The issue for your organiza-
tion is to determine the best way to manage high-velocity Big Data as 
a competitive asset that can be turned into BI.
High Variety
More varied data types and sources are available today than ever 
before. As data variety expanded, our understanding of how to 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
B I G D A T A ’ S  E F F E C T S  O N  B I E F F O R T S  I N  T H E  C L O U D
◂
157
use those data has also expanded. Early decision support systems 
created reports, dashboards, and other visual representations of 
data from our own systems. Not very many data sources external 
to organizations were easily available. The hard data often came 
from our own data stores (most frequently OLTP systems), and the 
soft data often came from analysis of trade journals, government 
reports, and news articles. Together these data formed the foun-
dations of decision support. With the advent of cloud data and ser-
vice providers, the necessity for BI infrastructure and the variety 
of data necessary to attain and maintain competitive position has 
expanded. Cloud computing, mobile devices, the Internet, and Big 
Data became a game changer for the way organizations create and 
use BI.
Throughout this book we have reviewed a number of data sources 
available to analyze and create BI:
◼Social media and social factoids, such as Facebook, LinkedIn, 
Instagram, and Foursquare
◼Internal data stores from your organization (e.g., OLTP, CRM, 
and ERP systems)
◼Legally mandated stores
◼Product reviews on various web sites (possibly your own orga-
nization’s web site)
◼E-mail
◼Data providers like Nielsen BookScan (book sales data), 
InfoGroup (business demographics), and PolicyMap (geo-
graphic information)
◼SaaS providers like Salesforce or Google Apps
And the list goes on. An Internet search will yield others. It would 
probably take this entire book to list all the data providers available 
today, and by the time the book is published, the list would be out-
dated. Clearly, there are many data providers available to create BI. As 
part of your organization’s BI plan, you must determine which data 
providers can give you the information needed to maintain competi-
tive position in your industry.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
158
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
Big Data, BI, and the Cloud
As you progress through the bevy of in-house data stores, cloud data, 
and service providers and contemplate combining them to create BI, 
you must determine whether the technical and analytical capabilities 
of your staff are up to the challenge. Cloud service providers may 
require speciﬁc programming or other technical skills, data providers 
may require specialized knowledge of creating BI from the various 
data sources, and internal data stores may require a skill set unique 
to managing those technologies. Internal and external BI solutions 
all have specialized needs that affect resource allocations, budgets, 
and timelines. The organizational consequences of these factors and 
others must be understood as Big Data, BI, mobile, and cloud deploy-
ments are considered.
MANAGING BIG DATA
According to Forrester’s glossary and their pragmatic deﬁnition of Big 
Data, your organization needs to be able to manage its data stores. 
You must be able to create actionable and pragmatic BI. This is accom-
plished by the following:
◼Storing. The ability to collect and store Big Data.
◼Processing. Having the staff and other resources to properly 
clean, enrich, and analyze appropriate data stores to create BI.
◼Accessing. Knowing how to retrieve, search, and integrate 
data stores to create meaningful visual representations that are 
useful and accessible to decision makers.
The organization’s ability to store, process, and access Big Data 
must be as well understood as the variety, velocity, and volume of Big 
Data so that investments in Big Data and BI can be maximized.
Storing
Big Data involves a stream of information that organizations collect 
and store. The type, size, and other characteristics of your organi-
zation determine how much information is streaming in. That data 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
B I G D A T A ’ S  E F F E C T S  O N  B I E F F O R T S  I N  T H E  C L O U D
◂
159
stream must be stored and made ready for processing so your users 
can access it. This may sound trivial, but based on your organization’s 
technical abilities and needs, where to store your data can be some-
what complex. For example:
◼Do you manage and store your e-mail or web site on-premises, 
or do you deploy to a SaaS provider like Google, a PaaS pro-
vider like Microsoft Azure, or an IaaS provider like Amazon 
Web Services?
◼Storing on-premises may make sense if you need that level of 
control, have staff with the necessary technical abilities, and 
have the infrastructure and Internet access to handle the data 
stream. Conversely, off-premises service providers will elimi-
nate some of the up-front costs and need for on-premises infra-
structure and staff, but may yield less long-term operational 
control of your content at a higher total cost of operation.
◼Do you collect data about (name your need: GIS, demograph-
ics, even annual rainfall) and build your own data store, or 
do you purchase the data from a cloud data provider? Which 
is easier to combine with your on-premises data stores, and 
which maximizes BI creation? Collecting data in-house may 
make sense if they are not available cost-effectively from a 
provider. However, if you do collect data in-house, do you 
have the staff to maintain them and the means to ensure their 
veracity and currency? On the other hand, would a service 
provider be better at that? Would its SLA provide appropriate 
guarantees?
◼Where do you store data in general? Does an IaaS provider 
like Amazon Web Services make sense? Alternatively, is it 
more cost-effective, and does it give a higher level of security, 
processing ability, and access to have the data on-premises? 
If you are a high-tech laboratory like Sandia, a contractor for 
the U.S. Department of Energy’s National Nuclear Security 
Administration, you might need on-premises infrastructure 
to store your information securely, but a business may ﬁnd it 
more effective to store its data and ﬁles at a cloud provider so 
the employees can access it from anywhere.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
160
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
Dropbox and SkyDrive are two good examples of SaaS ﬁle 
storage providers that allow information to be stored/retrieved 
on any device with the appropriate software installed. However, 
Dropbox and Skydive store ﬁles, and although the ﬁles can be 
stored, processed, and combined with other data to create BI, the 
question of data stores and their location is a bit different. IaaS 
providers like Amazon Web Services can store databases, Hadoop 
ﬁle structures, and other formats very cost-effectively, but that 
leaves local resources and staff to manage the IaaS provider.
Regarding storage to accommodate Big Data, you have the choice 
to store on-premises, in an external cloud arrangement, or in a hybrid 
(see Figure 8.3).
There are several questions you must ask before making a deci-
sion on how to collect and store data:
◼Do you have the necessary staff to build and maintain the data 
store? Both on-premises Big Data and cloud stores require staff, 
but of different types. What type of stafﬁng makes most sense for 
your organization? Do you have or need technical staff or staff 
familiar with the data who can clean and maintain it? Or both? 
◼Do you hire staff to build infrastructure, or do you hire less staff 
and use cloud providers? Do you already have staff in-house 
with expertise in the technologies or that can be trained?
TCO?
Necessary Access?
Appropriate Security?
Change to Stafﬁng?
Hybrid
External
Cloud
On-
Premises
Necessary Staff?
Sufﬁcient Infrastructure?
Organizational Impact?
Cost-Effective?
Figure 8.3
Where to Store Big Data
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
B I G D A T A ’ S  E F F E C T S  O N  B I E F F O R T S  I N  T H E  C L O U D
◂
161
◼What solution is less risky for your organization? Is it better to 
hire staff and build infrastructure or move to external cloud 
providers, where you pay on a metered use basis?
◼Do you have sufﬁcient ICT infrastructure (e.g., hardware or 
software) to store locally or put your data with a cloud provider?
◼What will the consequences to your organization be, in terms of 
stafﬁng, resources, and risk, by storing locally or in the cloud?
◼What is the TCO for an on-premises infrastructure versus a 
cloud infrastructure? Does a hybrid infrastructure make sense?
◼Do the cloud providers under consideration guarantee required 
access and security? Can you provide these better on-premises?
This short list of questions covers the basics that must be con-
sidered when collecting, storing, and maintaining Big Data. 
Figure 8.4 gives an example of how you could compare vendors using 
these questions. These considerations are important for maximizing 
the investment in Big Data and BI.
◼Enter the vendor name
◼Modify/add lines as necessary
◼Determine how important the attributes are to your 
organization
◼Determine how well vendor meets need at the level of 
importance indicated
◼Talley the number of yes/no in the Vendor Meets Need
column and use to compare vendors
◼E.G., if an attribute is rated as EXTREMELY IMPORTANT and 
vendor does an exceptional job of meeting the need then 
they would be scored YES, if they do not do an exceptional 
job of meeting that need then they would be scored NO
◼Scoring: Organizational Importance → Level At Which 
Vendor Meets Need
Figure 8.4
Cloud Data Storage Adoption Worksheet
(Continued)
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
162
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
◼Extremely Important → Exceptional
◼Very Important → Very Good
◼Important → Good
◼It is assumed that
◼All attributes are important to your organization
◼Vendors that do not score at least “good” on all attributes 
will not be considered
Vendor Name:_______________________________________
Organizational Importance
Vendor 
Meets 
Need
Attribute
Extremely 
Important
Very 
Important
Important
Yes
No
1
Necessary and 
Sufﬁcient Staff
2
Cloud Provider 
Support
3
Risk of Using Vendor
4
Sufﬁcient ICT Already 
On-Premises
5
Organizational Impact
6
Total Cost of 
Ownership
On-Premises
7
Total Cost of 
Ownership in Cloud
8
Sufﬁcient Security in a 
Cloud Solution
9
Sufﬁcient Security
On-Premises
10
Add More Lines as 
Needed
Total Number of Yes and No
Figure 8.4
(Continued)
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
B I G D A T A ’ S  E F F E C T S  O N  B I E F F O R T S  I N  T H E  C L O U D
◂
163
Processing
Choosing where to process Big Data is much like choosing where to 
store it. Similar to collecting and storing Big Data, processing it can 
occur on-premises or with an IaaS, a SaaS, or a PaaS cloud provider. 
Each offers different opportunities and beneﬁts to your organization. 
A Big Data solution can also be a hybrid of any of these options. The 
highlights of each are as follows:
◼IaaS providers like Amazon Web Services offer an entire infra-
structure (i.e., compute, storage, and network) that your orga-
nization can use to deploy a Big Data solution. In order to 
process your data at an IaaS provider, your organization would 
procure the necessary software licenses, build the necessary 
software images, and then upload them. The IaaS provider 
would supply computing and storage on a metered use basis 
and charge accordingly. Building a Big Data processing solu-
tion with an IaaS provider is more technically complex than 
other cloud service models, but it gives you the most ﬂexibility 
among the cloud choices. Your staff would remotely access the 
data stores and associated BI applications processed at a cloud 
provider.
An IaaS solution requires the necessary infrastructure and 
connectivity on-premises that allows access to the IaaS pro-
vider, but it will avoid the initial expense of building the entire 
Big Data infrastructure in-house. In an IaaS solution, the on-
premises infrastructure is much smaller, since Big Data stores 
and processing are at a cloud provider. With an IaaS solution, 
you can purchase the services necessary to deploy Big Data and 
BI solutions, but you will still need a technically sophisticated 
staff to build and maintain them.
◼A PaaS provider like Heroku will offer an integrated platform 
with database, operating environment, and other services on 
a pay-as-you-go basis.4 The provider operates within a spe-
ciﬁc environment, and your organization’s staff builds and/or 
deploys applications on that environment. The applications are 
accessed remotely over the Internet. The platform is built and 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
164
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
maintained by the PaaS provider, alleviating the need for your 
staff to do so and thus decreasing the upfront cost to deploy 
a Big Data or BI solution. You may be limited by the updates 
done to the PaaS environment. For example, if you require 
an update to Unix or Java because you need new functional-
ity, you may be limited by the revision level offered by the 
PaaS provider. Overall, a PaaS solution is good for an organi-
zation that wants to develop or deploy an application on an 
infrastructure that it does not want to own or maintain. Your 
organization will most likely have a larger cost of operation 
long-term, but it will get the ability to discontinue a Big Data or 
BI project that is not delivering as promised.
◼SaaS providers like GoodData offer Big Data storage and a 
cloud BI application packaged together. With limited program-
ming, your data scientists can build Big Data stores and pro-
cess them. Big Data SaaS providers often have connections to 
other cloud providers, like Twitter, Facebook, and Salesforce. 
Your organization will need the necessary infrastructure and 
connectivity on-premises so it can access the SaaS provider’s 
services. The SaaS provider will offer service contracts on a 
metered use basis, often allowing your organization to use pro-
vider services and deploy or cancel at will. That minimizes your 
organization’s risk (i.e., very low upfront costs and the ability 
to discontinue on short notice), compared to other methods of 
creating Big Data solutions. However, your organization will be 
constrained by the type of data and processing supported by the 
SaaS provider and its BI solution.
On-premises Big Data solutions can be built. They require staff and 
infrastructure resources to process the data. Upfront, this is the most 
expensive Big Data or BI solution, but when security, privacy, or other 
concerns are of paramount importance, it may be the best solution.
The choice of where to process Big Data depends on several 
factors:
◼Risk. Does your organization want to minimize risk (i.e., 
use cloud providers on a pay-as-you-go basis rather than 
build in-house infrastructure)? Cloud providers allow you to 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
B I G D A T A ’ S  E F F E C T S  O N  B I E F F O R T S  I N  T H E  C L O U D
◂
165
discontinue using and paying for their services, whereas build-
ing a Big Data or BI processing solution on-premises means that 
you have to make a substantial up-front investment and may 
be stuck with that infrastructure if the project is discontinued.
◼On-premises or off-premises. Does your organization’s Big 
Data or BI processing needs (e.g., security or access) require an 
on-premises solution, and does that make the most sense?
◼Features. A particular cloud provider may give you a limited 
platform on which to deploy a Big Data or BI solution. The 
cloud provider service offerings must be totally understood to 
make sure you can process and create the type of BI your orga-
nization needs.
◼Hybrid. Does a hybrid on-premises and a cloud solution make 
the most sense?
Organizations must be concerned with these issues when pro-
cessing Big Data to create useful BI. They must also be concerned 
with innovation and answer questions like these: Is your organiza-
tion interested in deploying a new, possibly untested, Big Data or BI 
solution? Might a cloud solution offer advantages that promote inno-
vation? Is the mix of CAPEX/OPEX important? What is the TCO? Is 
deploying a solution without substantial up-front investment impor-
tant? All these issues (and others) must be part of any Big Data or 
BI plan.
Accessing
Accessing Big Data depends on the following: Have you stored and 
processed your data so that your data scientists can retrieve them, 
integrate them with other data stores, and make them useful by apply-
ing BI techniques? Here our Big Data deﬁnitions from this chapter 
and our BI deﬁnitions from the previous chapter converge. Accessing 
Big Data is really about being able to make it actionable to support 
organizational decision making.
It is important that your Big Data efforts do not fall into the 
monthly reporting rut. Big Data should not be collected, stored, and 
processed only to have a monthly report created that is looked at 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
166
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
when an issue arises. The author has seen this happen in his consult-
ing practice. A health insurance company comes to mind—let’s call it 
Insure-A.
Every month the claims processing system (the OLTP system 
and internal data store) at Insure-A was used to create a summary 
report of all claims by diagnosis (i.e., the claims experience report). 
One month the chief ﬁnancial ofﬁcer (CFO) noticed that cash ﬂow 
was off and requested a special claims experience report. The CFO was 
told that it would be four days before the report was available. Once 
the CFO got the report, a few diagnoses that made up the bulk of the 
claims in the past month were noted, and it was apparent why cash 
ﬂow was off. However, this was a hindsight approach to monitoring 
cash and claims; the damage was done to Insure-A’s cash position, and 
it had to dip into its actuarial reserves. The CEO of Insure-A called in 
a consultant (the author) to determine how this could be avoided 
in the future. The recommendation was to put in systems that would 
do the following:
◼Increase access to claims experience. An OLAP system 
was developed that allowed the ﬁnance department to access 
information about claims experience in real time and model 
trends.
◼Add new data to the existing internal data stores. An 
early warning system was put into place so health-care pro-
viders could notify Insure-A about trends they were seeing in 
their patient visits (e.g., an increase of asthma or ﬂu). As part 
of the provider agreement, the existing and new health-care 
providers were required to enter the number of patient visits by 
diagnosis weekly. This information was available weeks before 
the claim was processed and allowed the ﬁnance department to 
estimate cash needs.
◼Shorten the time it took to ﬁnalize claims. By using the 
cloud-based services of a health information exchange and a 
claims clearinghouse, health-care providers were able to get 
their claims into Insure-A substantially faster and more accu-
rately. This reduced the time it took from claims submission to 
payment.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
B I G D A T A ’ S  E F F E C T S  O N  B I E F F O R T S  I N  T H E  C L O U D
◂
167
The on-premises and cloud infrastructure got larger at Insure-A, 
and it truly had a Big Data infrastructure after these systems were 
implemented. But by being better able to access its data so it could 
create effective BI, Insure-A was able to more effectively manage its 
claims, cash ﬂow, and cash reserves making the company more ﬁnan-
cially stable. What started as an access problem for the CFO and man-
agement team (not being able to access the claims experience report 
on a timely basis) turned into a Big Data and BI solution.
Big Data and Security
Discussing Big Data and security can cause some confusion. When 
discussing this topic, we are not just talking about how to secure Big 
Data. Securing data is an important topic, and there are volumes 
already written about it. The volumes about security and its associ-
ated technologies are very different in content from this book on BI 
and the cloud. What is important is to discuss how Big Data can be 
used to enhance security or, perhaps more correctly, to enhance sur-
veillance—the monitoring to ensure that individuals are in compli-
ance with the policies of an organization.5
There are numerous examples of how Big Data is used to deter-
mine consumer sentiments or track credit card fraud, but with Big 
Data and security, we mean “matching security data with the right 
collected data” to create security intelligence—who is doing what to 
your organization (e.g., external or internal perpetrators attempting 
to attack your digital assets).6
Security intelligence is deﬁned as understanding the following 
(all may not apply to all security threats):
◼The objective of a threat
◼How it is propagated or implemented
◼Where it originates from
◼The action being undertaken
◼What software or hardware vulnerability it is exploiting
◼The asset that is being attacked
◼What the attack is attempting to do
◼The effect on performance7
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
168
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
Big Data allows security intelligence to be created by linking data 
stores—for example, relating data from system log ﬁles to employee 
positions. Suppose the log ﬁles showed that an employee in the ﬁnance 
department was accessing proprietary process control or patent ﬁles 
more than he or she should. By relating the employee’s position in 
the company with the ﬁles this person accesses, a case of corporate 
espionage might be thwarted.
Big Data security intelligence is another layer of protection from 
would-be attackers. Adopting a security intelligence model uses Big 
Data analytics to assess risks and allows organizations to create knowl-
edge about how to defend the organization from attacks. The more 
risk-aware an organization is the more agile and better able it will be 
in stopping security threats before they happen.8
CONCLUSION
Big Data may seem passé, and cloud providers may seem like little 
more than Web hosts that offer services. However, the trend is for an 
increasing number of organizations to put their data in a cloud pro-
vider’s stores and process it there. This is because the ability to store, 
process, and access data in the cloud is less ﬁnancially risky, requires 
less up-front capital, and is more supportive of innovation than build-
ing local infrastructure.
Before the term Big Data came into vogue, many organiza-
tions already had it—think of the early use of Twitter, Facebook, 
and LinkedIn by marketing ﬁrms. These ﬁrms would combine and 
visualize postings to these social media sites before we realized the 
effect of automatically mining these web sites to create actionable 
BI. Companies were utilizing these social media outlets long before 
we had the term Big Data and realized the signiﬁcance of data vol-
ume, velocity, and variety.
The Big Data ecosystem (see Figure 8.5) is deﬁned by the variety, 
volume, and velocity of data that stream into organizations along with 
how those organizations store, process, and provide access.
Organizations also need to be concerned with data veracity, since 
Big Data often forces analysis of data that might be imprecise.9 At 
the core is the ability to create BI that supports decision making. By 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
B I G D A T A ’ S  E F F E C T S  O N  B I E F F O R T S  I N  T H E  C L O U D
◂
169
combining internal data stores with external data providers and min-
ing for new correlations and interactions, organizations can capitalize 
on Big Data momentum.
NOTES
1. Erin McCarthy, “The 5Ws and 1H of Big Data (Part 2 of 2),” SourceLink, 
August 
18, 
2012, 
www.sourcelink.com/blog/guest-author-series/2012/08/18/
the-5ws-and-1h-of-big-data-%28part-2-of-2%29.
2. Sabre Airline Solutions, “Set Your Business Free with Our Solutions Portfolio,” 
www.sabreairlinesolutions.com/images/uploads/AS_Overview_Brochure.pdf.
3. SAS Event Stream Processing Engine, “Gain Immediate Analytic Insights from 
Real-Time Data Streaming into Your Organization,” SAS, www.sas.com/software/
information-management/decision-management/event-stream-processing.html.
4. Heroku provides a Unix operating platform that offers Ruby on Rails, Node.JS, 
Clojure, Java, Python, and Scala; www.heroku.com.
5. Gendron, Business-Driven Data Communications.
6. Richard Stiennon, “Applying Intelligence to Big Data for Security,” Forbes,
May 
21, 
2013, 
www.forbes.com/sites/richardstiennon/2013/05/21/applying
-intelligence-to-big-data-for-security.
7. N. Ye, C. Newman, and T. Farley, T. “A System-Fault-Risk Framework for Cyber 
Attack Classiﬁcation,” Information, Knowledge, Systems, 5 (2006): 135–151.
Figure 8.5
The Big Data Ecosystem
Choices for
Storage,
Processing,
Access, and
Creation of BI
Store
Process
Access
Business
Intelligence
to Support
Decision Making
On-Premises
IaaS Provider
Paas Provider
SaaS Provider
Hybrid
Internal
Data
Stores
External
Data
Providers
High Velocity
High Variety
High Volume
Data Veracity
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
170
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
8. Sam Curry, Engin Kirda, Eddie Schwarz, William Steward, and Amit Yoran, “Big 
Data Fuels Intelligence-Driven Security,” EMC2, January 2013, www.emc.com/
collateral/industry-overview/big-data-fuels-intelligence-driven-security-io.pdf.
9. Michael Walker, “Data Veracity,” Data Science Central, November 28, 2012, www
.datasciencecentral.com/profiles/blogs/data-veracity.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
171
C H A P T E R 9
Mobile
Computing
Intersection
The Intersection 
of Mobile, Cloud, Big Data, 
and Business Intelligence
M
obile computing has brought a whole new level of data into 
play and is a major driver of Big Data and BI. Big Data comes 
from applications that companies create to interact with their 
customers, social media, cloud data providers, and a host of other 
sources. BI comes from using the data that are stored, processed, and 
distributed to create intelligence that can be used to innovate the 
business. All of this is enabled by cloud and mobile computing.
Mobile, cloud, Big Data, and BI all intersect to provide a new 
frontier of information processing. Mobile computing is composed 
of many applications and technologies. Mobile devices provide loca-
tor applications that know your geographic position and indicate the 
closest service (e.g., a store or an ATM), money transfer, and package 
tracking details. These are just a few of the recent mobile innovations.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
172
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
Organizations must determine how personal, commercial, and 
business applications of mobile computing can increase employee, 
customer, and supplier satisfaction and productivity throughout the 
supply chain. Doing so makes it possible to increase market share and 
enhance the bottom line.
Annual sales of mobile computing devices—phones, tablets, and 
other handheld devices—have outstripped the sale of desktop devices; 
that occurred more than 10 years ago. Driven by IT consumerization, 
the desktop is a staple at home and in the ofﬁce, but now we live 
in a post-PC era, with many mobile devices having more computing 
power than was available on the desktop 15 years ago. This has ush-
ered in a new paradigm of mobile and cloud computing, creating new 
ways that organizations can collect, store, process, and distribute Big 
Data and BI. The challenge is to harness the new opportunities to cre-
ate competitive position in the marketplace. This includes reckoning 
with the phenomenon of bring your own device (BYOD).
Mobile computing must be considered from the personal, com-
mercial, and business perspectives to realize its beneﬁts. These per-
spectives are deﬁned as follows:
◼Personal mobile computing. Applications that a person 
interacts with for his or her own use or beneﬁt but that do not 
include direct interaction with a business. For example:
◼An electronic health record that is enabled by mobile devices 
and cloud computing. The mobile device can collect data like 
heart rate and blood pressure (there are even free apps that 
do these things) that can be uploaded to the electronic per-
sonal health record (e.g., Microsoft HealthVault).
◼Various apps like the compass, ﬂashlight, or turn-by-turn 
directions.
◼The www.youtube.com app that allows the consumer to 
watch digital clips uploaded by other consumers for free.
◼Commercial mobile computing. Applications that allow the 
consumer to interact with a business. For example:
◼Amazon’s app allowing the consumer to shop at its web site.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
M O B I L E C O M P U T I N G I N T E R S E C T I O N
◂
173
◼Electronic banking apps that allow consumers to access their 
bank accounts.
◼A Netﬂix app that allows consumers to watch movies from 
the Netﬂix fee-based digital archive.
◼Business mobile computing. Applications or devices that 
allow an enterprise’s stakeholders (e.g., employees, suppliers, 
or distributors) to interact with the enterprise. For example:
◼RFID devices (i.e., tags and scanners) that allow automated 
inventory control.
◼Remote point-of-sale devices that allow sales transactions, 
updating of inventory, and credit transactions to occur unte-
thered from a cash register.
◼Mobile device apps that allow functions like self-service BI, 
e-mail, calendars, and a number of other apps to support the 
organization.
Consumers and employees (who are just consumers at work) 
drive the demand for mobile computing. Consumers want apps that 
allow them to be untethered from the desktop at home and at work. 
Here are some examples:
◼The locator that allows the consumer to ﬁnd the closest store 
or service (e.g., an ATM afﬁliated with one’s bank so there are 
no fees).
◼The self-service BI app that allows immediate access to critical 
sales data so a retail district manager can make decisions while 
on the road.
◼Social media apps that allow friends to check in at their current 
location or take pictures of their lunch.
As market demand changes, so does the pressure exerted by con-
sumers on organizations to provide mobile apps. It is essential for an 
organization to provide these apps to maintain employee satisfaction, 
develop innovation through the organization, and maintain its com-
petitive position in the marketplace.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
174
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
DEFINING MOBILE COMPUTING
Mobile computing is deﬁned by a number of technologies that con-
verge to create untethered access to data assets, including assets owned 
by the enterprise and the individual. Enterprise assets include on-
premises and cloud-based data stores. Individual information assets 
include ﬁles stored at cloud providers like Dropbox and SkyDrive as 
well as data stored at one’s bank, on social media sites, and by a myr-
iad of other online providers.
In this chapter, we will deﬁne mobile computing and discuss 
how to deal with it. We will speciﬁcally deal with business mobile 
concerns.
Mobile computing is deﬁned by its attributes. It is important to 
understand how cloud computing and mobile computing go hand 
in hand. It is somewhat of a “chicken or egg” problem. Without 
the cloud to enable mobile devices and without mobile devices to 
create the need for data storage and processing, neither cloud nor 
mobile could have become the force that it is. This symbiotic relation-
ship has allowed both to ﬂourish and will continue to do so.
Mobile computing is deﬁned as the devices and technologies that 
have or can do the following:
◼Communicate over mobile networks. This includes devices 
that can communicate over WiFi or mobile networks.
◼A unique user interface. Mobile devices typically have an 
interface that is driven by voice, ﬁnger movements, or gestures.
◼Apps. Lightweight, small-footprint applications that can run 
on mobile devices. These include personal mobile apps (e.g., 
Facebook, LinkedIn, and consumer banking) as well as com-
mercial and business applications that allow access to corporate 
information assets.
◼Recognition of geographic and physical context. The 
mobile device knows where it is geographically because of an 
onboard GPS and can provide that information to a locator 
app. The mobile device also knows how it is moving in space 
because of its accelerometer. If you shake your mobile device 
when the CNN news app is running, it might update the news. 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
M O B I L E C O M P U T I N G I N T E R S E C T I O N
◂
175
Alternatively, rotate your tablet to see a picture in portrait or 
landscape.
◼Computing power. Mobile devices have computing power 
that allows local processing and mobile connectivity.
MOBILE IN THE ENTERPRISE
The pervasiveness of mobile computing poses new challenges. One 
of these is whether to allow personal mobile devices to access cor-
porate information assets. Another is that mobile allows access both 
more quickly and from anywhere, with “anywhere access” having the 
greatest impact. You must also consider that the forefront of maximiz-
ing the investment in mobile access is self-service BI. If mobile access 
is being considered, then the enterprise has to deal with employees 
bringing their own devices to the workplace.
The mobile device allows managers and staff to access the digital 
assets of the enterprise. It is not uncommon for managers and staff to 
access multiple devices, including a desktop PC, laptop, tablet, and/
or mobile phone. This untethered access signals a change in the way 
employees interact with customers, the enterprise’s digital assets, and 
other stakeholders in the supply chain—in fact, mobile computing 
has the potential to change practically every interaction and the asso-
ciated cost of those interactions. Two examples provide insight into 
those changes:
1. In the health-care setting, patient interactions have changed 
because of mobile devices. Doctors and nurses initially entered 
patient information on paper charts and then later into desktop 
computers. In both cases the entries were made after seeing the 
patients. Today it is not uncommon for medical providers to 
enter information into a mobile device in the exam room or at 
the patient’s bedside. That allows the providers to interact with 
patients differently than they did even ﬁve years ago, capturing 
information in real time while seeing the patient.
2. In the manufacturing, retail, and warehouse setting, we see 
similar changes. Mobile devices are used to monitor and 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
176
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
collect data from process control devices. It is also common 
to see mobile devices (e.g., RFID tags and scanners) used for 
inventory control.
The changes motivated by mobile computing have increased the 
accuracy of data assets but have also caused new concerns for the enter-
prise. Some of these concerns are resource-based, whereas others can 
be addressed by a mobile device management solution.
Mobile Device Management Solutions
According to Gartner, “Enterprise mobile device management (MDM) 
software is: (1) a policy and conﬁguration management tool . . . and 
(2) an enterprise mobile solution for securing and enabling enterprise 
users and content.”1
Implementing an MDM solution assists an enterprise in its transi-
tion to an environment where mobile devices are allowed to access 
the organization’s digital assets. MDM can be a crucial part of a BYOD 
initiative or be used to manage devices owned by the organization. 
MDM solutions are put in place to manage all types of mobile devices, 
including mobile phones, tablet computers, laptops, mobile printers, 
mobile point-of-sale devices, and others. The three major goals of an 
MDM solution are as follows:
◼Access management. MDM solutions implement the policies 
of the enterprise that control mobile device access to the enter-
prise’s digital assets. When a device attempts access, the MDM 
solution interacts with the device to register it to the organiza-
tion’s network and to ensure that the device meets the required 
policies (e.g., software, operating system, and virus updates).
◼Update management. Updates for a mobile device’s operating 
systems, applications, and utilities (e.g., virus protection) are 
periodically available. Management of updates enforces your 
organization’s rules. For example, if your organization requires 
that virus protection updates are no more than 30 days old, 
mobile devices that are not current will not be allowed access 
until the required criterion is met. The same type of time-
sensitive rules (or version-sensitive rules) can be implemented 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
M O B I L E C O M P U T I N G I N T E R S E C T I O N
◂
177
for applications, operating systems, and even ﬁrmware on the 
mobile devices.
◼Maintenance of conﬁguration settings. MDM solutions 
allow the enterprise to change the conﬁguration setting for 
devices that are registered with them. This includes settings like 
ring tones, calendar entries, and service settings (e.g., FTP, tel-
net, and e-mail). This allows your organization to control how 
a device behaves while it is on your network.
MDM solutions operate with a server component, a client com-
ponent, and a management console (see Figure 9.1). Communication 
between the mobile devices and the MDM service is over the wireless 
mobile network. The MDM service is conﬁgured with your organiza-
tion’s rules via a management console normally located on-premises. 
The MDM solution can be on-premises or can be purchased from 
a SaaS cloud vendor like AppSense, AT&T (Toggle), Citrix, Juniper 
Networks, Microsoft, Novell, or VMware. Mobile devices are required 
to register with the MDM service before they can access the company’s 
digital assets. An employee will be required to install an MDM client 
that will enforce the organization’s policies before access is allowed.
MDM Service
On-Premises or Purchased
from a Cloud Provider
Mobile
Telephone
Network
Management
Console at
Your Organization
Mobile Devices 
Register to the 
MDM Service
Figure 9.1
MDM Solutions
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
178
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
BYOD Policy
Mobile devices are part of our everyday lives, and organizations must 
recognize that they are now part of the fabric of business and our 
society. No longer is anyone surprised to encounter someone using 
multiple mobile devices simultaneously (e.g., a mobile phone and a 
tablet). Considering that sales of mobile devices outpace desktop sales 
and that virtually everyone in the business world deals with mobile 
devices on a daily basis, it is practical for an organization to have a 
policy that dictates how these devices can be used in the workplace. 
It is better to manage mobile devices than to let them proliferate and 
be uncontrolled, creating another form of shadow IT. Organizations 
must reckon with personally owned mobile devices and need to cre-
ate a BYOD policy that accomplishes their goals.
No two BYOD policies are alike. Each reﬂects the character and 
culture of an organization and must be driven by well-deﬁned goals 
that ﬂow from the organization’s business strategy. You might be 
tempted to copy a policy from the Internet, and that is a good place to 
start, but your policy must reﬂect your organization. Compare a phar-
maceutical company and a marketing company. The BYOD policy for 
a pharmaceutical company will have different characteristics from the 
BYOD policy for a marketing company. There will be similarities, but 
the pharmaceutical policy may reﬂect stronger concerns about issues 
like protecting patentable products than the marketing company. 
A common factor in the pharmaceutical and marketing companies’ 
BYOD policies are that business strategy and enterprise policies must 
be the driving force.
BYOD policies should be implemented in an iterative fashion in 
which small incremental changes allow greater access over time. A 
company may start with communication services like e-mail or other 
collaboration technologies before moving to delivering self-service 
BI to their employees. The foundation must be the organization’s 
business and IT strategies, and those strategies must drive which ser-
vices are delivered and in what order. Of paramount importance to 
success is realizing that BYOD is about giving the choice to access 
digital assets on a desktop or via a mobile device. Mobile devices sup-
plement rather than replace the desktop. BYOD increases employee 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
M O B I L E C O M P U T I N G I N T E R S E C T I O N
◂
179
productivity and job satisfaction, and these are both good reasons to 
implement a BYOD policy. Keep in mind that BYOD devices are not 
a replacement for the tethered desktop, but rather an enhancement.
The development of a BYOD policy must involve all parts of the 
organization. It must be an integrative exercise, since BYOD affects all 
aspects of the organization. For example:
◼The human resources department will be helpful in under-
standing employee training needs and how the telecommuting 
experience will work.
◼IT security will aid the understanding of security polices and 
how BYOD will affect them.
◼Organizational security will shed light on mobile device theft 
and other physical threats.
◼C-suite members will bring a unique perspective that assists in 
aligning the BYOD policy with the business strategy.
◼Accounting or ﬁnance department members will aid in analyz-
ing the cost-beneﬁt of a BYOD project.
◼IT staff will be able to determine what technologies are nec-
essary to implement a BYOD policy and the consequences of 
MDM technologies on the existing ICT infrastructure and the 
IT staff.
◼Users must be part of the creation of the BYOD policies since 
they will be the most affected. The BYOD policy may limit cer-
tain applications, but only the users will be able to determine 
whether those apps are essential to productivity. An old adage 
applies here: “Managers tell you how a business process should 
work, but employees tell you how a business process actually 
works.” The difference in this perspective is essential to imple-
menting the correct technologies in the correct order. A good 
BYOD policy has direct input from both users and managers.
A basic road map to developing a BYOD policy includes the 
following:
◼Before the actual creation of a BYOD policy is undertaken, the 
following must be considered:
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
180
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
◼The creation of a BYOD policy must be driven by your orga-
nization’s culture and its business and IT strategies. These 
strategies must be clearly stated, and the group tasked with 
creating a BYOD policy must be familiar with them.
◼Users should be consulted to ensure that BYOD is impor-
tant to them and that the correct applications are available 
for their mobile devices. The correct implementation of 
BYOD is essential to increased productivity and employee 
satisfaction.
◼Human resources, managers, and staff should be queried to 
determine the effect of BYOD on telecommuting. If a tele-
work policy already exists, the BYOD policy must articulate 
(and not disagree) with it.
◼A thorough understanding of the challenges posed by BYOD 
to the organization must be considered. Among them are 
funding, user readiness, workforce dispersion, current IT 
staff ability and training, and existing security policies. This 
will undoubtedly mean involvement by the C-suite.
◼A cost-beneﬁt analysis should be performed.2 This analysis 
must take into account employee productivity increases, 
cost shifting, cost of technologies, and training of IT staff and 
users. Productivity increases are difﬁcult to quantify, but 
based on your type of business, metrics can be developed. 
Cost shifts are easier to quantify; for example, although 
BYOD may mean that desktop PCs need not be purchased 
or upgraded as often, potentially saving money, employees 
may want the organization to provide monthly payments to 
defray additional voice or data costs.
◼Creating a BYOD policy should involve all the stakeholders 
(human resources, the legal department, security, the account-
ing and ﬁnancial department, and IT). With these consid-
erations understood and a cost-beneﬁt analysis in hand, the 
company can decide to create a BYOD policy. To create a policy, 
the following steps should be undertaken:
◼The legal department should provide a framework for the 
types of data that can be accessed with BYOD and whether 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
M O B I L E C O M P U T I N G I N T E R S E C T I O N
◂
181
that access can be given off-premises—remember, BYOD 
often allows users to access corporate digital assets while not 
at work. For example, in certain situations, health-care data 
cannot be accessed on a mobile device outside the ofﬁce. 
The same can be said of other types of data (e.g., personnel 
records, conﬁdential e-mails).
◼Outside legal counsel should be consulted on issues such as 
the effects of existing labor laws.
◼Based on user input, a list of which apps will be supported 
must be developed (e.g., e-mail, self-service BI, or access to 
organizational ﬁle shares).
◼A list of supported devices must be created. Not all services 
and apps support all devices. An example of this is the origi-
nal SAS Mobile BI QuickView app which supported the 
iPhone, iPad, RIM Blackberry, and Android smartphones but 
not the Windows Phone.3 Each application, including virtual 
desktop and virtual application delivery, must be checked for 
compatibility with supported mobile devices.4
◼A plan must be developed to train IT staff and users and 
to assist users with conﬁguring their mobile devices. The IT 
staff might not be familiar with MDM, and thus training will 
be necessary. Users will need help conﬁguring their mobile 
devices to access corporate digital assets.
◼Deployment will consist of creating, disseminating, and imple-
menting the policies, services, and apps. IT training will have 
to occur before the MDM and associated technologies are 
brought online. User training and conﬁguration support must 
be in place as well.
Some best practices to consider when developing a BYOD 
policy and implementing the associated MDM solution are:
◼Prevent unauthorized access to corporate digital assets.
◼Monitor and update application and operating system ver-
sion on all connected mobile devices.
◼Maintain the appropriate conﬁguration on all registered 
mobile devices.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
182
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
◼Provide appropriate security and encryption to protect data 
as they traverse the mobile network and while they are on 
the mobile device.
◼Ensure user privacy and freedom of access.
◼Prevent data leakage by keeping corporate and personal 
apps separate.
◼Implement appropriate virtual private network technologies.5
The road map and best practices described here embody an ongo-
ing and iterative process. As new applications come online, the legal 
environment changes, and organizational staff needs change, the 
BYOD policy will have to be updated. This means revisiting the origi-
nal considerations (e.g., business and IT strategies, telework needs, 
cost-beneﬁt analyses) and updating them to reﬂect the changes. The 
need for BYOD policies is so pervasive that even national govern-
ments have begun to disseminate guidelines reﬂective of the issues 
discussed here. For example, the White House has created a tool kit 
to support federal agencies.6
Mobile Innovation
Integrating mobile computing into an enterprise is complex, requiring 
the input of staff from all segments of the organization. It is compli-
cated to set up a solution that allows access to corporate digital assets. 
This is largely because of the technical details and the investment of 
resources required. However, if your organization wants to encourage 
its employees to be more innovative with mobile technologies, that 
will require the investment of time and resources too. Good ﬁnan-
cial and organizational returns gained through mobile computing are 
predicated on employees having appropriate access to corporate digi-
tal assets, external data providers, and BI tools. A mobile deployment 
should be designed so it yields increased innovation that brings direct 
gain to customers. As discussed earlier, enterprise mobile deploy-
ments will start out with an MDM solution and a few applications like 
e-mail and calendar. However, to maximize the return on investment 
of a mobile deployment, Big Data and BI solution should not be far 
behind.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
M O B I L E C O M P U T I N G I N T E R S E C T I O N
◂
183
Big Data
With the right tools, employees are creative. Staff members gener-
ally want the organization they work for to succeed. There may be a 
few who just want a job, but most want to enjoy their work, be cre-
ative, and move the company forward. That is a good thing. It means 
that management, with a mobile computing deployment, must pro-
vide the tools necessary for the employees to reach these goals. Big 
Data and BI are just such tools.
In Chapter 8, we discussed many sources of data accessible over 
the Internet and from your organization’s own data stores, including 
both structured and unstructured data. These data stores create Big 
Data and can be combined to create innovative mobile solutions. The 
intersection of mobile computing, Big Data, and BI create opportu-
nities for innovation. Being able to assemble data stores and cloud 
services through mobile apps creates a convergence that can greatly 
beneﬁt the organization and the consumer, and thus your organiza-
tion’s market share. By harnessing this intersection, you can posi-
tively affect the bottom line.
An example of the intersection of Big Data, mobile comput-
ing, and BI may be found at TripAdvisor (www.tripadvisor.com).
TripAdvisor bills itself as the provider of “unbiased hotel reviews, pho-
tos and travel advice.”7 To accomplish its goals, TripAdvisor links to 
the consumer’s Facebook account to customize the online experience. 
The web site uses a cloud mapping and geo-locator service to provide 
street maps for hotels and other properties. TripAdvisor is monetized 
through a dedicated division that provides information to the tourism 
industry. It relies on Big Data, mobile computing, and cloud services 
to create those innovations, which include the following:
◼Wisdom of Friends. This allows consumers to get advice from 
their friends on Facebook as they plan their vacations.
◼City Guides. This is a smartphone app that allows consumers 
to get quick snapshots of travelers’ reviews of hotels, restau-
rants, and attractions.
◼Maps. Using location-based services, this innovation allows 
consumers to ﬁnd desired hotels. Hotel popularity, price, and 
availability are provided in a dynamic mapping interface.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
184
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
◼Check Rates. Using cloud services, consumers are allowed to 
compare hotel pricing and availability across multiple vendor 
web sites.
◼TripWatch. Customizable e-mail alerts on speciﬁc hotels, attrac-
tions, and destinations.
◼Third-party social networking applications. Innovations 
are available as applications for use on popular social network-
ing sites like Facebook.
These consumer-oriented innovations provide a treasure trove of 
structured and unstructured data for use in creating BI. Reservation 
information can be collected, and consumer trends and sentiments 
(through unstructured consumer reviews) can be tracked over time. 
This lets the travel industry follow trends, allowing it to understand 
customer preferences and behavior.
Business Intelligence
The ability to receive e-mail and webcasts and to perform video con-
ferencing on a mobile device is important, but aligning those commu-
nication services with mobile BI is a game changer. This innovative 
approach allows staff to be able to make decisions untethered from 
their desktops, and the aligned communication services allow those 
decisions to be carried out. The BI generated as visual analytics and 
reports delivered through self-service BI allow users to quickly access 
the information they need to drive enterprise success.
Self-service mobile BI provides essential capabilities so that deci-
sions can be made and acted on more quickly. SAS mobile BI is an 
example of analytics that allows the staff to make decisions while 
untethered. When you select a mobile BI solution, it is important to 
examine these key attributes:
◼Approachable user interface. The interface for mobile BI 
solutions must not require technical skills. Data visualiza-
tion and reports must be easy to generate, understand, and 
manipulate.
◼Required data stores. The mobile solution must make access 
to data stores straightforward. The data stores necessary to 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
M O B I L E C O M P U T I N G I N T E R S E C T I O N
◂
185
support decision making must be easily integrated and used. 
The application must support the integration of the necessary 
corporate digital assets with cloud-based data.
◼Predeﬁned views and reports. The ability to create pre-
deﬁned views of the required data along with predeﬁned 
reports is essential. These reports and views must incorporate 
dashboards and other visual representations of your organiza-
tion’s key performance indicators (KPIs). However, the pre-
deﬁned items must not limit the user’s access to only those 
reports and views. The user must be able to innovate and 
create custom views and reports, even combining those that 
already exist.
◼Manipulation and examination. BI solutions must allow 
the user to easily manipulate existing data views and reports. 
For example, a district sales manager must be able to examine 
a dashboard of KPIs for his or her region, then be able to pen-
etrate to the sub-regional level and then to the store level. The 
user must be able to easily manipulate the views, reports, dash-
boards and other visualizations in order to understand where the 
higher-level aggregated KPIs come from.
◼Improved productivity. A mobile BI solution will require 
that technical staff members deploy it. However, once deployed, 
that solution must be easy enough to use so it enhances pro-
ductivity rather than decreasing it. It is important that mobile 
BI solutions are designed and implemented with user input so 
that the solution does not become too complex.
◼Untethered and tethered access. The user must be able to 
access the same views and reports on their mobile device and 
desktop. This continuity is an important aspect of increased 
productivity and accuracy.
◼Deployment and maintenance. The BI solution must inte-
grate with existing digital resources and be an extension of 
them. Mobile BI solutions should not replace existing solutions 
but rather must support them. The mobile solution must also 
be easy to maintain and not require substantial additional staff 
and resources to work effectively.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
186
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
All these attributes must be considered under the spotlight of how 
the mobile BI solution aligns with existing business and IT strategies. 
The technological underpinning of these key attributes must recog-
nize, according to SAS, “that there are two opposing forces at work—
the need for IT to control the creation and distribution of BI assets and 
the demand from information workers to have freedom and ﬂexibility 
without requiring IT help.”8 A balance between these two forces must 
be reached. Knowledge workers, managers, and other staff must have 
free access to all BI components while IT has oversight of the self-
service BI environment to observe its utilization and manage technol-
ogy resources.
MOBILE AND THE CONSUMER EXPERIENCE
Looking at mobile computing from the consumer perspective is differ-
ent than looking at mobile computing as a way to empower employ-
ees. Yet getting customers involved in utilizing mobile technologies 
does have some similarities to employee involvement: There are tech-
nologies to be considered, apps that must be deployed or created, and 
decisions that must be made regarding which digital assets should be 
available. This is especially important because the consumer mobile 
market drives much of the Big Data movement. The mobile customer 
is both a consumer of the apps and a creator of most of the data we 
use. Consider the example of TripAdvisor that we just discussed. 
TripAdvisor provides mobile apps that allow consumers to create rat-
ings and comments about tourism locations. Those unstructured and 
structured data are mined to provide BI to the travel industry about 
consumer sentiments.
Consumers are involved in and affected by all types of mobile 
computing. At the personal level, they use apps like HealthVault; at 
the commercial level, apps allow them to interact with their preferred 
stores, banks, and cloud providers (e.g. Amazon, Netﬂix); and at the 
business level, there is self-service BI. There are a few commonalities 
in the personal, commercial, and business levels: (1) The individual is 
a consumer of services, (2) consumers both use and create data (even 
new BI is really a synthesis of existing data to create new data), (3) 
the needs of the consumer or employee must drive app creation and 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
M O B I L E C O M P U T I N G I N T E R S E C T I O N
◂
187
deployment, and (4) any new data created as a result of mobile com-
puting add to Big Data stores.
The topic of mobile and the consumer experience is expansive 
and somewhat beyond the scope of this book, which is to focus on the 
strategic implementation of cloud-based BI. You should consult other 
sources for a more thorough treatment of the exciting and complex 
subject of mobile and the consumer experience.
CONCLUSION
The topic of mobile computing must be examined from the personal, 
commercial, and business perspectives. These perspectives assist with 
an organizational understanding of how and why to build mobile 
solutions. This chapter was largely about integrating these perspec-
tives with the intersection of mobile and cloud computing, BI and Big 
Data, with an emphasis on how mobile computing is an integrative 
force to deliver self-service BI.
The core of delivering mobile services to corporate users is the 
MDM solution and the BYOD policy. The MDM solution allows 
management of mobile devices and facilitates secure access to digital 
assets, while the BYOD policy sets out expectations and aligns them 
with organizational objectives and strategy. Together the MDM solu-
tion and a strong BYOD policy create a structure in which employ-
ees can be untethered from the desktop, make better decisions 
faster, and implement them more quickly. By creating this struc-
ture, a mobile computing deployment will enhance the organiza-
tion, improve employee job satisfaction, and lead to an increase in 
the bottom line.
NOTES
1. Phillip Redman, John Girard, Terrence Cosgrove, Monica Basso, “Magic Quadrant 
for Mobile Device Management Software,” Gartner, May 23, 2013. www.gartner
.com/technology/reprints.do?id=1-1FRVS5W&ct=130524&st=sb.
2. Gendron, Business Intelligence Applied.
3. Doug Henschen, Mobile BI Apps Target iPad,” Information Week, April 15, 2010, www
.informationweek.com/software/application-optimization/mobile-bi-apps-target
-ipad/224400267.
4. Gendron, Business Intelligence Applied.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
188
▸
B U S I N E S S  I N T E L L I G E N C E  A N D  T H E  C L O U D
5. Computer Cloud World, “Five Key Issues to Factor into Your MDM Decision,” e-mail 
alert, July 30, 2013.
6. Bring Your Own Device, “A Toolkit to Support Federal Agencies Implementing Bring 
Your Own Device (BYOD) Programs,” the White House, August 23, 2012, http://
www.whitehouse.gov/digitalgov/bring-your-own-device.
7. TripAdvisor, “Fact Sheet,” www.tripadvisor.com/PressCenter-c4-Fact_Sheet.html.
8. Claudia Imhoff and Colin White, “Self-Service Business Intelligence: Empowering 
Users to Generate Insights,” SAS, 2011, www.sas.com/resources/asset/TDWI_
BestPractices.pdf.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
189
Conclusion
BI software connects people with information 
when and where they need it, and provides 
capabilities far beyond spreadsheets to deliver a 
true picture of the business. For small and mid-
size ﬁrms, however, ﬁnding a BI strategy that 
matches their resources, expertise and budgets 
can be particularly challenging.
—Gartner, A Step-by-Step Approach 
to Successful Business Intelligence
O
rganizations often start small with BI implementations by creat-
ing periodic reports or being reactive to enterprise events. That 
reporting is often based on historical data. However, moving past 
that is a real possibility.
Over time, organizations can move to using data to make predic-
tive decisions. Big Data, mobile computing, internal data stores, and 
the cloud combine to create an environment in which “the sky is the 
limit” when it comes to using data to understand customers’ percep-
tions as well as the general state of the business. Creating useful BI is 
a moving target that must adapt as available data and organizational 
needs change.
BI is not just the job of the IT department. It often starts that way, 
but it must grow. IT may focus on the storage, processing, and dissemi-
nation of BI, but for BI to be truly useful to your organization, IT must 
work alongside the business constituents who generate, understand, 
and use the intelligence. BI is not just a tool of the IT department—it 
may be enabled by technology, but it is a tool of business to enhance 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
190
▸
C O N C L U S I O N
the understanding of the state of affairs within and outside your orga-
nization to enable better decision making.
BI is enhanced through community-enabled solutions and 
a strong BI feedback loop.1 A community-enabled solution relies 
on the users of the solution to provide the feedback necessary for it 
to improve and mature. An enterprise must create a community 
to gain insights about its products so it can enrich its offerings. For 
example:
◼SAP HANA is building a community of users that will enable 
SAP customers to give feedback, derive data from a broad selec-
tion of HANA solutions, and thus enrich the HANA platform.
◼Microsoft 365 is creating a community by giving one-year 
free access to its Build Conference attendees. The commu-
nity is expected to send feedback and increase the adoption of 
Microsoft 365.
Creating BI through a community approach maximizes invest-
ment in a BI solution. This approach maximizes intelligence through 
the multiple data points that a community creates—this applies to 
product creation as well as BI for day-to-day decision making. Cloud, 
mobile, Big Data, and BI converge to create a natural ecosystem for 
community-enabled solutions to BI problems.
Three forces are essential in ﬁnding the BI “sweet spot” (see 
Figure C.1).
Mobile, cloud, and Big Data intersect to create an environment 
in which organizations can maximize their investment in BI. Trip 
Advisor (discussed in Chapter 9) has exploited these forces to mon-
etize its services. Its BI sweet spot employs the following technologies:
◼Mobile. This is used to collect consumer ratings via a custom 
app as well as to deliver self-service BI.
◼Cloud. The ubiquity of travel transactions and consumer rat-
ings are enabled through the cloud along with interactions 
among business partners.
◼Big Data. Consumer sentiments, travel sales transactions, and 
data from business partners are used to create BI that is sold to 
the travel industry.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
C O N C L U S I O N
◂
191
These forces can be exploited by all organizations to maximize the 
investment in BI and allow them to ﬁnd the BI sweet spot.
This book started with a brief history of how we got to cloud com-
puting, then proceeded to a detailed description of the characteristics, 
service models, and deployment models of cloud computing. Next, 
some basic cloud economics tools were described so the reader had a 
common basis for understanding cloud strategy and BI in the cloud. 
The ﬁnal part of this book deﬁned and discussed BI, Big Data, mobile 
computing, and their intersection.
The author hopes that this book enables you to understand the 
importance of BI, Big Data, mobile and cloud computing to the suc-
cess of an enterprise. Let him know how he can assist moving the 
BI agenda forward by sending him an e-mail at BIA@Gendron.info. 
Good luck as you create or update your BI plan based on the strategic 
objectives of your organization.
NOTE
1. Larry Carvalho, “Community-Enabled Solutions Are the Future,” blog, August 7, 
2013, http://robustcloud.com/community-enabled-solutions-are-the-future.
Figure C.1
The BI Sweet Spot
THE BI ECOSYSTEM
The BI 
Sweet
Spot
MOBILE
CLOUD
BIG DATA
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
193
Glossary
The number in parentheses after each deﬁnition indicates the chapter 
where more information can be found about the topic.
Application-as-a-service
Any application that is delivered through a browser or specialized client to 
an end user’s PC. SaaS providers offer this service. (2)
Application program interface (API)
A software interface in which cloud providers allow software to access 
their services. (6)
Association discovery
A data mining technique that analyzes data sets and discovers the associa-
tion among elements. (7)
Availability (network)
The amount of time a network is accessible for use. Often expressed 
as a percentage and often required to be 99.999 percent—referred to as 
ﬁve 9s. (6)
Big Data
Data with high volume, high velocity, and high variety. (7, 8)
Big iron
Massive computers that provide processing power in organizations that 
need to manipulate large amounts of data or transactions. (1)
Bring your own device (BYOD)
The practice of employees bringing their own personal digital devices (e.g., 
phones, smartphones, tablets, laptops) to work with the intent of using 
them on the employer’s network. (9)
Broad network access
A required essential characteristic of cloud computing. Services are avail-
able over the network and are accessible via a standardized interface (e.g., 
application program interface). (2)
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
194
▸
G L O S S A R Y
Business agility
The ability of an enterprise to sense and react quickly to changes in its 
environment. (4)
Business analytics
Techniques that create business intelligence, including analysis and data 
visualization. (7)
Business continuity
The ability of a business to stay open so that customers can access its ser-
vices. (6)
Business intelligence (BI)
Using business analytic techniques to create reports, dashboards, geo-
graphic information systems, or other forms of visualization that allow 
managers to make better decisions. (7)
Business intelligence feedback loop
A way for the users of business intelligence to provide feedback about 
quality, content, and format. (7)
Business mobile computing
Applications or devices that allow enterprise stakeholders (e.g., employ-
ees, suppliers, distributors) to interact with the enterprise or cloud-based 
services. (9)
Capital expense (CAPEX) versus operational expense (OPEX)
Accounting and strategic measurement tools. CAPEX refers to how large 
purchases with an expected life of greater than one year are handled on 
the balance sheet and proﬁt/loss statement. OPEX refers to items that are 
purchased by an organization and consumed during the current year. (4)
Classiﬁcation
A data mining technique that is very similar to clustering, except that a 
classiﬁcation is known beforehand. (7)
Client-server computing
A client (e.g., a web browser or an e-mail client) is used to access a hosted 
application, giving users access to remote servers. (2)
Cloud auditor
A third party employed to conduct an individual assessment of cloud ser-
vices. (6)
Cloud broker
An organization that manages the use, performance, and delivery of cloud 
services. (6)
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
G L O S S A R Y
◂
195
Cloud carrier
The intermediary that provides connectivity and transport between the 
cloud consumer and the cloud provider. (6)
Cloud computing
A new way to deliver information services that is composed of service 
models (i.e., SaaS, IaaS, PaaS), services, and essential characteristics. (2)
Cloud computing service model
How services are delivered to the user or developer (i.e., IaaS, PaaS, SaaS). 
Each delivery system has a number of underlying services that it offers. (2)
Cloud consumer
An individual or an organization that uses or consumes the (free or pur-
chased) services of a cloud provider. (6)
Cloud data provider
An organization that provides data to cloud consumers. (8)
Cloud deployment
The speciﬁc requirements for how solutions are implemented. These 
requirements involve the dimensions of service type (i.e., PaaS, IaaS, 
SaaS), location of deployment (on-premises versus off-premises), and 
deployment models (i.e., public, private, hybrid, or community). (5)
Cloud ecosystem
The system composed of cloud consumers, providers, carriers, and 
brokers. (6)
Cloud service provider
An organization that provides services to cloud consumers. (6)
Clustering
A data mining technique that groups together records with a similar attri-
bute. (7)
Commercial mobile computing
An application that allows the consumer to interact with a business. (9)
Community cloud
Cloud deployments provisioned for exclusive use by a speciﬁc community of 
consumers from organizations that have shared interests or concerns (e.g., 
mission, security requirements, policy, or compliance considerations). (3)
Compute-as-a-service
An IaaS offering. A service provider allows an individual user or an orga-
nization to have computing power on demand within the service pro-
vider’s infrastructure. (2)
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
196
▸
G L O S S A R Y
Computer in the back room
An approach in which users do not have direct access to computers. (1)
CP/M
An early PC operating system created by Gary Kildall. (1)
Dashboard
A display of key indicators that is necessary to make decisions. They often 
have the ability to click on an indicator and get more detail. (7)
Database
A repository of data typically organized according to a data model and 
structured in such a way that it can be queried. (7)
Database-as-a-service
An IaaS offering that allows developers and consumers to use the database 
services of a provider on a pay-as-you-go basis. (2)
Data cube
An online analytic processing system technique that is a multidimensional 
arrangement of data that can be used to produce summaries, means, and 
other statistics across dimensions. (7)
Data management system
A system’s software that allows users and applications to interact with a 
database. (7)
Data mining
The use of software that discovers unknown predictive relationships and 
complements an online analytic processing system. (7)
Data model
Speciﬁes how data are stored and the relationships among those data. (7)
Data retention
An organization’s policy (often driven by local or state laws) that speciﬁes 
how long digital assets must be preserved. (6)
Data scientist
The person in an organization who is tasked with managing and modeling 
data using computer science and statistical, analytical, and/or mathemati-
cal techniques to create business intelligence. (7)
Data veracity
An understanding of the quality of Big Data used in decision making so 
that decisions are given appropriate consideration. Big Data can sometimes 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
G L O S S A R Y
◂
197
be inconsistent, incomplete, or ambiguous because of its high volume, 
velocity, and variety. (8)
Data warehouse
A repository of views of data that is often integrated across various 
databases within an organization and is used for reporting and 
analysis. (7)
Decision support system (DSS)
Software that analyzes business data and presents them to managers; 
often referred to as data visualization. The presentation of data is designed 
to assist managers with decision making. (7)
Decision support tool
A software tool that creates visualizations to aid managers in decision 
making. (7)
Dimension one: Essential characteristics
The characteristics of cloud computing that are either required or optional. 
Required characteristics must be present, whereas optional characteristics 
are desired but not normally required. (2)
Dimension three: Deployment models
How a cloud is implemented: public, private, hybrid, and community 
clouds. (3)
Dimension two: Services models and underlying services
IaaS, SaaS, and PaaS cloud offerings and the software exposed in each of 
these offerings. (2)
Direct cost
A total cost of ownership metric used when purchasing information and 
communication technology. Direct costs include the purchase of technol-
ogy, installation, and maintenance. Depending on the implementation, 
direct costs may also include testing, the cost of facilities, and environmen-
tal (e.g., air-conditioning) and power conditioning. (4)
Fault tolerance
A required essential characteristic of cloud computing. The cloud 
infrastructure can detect and react to the faults of both hardware and soft-
ware. (2)
Geographic information system (GIS)
Data-driven maps used to enhance an understanding of the geography 
and the data that are overlaid with it. (7)
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
198
▸
G L O S S A R Y
Geo-replication
An optional, desired cloud computing characteristic. Storing the same dig-
ital assets in different places that are physically closer (from a geographic 
perspective) to the user so that access is faster. Because of today’s fast 
network access, geo-replication is not needed very often, but when it is
needed, the cloud infrastructure should provide it. (2)
High variety (Big Data)
The types of data available. (8)
High velocity (Big Data)
The speed of data availability. (8)
High volume (Big Data)
The amount of data available. (8)
Hosted application
A server used to store and execute the applications (e.g., the Web or 
e-mail) that are used in client-server computing. (2)
Hybrid cloud
A combination of two or more distinct cloud infrastructures (private or 
public) that remain unique entities but are bound together by standard-
ized or proprietary technology that enables data and application portabil-
ity. (3)
Increased information technology resources
An aspect of organizational agility in which more staff, hardware, or soft-
ware may be required to meet new requests to support innovations. As 
more services are requested more quickly, the additional resources needed 
to fulﬁll those requests must be available. (5)
Increased innovation
In terms of organizational agility and cloud computing, innovation within 
the organization should increase as the staff realizes that information tech-
nology services are available more quickly. (5)
Indirect cost
A total cost of ownership metric used when purchasing information and 
communication technology. Indirect costs are not directly associated with 
the purchase of an asset but are real costs that are necessary for an imple-
mentation to be successful. These costs must be included in any ﬁnancial 
analysis of technology purchases. Indirect costs include training, an outage 
(either planned or unplanned), a security breach (e.g., physical breach, 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
G L O S S A R Y
◂
199
virus, or malware breach), disaster preparedness and recovery, other 
development expenses, and eventual decommissioning. (4)
Information and communication technology (ICT)
Information technology, information systems, and the communications 
hardware that is used to interconnect them. (1)
Information-as-a-service
Any cloud-based service that provides an application-programming inter-
face or other similar method to allow an application to use or consume 
information. This service is offered by a SaaS provider. (2)
Information systems (IS)
Information technology plus software, people, and business processes. The 
terms information systems and information technology are often used synony-
mously, but they really are different. (1)
Information technology (IT)
The hardware used to process data and enable business processes. (1)
Information technology governance structure
The organizational information technology controls and the way that 
information and communication technology resource decisions are made 
in an organization. (5)
Information technology request prioritization
For organizational agility and cloud computing, information technology 
requests must be prioritized. The requests that generate greater proﬁtabil-
ity for the organization should be considered for implementation ﬁrst. This 
will affect the allocation of IT resources and may call for a more robust 
IT governance structure with a stronger portfolio management of 
projects. (5)
Information visualization
How information is presented. It is used to show complex representations 
of data so they can be more easily understood and analyzed. (7)
Infrastructure-as-a-service (IaaS)
An IaaS service provider offers the capability for the consumers to pro-
vision processing, storage, networks, and other fundamental computing 
resources so they can deploy and run software. (2)
Integration-as-a-service
Solutions and services that help companies integrate in-house and cloud-
based solutions; may be referred to as a hybrid cloud. Cloud integrators 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
200
▸
G L O S S A R Y
provide consulting, training, and service solutions within vertical markets 
or horizontally across business processes. This service is offered by a SaaS 
provider. (2)
Internet technology
A required essential characteristic of cloud computing. Technologies such 
as TCP/IP, HTTP, UDDI, SOAP, and REST must be employed for a service to 
be considered cloud. (2)
Knowledge management
Though not a speciﬁc mathematical or statistical technique, knowledge 
management is about organizing, measuring, and converting tacit infor-
mation generated by employees into digital form. (7)
Management-as-a-service
An on-demand service that provides the ability to manage one or more cloud 
services. These typically include asset, topology, resource utilization, virtualiza-
tion, and uptime management. This service is offered by a SaaS provider. (2)
Mean provisioning time
The average time it takes to make new services available. (6)
Mean time between failures (MTBF)
The average time allowable or expected between equipment failures. (6)
Mean time to repair (MTTR)
The average length of time it takes to repair equipment that has failed. (6)
Metered use
A required essential characteristic of cloud computing. The monitoring of 
utilization in the cloud environment so that resource pools can be adjusted 
to accommodate user demand. (2)
Metered use, with pay as you go
An optional, desired cloud computing characteristic. Although a private 
cloud may offer services to its local users without charge, a public cloud 
service provider will provide scalable and elastic services through metered 
use that will be based on the resources consumed, and charges will be 
based on that metered use. (2)
Middleware
Software that sits between various servers to provide services like load 
balancing or data conversion. (1)
Mobile device management (MDM)
Software that normally consists of a server, a client, and a mobile client who 
implements policy and conﬁguration management on mobile devices. (9)
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
G L O S S A R Y
◂
201
MS-DOS
An early PC operating system created by Bill Gates in collaboration with 
IBM. This operating system was command-line driven and did not have a 
graphical user interface. (1)
Natural language processing (NLP)
An unstructured text analysis technique that allows computers to deter-
mine meaning from text or human language input. (7)
Negotiated service level agreement
Negotiated terms between an organization and a cloud provider (as 
opposed to a standardize service level agreement). (6)
Network-as-a-service
An IaaS offering that provides functionalities to network users or the 
network itself. These functionalities help the network perform well and 
provide things like domain name resolution (changing a name like www
.gendron.info to 96.31.40.182) and Dynamic Host Conﬁguration Protocol 
(DHCP) (allowing client computers in a local area network to request cer-
tain protocol parameters). Other functions on the local area network, like 
e-mail, printing, and ﬁle sharing, can also be seen as network-as-a-service. 
(2)
On-demand self-service
An optional, desired cloud computing characteristic. The ability to set up 
and change service contracts without direct provider action. (2)
Online analytic processing system (OLAP)
The ability to analyze complex data interactively to perform on-demand 
data modeling. (7)
Online transaction processing system (OLTP)
A type of information system that facilitates the processing of business 
transactions immediately and interactively. (7)
Operating cost
A total cost of ownership metric used when purchasing information and 
communication technology. The cost of operating a cloud-based infra-
structure. It must include the operational costs of purchasing services from 
cloud vendors. If an organization requires additional staff because of a 
cloud implementation, this should be included in the operating cost as 
well. (4)
Operational objective
In a network service level agreement, this is a technical target that a net-
work must meet, like mean time between failures. (6)
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
202
▸
G L O S S A R Y
Orchestrator
Software that manages servers so their functioning can be maximized. See 
Middleware. (1)
Organization agility
See Business agility. (5)
Organizational transformation
Materially changing an organization by implementing new policies, cloud, 
or other technology. The change can be in process, organizational culture, 
or something else, but it must be transformative and substantial. (5)
Pay as you go
The ability to pay for only the portion of information and communication 
technology services you actually use. (1)
Personal mobile computing
An application with which a person interacts for his or her own use or 
beneﬁt, but this does not include direct interaction with a business (e.g., a 
heart rate monitoring app). (9)
Platform-as-a-service (PaaS)
A PaaS service provider offers the capability to deploy consumer-created or 
acquired applications onto the service provider’s cloud infrastructure. (2)
Predictive analysis
In the context of data mining, this refers to using data to forecast con-
sumer behavior. (7)
Private cloud
In a private cloud, infrastructure is provisioned for exclusive use by a sin-
gle organization comprising multiple consumers (e.g., business units). It 
may be owned, managed, and operated by the organization, a third party, 
or some combination of them, and it may exist on- or off-premises. (3)
Process-as-a-service
Supports business processes through combining other services to create 
meta-applications. This service is offered by a SaaS provider. (2)
Public cloud
An infrastructure provisioned for open use by anyone (i.e., all users share 
the same infrastructure, potentially resulting in economies of scale). 
It may be owned, managed, and operated by a business, academic, or 
government organization or some combination of them. It exists on the 
premises of the cloud provider and is accessible over the Internet. (3)
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
G L O S S A R Y
◂
203
Quick and dirty operating system (QDOS)
An early (1960s and 1970s) PC operating system. (1)
Regulatory impact
How laws and regulations effect an organization. (5)
Response time (network)
How long it takes to get a reply from a network after something is submit-
ted—for example, clicking a button on a web page. (6)
REST (REpresentational State Transfer)
A simple stateless architecture often used in mobile applications that 
emphasize the interactive of clients over http. An alternative to the SOAP 
protocol. (1)
Return on investment (ROI)
An accounting measurement that shows how well something performed 
ﬁnancially. (4)
Scalable and elastic infrastructure
A required essential characteristic of cloud computing. A cloud service 
offering that adapts to consumer demand. (2)
Security
An optional, desired cloud computing characteristic. The protection of 
digital assets by physical and software methods. (2)
Security-as-a-service
Rather than acquiring personal security software tools and the technical 
expertise to administer them, the user contracts with a security vendor to 
consume turnkey services like virus defense, ﬁrewall management, and 
e-mail ﬁltering. This service is offered by a SaaS provider. (2)
Sequence discovery (data mining)
Sequence discovery is used to show relationships over time when data 
items are being mined. (7)
Service broker
An entity that maintains a service registry describing the available cloud 
services. When the broker exists today, it might be referred to as a “man-
aged service provider.” (1)
Service consumer
An individual user or an organization that purchases cloud services from 
a service provider. (1)
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
204
▸
G L O S S A R Y
Service level agreement (SLA)
A contract between a cloud consumer and a provider that speciﬁes the 
business, data, and technical objectives that must be met. (4)
Service level agreement business policy
Speciﬁes guarantees, acceptable use, services not covered, excess usage, 
activation, payment and penalty models, governance and versioning, 
renewal, transferability, support, planned maintenance, subcontracted 
services, licensed software, industry-speciﬁc standards, and additional 
terms for different geographic regions. (6)
Service level agreement data policy
Speciﬁes data preservation, redundancy, location, seizure, and privacy. (6)
Service model
The way cloud services are delivered. Includes infrastructure-as-a-
service (IaaS), platform-as-a-service (PaaS), and software-as-a-service 
(SaaS). (2)
Service-oriented architecture (SOA)
A software engineering technique directed toward designing and building 
computer software services that interoperate. (1)
Service provider
A cloud service provider that exposes (i.e., makes available) services for 
use or purchase. (1)
Service-speciﬁc objectives
In a service level agreement, the software targets that a network must 
meet (e.g., trafﬁc parameters) that indicate how well a service is perform-
ing. (6)
Services
Software applications that are exposed (i.e., made available) by a service 
provider for use or consumption. (2)
Services-based
A required essential characteristic of cloud computing. Cloud offerings are 
provided as a set of facilities to be used by consumers. (2)
Shared resource
A required essential characteristic of cloud computing. The service pro-
vider combines its resources, making that combination transparent to the 
consumer of the services. All users employ the same pool of resources 
simultaneously, but that simultaneous use does not affect the user, nor do 
the users know they are using pooled resources. (2)
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
G L O S S A R Y
◂
205
Simple object access protocol (SOAP)
An XML protocol used to exchange information between the orchestra-
tion layer of a web service and the services it calls. (1)
Slicing and dicing
An analysis technique in which the data at any speciﬁc point in a data 
cube are measured. (7)
Social factoid
Information of a social nature (e.g., location or birth date) that is posted to 
social media sites (e.g., Facebook). (8)
Software-as-a-service (SaaS)
A model of software delivery provided from a remote server rather than 
from direct installation on the user’s PC. Software delivery is often accom-
plished via the web browser. (1, 2)
Staff readiness
Strategic measurements put in place to understand whether the staff is 
ready or able to implement cloud technologies. (4)
Standardized service level agreement
Standard terms that are agreed to when a user creates a new account rela-
tionship with a cloud provider. (6)
Storage-as-a-service
The ability to utilize storage that physically exists at remote locations but 
logically appears as local storage to any application that requires it. An 
IaaS service, also known as disk on demand. (2)
Strategic measurement
Establishment of the metrics necessary to set, accomplish, and monitor a 
strategic orientation. (4)
Structured data
Data that follow a data model. (7)
Testing-as-a-service
Providers offer the ability to test applications through cloud-delivered 
algorithms that can test web sites, applications, and other software that do 
not require an on-premises footprint to carry out the testing. This service 
is offered by a SaaS provider. (2)
Text mining
Unstructured data analysis technique to extract information from text 
documents, including letters, e-mail, customer service logs, and feeds from 
social media services such as Twitter, LinkedIn, and Foursquare. (7)
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
206
▸
G L O S S A R Y
Total cost of ownership (or operation) (TCO)
A ﬁnancial estimate of the direct and indirect costs of owning something 
like cloud infrastructure. Understanding the total cost of existing infra-
structure aids in knowing how businesses beneﬁt from that infrastructure. 
It is also very useful when comparing various options being considered for 
funding. (4)
Trafﬁc parameters
The type of trafﬁc (e.g., constant, real-time, non-real-time), the speed of 
that trafﬁc, and the acceptable amount of delay during transmission. (6)
Transmission errors
The acceptable number of errors during transmission. (6)
Unstructured data
Data such as text ﬁles, documents, e-mails, web pages, and social media 
sites that do not follow a data model and are free-form in nature. (7)
Unstructured data analysis
Analyzing data that do not have a speciﬁc data model. (7)
Virtualization
Creating copies of something that all share the same physical resource. 
Each copy will execute on a single device, but to the user it will appear as 
if each has its own dedicated resource. (1)
Web services description language (WSDL)
An XML-based language that is used to describe cloud services. (1)
Web usage mining
An unstructured data analysis technique used to understand the path that 
users take through a web site. (7)
Whole is greater than the sum of its parts
In the information and communication technology context, a computer 
cluster in which multiple devices are loosely connected via networks and 
software, resulting in a combined greater processing power than that of 
any PC alone. (1)
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
207
About the Author
Michael Gendron practices what he writes about in this book 
through his consulting practice and his information systems professo-
riate where he creates theories used in business. His approach is that 
theories become most useful only when they have practical appli-
cation. Some of the recommendations on his LinkedIn proﬁle may 
describe him best.
From a colleague in the cloud space:
Michael Gendron is an internationally known thought 
leader on the intersection of business intelligence, mobile, 
cloud and Big Data. . . . His experience includes decades 
of IT management, where he rose through the ranks from 
programmer to systems analyst to CIO. Currently, he is a 
professor of Information Systems.
From a former student:
Dr. G is one of the most genuine professors I have ever 
come across. His passion for technology and teaching is 
absolutely contagious. He has been inﬂuential in my life 
as a technology buff, and I can say that it was through his 
teachings that I developed my ability to research, to always 
look for creative ways to conquer technological challenges, 
and to always believe in myself. I owe a lot to Dr. G, and 
he is truly an asset to have in my corner.
Michael has worked as a consultant, an information technology 
coordinator, a chief information ofﬁcer, and in several other IT-related 
positions in which he created business strategy, provided technical 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
208
▸
A B O U T  T H E  A U T H O R
insight, and generally oversaw the implementation of technical solu-
tions. As an academic, his research includes the following:
◼Strategic use of information and communications technology
◼Value-driven information and communications technology
◼Business intelligence and analytics
◼Information supply chain
◼Health-care information and communication technology (ICT)
◼Internet governance
◼Psychological impact of information systems
◼Data visualization through geographic information systems
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
209
Figures and tables are indicated by f and t, respectively.
Accenture, 39, 117
Acceptable use policy (AUP), 9, 114, 116, 
119
Access
for Big Data, 158, 165–167, 185
for mobile computing, 176, 185
Accessibility
of applications, 36, 38, 44, 48, 74
of data, 118, 158, 183
Activation, SLAs on, 119
Agile organization, 20, 51, 56, 62, 86, 92, 
93, 94–95, 168
Amazon.com, 19, 33, 47, 55, 56–57, 
154, 186
Amazon S3, 42
Amazon Web Services (AWS), 29–30, 43, 
51, 55–57, 59, 63–64, 99, 100, 111, 
113–116, 156, 159, 160, 163
Analytics cycle, 134–135, 134f
Apache Hadoop, 156
Apple Macintosh (Mac) computer, 8
Application-as-a-service, 38
Application program interface (API), 25, 
36, 39, 59, 114, 119, 138–140
Application virtualization, 16–19, 18f
Apps, for mobile computing, 174
ARPANET, 8
Association discovery, 142
Asynchronous transfer mode (ATM), 
108–109
AT&T, 10, 43, 177
Audits, 91, 117, 123
Author Central, Amazon, 154
Availability, SLAs on, 108, 122
AXIT AG, 111–112
Ballmer, Steve, 26, 31, 33
Bandwidth, 10–11
Bare metal server approach, 3, 19, 50, 55
Basnight, Jay, 62
Berners-Lee, Tim, 10
BI. See Business intelligence (BI)
Big Data, 130, 149–169
accessing, 158, 165–167, 185
analytics in, 150–151, 150f
business intelligence and, 158
data sources in, 138, 149, 154, 157
deﬁning, 151
dimensions of, 140
ecosystem of, 168, 169f
managing, 158
mobile computing and, 154, 171, 
183–184
processing, 158, 163–165
reports in, 152, 166, 185
security and, 167–168
storing, 158–161, 160f, 161f–162f
uses of, 149–150
variety of, 150, 151, 152f, 156–157
velocity of, 150, 151, 152f, 155–156
volume of, 150, 151–155, 152f
Bring your own device (BYOD), 172, 
176, 178–182, 187
Brokers, 15, 117, 120
Budgets, 3, 47, 77, 79, 93, 94f, 104, 105
Build-versus-buy decision, 75, 100
Burroughs, 5
Business agility, 20, 51, 56, 62, 86, 92, 
93, 94–95, 168
Business analytics, 127–128, 130, 
134–135, 134f, 148
Business continuity plans, 124
Business intelligence (BI), 129–148
analytics cycle in, 134–135, 134f
Big Data and, 157, 158
competitive information using, 130
Index
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
210
▸
I N D E X
Business intelligence (BI) (Continued)
concepts and measures used in, 71–72
costs of, 148
data analysis in, 139–145, 140f, 142f,
145f, 147
data available for, 130
data collection in, 135–139, 137f, 140f
data distribution in, 145–147
data types used in, 135, 135f
deﬁnition of, 71, 127
evolution of, 130
external forces and, 131–132, 132f
feedback loop in, 134, 145
mobile computing and, 184–185
move to cloud computing and, 86
objectives for project in, 132–134
risk in, 132, 140, 148
self-service, 145–146
strategy for, 130–132
total cost of ownership (TCO) and, 73
value-producing activities and, 
131–132, 131f
Business IT cloud, 51–53, 52f, 53t
Business life cycle, 79–82, 82f
Business policies, in SLAs, 119–120
Butler, Brandon, 65
BYOD (bring your own device) policy, 
172, 176, 178–182, 187
Capital expense (CAPEX)
build-versus-buy decision and, 75
business life cycle and, 79–82, 82f
deﬁnition of, 72
internal versus external cloud in, 
77–79, 80f–81f, 84t, 85–86
move to cloud computing and, 50, 55, 
57, 58, 64, 66
operational expense (OPEX) versus, 
76–82
strategic measurement with, 79
Carvalho, Larry, 28
Change management, 123
Chief information ofﬁcers (CIOs), 95, 
96–97, 96f
Citi Community Development, 139
Classiﬁcation, of data records, 142–143
Client-server computing, 25–26
Cloud, use of term, 44, 48
Cloud auditors, 120
Cloud brokers, 15, 117, 120
Cloud carriers, 117
Cloud computing, 19
accessing, 54
business IT cloud versus user IT cloud 
in, 51–53, 52f, 53t
business life cycle and, 79–82, 82f
cloud versus, 44, 48
considerations in moving to, 49–53
deﬁning along three dimensions, 30
deployment models for, 43, 47–70
essential characteristics of, 30–37, 35f, 44
gaming applications example of, 
29–30, 30f
global economic crisis and, 20
historical background to, 3–20
hosted applications versus, 25–26
industry standards for, 31
LAN-based applications versus, 
27–29, 28f
layers of abstraction in, 24–25, 26f
resource allocation in, 61
service models used by, 37f, 37–43, 44
telephone system as example of, 23–24
Cloud computing strategy, 72, 
130–132, 131
Cloud Credential Council, 103
Cloud Standards Wiki, 31, 35
Clustering, 11–13, 12f, 13t, 142
Coca-Cola Company, 153
Community cloud, 43, 54, 121
description of, 65, 66
examples of, 65–66
infrastructure and applications in, 49
on-premises versus off-premises, 
99–102, 101t
SLA decision related to, 113, 113t
Competitive advantage, 3, 43, 66, 92, 
98, 122–123, 132, 145, 151, 157, 
172, 173
Compliance, 49, 65, 66, 90–91, 114, 118, 
119, 123
Compute-as-a-service, 42–43
Control Data Corporation, 5
Copyright, 114
Core business functions, 51, 53
Core competencies, 57, 92, 102
Costello, John, 60
Costs
business intelligence plans and systems 
and, 148
BYOD policy in mobile computing 
and, 180
communication and data transmission 
and, 11
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
I N D E X
◂
211
external stakeholders and changes in, 
104–105
SLA type and, 126
See also Capital expense (CAPEX); 
Operational expense (OPEX); Total 
cost of ownership (TCO)
Critical performance objectives, in SLAs, 
121–122
Customer agreements. See Standardized 
service level agreements (SLAs)
Customer relationship management 
(CRM), 40, 47, 59, 60, 96, 100–102, 
129, 131, 138, 148, 157
Customers
analyzing data from, 141, 142, 143, 
144, 145f
Big Data on perceptions of, 150, 151, 
152–156
business agility and, 86, 95
business intelligence and, 131, 132, 
133, 134, 145, 183–184
cloud computing’s beneﬁts for, 3, 51, 
56, 64, 89, 126
cloud computing’s pressures on, 103, 
104f, 105
disaster recovery plans and contact 
with, 124
ICT projects and, 20
managing data of, 59, 60, 91, 135, 
146, 149
mobile computing’s interactions with, 
172, 175, 182, 183–184, 186
personalized marketing to, 156
platform-as-a-service (PaaS) service 
for, 40, 58
private cloud charges for, 61
response time and, 122
SLAs and needs of, 107, 109, 
122, 123
social media for contact with, 60, 153, 
154, 155–156
Dashboards, 64, 65, 132, 144, 148, 154, 
157, 185
Data
external sources of, 138–139
internal sources of, 136–138, 137f, 166
structured, 135, 135f
unstructured, 135, 135f, 143
variety of, 150, 151, 152f, 156–157
velocity of, 150, 151, 152f, 155–156
volume of, 150, 151–155, 152f
Data analysis, 139–145, 140f, 142f, 143, 
145f, 147
Data analytics, 130, 168, 150–151, 150f
Database-as-a-service, 42
Database management systems (DBMS), 
42
Databases, 25, 47, 55, 130, 136, 137, 138, 
149, 151, 160
Data-center-as-a-service, 41
Data centers, 20, 24, 27, 28, 34, 40, 47, 
56, 61, 63
Data collection, 135–139, 137f, 140f
Data cube, 141, 142f
Data distribution, 145–147
Data location, 118
Data management systems, 136, 137f
Data mining, 141–142
Data model, 136, 137, 137f
Data policies, 114, 118–119
Data preservation, 118
Data privacy. See Privacy laws
Data protection from seizure, 119
Data redundancy, 118
Data scientists, 130, 150, 164, 165–166
Data sources, for Big Data, 138, 149, 154, 
157
Data storage, 158–161, 160f, 161f–162f,
185
Data warehouses, 130, 137, 137f, 151
Decision support, 130, 141, 157
Dedicated hosting, 41, 63
Defense Advanced Research Projects 
Agency (DARPA), 8
Deployment models
overview of, 43, 47–70
SLA negotiations and understanding 
of, 121
See also Community cloud; Hybrid 
cloud; Private cloud; Public cloud
Descriptive reporting, 141
Desktop virtualization, 16–19, 18f
Digital Millennium Copyright Act, 114
Direct costs, 71, 73, 74t
Disaster recovery plans, 124
Disk on demand, 41–42
Distribution of data, 145–147
Dropbox, 37, 42, 110–111, 160, 174
Dunkin’ Donuts, 59–61
Elasticity, 32, 36
Ellison, Larry, 30
Ellucian, 123
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
212
▸
I N D E X
Engine Yard, 41
Enterprise resource planning (ERP), 6, 
53, 129, 131, 134, 157
Ethernet, 9–10
Eucalyptus, 62
Excess usage, SLAs on, 119
Exit clauses (termination), in SLAs, 115, 
125
Expectations, about SLAs, 125
Expenses. See Capital expense (CAPEX); 
Operational expense (OPEX)
External forces on organization, 131–132, 
132f
External sources of data, 138–139
External stakeholders
budgeting for IT and, 93–94, 94f
cloud SLAs and, 109, 110, 117, 118, 
124, 126
effects of cloud strategy on, 70, 89, 90, 
90t, 103, 104f, 105–106
governance structure and, 98
mobile computing and, 173, 175
need for increased technology by, 
103–104
payment model changes and, 104–105
regulatory compliance and, 90–91
requests for increased innovation from, 
105
training for, 105
See also Customers; Suppliers; Vendors
Facebook, 29, 60, 138, 143, 153, 154, 
156, 157, 164, 168, 174, 183, 184
Failure management, in SLAs, 123–124
Fair Credit Reporting Act, 152
Family Educational Rights and Privacy 
Act (FERPA), 123
Fault tolerance, 33, 36, 56
Financial services industry, 66
Forrester Research, 158
Foursquare, 138, 149, 153, 157
Fraud detection, 155
Gaming industry, 29–30, 30f, 65
Gartner, Inc., 31, 127, 150, 176
Gates, Bill, 7
General Electric, 5
Geographic context, for mobile comput-
ing, 174–175
Geographic information system (GIS), 
144, 146, 159
Geographic regions, SLAs on, 120
Geo-replication, 33–34, 36
GoodData, 164
Google, 33, 122, 139, 156
Google Apps, 38, 59, 138, 157, 159
Governance structure, 95, 97–98, 119
Graniterock, 133–134
Grid computing, 13, 13t, 14f
Guarantees, in SLAs, 119
Hardware virtualization, 16–19, 18f
Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act (HIPAA), 65, 
90–91, 152
Heroku, 41, 156, 163
High-variety data, 150, 151, 152f,
156–157
High-velocity data, 150, 151, 152f,
155–156
High-volume data, 150, 151–155, 152f
Honeywell, 5
Hosted applications, 25–26, 29, 41
Hybrid cloud, 28, 43, 82, 121
description of, 63, 66
infrastructure and applications in, 48
integration-as-a-service with, 39
interplay of deployment models with, 
48–49, 48f
move from private cloud to, 64, 65
on-premises versus off-premises, 
99–102, 101t
public or private clouds and, 54, 63, 
64–65, 66
SLA decision related to, 111, 113, 113t
Zynga example of use of, 63–65
Hypertext markup language (HTML), 10
Hypertext transfer protocol (HTTP), 10, 
33, 35
IBM, 5, 7, 9, 15, 143, 147, 156
IBM 402, 5, 5f
Indirect costs, 71, 73, 74t
Industry-speciﬁc standards, SLAs on, 120
InfoGroup, 138–139, 157
Information and communication technol-
ogy (ICT), 10, 20, 29, 32, 57, 59, 72, 
73, 74, 76, 77, 79, 83, 161, 179
Information-as-a-service, 39–40
Information sharing, in community 
clouds, 65
Information systems (IS), 3, 4, 14, 19–20, 
34, 47, 76, 109
Information technology (IT)
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
I N D E X
◂
213
budgeting for, 3, 47, 77, 79, 93, 94f,
104, 105
BYOD policy and, 179, 180, 182
cloud computing delivery of, 3, 5, 
19–20, 47, 49, 50–53, 63–64, 69, 91, 
92, 102
increased demand for, 50–51, 62, 95
innovation and, 53, 94–95
mobile computing and, 172, 178, 186
on-premises versus off-premises cloud 
in, 99–102, 101t
organizational agility and, 94–95, 94f
readiness for cloud strategy of, 99
resource management of, 39, 51–53, 
52f, 53t, 78, 98–99
responsibility of providers of, 109
security and, 34, 122, 179
self-service BI and, 146, 186
shadow, 178
staff readiness for, 102–103
Information technology (IT) staff
BYOD policy and, 179
chief information ofﬁcers (CIOs) and, 
96–97
cloud computing IT delivery and, 20, 
25, 37, 49, 51, 53, 58, 72, 89, 91, 92, 
95–97, 96f, 121
effects of cloud strategy on, 90, 90t
governance structure for, 95, 97–98
readiness for cloud strategy of, 50, 92, 
102–103
responsibilities of, 53, 62, 72, 97, 98, 
99, 146
training for, 50, 180, 181
Information visualization, 144
Infrastructure-as-a-service (IaaS)
Big Data and, 159, 160, 163–64
delivering IT via the cloud using, 19, 
59, 62, 66
description of, 41
Netﬂix example of, 55–57
on-premises versus off-premises, 
99–102, 101t
SLAs and, 111, 113, 113t, 121
as service model, 37, 41, 43, 48
underlying services in, 36f, 41–43
Innovation
chief information ofﬁcers (CIOs) and, 
97
increased organizational agility and, 
94–95, 94f
mobile computing and, 182–186
move to cloud computing and, 51–52, 
53, 56–57, 74, 92
non-IT staff and, 92
requests from external stakeholders 
for, 105
Instagram, 149, 157
Institute of Electrical and Electronics 
Engineers, 9, 31, 35
Integrated circuit (IC), 4–5, 7
Integration-as-a-service, 39
Internal sources of data, 136–138, 137f,
166
Internal stakeholders
BYOD policy in mobile computing and, 
180–181
cloud SLAs and, 109, 110, 117, 118, 
124, 126
effects of cloud strategy on, 89, 
90, 90t
mobile computing and, 173, 175
Internet service providers (ISPs), 9, 33
Internet technologies, 33, 35
Interoperability, 14, 65
Intranet private clouds, 112, 112t
Izrailevsky, Yuri, 56
Jobs, Steve, 7–8
Kildall, Gary, 7
Kirby, John, 5
Knowledge management, 144
LAN-based applications, 27–29, 28f
Laprade, Ed, 133
Lee, Jimmy, 146
Legal requirements, 49, 65, 66, 90–91, 
114, 118, 119, 123, 139, 152
Leinwand, Allan, 64
Licenses, 59, 74–75, 115, 116, 120, 123, 
161
LinkedIn, 60, 137, 138, 149, 153, 157, 
168, 174
Load balancers, 12–13
Local area networks (LANs), 9, 27–28, 
28f, 29, 43
Location of data, 118
Macintosh (Mac) computer, 8 
Mainframe computing, 4–6, 5f, 6t, 47
Maintenance
for mobile computing, 177
SLAs on, 119–120
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
214
▸
I N D E X
Managed service providers (cloud 
brokers), 15, 117, 120
Management-as-a-service, 39
Management process
for Big Data, 158
in SLAs, 124–125
Managed service provider, 15, 117
Marketing, with Big Data, 156, 168–169
Mean provisioning time, 108
Mean time between failures (MTBF), 108
Mean time to repair (MTTR), 108
Measurements
business intelligence with, 71–72
strategic, 69–70
Metcalfe, Robert, 9
Metered use, 13t, 16, 33, 36–37, 43, 48, 
55, 57, 61, 77, 78, 79, 104, 119, 123, 
140, 147, 161, 163, 164. See also Pay-
as-you-go billing
Microprocessor-based computers, 7–8
Microsoft, 7, 26, 31, 33, 116, 156, 177
Microsoft Azure, 41, 57–59, 100, 111, 
120, 156, 159
Middleware, 13
Mikola, Markus, 58
MILNET, 8
Minicomputers, 6–7
Mining techniques, 141–142, 143, 
155–156
Mobile computing, 171–187
Big Data and, 154, 171, 183–184
business perspective on, 173
BYOD policy and, 172, 176, 178–182, 
187
commercial perspective on, 172–173
consumer experience and, 186–187
deﬁning, 174–175
examples of apps for, 173
innovation and, 182–186
management solutions for, 176–177, 
177f
personal perspective on, 172
uses of, 175–176
Mobile device management (MDM), 
176–177, 177f, 179, 180, 181, 182, 
187
Moore ’s Law, 7
National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration (NASA), 139
National Cash Register (NCR), 5
National Institute of Standards and 
Technology, 31, 34, 38, 43
National Science Foundation Network 
(NSFNET), 8–9
Natural language processing (NLP), 11, 
143
Netﬂix, 55–57, 98–99, 173, 186
Negotiated service level agreements 
(SLAs)
cloud use parameters and choice of, 
110–112, 111f, 112t
costs under, 126
description of, 110
expectations and, 125
negotiating process for, 116–117, 126
type of service and deployment and, 
51, 113, 113t
Network access, 34, 36
Network-as-a-service, 43
Networks, 8–10, 174
Nielsen BookScan, 154, 157
Nike, 146
Non-IT staff, 90, 90t, 92–95, 93f, 94f
NoSQL databases, 138
Noyce, Robert, 5
Objectives, in business intelligence, 
132–134
Object Modeling Group, 31, 35
Object-oriented programming, 25–26
Off-premises Big Data storage in cloud, 
160–161, 160f, 165
Off-premises cloud infrastructure
access to resources and, 54
Big Data storage control and, 159, 165
community clouds and, 49
computing power requirements and, 
139
governance structure for, 97, 98
IT staff members and, 98
mobile computing and, 181
on-premises deployment versus, 
99–102, 101t
private clouds and, 48, 112
SLA requirements and, 121
On-demand self-service, 34–35, 36
Online analytical processing (OLAP), 130, 
141, 166
Online transaction processing (OLTP), 
136, 137, 137f, 143, 149, 154, 155, 
157, 166
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
I N D E X
◂
215
On-premises Big Data storage, 160–161, 
160f, 165
On-premises cloud infrastructure
access to resources and, 54
Big Data storage control and, 159, 165
community clouds and, 49
computing power requirements and, 
139
off-premises deployment versus, 
99–102, 101t
private clouds and, 48, 112
SLA requirements and, 121
Operating costs, 73, 74t, 75, 86
Operational expense (OPEX)
build-versus-buy decision and, 75
business life cycle and, 79–82, 82f
capital expense (CAPEX) versus, 76–82
deﬁnition of, 72
internal versus external cloud in, 
77–79, 80f–81f, 84t, 85–86
move to cloud computing and, 50, 55, 
57, 58, 64, 66
strategic measurement with, 79
Oracle, 29, 42, 156
Organizations
budgeting for IT and, 93–94, 94f
external forces on, 131–132, 132f
governance structure in, 95, 97–98
increased agility in, 94–95, 94f
move to cloud computing and effects 
on, 91–92
non-IT staff and transformation of, 
93–94
Pay-as-you-go billing, 4, 15, 27, 33, 
36–37, 42, 43, 48, 54, 59, 163, 165. 
See also Metered use
Payment models, 104–105, 119
Penalty models, in SLAs, 119
Pentaho, 147
Performance objectives, in SLAs, 121–122
Personal computers (PCs), 6, 7–8
Personalized marketing, 156
Plain old telephone system (POTS), 
23–24
Planned maintenance, SLAs on, 119–120
Platform-as-a-service (PaaS)
Big Data and, 159, 163, 164
description of, 40
on-premises versus off-premises, 
99–102, 101t
as service model, 19, 38, 40, 43, 48
SLAs and, 111, 113, 113t, 120
Sopima example of, 57–59
underlying services in, 36f, 40–41
PolicyMap, 139, 157
Pooling, 12
Potter, Stephen, 96
Predictive analysis, 143–144, 145f
Preservation of data, 118
Primary and Preventative Care GIS 
(PPCGIS), 146
Privacy laws, 91, 118, 119, 122–123, 
139, 152
Private cloud
applications delivered from, 38, 40
as basis for cloud computing, 54, 66
charges for use of, 36–37
as deployment model, 43, 54
Eucalyptus example of use of, 62
hybrid cloud with, 54, 63, 64–65, 66
infrastructure and applications in, 
48, 82
infrastructure-as-a-service (IaaS) with, 
55
interplay of deployment models with, 
48–49, 48f
move to cloud computing beginning 
with, 60–62
move to hybrid cloud from, 64, 65
on-premises versus off-premises, 
99–102, 101t, 112
platform-as-a-service (PaaS) with, 57
public cloud differentiated from, 54–55
resource allocation in, 61, 62
SLA decision related to, 111, 112t, 113, 
113t
SLA requirements for, 121
Process-as-a-service, 40
Processing, of Big Data, 158, 163–165
Proprietary rights, in standardized SLAs, 
115–116
Public cloud
as basis for cloud computing, 54, 66
charges for use of, 36–37
as deployment model, 43, 54
hybrid cloud with, 54, 63, 64–65, 66
infrastructure and applications in, 48, 82
infrastructure-as-a-service (IaaS) 
with, 55
interplay of deployment models with, 
48–49, 48f
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
216
▸
I N D E X
Public cloud (Continued)
move to cloud computing beginning 
with, 61
on-premises versus off-premises, 
99–102, 101t
platform-as-a-service (PaaS) with, 57
private cloud differentiated from, 
54–55
resource allocation in, 61
response time with, 122
SLA decision and, 110–111, 111–112, 
112t, 113, 113t
SLA requirements for, 121
Puma, 62
Quality of service (QOS), 107, 
108–109
Quicken, 40
Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation (RFID), 
133, 134, 173, 176
RCA, 5
Readiness for cloud strategy, 50, 92, 99, 
102–103
Red Hat, 40
Redundancy, data, 118
Regulatory compliance, 49, 65, 66, 
90–91, 114, 118, 119, 123, 139, 152
Renewals, SLAs on, 119
Reports, and Big Data, 152, 166, 185
Resource allocation, 33, 37, 61, 62, 158
Resource sharing, 17, 66
Response time, 28, 62, 122
Return on investment (ROI)
business intelligence solutions 
and, 133
calculation of, 83
deﬁnition of, 69, 72
internal versus external cloud in, 
83–85, 84t, 86
LAN-based applications and, 27, 28
limitations of, 85
mobile computing and, 182–183
move to cloud computing decision 
and, 75
SLA monitoring and, 126
stafﬁng considerations and, 92, 99–100, 
103
strategic measurement with, 69, 70, 76
Risk
Big Data storage and, 161, 164–165
business intelligence projects and, 132, 
140, 148
Sabre, Inc., 154
Safe harbor program, 114
Salesforce, 38, 40, 47, 59–60, 100, 121, 
138, 145, 157, 164
SAS, 141, 145, 155, 156, 181, 184, 186
Scalability, 32, 36, 57, 62
Schema, 136
Security
Big Data and, 167–168
cloud computing and, 34, 36
regulatory compliance and, 91
SLAs on, 114, 122–123
virtualized environment and, 17
Security-as-a-service, 39
Security intelligence, 167–168
Self-service business intelligence (BI), 
145–146, 147, 186
Sequence discovery, 142
Service-based characteristic of cloud com-
puting, 31–32, 35
Service brokers, 15, 117, 120
Service failure management, in SLAs, 
123–124
Service level agreements (SLAs), 107–128
Amazon Web Services example of stan-
dardized, 113–116
business policies in, 119–120
cloud use parameters and choice of, 
110–112, 111f, 112t
critical performance objectives and, 
121–122
data policies and, 118–119
deployment models considerations and, 
121
disaster recovery plan and, 124
effective management process and, 
124–125
exit process clause in, 125
expectations about, 125
external cloud providers and, 109–110
move to cloud computing and, 51
negotiating process for, 116–117, 126
purposes of, 107
quality of service (QOS) and, 107, 
108–109
ROI and monitoring of, 126
roles and responsibilities under, 
117–118, 118f
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
I N D E X
◂
217
security and privacy requirements and, 
122–123
service and deployment types and, 
113, 113t
service failure management and, 
123–124
service management requirements 
and, 123
service models considerations and, 
120–121
speciﬁcations included in typical, 
107–108
standardized, with Amazon Web 
Services, 113–116
types of, 110
Service management requirements, in 
SLAs, 123
Service models
overview of, 36f, 37–43, 44
SLA negotiations and understanding of, 
120–121
See also Infrastructure-as-a-service 
(IaaS); Platform-as-a-service (PaaS); 
Software-as-a-service (SaaS)
Service-oriented architecture (SOA), 
13–16
Services not covered, SLAs on, 119
Service terms. See Standardized service 
level agreements (SLAs)
Service utilization metrics, 33, 36–37
Shared resources, 32–33, 36
Simple object access protocol (SOAP), 
15, 35
6waves, 29–30, 30f
SkyDrive, 160, 174
Small and medium-size businesses 
(SMBs), 110
Social media, 153, 155–156, 157, 158
Software-as-a-service (SaaS)
Big Data and, 157, 159, 160, 161, 164
description of, 38
Dunkin’ Donuts example of, 59–60
mobile device management (MDM) 
using, 177
on-premises versus off-premises, 
99–102, 101t
as service model, 16, 19, 25, 38, 43, 48
SLAs and, 110–111, 112, 113, 113t,
121
underlying services in, 36f, 38–40
web browser delivery of, 59–60
Sopima, 32, 57–59
Sperry, 5
Staff. See Information technology (IT) 
staff; Non–IT staff
Stakeholders. See External stakeholders; 
Internal stakeholders
Standardized objectives, 133
Standardized service level agreements 
(SLAs)
Amazon Web Services example of, 
113–116
cloud use parameters and choice of, 
110–112, 111f, 112t
costs under, 126
description of, 110
negotiating process for, 116–117, 126
small and medium-size businesses 
(SMBs) and, 110
type of service and deployment and, 
51, 113, 113t
universal service terms in, 115–116
Standards, SLAs on, 120
Storage-as-a-service, 41–42
Storage of Big Data, 158–161, 160f,
161f–162f, 185
Strategic measurement, 69–70
Strategy, for cloud computing, 72, 
130–132, 131
Structured data, 135, 135f
Subcontracted services, 120
Supercomputers, 6, 6t
Suppliers
business intelligence project and, 132, 
146
increased IT expenses and, 105
mobile computing and, 172, 173
move to cloud computing and, 70, 89, 
91, 103, 109
regulatory compliance and, 90–91
training of, 105
See also Vendors
Supply chain management, 103–104, 
111–112, 148, 172
Support, SLAs on, 114, 115, 119, 125
Telephone system, 23–24
Temporary suspension, in standardized 
SLAs, 115
Termination (exit clauses), in SLAs, 
115, 125
Testing-as-a-service, 39
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
218
▸
I N D E X
Text mining, 143
Tong, Cosmos, 29
Total cost of ownership (TCO)
build-versus-buy decision and, 75
cloud computing and, 70, 74–75, 78, 
83, 85–86, 161, 165
costs considered in, 73, 74t
deﬁnition of, 71–72
example of, 72–73
LAN-based applications and, 27, 28
Trafﬁc parameters, in SLAs, 108–109
Training, 50, 105, 180, 181
Transferability, SLAs on, 119
Transmission errors, in SLAs, 108
TripAdvisor, 183–184, 186
Twitter, 60, 137, 138, 143, 153, 164, 168
UNIVAC, 5
Unstructured data, 135, 135f, 143
Upgrades, SLAs on, 123
Update management, for mobile comput-
ing, 176–177
Usage agreements. See Standardized 
service level agreements (SLAs)
User IT cloud in, 51–53, 52f, 53t
Value-producing activities, 131–132, 131f
Variety of data, 150, 151, 152f, 156–157
Velocity of data, 150, 151, 152f, 155–156
Vendors
Big Data solutions from, 163–165, 
161f–162f
BI tools from, 145, 156
cloud computing solutions from, 31, 
33–34
internal versus external cloud from, 76, 
77–79, 80f–81f, 84t, 85–86
layers of abstraction when working 
with, 25
network access to services from, 34
operational costs of products from, 73
security-as-a-service from, 39
service-oriented architecture (SOA) 
and, 14
software-as-a-service (SaaS) 
from, 177
See also Suppliers
Versioning, 119
Virtualization, 16–19, 18f
Volume of data, 150, 151–155, 152f
Walmart, 149
Watson engagement advisor, 143
Web services description language 
(WSDL), 15
Web usage mining, 143
Wikibon, 63
Windows Azure, 41, 57–59, 100, 111, 
120, 156, 159
Xerox Parc, 9
XML, 14, 15, 35
YouTube, 60
Zynga, 63–65, 82, 111
www.ebook777.com

