

Business
Transformation

Wiley & SAS 
Business Series
The Wiley & SAS Business Series presents books that help senior-level 
managers with their critical management decisions.
Titles in the Wiley & SAS Business Series include:
Activity-Based Management for Financial Institutions: Driving Bottom-
Line Results by Brent Bahnub
Bank Fraud: Using Technology to Combat Losses by Revathi 
Subramanian
Big Data Analytics: Turning Big Data into Big Money by Frank 
Ohlhorst
Branded! How Retailers Engage Consumers with Social Media and 
Mobility by Bernie Brennan and Lori Schafer
Business Analytics for Customer Intelligence by Gert Laursen
Business Analytics for Managers: Taking Business Intelligence beyond 
Reporting by Gert Laursen and Jesper Thorlund
The Business Forecasting Deal: Exposing Bad Practices and Providing 
Practical Solutions by Michael Gilliland
Business Intelligence Applied: Implementing an Effective Information 
and Communications Technology Infrastructure by Michael Gendron
Business Intelligence in the Cloud: Strategic Implementation Guide by 
Michael S. Gendron
Business Intelligence Success Factors: Tools for Aligning Your Business in 
the Global Economy by Olivia Parr Rud
CIO Best Practices: Enabling Strategic Value with Information 
Technology, Second Edition by Joe Stenzel
Connecting Organizational Silos: Taking Knowledge Flow Management 
to the Next Level with Social Media by Frank Leistner

Credit Risk Assessment: The New Lending System for Borrowers, Lenders, 
and Investors by Clark Abrahams and Mingyuan Zhang
Credit Risk Scorecards: Developing and Implementing Intelligent Credit 
Scoring by Naeem Siddiqi
The Data Asset: How Smart Companies Govern Their Data for Business 
Success by Tony Fisher
Delivering Business Analytics: Practical Guidelines for Best Practice by 
Evan Stubbs
Demand-Driven Forecasting: A Structured Approach to Forecasting,
Second Edition by Charles Chase
Demand-Driven Inventory Optimization and Replenishment: Creating a 
More Efﬁcient Supply Chain by Robert A. Davis
The Executive’s Guide to Enterprise Social Media Strategy: How Social 
Networks Are Radically Transforming Your Business by David Thomas 
and Mike Barlow
Economic and Business Forecasting: Analyzing and Interpreting 
Econometric Results by John Silvia, Azhar Iqbal, Kaylyn Swankoski, 
Sarah Watt, and Sam Bullard
Executive’s Guide to Solvency II by David Buckham, Jason Wahl, 
and Stuart Rose
Fair Lending Compliance: Intelligence and Implications for Credit Risk 
Management by Clark R. Abrahams and Mingyuan Zhang
Foreign Currency Financial Reporting from Euros to Yen to Yuan: A 
Guide to Fundamental Concepts and Practical Applications by Robert 
Rowan
Health Analytics: Gaining the Insights to Transform Health Care by 
Jason Burke
Heuristics in Analytics: A Practical Perspective of What Inﬂuences Our 
Analytical World by Carlos Andre Reis Pinheiro and Fiona McNeill
Human Capital Analytics: How to Harness the Potential of Your 
Organization’s Greatest Asset by Gene Pease, Boyce Byerly, and Jac 
Fitz-enz
Implement, Improve and Expand Your Statewide Longitudinal Data 
System: Creating a Culture of Data in Education by Jamie McQuiggan 
and Armistead Sapp

Information Revolution: Using the Information Evolution Model to Grow 
Your Business by Jim Davis, Gloria J. Miller, and Allan Russell
Killer Analytics: Top 20 Metrics Missing from Your Balance Sheet by 
Mark Brown
Manufacturing Best Practices: Optimizing Productivity and Product 
Quality by Bobby Hull
Marketing Automation: Practical Steps to More Effective Direct Marketing
by Jeff LeSueur
Mastering Organizational Knowledge Flow: How to Make Knowledge 
Sharing Work by Frank Leistner
The New Know: Innovation Powered by Analytics by Thornton May
Performance 
Management: 
Integrating 
Strategy 
Execution, 
Methodologies, Risk, and Analytics by Gary Cokins
Predictive Business Analytics: Forward-Looking Capabilities to Improve 
Business Performance by Lawrence Maisel and Gary Cokins
Retail Analytics: The Secret Weapon by Emmett Cox
Social Network Analysis in Telecommunications by Carlos Andre Reis 
Pinheiro
Statistical Thinking: Improving Business Performance, Second Edition 
by Roger W. Hoerl and Ronald D. Snee
Taming the Big Data Tidal Wave: Finding Opportunities in Huge Data 
Streams with Advanced Analytics by Bill Franks
Too Big to Ignore: The Business Case for Big Data by Phil Simon
The Value of Business Analytics: Identifying the Path to Proﬁtability by 
Evan Stubbs
Visual Six Sigma: Making Data Analysis Lean by Ian Cox, Marie A. 
Gaudard, Philip J. Ramsey, Mia L. Stephens, and Leo Wright
Win with Advanced Business Analytics: Creating Business Value from 
Your Data by Jean Paul Isson and Jesse Harriott
For more information on any of the above titles, please visit www
.wiley.com.

Business
Transformation
A Roadmap for Maximizing 
Organizational Insights
Aiman Zeid

Cover Design: Andrew Liefer
Cover Illustration: left blue panel: © iStockphoto.com/trafﬁc_analyzer, right green 
panel: © iStockphoto.com/Andrey Prokhorov
Copyright © 2014 by SAS Institute. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or 
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, 
recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of 
the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission 
of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee 
to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 
(978) 750-8400, fax (978) 646-8600, or on the Web at www.copyright.com. Requests 
to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011, 
fax (201) 748-6008, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have 
used their best efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or 
warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book 
and speciﬁcally disclaim any implied warranties of merchantability or ﬁtness for a 
particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales representatives 
or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not 
be suitable for your situation.  You should consult with a professional where 
appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of proﬁt 
or any other commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental, 
consequential, or other damages.
For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, 
please contact our Customer Care Department within the United States at (800) 
762-2974, outside the United States at (317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley publishes in a variety of print and electronic formats and by print-on-demand. 
Some material included with standard print versions of this book may not be 
included in e-books or in print-on-demand. If this book refers to media such as a 
CD or DVD that is not included in the version you purchased, you may download 
this material at http://booksupport.wiley.com. For more information about Wiley 
products, visit www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Zeid, Aiman.
  Business transformation : a roadmap for maximizing organizational insights / 
Aiman Zeid.
   pages
cm. — (Wiley & SAS business series)
Includes index.
  ISBN 978-1-118-72465-1 (hardback); ISBN 978-1-118-89148-3 (ebk); 
ISBN 978-1-118-89161-2 (ebk)
1. Information technology—Management.
2. Organizational behavior. 
3. Organizational change.
4. Business planning.
I. Title. 
HD30.2.Z444
2014
658.4'038—dc 3
2013047059
Printed in the United States of America
10   9   8   7   6   5   4   3   2   1

vii
Contents
Foreword
xi
Preface
xv
Acknowledgments
xvii
Chapter 1: The Critical Role of Business Insight
1
The Disruptive Nature of Data
2
An Unconventional Look at Conventional Wisdom
3
Innovating at the Speed of Data
5
Weighing Risk and Bringing the Better Part of 
Gut Instinct Back into the Equation
6
People, Process, Technology, and Culture
8
Starting the Journey
10
Notes
12
Chapter 2: The Journey: Taking the First Steps 
toward Transforming Your Organization
13
Different Approaches
13
Juggling Multiple Challenges
15
How to Deal with Challenges Effectively
17
Executive Sponsorship: Critical to Success
18
Understanding Current Capabilities
19
Aligning Capabilities with Business Objectives
20
Let’s Start the Journey
22
Taking the First Steps to Transforming 
Your Organization
24
Note
24

viii
▸
C O N T E N T S
Chapter 3: Challenged Organizations: When Rugged 
Individualism and Department Silos 
Aren’t Enough
25
Getting Along One Day at a Time: Organizations 
at the Individual Level
27
When “Have It Your Way” Isn’t a Good Thing
32
Superhighways and Dirt Roads
33
Consolidated, but Not Cohesive: Organizations 
at the Departmental Level
37
Subject Matter Experts and Gatekeepers
38
Understanding the True Consequences of the 
Challenged Levels
46
Business Transformation Strategy Objectives 
for Challenged Organizations
46
Notes
47
Chapter 4: Foundational Organizations: Making the Leap 
to an Enterprise-Wide Approach
49
The Possibilities That Come with Patience
51
Seeing the Value across the Enterprise
51
How an Enterprise Level Organization Functions
54
Big Data: The Big Opportunity for Enterprise 
Level Organizations
62
Don’t Let Up
62
Continuous Improvement Required
64
Business Transformation Strategy Objectives for 
Foundational Organizations
64
Chapter 5: Progressive Organizations: Harnessing the 
Power of Information to Achieve Market 
Advantage and Expand Their Business 
Offerings
67
Optimization: The Easiest Business Case of All
69
Toward Innovation and Beyond
79
Business Transformation Strategy Objectives 
for Progressive Organizations
87

C O N T E N T S
◂
ix
Chapter 6: Centers of Excellence: The Key to Accelerate 
Organizational Transformation
89
The 10,000-Foot View of Information
92
A Quick Look at the Key Responsibilities of a CoE
93
CoEs and the Levels of Maturity
95
How Should CoEs Be Organized?
96
Accelerating Maturity—Not Creating Dependency
97
Finding the Right Spot in the Org Chart
99
Mapping the Mini-Units That a CoE Might Host
99
How the CoE Helps Secure the Organizational Pillars
104
Phased versus Big Bang Approach for Starting a CoE
109
Finding the Right Funding Mechanism
109
Selecting the Right Personalities
110
Ramping Up Your Change Agent
111
Note
112
Chapter 7: Starting the Journey: Developing a Strategy 
and Roadmap to Guide Your Business 
Transformation
113
Knowing Where to Start
114
Riyad Bank’s Enterprise Business Intelligence 
Competency Center
114
E.SUN Bank’s Customer Risk Value Organization
118
Success Story Takeaways
120
Applying the Lessons from E.SUN and Riyad
121
The Most Important Characteristics of 
Successful Business Transformation Strategies
121
A Step-by-Step Look at the Key Components
122
Identifying a Starting Point
126
Summing It All Up
127
In the End, It’s about Being a Leader
128
Appendix:
Snapshot of the Information 
Evolution Model
131
The Individual Level: Getting Along One Day at a Time
131
Departmental Level: The Consolidated Organization
136

x
▸
C O N T E N T S
The Enterprise Organization: A Common Sense of 
Purpose
142
The Optimize Level Organization: Aligned and Ready
149
The Innovate Level: Spawning and Supporting 
New Ideas
156
Glossary
165
About the Author
173
Index
175

xi
Foreword
When Information Revolution1 was published in 2006, no Chinese-
based companies were among the top 10 largest companies by market 
capitalization. Apple didn’t sell phones. Facebook was something col-
lege kids used to connect with their friends. Back then, we talked a 
lot about the amount of data coming in and faster processing speed.
What we believed then remains true today: Data, and the decision-
making process, can be moved throughout the organization to equip 
every decision maker (automated, line worker, analyst, executive) 
to make the best choices. By operationalizing analytics, organiza-
tions can identify and quantify both opportunity and risk. Information 
Revolution highlighted SAS’ Information Evolution Model, which helps 
organizations understand how they interact with their information 
and how to extract more value from it through analytics.
SO WHAT HAS CHANGED?
Business intelligence still matters. But today’s global economy 
requires predictive analytics and forecasting to play a more active 
role. Insights from unstructured data now hold great promise. New 
ways to store, move, and process data have made big data more acces-
sible and affordable than ever before. Delivery has moved to mobile. 
Many leaders run their businesses from tablets and smartphones.
A persistent myth is that technology alone enables all this. Sure, 
you need technology, but it’s just one component: People, informa-
tion processes, and culture are equally critical. That’s really what this 
book is about—transforming your organization to harness all four 
components.

xii
▸
F O R E W O R D
PUTTING THE SPOTLIGHT ON PEOPLE AND CULTURE
After Information Revolution was published, accelerated processing 
speeds gave rise to near-real-time results. More granular exploration 
of data became possible in ways that weren’t quick or easy before. 
Organizations that treat their data as an asset continue to:
Invest in people with the skills to extract the insights that were 
hidden in the data and surface them to decision makers through-
out the organizations.
Foster a culture that encourages using data to uncover new 
business opportunities and gain a better understanding of their 
customers.
Have an executive sponsor who leads the effort to ﬁnd, hire, cul-
tivate, and support individuals who embrace fact-based decision 
making. This executive sponsor pays particular attention to the 
communication challenge that data-driven decision making pres-
ents. It’s important to have an executive who can articulate what 
the analytical insight returns can mean to the business units—
and win over skeptics.
If top executives still make decisions based on gut feeling and 
data-driven individuals are still a separate part of the business, no 
amount of technology and data governance processes will make a dif-
ference. But if an organization is committed to using data successfully, 
one strategic hire can have a huge impact. A new type of professional, 
the data scientist, can bridge the communication gap that prevents an 
analytical culture from taking hold. Tom Davenport, in his Harvard 
Business Review article “Data Scientist: The Sexiest Job of the 21st 
Century,”2 describes a data scientist this way: “It’s a high-ranking pro-
fessional with the training and curiosity to make discoveries in the 
world of big data. . . . Their sudden appearance on the business scene 
reﬂects the fact that organizations are now wrestling with information 
that comes in varieties and volumes never encountered before.” Data 
scientists help organizations get the most out of their data, in part, by 
using business requirements to drive the information exploration and 
the application of analytics. Data scientists often have a background in 
math, statistics, and computer science, but aren’t necessarily experts 

F O R E W O R D
◂
xiii
in any one of those ﬁelds. They have to be very good at translating the 
value of data to the business and helping analysts understand what 
they need to do.
Internal communication and business and IT alignment continue 
to present challenges for organizations. Many rely on enterprise Cen-
ters of Excellence to boost business-transformation efforts.
My point is: You can’t just bring in technology tools to solve your 
business problems and expect them to do all the work. You must have 
the infrastructure capabilities, the skilled people, the information pro-
cesses, and the cultural commitment to derive the most value from 
your data.
AND SOME THINGS STAY THE SAME . . .
Some things haven’t changed, and one of them is taking a struc-
tured approach to building toward the enterprise level of information 
maturity—and beyond. The ﬁve levels outlined in 2006 remain rel-
evant today (though we’ve grouped the levels into three key catego-
ries). Unfortunately, many organizations are in a quandary about how 
to reach information maturity. Now here’s the clincher: “By 2015, 15 
percent of organizations will modernize their strategy for informa-
tion management capability and exhibit a 20 percent higher ﬁnancial 
performance than their peers,” according to Gartner.3 These are clear 
signs of strategic initiatives by many organizations to reach higher 
maturity level.
To get started, you need to understand where your organization 
is today before you can build toward the future. This is particularly 
important as it relates to purchasing technology. Organizations that 
say they have not received a strong return on their investment in ana-
lytic technology frequently suffer from information maturity issues 
and may beneﬁt from a business-transformation effort. Assessing 
maturity is a process, but well worth the effort in the knowledge you 
will gain. It can be painful to ﬁnd out your organization is not at the 
maturity level you assumed. But, you will have a clear picture of how 
to begin developing your road map to get to the next level.
A fact-based decision-making culture is no longer an option; it’s 
a requirement spreading across industries. To stay competitive, be 

xiv
▸
F O R E W O R D
proactive. Use the Information Evolution Model. Let your data give 
you a fresh perspective on your business—see what’s working, ﬁx 
what isn’t, and set your sights on new opportunities.
—Jim Davis
Senior Vice President and 
Chief Marketing Ofﬁcer
SAS
NOTES
1. Jim Davis, Gloria J. Miller, and Allan Russell, Information Revolution: Using the 
Information Evolution Model to Grow Your Business (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 
2006).
2. Thomas H. Davenport and D. J. Patil, “Data Scientist: The Sexiest Job of the 
21st Century,” Harvard Business Review, October 2012, http://hbr.org/2012/10/
data-scientist-the-sexiest-job-of-the-21st-century/ar/1.
3. Eric Thoo, Mark A. Beyer, Ted Friedman, Merv Adrian, and Andreas Bitterer, 
“Predicts 2013: Advancing Data Management Maturity,” Gartner, December 10, 
2012.

xv
Preface
Over the past 28 years of my professional career, I had the opportunity 
and privilege to work with many clients in almost all industries and 
sectors in the United States, Europe, the Middle East, Asia, and Latin 
America. I have helped these clients improve their efﬁciency, change 
their operating models, and transform their organizations. Although 
each region has business and cultural differences, all organizations 
face the same types of core challenges when they look closely at their 
operating models and evaluate their efﬁciency and alignment. When 
organizations realize they have a weakness in their decision-making 
process, strategy, or business functions, the ﬁrst impulse is go with 
the easy answer ﬁrst. Often in my travels I’ve seen a new technol-
ogy being touted as a cure-all. And while new technology might be 
needed, the business results could vary considerably. Visionary lead-
ers and executives realize that the key to unlocking their organiza-
tion’s full potential requires honest and objective observation and 
evaluation of how the organization conducts its daily routine tasks.
Two key obvious ingredients are required to develop strategy and 
make sound decisions—information and skills. Accurate and consis-
tent information provides a detailed understanding of business per-
formance. People with the right skills can explore this information 
and analyze it to help their organization make sound decisions. This 
may be all organizations need if they limit their view to speciﬁc tasks 
or functions. But the focus should always be on enterprise perfor-
mance. The formula for an efﬁcient operating model will now need 
two more ingredients. Decision makers from various business units 
need to interact and collaborate to make the right decisions for the 
enterprise. Then the human nature characteristics and challenges 
quickly bring our attention to the internal organization culture that 

xvi
▸
P R E F A C E
we all recognize in our individual environments. Each environment 
has its own unique formal and informal business practices, norms, 
and expectations that inﬂuence how decisions are made.
Aligning all business units around enterprise performance can be 
difﬁcult. Effective organizational transformations can achieve align-
ment when organizations focus on their four key pillars—people, 
processes, technical infrastructure, and culture. The winning organi-
zational transformation formula is now complete. When I visit clients 
I emphasize that it doesn’t matter that you’ve mastered one, or even 
two, of these factors—you need to work on all of them to bring your 
organization into alignment and truly transform it. Think of it like a 
recipe. Cut out a key ingredient, or substitute a poor alternative, and 
the recipe won’t taste the same—it might not even work. It’s the 
same with organizational transformation. If you ignore the culture 
part, the best technical infrastructure in the world won’t help you 
improve the organization’s business performance.
Many visionary leaders and executives realize the need to take 
a comprehensive look at their organizations. Addressing weaknesses 
and leveraging strengths in the current capabilities in each environ-
ment requires business transformation efforts in many cases. Leaders 
who realize that and, more important, act quickly can produce signiﬁ-
cant results for their organizations. I wrote this book because many 
executives still struggle with how and where to start. Approaching 
these complex organizational challenges needs a structured approach 
and a sound strategy that is tailored for each environment. This 
has been a signiﬁcant focus of my professional career, and I wanted 
to share my experience and provide a roadmap for organizations to 
follow.

xvii
Acknowledgments
Writing this book would not have been possible without the encour-
agement and support I received from my family and colleagues. Their 
support gave me the energy and inspiration I needed to make the 
time to write this book after long days in the ofﬁce and many busi-
ness trips. I dedicate this book to my wife Marianne for her patience, 
support, and tolerance of my work and travel schedule, and to my 
children Suzanne and Adam, of whom I am very proud. The support I 
received from my colleagues at SAS has been invaluable. I would like 
to especially thank Michi Johnson, Christina Harvey, Cathy Traugot, 
and Stacey Hamilton for the contributions and support they provided.


1
C H A P T E R 1
The Critical 
Role of 
Business Insight
H
ave you ever asked a question that no one in your organization 
could answer? Or maybe someone answered it, but it turned out 
the information driving the answer was so ﬂawed that you really 
got no answer at all. Or maybe you got multiple conﬂicting answers 
that took hours, days—or maybe even weeks to straighten out.
Have you ever wondered why—in an age when bar codes are on 
everything, every conversation with a customer is recorded, and the 
Internet is full of comments about your products and services—you 
don’t really know who your customers are? Or what they want? Or, 
more important, what they might want next year? Are you frustrated 
because your organization isn’t achieving its goals? Or are you won-
dering why your organization is not keeping up with the competition?
You are not alone. Information, and the business insight you can 
derive from it, is coming so fast, from so many sources, in so many 
different formats, and at such incredible volumes that it is difﬁcult to 
grasp. It’s not hyperbole to suggest that gaining insight from data is 
like drinking water from a ﬁre hose. Business insight is derived from 
an organization’s information by using the domain knowledge of its 
resources and applying analytics to mine the data for critical trends, 
forecast revenue, determine customer propensity to buy products and 

2
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
services, and predict attrition in critical talent. Business insight is also 
produced by using business intelligence for querying and reporting, 
performance management to monitor critical business key perfor-
mance indicators (KPIs) and validate strategies, and industry solu-
tions to optimize the operations of critical business functions. Deriving 
business insight depends on developing an enterprise information 
foundation to properly integrate data from all business units in the 
organization. Organizations also have to take advantage of external 
and unstructured data to develop business insight. Yet most organiza-
tions ﬁnd they can’t generate the information they need (from their 
data)—or, if they can, it is not coming fast enough to make a difference.
Business insight adds value in several areas, ranging from a 
simple view of historical performance driven by the use of business 
intelligence to predictions of sales volumes and customer behaviors 
developed by the use of analytics. Successful organizations create a 
competitive advantage by maximizing the use of analytics to guide 
their decision making and strategies. This book highlights the impor-
tance of developing and aligning the organization’s resources and tal-
ents, information infrastructure, and use of analytics with the required 
processes and culture to create business insights that strengthen its 
competitive advantage.
You have questions, your organization has data—but can you 
generate the insight you need from the data? And can you do it fast 
enough? You need more than technology, a team of consultants, or 
a visionary data guru to lead you out of the data forest. You need a 
comprehensive approach to evolve your current information manage-
ment practices to generate more insight. You need to introduce new 
talent, new processes, and a new culture that will help make your 
organization more data-driven and analytical. You need to promote 
the use of analytics and insight across the organization in a repeat-
able and effective way, and learn how to identify a starting point and 
develop a strategy for getting this done. And that’s what you will read 
about in this book.
THE DISRUPTIVE NATURE OF DATA
During the recent U.S. presidential election there was a spirited dis-
cussion around whether aggregating poll data could accurately predict 

T H E  C R I T I C A L R O L E  O F  B U S I N E S S  I N S I G H T
◂
3
its outcome. Much of the debate related to the work of a blogger and 
statistician named Nate Silver (www.fivethirtyeight.com). Silver built 
a model that weighs and averages numerous polls based on multiple 
factors. Every few days, on his blog, he would update the percentage 
chances that Mitt Romney and Barack Obama had of winning the 
election. In 2008, Silver’s model of the presidential election was accu-
rate to within one percentage point of the ﬁnal popular vote,1 and he 
correctly predicted the race in 49 of 50 states. But at that time he was 
a comparatively unknown blogger. In 2010, his blog was licensed to 
the New York Times, and in the fall of 2012 he had recently published 
a book.2 As his 2012 model increasingly showed a likely victory for 
the incumbent (it stood at 90.9 percent the day of the election), pun-
dits began to howl. Some tried to pick apart the model, while others 
claimed bias. But one savvy commentator noted what was really up: 
Silver was a disruptive force. “Silver’s work poses a threat to more 
traditional—and, in particular, to more excitable—forms of political 
punditry and horse-race journalism,”3 explained a Washington Post col-
umnist. Silver was threatening a traditional profession. And it wasn’t 
his ﬁrst time. Silver initially gained notice for forecasting professional 
baseball player and team performance by using less traditional statisti-
cal measures. A variation on his system was adopted by the Oakland 
Athletics baseball team’s general manager, who hired an analyst and 
began selecting players based on skills that weren’t as highly valued in 
the marketplace. The book Moneyball,4 by Michael Lewis, captured the 
tension fueled by the general manager’s decision to ditch the conven-
tional wisdom of scouts who looked at traditional statistics. Despite 
regular declarations that “moneyball” is “dead,”5 it not only survives 
but also continues to grow as more teams, both inside and outside of 
baseball, hire analysts.
AN UNCONVENTIONAL LOOK AT
CONVENTIONAL WISDOM
In the business world the corollary to the pundits and scouts are 
those buyers and marketing gurus—even CEOs—who operate on 
“gut” instinct in choosing what products to launch and what business 
path to follow. They are often rather hostile to the Nate Silvers, who 
invaded their territory with analysis that suggests a different path. 

4
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
Unfortunately, businesses tend to have far too many pundits and not 
nearly enough Nate Silvers. So even if an organization purchases 
software or a solution to begin to drive the business more analyti-
cally, they don’t have the people who can analyze the data, or work 
with the business unit to decide what to analyze. Or the organization 
doesn’t have a culture in place that will accept the analysts’ work, a 
process in place that makes analytics a factor in everyday decisions, 
and a leadership that understands that gut instinct is old school.
Conventional wisdom has a way of creeping into organizations 
and holding them hostage. Even companies whose executives talk 
about their “change management” are often entrenched in approaches 
and ways of doing business that aren’t really working. An analytic 
project often provides the aha moment when an organization realizes 
everything it thought it knew—what its customers wanted, what was 
most likely to sell, what was its most proﬁtable service—was not com-
pletely accurate. Let’s explore a few of those moments.
Customer value is rife with examples. We all know our best cus-
tomer, right? It’s the one who buys the most stuff from us. Or is it? If 
you want to create an offer, or provide a discount, or do anything to 
increase the loyalty of your best customers you don’t need analytics—
you just need to know who spent the most money. Many telecommu-
nication providers certainly worked under that assumption for years, 
until some of the savvier ones used insight from analytics to discover 
that their “best” customers were actually costing them a lot of money. 
These were the customers who tied up customer support with ques-
tions about their plan, subscribed to a plan that was not proﬁtable, 
used the service in the least proﬁtable way to the organization, or 
didn’t keep up with their payments and had a high delinquency rate. 
All that attention to those high-needs customers was hurting the bot-
tom line. Yet this ﬂies in the face of conventional wisdom that sug-
gests you do anything to keep a customer happy because it costs more 
to gain a new one than retain one.
Another example of the use of insight from information comes 
from the banking industry. Banks often have three critical functions 
operating in silos. The marketing department focuses on customer 
retention, product innovation, proﬁtability, and the proper channels 
to promote them. The risk team develops and monitors opera-
tional risk factors and scores customers in terms of their liabilities 

T H E  C R I T I C A L R O L E  O F  B U S I N E S S  I N S I G H T
◂
5
and probability of default. The ﬁnance organization keeps its reve-
nue and loss information in its own silo. Banks have operated these 
three critical functions in silos for years. When the information from 
these siloed functions is integrated, a brand new perspective pro-
vides more business insight for making better decisions and setting 
strategies. The actual revenue from each customer is produced from 
the ﬁnancial side. The risk rating for each customer can be provided 
by the risk team, and now the marketing organization can use all it 
knows about the customers to identify the proper product to market 
to each one based on his or her risk score and total contribution to 
the bank’s revenue. Banks can now develop a more effective strategy 
to grow their business with each of their customer segments based on 
insights derived from their information.
INNOVATING AT THE SPEED OF DATA
Both telecommunications and banking examples highlight the value 
of speed in working with data. It’s one thing to ﬁgure out that certain 
customers aren’t worth the effort to retain and decide not to send them 
an offer; it’s another to do it in real time when a customer calls looking 
for a different rate plan or upgrade or walks into a branch to apply for 
a home mortgage. Does the service agent have a ﬁle that offers sug-
gestions as to whether a discounted upgrade should be offered to the 
customer or whether a credit limit should be extended? Or should 
the agent just politely listen and ignore customers’ threats to take their 
business elsewhere?
When organizations begin using analytical insight they challenge 
conventional wisdom quickly and effectively. An online ﬂoral com-
pany stopped gearing its advertising to men when it discovered most of 
the people buying ﬂowers for various holidays were women. A casino 
directed its best discounts away from its most loyal customers (they 
were going to visit either way), and targeted them at the customers 
who were also visiting their competitors. Engineers on an oil rig use 
data on conditions in their environment to predict when equipment 
needs maintenance before a costly breakdown, rather than relying on 
the manufacturer’s manual that had not proven effective in the past. 
Automobile companies predict which part may fail, and proactively 
replace it when a customer comes in for routine maintenance, saving 

6
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
money and increasing customer perception of quality. Hospitals use 
analytics to predict—at admission—which patients are at risk for 
readmission, and then plan treatment and discharge to keep them 
from being readmitted.
The value of insight goes beyond the business world in ways that 
a businessperson can certainly relate to. If you have a child getting 
ready to attend college or a university you have heard time and time 
again that their grades and their entrance exam scores will deter-
mine how well they will do. One college discovered that grades and 
entrance exams weren’t the determining factor at all—it was when 
the students signed up for classes. Those signing up late were more 
likely to fail or drop out.
Even when the “gut” is backed up by data, analytics helps orga-
nizations blend in other data that puts these statistics into a different 
context. One insurer bucked conventional wisdom by scaling back its 
rate increases for families insuring teenage drivers. The 17-year-olds 
it insured didn’t suddenly lose their propensity for fender benders 
and speeding tickets. Instead, the insurer discovered that over the 
lifetime of the family (both teens and parents), increasing the rates to 
cover expected claims actually drove some very loyal customers away 
permanently—and that was more costly for the company than cover-
ing the price of a new fender.
WEIGHING RISK AND BRINGING THE BETTER PART
OF GUT INSTINCT BACK INTO THE EQUATION
The insurance example drives to the heart of what analytics and the 
business insight it generates is about, and what it isn’t meant to do. 
Analytics doesn’t replace innovation, it helps innovation ﬂourish. By 
using insight to challenge conventional wisdom and weigh the suc-
cess of new approaches, organizations can feel more conﬁdent about 
their choices. Short of cloning the DNA of Apple founder Steve Jobs, 
most organizations will succeed not on the cult appeal of an inno-
vative leader, but on the success of many decisions made by many 
individuals working with sound data. If you are reading this book and 
consider yourself an innovator, think of analytics as your behind-the-
scenes assistant that helps you test your bold ideas and gives a view of 

T H E  C R I T I C A L R O L E  O F  B U S I N E S S  I N S I G H T
◂
7
what the likely outcomes of your initiatives, products, and strategies 
may be in the future.
Analytics lets you put the gut instinct back into the discussion in 
a way that controls the downside. A simple example is the A/B testing 
in web marketing (where some visitors see the “A” page with certain 
recommendations and others see the “B” page with different recom-
mendations). Test that novel idea, that catchy slogan, that interest-
ing promotion—but do so in a controlled environment in which you 
can quickly, efﬁciently, and effectively analyze the outcome without 
dependence on time-consuming sampling. In a faster processing envi-
ronment, you can test more granularly and run as many scenarios as 
you need.
There are more serious examples where innovation ran rampant 
without the steadying inﬂuence of business insight. The economic 
meltdown of the last decade certainly put a spotlight on some very 
innovative practices: no-doc mortgages, credit default swaps, and lots 
of chopping and repackaging of thinly secured debt. If the layers of 
oversight weren’t steep enough prior to the meltdown, they’re get-
ting steeper today. Managing risk is the yin to innovation’s yang. You 
want to manage risk without stiﬂing innovation and without feel-
ing beholden to the bean counters and frightened of the regulators. 
This is an area where analytics really shines. Use fast processing and 
you can manage risk more dynamically—in a way that actually drives 
innovation. New innovative high-performance analytics solutions are 
now contributing signiﬁcant value to organizations in areas like risk, 
fraud, and others.
Credit card issuers illustrate the risk-to-innovation phenomenon 
in their efforts to make the proverbial lemonade from the sour stench 
of stolen credit cards. Forrester “estimates that globally merchants are 
paying between $200 billion and $250 billion in fraud losses annually, 
while banks and ﬁnancial services organizations are losing between 
$12 billion and $15 billion annually.”6
In a perfect world, issuers could stop the fraud before it happens. 
Easier said than done, as anyone knows who ever took that dream 
trip overseas without calling their credit card issuer ﬁrst. The anger, 
frustration, fear, embarrassment of having a legitimate charge denied 
doesn’t go a long way in developing a loyal lifetime customer. Pressed 

8
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
between losing money or losing a customer, issuers have tried to ﬁnd 
better ways to target fraud without angering customers. Some of 
these efforts worked, but not in a timely way. Who hasn’t gotten a 
call from a credit card company asking you if you recently purchased 
a television at a store you’ve never set foot in? Or through an online 
website you’ve never heard of?
But if you apply high-performance analytics, in a fast processing 
environment, to big data and create models that can predict fraudu-
lent claims during the ﬁve-second window between when the sale is 
recorded and the bill is paid—now that’s managing risk innovatively.
Note that the example added at least one phrase we haven’t spent 
much time talking about: fast processing. Since Information Revolution7
was published, there has been a real technical revolution in process-
ing speed at modest cost. Today’s cost factor for increased processing 
speed should not blow up the IT budget.
The speed is there. The data is there. The cost is reasonable. What 
is often lacking is the analytic know-how and the cultural structure. 
The linchpin of the card issuer’s ability to decline a charge without 
irritating its customer is the skill to build a model that accurately 
understands whether the person who owns the card is buying the 
television (or someone else is), the data to run the model against, and 
the processing speed to do it in ﬁve seconds. An organization can’t 
simply buy a solution that will let them determine with customer-
pleasing accuracy (and then stop) a fraudulent credit card transac-
tion in the ﬁve-second window between the time the card is swiped 
and the sale is ﬁnalized. It can buy a solution that might temporarily 
stop fraud without ticking off customers—until the fraudsters ﬁnd a 
way around it. It might buy a solution that gets it right enough of the 
time so that it won’t chase away too many customers. But technology 
alone will not consistently stop fraud or please customers.
For that you need the other organizational foundations to support 
analytics: people, processes, and culture.
PEOPLE, PROCESS, TECHNOLOGY, AND CULTURE
The ﬁrst thing a credit card issuer that is successfully combating fraud 
must do is have a process in place for managing the data it will use 

T H E  C R I T I C A L R O L E  O F  B U S I N E S S  I N S I G H T
◂
9
to build a model that can tell the difference, in ﬁve seconds, between 
a legitimate and a fraudulent charge. Data governance is a term that 
doesn’t get covered in the mainstream business press or discussed at 
executive board meetings. If the issuer doesn’t know, for instance, 
that a customer on a spending binge at the local home improvement 
store just acquired a home mortgage from the organization’s mort-
gage branch, the purchase of a riding lawn mower looks a little sus-
picious. The organization needs people who can drive this process, 
choosing the right data and using it in a disciplined fashion. Typically, 
these individuals have both business and technical knowledge and 
an afﬁnity for talking to both sides of the “house.” They are creative 
enough to use analytics to know what data (a new mortgage, credit 
scores, deposit movements) really matter—and which don’t matter at 
all. And they understand how to create a consistent, replicable pro-
cess that works over and over and over. If business units have the 
bureaucratic equivalent of armed guards patrolling outside their own 
information silos, and IT is rolling its eyes over the business case for 
analytics, then the organization will get stuck.
If you’ve picked up this book, you already have some general 
sense that analytics and business insight are something you need 
more of. You probably also reached the conclusion that a comprehen-
sive business and organizational transformation is needed to generate 
this insight and, more important, convince the business consumers 
to use this insight to make decisions and validate strategies. Or you 
want to understand how you can expand on the business intelligence 
efforts that have served you well. You might have read about pre-
dictive analytics, forecasting, or high-performance analytics and you 
want to know how your organization can transform itself to get more 
deeply engaged in those processes. You might also be trying really 
hard to gain insight from analytics and be unable to ﬁgure out why it 
isn’t working.
Or you might think you’ve got this all ﬁgured out and you’re 
looking for validation.
Chances are your organization doesn’t have it all ﬁgured out. 
Many organizations haven’t achieved a level of maturity where 
the business units have called off the armed guards surrounding the 
information silos and the organization is taking an enterprise-wide 

10
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
view of the business. Instead, most organizations have multiple ad 
hoc and individual analytics efforts attempting to generate insight. 
This approach is not very effective, is not replicable, and can result 
in a lot of redundancies (with their attendant costs). A well-planned 
business and organizational transformation is needed to make the 
proper changes to move from the ad-hoc approach to a more repeat-
able process to use analytics to derive business insight.
For organizations struggling to get started and for those that feel 
they need to improve, this book outlines how to approach the devel-
opment of a business and organizational transformation effort. This 
process is an endeavor to improve organization maturity and must be 
guided by a structured methodology.
This book uses the Information Evolution Model, a maturity 
model patented by SAS,8 to help you develop your business transfor-
mation roadmap. Figure 1.1 illustrates the ﬁve levels of information 
and analytical maturity that can help you assess your organization’s 
current capabilities. Knowing where you are sets the starting point of 
your journey. The model will also guide you in determining where 
you need to go and how to get there. A special emphasis is placed on 
the need to reach the Enterprise level so that organizations can focus 
on a holistic view of their operation and understand their value chain. 
The book also provides guidance in identifying a starting point for 
focusing your initial effort and launching your organization’s business 
transformation. This leads to a discussion of how organizations can 
develop a strategy for their business transformation and a roadmap to 
implement their strategy objectives.
STARTING THE JOURNEY
If you’ve weathered the recent ﬁnancial upheavals with minimal 
disruption, or are buffeted from competitive forces by brand lead-
ership or monopoly, there is a tendency to view analytics and the 
value they deliver as something not worth the bother, especially if it 
involves changing a culture that is working just ﬁne. The information 
in this book might seem like something that doesn’t apply. Eventually, 
though, even market leaders are challenged, barriers to entry are 
lowered, natural monopolies disappear. Don’t wait until that happens. 

T H E  C R I T I C A L R O L E  O F  B U S I N E S S  I N S I G H T
◂
11
Figure 1.1
The Five Levels of the Information Evolution Model

12
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
When you reach the point at which you are reacting to pressure, it 
will be so much more expensive and time consuming to become a 
proactive, strategic organization.
When Information Revolution was published in 2006 the concept 
that maximizing the value of business insight required more than 
technology was a tough sell. The idea that people, processes, and cul-
ture were just as important—if not more so—was somewhat revolu-
tionary. Since that time, more organizations have begun to share this 
vision and are engaged in determining their maturity, and you’ll learn 
how they are progressing. By the time you ﬁnish reading this book 
you should have a better understanding of where your organization 
is at and how to reach the level that will allow the organization to use 
insight in a way that helps you thrive and grow.
Let’s start that journey now.
NOTES
1. www.nytimes.com/2008/11/10/business/media/10silver.html?pagewanted=all.
2. Nate Silver, The Signal and the Noise: Why So Many Predictions Fail—But Some Don’t
(New York: Penguin, 2012).
3. www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/wonkblog/wp/2012/10/30/the-nate-silver-
backlash/.
4. Michael Lewis, Moneyball: The Art of Winning an Unfair Game (New York: W.W. 
Norton, 2004).
5. http://mlb.sbnation.com/2012/10/26/3560434/moneyball-stats-scouts-brad-pitt-
shirtless-come-on-google-traffic.
6. Andrew Cser, “The Forrester Wave: Enterprise Fraud Management, Q1 2013,” 
Forrester Research Inc., February 13, 2013.
7. Jim Davis, Gloria J. Miller, and Allan Russell, Information Revolution: Using the 
Information Evolution Model to Grow Your Business (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 
2006).
8. D. A. Hatcher, W. M. Prentice, and R. A. Russell, “Enterprise Information Evolution 
Analysis System,” U.S. Patent 7 752 070 B2, Assignee SAS Institute Inc., July 6, 2010.

13
C H A P T E R 2
The Journey: 
Taking the First 
Steps toward 
Transforming 
Your Organization
W
hat we’ve learned so far: Business insights hold signiﬁcant 
value for organizations in all industries and domains despite 
the fact that research suggests that 70 percent of organiza-
tions haven’t achieved a level of maturity where appropriate business 
insight is developed and used effectively to drive decisions and vali-
date strategies. So, the next question is, “Why?” Why are organiza-
tions not producing all the business insight they need or, even, why 
are they not producing sufﬁcient insight to understand their custom-
ers’ behavior and properly manage their risk using all the information 
they already have?
DIFFERENT APPROACHES
To answer the question of why this happens, let’s think about the 
capabilities that exist in business units. When business units have a 

14
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
need to answer a business question, they typically use their business 
perspective and interpretation of their own performance to guide this 
process. They perform these tasks on a daily basis in any way they can 
to meet their deadlines. This may include using the IT team for some 
support. The same process is also completed when the organization as 
a whole has a need to produce, let’s say, compliance reports to submit 
to regulators. The accuracy of these reports may not be the best an 
organization can produce. Furthermore, these processes are lengthy, 
especially if they require getting information from other business 
units. And, ﬁnally, these processes are inefﬁcient. Many informa-
tion management processes are duplicated over and over. The use of 
resources, especially analytical resources, is not optimized; neither is 
the use of business unit and IT infrastructure resources. All organiza-
tions are doing this today at various levels. And why wouldn’t they? 
Business units must do something to get their work done, and using 
the resources they can control seems the most expeditious.
Does this sound familiar?
◼A business issue becomes a priority because of a problem: a 
drop in sales or the erosion of proﬁt. Everyone scrambles to 
react.
◼A technical team is assembled.
◼Data is gathered and analyzed.
◼Information processes are repeated with different business per-
spectives leading to different interpretations and results.
Assuming the different interpretations can be resolved—and the 
project deemed a success—another problem emerges. Someone says, 
“Hey, let’s do that again.” But the technical team has moved on to put 
out another ﬁre. So managers ﬁgure they need to expand those tech-
nical teams, or add more technical or analytical resources, and end 
up duplicating many tasks that are common to these ad hoc projects 
and requests.
This is a particular issue in model building and deployment, which 
is critical to successful predictive analytics approaches. It isn’t enough 
to compute customer lifetime value once a year or once a quarter. 
Many companies talk about how they loved the results they got from 
those infrequent modeling runs, but they took too long to build or 

T H E  J O U R N E Y
◂
15
they took so long to run that tweaking them dragged the produc-
tion cycle out. It becomes a project, rather than an ongoing process. 
One retailer had some terriﬁc success automating markdowns (the 
process of picking the right price cut to help get the merchandise out 
the door). But over time the model broke down and was too cumber-
some to rebuild. A well-deﬁned and repeatable process was not used 
to extract and integrate the information.
With the growing demand to make decisions quickly, and to 
automate the results so that more business users can use them, these 
project-driven information management practices are not efﬁcient. 
In addition, they don’t produce accurate results when they require 
input from other business functions. Consequently, many decisions 
are made without information validations. And many organizations 
using these practices are not producing sufﬁcient business insight to 
support their decisions.
A much better approach is for organizations to think of infor-
mation as a corporate asset to be deliberately managed using a 
well-structured process. The process is managed with input from all 
stakeholders and with careful attention to minimizing duplication of 
efforts and maximizing the use of all resources (business, analytical, 
and technical). Get away from thinking about projects and instead 
think about an ongoing, ﬂexible, holistic process that treats data—and 
what can be gleaned from it—as a strategic entity worthy of your time 
and attention.
JUGGLING MULTIPLE CHALLENGES
In addition to the challenges caused by their approach to information 
management, organizations are also facing issues involving both the 
information itself and the act of organizing it. Over the past ﬁve years 
there has been a signiﬁcant increase in the amount of information 
gathered. New technologies make it much cheaper to store all this 
information, so every customer interaction is tracked and every prod-
uct development step is monitored. Vast amounts of unstructured 
information are available through call center notes, warranty claims, 
social media, and more. Information is ﬂowing in much faster than 
our current processes can handle.

16
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
In addition to the increase in data volume, there is also a vis-
ible increase in the complexity of the information available to us. 
Finally, government regulations and risk factors are always a concern. 
This new reality presents information management challenges. The 
IT team, dealing with these issues on a daily basis, focuses on cost 
control and an information architecture that can scale to handle the 
increased demand for processing power and information requests.
Organizations focus on the cost, and the management—but not 
on the organization. Every business unit is busy managing its own 
environment, and dare we say “silo” (more on that later), with too 
little attention paid to collaborating or sharing with other business 
units. Furthermore, individual business units use their own perspec-
tive to deﬁne how to interpret information and create business perfor-
mance views. If marketing is measured on how many new customers 
it brings in, the description of a “new customer” might be different 
than in a sales unit where cross-marketing to existing customers is 
a key performance metric. So when an executive asks a seemingly 
simple question—“How many of our deposits are coming from new 
customers?”—multiple conﬂicting answers swarm in.
In addition, there is typically a limited supply of analytical and 
domain resources scattered around in business units—and no frame-
work to use these skills efﬁciently across business units. Finally, there 
is the classic challenge in reaching a healthy and collaborative work-
ing relationship between business and IT. Why? Because business and 
IT have very different priorities and perspectives that can’t be aligned 
without the intervention of an enterprise-level executive.
These organizational challenges are much harder to deal with 
than the information challenges, despite the fact that the information 
challenges tend to consume business unit and IT time. Dealing with 
both types of challenges is necessary, and the approach organizations 
choose to use can make a difference between producing actual results 
and continuing to deal with the symptoms.
For instance, when organizations realize they have a data quality 
problem, they may purchase software to clean their data. But ﬁxing 
the information quality problem by cleaning existing data will not stop 
more dirty data from entering the organization’s information envi-
ronment. The organization needs to uncover the root cause of the 

T H E  J O U R N E Y
◂
17
poor quality data. Operational data entry processes may be one pos-
sible and obvious culprit. But a lack of consensus about how business 
units deﬁne or derive additional data elements such as proﬁt, house-
hold, or customer segments may be the real culprit.
What organizations need to recognize is that these two very dif-
ferent types of challenges are interrelated and must be dealt with from 
an enterprise perspective simultaneously. If you suffer from asthma, 
you can keep running to the emergency room to get treated, or you 
can take preventive medicine to get at the underlying lung inﬂamma-
tion. Although not quite the same in information management and 
organization, you get the gist. Preventive medicine for the organiza-
tion is a business transformation approach supported by the execu-
tive team. The approach should develop a common understanding 
of various competing priorities as well as build relationships between 
business units and between business and IT through well-established 
processes, consistent communication, and alignment of efforts. This 
book explores these organizational maturity qualities in later chapters.
HOW TO DEAL WITH CHALLENGES EFFECTIVELY
How do you deal with these challenges in a pragmatic and effective 
way? By transforming your organization’s approach to information: 
to using it, managing it, organizing it, and—ultimately—analyzing it. 
The objective of business transformation efforts is to evolve the orga-
nization’s maturity to a higher level. Increasing your organization’s 
maturity requires focus on four key organizational pillars: people, 
processes, technical infrastructure, and culture (see Figure 2.1). And 
it is not something that can happen overnight. It is a journey.
The three key requirements to successfully embark on this jour-
ney are:
1. Securing continuous executive sponsorship
2. Understanding the current capabilities and dynamics of the 
four capability pillars
3. Aligning the capabilities of the four pillars with the organi-
zation’s business objectives with the support of a Center of 
Excellence to develop the four pillars

18
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
This book discusses many aspects of this journey. Let’s start by 
exploring each of these key requirements in detail.
EXECUTIVE SPONSORSHIP: CRITICAL TO SUCCESS
Organizations genuinely interested in making long-lasting changes 
need a leader who can make them happen. Transforming an organi-
zation’s approach to information affects the daily routine, the work-
force, the information environment, the processes, and the operating 
model. It can upend the cultural paradigm. Executives need to support 
these efforts and give them visibility and priority. Visionary executives 
who believe in innovation understand the crucial role of informa-
tion and analytics to transform their organizations into viable mar-
ket competitors. Steve Jobs’s consistent commitment to simplifying 
iPhone operations and using innovative new ways to communicate 
with users guided Apple to unprecedented success in the market. The 
success of Apple is an example of how a leader can develop and align 
the capabilities of an organization to not only achieve phenomenal 
ﬁnancial performance levels, but to also reach a high level of market 
dominance.
Executive buy-in and meaningful involvement help organiza-
tions resolve conﬂicts and adjust course as they get their business ini-
tiatives off the ground. Executive support is also needed to monitor 
focus. Many organizations continue to focus on tactical work because 
this is the way they operated for years. When people are part of an 
Figure 2.1
Organizational Capability Pillars

T H E  J O U R N E Y
◂
19
organization with some operational history, it is sometimes hard for 
them to stop and ask themselves the question, “Is this work contrib-
uting to a critical organizational objective, or is it nice to have since 
we are so used to using the output of this task?” Business units some-
times struggle to shift to a more strategic approach. Executive spon-
sorship is critical to guiding business unit stakeholders and leaders 
to strike the right balance between tactical and strategic information 
management efforts.
UNDERSTANDING CURRENT CAPABILITIES
The second requirement speaks to the need to know what the orga-
nization has now, in order to understand what is needed to move 
forward. When we plan a trip or a project, we naturally have to 
deﬁne two key elements: The starting point and the destination or 
the ﬁnal objectives. This organizational journey is no exception. 
Business transformation efforts focus on improving capabilities, skills, 
and the operating model of an organization. To ﬁgure out how to 
improve our organization’s capabilities in developing business insight 
and using analytics, we need to ﬁrst know what capabilities we have 
today. We mentioned the organizational pillars (people, process, tech-
nical infrastructure, and culture) as the structural foundation of the 
organization. The organizational capabilities to produce and consume 
business insight should be viewed from these four key perspectives. 
The collective capabilities of all four pillars make up the overall orga-
nizational capabilities, including strengths and weaknesses. So, the 
second requirement of the journey is to recognize that each organiza-
tion must understand and develop the key pillars together, and then 
ﬁgure out the organization’s current collective capabilities.
Establishing a baseline of the organization’s current capabilities is 
the ﬁrst step in the journey to a higher organizational maturity level. 
The technical infrastructure pillar typically gets a lot of attention 
in most cases. It is a critical foundation that any organization needs in 
order to manage its information assets and develop the insight it needs 
to make decisions. However, technology alone will not help an orga-
nization advance to a more mature and robust state. The other three 
pillars must be strong and functional to get the most from technology. 

20
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
In fact, research suggests the “people” component is the most critical 
pillar of an organization.
In summary, organizations need to establish a baseline of their 
current capabilities, including strengths and weaknesses in each of 
the four key organizational pillars, to be able to develop a strategy 
and roadmap to implement their business transformation. To success-
fully assess and determine this capabilities baseline, organizations will 
need a structured approach and methodology. The SAS organizational 
maturity model (the Information Evolution Model) is used in the fol-
lowing chapters to provide a structured approach to evaluate current 
organizational capabilities, determine the target destination, and ﬁg-
ure out what additional capabilities are needed to get from the start-
ing point to the target organization maturity destination.
ALIGNING CAPABILITIES WITH BUSINESS OBJECTIVES
The third requirement for this business transformation journey is 
actually the hardest one. If the organization knows the strategic objec-
tives that have been outlined by the executive team and has assessed 
its current capabilities to establish a baseline, then the only thing left 
to do is to execute, right? Correct! But we need to keep in mind that 
this ﬁnal requirement is not a one-time effort. This ﬁnal require-
ment entails changes to the organization’s operating model to align its 
effort in each of the four organizational pillars with the organization’s 
business objectives. This means aligning the hiring and employee 
performance evaluation practices and incentives. It includes mak-
ing changes and enhancements to the technical infrastructure, and 
developing sufﬁcient well-deﬁned processes and engagement models 
for business units and IT to use. It also must include a change man-
agement process to gradually change the organization’s culture to use 
information and the business insight produced by analytics to support 
decisions and validate strategies. All these changes must be aligned 
with the organization’s strategic objectives.
This alignment is an ongoing process. Many organizations launch 
these business transformation efforts and actively work on them for 
some time. Then some lose momentum, get too busy with tactical 
day-to-day requirements, and undo some of the progress they have 
made. This is one of the reasons that we need executive support to 

T H E  J O U R N E Y
◂
21
monitor business performance from an enterprise perspective using 
the organization’s performance management capabilities and take 
corrective actions when necessary.
Achieving this continuous alignment is not an easy 
job, and the question is who will take on these additional 
responsibilities, or how can organizations accelerate this 
transformation process. An enterprise Center of Excellence can be a 
very effective method, among other recommendations, to help orga-
nizations in accelerating their business transformation effort. The 
structure and role of an enterprise Center of Excellence are important 
topics in the discussion of business transformation. These topics are 
covered in more detail in Chapter 6. It is important to understand that 
establishing a Center of Excellence is not the only required step in 
implementing a business transformation plan. Centers of Excellence 
will accelerate the internal adoption of changes and enhancements 
that are part of the organization’s business transformation plan, and 
should be viewed from this perspective. Many other changes are nec-
essary to implement business transformation plans.
Aligning an organization is like setting up a tent. Think of people, 
process, technology, and culture as its four poles. Each pole needs to 
be equally high or your tent is going to be a bit lopsided. Needless to 
say, if one pole collapses, you don’t have a functioning tent. Or, put 
another way, the four pillars are like the four wheels of a car. The four 
wheels must be properly inﬂated and aligned to optimize your car’s 
performance. And if one of your car’s tires is not performing well to 
match the other three, you may not be able to get to your destina-
tion. Organizations don’t often view these four criteria equally, and 
that’s when you end up with a mismatch. Particularly common is the 
situation in which the technology purchased can’t be used effectively 
to show business value because the people, processes, and culture 
aren’t in place to take advantage of it. Another common situation 
is when organizations lose their highly skilled resources because 
those people are frustrated by a lack of accurate information and 
processes to support the business or the lack of a culture that val-
ues and uses information to make decisions and set strategies. There 
are lots of lopsided, partially collapsed tents out there. Let’s look at 
how to build some sturdy tent poles and get them aligned at the 
same height.

22
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
LET’S START THE JOURNEY
We discussed the three requirements to structure and successfully 
complete the business transformation journey. Organizations will 
have to develop a strategy to guide them through that journey. An 
organizational executive will have to sponsor and own the develop-
ment and implementation of the strategy. Chapter 7 focuses on how 
organizations can develop a business transformation strategy.
The second requirement of the business transformation jour-
ney is to assess the current organization’s capabilities. This process 
will produce a capabilities baseline that must identify strengths and 
weaknesses in each of the current four key organizational pillars. 
This step is necessary to be able to develop a strategy and roadmap to 
EIGHT WAYS YOU CAN TELL YOU HAVE AN 
ALIGNMENT ISSUE
1. We invested so much in technology and resources, but we 
are still struggling with data integration, business silos, and 
getting a consistent view of our business performance.
2. Business return from our investment is not visible or 
quantiﬁable.
3. We can’t ﬁgure out the right balance between tactical and 
strategic priorities.
4. We can’t produce a 360-degree view of our customers or 
understand our value chain.
5. We have too many repetitive processes.
6. We can’t rationalize or deal with our different competing 
priorities.
7. The use of our critical resources and talents is not 
optimized.
8. Given our capabilities and talents, we should have a much 
better market-competitive advantage.

T H E  J O U R N E Y
◂
23
implement their business transformation. The baseline will be used 
as the starting point for your journey toward a higher organizational 
maturity level. The second essential requirement is to ﬁgure out the 
target maturity level and its required capabilities. For organizations to 
complete this task, they need a well-structured and comprehensive 
approach and methodology.
Chapters 3, 4, and 5 review the SAS Information Evolution Model 
(IEM), which provides the required methodology to objectively eval-
uate organizations’ maturity levels. The model provides a structured 
approach to evaluate current organizational capabilities, determine 
the target destination, and help organizations discover what addi-
tional capabilities are needed to get from the starting point to the 
target organizational maturity destination.
The IEM model1 has been patented by the U.S. government and 
has been used effectively to develop the required details for organi-
zational transformations. The model applies to all types of organiza-
tions in all industries in the private and public sectors. It focuses on 
evaluating how organizations develop and consume information and 
business insights and how they effectively use information to make 
decisions and validate strategies.
The model describes ﬁve organizational maturity levels in the 
context of the four organizational pillars: people, process, technical 
infrastructure, and culture. The levels are:
1. Individual
2. Departmental
3. Enterprise
4. Optimize
5. Innovate
Individual is the lowest organizational maturity level, and inno-
vate is the highest. The ﬁve levels can be grouped into three key 
operational categories (see Figure 2.2):
1. Challenged levels (individual and departmental)
2. Foundational level (enterprise)
3. Progressive levels (optimize and innovate)

24
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
The description and characteristics of these three organization 
maturity categories are reviewed in greater detail in Chapters 3, 4, 
and 5.
TAKING THE FIRST STEPS TO TRANSFORMING
YOUR ORGANIZATION
W. Edwards Deming put it succinctly: “It is not necessary to change. 
Survival is not mandatory.” It’s fascinating to see how many of the 
quality guru’s midcentury musings still hold true today. He was early 
to identify what today is called “executive sponsorship.” Deming’s 
statistical processes for improving quality didn’t gain traction in the 
United States, so when he had the opportunity to work with Japanese 
industry after World War II he wisely decided to take his ideas straight 
to the top.
Deming had to export his methods to another continent in order to 
be heard. We hope you won’t have to travel so far. This book explores 
further the role of people, information processes, technology infra-
structure, and culture, the pillars that underpin the SAS Information 
Evolution Model. And it illustrates the shift from using data tactically 
to employing it strategically by deriving as much business insight as 
possible to guide the decision-making process.
NOTE
1. U.S. Patent No 7 752 070 B2.
Figure 2.2
Information Evolution Model Levels and Categories

25
C H A P T E R 3
Challenged
Organizations: 
When Rugged 
Individualism and 
Department Silos 
Aren’t Enough

26
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
W
hat we’ve learned so far: People, information processes, techni-
cal infrastructure, and culture are the pillars that organizations 
must strengthen to gain insight from information and use that 
insight to make sound decisions and validate strategies. The best way 
to do this is through an understanding of an Information Maturity 
Model, an unbiased, vendor-neutral approach that allows each orga-
nization to craft its own roadmap toward information maturity. The 
maturity model uses levels that each organization can assess their 
maturity against.
You might be tempted to skip this chapter, as it describes orga-
nizations with signiﬁcant information maturity issues. You probably 
don’t think your organization is that bad off. Think again. In a recent 
report, Gartner expects that by 2015 20 percent of Global 1000 orga-
nizations will have established a strategic focus on information infra-
structure equal to that of application management.1 That means at 
least 80 percent of the largest companies don’t have that now. Since 
four out of ﬁve of you are likely in these circumstances, reading about 
the Challenged Level organizations will help you get a better under-
standing of where you stand today.
Organizations stuck at the Individual Level operate in a near total 
enterprise data vacuum even if they are churning out a lot of data and 
reports. Competitiveness and market conditions put them in a precar-
ious state. Organizations whose operations are at the Departmental 
Level are common across multiple industries and exist around the 
world. They might be well-led or poorly run, large or small, innova-
tive or staid. Often these organizations have units, brands, regions, 
and departmental silos that do a great job using their data to produce 
their own view and perspective of their performance. What they don’t 
have is an enterprise-wide view of business performance. They are 
at particularly high risk of inadvertently cannibalizing revenue and 
proﬁts due to their inability to understand their performance across 
business functions.
What these organizations have in common is that they are at 
risk. They don’t have a complete view of their organization “value 
chain.” They don’t understand the underlying metrics that drive 
their revenue and proﬁts. Both Individual and Departmental organi-
zations are considered challenged, because that verb ﬁts them to a T.

C H A L L E N G E D O R G A N I Z A T I O N S
◂
27
If these challenges sound familiar, you’ll want to learn more 
about how your organization can develop an aggressive roadmap 
to improve its environment today and start evolving toward a more 
proﬁtable level of organizational maturity.
GETTING ALONG ONE DAY AT A TIME: ORGANIZATIONS
AT THE INDIVIDUAL LEVEL
The business focus of organizations at 
the Individual Level is on immediate 
and tactical needs—the here and now. 
Information gathering evolves to sup-
port day-to-day operations. Narrow 
“stovepipe” applications and transac-
tional systems exist, but they support 
fragmented business operations.
The executives, managers, and staff of these organizations gen-
erally make decisions in unplanned and chaotic information envi-
ronments. Leaders do not have long-range plans regarding data use 
nor do they place any value on information standards. As a result, 
information quality and consistency is questionable. Gut feel, per-
sonal experience, and intuition take the place of information as the 
key factors in decision making. What information is available is often 
controlled by a “Data Maverick” that you’ll learn more about later in 
this chapter. Luck and visionary leaders are probably the only things 
keeping these organizations in business.
While these organizations may be proﬁtable at certain stages 
of the market lifecycle, their low level of information management 
maturity limits their ability to sustain this success over the long term. 
These organizations are operating in a very risky environment, and 
can approach a cliff with unforeseen consequences. Here are a few 
reasons why:
◼Inconsistent views of business performance signiﬁcantly 
increase the chance for inaccurate decisions and policies. If you 
are an Internet retailer offering “free” shipping for some orders, 
is that a marketing cost? Or does it come off the bottom line? 

28
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
And is the data being collected in enough detail so you can even 
tell whether free shipping helps or hurts your organization?
◼Reaction time is slowed. When accurate enterprise or even 
departmental view of performance is lacking, the organization 
is unable to react effectively to market changes and challenges—
economic, competitive, resources, or others. If your organization 
is tied up trying to consolidate spreadsheets sent in from regional 
ofﬁces all over the globe, it doesn’t have time to react to market 
changes, let alone plot strategy to be proactive.
◼Compliance with government audits and regulations is prob-
lematic. Expending extra resources and time to make the data 
comply with government regulations does not help the bottom 
line, but it is necessary in light of rules like the Basel Accords 
and the USA Patriot Act.
◼Strong candidates leave or avoid your organization. The lack of 
new talent, coupled with the revolving door of individuals who 
don’t want to deal with Data Mavericks, limits the organiza-
tion’s ability to operate efﬁciently, innovate, and survive.
◼Expansion is difﬁcult and risky. The lack of consistent data, 
standards, and governance presents signiﬁcant challenges that 
hinder the organization’s ability to operate in different markets 
and regions.
Decisions after the Fact
From the 30,000-foot perspective, organizations at the Individual 
Level are focused on getting the job done today. It’s a tactical approach 
that provides few opportunities to look at the bigger picture. These 
organizations often end up relying too much on external consultants 
for strategic projects—and virtually everything is a project. Asking 
questions like “At what point would we be better off exiting this busi-
ness?” or “How much money should we spend to gain new custom-
ers?” involves at least some signiﬁcant data gathering and cleansing 
that is frequently accompanied by a lengthy series of ad hoc steps to 
hunt down the data and create a report that is out-of-date almost 
from the moment it arrives on the executive’s desk.

C H A L L E N G E D O R G A N I Z A T I O N S
◂
29
True story: When a marketing executive arrived at his new job 
at a retailer he received a binder that showed the results of an entire 
year’s analytics effort. It said that the best customers were the ones 
who shopped most frequently. It didn’t address what marketing 
efforts worked or which were the most cost-effective—just a report 
that stated the obvious.
Being reactive is par for the course. Individual organizations can 
rarely see micro patterns emerge before they start nibbling at the 
bottom line. As long as data is perceived as correct for operational 
purposes—bills are accurate, orders are ﬁlled correctly, collections are 
made promptly (and even that doesn’t always happen)—upper-level 
management is content. For everything else, managers make deci-
sions based on hunches, or what worked at their last company, or 
maybe what they heard at a conference. And when they decide to 
ﬁnd some data—perhaps to justify a hunch—efforts to track down 
the data meet roadblocks. Maybe the Data Maverick doesn’t like the 
direction of the manager’s request so she ﬁnds data to shape a narra-
tive of what she thinks is going on. Or maybe the request has to go to 
the IT department, which puts it in a queue behind the pressing needs 
of the operational side of the business.
Managers often don’t understand how risky the situation is. Not 
only are these organizations less able to respond to dips in sales or 
revenue—they can be bowled over by high demand for their service 
or product. A simple illustration of this is small and mid-sized organi-
zations that book “daily deal” offers through companies like Groupon. 
Meant to drive new business at a modest marketing cost, only 44 per-
cent of these offers were proﬁtable for restaurants surveyed by a Rice 
University professor.2 These organizations often had a hard time ﬁg-
uring out what kind of offer to construct that would not cause them 
to spend more to staff their operations than they would get back in 
repeat business at full price. Some actually shut their doors after par-
ticipation in these offers caused them to lose money or they lost valu-
able customers paying full price.
To say the least, Individual Level organizations aren’t equipped 
to operate globally. This is due to the fact that a fundamental under-
standing of the organization’s business performance and value chain 
is lacking at the Enterprise Level. Good understanding of the internal 

30
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
processes, the viability of the organization’s products and services, 
and the organization’s interactions and collaboration with its exter-
nal partners are all essential requirements to enable the organization 
to operate on a global level. The inability to operate effectively at a 
global level may limit the organization’s competitive advantage. It is 
a particular burden for ﬁnancial services companies eager to expand 
beyond their country of origin. Whether they want to provide bank-
ing services to expats, service their customers with business operations 
in other countries, or simply to export what they see as innovative 
and well-priced products, information immaturity threatens not just 
proﬁtability, but it can put them at regulatory risk.
In our current economic and market conditions, these organiza-
tions can only survive if they have little or no external market pressure 
from the competition. Once the pressure increases, Individual Level 
organizations are forced to look internally at their current operation 
and evolve their organization to a higher capability level (maturity).
Is your organization functioning at the Individual Level? Let’s take 
a look now at how people, information processes, technical infrastruc-
ture, and culture operate at this level.
Rogues Manning the Spreadsheets
In this type of environment, Data 
Mavericks thrive. These are individuals 
with the technical skills to work magic 
with a spreadsheet. They can tell you all 
about their favorite desktop database, or 
they know just who to ask in IT—and 
what to ask for—to gain access to opera-
tional systems or get a useable report back. 
A department’s monthly report, weekly sales ﬁgures, or quarterly market-
ing plan can’t make it out the door without the help of this person because 
no one else can access the information or knows what to do with it.
While some of these individuals try to spread knowledge across 
the department, often they have wised up to their value and become 
information hoarders and data gatekeepers. Some grow frustrated 

C H A L L E N G E D O R G A N I Z A T I O N S
◂
31
quickly and leave for companies with a more mature commitment to 
being insight driven—leaving a gaping knowledge void in their wake. 
In organizations mired at the Individual Level, these mavericks are 
sprinkled across the organization—with multiple mavericks in the 
biggest business units.
The Data Mavericks are very interested in information because 
they like to work with data, and they’ve discovered it’s their ticket 
to life employment, at least as long as your organization stays stuck 
in a low level of information maturity. If no one else can whip up a 
report or set of numbers, they’re golden. But before you look askance 
at the data analyst in marketing who ﬁgured out how to write Excel 
programs that trimmed your catalog list without impacting revenue, 
understand that they are often aided and abetted by managers who 
haven’t a clue how to use data—or are frankly frightened by it.
Dismissive of business intelligence solutions, dashboards, and 
metric development efforts, Data Mavericks gain a powerful foothold 
because organizations don’t value hiring, motivating, and retaining 
individuals with critical thinking, technology, and analytics skills out-
side the IT organization. And the decision makers who manage these 
individuals are so focused on day-to-day crises that they can’t look at 
matters strategically.
WHAT ARE DATA MAVERICKS?
Data Mavericks are data-knowledgeable workers who realize 
the organization is so disorganized when it comes to using data 
that controlling data is the key to job security.
The existence of Data Mavericks isn’t a problem, per se, unless 
they try to ﬁght off efforts to develop a more mature approach to infor-
mation gathering. A larger issue in understanding the “people” part of 
the maturity puzzle is making sure decision makers want to base their 
decisions on quality information—and that they aren’t too comfortable 

32
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
WHEN “HAVE IT YOUR WAY” ISN’T A GOOD THING
You’re in charge of an organization that sells subscriptions for vari-
ous services. You would like to know the renewal rate. That’s a really 
simple question, right? It should be. For companies at the Individual 
Level, it’s anyone’s guess how many different answers you’re going to 
get, or whether the method used to answer the question one year will 
be the same the next. Most of the effort tends to be ad hoc. Consistent 
information processes often don’t exist. Information is pieced 
together with lots of queries to IT or through requests to Data 
Mavericks who make decisions on the 
ﬂy as to how to interpret the questions 
and present the data.
When organizations operate at this 
level they struggle with performance met-
rics because of their sloppy information 
processes. On the ﬁnancial side, there is 
usually a set of metrics (often standardized 
working with Data Mavericks to create information that makes both of 
them look good at the expense of the greater good of your organiza-
tion. All that said, probably the best sign that you are operating at the 
Individual Level is that you can’t produce critical reports if you lose 
certain staff.
INDIVIDUAL LEVEL: PEOPLE
◼Happy to share the results, but not the process used to 
obtain them
◼Hostile to unit- or company-wide efforts to establish data 
processes and governance
◼Reluctant to train other employees in data gathering, 
reporting, and analysis

C H A L L E N G E D O R G A N I Z A T I O N S
◂
33
by industry) and information is gathered to report on them. But other 
types of metrics are generally not collected and used, including informa-
tion on customer satisfaction, internal efﬁciencies, and external market 
conditions. Most of the metrics are lagging metrics; that is, they focus 
on past performance. Rather than a dashboard with information updated 
regularly, you get a report that is quickly out of date. IT and data qual-
ity governance rarely exist. People who prize autonomy appreciate the 
lack of standard protocol—it lets them gather and report data in what-
ever manner suits them. And without documented processes, standards, 
and policies, nothing is repeatable and any effort to analyze your data 
becomes a project.
INDIVIDUAL LEVEL: INFORMATION PROCESSES
◼There are no department or organization standards policies 
around data collection so consistent results are rare.
◼Metrics are focused on the recent ﬁnancial performance 
of the organization, ignoring indicators like customer 
satisfaction or turnover.
◼Developing accurate enterprise business performance 
views is difﬁcult and time-consuming.
◼Information management and data governance, if it 
exists, is limited to operational and ﬁnancial systems.
SUPERHIGHWAYS AND DIRT ROADS
It’s not all bad news at the Individual 
Level. There are often strong pockets 
of technology use, including enter-
prise resource planning (ERP) and 
supply chain systems. IT typically has 
the mission-critical processes run-
ning smoothly—from keeping the 
e-mail virus-free to processing the 
payroll (if that’s done in-house). But 

34
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
the business performance calculations—the “where are we now and 
where are we going in the future”—is often powered by a collection 
of unconnected and unsophisticated desktop and personal productiv-
ity tools, such as Microsoft Excel and Access. Everyone has his or her 
own pool of data, way of analyzing it, and business rules—sometimes 
his or her own customized tool. Methods are rarely documented, so 
when the Data Maverick who created the program leaves, the program 
is orphaned.
If there are no technology standards at the department or 
Enterprise Level, sharing data is a challenge. If more sophisticated 
tools are used, it is only because ambitious, self-taught employees 
have acquired them. Automating the distribution of information to 
decision makers is not a common practice. Consequently, decision 
makers frequently rely on instinct. Multiple and inconsistent reports 
and business views create confusion and redundancy and result in 
questionable decision quality.
As the hunt for data is often time-consuming, there is very little 
time to analyze the data. Organizations that have matured and are 
operating at the Enterprise Level frequently report that the biggest 
difference (other than just having accurate, reliable data available) is 
that they now have time to analyze data.
It’s also very tough for the Individual Level organization to 
take advantage of new technologies. With such a scattered ad hoc 
infrastructure, it would be difﬁcult to calculate how much money 
you could save using cloud computing, for instance. Master data 
management and service-oriented architecture are beyond the 
ability of the organization to use effectively. You can forget about 
analyzing Big Data. But even smaller efforts can be problematic. A 
hotel chain, for instance, might want to use text analytics to moni-
tor online comments. It could outsource the effort—but without 
mature information processes in-house it can’t sync up the infor-
mation it’s receiving (complaints about front desk staff, product 
quality, or marketing offers) with internal information and then 
get the right information to the right people to quickly ﬁx the prob-
lem—or even determine the severity of complaints and how they 
should be addressed.

C H A L L E N G E D O R G A N I Z A T I O N S
◂
35
INDIVIDUAL LEVEL: TECHNICAL INFRASTRUCTURE
◼A strong operational system in some areas but too much 
reliance on personal productivity tools, such as Excel 
and Access. More sophisticated intelligence tools can be 
orphaned if their user leaves the organization.
◼Occasional use of analytics by individuals with the appro-
priate skills to meet ad hoc business requests. The quality 
or the results are questionable.
◼Proper data management is not a business priority and is 
haphazardly applied by Data Mavericks.
◼Organizations can’t take advantage of advances such as 
master data management, service-oriented architecture, 
and cloud computing or big data.
◼Basic technical infrastructure foundation to support effec-
tive data integration, business intelligence, analytics, and 
performance management is missing.
A Little Too Much Rugged Individualism
The words and phrases that have positive connotations in many cul-
tures—“maverick,” “rugged individualism,” and “gut instinct”—are not 
necessarily positive when it comes to working with data. This doesn’t 
mean that a mature information organization is run by humorless stat-
isticians crunching numbers in an effort to stamp out all signs of cre-
ativity. Instead, it’s using data effectively to foster creativity—and that’s 
not what is happening at the Individual Level. Instead, these organiza-
tions have a culture that allows chaos.
You try to reward people for the 
right reasons, but in Individual Level 
organizations, people tend to be 
rewarded for all the wrong reasons. 
These are the people politically aligned 
to a certain decision maker, or whose 
“gut” bet paid off big (even if it may 

36
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
have cannibalized proﬁt because this organization often doesn’t know 
what drives proﬁt), or who are seen as “indispensable.” In this politi-
cally charged organization, managers exercise a lot of command and 
control. Although they issue edicts, the Data Mavericks hold the day-
to-day power, since they hold the key to the information that managers 
need. The environment is internally competitive. Thought leaders and 
innovators who propose anything “outside the box” are not encour-
aged or rewarded. They may, in fact, be viewed as a threat. And even 
if the situation is chaotic, the culture doesn’t really like change.
Internal top-down communication is limited, and may only focus 
on providing general direction or ﬁnancial targets.
INDIVIDUAL LEVEL: CULTURE
◼Rewards are subjective and often political, focused on 
individual excellence in day-to-day activities rather than 
contributions to corporate-level objectives.
◼Information practices aren’t aligned with the corporate 
mission and objectives.
◼Business units aren’t encouraged to share data, and they 
rarely do.
◼Change is feared and shunned unless there is personal gain 
involved.
◼There is little internal collaboration within and between 
business units.
◼Outside-the-box thinking is discouraged.
This bunker mindset at the Individual Level tends to reward personal 
or product successes without analyzing their impact on other products 
or unknowingly undermines enterprise-wide proﬁtability. Because suc-
cess depends on the efforts of one or two talented workers, the organi-
zation’s ability to identify and repeat successful information processes, 
products, or services is limited, especially if key personnel leave.
The ironic aspect is all the money that Individual Level organiza-
tions save by not investing in people and infrastructure costs indi-
rectly in lost opportunity. Organizations at this level will sometimes 

C H A L L E N G E D O R G A N I Z A T I O N S
◂
37
invest in technologies to deal with data volume, or attempt to solve a 
problem because a Data Maverick convinced management a new solu-
tion was needed. But without consistent validation, quality standards, 
governance—and a culture populated with individuals ready to act on 
data—the technology investment is for naught. These organizations 
are the most likely to “turn off” an expensive investment because the 
groundwork wasn’t prepared to effectively use it.
What is the most unfortunate thing about operating at the 
Individual Level? So few recognize that they are. Too often, orga-
nizations at this level face a major crisis that forces them to quickly 
evolve—an expensive and wrenching experience. Better to take a pro-
active approach to candidly identify their level before that happens.
CONSOLIDATED, BUT NOT COHESIVE: 
ORGANIZATIONS AT THE DEPARTMENTAL LEVEL
An interesting dilemma occurred around a convention booking at a 
resort hotel. The hotel’s convention and marketing units were becoming 
increasingly savvy about using data to create offers. There was only one 
problem—they never worked together. Rates were assigned by a rev-
enue management system. Both the marketing and the convention units 
were looking for slow periods to market more heavily, when there would 
be plenty of rooms available at a low rate. And they both independently 
locked on a speciﬁc weekend. A large convention was booked, rooms 
were blocked, but when individual travelers called to get the special rate 
created by marketing they were met with an “I’m sorry; we don’t have 
any rooms available at that rate.” Marketing’s time and expenses were 
wasted, and instead of making custom-
ers happy, they ticked them off.
Business units at this level don’t 
ask: “How will this decision affect the 
organization as a whole?” They ask: 
“How will my department’s metrics 
look better?” Unlike the Individual 
Level organization, these businesses 
often have entire departments that 
are savvy about using data, follow 
solid processes for working with and 

38
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
governing data, and take a team approach. Data Mavericks have been 
induced to play team ball. These are organizations that boast market-
ing departments that understand the total value of a customer or war-
ranty groups that have slashed costs and optimized processes.
The problem is that data is stored and analytic applications are 
designed, developed, and supported from a departmental perspective 
without much consideration for how well those data might integrate 
with other units in the enterprise. As business units at the Departmental 
Level continue to act and think locally, the enterprise will end up with 
many information silos, each with its own version of the truth.
By becoming subject matter experts with regard to the informa-
tion under their control, these business units tend to use their infor-
mation access for political power and may even go so far as to shield 
the department from scrutiny at the enterprise reporting level. In 
many cases, enterprise goals and objectives are secondary to depart-
mental goals, so much so that they may be tracked manually or not 
at all. To reach any enterprise-level decision or attempt to gain any 
enterprise-wide perspective, these conﬂicting silos of information 
must be painstakingly merged and rationalized. It is not uncommon 
for organizations at this level to have sophisticated data gathering and 
reporting abilities at the unit level—and for those units to then cut 
and paste their results into a spreadsheet that someone in a C-level 
executive’s ofﬁce must try to reconcile and synthesize.
In fairness, there are data-savvy groups aware of the possibilities 
that exist if they can integrate data with other units in the enterprise. 
They often report that signiﬁcant roadblocks exist that they are not 
equipped to break down.
SUBJECT MATTER EXPERTS AND GATEKEEPERS
The Data Mavericks who agreed to 
be team players have migrated to 
jobs with titles like business analyst. 
Although the business units may have 
data governance and processes in place 
these analysts still spend a lot of time 
preparing and integrating information, 

C H A L L E N G E D O R G A N I Z A T I O N S
◂
39
and, if no automated business intelligence system is available, more 
time is needed to develop reports that put the best departmental spin 
on the data. Note the word “spin.” There still tends to be a lot of 
emphasis on using data to match a business unit’s expectations versus 
reality. In other words, if the marketing department invested a lot of 
money in a speciﬁc advertising medium, they’re going to look for data 
points to justify that expense.
Business analysts in the consolidated organization are valued and 
paid for their information skills. In some cases, they’ve built up shadow 
IT empires that clash with an organization’s actual IT operation. In addi-
tion, a key differentiator between organizations at the Departmental 
Level and those at the Enterprise Level is that investment in resources, 
hardware, and training is usually funded by business units to satisfy 
departmental needs rather than any enterprise program for informa-
tion and skills development.
The good news is that team players thrive in this type of organiza-
tion. They have strong managers who defend the department and create 
internal cohesion. Those with an interest in information management 
are recognized and appreciated for their skills. The bad news is that the 
business unit-centric model tends to make it difﬁcult for these individu-
als to work cooperatively with other departments. After all, those are 
competitors in the internal corporate struggle for power, recognition, and 
budget. If someone suggests a Center of Excellence to help create a more 
enterprise-wide method of dealing with data, the business units are likely 
to resist, fearing that their budgets or autonomy will be compromised.
DEPARTMENTAL LEVEL: PEOPLE
◼Team players for their department; hesitant to work across 
department lines.
◼Training focuses on improving department performance.
◼Data gathering and interpretation reﬂect business unit goals.
◼Few skills to support the development and improvement of 
the enterprise technical architecture.
◼Less than effective use of critical skills across the 
organization.

40
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
Strong Interior, Weak Exterior
At this level, information is collected, assembled, accessed, and tracked 
on a Departmental Level. Data management processes are fairly well 
deﬁned within each department but not across departments. Since 
analysis is based on a myopic view, it will not accurately reﬂect inﬂu-
ences from outside the department. Sales and marketing, for instance, 
might be working with a similar set of numbers but reporting and ana-
lyzing them differently. Duplication of effort is common.
Even the simplest things, such as the definition of a “cus-
tomer” or “sale,” can vary by business unit. Standardizing business 
rules across all the brands to better analyze costs is difficult and 
politically challenging. For example, if you charge for shipping, 
should that be revenue or should that be considered part of the cost? 
At one multichannel retailer, every brand defined it differently.
There is also a heavy focus on static reporting of operational 
measures, such as gross margins, total revenue, total expense, or inven-
tory on hand. Business analysts perform some interactive analysis to 
distill other performance measures, but only at a Departmental Level.
If enforced, enterprise rules are left to interpretation by individual 
departments. Because these departments do maintain individual stan-
dards, they are pretty good at outsourcing 
functions (just like they are fairly good at 
ﬁnding their own technology providers). 
But just like with technology purchases, 
there is little corporate governance of 
this activity, limiting the advantages for 
economies of scale and consistent qual-
ity and vendor management.
DEPARTMENTAL LEVEL: INFORMATION PROCESSES
◼Data management and governance well-deﬁned at the 
department level
◼No processes in place to support collaboration between 
business units to agree on standard or on how to interpret 
enterprise-wide rules

C H A L L E N G E D O R G A N I Z A T I O N S
◂
41
Many Roads, Not Enough Bridges
There are some enterprise-wide approaches at Departmental Level 
organizations. Hardware and networking standards have been estab-
lished across the enterprise, but each department prefers to use its 
own tools and data standards. Except for basic organization techni-
cal infrastructure, there are no enterprise-wide technology standards 
or frameworks. There might be dozens of departmental databases on 
servers stored in ofﬁces and maintained by individuals, most of them 
unknown to IT and some even unsupported by the central IT depart-
ment or their vendors.
At this level, each department acquires and uses its own business 
intelligence tools—niche or proprietary solutions that address a spe-
ciﬁc function, such as campaign management, supplier evaluation, or 
budgeting. These tools might be quite sophisticated, but they cannot 
be used for broader applications outside the department. Without the 
oversight or control of an enterprise architecture group, redundancy 
of tools and applications is both a problem and an added expense. 
Moving to the next maturity level (Enterprise Level) may force busi-
ness units to comply with the organization’s IT standards or justify the 
use of their favorite applications to increase the overall return from 
existing technologies.
Individuals within a department 
typically have ready access to data 
for their department. Departmental 
data marts assemble data from the 
group’s users and make it available in 
numerous reports, but these reports 
often 
present 
conﬂicting 
results 
across departments and provide lim-
ited enterprise context. For instance, 
◼Strong documentation of processes within departments
◼Limited, time-consuming, and often manual processes to 
produce enterprise business performance view

42
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
marketing might be measuring the overall success of campaigns—the 
“lift” rates—but can they follow how the lift rate impacts the com-
pany’s bottom line? One multichannel retailer, with multiple brands, 
discovered that discount coupons offered in one catalog cannibalized 
sales for another brand when it began taking an enterprise-wide view 
of its information. In addition, offering discount coupons on websites 
tends to draw in customers who buy one item with no deeper loyalty 
to the retailer. Finally, they realized that customers who discover the 
retailer through comparison shopping engines are rarely worth fur-
ther promotion. This wouldn’t work if brands kept their own infor-
mation silos.
Departmental Level organizations aren’t known for shar-
ing information across business units. Needed information might 
be owned by other departments, and there is no formal way 
of accessing it. There is some collaboration via meetings, memos, 
and simple file sharing. But understanding the data still requires 
the tribal knowledge and goodwill of information gatekeepers. 
There is too much time spent finding, assembling, and debating the 
interpretation of information; too little time is spent making sense 
of it.
If standards aren’t kept across silos, even efforts to get depart-
ments to share information are likely to fail. For example, the technical 
infrastructure may deﬁne customers, suppliers, and partners differ-
ently or use different account codes across departments. Enterprise 
master data is not well managed.
Departmental Level organizations can adapt to cutting-edge tech-
nologies within business units. High-speed analytics, for instance, is 
possible. But realizing a technology’s full enterprise value requires 
more effort. Financial institutions have to calculate risk exposure 
across an enterprise and many have embraced high performance ana-
lytics to do that quickly—dropping the time to calculate loan defaults 
from several days to four hours. But if a mortgage group is doing that 
independently of commercial loans and that group is working inde-
pendently of consumer loans, what happens when it is time to look 
at overall risk? Out come the electronic scissors, the virtual paste, and 
the spreadsheets.

C H A L L E N G E D O R G A N I Z A T I O N S
◂
43
In the area of text analytics, a marketing department might 
do a fabulous job of determining exactly what consumers like and 
dislike about a product. But without an enterprise approach, the 
exercise is just that—an exercise. The marketers can send their 
report to the warranty, manufacturing, and product development 
units, but their data might be telling them something different. 
“We’re not getting reports that the buttons are sticky,” warranty 
will say. “Sticky buttons are a warranty problem,” says manufac-
turing. “Our data shows people like those buttons,” says product 
development.
By comparison, in Enterprise Level organizations, the technical 
infrastructure is capable of analyzing consumer comments and dis-
tributing them to all stakeholder groups who will collaborate in ana-
lyzing the results. Warranty could mine its own data to look for claims 
that relate to “sticky buttons” (but aren’t called that), manufacturing 
can look for root causes, sales can track whether sticky button chatter 
is impacting sales, and product development can begin looking for a 
workaround at the next stage.
DEPARTMENTAL LEVEL: TECHNICAL INFRASTRUCTURE
◼Fragmented hardware and storage—dozens of department 
databases on servers stored in business unit ofﬁces or main-
tained by individuals aren’t uncommon.
◼Departments choose their own business intelligence and 
analytics tools. Redundancy of tools and applications is a 
problem.
◼Enterprise technical infrastructure is expensive to maintain 
and hard to scale.
◼Information access within a department is ﬁne; between 
departments it is problematic.
◼Each department deﬁnes key master data its own way, 
making it difﬁcult to integrate information at the 
Enterprise Level.

44
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
“Us versus Them”
The rewards in a Departmental Level 
organization revolve strictly around 
the success of a given unit, brand, 
or department. These units become 
expert at using data as “proof” of 
localized needs and accomplish-
ments. Incentives are based on meet-
ing departmental goals, which may or 
may not be in line with the best interests of the enterprise.
Change is embraced when it results in political or self-improve-
ment gain for the department—or if it takes place in someone else’s 
department (especially if it creates an opportunity to gain more 
resources). Change is viewed as a threat if it disrupts the department’s 
own carefully groomed processes or if it requires disparate functional 
units to work together. Departments might actively resist change that 
beneﬁts other groups or distracts them from their own missions, even 
if the company as a whole would beneﬁt. Even under the best of cir-
cumstances, change is poorly communicated, cautiously approached, 
and limited in results.
One of the worst features of Departmental Level organizations 
is a tendency to assume that if the business units are individually 
meeting goals, then the enterprise will meet its goals. And if busi-
ness units aren’t meeting goals? Well, they’ll argue individually for 
more money and support. You can see where this is headed. It’s the 
Monday morning meeting where the heads of each business unit 
present their own version of the truth in the board meeting with 
the C-level executives and squabble for additional resources. And 
worse, these organizations don’t know what the truth is because 
there is no one with information that isn’t enmeshed in a unit or 
department. It’s “us” versus “them” to the nth degree. The unfor-
tunate consequence of this is the inability of the executive team 
to make accurate and timely decisions based on well integrated 
and agreed upon enterprise performance information. They may 
eventually generate the correct and required information, but it is 

C H A L L E N G E D O R G A N I Z A T I O N S
◂
45
usually too late and some decisions may have already been made 
based on gut feeling or intuition.
DEPARTMENTAL LEVEL: CULTURE
◼Data used to prove departmental needs and 
accomplishments.
◼Not enough communication and performance measure-
ments to encourage and demand internal collaboration.
◼Change is embraced if it furthers a department’s goal; not 
the organization’s.
◼A politically charged and distrustful situation exists 
between departments.
The “everyone is in it for themselves” mentality that grips 
Departmental Level organizations is obviously damaging. The deci-
sion that best beneﬁts my group might be gained at your expense. The 
high cost to maintain the organization’s technical infrastructure will 
continue to grow, allowing more duplication of efforts, hardware, and 
technology. The inconsistency in coding and maintaining the mas-
ter data and in storing critical information will continue to introduce 
challenges in integrating data from various business units. Since the 
organization is challenged by its inability to develop and analyze its 
business performance at the Enterprise Level, inaccurate decisions 
and strategies are made and adopted. You can’t achieve a competitive 
advantage in the market, and deal with market changes and chal-
lenges, working in this level.
Failure to see the big picture really poses problems during an eco-
nomic downturn or when faced with competition that is savvier about 
gaining insights from information. Root cause analysis for the failure 
of something—a new product or long-existing popular product—is 
compromised by never-ending rounds of ﬁnger pointing. And busi-
nesses operating at the Departmental Level are hamstrung during 
merger and acquisition discussions by not fully understanding their 

46
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
organizational value chain. If they buy a company and let it work as 
another silo, they create a problem. If they buy a company and try 
to integrate operations, the level of information discord can be eye 
opening.
The good news is that these organizations often possess almost 
everything necessary to have a uniﬁed, enterprise-wide view of infor-
mation. There is data talent capable of playing for a team and tech-
nologies are used that yield strong results. It takes leadership and 
guts—but not gut instinct—to get to the next level. Let’s ﬁnd out how.
UNDERSTANDING THE TRUE CONSEQUENCES
OF THE CHALLENGED LEVELS
It is difﬁcult, frankly, to get many companies to understand what level 
they are at and why it is such a problem. Many of today’s success-
ful executives climbed the corporate ladder before there was even 
that much data to be had. Their leadership, strong gut instinct, and 
boldness in moving their organizations into new areas was done in a 
less competitive environment—certainly as it pertains to information. 
The Individual Level organizations are, to some extent, more aware 
of issues because executives who ask a simple question and can get 
no answers are aware of the problem. Even when getting conﬂicting 
answers at the Department Level organizations, executives often ﬁg-
ure that this is less an institutional problem than a little turf ﬁghting 
between departments. If putting an end to those conﬂicting answers 
(by moving to the Enterprise Level) involves draining internal battles, 
maybe a few conﬂicting answers is a small price to pay. Increasingly, 
this just won’t sufﬁce. Maybe the best way to muster up the courage 
to face down the silos is to see what an Enterprise Level organization 
looks like.
BUSINESS TRANSFORMATION STRATEGY
OBJECTIVES FOR CHALLENGED ORGANIZATIONS
In Chapter 2, three requirements were described for organiza-
tions to successfully embark on a business transformation journey. 
Organizations will need to develop a business transformation strategy, 

C H A L L E N G E D O R G A N I Z A T I O N S
◂
47
sponsored by the executive team, to adequately address the three 
requirements and gradually transform the organization. Chapter 7 is 
dedicated to the strategy discussions. The strategy will depend on the 
maturity level of your organization. If you believe your organization 
has the symptoms and characteristics just described as associated with 
Challenged organizations, the following should be key objectives for 
your business transformation strategy:
◼Assess your current organization capabilities in the four key 
pillars to determine which maturity level your organization is 
operating on and determine capability gaps.
◼Identify critical business areas with the highest information 
and organizational challenges as well as the highest potential 
business value.
◼Leverage your current key talents and resources as part of 
your strategy. Although they may not be operating in the most 
efﬁcient manner, they still have signiﬁcant knowledge of the 
business.
NOTES
1. Roxane Edjlali, Regina Casonato, Ted Friedman, Mark A. Beyer, and Donald Fineberg, 
“Predicts 2013: Big Data and Information Infrastructure,” Gartner, November 30, 
2012,
www.gartner.com/document/2258415?ref=QuickSearch&sthkw=Predicts%
202013%3A%20Big%20Data%20and%20Information%20Infrastructure.
2. Utpal Dholakia, “How Businesses Fare With Daily Deals As They Gain Experience: 
A Multi-Time Period Study of Daily Deal Performance Fair,” June 2012, http://news
.rice.edu/wp-content/uploads/2012/07/2012-07-05-DailyDeals.pdf.


49
C H A P T E R 4
Foundational
Organizations: 
Making the Leap 
to an Enterprise-
Wide Approach

50
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
W
hat we’ve learned so far: Challenged organizations stuck at the 
Individual or Department levels face multiple hurdles when it 
comes to developing and using information to help the organi-
zation succeed. Individual Level organizations are so focused on imme-
diate tactical needs that they rarely operate strategically. Departmental 
Level organizations often use information in sophisticated ways, but 
that information is used to make the department perform better with-
out consideration for the organization as a whole. There is never “one 
version of the truth.” Instead, there are multiple silos and competing 
versions of the truth.
Will you be in business in ﬁve years? Organizations at the 
Challenged Levels can’t say that with certainty. Given the increasing 
level of market and product competitiveness, improvements in com-
munications and online selling, and the ease with which consum-
ers can research products, organizations must integrate their data 
across the enterprise to compete aggressively. There is no magic in 
reaching the Enterprise Level, as you’ll learn. It is about building 
a foundation from which you can develop accurate and consistent 
enterprise information and can better deploy predictive analytics, big 
data advances, and optimization techniques in highly competitive 
and innovative ways.
Moving to the Enterprise Level requires patience and self-aware-
ness. It demands executive-level sponsorship. Achieving this level of 
organization maturity requires executives who understand the value 
of an enterprise-wide view of business performance, and are eager 
to embrace change. More so than even in the preceding levels, mak-
ing this leap requires more than just 
technology—key challenges associ-
ated with people, processes, and cul-
ture must be addressed. This level is 
the tipping point in the organization’s 
information evolution and signiﬁes 
the beginning of the evolutionary 
journey toward higher levels of com-
petitiveness and, ultimately, organiza-
tional transformation.

F O U N D A T I O N A L O R G A N I Z A T I O N S
◂
51
THE POSSIBILITIES THAT COME WITH PATIENCE
The payoffs might not be as obvious—at least not initially. Much 
of the low-hanging fruit wins in speciﬁc departments (more efﬁcient 
marketing, improvements in handling warranty claims) have hap-
pened at the Department Level. The major gains associated with the 
Enterprise Level occur when organizations develop a good under-
standing of their value chain for the ﬁrst time, and start using it 
to move toward optimization and beyond. This is the level when 
eyes are opened, synergies knit together, and activities—the acquisi-
tion of a competitor, the opening of stores in another country, the 
streamlining of a supply chain—can be done with more efﬁciency 
and ease. That’s because Enterprise Level organizations are working 
with one version of the truth and an informed view of operations 
across the enterprise. Access to information is uniform and enter-
prise-wide, and information processes are repeatable. This view of 
the enterprise is built on the back of enterprise-wide standards and 
uses an enterprise information architecture that is agile, scalable, and 
integrated.
SEEING THE VALUE ACROSS THE ENTERPRISE
Everything—including technical infrastructure, people, processes, 
and culture—is consistent and repeatable at this level. It’s all about 
how you manage the data, not necessarily where you store it or 
what architecture approach you chose. Thus, a single enterprise data 
warehouse, multiple smaller data warehouses, or data marts are all 
options. The key is that the data is consistent across divisions and 
departments to enable all units to share the same business deﬁnitions 
and use the same metadata. This is possible because the other three 
organizational pillars are aligned and support the need to have a con-
sistent enterprise view of business performance.
At the Enterprise Level, for the ﬁrst time, decision makers across 
the organization can actually see relationships across functions and 
understand how the organization performs as a whole. Employees 
can see how their work ﬁts into the big picture. The organization 

52
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
quickly focuses on deﬁning its value chain, a fundamental require-
ment for achieving this maturity level.
WHAT IS A VALUE CHAIN?
The value chain encompasses the points at which value is cre-
ated when producing, distributing, and servicing a product. 
These points might include the acquisition of the raw goods, 
the manufacturing of a ﬁnished product or service, the identiﬁ-
cation of sales channels through which to sell the products and 
services, and the means of servicing the product or supporting 
the customer. No two value chains are alike, and it is incumbent 
on organizations to deﬁne their chain—a process made immea-
surably easier with an enterprise-wide data view.
The enterprise architecture links information needs and require-
ments to organizational objectives, and therefore information proj-
ects have higher business adoption and success rates. By being able to 
identify and document the value chain at the Enterprise Level, orga-
nizations can quickly identify what is running well and what needs 
to be improved in the next level, the Optimization Level. The analysis 
might even show what might be outsourced as a noncore activity. A 
value chain analysis might help a manufacturer in the next maturity 
level to discover that a low-cost part isn’t saving money because of the 
costs associated with ﬁnishing it (or replacing the ﬁnished product). A 
bank’s value chain analysis could unearth evidence that the custom-
ers it thought were most proﬁtable aren’t, making it counterproduc-
tive to keep offering those customers special deals.
OVERCOMING WARINESS
Challenged organizations are often wary of seeking the 
Enterprise Level as they think it means relinquishing all infor-
mation and analytical endeavors to a centralized organization. 
Business units sometimes see it as a power grab, or complain 
that the Enterprise Level effort will return them to the Dark 
Ages of having to get in line for simple reports. Neither is the 

F O U N D A T I O N A L O R G A N I Z A T I O N S
◂
53
case. At the Enterprise Level, there is a balance between busi-
ness unit autonomy and enterprise requirements. At this level, 
organizations establish business and IT standards that guide 
information and technical architecture and provide organiza-
tion-wide performance metrics and deﬁnitions. Business units 
have the ﬂexibility to manage their operations within this 
framework. No one seeks to conﬁscate analytical productiv-
ity tools. Rather, Enterprise Level organizations care about the 
underlying information moving in and out of the tools.
What else can an Enterprise Level organization do that Challenged 
organizations can’t? Let’s start with a few simple examples: agreeing on 
what a customer is, which products are proﬁtable, and who the organiza-
tion’s suppliers are (all of them, with subsidiaries mapped). If you’ve ever 
attempted to get answers to these questions at a Challenged organization 
you know it (a) took much too long and (b) involved different answers 
from different business units. Identifying basic value chain information 
is essential and places the organization at the tipping point to focus on 
optimization and innovation in the next higher maturity levels.
But what about those “aha” moments reached at the Department 
Level? The application that increased the efﬁciency of marketing 
spend or helped make sense of the supply chain? These “wins” are 
real. At the Enterprise Level, the aha moments transcend depart-
ment-speciﬁc metrics and speak to the goals of the organization as a 
whole. At Department Level organizations, the manufacturing unit 
might consider a product proﬁtable, while the warranty department is 
reporting it isn’t. Marketing might consider its efforts to tout a service 
successful, while ﬁnance is seeing diminished proﬁt on higher sales. 
It’s an enterprise-wide view of the data that quickly reveals the prob-
lems that led one department to think it hit a home run while another 
department is shaking its head. Or better yet, it keeps the problems 
from occurring in the ﬁrst place. With an enterprise-wide view of the 
data, marketing and ﬁnance can work together to model likely proﬁt 
outcomes of a new service plan before they offer it.
You might be thinking, “Oh, we have found unproﬁtable mar-
keting efforts and product defects that hurt the bottom line. We’ve 

54
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
even modeled outcomes before introducing a product or service—and 
no one made us reach this Enterprise Level.” Of course you did, but 
how hard was it? How long did it take? Would you say you did this 
reactively or proactively? And how often have your C-level execu-
tives disagreed over whether something was truly proﬁtable? At the 
Enterprise Level, for the ﬁrst time, organizations can efﬁciently, pro-
actively, and conﬁdently use data to drive decisions that beneﬁt the 
entire organization.
HOW AN ENTERPRISE LEVEL ORGANIZATION FUNCTIONS
So what does this Enterprise Level really look like? These organiza-
tions get the strategic and competitive value of information and work 
as one entity, not a disparate group of business units. To that end:
◼Enterprise business performance is the main focus and driver. 
There is now a set of common corporate strategies and tactics, 
and each group understands its role in executing those tactics 
and the correlation among business units. Performance is now 
managed based on an informed, comprehensive view of all 
operations across the enterprise.
◼Information is seen as a critical strategic asset, just as impor-
tant as tangible, operational assets. Everyone understands that 
integrated information is essential to run the business. The 
organization has managed to integrate internal and external 
information successfully across business units and functions to 
create an enterprise view of the operation.
◼For the ﬁrst time, the organization understands its business 
value chain. Managers and staff also appreciate the importance 
of data quality.
◼Integrated enterprise information is now available to all deci-
sion makers across the enterprise, and around the globe. 
Decisions are focused around managing the value chain, such 
as engaging new suppliers or launching campaigns to support 
dormant markets.
While clean data is tapped for use in speciﬁc analytics efforts, 
the Enterprise Level organization is driven on a daily basis by Key 

F O U N D A T I O N A L O R G A N I Z A T I O N S
◂
55
Performance Indicators (KPIs) that have been developed with input 
across the enterprise. When developing KPIs, it is important to know that:
◼People across all business units of the enterprise have discussed 
and agreed on the business performance KPIs.
◼Processes are designed to make sure the KPIs are produced and 
distributed using the right data for the metric.
◼Information is made available in a timely fashion and technol-
ogy is employed to that end.
◼The culture accepts the metrics and uses them to drive deci-
sions and reward people.
All the pillars are in alignment. Now let’s visit each pillar in more 
detail.
Knowledge Workers Equipped with the Right
Information and Technologies
At the Enterprise Level, anyone who needs to make a decision has 
access to information. Decision makers can identify alternatives and 
act on information from a truly enterprise-wide perspective, and their 
decisions reﬂect enterprise goals and objectives. Marketing, for exam-
ple, might be responsible primarily for getting more click-throughs 
on a website. They have access to the click-through rates, but also 
have access to whether the click-throughs are leading to sales, which 
come from the sales business units. And if they aren’t, the marketing 
department is empowered to redesign offers to drive sales. They aren’t 
measured on an isolated metric—click-throughs, with resultant sales 
being, well, a sales problem. Is marketing taking the blame for poor 
sales? Not at all. Because at this level, marketing can see that the high 
click-throughs/low sales are coming 
from products that aren’t available (a 
fulﬁllment problem). In a siloed opera-
tion, marketing would be rewarded for 
creating emails and websites that spawn 
high click-throughs while the unit 
responsible for making sure product 

56
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
was available would be judged on its overall fulﬁllment levels. In 
an Enterprise organization, both units would need to work together 
to meet a KPI measuring click-throughs to sales. Each unit would 
be acknowledged for what it accomplished for the organization, not 
what it accomplished in a vacuum.
Enterprise Level organizations have a high percentage of knowl-
edge workers—team players who have domain knowledge and 
understand corporate goals. Career development programs are well 
established and widely used to keep employees current with new 
skills, technologies, and best practices. Marketing staff have more 
than just career development programs aimed at juicing their creativ-
ity. They are also trained on how to measure their successes and use 
available data to make decisions. These organizations don’t promote 
or reward the data averse.
ENTERPRISE LEVEL: PEOPLE
◼Recruited with targeted technical, analytical, and informa-
tion skills. The workforce contains a high percentage of 
“knowledge workers.”
◼Team players who have domain expertise and understand 
corporate goals are the norm. Interdepartmental competi-
tiveness fades and collaboration is encouraged.
◼Exceptional information skills are retained and rewarded 
because the organization places a high value on 
information.
No More KPI Confusion
Where an organization gets its data, 
how it enters its systems, and how it is 
cleaned, stored, and used is monitored 
and guided at the Enterprise Level. 
Business units still own their informa-
tion, but processes are in place to inte-
grate business unit information, produce 

F O U N D A T I O N A L O R G A N I Z A T I O N S
◂
57
enterprise performance views, and share them across the enterprise. 
Proper information management concepts and best practices are 
applied and accepted. Data management processes are well deﬁned, 
resulting in a shared view of operations and a reliable foundation 
for analysis. Processes to obtain information are well deﬁned and 
detailed—technologies, people, plans, tasks, and responsibilities. Data 
is governed: A sale is tracked the same way regardless of who booked 
it. The same goes for orders, raw materials, and supplies.
Now that the organization has a holistic view of the enterprise, 
it starts to see duplicate, overlapping, and inefﬁcient processes. In 
Departmental Level organizations, problems with customer retention 
might trickle down to the business units that would then embark 
independently on analytic projects to ﬁgure out what is going on. 
The Call Center unit might be pinging IT looking for data on transac-
tions that occurred between the customer and call center prior to the 
customer switching to a competitor. Another unit might be build-
ing a model to look at what customers buy in the six months before 
they drop their service so they can predict who might be leaving 
and provide a special offer. These expensive, time-consuming efforts 
might yield conﬂicting suggestions (especially if the underlying data 
is inconsistent). In contrast, Enterprise Level organizations might 
build a model across the business units looking at all customer inter-
actions in the six months before they left so business units aren’t left 
pointing ﬁngers at each other, but instead working collaboratively 
to ﬁgure out the root cause of customer attrition and the best way to 
improve their efforts.
OUTSOURCING AT THE ENTERPRISE LEVEL
Organizations are often advised to outsource activities that 
are not part of their core competencies. But without an 
enterprise-wide view of data, it can be difﬁcult to outsource 
cost-effectively. Individual units might be negotiating separate 
contracts with the same vendors. There might be no standards 
or processes for choosing which business functions to out-
source, and no effort to make sure critical data generated from 
the outsourcing looped back to the business. In Enterprise Level 

58
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
organizations, these processes are standardized, and controls 
are in place for the bidirectional movement of data and 
information to and from vendors.
ENTERPRISE LEVEL: INFORMATION PROCESSES
◼Enterprise information governance is enforced, and data 
consistency is paramount.
◼Centers of Excellence are used to help promote and ensure 
consistent data deﬁnitions, data collection, data quality, 
analytics, and information delivery.
◼Departmental and business unit information processes 
align with enterprise objectives and with each other.
◼Data stewards are identiﬁed, and the organization has con-
trol of its critical enterprise master data.
◼The organization is better able to comply with external 
reporting requirements, such as Sarbanes-Oxley, Basel II, 
IFRS, GAAP, SEC, Solvency II, FDA, and other regulatory 
bodies.
Freedom of Choice Knitted into 
a Sound Framework
The 
Enterprise 
Level 
organization 
doesn’t dictate which analytical tools to 
use. Rather, there is a concerted effort 
to manage and rationalize tools across 
departments and business units. In this 
environment, an organization might decide it is more cost-effective 
to place tools and solutions on a server, rather than keeping them on 
each desktop. It might consolidate around certain vendors—keeping 
“best of breed” technologies where necessary. Value to the organi-
zation does trump an individual user’s comfort level with a tool or 

F O U N D A T I O N A L O R G A N I Z A T I O N S
◂
59
solution, but there is no bureaucratic sweep to rid the enterprise of 
anything but a select group of tools or solutions.
JUST SAY NO TO THE BLACK BOX
Enterprise-wide organizations know what is under the hoods 
of the analytical tools they use. At this level, “black box” tools 
that promise to spit out an answer if certain data is fed into the 
“box” are dropped in favor of tools whose logic is relevant and 
understood by the sophisticated knowledge workers populat-
ing Enterprise Level organizations.
While the analytical tools are diverse, the organization tends to 
use a standardized set of technologies to manage data integration, 
distribution, and reporting. Now that information resides in central 
data repositories, it is available to decision makers at all levels of the 
organization, not just the original data “owners” or the executives. 
Information access and security is also managed from an enterprise 
perspective. Furthermore, the information has been cleansed through 
standard data-quality routines, so users can have conﬁdence in the 
results. Decision makers now have access to information that repre-
sents “one version of the truth,” presented to them with contextual 
relevance.
Users have access to the data through interfaces tailored for their 
speciﬁc needs and skill sets. Data can be organized and analyzed regard-
less of whether it is structured or unstructured. Trending on social 
media is captured along with sales data. Executive dashboards, sum-
mary information with drill-down capability for business managers, ad 
hoc query for business analysts, and sophisticated model development
for quantitative analysts are examples of the ﬂexibility provided. It is 
fairly easy for the organization to add visual options and move data to 
mobile applications. As a result, more users than ever can access and 
explore information with conﬁdence that they can make more accu-
rate decisions.
Analysts who were once stuck using only the data they could get 
from their business unit now have near real-time access to enterprise 

60
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
data. They are also freed from tedious data collection and preparation 
activities, allowing them time to extract insight from data.
ENTERPRISE LEVEL: TECHNICAL INFRASTRUCTURE
◼Enterprise and business unit requirements drive the 
organization’s information infrastructure.
◼An information model and architecture relevant to the 
organization’s industry and speciﬁc business is used to 
structure and maintain enterprise information.
◼Enterprise information architecture is dynamic to accom-
modate business changes and scalable to incorporate 
the increased availability of external and unstructured 
information.
◼Clean and consistent enterprise information provides 
the organization with the ability to take advantage of 
advances in “Big Data” analysis, high-performance analyt-
ics, cloud computing, mobile computing, and text analytics 
using enterprise data.
◼The adoption of new technologies is a managed process at 
the enterprise level. The organization is systematic in how 
technology is acquired, deployed, and maintained while 
still allowing departments to retain necessary autonomy to 
meet their individual business needs.
All for One, One for All
Business units in highly evolved Departmental organizations may 
question the necessity of reaching the Enterprise Level. The resource 
competition that exists at Departmental 
organizations can be spun as a posi-
tive. Or they might feel that moving to 
the Enterprise Level implies a level of 
micromanagement that stiﬂes innova-
tion. Those of you who have identiﬁed 
your organizations as Departmental 

F O U N D A T I O N A L O R G A N I Z A T I O N S
◂
61
Level might be thinking, “Can’t our business units simply share their 
successes with other business units?” Others might think the issue of 
information not being in sync when it reaches the top of the organiza-
tion is inevitable in a large enterprise. These are excuses. There is no 
long-term value to staying at the Departmental Level. Furthermore, 
Departmental Level organizations are reactive and are at a disad-
vantage when they need to compete with innovative products and 
services.
That said, multidisciplinary teamwork is the hallmark of the 
Enterprise Level organization, and teams frequently pop up to work 
on corporate-wide issues. Employees may be temporarily assigned to 
cross-departmental teams in a way that best utilizes their skills and 
job functions. The goal, of course, is to not create queue-producing 
“projects” but ongoing processes that feed analytics-driven insights to 
decision makers.
When an organization truly reaches this Enterprise Level, 
everyone is focused on the health of the enterprise and on producing 
high-quality data and analysis for strategic value. The organization 
shows its understanding of the information value by funding efforts to 
manage enterprise information and acquire and retain critical talents. 
Issues that had sat on the back burner, such as efforts to measure and 
improve social responsibility and sustainability, can be undertaken 
with ease and efﬁciency.
ENTERPRISE LEVEL: CULTURE
◼The organization is managed based on an informed 
understanding of the enterprise value chain.
◼Business priorities are used to measure employee 
performance and provide incentives.
◼There is more emphasis on critical thinking and analytical 
skills, with talent made available for cross-departmental 
initiatives.
◼The availability of reliable enterprise information is feeding 
data-driven decision making.

62
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
BIG DATA: THE BIG OPPORTUNITY FOR
ENTERPRISE LEVEL ORGANIZATIONS
Big data provides organizations the ability to apply modeling and ana-
lytics to large and detailed amounts of data. In the past, analysts relied 
on sampling, summarizing, and categorizing data to reduce its size 
before analytics could be applied. Departmental Level organizations 
with functioning silos can certainly beneﬁt from the boon in technol-
ogies that make it easier to analyze large volumes of all related data, 
not subsets. But Enterprise Level organizations are better poised to 
maximize the beneﬁt from big data analysis by applying this technol-
ogy to enterprise information versus departmental information.
For example, big data allows retailers to forecast, measure, and 
model their consumer price sensitivity with much ﬁner granularity 
than in the past. Now retailers are able to do it at the store level, by a 
stock-keeping unit (SKU) level, or by a unit of time. In the past, this 
type of analysis was limited to higher grouping and categorizations of 
products and regions. An Enterprise Level organization has already 
integrated its data and can use big data analytics much more effec-
tively than a Departmental Level organization. Departmental Level 
organizations can (and do) use big data analysis on their own efforts, 
but the impact for the enterprise is limited. For example, ﬁnancial 
institutions’ risk departments are increasingly taking advantage of big 
data to make better decisions about investments and loans. But if the 
information isn’t integrated across the enterprise, other departments 
could be working at cross purposes. A marketing push for a certain 
kind of loan could lead to thousands of upset customers who discover, 
once the prospective loan is analyzed by the risk department, that 
they won’t qualify.
Being able to generate more business insight from enterprise 
information adds a competitive advantage for Enterprise Level orga-
nizations that can produce better ﬁnancial performance, and enables 
organizations to be proactive in predicting market trends.
DON’T LET UP
The risks facing the Challenged Level organizations are quite clear (as 
detailed in Chapter 2), but there are risks in reaching the Enterprise 

F O U N D A T I O N A L O R G A N I Z A T I O N S
◂
63
Level as well. In order to succeed at this level, organizations must 
(1) use the information generated, (2) act on it effectively, and 
(3) avoid the temptation to backslide. That last one is big—because 
organizations often lose sight of a fundamental aspect of information 
maturity: It’s not a one-and-done project. In fact, market research 
done by SAS indicates that the majority of organizations are stuck 
between the Departmental Level and the Enterprise Level. “We’ve 
integrated our data, we’ve set up a governance process, picked some 
KPIs, trained some analysts, and shown everyone how to access data. 
Now let’s move on to the next problem,” goes the mantra of organi-
zations that might have brieﬂy scaled the top of Mount Enterprise 
before landing back at the Departmental Level. Instead, the thinking 
should be: “Let’s continue to stay focused on this process to ensure all 
our efforts toward organizational transformation aren’t for naught.”
But even before organizations reach the backsliding phase, they 
often get stranded at the point where data-driven decision making hasn’t 
quite seeped into the staff’s collective bloodstream. Say you work at a 
hospital that has made dramatic strides in enterprise-wide information 
gathering, including building dashboards that measure hospital infection 
rates in nuanced detail—unit, ﬂoor, and date. Instead of a nurse man-
ager getting a report quarterly or monthly, the information is refreshed 
daily and available to the nursing staff. Except the staff doesn’t use the 
dashboard. They’ve gone through the class on how to read it and why it 
is important, and what to do when infections start popping up, but it isn’t 
ingrained in their work ﬂow. They ﬁgure if there is a problem someone 
from infection control will deal with it. Or perhaps the staff stares at a 
screen showing that the three patients released last week were readmit-
ted with infections, but they don’t troubleshoot because they’ve got too 
much else to do right now. The institution taught the nursing staff how 
to use the information, it empowered them to troubleshoot the situation, 
it may even be dunning units with poor infection controls marks, but it 
didn’t really change the culture if the staff doesn’t have time to deal with 
what they’re seeing or ﬁgures that it is someone else’s problem to solve. 
This gets back to the alignment issue that is so critical. If people, pro-
cesses, technology, or culture is out of alignment, the organization can’t 
move forward.
Another example of risk at the Enterprise Level is what happens 
when an organization can’t act on the information it is now able to 

64
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
acquire. Having the necessary information is useless if it can’t be acted 
on. For instance, if a retailer plans a marketing campaign around 
sweaters featuring a certain kind of wool, and then learns from its 
suppliers that those sweaters are going to cost a lot more because of 
conditions in the wool market, it must be able to rework the plans 
to focus on other products. If the company has the Enterprise Level 
view, but doesn’t have the processes, skills, and infrastructure to sup-
port rapid redeployment, its Enterprise Level maturity isn’t returning 
on its investment like it should.
CONTINUOUS IMPROVEMENT REQUIRED
Business units in Department Level organizations have a natural impe-
tus to stay at the highest functioning end of that level—it makes them 
look good. In contrast, staying at the Enterprise Level requires con-
stant vigilance. The Enterprise Level organization must make sure data 
governance and policies to control the accuracy and ﬂow of enterprise 
information are followed by all business units on an ongoing basis. 
Keeping an eye on internal alignment between business units is also 
critical. Since all decision makers and business units in this type of 
organization have access to integrated enterprise information, their 
decision-making process is faster. As a result, there may be an increased 
sense of autonomy that should be monitored and managed to support 
the enterprise objectives. Executive sponsorship remains critical. If a 
Center of Excellence was formed to help the organization reach this 
level it should remain open for business with its charter modiﬁed to 
focus on continuing the progress toward a higher maturity level.
Achieving the Enterprise Level is no small accomplishment. This 
step eludes many organizations. But when it does happen, leader-
ship quickly realizes the strategic advantages of continuing along the 
information evolution path. It shouldn’t be a tough sell to start the 
discussion to move to the Optimized Level.
BUSINESS TRANSFORMATION STRATEGY OBJECTIVES
FOR FOUNDATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS
If you believe your organization has achieved Enterprise Level matu-
rity, then the really tough part is done. Your organization value chain 

F O U N D A T I O N A L O R G A N I Z A T I O N S
◂
65
is now clear and available to all decision makers. Your organization 
is at the tipping point to achieve higher levels of maturity and com-
petitive advantage if it can put together a business transformation 
strategy to move to the Optimize and Innovate Levels. Your business 
transformation strategy should include the following objectives:
◼Assess your current organization capabilities in the four key 
pillars to validate the maturity level on which your organiza-
tion is operating and determine gaps in capabilities.
◼Identify business areas that can beneﬁt from optimizing their 
operation using enterprise information and insight from value 
chain information.
◼Focus on identifying and acquiring the skills needed to opti-
mize business operation.
THE WORLD REALLY CAN BE SMALLER
Enterprise Level organizations are in a much better position to 
engage in the global market because they have developed a 
clearer understanding of their business model and value chain. 
Expanding the business to new markets requires comprehensive 
understanding of the organization’s product cost, proﬁtability, 
and marketability in new markets. Expansion may also require 
that the organization develop new skills and a partner net-
work. Enterprise Level organizations have done the essential 
groundwork needed to understand the cost and proﬁtability of 
their products and services. This information tends to be miss-
ing in action at the Challenged Level organizations.


67
C H A P T E R 5
Progressive 
Organizations: 
Harnessing 
the Power of 
Information to 
Achieve Market 
Advantage and 
Expand Their 
Business Offerings

68
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
W
hat we’ve learned so far: Moving to the Enterprise Level is a 
key step that provides a foundation for higher levels of matu-
rity. Enterprise organizations are at a tipping point to achieve 
higher levels of competitive advantage by using their resources and 
talents to optimize and innovate. Reaching the Enterprise Level does 
require constant vigilance as it is easy for people, information pro-
cesses, technology, and culture to slip out of alignment. Maintaining 
that alignment, and exploring the value that enterprise-wide infor-
mation brings, is eye-opening.
In the fast-changing marketplace you need to move quickly 
and proactively to counter market forces. That’s the reason to work 
toward the integrated enterprise-wide view of information emblem-
atic of a Foundational Level organization. Is that enough? While hav-
ing a clear picture of the value chain lowers your organization’s risk, it 
doesn’t take full advantage of the opportunities that come with inte-
grated data. For this, organizations need to head for the Optimize and 
Innovate Levels.
Optimizing is about more than regularly using insight-driven 
decision making—as opposed to using it in an occasional project—it is 
about automating insight-driven decision making. The enterprise-wide 
view of data allows the organization to create a model that suggests 
the best price, the service plan most likely to entice a customer, or 
the defect (from warranty data) that manufacturing needs to address 
now. Optimized organizations use their understanding of their value 
chain to look for opportunities to drive the unnecessary cost out of 
their operations. They analyze their suppliers list and identify the 
ones that provide the best prices, relationship, and future potential for 
expanded partnerships. They analyze their interactions with custom-
ers, identify the most proﬁtable ones, and develop strategies to keep 
their elite customers loyal and engaged. They take the same approach 
with their products and services to identify the proﬁtable ones on 
which to focus as well as the not-so-proﬁtable ones and subject them 
to critical analysis to determine their fate. They look for best practices 
and innovative methods to improve and align their internal functions. 
What do they get in return? Tangible improvement in their perfor-
mance and market position and increased alignment with their sup-
pliers and partners.

P R O G R E S S I V E O R G A N I Z A T I O N S
◂
69
There is another key factor at play here: Optimized organizations 
do all this in ways that are highly automated and embedded in the 
process. It is not a one-time project to discover the most proﬁtable 
customers; it is an ongoing process.
Often the narrative on innovative organizations suggests gutsy 
risk-taking ventures, the ﬂouting of conventional wisdom, and bold, 
visionary leadership. The last part is correct in the sense that orga-
nizations at the Innovative Level typically require visionary leader-
ship to drive information maturity to the point where it can support 
innovation. A good idea, after all, is just the beginning. Before that 
comes an exceptional understanding of the value chain, such that 
the organization can quickly and easily model new products or ser-
vices. These organizations leave observers thinking not only “Why 
didn’t we think of this?” but “How did they know that would be so 
successful?”
Innovative Level organizations think this way: “With the talent 
and knowledge we have, why should we limit ourselves to a speciﬁc 
line of product or industry?” That is when the executive vision, com-
bined with innovative talent in the workforce, enables organizations 
to think about new products and services. These organizations insti-
tute a process and a culture that encourages and rewards prototyping 
new products and services. They use their own information as well as 
all possible external market information to study consumer behavior 
and the available products in the market, and look for opportunities 
they can capitalize on.
For both of these Progressive Levels, fact-based decision making 
is the norm. These organizations have put in the tough work of iden-
tifying enterprise-wide KPIs and have the ﬂexibility to know when 
and how to change them up. Gut instinct has left the building. It’s not 
coming back.
OPTIMIZATION: THE EASIEST BUSINESS CASE OF ALL
Optimization is the brass ring that analytics has been promising 
organizations for at least the past decade. But in a siloed environ-
ment, failures and stalled progress are likely. Retailers have embraced 
markdown optimization to move merchandise quickly—get rid of 

70
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
the bathing suits in August and holi-
day ornaments in January. But if the 
data isn’t being fed back to vendors, 
planners, and assortment packers, the 
value of optimization is muted.
One international retail organiza-
tion has deployed optimization better 
than most by reducing its involvement 
in the daily decision making involved 
in restocking goods. It opened up its 
internal store ordering systems to suppliers so they can see which 
stores need a fresh shipment of diapers or a dozen cases of apple juice. 
The organization incorporated weather forecast information that 
predicts severe weather, and used their supply chain to ship storm 
items to their stores in the affected areas. They carefully established 
all the business, engagement, and pricing rules to govern their rela-
tionships with their suppliers. Then, instead of getting mired in the 
tactical issues of diaper dispersal, headquarters works on the strategic 
issues—ﬁnding and pairing with suppliers that will provide the best 
price and service.
Optimization is transformative. A national shoe retailer wanted to 
eliminate the problem of Store A selling out of a certain size or style 
rapidly while Store B was heavily marking down the same style and 
size. It began analyzing store sales to ﬁnd patterns that could sug-
gest better assortment packs. Retailers have done this in the past in 
an ad hoc, “gut” sort of way. Boston got more boots and Miami got 
more ﬂip ﬂops. But this retailer, working in a well-integrated data 
environment, analyzed at a much more granular level using both past 
sales data and customer “frequent shopper” information. It doesn’t 
just know that boots sell in Boston; it knows which Boston 
stores have a lot of size-8 customers who like edgier fashions. 
Stockouts have dropped, margins have improved, markdowns are 
fewer, and vendors have now bought into the process.
The optimized organization now has the ability to monitor the 
marketplace and quickly realign itself to meet market demands. It can 
incrementally improve the proﬁt margin by removing cost from the 
process wherever possible. Both approaches improve the ability to 

P R O G R E S S I V E O R G A N I Z A T I O N S
◂
71
compete. If you can do optimization better than anyone else in your 
market, you will achieve sustainable market leadership and competi-
tive advantage.
The progression from the Enterprise Level to the Optimized Level 
is ﬂuid because it requires no signiﬁcant overhaul on any dimension, 
just incremental enhancements in each supported by sound executive 
leadership. However, this level represents the point at which organi-
zational focus must shift from collecting and integrating data to using 
the value chain for optimization in every facet of the organization. 
These organizations will need new talents who understand how to 
optimize the organization value chain. That is how gaining genuine 
value from that data is realized. Paramount to success is consistent 
executive direction.
WHAT THE OPTIMIZED LEVEL ORGANIZATION 
LOOKS LIKE
◼The organization optimizes every business function by 
driving the cost out and maximizing proﬁt. It becomes more 
in touch with external market conditions and can foresee 
the slightest shift in expectations.
◼It increases appetite for more data than ever because 
the organization monitors and analyzes structured and 
unstructured data from many sources: markets, customers, 
partners, suppliers, social networks, blogs, and wikis.
◼It expands global operations as better data controls make 
these ventures less risky and more proﬁtable.
Along with better partner and supplier collaboration, Optimized 
Level organizations have mastered the data quality and governance 
issues that lower information maturity organizations struggle with. 
The infrastructure is more open to integrating external data and con-
tact channels to improve insight. The metadata model documents the 
entire business process, value, and strategy. Everything is transparent. 
A closed-loop infrastructure feeds results back into the system to cre-
ate a continuous learning environment.

72
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
Self-Managing Knowledge Workers
The Optimized Level organization has 
fewer worker bees and more knowledge 
workers tasked with using analytics 
for strategy and performance manage-
ment. These employees are typically 
given wide-spanning authority. The 
command and control management 
style is phased out. Collaborative work 
is valued, and there is emphasis on incremental process improvement.
Finding and retaining the right workers can be challenging, as 
the people who thrive in this environment are in great demand. 
In addition, some of the skills that help an organization get to the 
Enterprise Level may now be redirected to focus on optimization. It 
is essential to identify the employees who showed the greatest ﬂex-
ibility and drive at earlier levels and provide them the training and 
resources necessary to succeed at the Optimized Level. One organic 
way to identify the high ﬂyers is through peer groups that are now 
formalized across departments. These groups get together for brain-
storming sessions on how to identify and allocate cost to the various 
functions and processes in the organization value chain. Employees 
and decision makers leverage information and use trending, pattern 
analysis, forecasting, and predictive analytics to increase effective-
ness, proﬁtability, and quality, which leads to incremental improve-
ment in market share and competitive advantage.
Reaching this level is disruptive. Resource realignment and the 
continuous skill-improvement requirement can leave employees 
wondering how they ﬁt into the organization. Change manage-
ment and training programs are critical to maintaining this level. 
The employees who acted as a conduit between the organization 
and vendors, those tasked with marking down merchandise, any-
one who had speciﬁc skills and relationships, naturally fear they will 
become obsolete. While executives see optimization as a way to free 
resources for more, the resources are worried about job security. It 
becomes even more important that the right training and reward 
systems are in place. Those who think outside the box to achieve 

P R O G R E S S I V E O R G A N I Z A T I O N S
◂
73
greater optimization deserve additional training, new opportunities, 
and advancement.
OPTIMIZED LEVEL: PEOPLE
◼The staff is focused on incremental process improvement.
◼Autonomy and empowerment are common.
◼Cross-business unit peer groups become established.
◼Knowledge workers are prized, rewarded, and given 
adequate training.
Feeding the Continuous Improvement Loop
Self-improvement is paramount at 
this 
level. 
Information 
processes 
established at the Enterprise Level are 
now expanded to provide feedback 
that drives optimization of internal 
and external functions. Best practices 
are captured to replicate successes 
and to prevent repeated mistakes.
Project experience is documented, and new project teams start by 
checking out these corporate experiences. New projects are designed 
to evolve into ongoing, automated processes.
In order to optimize, these organizations put in place new infor-
mation processes that govern how external information sources are 
integrated with organizational data. They ask vendors and suppli-
ers to participate in the information sharing process and optimiza-
tion efforts. This collaboration helps strengthen relationships with 
suppliers and partners and provides the organization with a bet-
ter understanding of their partners’ knowledge, capabilities, and 
potential.
Many optimization efforts, though, give customers the sense 
that they’re working with a forward-looking organization. Let’s look 

74
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
at a ﬁnancial institution that wants to boost its credit card business. 
The local megamall is hosting a big promotion. If the bank can auto-
mate a text message about the promotion to customers near the mall, 
and offer ﬁve percent cash back, it magniﬁes the impact of the pitch. 
It’s not just a message about ﬁve percent cash back or just a message 
about a mall promotion. It shows the bank’s attempt to understand 
the consumer’s shopping preferences and desire to provide relevant 
value in the form of cash back for purchases the consumer is buying 
anyway.
Plus, business units have a strong set of processes and tools to bet-
ter analyze whether these kinds of efforts yield a strong enough return 
on investment. Discoveries in one unit can be quickly applied across 
the organization. For example, if combining two items on a promo-
tional web page doubled sales of the cross-sell item, that knowledge 
can be rapidly exported to in-store displays.
As the organization learns more about the value chain, the metrics 
evolve to emphasize a more outward focus. Measures are deﬁned and 
tracked across time periods for the entire business value chain. These 
might include employee productivity, sales growth rate, customer 
satisfaction, time to market, and adoption rate of new products and 
customers. Cause-and-effect relationships among performance met-
rics get closer scrutiny. The global restaurant company that learned 
that quick service wasn’t enough was able to ﬁnd the “sweet spot” 
where fresher taste didn’t take so long that customers complained 
about the wait. This is also often the point at which organizations dis-
cover that seemingly sound business or marketing practices are coun-
terproductive—such as when a telecommunications provider learns 
that the customers with the highest-priced plans are not always the 
most proﬁtable.
OPTIMIZED LEVEL: INFORMATION PROCESSES
◼Best practices are captured to replicate successes and pre-
vent repeated mistakes.
◼KPIs are tweaked to better understand root causes and 
drive performance.

P R O G R E S S I V E O R G A N I Z A T I O N S
◂
75
◼Information is pulled in from outside sources.
◼The organization works collaboratively with vendors and 
suppliers.
◼Functions for outsourcing are easily identiﬁed.
Anywhere, Anytime Intelligence
Optimized Level organizations accel-
erate their adoption of new technolo-
gies and concepts, especially those that 
strengthen the relationship with cus-
tomers, partners, and suppliers. They 
use the insight they develop from 
understanding their value chain, and 
develop multiple cross-function busi-
ness performance views to enable them to analyze their value chain 
and look for business, process, and product optimization opportu-
nities. Multiple data marts that integrate products, customers, and 
channel information are developed. Various views of customer satis-
faction, microsegmentations, and customer value analysis are used to 
enhance customer experience and validate business assumptions of 
product quality and value. The goal is to be well-positioned to derive 
the most insight from social media, along with knowing when cloud 
computing, software as a service, and high-performance analytics can 
make a difference. They are eager to adopt technologies that help 
them understand the broader aspects of their customers’ behavior 
using social media analytics and manage risk in real time using high 
performance analytics. They are very focused on driving incremental 
improvements, and can easily and quickly build the business case to 
strengthen their information infrastructure capabilities.
The Optimized Level organization has a highly calibrated sense of 
the analytic functions that need to remain centralized and those that 
should be pushed down to the business unit. Because the data is well 
governed, these organizations can keep specialized high-end analytic 

76
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
activities embedded in the business unit, knowing the results of those 
efforts aren’t at odds with enterprise-wide insight. While information 
integration suggests centralized control, decision makers in business 
units can actually have more autonomy and ﬂexibility.
FAILURE IS OKAY
In organizations at this level, failure is part of the learning 
process as they start to look at what customer behavior 
signs or events might indicate the customer is leaving—or 
which marketing messages and channels are more effective to 
attract a certain age group or demographic. These are difﬁcult 
questions to answer. Using analytics to ﬁgure out answers to 
these business challenges requires the exploration of various 
alternatives and hypotheses. Exploring the validity of some of 
the options may not produce positive outcomes. These 
practices are viewed as constructive steps in the learning pro-
cess and are accepted as necessary to arrive at the correct out-
come. The organization is so agile that missteps can be easily 
foreseen or overcome—and prevented from recurring. This 
supportive attitude works both ways. People are willing to 
accept the concept of compromise for the good of the organi-
zation if they know the organization is willing to compromise 
for them.
The use of technology goes far beyond the classic business intel-
ligence drill, sort, ﬁlter, and rank—the calculations and tallies that are 
sometimes mistaken for analytics. At this level, organizations use ana-
lytics to predict future outcomes of interest; explore and understand 
complex relationships in data; and model customer behaviors and 
processes. Business analytics tools model workﬂow interactions to 
develop new and improved business processes. They monitor cause-
and-effect relationships to continue ﬁnding opportunities to improve. 
They examine customer information to detect patterns that predict 
future behavior. And they get answers in real time, or close to it. 
Knowledge workers can forecast and predict, not merely look at what 
happened in the past.

P R O G R E S S I V E O R G A N I Z A T I O N S
◂
77
OPTIMIZED LEVEL: TECHNICAL INFRASTRUCTURE
◼New technologies are adopted with comparative ease and 
better results.
◼Function, process, and infrastructure de-duplication con-
tinue, saving time and money.
◼Technology supports optimization, predictive analytics, and 
forecasting.
◼Business units have access to high-quality enterprise infor-
mation and high-end tools because the data is centralized, 
not the analysis of it.
Thriving on Change
At this level, change is a core 
competency—not a threat. The com-
pensation system is structured around 
business performance (as measured 
by KPIs). The organization expects 
employees to apply critical thinking, 
validate assumptions, and determine 
root causes as bases for decisions. With 
an adaptive information architecture, job descriptions, accountabilities, 
organizational structure, workﬂow, and processes are more ﬂuid. This is 
important as change is rapid, iterative, and continuous—just as it is in the 
markets the organization serves.
Optimized Level organizations can’t function unless collaboration is 
embedded in the culture. The environment promotes widespread shar-
ing of internal and external information across business units and func-
tions, providing a broad context for communities of interest to share 
their experiences and ﬁne-tune the business. This culture of commu-
nity now extends outside the organization to include customers, suppli-
ers, and partners. Strategic thinkers are prized as visionaries, and their 
ideas are given a chance to ﬂy. Some of these ideas will ﬂop, but mis-
takes are not punished; they are viewed as learning experiences.

78
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
To tackle difﬁcult business problems, these organizations form 
diverse teams, combining expertise from various business functions in 
ways they’ve never done before. Critical analytical, business, as well 
as technical skills are used to focus on optimizing the enterprise value 
chain, with information on the value chain documented and distrib-
uted to all business units and decision makers. Centers of Excellence 
play a key role. The centers help business units learn how to use data 
and analytics to answer questions like: “How can we identify cost 
imbedded in our processes?” “How can we identify the most proﬁt-
able products and customers?” “How can we optimize our distribution 
routes?” “Will this process improvement be worth it?”
OPTIMIZED LEVEL: CULTURE
Flexibility and adaptability are important traits.
◼Employees are rewarded based on business performance.
◼Collaboration is essential and ongoing.
◼Analytics supports novel initiatives.
◼Executive support remains constant.
Getting the Most from Optimization
The Optimized Level has challenges. It can sometimes be a struggle 
to win over vendors and suppliers to the “optimized” way of doing 
business—sharing performance and operational results. Optimization 
models can also be so complex that they take too long to run using 
conventional computing, such as a markdown optimization model that 
takes a day or more to run. Procuring cutting-edge, high-performance 
analytic technologies is necessary. There also needs to be a dedicated 
effort to care and feed information to the models that support opti-
mization. At this level, modeling and advanced analytics are neither 
one-time projects nor a process that is set up to run into inﬁnity. 
Models will change, competitive pressures shift, new sources of infor-
mation emerge. The organization has to have the people, processes, 

P R O G R E S S I V E O R G A N I Z A T I O N S
◂
79
technology, and culture to account for these issues and make changes 
as necessary.
Internal perception is another challenge. Because optimization 
introduces changes to the operating model, the organization needs to 
explain how it uses insight to optimize its value chain and to make 
decisions. Helping everyone understand the value of insight-driven 
decision making is paramount. This is particularly important in organi-
zations that will continue to depend on a large pool of customer-facing 
staff (such as retailers, government entities, and telecommunication 
and hospitality providers). If the hotel desk clerk, the call center oper-
ator, or the assistant store manager doesn’t understand why certain 
offers are being made—or doesn’t trust the optimization’s recommen-
dations, seeking to override or ignore them—then efforts are jeopar-
dized. Business performance dashboards for frontline staff can help.
Finally, even a good thing can be taken to an extreme. Optimization 
in and of itself can only wring out so much proﬁt. And organizations 
may be at risk if they rest too much on their laurels and become too 
conﬁdent of their ability to control and protect their market share and 
success. In this global economy, continuing success will depend on 
innovation—and exploring different ways to improve performance, 
products, and services, and their understanding of their customers.
TOWARD INNOVATION AND BEYOND
Twenty years ago, you bought music 
on a compact disc, books came bound, 
and photos had to be developed. Toys 
were purchased at a store, and you 
needed to set a VCR to record a tele-
vision show. Obviously things have 
changed. In many cases, the manu-
facturers of now rarely used products 
have changed. Others went out of 
business. Even in organizations that 
were ﬁrst to market with an innovative new product (think of the 
early smartphone producers) someone else comes along and does it 
better. All the more reason to try and reach for the Innovate Level.

80
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
As beneﬁcial as it is to optimize your organization it can produce 
a sense of contentment, which leads to acceptance of the status quo, 
which may present a signiﬁcant risk to organizations in industries 
undergoing rapid transformation. In other words: You can’t rest on 
your laurels. Innovation—in terms of new products, new services, and 
new ways to deliver goods to your customers—is critical. Innovation, 
though, starts with a focus on what the enterprise does well—its core 
competencies. Having used insight to optimize the bottom line, orga-
nizations at this level are ready to use insight to focus on the top line.
A great example of this is health care plan organizations that have 
integrated their data to streamline their marketing campaigns, root 
out fraud, and provide competitive disease management programs. 
What’s the next step? For some very sophisticated plans, teaming 
with pharmaceutical companies to conduct aftermarket studies on 
drugs and interactions is a logical step. After all, the health plan has a 
rich data source to tap—and skill in using it.
Or, take the example of a company that initially mastered selling 
books online. Then it ﬁgured out how to sell lots of other things on 
the web (sometimes in partnership and sometimes directly), then it 
looked at the struggling e-reader market and came out with its own 
version. Now it’s helping authors bypass publishers. It wasn’t the ﬁrst 
company to sell products online or the ﬁrst to develop an e-reader, 
and self-publishing has been around forever. This organization just 
kept building on its core competencies. Given the organization’s suc-
cess, it’s a sure bet that data isn’t siloed and analytics is well practiced.
WHAT THE INNOVATE LEVEL ORGANIZATION LOOKS LIKE
◼Proactive and continuous innovation
◼Fosters and rewards innovation
◼Exceptional at incorporating outside data sources
◼Analytics-driven product and service decisions 
differentiation
◼Dominates industry and competes as a leader in a global 
market

P R O G R E S S I V E O R G A N I Z A T I O N S
◂
81
The Innovate Level organization extends the value of previous 
maturity stages. This organization spawns new ideas and institution-
alizes innovation. And it understands what it does well and applies 
this expertise to new areas of opportunity. There seem to be no limits 
to the new ideas that employees put forth, ideas that bring revenue 
from new sources. Some of the most inventive ideas are gleaned from 
other industries and unlikely inspirations.
Everyone in the organization is encouraged to offer up new ideas 
through a well-established process. New ideas are routinely modeled 
and prototyped to identify the ones that have the merit and potential 
to drive the organization forward. Groups with various competencies 
are formed to analyze and prototype new products and services. Go/
no-go decisions are based on information and sophisticated descrip-
tive and predictive analytics that include data from the entire value 
chain—from sources inside and outside the organization. A principal 
focus is innovation that is driven by a well-deﬁned internal process 
that encourages prototyping, piloting, and exploration in new mar-
kets. These organizations dominate their industry in market share, 
taking bold risks, setting new trends, and breaking new ground. Their 
efforts are based on a thorough understanding of their customers’ 
behaviors, market changes, and product values. Their innovative 
approach puts them ahead of their competitors.
Creative Collaborators
In addition to the people needed to run 
and optimize the business, the organi-
zation attracts and rewards individu-
als who can synthesize information 
and ideas from multiple industries and 
interpret these to propose new and 
viable services and products. People 
are expected to think like entrepreneurs. Hungry ones. These people 
are hard to ﬁnd, but the organization has made an ongoing commit-
ment to hire and retain them in part by providing a stimulating envi-
ronment for creative thinkers who like to challenge old paradigms 
and work outside the box. In many cases, organizations can also 

82
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
identify existing human resources who have intimate knowledge of 
the organization value chain and capabilities as well as the creative 
and innovative minds. In this dynamic environment, anyone in the 
organization can bring a new idea to the table. The toughest aspect for 
these organizations? Identifying and encouraging this creative pro-
cess, and keeping the critical resources engaged. Losing this talent will 
signiﬁcantly hinder this innovative process.
It is also important to recognize that these skills are not just product, 
marketing, or analytical resources. They include executives and leaders 
who create the environment and culture to foster innovation. Think of 
Steve Jobs’s career and involvement in Microsoft before leading Apple. 
His vision and creativity made him an icon in the industry and propelled 
Apple, from a performance and consumer perspective, to a leader and 
trendsetter as it broke new ground in many areas of telecommunica-
tions and media. Its success was clearly based on its ability to better and 
earlier understand consumers’ preferences and requirements. It took 
bold risks in creating new product interfaces and in creating the world-
wide collaboration of partners that contributed to its success by devel-
oping products that work on its iPhone and iPad products. It managed 
to get thousands of organizations to indirectly promote its products.
People at the Innovate Level truly represent a cross-section of 
different talent types—from efﬁciency experts to right-brain-centered 
individuals. Multidisciplinary skills are common. Differences in back-
ground, experience, and knowledge are embraced and encouraged. 
Collaboration is all the richer when the participants bring unique per-
spectives to the table. Cross-functional peer groups continue to play 
a key role in an individual’s day. Peer groups are always looking to 
broaden the diversity of the team—all the better for the most vibrant 
brainstorming sessions and the most creative ideas.
INNOVATE LEVEL: PEOPLE
◼Individuals with varied skill sets are cultivated.
◼Collaboration is expected.
◼Creativity is prized.
◼Entrepreneurial personalities ﬁt well.

P R O G R E S S I V E O R G A N I Z A T I O N S
◂
83
Managing Constant Renewal
There is no rest for the process guard-
ians at the Innovate Level organization. 
In addition to keeping the well-deﬁned 
processes built up over time, these orga-
nizations need new processes and poli-
cies for managing innovation. A project 
incubation process is used to grow new 
ideas and move them quickly into prototype and pilot stages. The 
results of innovation are routinely managed, evaluated, and communi-
cated in a well-structured manner. The innovation pipeline is analyzed 
just like a portfolio of risk. The Innovate Level organization stays on 
top of issues such as technology readiness, barriers to market entry, the 
impact of a new project on existing processes, and—more important—
on its existing customer base.
New metrics reﬂect the importance of innovation, such as rev-
enue from new ventures, number of ideas at various stages of the 
development process, time from idea to launch, and the projected 
value of new ideas in the pipeline.
INNOVATE LEVEL: INFORMATION PROCESSES
◼Business processes are self-learning and self-tuning.
◼Process to prototype and pilot new products and services is 
well-deﬁned.
◼Performance metrics reﬂect the importance of innovation.
◼Comprehensive and mature governance processes and 
policies continue to evolve.
Growing a Support Network for Innovation
The integrated, enterprise-wide IT architecture continues to update and 
distribute value chain information to all decision makers and support 
the optimization process with appropriate data marts that provide inte-
grated information from various business functions. The exploration 

84
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
of new ideas that may produce new 
products or services requires additional 
integration and consolidation of inter-
nal and external information. Innovate 
Level organizations dedicate techni-
cal resources to support this critical 
need. Teams with appropriate technical, 
analytical, and domain resources are 
quickly formed to support timely analysis and exploration of new pro-
totypes that have been approved in a laboratory-type environment. The 
infrastructure becomes an information hub to support creativity, with 
options for sharing, reviewing, commenting, and analyzing informa-
tion. It includes a kind of content management system for assembling 
internal and external information needed to spawn new ideas, manage 
the pipeline of new ideas, and move along ideas deemed worthy to 
pursue. The infrastructure accepts structured and unstructured data in 
a variety of media, such as databases, text documents, graphics, e-mail, 
and digitized voice communications. Proposals and pilot projects are 
documented and categorized and are easily accessible for reference and 
use. Post-pilot reviews are documented and made available for learning.
Predictive analytics is used extensively to model the future—to 
identify potential ideas quickly, rule them out or approve them, and 
minimize the risk of moving forward with any of them. “What if” 
becomes a daily question, and analytics provides reliable answers 
based on quality information. Risk management systems and human 
capital management systems take on new life.
Information access is generally widespread among knowledge 
workers, but when sensitive information is needed to speed research 
and prototyping efforts it is done quickly with an established protocol 
that recognizes the importance of speed to market. The organization’s 
information infrastructure is adaptable enough to provide a secure 
environment or laboratory to support innovation.
INNOVATE LEVEL: TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE
◼Allows rapid analysis of new business and marketing 
opportunities.

P R O G R E S S I V E O R G A N I Z A T I O N S
◂
85
◼Affords knowledge workers easy access to information—
with appropriate security measures for protecting intellec-
tual property.
◼Supports analysis of many different types of internal and 
external data, including unstructured data.
◼Incorporates a broad variety of information delivery and 
analysis options.
A Culture of Entrepreneurial Innovation
One of the chief reasons organizations 
need to become insight-driven is to 
replace gut instinct and intuition. In 
disorganized, data-immature organi-
zations intuition is problematic, as it 
is too often used to justify wrong deci-
sions. At the Innovate Level, intuition 
gets a seat at the table again, but with 
a twist. This is because the culture is aligned so that creative indi-
viduals draw on their instincts—and on data—to make decisions and 
explore new products and services. These are organizations that are 
successful enough to avoid failures, because they’ve learned how to 
efﬁciently vet ideas and pull the plug before large costs have been 
accrued. After all, perhaps only one idea in ten will be funded for fur-
ther development and one in one hundred of those actually brought 
to market. But if the idea can be quickly brought from concept to 
fruition the discarded ideas don’t impact the bottom line like they 
might in an organization that doesn’t have the insight and maturity 
to rapidly model them in a virtual environment and track the pipeline 
just like it manages tangible products.
Innovate Level organizations function like magnets drawing in 
highly skilled, creative workers—although ﬁnding those who ﬁt the 
culture can be a challenge. And helping existing employees stay up to 
date on the organizational evolution requires a sophisticated internal 
communications team. In addition, the organization must balance the 

86
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
types of knowledge workers it employs. Some highly skilled, highly 
creative individuals prefer to work as “lone wolves,” which can cause 
friction at an organization that needs to form and reform teams to 
better innovate. Innovate organizations are always working to strike 
the right balance.
Innovate Level organizations don’t fear market volatility; they 
meet it head-on through continuous innovation. These organizations 
deliver a constant stream of new products, services, and business 
models—staying ahead of the competition to sustain market leader-
ship. When competition or commoditization threatens one source of 
revenue, the organization had already predicted and considered this 
outcome, and is already prepared to release the next product.
As is the case in other levels of maturity, these organizations face 
the risk of losing focus. Daily tactical and operational responsibili-
ties still exist—and ﬁnding the right mix of staff to monitor the more 
routine activities is needed. The challenge is to constantly hone the 
business strategy, being careful not to stray too far away from core 
competencies or stray too far out of alignment with market conditions 
and customer demands.
INNOVATE LEVEL: CULTURE
◼New ideas are continuously evaluated.
◼Permission to fail is considered part of the creative and 
innovative process.
◼A proactive approach to information and market research 
protects the organization when competition or commoditi-
zation threatens one source of revenue.
◼Executive leadership supports an entrepreneurial approach 
to innovation.
Stopping at the Optimized Level—Or Striving toward 
the Innovate Level
“At what level do we really need to be?” Given the information maturity 
level most organizations are at, the question seems simple. Organizations 

P R O G R E S S I V E O R G A N I Z A T I O N S
◂
87
absolutely must break out of the Individual and Departmental mind-
set and progress toward an enterprise-wide approach. The Enterprise 
Level is without question the starting point and the foundation to gain 
the efﬁciencies of the Optimized Level and the competitive and proac-
tive advantages of the Innovate Level. Enterprise Level should be the 
minimum level of organizational maturity. Many factors will inﬂuence 
the strategy to move forward toward the higher level. These factors 
include the organization’s size and global reach, the industry and the 
market competitive pressure, and the history and legacy of the orga-
nization. There are good reasons to always work on optimizing the 
organization’s value chain to drive out unnecessary cost. And there are 
also many cases where innovation to expand the current portfolio of 
products and services is necessary for survival in today’s very competi-
tive global market. And, ﬁnally, it is important to also point out that 
once organizations achieve a reasonable level of value chain optimiza-
tion, they may assign various priority levels to drive innovation in their 
different business functions.
BUSINESS TRANSFORMATION STRATEGY OBJECTIVES
FOR PROGRESSIVE ORGANIZATIONS
Your organization is in much better shape compared to the majority of 
organizations if you believe you have achieved some of the capabili-
ties and characteristics of the Optimized and the Innovate organiza-
tions. Chances are that these progressive improvements may not be 
widespread across the organization’s business units, or your organiza-
tion is at the early stages of this maturity journey. To continue to prog-
ress and not lose momentum, many organizations at this stage have 
the following objectives for their business transformation strategy:
◼Assess your current organizational capabilities in the four key 
pillars and determine business priorities and gaps in capabilities.
◼Focus on evaluating the current resources in critical areas to 
ensure the appropriate talents are acquired and retained.
◼Focus on internal communication, change management, and 
training to support the desired innovative and progressive 
culture.

88
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
What Is Next after Finding Your Current 
Organization Maturity Level
This chapter, as well as Chapters 3 and 4, has provided descriptions to 
help you ﬁgure out at what level your organization is working cur-
rently, what levels are optimal, and some of the characteristics of each 
level with examples of what organizations can accomplish (or can’t) 
at the various information maturity levels. In the following chapters, 
you will read about the role of a Center of Excellence at each matu-
rity stage, with some examples of organizations that have successfully 
moved to a more mature level and a roadmap to help your organiza-
tion get started.

89
C H A P T E R 6
Centers of 
Excellence: The 
Key to Accelerate 
Organizational
Transformation
W
hat we have learned so far: As organizations move through 
each level they increase their opportunities to drive down 
costs, increase revenue, and improve the bottom line. However, 
evolving into a more insight-driven organization takes a lot of work. 
Reshaping the culture is critical, establishing uniform information 
processes is necessary, developing a strong skilled staff is equally 
important, and acquiring and properly using technology to develop 
an effective information infrastructure is vital. The past chapters have 
mentioned the role of a Center of Excellence (CoE) in helping orga-
nizations mature. Some organizations also use the term Business 
Intelligence Competency Center (BICC). This chapter explores that 
concept.
The biggest issue organizations confront when they decide to take 
their information and analytical maturity to a new level is how to go 

90
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
about it. It is a daunting task that can’t be outsourced or bought. The 
best plan of attack should include the following steps:
Step 1: Secure executive-level sponsorship to lead and support 
the organization’s effort not only initially but throughout the 
information maturity journey.
Step 2: Evaluate organizational maturity to determine capabili-
ties, weaknesses, and gaps that may prevent the organization 
from achieving its business objectives.
Step 3: Develop a strategy that outlines how the organization will 
address gaps and develop the capabilities to achieve its business 
objectives.
Step 4: Determine what role the Center of Excellence will take 
and outline a structure, engagement processes, and needed skills.
Step 5: Produce a roadmap that breaks down the required steps 
into reasonable and manageable phases.
No two CoEs are exactly alike, just as no two organizations have 
the exact same issues or maturity level. Nor are CoEs silver bullets 
that can solve all problems. They can, however, play a signiﬁcant role 
in leading the organization’s effort throughout its journey to a higher 
maturity level, and in introducing efﬁciency and productivity mea-
sures and best practices that can eliminate duplication of effort and 
improve decision quality. These beneﬁts are essential to the success of 
any information strategy.
CoEs aren’t static entities. They evolve as the organization evolves 
and should take on different roles throughout the organization’s 
maturity journey. They might have permanent staff, or people on 
loan. They might work in a central location, or operate as a virtual 
team. The structure for a CoE should meet the needs of the organiza-
tion and take into account the internal culture.
When a bank decided it wanted to increase its informational and 
analytical maturity to improve its business performance it built a CoE 
that was focused on breaking down information silos that had been 
formed by business units. The ﬁrst order of business was to make 
sure each business unit was represented in the CoE organization. 

C E N T E R S  O F  E X C E L L E N C E
◂
91
The bank recognized the required effort, and demonstrated its com-
mitment to this critical initiative by establishing a permanent CoE 
organization dedicated to achieving this objective. The CoE was 
staffed with technical and banking domain experts and business intel-
ligence and analytics staff. The goal was to improve the quality of 
information used for making decisions, and to enhance the informa-
tion infrastructure to supply the right information at the right time, 
and in the right format, to decision makers. This insider/outsider 
approach worked perfectly for this organization. It saw substantial 
ROI gains from efforts to develop an enterprise-wide view of its cus-
tomers and services.
A manufacturing company took a different approach. It created 
a CoE with the goal of routing all its high-end analytics projects 
through the CoE. It thought it would be a better use of resources to 
keep all the analytical exploration in one location. While the com-
pany has reported successes, it isn’t doing much to make its internal 
analytics efforts more process focused. Instead, the CoE takes a very 
project-based mentality and has become a bottleneck. It is not doing 
an effective job of advancing the use of information throughout the 
organization. While it is an improvement on the previous method 
of pestering IT for information, all it has done is create another 
queue.
CoEs should be ﬁguring out how to eliminate queues—not form 
them. Depending on an organization’s maturity stage, a CoE might 
initially support analytical and BI requirements with the long-term 
objective of promoting self-service. It may also help eliminate data 
silos, bring together business units to discuss KPIs, or search out out-
standing business unit analytic efforts to help other units beneﬁt from 
those insights. At its heart, it moves the organization toward develop-
ing skills and processes that make fact-based and analytically driven 
decisions a part of the organization’s DNA. This will require changing 
the organization’s mentality regarding its information from a “project” 
approach to an ongoing “process” approach that is embedded in day-
to-day activities. Successful organizations keep the following question 
foremost in their mission: “Are both data and analytics regarded and 
managed as strategic assets in our organization?”

92
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
WHAT’S IN A NAME?
A Center of Excellence doesn’t need to be called that. What’s 
important is to consider the message it sends the organization. 
Avoid using a name that suggests a limited scope. For instance, 
using the name “Business Intelligence CoE” suggests the center 
will focus solely on querying and reporting. In some instances, 
the implementation roadmap will limit the CoE’s focus to sup-
port a speciﬁc business function, yet choosing a broader name 
will help you avoid renaming the center as you move through 
the maturity levels. One idea: Call it the Enterprise Business 
Analytics CoE. “Business analytics” encompasses all areas of 
information management, including data integration, BI, ana-
lytics, performance management, and the various solutions that 
support business functions. Using this term provides the orga-
nization with the ﬂexibility to expand and change the focus of 
the CoE as it moves through the maturity journey. Including the 
term “CoE” in the name is not critical.
THE 10,000-FOOT VIEW OF INFORMATION
CoEs are assigned the critical role of providing the proverbial big pic-
ture view, seeing the good and the bad. One of the main lessons Dan 
Ariely gleaned from the research for his book Predictably Irrational: The 
Hidden Forces That Shape Our Decisions is that “although irrationality 
is commonplace . . . once we understand when and where we make 
erroneous decisions, we can try to be more vigilant, force ourselves to 
think differently about these decisions or use technology to overcome 
our current shortcomings.”1 Just as individuals have unique interpre-
tations, biases, and cognitive blind spots, so do organizations. They 
often struggle to understand how mature they are in information 
usage and what they need to get to the next level. CoEs help organi-
zations see where those erroneous decisions are coming from, why 
business units have different interpretations of the enterprise business 
performance, and what can be done to ﬁx these problems. They are 
sort of like an on-site think tank, asking questions such as, “Are we 
sharing results effectively across the organization?” A CoE should be 

C E N T E R S  O F  E X C E L L E N C E
◂
93
the group that can challenge “business as usual” and, most important, 
sponsor continuous learning and improvement. A CoE should also 
encourage business leaders to explore different ways to analyze their 
information and make decisions. The very nature of this exploration 
process will lead to unsuccessful attempts and false starts. Exploring 
the different options is a healthy practice that will ultimately lead 
to the best approach. Executive sponsors must grant “permission to 
fail” in order to help the CoE succeed.
Another key CoE role is as the “Cultural Driver” and “Change 
Agent” that removes the blinders, empowers the right people, and 
creates the information process framework that helps organizations 
reach the enterprise level—and beyond. Although the CoE can be vir-
tual or permanent, it should ideally have the following characteristics:
◼Supported and sponsored by executive-level management
◼Funded and staffed by the organization
◼Staffed by business, domain, analytical, and IT experts
◼Established with well-deﬁned focus, roles, responsibilities, and 
processes
A QUICK LOOK AT THE KEY RESPONSIBILITIES OF A CoE
Regardless of what drives an organization to establish a CoE, its char-
ter should be well-deﬁned. It needs to be able to work with any and 
all stakeholders, from IT and the teams responsible for collecting and 
storing data to the business units who use data to make decisions such 
as how to market products and from whom to buy supplies. A sig-
niﬁcant portion of its charter should be committed to understanding 
the information ﬂow throughout the organization and improving this 
process so that all decision makers have valid and consistent infor-
mation. This will require a close collaboration with the IT team that 
manages the information environment (including a data warehouse 
and marts). The CoE should become the link that connects business 
requirements to the information sources, understanding both the sup-
ply of available information and the demand for it. In many organiza-
tions, that link is not well established. Many information sources may 
exist that contain inconsistent and duplicate information. These are 

94
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
the dreaded silos that have been developed over time. Although the 
silos were meant to support the business, the inconsistent information 
embedded in them becomes one of the root causes of different inter-
pretations of business performance. Maintaining these silos comes at 
a high cost in terms of duplication of data and efforts. A CoE can lead 
the effort to de-silo the organization, introducing efﬁciency, elimi-
nating duplication, and documenting the information ﬂow across the 
organization. Ultimately, a CoE helps the business identify the right 
source for information. If the required information is not available, or 
if it is available in multiple locations, the CoE will lead the effort to 
identify the proper information architecture.
The CoE keeps in mind that information sources need to:
◼Support the business decision process and facilitate the pro-
duction of business insight through the application of analytics 
and the use of effective performance management and business 
solutions.
◼Be governed to ensure Master Data is managed properly and 
the IT architecture requirements are addressed to ensure a 
strong link between supply and demand.
◼Be maintained by using best practices to create repeatable and 
efﬁcient information acquisition and use, and to enable closed-
loop learning to allow for continuous improvement.
MORE EXAMPLES OF CoE TEAM RESPONSIBILITIES
◼Develop and promote information management and 
analytical best practices to facilitate the identiﬁcation of 
analytical requirements, the application of analytics, and 
the interpretation and distribution of results.
◼Educate the organization on the importance of data qual-
ity and support or lead the effort to manage master data.
◼Help the decision makers develop analytics and informa-
tion competency to support and guide fact-based and 
timely decisions.
◼Leverage available analytical skills and resources to opti-
mize their contribution to priority projects and business 
requirements.

C E N T E R S  O F  E X C E L L E N C E
◂
95
◼Gradually change the culture of the organization to always 
apply critical thinking and demand the validation of busi-
ness assumptions and strategy.
◼Foster a learning culture that encourages experimentation 
and provides permission to fail.
◼Develop analytical talent and resources throughout the 
organization.
CoEs AND THE LEVELS OF MATURITY
The nature, structure, and role of the CoE will be different for organi-
zations at different levels of maturity. At the Individual Level, infor-
mation is not viewed as a valuable asset so there really is no point to 
having a CoE.
For organizations at the Departmental Level, it is possible to have 
business unit or departmental CoEs. These efforts might not be as 
organized as they should be in a true CoE, but they could provide the 
beneﬁt of helping departments begin to do a better job of organiz-
ing information internally. But they can only be temporary structures 
because, as discussed earlier in the book, Departmental Level orga-
nizations are prone to developing information silos—and informa-
tion silos are anathema to becoming an insight-driven organization. 
View the departmental CoE only as a stepping-stone to the eventual 
goal of having one consistent information architecture to serve the 
enterprise. Do not let these departmental CoEs become bulwarks of 
the political and cultural resistance to enterprise-level information 
sharing.
CoEs can provide a signiﬁcant value in helping organizations 
reach the Enterprise Level. Some organizations establish an enter-
prise CoE to speciﬁcally drive the organization to this maturity level. 
Other organizations will provide some of the services and beneﬁts of 
a CoE in an informal or temporary fashion during the deconstruction 
of information silos and establishment of an enterprise information 
environment.
As the Optimize and the Innovate Levels are progressive maturity 
levels, Enterprise CoEs are likely to exist in many forms. Organizations 

96
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
that reach one of these levels must have addressed their information 
challenges. There are situations where the concept, services, and role 
of an enterprise CoE can be observed in an organization in some form 
without being recognized as a CoE organization. While these efforts 
are clearly beneﬁcial, introducing the formal best practice structure 
of an enterprise CoE is still worthwhile. It’s important to note that 
the focus of a CoE in an organization that operates at one of the pro-
gressive maturity levels will clearly be different than organizations at 
lower levels (foundational and challenged) of maturity. These CoEs 
have the beneﬁts of a well-integrated enterprise information architec-
ture that can now focus on how to leverage the clean and consistent 
enterprise information to further propel the organization to higher 
levels of competitive advantage in the market. The use of analytics to 
validate assumptions and strategies and predict customers’ behavior 
and preferences are all examples of CoE focus areas at the progressive 
organization maturity levels.
HOW SHOULD CoEs BE ORGANIZED?
Although the CoE should include experts drawn from various disci-
plines throughout the organization, there is no standard and ﬁxed 
structure. The appropriate structure should be based on the orga-
nization’s business priorities and capabilities. Each organization has 
strengths and weaknesses in its ability to produce and use business 
insight. The CoE should be structured to address weaknesses, supple-
ment strengths, and enable it to achieve its business objectives. The 
CoE members must represent business users, technical specialists, and 
domain experts—the people who use information insight and ana-
lytics to make decisions along with those who actually produce that 
insight and build the analytical models. The optimal structure is a 
permanent organization with well-deﬁned roles and responsibilities 
and KPIs to measure their contribution and impact. The team should 
be visible in the organizational structure and accessible to all the busi-
ness units it intends to serve. Some organizations may start with a 
virtual team that combines the relevant resources from various loca-
tions. Although this approach may be quick to set up, it does present 
challenges in commitment, focus, and work prioritization, and should 

C E N T E R S  O F  E X C E L L E N C E
◂
97
be only used as a temporary step toward a permanent structure. If 
dual reports have to moonlight to get their CoE work done, the vir-
tual CoE concept won’t work.
TRAITS OF THE MOST EFFECTIVE AND STRATEGIC
IMPLEMENTATIONS OF A CoE
The most effective and strategic implementations of a CoE have 
these traits:
◼Partnering with business stakeholders for ongoing success
◼Continuous and effective executive sponsorship
◼Sufﬁcient prominence in the organizational hierarchy to 
have visibility and impact.
ACCELERATING MATURITY—NOT CREATING DEPENDENCY
There are two interpretations of how a CoE should be structured. One 
interpretation sees it as an organization that acts as a change agent; 
the other is to consider it a shared services organization. The differ-
ence is signiﬁcant, and it comes down to how organizations view the 
purpose and role of the CoE organization. The change agent approach 
is to think of a CoE as an effective tool to:
◼Address inefﬁciencies in the current information management 
and analytical practices in the organization.
◼Help organizations make the necessary changes to improve 
each organizational pillar.
◼Accelerate the organization’s effort to evolve to a higher matu-
rity level as part of the broader organization’s transformation 
roadmap.
To achieve these objectives, the business users have to be actively 
involved, and the CoE has to have the right resources with the 
required skills to act as the agent of change. Visibility, business impact, 
and executive support will be essential requirements for the CoE to 
achieve these objectives.

98
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
The other interpretation of a CoE is as an IT shared service orga-
nization that offers some type of technical service such as reporting 
or analytical support. Although this approach may improve how the 
organization responds to business requests, it reinforces a barrier 
between the business users and the technologies, critical thinking, 
and information analysis process needed to improve decision making.
IT shared service organizations encourage business units to send 
information and analysis requests to queue up to the organization 
and wait to get the results back. A shared service organization works 
on a project basis, handling “requests” for information and analytics, 
and in some cases they charge for these projects. The second example 
in the opening of this chapter is a “shared service” model. This model 
does nothing to help the business units successfully work with data 
and analytics on their own. Inevitably, bottlenecks evolve, and the 
use of analytics and information insight becomes a “project” and an 
undesirable burden,not a core component of the decision-making 
process. Frustrated with the long lines that form to get a spot on the 
CoE schedule (or the price), business units start patching together 
their own solutions, working with whatever data they’ve got and 
using whatever talent they have.
TWO INTERPRETATIONS OF HOW A CoE SHOULD 
BE STRUCTURED
There are two interpretations of how a CoE should be struc-
tured. One interpretation sees it as an organization that acts 
as a change agent, while the other is to consider it a shared 
services organization. The difference is signiﬁcant, and it comes 
down to how organizations view the purpose and role of the 
CoE organization.
In comparison, well-functioning CoEs help business users learn to use 
information and develop business insight themselves—they don’t do it 
for them. A critical requirement of a well-structured CoE is to aggres-
sively work toward promoting self-service capabilities to enable the 
business users to do as much as they can on their own. The technolo-
gies available today are often designed with business users in mind.

C E N T E R S  O F  E X C E L L E N C E
◂
99
In addition, in order to avoid being an ineffective budgetary sink-
hole that does nothing to move the organization to a greater level of 
informational maturity, the CoE needs a close connection and inte-
gration with the various business units. At all costs the CoE should 
avoid being chartered only for projects. A project-only focus rarely 
allows these CoEs to identify the root cause of data issues such as 
data inconsistency, availability of master data, data quality, and inte-
gration. Consequently, they may not be able to make recommenda-
tions to address the root cause of these problems since it is not part of 
their project completion objectives. Actually, in some cases, IT shared 
service organizations, or outsourced services that perform similar 
functions, are measured by the volume of completed projects, which 
completely ignores the need to improve the information infrastruc-
ture, improve internal skills and process, and change the culture.
FINDING THE RIGHT SPOT IN THE ORG CHART
The CoE should be located in a high—and visible—spot in the org 
chart. It needs to be accessible to all internal stakeholders and custom-
ers. The leader of the CoE must report to an executive sponsor at the 
C level. Since CoEs will be making recommendations and changes to 
help business users make better fact-based decisions, they need the 
backing and support from the executive team.
MAPPING THE MINI-UNITS THAT A CoE MIGHT HOST
An effective structure for a CoE is developed only after evaluating 
the organization’s business priorities and its capabilities to produce 
and use the required business insight to achieve these objectives. The 
assessment of current organizational pillars will reveal the organiza-
tion’s capabilities, weaknesses, and strengths. There is no standard 
structure for a CoE that will work in every environment and culture. 
However, there are basic information functions that provide essential 
information capabilities that must be evaluated. Figure 6.1 shows the 
basic functions that should be considered for a CoE.
Figure 6.1 illustrates enterprise CoE key functions, which cor-
respond to key information management practices that exist in any 

Information Architecture
Technologies
Data
Management
Operational
Data Sources
Data Quality
Master Data
Management
Information
Schema
Ent
erpr
ise
Busi
ness
Ana
lytic
s Pr
ogr
am
Information
Delivery
How BI and 
BA Are Used
User Training
and Support
Data Marts
Structure and
Content
In
te
rn
al
Pr
oc
es
se
s
Da
ta
St
ew
ard
shi
p a
nd
Go
ve
rn
an
ce
Figure 6.1
Key Functions of an Enterprise-Wide Center of Excellence
100

C E N T E R S  O F  E X C E L L E N C E
◂
101
organization. As you can imagine, different levels of organizational 
maturities will have an impact on how well these areas are supported. 
Before we start exploring these key functions, keep in mind that a 
CoE may not have to address all of them. The assessment of the cur-
rent organizational maturity and capabilities combined with a thor-
ough gap analysis process will identify what type of a CoE is needed 
and which of these key functions should be addressed by the CoE. 
Let’s start exploring these functions.
The information infrastructure of any organization brings opera-
tional and external data in, processes the data, and should produce 
good quality information to deliver it to the information consumers. 
We can think of this as a supply and demand environment. The process 
of taking raw data and converting it to useful enterprise information 
requires quite a bit of work, including the following key functions:
◼Effective data integration
◼Master data management
◼Business intelligence capabilities to query and report on the 
data
◼Application and effective use of analytics to produce business 
insight
◼Application and use of performance management capabilities 
and principles
◼Effective information management processes
◼Data stewardship and information governance
This is the information value chain, and it is the heart of this 
discussion. When anyone talks about an organization’s capabilities, 
it is in reference to this value chain. An enterprise CoE will carefully 
monitor this process to make sure it is functioning effectively. If one 
of these functions is working well, then we don’t necessarily have to 
include it as a CoE function.
Data Management
This refers to the process of extracting operational systems data and 
external data and bringing it into the organization’s information 

102
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
infrastructure. The infrastructure may include staging areas, data 
warehouses, and marts. To effectively manage this function you need 
a good understanding of the operational data sources, good manage-
ment of the data quality, well-documented application of enterprise 
business rules, and master data management. All these functions and 
processes will load the extracted data into the organization’s infor-
mation infrastructure, which must have a well-deﬁned information 
model or schema (usually a data warehouse model). The data man-
agement supplies information and makes it available to the informa-
tion consumers.
Information Delivery
This key function represents the consumption of information by the 
business side. This is the demand side. Many of the inefﬁciencies and 
challenges in managing enterprise information may be attributed to 
the lack of alignment between supply and demand. Organizations will 
obviously need to produce the appropriate information that will sat-
isfy the demand from a business consumer. To achieve this objective 
organizations, with the help from a CoE, will have to pay attention 
to how business requirements for information are managed and satis-
ﬁed. How are the information consumers using business intelligence, 
analytics, or performance management? How well are the informa-
tion marts structured to support the business users, and the skill levels 
of the business users? The information delivery function manages the 
demand side.
Enterprise Business Analytics Program
Information management practices need to be an ongoing process 
versus a series of projects that may not be well connected. The enter-
prise business analytics program function for the CoE addresses this 
very important requirement. This function will ﬁnally have an owner 
who is empowered to manage the key projects to stop redundancies, 
identify best practices, leverage skills, and so on. This critical function 
includes reaching out to all business, IT, and domain stakeholders to 

C E N T E R S  O F  E X C E L L E N C E
◂
103
get them to collaborate and communicate more effectively. Depending 
on the unique requirements and maturity of each organization, this 
function may also include coordination with other business and IT 
initiatives involving master data or governance.
Data Stewardship and Governance
Wouldn’t it be great if your enterprise information was always clean 
and consistent? That is not a very common attribute. In reality, enter-
prise data is often not high quality. To ﬁx these challenges, you need 
to ﬁgure out the root causes and in doing so ask the questions: Who 
owns the data? Who owns the application systems? Who owns the data 
sources? These are the different areas in any organization that may 
impact data quality. Assigning an owner (steward) who is accountable 
for the data stored or managed by each one of these areas is needed to 
control the overall data quality ﬂowing through the enterprise. There 
are potentially different types of stewards. A technical steward might 
work on data governance issues while a business steward could work 
on who has a right to access the information.
Ultimately, organizations will have to identify the different types 
of data stewards and the different data governance decisions and deci-
sion rights they will need to effectively manage enterprise informa-
tion quality. Depending on the organization’s maturity, a CoE team 
may be asked to play a role in addressing these critical functions.
Internal Information Processes
You have already explored several key information functions. To 
effectively perform each of these functions, individual processes need 
to be deﬁned in order to help business units interact with each other, 
and engage with IT. Developing a comprehensive engagement model 
will facilitate the implementation of new recommendations. These 
processes are also essential to guide how business units and the IT 
team will interact with the CoE organization. The CoE may have to be 
involved in structuring and maintaining these processes. This is key to 
developing and maintaining effective information architecture.

104
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
HOW THE CoE HELPS SECURE THE
ORGANIZATIONAL PILLARS
People, information processes, technology, and culture are this book’s 
mantra for understanding how to evolve to a more mature organiza-
tion. With that in mind it makes sense to also look at the organiza-
tional impact of a CoE from that perspective. Let’s explore how a CoE 
can impact each of those pillars.
KEY ROLE OF A CoE
One of the key roles of a CoE is to help the organization to 
evolve into a higher maturity level. This journey can only be 
successful when the four organizational pillars evolve together 
to a higher level of maturity.
Finding and Leveraging Talent
Good multidisciplinary resources are 
not easy to attract and retain. These 
leaders are usually driven by the desire 
to apply their knowledge to have a 
positive impact in their organization’s 
business performance.
A Center of Excellence can:
◼Leverage the specialized talents in various groups within the orga-
nization to get the most value of their contribution. This can be 
achieved by providing a method, process, and incentive for these 
talents to collaborate, share ideas, and develop best practices.
◼Support the business units and the HR team in identifying the 
proper training, continuing education, and knowledge transfer 
for the critical talent across the organization.
◼Raise awareness and support the organization’s effort to develop 
meaningful job descriptions, job families, and an attractive 
career path to attract and retain critical talent.

C E N T E R S  O F  E X C E L L E N C E
◂
105
Understanding and Communicating the Big Picture
Creating 
uniform, 
enterprise-wide 
information processes requires diplo-
macy and a detailed understanding 
of the needs of business units. It also 
requires careful analysis of the required 
information tasks to determine whether 
they are business or IT tasks. In addi-
tion, a careful and consistent analysis 
of these tasks and processes is essential for the organization to reach 
the right balance between centralizing and decentralizing these tasks. 
The CoE staff can look at the big picture, especially as it relates to the 
value chain, and communicate that information to decision makers, 
analysts, and other stakeholders. These business views should provide 
decision makers, analysts, and other stakeholders with a good under-
standing of the organizational value chain.
In addition, the CoE can:
◼Be cognizant of industry best practices and apply them to cur-
rent processes when appropriate.
◼Carefully identify and analyze the required information pro-
cesses to clearly deﬁne what should be handled and owned by 
the business and IT organizations.
◼Recognize internal politics and identify obstacles and bring this 
knowledge to the executive sponsor with prescriptive recom-
mendations to resolve these issues.
◼Evaluate the current state of data quality, consistency, security, 
and access, and make recommendations.
◼Establish processes to connect with data stewards in business areas 
to discuss and solve data quality issues and support the organiza-
tion’s data quality, master data, and governance initiatives.
◼Develop processes to promote best practices around the use of 
analytics, performance management, and business solutions.
◼Identify the best way for individuals to engage with the CoE 
and a process for working with other CoEs (if they exist).

106
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
Assessing the Impact of Technology
While technology often changes at a 
fast pace, people and organizational 
cultures don’t. When ﬁguring out 
whether a new technology is valu-
able you need to take a variety of 
issues into consideration, including 
the analysis of the technology impact 
on business users, culture and change 
management requirements, resource requirements, and of course how 
this technology augments and integrates with other technologies and 
scheduled enhancements. The CoE is in a good position to help objec-
tively assess the value of adopting technology improvements to meet 
the increasing business requirements and, more important, work with 
other IT and business groups to coordinate these enhancements with 
other initiatives planned for the organization.
A CoE can ask:
◼
Is the organization collecting and integrating enter-
prise information to support the decision-making process?
The ultimate test of the success of the organization’s effort to manage 
its enterprise data is to answer yes to this question. One of the main 
objectives of establishing a CoE is to address the challenges organiza-
tions face when they try to integrate enterprise data and break the 
departmental silos. The CoE organization will have business user rep-
resentatives to make sure business requirements are well deﬁned. 
The CoE’s job is to constantly manage the organization’s information 
environment (data warehouses, marts, or any other architecture) to 
ensure the proper information is collected, integrated, and stored. 
Consequently, when executed properly, the concept of establishing 
an enterprise CoE will have a direct and visible impact on the organi-
zation’s information infrastructure.
◼
Is there a business analytics strategy and architecture?
As business users continue to increase their use and reliance on BI, 
analytics, performance management, and business solutions, the 
process of coordinating these various efforts can be very inefﬁcient. 

C E N T E R S  O F  E X C E L L E N C E
◂
107
A properly established CoE will own the requirement of developing 
and maintaining an enterprise business analytics strategy and archi-
tecture. This work must be done in close collaboration with the IT 
team to align the BA strategy and architecture with the enterprise 
IT information strategies and architectures.
◼
What new technology should we use? In addition, the CoE 
will be in the best position to evaluate and select new technologies to 
support the business requirements. In doing so, the CoE, in collaboration 
with the business users, will be evaluating the use of new technology 
to introduce efﬁciency and produce the insight to support the business 
decision-making process. The CoE can look into better ways to analyze 
information visually (using interactive and dynamic data visualization 
methods, exploring strategies and technologies to analyze big data, 
utilizing best practices for applying analytics in business solutions, and 
determining the pros and cons of using cloud-based or hosted options).
◼
Does our strategy scale and extend to support the grow-
ing business requirements? As the organization starts to organize 
its information management efforts, a long-term view of the extend-
ability and scalability of the information architecture is necessary. The 
CoE will work closely with the IT team to ensure this requirement 
is met. This will allow the organization’s information environment 
to keep up with the business requirements, manage the information 
infrastructure cost, and help justify the required investments in infor-
mation infrastructure.
◼
What types of analytic methods are needed? Many low-
maturity organizations get stuck in the rut of using regression analy-
sis, or simple spreadsheet analysis. A CoE can work with the business 
users to identify the appropriate robust analytical methods to support 
the decision-making process, and ensure the information marts are 
properly structured to collect, store, and provide the right information 
in the right formation to support the required information analyses.
◼
Are we using high-quality data to make decisions? One 
of the critical requirements and beneﬁts for the CoE is to support the 
organization’s effort in cleaning its data, managing its master data, 
and applying the appropriate level of information governance. A 
properly executed CoE will support the organization’s efforts around 

108
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
these topics and, depending on each environment, may take some or 
all responsibility to lead the organization’s effort in these areas.
Communicating Value
The CoE can have one of its biggest 
impacts in the culture arena, helping 
set a tone that embraces fact-based 
and analytically driven decision mak-
ing. This organization dimension is 
probably the hardest to change, but 
has the most signiﬁcant impact on 
the organization’s ability to become 
insight-driven. Changing the organization’s culture will take time, 
diplomacy, and careful changes to the way the organization evaluates 
its employees’ performance, provides incentives and rewards, hires 
and promotes new skills, and communicates strategies and objec-
tives. The CoE supports the organization’s effort by communicating 
the organization’s business priorities and objectives and demonstrat-
ing (through communicating its success stories) the value of business 
insight, analytics, and information as a corporate asset.
The CoE can:
◼Work closely with the business users to demonstrate the value 
of using new technologies and support them in meeting their 
business objectives.
◼Document and communicate new successes achieved by the 
business units using new methods, technology, and analytics.
◼Work as a change agent to encourage business users to try new 
approaches and use new technologies to address their business 
priorities.
◼Encourage experimenting with new ideas and accept unsuc-
cessful attempts (from time to time) as part of the maturity 
process.
◼Leverage existing domain and analytical skills to promote a col-
laborative atmosphere.

C E N T E R S  O F  E X C E L L E N C E
◂
109
◼Create an internal method to exchange ideas and re-use meth-
ods and techniques to solve business problems.
◼Work closely with the heads of business units to dedicate resources 
and effort to support them in meeting their business objectives.
PHASED VERSUS BIG BANG APPROACH FOR
STARTING A CoE
Should you start in phases or go for a big commitment? A phased 
approach is more practical. Organizations generally learn a lot from 
the initial attempts to establish a CoE. Taking a phased approach 
enables them to use these lessons learned to evaluate and expand 
the scope of their CoEs through later iterations. It’s important that 
a CoE establish credibility with early successes that build its reputa-
tion and earn it continual ongoing support from business units, IT, 
and executive sponsors. The phased approach should keep in mind 
an organization’s level of maturity. An organization operating at the 
Departmental Level might inaugurate a CoE with the objective of 
breaking down the departmental silos. An Enterprise Level organiza-
tion might use the CoE to focus initially on improving its marketing 
efforts to identify valuable customers and cross-sell opportunities.
In the early stages of a CoE, it is important to keep the focus some-
what narrow. The CoE can only bite off so much without getting a rep-
utation for trying to do too much too soon—or fail to deliver tangible 
results and lose its credibility with the business units. The CoE needs 
an initial win and a success story to catch the attention of the business 
unit and encourage its participation and engagement with the CoE. As 
the CoE begins to establish its roles and relationships within the orga-
nization, its members will be better equipped to deal effectively with 
thorny internal politics. Limiting the scope of the CoE’s inﬂuence, at 
ﬁrst, allows the CoE to ensure continued buy-in and collaboration.
FINDING THE RIGHT FUNDING MECHANISM
Organizations often ﬂounder when it comes to determin-
ing how to fund a CoE. You want business units to use the services, 

110
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
expertise, and advice of the CoE. Thus, charging for using the CoE 
is tricky. Business units within Department Level organizations, for 
instance, don’t want to be charged to then be told they need to work 
at breaking down their information silos. It would be reasonable to 
be charged for consulting on the purchase of major analytics—the 
kind of consulting the business unit might have looked for outside 
the organization. But, in general, to acquire strong support for the 
CoE’s toughest work—building an enterprise-wide view of data and 
changing culture to be data-driven—the CoE needs to be budgeted as 
a line item in the overhead budget. To make sure the budgeted dollars 
remain, the CoE’s ﬁrst task is to work with its executive sponsor to 
develop a set of metrics it will be measured on.
SELECTING THE RIGHT PERSONALITIES
There is no one right way to staff a CoE, or one speciﬁc mix 
of skills. Many stafﬁng decisions are made as a result of completing an 
assessment of the current information management practices in the 
organization. The assessment will not only reveal the organizational 
maturity level but, more important, will also identify the organiza-
tion’s weaknesses and strengths that may impact its ability to achieve 
its business priorities. Identifying these weaknesses and strengths and 
conducting a capability gap analysis will enable the organization to 
ﬁgure out the proper ways to close gaps, address weaknesses, and 
leverage strengths. These are the essential ﬁrst steps to identifying and 
designing the proper CoE organizational structure and identifying the 
required resources to staff it. In general, the key traits necessary for 
CoE resources are:
◼Business, technical, and industry domain background
◼Ability to translate business requirements into technical and IT 
processes
◼Strong skills at working collaboratively with many groups
◼Ability to listen to the business, technical, and personal require-
ments from the business users
◼Excellent communication and personal skills
◼Specialized skills determined by the focus and function

C E N T E R S  O F  E X C E L L E N C E
◂
111
KEY TAKEAWAYS
◼Secure executive-level sponsorship to lead and support the 
organization’s effort not only initially, but throughout 
the information maturity journey.
◼Evaluate the current organizational maturity to determine 
capabilities, weaknesses, and gaps that may prevent the 
organization from achieving its business objectives.
◼Develop a strategy that outlines how the organization 
will address gaps and develop the required capabilities to 
achieve its business objectives.
◼Evaluate the role of an enterprise Information and 
Analytics Center of Excellence that can lead and direct 
the organization’s efforts, and develop the CoE 
organizational structure, engagement processes, and 
required skills.
◼Develop a roadmap that will break down the required 
steps into reasonable and manageable phases that can be 
adopted by the organizational culture.
RAMPING UP YOUR CHANGE AGENT
Ultimately, CoEs should be part of a broader roadmap to 
address gaps and weaknesses in capabilities and in the current infor-
mation management practices in an organization. The CoE can be 
your catalyst, your agent of change, and a key means of accelerating 
the organization’s efforts to evolve into a higher maturity level.
As noted earlier, CoEs are not silver bullets, and they don’t solve 
all problems. But when organizations think through the role and 
mission of a CoE and support it at the highest levels, the centers can 
produce signiﬁcant value and tangible results.
Organizations should not establish a CoE just because it is a best 
practice approach to improve efﬁciency and alignment between busi-
ness and IT. Don’t do it because it seems like it is something you 
should do. A much better approach is to understand the concept 

112
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
and its strategic nature, something you learned about in reading this 
chapter. The next chapter focuses on how organizations can develop 
a business analytics strategy.
NOTE
1. Dan Ariely, Predictably Irrational: The Hidden Forces That Shape Our Decisions (New York: 
Harper Perennial, 2010).

113
C H A P T E R 7
Starting the 
Journey: 
Developing a 
Strategy and 
Roadmap to 
Guide Your 
Business
Transformation
W
hat we’ve learned so far: To improve an organization’s maturity 
level, a business transformation effort is required to improve 
and align the capabilities of the organization’s four pillars: 
people, information processes, technical infrastructure, and culture. 
Structuring and launching a business transformation initiative is a 
journey that should be well planned and executed. To plan the jour-
ney, organizations need to address three key requirements:

114
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
1. Secure continuous executive sponsorship.
2. Assess current capabilities and dynamics of the four organiza-
tional pillars (people, processes, technical infrastructure, and 
culture) using a structured maturity model to determine the 
starting/baseline and target points.
3. Align the capabilities of the four pillars with the organization’s 
business objectives with the support of a Center of Excellence 
to develop the four pillars.
As you’ve read throughout this book, a business transformation 
strategy is necessary to make this happen.
KNOWING WHERE TO START
It is not easy to transform an organization, especially as it relates to 
information maturity. When an organization makes the decision to 
embrace information maturity, the “where to start” question isn’t sim-
ple to answer. Should a Center of Excellence be chartered? Are there 
people on staff who can guide us? Will this require the help of an 
outside consultant? Everyone nods eagerly when you tell them how 
information, properly aligned, can help them make decisions quickly 
and effectively. But moving to more mature levels, breaking down 
silos, transforming the culture—this is tough stuff. It can’t be done in a 
few months, or even a year or maybe several years. You need to start 
somewhere. And this is what this chapter is about: getting started.
Let’s start by reviewing how two organizations successfully 
planned and executed their business transformation strategy, and the 
business results they managed to achieve.
RIYAD BANK’S ENTERPRISE BUSINESS
INTELLIGENCE COMPETENCY CENTER
Riyad Bank is one of the largest ﬁnancial institutions in the Middle East with 
US$49 billion in assets. It has 251 branches, including locations in Houston, 
London, and Singapore, along with 20 self-service branches and 2,600 ATMs. The 
bank has the best credit rating of any ﬁnancial institution based in Saudi Arabia.

S T A R T I N G T H E  J O U R N E Y
◂
115
Challenges and Objectives
With the highest bank rating in Saudi Arabia, Riyad Bank was grow-
ing and experiencing many of the typical informational and orga-
nizational challenges such as information silos, business alignment, 
and the need for infrastructure enhancements and optimization. The 
bank was also launching a customer-centric initiative, and wanted to 
improve its information quality and its business performance moni-
toring capabilities.
Riyad Bank realized that a business transformation effort was 
needed to implement its customer-centric initiative. The bank needed 
to better understand its customers so it could develop and promote 
the appropriate ﬁnancial products and services to the right customers, 
manage risk, and arm its decision makers with consistent and accu-
rate information to help them make better decisions. The bank knew 
that a technology solution alone was not the answer.
Enterprise Plan with a Phased Approach
To effectively implement its customer-centric strategy, Riyad Bank 
used a comprehensive and enterprise-focused business transforma-
tion approach to evaluate the organization’s maturity in developing 
and using information. The bank used the SAS information matu-
rity model to evaluate its current capabilities, determine the target 
maturity level, and develop a roadmap to enhance its capabilities and 
reach the desired maturity level. The bank carefully evaluated the 
skills of its workforce, the current internal information processes, 
the capabilities and architecture of its information environment, 
and, of course, its internal culture. The investment in this evaluation 
enabled the bank to develop a roadmap to change its information 
management practices and operating model. The bank implemented 
organizational and business changes, including the establishment of 
an enterprise Business Intelligence Competency Center (BICC) to lead 
its business transformation effort. The focus of the BICC organization 
was not limited to business intelligence. It included all the analyti-
cal, performance management, and data integration efforts as well. 

116
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
This BICC organization is one of the best practices implementations of 
the concept of the Enterprise Business Analytics Centers of Excellence 
that was explored in Chapter 6. Riyad Bank chose the name “BICC” 
for the implementation.
The bank also understood the expected business impact of all 
the new changes it was planning to introduce, and decided to take a 
phased approach to gradually roll out new capabilities and change the 
operating model and culture. To do that successfully, the bank used its 
business priorities and decided to focus on one critical business func-
tion ﬁrst: its retail banking business unit.
Evolution and Expansion over Time
The BICC organization started with fewer than 10 resources, and 
quickly grew to a staff of 29 employees. The group included techni-
cal staff from the business units who had managed their unit’s siloed 
information systems. The BICC organization reports to the Deputy 
CEO, who provides it with enterprise visibility and reach. “Our BICC 
team consists of a mix of business, analytical, and technical resources 
with a good business understanding of the operation and priorities of 
the business units we support,” says Mr. Yassir Al-Suwais, Senior Vice 
President, Enterprise Business Intelligence Competency Center.
Initially the BICC organization focused on helping promote the 
use of the information to support business decisions, including a 
function devoted to change management and communication. “Now 
the role of the BICC organization started to shift towards delivering 
business advisory services by partnering with our business unit stake-
holders and working together to ﬁgure out how we can apply ana-
lytics to expand our business and grow revenue,” says Mr. 
Adil Belhouari, AVP and Manager of BICC Analytics & Data 
Mining group.
The keys to Riyad Bank’s success with their BICC are:
◼Comprehensive evaluation of current organizational capa-
bilities provides a clear view of what needs to be done to 
change the current operating model and culture.

S T A R T I N G T H E  J O U R N E Y
◂
117
◼A phased approach produces quicker business value and 
provides organizations with the ﬂexibility to make adjust-
ments to address changing business requirements and 
conditions.
Business Beneﬁts from the New Organization
This wasn’t just an exercise in using data. The bank had speciﬁc goals 
in mind. On the marketing side, it wanted to enhance cross-selling, 
attract new customers, increase sales, develop strategic partnerships 
for customer loyalty programs, and support channel activities. It 
wanted to do all this while decreasing the costs of marketing projects. 
During its short time in existence, the BICC organization has already 
increased cross-sell wins by 35 percent, helped the retail business unit 
to identify its most valuable customers, and launched programs to 
retain them. The team is now continuing to add value by using ana-
lytics to segment customers, develop retention, and churn models, 
and using LTV models to win back lost customers.
The bank’s operations group speciﬁcally wanted to see if there was 
a less expensive way to keep ATMs adequately stocked with cash. The 
BICC team ﬁgured out how to reduce the amount of ATM dormant 
cash by 35 percent by optimizing its replenishment process. The BICC 
organization is also supporting the risk team in its effort to comply 
with Basel II and developing risk models to monitor and control risk.
These early successes represent comparatively simple wins—the 
low-hanging fruit of taking an enterprise-wide information approach.
To continue to succeed, Riyad Bank understood that it needed an 
enterprise-wide set of metrics. One of the BICC’s current tasks is to 
survey business units and help develop a set of metrics that can mea-
sure the business value from the BICC contribution.
Future Expansion
The progress achieved by the BICC organization encouraged Riyad 
Bank’s executives to continue its mission of evolving the organiza-
tion’s maturity level by investing in new enterprise-wide projects 

118
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
such as data quality management, big data analytics, and a customer 
experience analytics program.
E.SUN BANK’S CUSTOMER RISK VALUE ORGANIZATION
E.SUN is one of the leading banks in Taiwan, and was named by The Banker 
as one of the top global 500 banking brands in 2013.
E.SUN Bank developed a strategic Center of Excellence organi-
zation to improve its CRM marketing capabilities. The organization 
is called Customer Risk Value (CRV), and it was an expansion of an 
existing team that provided risk intelligence support. The most inno-
vative approach in the E.SUN Bank case is how it is measuring the 
performance and business impact of this organization, as explained 
later in this section.
The CRV organization has 36 resources to support risk and mar-
keting analytics requirements for the bank. The team is structured 
into three groups to handle Analytics CRM (ACRM), Operational 
CRM (OCRM), and an Analytical Data Warehouse. The groups within 
the CRV organization included three teams: Campaign Analytics, Data 
Mining, and Operational CRM.
E.SUN bank developed career paths to not only attract highly 
skilled resources, but also to develop and retain these critical resources 
by providing them with a well-deﬁned path to develop their skills and 
grow their career potential. The career path covered both campaign 
and analytical data mining resources.
◼The career path for campaign resources—data analytics →
insighter → tactical planner → strategic planner → PM →
consultant
◼The career path for mining resources—data analytics →
insighter → modeling → modeling resolution → modeling sys-
tem or decision manager → consultant
E.SUN realized the importance of having the right talent. The 
bank developed a training program and was able to develop 95 per-
cent of the skills and talents it needed. In addition, 20 percent of the 
CRV staff comes from the bank business units.

S T A R T I N G T H E  J O U R N E Y
◂
119
How the CRV Focus Evolved over Time
The CRV team was established in 2006 with an initial focus on the risk 
intelligence function. The team provided analytical services to support 
the risk team in making decisions. The focus of the CRV organization was 
expanded in 2008 to also support the marketing function. The CRV orga-
nization now supports the bank’s effort to promote a customer-centric 
approach versus a product-centric approach. This approach required the 
development and extensive use of analytical methods and capabilities.
The team offered analytical services, including customer seg-
mentations, propensity to buy analytical models, and other services 
to support the marketing team. The expansion continued to offer 
strategic services including campaign services, data mining, support 
for the OCRM function, and the development and maintenance of 
the Analytical Data Warehouse. The team is working closely with the 
business units and is using their business requirements to determine 
the proper content and structure of the Analytical Data Warehouse.
The CRV organization is now looking into the use of digital mar-
keting analysis, online behavior analysis, and big data analytics.
How the CRV Organization Is Adding to E.SUN Bank
The CRV organization has been adding value to the organization since 
it was established. Some of the business beneﬁts include:
◼The analytical insight developed by the CRV team enabled the 
risk team to support the bank in growing its lending products to 
qualiﬁed customers by 60 percent. The CRV team was respon-
sible for 25 percent of this growth.
◼Reduced call center labor cost for campaign (e.g., from 130 to 
25 call center employees).
E.SUN Bank groups the services offered by the CRV organization 
into three types. The bank uses these three project categories to mea-
sure the business ROI contributed by the CRV organization. The proj-
ect categories are:
1. Sales revenue-driven project type: The CRV organization 
co-owns the P&L and sales quota with the business units. The 

120
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
main business with signiﬁcant growth includes personal loan, 
mail loan, and cross-sell insurance products. Sales revenues 
doubled using only 30 percent of the call center resources com-
pared to previous performance ﬁgures.
2. Consultative project type: These types of projects focus on 
the strategic business value generated for E.SUN Bank, and not 
on generating immediate revenue (for instance, focusing on 
customer segmentation versus customer treatment strategy). 
Other technical projects include the development of analytical 
data marts and segment-speciﬁc analytical risk models. These 
projects are sometimes initiated by business units. The bank 
uses CRV members’ utilization KPIs to ensure projects are com-
pleted on time and are producing high quality outcome within 
the assigned budget.
3. Innovative project type: The CRV organization runs two 
to three innovative projects per year. The innovative project 
is the most comprehensive project for the CRV organization. 
These projects cover conceptual phases and continue to pro-
duce actionable results. They are business-oriented projects 
and don’t necessarily focus on technical areas.
SUCCESS STORY TAKEAWAYS
These two organizations applied some of the most aggressive and 
pragmatic approaches to achieve their business objectives. The inter-
nal visibility, clout, and performance management approach were 
essential to help these organizations become effective quickly. Their 
implementations are signiﬁcantly improving the organizations’ abil-
ity to develop and use business insight to support their objectives and 
decision-making process. The internal inﬂuence of these CoE orga-
nizations is deliberate, well planned, and supported by the executive 
team. The progress of these CoE organizations would not have been 
possible without the continuous support and monitoring from the 
executive team.
It is important, too, to point out that the success of these CoE organi-
zations is also due to the banks’ clarifying how these CoE organizations 

S T A R T I N G T H E  J O U R N E Y
◂
121
will work with the business units and the IT team. This is a key success 
factor.
And, ﬁnally, the CoE organizations are agents of change, gradu-
ally changing the decision-making culture. After the Riyad Bank CoE 
organization (BICC) was established and improved the basic reporting 
and analysis capabilities in many business units, it started to shift its 
focus toward delivering business advisory services to business stake-
holders. The CoE analytical consultants started to work closely with 
business stakeholders to ﬁgure out how to apply analytics to expand 
the business and grow revenue based on accurate insight derived 
from information. This represents a key organizational maturity mile-
stone in moving toward fact-based and analytically driven decisions 
and strategies. This is clearly a cultural change toward a higher matu-
rity level.
APPLYING THE LESSONS FROM E.SUN AND RIYAD
No two organizations are alike. Their successes can’t be lifted and 
grafted to your organization; they developed plans that were speciﬁc 
to their strengths and weaknesses. What applies to any organization 
is the approach used to arrive at this structure. And that brings us to 
the next topic: How can an organization develop a business transfor-
mation strategy to work for its unique requirements, environment, 
and culture? Let’s explore the answer to this question in the following 
sections.
THE MOST IMPORTANT CHARACTERISTICS OF
SUCCESSFUL BUSINESS TRANSFORMATION STRATEGIES
Before discussing the key components of a business transformation 
strategy, let’s review what a good business transformation strategy 
should cover. There will be many unique requirements for each orga-
nization. However, all organizations should be mindful of the follow-
ing requirements when developing a strategy. A strategy should:
◼Address more than just the technology. The tendency of 
many organizations is to think of the technology ﬁrst. There 

122
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
is no doubt that appropriate technology to apply analytics to 
generate business insight is needed. Technology alone will not 
resolve internal organizational and business challenges, nor 
will it achieve the long-term objectives of any business trans-
formation strategy.
◼Create a repeatable process to generate business insight.
The strategy has to build a long-term foundation of well-
planned and agreed-on repeatable processes. All business units 
will use these processes to interact and collaborate to generate 
and use business insight.
◼Evaluate current capabilities and interactions of the four 
organizational pillars. Chapters 3, 4, and 5 covered the pil-
lars: people, processes, technology, and culture. Understanding 
where your organization stands in regard to each pillar is 
crucial.
A STEP-BY-STEP LOOK AT THE KEY COMPONENTS
There are ﬁve key components of effective business transformation 
strategies:
1. Clear strategy objectives
2. Current and desired competencies and capabilities
3. Approach to achieve strategy objectives
4. Initial set of organizational initiatives to achieve objectives
5. Clear performance management KPIs agreed to by stakeholders
Clear Strategy Objectives
Internal and external triggers drive organizations to think about the 
need for a business transformation. They may include market pres-
sure from the competition that makes organizations take a closer 
look at their internal capabilities and operating model. It could be the 
vision of a new executive who was brought in by the board to take 
the organization’s operation to a higher level, new market, or new 

S T A R T I N G T H E  J O U R N E Y
◂
123
products. Or it may be that the internal information and organiza-
tional challenges have reached an intolerable level and are hindering 
the organization’s progress. Whatever the trigger, the organization—
and speciﬁcally the executive sponsor—has to think very carefully 
about what the organization needs to do and can do in a realistic and 
pragmatic way. The answer may be a set of objectives and priorities. 
It may be that the organization needs to improve its marketing func-
tions and try to know its customers better, or it may be that the risk 
or fraud area is a critical function that needs to be managed better. It 
may be that the executive team recognized that the organization is 
not making sound decisions based on facts and needs to improve its 
capabilities to generate business insight.
These triggers start a conversation among stakeholders. The key is 
to recognize the difference between making localized improvements 
(limited to a particular business function) versus applying a compre-
hensive business transformation approach to outdated systemic and 
widespread practices. The objectives should be clearly deﬁned and, 
more important, prioritized, since they will serve as the general guide-
lines and targets for any business transformation strategy.
Current and Desired Competencies and Capabilities
The objectives will tell us a lot about the ﬁnal destination. Do we want 
to be the number one bank (by deposits) in China? Are we trying to be 
the Brazilian telco with the most innovative product mix? These goals 
will inform how you map your information maturity journey. And 
as in any journey you will need to know where you are right now. 
Organizations might think it is easy to understand what their current 
capabilities are. That assumption is probably inaccurate. Executives 
may know the organization’s current capabilities, strengths, and 
weaknesses at a high level. For instance, the CEO knows that inno-
vative ideas are generated regularly but take too long to reach the 
market. Trying to ﬁgure out why, though, is problematic. There might 
be a focus on the enterprise resource planning system not providing 
enough support when the real issue might lie in skill sets, cultural 
interactions, and organizational politics.

124
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
A comprehensive evaluation of the current capabilities and inter-
actions of the four organizational pillars is not only essential, but 
will save the organization time, effort, and money down the road. 
Establishing a capability baseline that shows the strengths and weak-
nesses of the people, processes, technical and information infrastruc-
ture, and culture is an essential component of a well-planned business 
transformation strategy. The Information Evolution Model, explained 
in Chapters 3, 4, and 5, provides a structured approach to evaluate 
current capabilities and establish a capability baseline.
The strategy objectives provide a second key input to this process. 
Objectives should be used to determine the desired capabilities. For 
instance, if the organization wants to introduce and promote the use 
of analytics to support decisions and validate strategies, then it should 
work on developing new capabilities in analytical skills, accurate and 
consistent information, and analytical information data marts to sup-
port analytics. Furthermore, the capabilities will also include devel-
oping an analytical team or an Analytics Center of Excellence with 
a well-deﬁned set of processes to allow the business units to tap into 
this talent to help them make better decisions. And, ﬁnally, changes to 
the organizational culture may be needed to ensure that the adoption 
and use of analytics is encouraged and supported. The Information 
Evolution Model can help you determine the desired target capabili-
ties and maturity level based on the strategy objectives.
Approach to Achieving Strategy Objectives
By establishing your capabilities baseline, you understand where you 
are today. You have also outlined the desired capabilities you need 
to develop. What organizations need to do next is think about how to 
improve the capabilities baseline to develop the desired capabilities. 
Again, these capabilities must include all four organizational pillars.
Organizations should ask themselves the following key questions:
◼What is the scope of the required effort to develop desired 
capabilities?
◼Who will lead this effort?
◼What type of organization should own the key development 
steps?

S T A R T I N G T H E  J O U R N E Y
◂
125
◼Would an enterprise Center of Excellence be the appropriate 
organizational approach?
◼What changes in the current operating model and processes are 
required?
◼Where should we start?
Initial Set of Organizational Initiatives to 
Achieve Objectives
Business transformation effort takes time and should include a well-
planned set of activities or initiatives sequenced in an implementa-
tion roadmap. Each initiative should improve the current capability 
baseline and move it closer to the desired capabilities. These capabili-
ties must address the four organizational pillars. The collective busi-
ness impact of all identiﬁed initiatives should move the organization 
toward achieving its strategy objectives.
For instance, if the organization is trying to introduce and pro-
mote the use of analytics across business units, some of the initiatives 
may include:
◼People and skills: Determine what skills are needed, what 
skills the organization currently has, and the organization’s 
potential to attract, hire, and retain the necessary talent.
◼Technical and information infrastructure: Evaluate the 
effectiveness of the current information environment, data 
quality, historical data, and availability of analytical data marts.
◼Processes: Review the current engagement model and interac-
tions between business units to determine how critical analyti-
cal resources are utilized.
◼Culture: Assess the awareness and knowledge of analytics and 
how it is currently being used.
The result of the process is to identify and prioritize initiatives 
needed to meet strategy objectives. This provides the building blocks 
of the implementation roadmap. From there, organizations can gain 
stakeholder buy-in for sequencing and supporting these initiatives. 
Now all you need to do is launch this process and follow the roadmap.

126
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
Clear Performance Management KPIs Agreed
to by Stakeholders
The ﬁnal component of an effective business transformation strategy 
is the development of performance management KPIs for each initia-
tive. Many organizations tend to skip this critical step and ﬁnd out 
later that many stakeholders have different opinions of the business 
transformation process and its success. With something that involves 
such an extensive amount of time, effort, and money, organizations 
have to deﬁne what success looks like.
The executive sponsor team should expect all the business and 
IT stakeholders to work together to develop, discuss, and agree to a 
set of performance management and success KPIs for each initiative. 
The key requirement here is to get all stakeholders to participate in 
this critical process. They must be part of it, and they all must agree 
to these KPIs. This will establish a collective sense of ownership and 
camaraderie among all stakeholders that is so important to the success 
of these long-term business transformation efforts.
IDENTIFYING A STARTING POINT
Organizations often struggle with identifying a starting point for both 
exploring current capabilities and engaging their business transforma-
tion efforts. All strategic initiatives that introduce a new way of doing 
business and change the current operating model in an organization 
should be viewed as an internal selling job to promote new business 
practices. To sell anything, organizations need to demonstrate proof of 
value to buyers. Introducing analytics, new technology, or new busi-
ness practices as part of a business transformation effort is no excep-
tion. Consequently, identifying the starting point is critical to develop 
proof of value.
These are key questions that organizations should answer for 
each possible starting area or function:
◼Does this area represent a high business priority for the organi-
zation that is sponsored by an executive?
◼Do we have integrated and consistent data available for the 
selected area?

S T A R T I N G T H E  J O U R N E Y
◂
127
◼Do we have sufﬁcient integrated and consistent historical 
data—if the objectives include using analytics?
◼Can we predict the potential outcome and would the outcome 
produce business value?
◼Do we have the business domain, technical, and analytical 
skills we need to produce the expected outcome?
If the answers to these questions are yes, then the organization 
can start with the business function.
SUMMING IT ALL UP
Any kind of business transformation can seem a little over-
whelming. Even with the Information Evolution Model, case studies, 
and compelling evidence of why you need to do this, wrapping your 
arms around the issue isn’t easy. Here are guiding principles that can 
help you push past the institutional inertia to get your effort started.
◼Use a comprehensive organizational approach, no mat-
ter the pain. When Riyad Bank decided to launch its customer-
centric initiative, they knew that it would take more than just 
technology. Their comprehensive approach to evaluating their 
current organizational capabilities in skills, processes, technol-
ogy, and culture provided them with a clear view of the nature, 
scale, and speciﬁc tasks needed to help the bank achieve its 
customer-centric model while enhancing the overall maturity 
level of the organization.
◼Use a phased approach that provides ﬂexibility. Another 
key lesson learned from the Riyad Bank experience is that it 
is beneﬁcial to take a phased approach to quickly show value 
by focusing on one business function ﬁrst, and then applying 
all the lessons learned from the ﬁrst phase to other business 
functions.
◼Don’t be tempted to employ the big bang approach. If 
you are thinking, “Forget the piecemeal approach. We’re going 
to analyze every nook and cranny of this organization,” stop! 
It will take too long to show business value and the business 
requirements could change along the way. Adopting a phased 

128
▸
B U S I N E S S  T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
approach allows organizations to make quick adjustments to 
their plans to deal with changing business requirements.
◼Structure your organization’s performance manage-
ment and compensation to drive the desired behavior.
Performance management principles are needed to guide the 
operation of any business function, as well as to guide employ-
ees’ performance. This is required for two reasons. First, it is a 
responsibility and obligation for a well-run organization to pro-
vide enough guidance to the workforce to help it complete its 
work successfully. Second, setting up appropriate employee and 
business function KPIs and how well employees are compen-
sated are very effective ways to promote the desired behavior 
for the organization.
IN THE END, IT’S ABOUT BEING A LEADER
The world is a very different place than it was 10 years ago, and it will 
be a very different place a decade from now. Chances are the leading 
organizations in banking, communication, technology, retail, enter-
tainment, and manufacturing in 2024 won’t all have the same names 
as those today. Surviving and thriving will increasingly be dependent 
on the ability to see where the market is going much more quickly 
than the competition. The good idea won’t be enough – it’s what you 
do with that idea that will make or break your organization.
Agility and innovation are critical. But time-to-market is just as 
important to take advantage of market opportunities. This means 
knowing your customer. Organizations can now analyze their cus-
tomers’ behaviors, identify the most valuable customer segments, and 
determine their propensity to buy or churn with remarkable accuracy. 
They can then use this information to put in place proactive cam-
paigns to retain valuable customers and cross-sell more products and 
services. That becomes critical to innovating, even disrupting, estab-
lished markets.
Data-driven decision making underpins this customer knowledge. 
But being able to make decisions using information is dependent on 
taming organizational and information challenges and working on 

S T A R T I N G T H E  J O U R N E Y
◂
129
them simultaneously. It requires the enterprise to think differently 
and address systematic, political, technical, legacy, and other chal-
lenges comprehensively and with executive support. Visionary execu-
tives and leaders recognize the need for internal change to continue 
to compete in the market, and launch business transformation ini-
tiatives to introduce change and align the organizational pillars. The 
approach outlined in this book provides a framework for grappling 
with these issues.
Although the journey may seem difﬁcult and lengthy, it can be 
tremendously rewarding—both to the organization and the people 
tasked with driving that change. Many organizations may choose to 
delay the journey by ﬁnding excuses or false hopes in tactical and 
limited solutions only to ﬁnd out that the sooner they embrace the 
journey, the easier it is for them to get back on track and be competi-
tive in the market. The practical guidance, ideas, and examples in this 
book should persuade your organization to pack its bags, chart its 
itinerary, and get going. There are risks and costs associated with any 
plan of action, but they are far less than the risks and costs associated 
with comfortable inaction.


131
Appendix:
Snapshot of the 
Information Evolution 
Model
C
hapters 3, 4, and 5 detail the levels of the Information Evolution 
Model. This appendix provides a brief overview of each level. It 
can help you begin to deﬁne what level your organization is at 
now—and what the next level looks like.
THE INDIVIDUAL LEVEL: GETTING
ALONG ONE DAY AT A TIME
From the 30,000-foot perspective, the Individual Level organization is 
focused on getting the job done—now.
◼Business focus. Sustain day-to-day operations and promote 
the business. The focus is completely driven by the need to react 
to tactical and immediate business requirements. Long-term 
strategies for the business unit or the enterprise are not a priority.
◼Data value. Data is valued by some as a source of individual 
power and does provide limited value at the department level 
but questionable value for the enterprise. As long as data is per-
ceived as correct for operational purposes—bills are accurate, 
orders are ﬁlled correctly—upper-level management is content.
◼Decision making. Decisions are limited to day-to-day, opera-
tional decisions, such as shipping, invoicing, sales, and collections.

132
▸
A P P E N D I X
Most decisions are based on personal experience, intuition, 
or bravado with some reliance on information produced by 
Information Mavericks, typically on request.
◼Globalization. The Individual Level organization’s ability to 
operate at the global level and deal with different market con-
ditions is very limited. This is due to the fact that the basic 
fundamental understanding of the organization’s business and 
value chain is lacking at the enterprise level. Good understand-
ing of the internal processes, the viability of the organization’s 
products and services, and the organization’s interactions and 
collaboration with its external partners are all essential require-
ments to enable the organization to operate on a global level. 
The inability to operate effectively at a global level may limit 
the organization’s competitive advantage.
Infrastructure: Desktop Diversity
◼IT architecture. There is no overall information architecture 
at the department level or the enterprise level. There may be 
pockets of strong operational systems such as manufacturing or 
production systems, but business performance information is 
produced by a collection of unconnected and unsophisticated 
desktop and personal productivity tools. As a result, there are 
many individual interpretations of business performance by 
the Mavericks. This is chaos in action.
Individuals maintain their own data, tools, and methods. 
Tools used to generate reports and business metrics are rarely 
documented, and they may become orphaned when their cre-
ators leave the organization.
◼Intelligence tools. Tool capabilities are limited to simple data 
extraction and reporting. Toolsets also include personal pro-
ductivity tools, such as Excel and Microsoft Access. There are 
no technology standards at the department or enterprise level, 
and, therefore, sharing data is a challenge. If more sophisticated 
tools are used, it is only because ambitious, self-taught employ-
ees have acquired them.

A P P E N D I X ◂
133
◼Information access. Information access is limited to those 
who know how to ﬁnd the data and analyze it themselves or 
have access to an Information Maverick who can share the data. 
Distributing information for decision making is not a common 
practice. Consequently, decision makers do not always have 
access to reliable and consistent information and frequently 
rely on instinct. Multiple and inconsistent reports and business 
views create confusion and redundancy.
◼Analytics. Very little advanced analytics technology is used. 
There may be infrequent use of analytics by individuals with 
the appropriate skills to meet ad hoc business requests.
◼Data management. Data management depends on individual 
efforts of the Information Mavericks. Managing information 
is not viewed as a top business priority. As a result, there are 
many undocumented, unrepeatable, inconsistent data man-
agement efforts.
◼New technologies. Organizations at this level are not able 
to take advantage of new advances in technology concepts 
and methodologies such as master data management, service-
oriented architecture, or cloud computing. Implementing these 
technologies and methodologies requires an environment with 
a more mature level of collaboration.
Information Processes: Have It Your Way
◼Degree. There is little emphasis on policies, practices, and stan-
dards around the collection, distribution, and use of informa-
tion. Decision makers must rely on their own individual efforts 
to obtain information. In many cases, they must manually 
piece together information from many different individuals or 
sources. There is no deﬁned or funded team with responsibility 
for supporting business users.
◼Consistency. Consistent results, if they occur, are a fortu-
nate accident. Two people in the same group, using the same 
information for much the same purpose, might do things dif-
ferently. There are no departmental or organization standards. 

134
▸
A P P E N D I X
Information Mavericks have developed their own processes to 
get information.
◼Metrics. Metrics are primarily focused on recent ﬁnancial per-
formance of the organization. The Individual Level organiza-
tion does not generally collect and use other metrics such as 
customer satisfaction, internal efﬁciencies, and external market 
conditions. Most of the metrics are lagging metrics; that is, they 
focus on past performance.
◼Governance. General information management governance, 
if it exists, is limited to operational and ﬁnancial systems. IT and 
data quality governance are rarely observed at an Individual 
Level organization. People who prize autonomy appreciate the 
lack of standard protocol.
◼Outsourcing. The culture at the Individual Level organization 
is heavily inﬂuenced by personal or individual objectives that 
greatly reduce the likelihood of outsourcing nonessential func-
tions. Additionally, the lack of documented processes, stan-
dards, and policies introduces challenges in obtaining desired 
results.
◼Change management. There is resistance to change at many 
levels within the organization. Maintaining the status quo is 
an acceptable and desirable approach for an Individual Level 
organization. The emphasis on individualism tends to squelch 
any out-of-the box thinking.
People: Data Stars
◼Skills. The organization does not recognize the business value 
of hiring, motivating, and retaining individuals with critical 
thinking, technology, and analytical skills, except perhaps in 
the IT organization. Hiring practices and job categories do not 
typically reﬂect information management and analytical skills. 
Within business units, some people will bring information skills 
from their former jobs or pick them up on their own. These 
individuals may become Information Mavericks through their 
ability to analyze data and share it with decision makers.

A P P E N D I X ◂
135
◼Motivators. Decision makers in these organizations are gen-
erally motivated by and focused on dealing with day-to-day 
crises within their own departments. They are not motivated to 
make decisions based on good quality information or consider-
ation of other aspects of the organization.
◼Dynamics. Information Mavericks may hold the enterprise 
hostage with their exclusive access to information. They will 
share their results (with their own personal interpretation), but 
not their process for obtaining them. Most other individuals 
have to base their decisions on instinct and experience.
Culture: Rugged Individualism
◼Rewards. Rewards are subjective and often political, focused 
on individual excellence in day-to-day activities rather than 
contributions to corporate-level objectives. This reward struc-
ture creates internal competition for political favor and recog-
nition, and does not reward information skills.
◼Adaptability. The corporate mission and objectives are not 
well deﬁned or communicated. Consequently, information 
management efforts are not aligned with corporate objectives.
Change is feared and shunned unless there is personal gain 
involved. Information Mavericks are especially resistant to 
change, because they stand to lose power or inﬂuence if they 
must forfeit their proprietary positions.
◼Collaboration. In this politically charged organization, man-
agers exercise a lot of command and control. Although they 
issue edicts, the Information Mavericks hold the day-to-day 
power, since they hold the key to the information that manag-
ers need.
There is little internal collaboration within or between busi-
ness units. As a result, the organization’s ability to respond to 
changes in market conditions is signiﬁcantly reduced.
◼Innovation. The environment is internally competitive. 
Thought leaders and innovators who propose anything outside 

136
▸
A P P E N D I X
the box are not encouraged or rewarded. They may, in fact, be 
viewed as a threat.
◼Internal collaboration. Individual Level organizations are 
not in a position to leverage the diverse talents available in 
their environment because of the nature of their internal cul-
ture. These environments are very tactical and are not focused 
on how to maximize or improve their ability to use information 
and solve problems. Instead, they are occupied with the tacti-
cal nature of their day-to-day routine, and are content with 
very few individual efforts to manage information and provide 
answers to their operational concerns.
◼Analytical thinking. Because information and critical-thinking 
skills are not readily available in all business units, decisions are 
often based on individual experience or gut instinct. Information 
management and analytical tasks are based on individual efforts 
that are scattered throughout the organization. These efforts are 
not coordinated or shared between business units, and are typi-
cally focused on tactical day-to-day operations. There is little 
emphasis on using analytics or nonﬁnancial metrics to drive 
decisions and set strategies.
◼Social responsibility. The social pressure at an Individual 
Level organization is not viewed as a top priority. There is no 
signiﬁcant organizational commitment or funding dedicated 
to social responsibility initiatives beyond the possibility of pet 
projects.
DEPARTMENTAL LEVEL: THE
CONSOLIDATED ORGANIZATION
Silos of information are the hallmark of this IEM level. They are well 
guarded and enthusiastically supported.
◼Business focus. Each individual department or business unit 
drives toward its own consistency and success. The focus is on 
meeting the short-term or tactical requirements of the business 
unit with little or no consideration of enterprise strategy or the 
performance of other business units.

A P P E N D I X ◂
137
◼Data value. Information is valued for achieving department-
level goals but rarely has an impact on a corporate decision, 
nor is it valued as a corporate asset. Users realize data qual-
ity is important, but they control quality only in their own 
domains—often by applying unique rules, manually correcting 
known errors, and ﬁlling in the gaps with their own knowl-
edge. There is no big picture.
◼Decision making. Decisions revolve around myopic depart-
mental goals and requirements. Most decisions are made in 
departmental islands. Enterprise decisions are pushed up to 
higher levels where executives can add their insights.
At the enterprise level, good decision making is hindered 
by the lack of consistent reporting from the departments. The 
available information provides differing views of performance 
because there are no standards or adherence to standards for 
data, reporting, analysis, or tools.
◼Globalization. A Departmental Level organization may have 
limited ability to operate at a global level. The organization’s 
ability may be limited to those business units and departments 
that have some control and understanding of their information 
management processes. Consequently, many global opportuni-
ties to leverage the organization’s products and services may be 
missed, or explored and managed with great difﬁculties.
Infrastructure: Departmental Tools and Standards
◼IT architecture. Hardware and networking standards have 
been established across the enterprise, but each department 
uses its own tools and data standards. Except for basic infra-
structure, there are no enterprise-wide technology standards 
or frameworks. In fact, it is very fragmented. There might be 
dozens of departmental databases on servers stored in ofﬁces 
and maintained by individuals, most of them unknown to IT 
and some even unsupported by their vendors.
◼Intelligence tools. Each department acquires and uses its 
own business intelligence tools—niche or proprietary solutions 

138
▸
A P P E N D I X
acquired to address a speciﬁc function, such as campaign man-
agement, supplier evaluation, or budgeting. These tools might 
be quite sophisticated but they cannot be used for broader 
applications outside the department without discussions and 
negotiations between business units. Without the oversight 
or control of an enterprise architecture group, redundancy of 
tools and applications remains a problem.
◼Information access. Departmental data marts assemble 
data from the group’s users and make it available in numer-
ous reports, but these reports often present conﬂicting results 
across departments and provide limited context. How do the 
ﬁgures relate to real business issues?
Worse, needed information might be owned by other 
departments, and there is no formal way of accessing it. There is 
some collaboration via meetings, memos, and simple ﬁle shar-
ing, but understanding the data still requires the tribal knowl-
edge and goodwill of information gatekeepers. There is too 
much time spent ﬁnding and assembling information; too little 
time is spent making sense of it.
◼Analytics. Analytics expertise is limited to individuals or 
small groups contained within a department or business unit. 
Niche tools with specialized analytic capabilities are used, for 
example, in marketing or campaign optimization or cash ﬂow 
forecasting, but their use cannot usually expand beyond that 
specialized function.
◼Data management. Standards may be provided but not man-
dated or adhered to, so there are a lot of different departmental 
deployments of data management techniques. There is a lack 
of consistent enterprise data stewardship effort, which is why 
there is no consistency beyond the department level. For exam-
ple, customers, suppliers, and partners are deﬁned differently or 
given different account codes across departments. Although the 
data are available, it is very hard to get a reliable, consistent view 
of how the organization as a whole interacts with the customer.
◼New technologies. Departments do adopt and use new tech-
nologies, but their adoption is inconsistent and limited to their 

A P P E N D I X ◂
139
department. Some departments may have the appropriate skill 
sets and appetite for early adoption of systems to suit their 
needs, while other departments are more conservative in their 
approach. The result is unmanaged, inconsistent, and inefﬁ-
cient utility of the technology.
Information Processes: Well Deﬁned at 
the Departmental Level
◼Degree. Information is collected, assembled, accessed, and 
tracked on a departmental level. Data acquisition processes are 
separate from analysis and reporting, and many users receive 
reports on a systematic basis. De facto groups may evolve to 
become providers of reports and analyses for the department 
or business unit. This responsibility emerges because there is 
no corporate Center of Excellence. Their perspective is limited 
to requirements and practices of the department.
Data management processes are fairly well deﬁned within 
each department but not across departments. Since analysis is 
based on a myopic view, it will not accurately reﬂect inﬂuences 
from outside the department. There is also much duplication of 
effort, and departmental information must be manually consoli-
dated to get an enterprise view.
◼Consistency. Although there might be uniform hardware, 
networks, and software in place, this infrastructure is not used 
consistently. Even the simplest things, such as the deﬁnition 
of a “customer” or “sale,” can vary by business unit. It is hard 
to generate an enterprise view that crosses organizational 
boundaries.
◼Metrics. There is a heavy focus on static reporting of oper-
ational measures, such as gross margins, total revenue, total 
expense, or inventory on hand. Business analysts perform 
some interactive analysis to distill other performance measures, 
but only at a departmental level.
◼Governance. If enforced, enterprise rules are left to interpre-
tation by individual departments. Departmental organizations 

140
▸
A P P E N D I X
are characterized by a strong departmental autonomy and lack 
of emphasis on enterprise governance and policies.
◼Outsourcing. The availability of documented departmental 
standards and processes makes it possible for individual depart-
ments to outsource functions, much like the adoption of tech-
nology. Each department may use preferred providers, but 
there is little corporate governance of this activity, limiting the 
advantages for economies of scale and consistent quality and 
vendor management.
◼Change management. Change occurs at an inconsistent pace 
and depends on each department’s appetite for change.
People: Subject Matter Experts and Gatekeepers
◼Skills. The job of subject matter expert (or business analyst) 
has been established within departments, and Information 
Mavericks have naturally migrated to those jobs. Subject mat-
ter experts spend the majority of their time preparing and inte-
grating information and preparing reports that put the best spin 
on the data.
They are valued and paid for their information skills, even 
though they are not explicitly IT workers. Training, when it is 
provided, is done to satisfy departmental needs rather than any 
enterprise program for information skills training at the busi-
ness unit level.
◼Motivators. Team players thrive in this type of organization. 
They have strong managers who defend the department and 
create internal cohesion. Those with an interest in informa-
tion management are recognized and appreciated for their 
skills.
◼Dynamics. Team members work well together, but they are 
challenged when asked to work cooperatively with other 
departments. After all, those are competitors in the internal 
corporate struggle for power, recognition, and budget.

A P P E N D I X ◂
141
Culture: “Us versus Them”
◼Rewards. Within departments, managers and subject matter 
experts have vested interests in controlling departmental data. 
Subject matter experts have emerged as the rightful owners of 
“good” data for their department and are rewarded for their 
ability to advance departmental agendas. They know how to 
use that data as “proof” of departmental needs and accomplish-
ments. Incentives are based on meeting departmental goals, 
which may or may not be in line with the best interests of 
the enterprise. People are told they are empowered, but how 
empowered can they be if they do not have direct access to 
information?
◼Adaptability. Change is embraced when it results in politi-
cal or self-improvement gain for the department—or if it takes 
place in someone else’s department (especially if it creates 
an opportunity to grab some of their resources). Change is 
viewed as a threat if it disrupts the department’s own carefully 
groomed processes or if it requires disparate functional units to 
work together. Departments might actively resist change that 
beneﬁts other groups or distracts them from their own mis-
sions, even if the organization as a whole would beneﬁt. Even 
under the best of circumstances, change is poorly communi-
cated, cautiously approached, and limited in results.
◼Collaboration. Staff and funding are dedicated to departmen-
tal objectives, with the hope that the entire enterprise will be 
better off. However, the department focus creates an us-versus-
them mentality. Every business unit protects data as its unique 
intellectual property. No one really wants to share. After all, to 
give away your knowledge is to give away some of your value 
and political position. In this top-down management struc-
ture with a strong team-ﬁrst perspective, decisions can be very 
politically oriented.
◼Innovation. Thanks to internal competition among depart-
ments, the culture is politically charged and somewhat distrusting. 

142
▸
A P P E N D I X
Department heads are focused on making their departments 
shine rather than on making the organization shine. Therefore, 
people who think outside the box might be tolerated. However, 
their good ideas might not get very far, because exploring new 
ideas outside the assigned department is seen as nonproductive.
◼Internal collaboration. Since Departmental Level organiza-
tions are characterized as siloed environments, they can only 
leverage the diverse talent and skills of their workforce in each 
speciﬁc silo or organizational unit. Individual business units 
and groups will beneﬁt when they manage to bring together 
different skills to focus on solving the business challenges faced 
by each group. However, they will miss the opportunity to ben-
eﬁt from the cross-functional collaboration between business 
units, which will beneﬁt the entire organization.
◼Analytical thinking. A more organized use of analytical 
thinking and analytical technology will start to emerge in 
some business units as they try to understand their silo busi-
ness view. The development of business unit information stan-
dards and policies provides an opportunity to apply analytical 
thinking and use analytical technology to manage and opti-
mize the operation of each business function. However, these 
organizations will miss out on the value of applying analytics 
to analyze business performance across functions and groups 
to understand more comprehensively the performance of the 
entire enterprise.
◼Social responsibility. The commitment to social responsibil-
ity is limited to individual efforts by some business units. A 
tangible enterprise strategy and impact on social responsibility 
and sustainability may be limited due to the lack of internal 
collaboration between business units and functions.
THE ENTERPRISE ORGANIZATION: A 
COMMON SENSE OF PURPOSE
When organizations reach the Enterprise Level they are much bet-
ter equipped to take advantage of data and use it to drive business 
decisions.

A P P E N D I X ◂
143
◼Business focus. Enterprise business performance is the main 
focus and driver. There is now a set of common corporate strat-
egies and tactics, and each group understands its role in exe-
cuting those tactics and the correlation among business units. 
Performance is now managed based on an informed, compre-
hensive view of all operations across the enterprise.
◼Data value. Information is seen as a critical strategic asset, 
just as important as tangible, operational assets. Everyone 
understands that integrated information is essential to run the 
business. The organization has managed to integrate internal 
and external information successfully across business units and 
functions to create an enterprise view of the operation.
For the ﬁrst time, the organization understands its business 
value chain. Managers and staff also appreciate the importance 
of data quality.
◼Decision making. Integrated enterprise information is now 
available to all decision makers across the enterprise. Decisions 
such as engaging new suppliers or launching campaigns to sup-
port dormant markets are focused around managing the value 
chain.
All decision makers have access to accurate enterprise data 
and are empowered to make decisions using the information 
assets available to them. Decision makers can identify alterna-
tives and act on information from a truly enterprise-wide per-
spective, and their decisions now reﬂect enterprise goals and 
objectives.
◼Globalization. The Enterprise Level marks a signiﬁcant mile-
stone that increases the organization’s ability to operate at the 
global level. Enterprise Level organizations are in a much bet-
ter position to engage in the global market because they have 
developed a clearer understanding of their business model and 
value chain.
Infrastructure: Integrated across the Enterprise
◼IT architecture. Moving beyond stand-alone and black box 
tools in the departments, this organization has achieved an 

144
▸
A P P E N D I X
integrated enterprise information platform. An enterprise repos-
itory of integrated data stores and manages all information from 
disparate databases, proprietary tools, and external sources. 
Enterprise-standard tool sets and applications manage data 
extract/transform/load (ETL) processes, data quality routines, 
analysis, and information delivery. Processes are deﬁned for 
evaluating and implementing new architecture designs and prac-
tices, like service orientation, web services, and virtualization.
A central group has established at least a high-level enter-
prise data model that deﬁnes common measures, deﬁnitions, 
data standards, and metadata (data about data) for the whole 
organization. In this well-managed environment, central gov-
ernance is maintained, all actions are tracked for compliance 
purposes, and all information assets are protected.
◼Intelligence tools. This organization has made a concerted 
effort to manage and rationalize disparate data and tools across 
departments and business units. To maintain its enterprise view, 
the organization uses a standardized set of technologies, includ-
ing data integration and management, reporting, distribution, 
analytics, and performance management. As a result of this 
effort, corporate memory, once reliant on operational processes, 
has now transitioned into a robust information system.
◼Information access. Now that information resides in central 
data repositories, it is available to decision makers at all lev-
els of organization, not just the original data “owners” or the 
executives. Furthermore, it has been cleansed through stan-
dard data-quality routines, so users can have conﬁdence in the 
results. Decision makers now have access to information that 
represents “one version of the truth,” presented to them with 
contextual relevance.
Users have access to the data through interfaces tailored 
for their speciﬁc needs and skill sets. Executive dashboards, 
summary information with drill-down capability for business 
managers, ad hoc query for business analysts, and sophisticated 
model development for quantitative analysts are examples 
of the ﬂexibility provided. As a result, more users than ever 

A P P E N D I X ◂
145
exploit information with conﬁdence and make more accurate 
decisions.
◼Analytics. The use of analytics has now extended beyond the 
department and business unit specialization and moved to the 
enterprise level. Analysts from various business units now have 
access to integrated enterprise data and can analyze it to under-
stand various aspects of the business and enrich the value of 
information used by decision makers.
Now that the organization has integrated enterprise data 
available in analytical data marts, analysts can focus more on 
the analysis and less on ﬁnding and preparing data. With data 
available from across the enterprise and external sources, the 
results of analyses can be framed in broader context.
Analysis and visualization methods distill meaningful 
insights from enterprise data, without requiring business users 
to become statisticians.
◼Data management. Enterprise data management is driven by 
business requirements. The organization is considering opera-
tional business intelligence to address data latency in the con-
text of those business requirements.
Enterprise Level organizations have established enterprise 
data governance, identiﬁed data stewards, and laid the foun-
dation for a master data management program. Processes are 
in place to enforce data standards. The organization is better 
able to comply with external reporting requirements, such as 
Sarbanes-Oxley, Basel II, IFRS, GAAP, SEC, Solvency II, FDA, 
and other regulations and regulatory bodies.
◼New technologies. The adoption of new technologies is a man-
aged process at the enterprise level. The organization is system-
atic in how technology is acquired, deployed, and maintained 
while still allowing departments to retain necessary auton-
omy to meet their individual business needs. This governed 
approach enables the organization to explore newer technology 
options, such as in-database processing, in-memory processing, 
Software as a Service, cloud computing, Advanced analytics, 
Big Data analytics, mobile computing, or Open Source.

146
▸
A P P E N D I X
Information Processes: Well-Deﬁned
across the Enterprise
◼Degree. Information management concepts are applied and 
accepted. Data management processes are well deﬁned, result-
ing in a shared view of operations and a reliable foundation 
for analysis. Processes to obtain information for decision mak-
ing are well deﬁned and detailed—technologies, people, plans, 
tasks, and responsibilities.
Staff members can see exactly how they contribute to the 
business. Now that the organization has a holistic view of the 
enterprise, it starts to see duplicate, overlapping, and inefﬁcient 
processes.
◼Consistency. Enterprise governance is enforced, and data con-
sistency is paramount. Centers of Excellence are in place to ensure 
consistent data deﬁnitions, data collection, data quality, analyt-
ics, and information delivery to support business objectives.
Departmental and business unit information processes now 
align with enterprise objectives and with each other.
◼Metrics. The organization now deﬁnes and tracks metrics 
related to overall business performance and the value chain. 
Departmental and enterprise metrics are more widely avail-
able to decision makers. Key performance indicators (KPIs) go 
beyond ﬁnancial metrics to include measures such as compara-
tive growth, customer satisfaction, internal process efﬁciency, 
and employee development.
◼Governance. The organization has institutionalized gover-
nance to cover areas such as data quality, internal and external 
reporting, information life cycle management, data retention 
and disposition, information security and privacy policies, appli-
cations and tools, and intellectual property. These organizations 
have a much stronger handle on information governance.
◼Outsourcing. Standards and processes are in place to use 
business priorities and core competencies to determine which busi-
ness functions can be outsourced. Other standards determine 
how vendors are selected, terms are negotiated, and quality of 

A P P E N D I X ◂
147
deliverables is managed. Controls are in place for the bidirec-
tional movement of data and information to and from vendors.
◼Change management. Enterprise objectives are the drivers 
for change throughout the organization and within depart-
ments. Objective-driven changes are more readily adopted 
throughout the organization.
People: Knowledge Workers Encouraged to 
Work with Data
◼Skills. The organization uses an up-to-date set of deﬁned job 
categories to guide stafﬁng initiatives. The organization actively 
seeks to recruit people with the targeted technical and informa-
tion skills. The workforce contains a high percentage of knowl-
edge workers—team players who have domain knowledge and 
understand corporate goals. Career development programs are 
widely used to keep employees current with new skills, tech-
nologies, and techniques.
◼Motivators. Employees are encouraged to make fact-based 
decisions, based on the availability of complete and accurate 
information in the Enterprise Level organization. Exceptional 
information skills are rewarded accordingly because the orga-
nization places a high value on information.
◼Dynamics. Employees at this level are aligned with enterprise 
goals. This alignment reduces the interdepartmental competi-
tiveness typical in these organizations; every employee is driv-
ing toward the same destination.
Culture: All for One
◼Rewards. The reward structure encourages users to comply 
with enterprise information standards. At this level, it is no 
longer acceptable to run wild and free with independent tool 
sets and methods. The organization especially prizes employees 
with exceptional skills in information management. The orga-
nization has deﬁned career paths for information experts and 

148
▸
A P P E N D I X
provides ongoing training and organizational development to 
foster excellence.
◼Adaptability. There is a strong drive by employees to obtain a 
clear and accurate view of operations, which requires a greater 
level of adaptability compared to the Departmental Level. 
Employees are now willing to share information and knowl-
edge among themselves and across business units as long as the 
causes and beneﬁts to the organization are well communicated.
◼Collaboration. Multidisciplinary teams come together to solve 
corporate issues, and then are reshaped when the work is done. 
Employees may be temporarily assigned to cross-departmental 
teams in a way that best utilizes their skills and job functions. 
As a result, the workforce becomes adaptable; team members 
can work with anyone to get the job done.
◼Innovation. Everyone is focused on the health of the enter-
prise and on producing high-quality data and analytics for stra-
tegic value. Employees are starting to think strategically, and 
a lot of ideas are being generated; more reliable information is 
made available. Some ideas make it to fruition, but with no real 
consistency because there is no formal means for evaluating or 
prioritizing them.
◼Internal collaboration. Reaching the Enterprise Level 
marks the ﬁrst opportunity for the organization to take 
advantage of its diverse collection of talent and expertise. The 
environment provides the opportunity for organizations to 
maximize the value of the collective and diverse expertise of 
its workforce and channel it to focus on understanding its 
value chain at the enterprise level. Enterprise Level organi-
zations are willing to integrate a collection of multitalented 
individuals with multicultural skills covering critical thinking, 
technology, and analytics to focus on solving enterprise busi-
ness objectives.
◼Analytical thinking. Enterprise Level organizations focus on 
managing organizational performance based on an informed, 
comprehensive understanding of the enterprise value chain. 
The organization as a whole places more emphasis on critical 

A P P E N D I X ◂
149
thinking and analytical skills, which are made more available 
for cross-departmental initiatives. The availability of reliable 
enterprise information is feeding data-driven decision making.
◼Social responsibility. The availability of comprehensive 
and accurate enterprise information drives organizational 
self-awareness. For the ﬁrst time, the organization begins to 
establish strategies to address its social responsibility and sus-
tainability goals.
THE OPTIMIZE LEVEL ORGANIZATION: 
ALIGNED AND READY
The Optimize Level organization is a well-oiled machine that has a 
clear picture of its value to customers and can adapt to any market 
change or condition with sufﬁcient and continuous commitment. The 
organization has built on the integrated information environment it 
created at the Enterprise Level to further (and continually) optimize 
market alignment, business decisions, and processes.
The progression from the Enterprise Level to the Optimize Level is 
a ﬂuid one, because it requires no signiﬁcant overhaul on any dimen-
sion, just incremental enhancements in each. However, this level 
represents the point at which organizational focus can shift from col-
lecting and integrating data to gaining genuine value and business 
insight from that data.
◼Business focus. Organizations will start building on the inte-
grated infrastructure developed at the Enterprise Level and the 
clear visibility of their value chain. They begin to optimize every 
aspect of their business function by driving the cost out and 
maximizing proﬁt. The organization becomes more in touch 
with external market conditions and can foresee the slight-
est shift in expectations and realign the organization accord-
ingly—while always improving the efﬁciency and effectiveness 
of related processes.
◼Data value. Information is tightly woven into the fabric of 
the business and is highly valued as a strategic asset. Integrated 

150
▸
A P P E N D I X
enterprise information is essential to identifying potential areas 
of efﬁciency gain.
There is an appetite for more data than ever because the 
organization monitors and analyzes structured and unstructured 
data from many sources: markets, customers, partners, suppliers, 
and even newer social networking sources like blogs and wikis.
◼Decision making. Decision makers use integrated enterprise 
data to optimize their value chain. For example, decisions focus 
on optimizing how the organization is dealing with its suppli-
ers, customers, and partners.
Decision makers at various levels focus on optimizing the 
business function they are responsible for with a clear under-
standing of the impact of their decisions on other business units. 
The decision-making environment is so agile that it can react 
quickly to the nonstop changes that happen in today’s economy.
◼Globalization. Optimizing the organization value chain rep-
resents the main focus of a Level 4 organization. The optimiza-
tion process spans all aspects of the organization including its 
operations in various markets. Level 4 organizations are not 
only able to operate very efﬁciently in the global market, but 
also able to improve their bottom line in every market.
Infrastructure: Anywhere, Anytime Intelligence
◼IT architecture. A Level 4 organization will evaluate and 
optimize its IT infrastructure to eliminate duplicate functions 
and processes. There are concerted efforts to identify and sepa-
rate IT infrastructure functions that should be centralized from 
those that should be left to the business units. The objective is 
to increase the autonomy and ﬂexibility for decision makers in 
business units while maintaining control over areas that should 
be governed by enterprise-wide rules and standards, such as 
security, data quality, and governance.
The organization also expands its IT infrastructure to 
increase collaboration with partners and customers, allowing 
them access to certain organizational data. The infrastructure 

A P P E N D I X ◂
151
is more open to integrate external data and contact channels to 
optimize insights for decision makers.
The infrastructure is reliable and fault tolerant, and data 
quality processes are widespread. The metadata model docu-
ments the entire business process, value, and strategy. Everything 
is transparent. A “closed-loop” infrastructure feeds results back 
into the system to create a continuous learning environment.
◼Intelligence tools. The use of business intelligence tools goes 
way beyond drill, sort, ﬁlter, and rank—the calculations and 
tallies that are often mistakenly called analytics. Extending the 
value of the Enterprise Level analytical tools, users can pre-
dict future outcomes of interest; explore and understand com-
plex relationships in data; and model customer behaviors and 
processes.
Business intelligence tools model work-ﬂow interactions to 
develop new and improved business processes. They monitor 
cause-and-effect relationships to continue ﬁnding opportunities 
to improve. They examine customer information to detect pat-
terns that predict future behavior. And they get answers in real 
time, or close to it.
In fact, information has become so automated and integral 
to the business that it is just something employees expect to be 
there when they need it, just like their desks and chairs.
◼Information access. Organizations have an increased focus 
on information personalization. They make concerted efforts to 
determine the type and format of information needed by each 
information consumer category. Furthermore, special atten-
tion is given to the method and technology used to deliver that 
information. The objective is to match the information needs 
and skill level of users with the delivery method and content. 
Streamlining this process is essential to accelerate the optimiza-
tion effort that characterizes a Level 4 organization.
Critical external partners now have access to organizational 
data that enables them to work more collaboratively with the 
organization. Organizations provide their customers with more 
information to optimize and personalize the relationship.

152
▸
A P P E N D I X
◼Analytics. The IT infrastructure is able to provide advance 
analytical capabilities such as optimization, forecasting, and 
predictive capabilities. The Level 4 organization is now focused 
on combining domain and analytical skills with these techni-
cal capabilities to optimize business performance and drive out 
cost and inefﬁciencies in the process.
◼Data management. Additional enterprise data management 
effort is driven by optimization requirements that center on 
how the organization works with partners, customers, and 
suppliers. A strong focus on optimizing the organization value 
chain leads business users and decision makers to produce new 
data management practices constantly. Dynamic data manage-
ment processes are in place to address the changing require-
ments. Centers of Excellence may play a signiﬁcant role in 
enabling a Level 4 organization to be agile enough to meet new 
data management requirements.
◼New technologies. The optimized nature of the Level 4 
organizations accelerates their adoption of new technologies 
and concepts, especially those technologies that strengthen 
the relationships with customers, partners, and suppliers. 
Furthermore, Level 4 organizations are more aware and 
concerned about social networking media and may be more 
willing to incorporate insights from these media into their cor-
porate database. Text analytics and social media analytics are 
used to extract insights from these media as part of the opti-
mization process. The governed approach established in the 
Enterprise Level to evaluate the adoption of emerging tech-
nologies becomes more critical to continue to support optimi-
zation objectives.
Knowledge Process: Continuous Improvement
◼Degree. Information processes established at the Enterprise 
Level are now expanded to provide a closed-loop feedback to 
enable optimization of internal and external functions. Best 

A P P E N D I X ◂
153
practices are captured to prevent repeated mistakes. This is the 
true “learning organization.” Project experience is captured 
and cataloged, and new project teams start by checking out 
these corporate experiences.
Level 4 organizations put in place new information pro-
cesses that govern how external information sources are inte-
grated with organizational data. External information sources 
include suppliers, partners, social media, distribution channels, 
and, more importantly, customers.
◼Consistency. Level 4 organizations make wider use of Centers 
of Excellence, which now focus primarily on optimization and 
enterprise information management in addition to data inte-
gration and quality.
Consistent processes, tools, and information enable business 
units and decision makers to better analyze the relationships 
and dependencies between various business functions, which 
is essential for optimizing the value chain. For example, if com-
bining two items on a promotional web page doubled sales of 
the cross-sell item, that knowledge can be quickly applied to 
in-store displays.
◼Metrics. Because value chain optimization is the driving goal, 
a Level 4 organization’s metrics reﬂect a more outward focus 
than ever before. The organization deﬁnes and tracks measures 
across time periods for the entire business value chain, such 
as employee productivity, sales growth rate, customer satisfac-
tion, time to market, and adoption rate of new products and 
customers.
Furthermore, there is an increased emphasis on analyzing 
the cause-and-effect relationships among performance metrics. 
To optimize, the Level 4 organization must dedicate an increased 
level of effort toward understanding root causes and key drivers 
of its performance.
◼Governance. The strong governance framework established 
at the Enterprise Level has expanded to include relationships, 
information exchange, and processes with partners, customers, 
and suppliers.

154
▸
A P P E N D I X
◼Outsourcing. Better understanding of the value chain and 
the strong emphasis on optimizing their business performance 
enables the Level 4 organization to deﬁne its core competen-
cies and identify functions that can be outsourced. This effort 
enables the organization to focus on outsourcing functions that 
are not core to its business.
◼Change management. Now that change is a core competency 
of the organization, new processes are put in place around opti-
mizing the enterprise performance. The organization models 
work-ﬂow interactions and analyzes results in the context for 
continuous process improvement.
People: Self-Managing Knowledge Workers
◼Skills. A Level 4 organization enriches its job family with 
new categories that focus on analytics, forward thinking, and 
performance management with wide-spanning authority and 
accountability. Critical thinking skills are vitally important, to 
monitor market data and analyze what it means to the organi-
zation’s entire value chain.
Not surprisingly, the Optimize Level organizations face chal-
lenges in recruiting and retaining the right resources and skills. 
They often make signiﬁcant investments in training and retain-
ing their workforce. In many roles, information management 
and analytical thinking skills are required for advancement.
◼Motivators. A Level 4 organization permits more autonomy 
and empowerment among its skilled employees. Clear rewards 
are offered for employees who can think out of the box to 
achieve greater optimization. For an achievement-oriented indi-
vidual, these organizations can be very gratifying places to work.
◼Dynamics. Level 4 knowledge workers are very focused on 
incremental process improvement. There is a strong commit-
ment to process improvement and optimization. Peer groups 
are formalized across departments; these groups get together for 
brainstorming sessions that can lead the entire organization into 

A P P E N D I X ◂
155
new market dynamics. Employees and decision makers leverage 
information and use analysis, trending, pattern analysis, and 
predictive results to increase effectiveness and market share.
Culture: Thriving on Change
◼Rewards. The compensation system is structured primarily 
around improving business performance. The organization 
expects employees to apply critical thinking, perform valida-
tion of assumptions, and determine root causes as bases for 
decisions. A well-communicated reward system is in place to 
reward employees who operate in this manner.
◼Adaptability. Change is a core competency and is viewed as 
an opportunity, not a threat. The information architecture is 
adaptive, and so are job descriptions, accountabilities, orga-
nizational structure, work ﬂow, and processes. That is a good 
thing, because change is rapid, iterative, and continuous—just 
as it is in the markets the organization serves.
◼Collaboration. The environment promotes widespread shar-
ing of internal and external information across business units 
and functions, providing a broad context for communities of 
interest to share their experiences and ﬁne-tune the business. 
This culture of community now extends outside the organiza-
tion to include customers, suppliers, and partners.
◼Innovation. With a participative management style, the cul-
ture is very collaborative and supportive. Strategic thinkers 
are prized as visionaries, and their ideas are given a chance to 
ﬂy. Some of these ideas will ﬂop, but mistakes are not pun-
ished; they are viewed as learning experiences. The culture 
embraces the permission to fail when exploring new hypoth-
eses and assumptions. The organization is so agile that mis-
steps can be easily foreseen or overcome—and prevented 
from recurring.
This supportive attitude works both ways. People are will-
ing to accept the concept of compromise for the good of the 

156
▸
A P P E N D I X
organization if they know the organization is willing to com-
promise for them.
◼Internal collaboration. To tackle difﬁcult business problems, 
Level 4 organizations form diverse teams, combining expertise 
from various business functions in ways they’ve never done 
before. Critical analytical, business, and technical skills are lev-
eraged to focus on optimizing the enterprise value chain. Level 
4 organizations managed to identify, document, and distribute 
information about their enterprise value chain in the previous 
level. The process of mobilizing diverse talent may be facilitated 
by enterprise information management Centers of Excellence. 
These centers make that talent available to all business units.
◼Analytical thinking. There is a higher focus on the value and 
use of analytics to optimize the current enterprise value chain 
established in the previous level. Decisions are always based on 
analytics that not only explain what was but reliably predict 
what will be, using quantitative and qualitative inputs. “Should 
we invest in this new product?” “Will this process improve-
ment be worth it?” Answers to such questions emerge from 
sophisticated decision support tools, such as predictive mod-
eling using activity-based costing to calculate the return on 
investment (ROI) of process changes and risk management to 
determine whether to chase a new opportunity.
◼Social responsibility. Level 4 organizations are in a much bet-
ter position to implement effectively their strategies to address 
their social responsibility and sustainability goals. Executing 
their strategies is facilitated as a component of their commit-
ment and focus to optimize their enterprise performance and 
value chain.
THE INNOVATE LEVEL: SPAWNING
AND SUPPORTING NEW IDEAS
The Innovate Level organization extends the value of previous evo-
lutionary stages. This organization spawns new ideas as a matter of 
course and institutionalizes innovation in a manner similar to a think 

A P P E N D I X ◂
157
tank. This organization understands what it does well and applies this 
expertise to new areas of opportunity. There seem to be no limits to 
the new ideas that employees put forth, ideas that bring revenues 
from new sources. Some of the most inventive ideas are gleaned from 
other industries and unlikely inspirations.
◼Business focus. There is a deliberate effort to sustain growth 
by constant innovation by maximizing the organization’s com-
petencies, intellectual property, and resources. Top-line rev-
enues grow by applying core competencies to new products, 
markets, and business models—which propels the organiza-
tion to market leadership. They have the agility to respond to 
change in markets.
◼Data value. The Innovate Level organization demands more 
value from the data than what is offered by its own internal 
data. The data value is an essential tool for uncovering and 
exploring new opportunities and driving innovation. The orga-
nization explores data not only from its own operations and 
markets, but from other spheres where innovation might be 
found. The organization has conﬁdence in its data and is able to 
use it to accurately model likely outcomes and effectively man-
age risk as it explores new products and markets.
◼Decision making. An increased focus on innovation char-
acterizes the types of decisions made by these organiza-
tions.  Decision makers at various levels put an increasing 
effort on differentiating their products and services from 
their competitors, and on expanding into new markets and 
product lines.
Everyone in the organization is encouraged to offer up 
new ideas constantly, which are routinely modeled in a 
simulated environment to identify the ones that will drive 
the organization forward. Groups with various competen-
cies are formed to analyze and prototype new products and 
services. Go/no-go decisions are based on sophisticated 
descriptive and predictive analytics that include data from 
the entire value chain—from sources inside and outside the 
organization.

158
▸
A P P E N D I X
◼Globalization. A principal focus of organizations at this level 
is innovation that is driven by a well-deﬁned and aggressive 
internal process that encourages prototyping, piloting, and 
exploration in new markets. These organizations dominate 
their industries in market share, and are very successful com-
petitors in the global market.
Infrastructure: A Support Network for Innovation
◼IT architecture. The integrated, enterprise-wide IT archi-
tecture serves as a support network for creativity. It includes 
systems to assemble any type of internal and external informa-
tion that could spawn new ideas, manage the pipeline of new 
ideas, and implement ideas that are deemed worthy to pursue. 
The infrastructure accepts structured and unstructured data in 
a variety of media and languages, such as databases, text docu-
ments, graphics, e-mail, and digitized voice communications.
Proposals and pilot projects are documented, categorized, 
and easily accessible for reference and use. Post pilot reviews are 
documented and made available to all who might learn from 
them.
◼Intelligence tools. Predictive analytics are used extensively 
to model the future—to identify potential ideas quickly, rule 
them out or approve them, and minimize the risk of moving 
forward with any of them. “What if” becomes a daily question, 
and analytics provide reliable answers based on quality infor-
mation. Risk management systems and human capital manage-
ment systems take on new life. The organization also adds an 
integrated application to manage the pipeline of new projects.
◼Information access. User access at the Innovate Level 
depends on role. Many employees will focus on maintaining 
Enterprise and Optimize Level efﬁciencies. A smaller number 
will focus on creating change—identifying and seizing on new 
opportunities. These people will have widespread access to 
many data sources from a broad selection of industries, areas of 
interest, and backgrounds.

A P P E N D I X ◂
159
◼Analytics. Innovate Level organizations focus on exploring 
new ideas, products, and services, and use many different types 
of analytical technologies and methods. These capabilities are 
used to conduct different types of analysis such as cost beneﬁt 
analysis, customer behaviors and propensity to buy products 
and services, external market data, and so forth.
◼Data management. The data management environment and 
effort are very dynamic and set up to expect and facilitate the 
need to analyze and explore new business and market oppor-
tunities. Data management efforts enable analysts to regroup 
and restructure products and services data in different ways to 
analyze future opportunities.
◼New technologies. Innovate Level organizations have a 
strong commitment to explore new market opportunities. This 
commitment provides them with more ﬂexibility in exploring 
new cutting edge technologies, pushing the envelope of exist-
ing capabilities, and pioneering their own new methodologies 
and concepts.
Knowledge Process: Managing Constant Renewal
◼Degree. In addition to the well-deﬁned processes that pro-
vide cross-functional collaboration at the Enterprise Level and 
optimization at the next level, the Innovate Level organization 
adds new processes and policies for managing innovation.
All information types, measures, and experiences are 
applied to develop insights that lead to innovation. A project 
incubation process ensures the growth of many new ideas and 
moves them quickly into prototype and pilot stages. The results 
of innovation are routinely managed, evaluated, and communi-
cated. The innovation pipeline is analyzed just like a portfolio of 
risk. The organization always understands such issues as tech-
nology readiness, potential barriers, and the impact of a new 
project on existing processes.
◼Consistency. Alignment with enterprise goals is a given by 
now. Beyond mere consistency, Innovate Level organization 

160
▸
A P P E N D I X
processes are self-learning and self-tuning, able to automati-
cally capture and share best practices, benchmarks, and expe-
rience. Only by understanding the full context and impact of 
historical actions can an organization identify early indicators 
of success or failure, and collaborate on options by tapping the 
knowledge of the entire organization. Individuals make effec-
tive decisions that apply past knowledge as part of a strategic 
learning loop. Innovation Centers of Excellence are common to 
support the organization’s aggressive innovation strategy.
◼Metrics. New metrics reﬂect the importance of innovation, 
such as revenue from new ventures, the number of ideas at 
various stages of the development process, the time from idea 
to launch, and the projected value of new ideas in the pipeline.
◼Governance. Innovate Level organizations have a more com-
prehensive and mature set of governance policies because their 
information management requirements are greater and more 
dynamic than any other level.
◼Outsourcing. These organizations have a strong focus on eval-
uating their existing line of products and services and explor-
ing new business opportunities. This process will enable them 
to explore outsourcing as one of many options to restructure 
their current offerings, or in developing their new products and 
services.
◼Change management. Innovate Level organizations are very 
adaptive and willing to change course as they are driven by 
the innovation and the need to explore new business oppor-
tunities. This attitude creates a culture that not only expects 
change, but also embraces it.
People: Creative Collaborators
◼Skills. In addition to the people needed to run and optimize 
the business, the organization attracts and rewards individuals 
who can synthesize information and ideas from multiple indus-
tries and interpret these to propose new and viable ideas. In 
short, people are expected to think like entrepreneurs: Hungry 

A P P E N D I X ◂
161
ones. These people are hard to ﬁnd, but the organization 
has made an ongoing commitment to hiring and retaining 
them.
◼Motivators. This organization provides a stimulating environ-
ment for creative thinkers who like to challenge old paradigms 
and work outside the box. In this dynamic environment, any-
one in the organization can bring a new idea to the table.
◼Dynamics. The Innovate Level is truly a melting pot—
efﬁciency experts mixed with creative thinkers. However, 
differences in background, experience, and knowledge are 
embraced and encouraged. Collaboration is all the richer 
when the participants bring unique perspectives to the table. 
Cross-functional peer groups continue to play a key role in an 
individual’s day. Peer groups are always looking to broaden 
the diversity of the team—all the better for the most vibrant 
brainstorming sessions and the most creative ideas.
Culture: Entrepreneurial Innovation
◼Rewards. Individual intuition and innovation are supported 
by a culture of inquiry, cooperation, and experience. The cul-
ture rewards creativity and drive and does not punish failures. 
Perhaps only 1 idea in 10 will be funded for further develop-
ment and 1 in 100 of those actually brought to market, but 
that idea will be brought quickly from concept to fruition. This 
momentum provides a gratifying work experience for achieve-
ment-oriented teams.
◼Adaptability. Proactive change—even “revolutionary” cul-
tural change—is constant. There is an atmosphere of business 
tension in which competitive and market information con-
stantly stimulates inventive thinking and action. The Innovate 
Level environment requires employees, customers, and suppli-
ers to continuously contribute and evaluate new ideas. As with 
Optimize Level organizations, change is fundamental—not 
only accepted, but expected.

162
▸
A P P E N D I X
◼Collaboration. Self-managed teams dominate the landscape. 
Collaboration is sophisticated. Diversity of experiences among 
these cross-functional teams leads to great originality. The cul-
ture of innovation accepts that failures are inevitable and used 
as learning experiences. The results of these learning experi-
ences are documented and shared as enterprise knowledge, 
further developing the corporate culture.
◼Innovation. Strategic thinking is viewed as visionary at the 
Optimize Level. It is expected at the Innovate Level. People 
think like out-of-the-box geniuses but act like team contrib-
utors with a common end goal. The organization embraces 
even the most outrageous new ideas, because it can accurately 
forecast the potential of new ideas and manage risk to within 
tolerable levels—while continuing to manage existing business.
◼Internal collaboration. Innovate Level organizations are 
even more aggressive and dedicated to leveraging their collec-
tive talents and skills just like organizations. The difference is in 
the primary focus. In Innovate organizations, collective talents 
and skills are not only used to solve business problems, but also 
to explore new ideas, products, and services. These organiza-
tions strongly encourage the employees and business units to 
mobilize their collective talents to look for new market oppor-
tunities to launch new products and services. Key stakeholders 
from a variety of disciplines frequently participate in innova-
tion Centers of Excellence to combine their collective talent to 
support innovation.
◼Analytical thinking. The use of analytics is an essential core 
component at this level as the organization focuses on explor-
ing new products, services, and markets. Analytics are used to 
understand customer needs, behaviors, and propensity to buy 
new products and services. External market information is 
integrated with internal data to provide comprehensive infor-
mation to enable the application and validation of assumptions, 
models, and predictions. Information from partners and suppli-
ers is also analyzed to connect the dots and produce a compre-
hensive analysis of potential new products and services.

A P P E N D I X ◂
163
◼Social responsibility. Innovate Level organizations are not 
only able to execute their strategies to address their social 
responsibility and sustainability, but also have the opportunity 
to address their social responsibility and sustainability goals 
in the design, development, and marketing of new products 
and services. Furthermore, these organizations may use their 
customers’ awareness of social responsibility and sustainability 
concerns to identify new products and services.


165
Glossary
ad hoc
In analytics it is a query made solely in response to a speciﬁc situation or 
request without considering the wider or long-term repeatability issues. It 
is considered a reactive way to practice fact-based decision making.
adaptability
The organization’s acceptance of or resistance to change.
alignment
In the context of organization maturity, it is the act of the organization to 
match the capabilities of the four organizational pillars (people, processes, 
technology, and culture) to support the organization’s business priorities 
and objectives.
analytics
A suite of technical solutions that uses mathematical and statistical meth-
ods. The solutions are applied to data to generate insight to help organiza-
tions understand historical business performance as well as forecast and 
plan for future decisions.
big data
Information (both structured and unstructured) of a size and complex-
ity that challenges or exceeds the capacity of an organization to handle, 
store, and analyze it.
business experts
Nontechnical users of data and information, whose input is needed to 
develop analytics, select key performance indicators, and use information 
for decision making.
business intelligence
A broad category of applications and technologies for reporting, analyz-
ing, and providing access to data to help enterprise users make better busi-
ness decisions. BI applications include the activities of decision support 
systems, query and reporting, and online analytical processing (OLAP).

166
▸
G L O S S A R Y
business process
The deﬁned method for a range of activities that organizations perform. 
A business process can include anything from the steps needed to make a 
product to how a supply is ordered or how a decision is made.
business rule
A statement of business logic that speciﬁes conditions to be evaluated and 
actions to be taken if those conditions are satisﬁed.
business users
Non-technical individuals who use data for decision making.
Center of Excellence (CoE)
Typically a permanent, formal organizational structure consisting of repre-
sentatives from both business and IT that seeks to advance and promote the 
proper and effective use of technology and analytics to support the orga-
nization’s business strategy. Sometimes known as a Competency Center.
change agent
An organization or group of individuals tasked with introducing change 
in the way the organization is currently operating.
change management
The organization’s effort to control and manage the introduction of new 
changes to the current operating model to ensure gradual and successful 
adoption.
cloud computing
A model for network access in which large, scalable resources are provided 
via the Internet as a shared service to requesting users. Access, computing, 
and storage services can be obtained by users without the need to under-
stand or control the location and conﬁguration of the system. Users con-
sume resources as a service, and pay only for the resources that are used.
collaboration
The ability of individuals to interact effectively to support organizational 
goals.
cultural driver
A business leader, likely at the executive level, able to inﬂuence an orga-
nization’s culture.
culture
The set of shared attitudes, values, goals, and practices that characterize a 
company or an organization.

G L O S S A R Y
◂
167
customer lifetime value (CLV)
The measure of the long-term economic value of a customer. It is the 
sum of all the proﬁts from a given customer over the lifetime of his or her 
relationship with your business.
dashboard
A view that displays ranges of data in a graphical format. Key perfor-
mance indicators (KPIs) or any element can be displayed in a dashboard. 
Each element is represented by a gauge that displays the data ranges that 
are deﬁned. Links to comments, trend data, and element properties can 
also be provided.
data cleansing
The process of eliminating inaccuracies, irregularities, and discrepancies 
from data.
data governance
The process for addressing how data enters the organization, who 
is accountable for it, and how that data achieves the organization’s 
quality standards that allow for complete transparency within an 
organization.
data management
The process of managing data as a resource that is valuable to an organi-
zation or business, including the process of developing data architectures, 
developing practices and procedures for dealing with data, and then exe-
cuting these aspects on a regular basis.
data mart
A subset of the data in a data warehouse. A data mart is optimized for a 
speciﬁc set of users who need a particular set of queries and reports.
Data Mavericks
Individuals with in-demand analytical and technical skills who have 
made their organization very dependent on their skills to understand 
data. These individuals also tend to resist efforts to broaden the use of 
technology in an organization as it threatens their status.
data modeling
A model that is used to either logically or physically organize the data 
elements in a database, including the deﬁnition of the data elements and 
of the relationships among the data elements for a speciﬁc industry, such 
as banking.

168
▸
G L O S S A R Y
data quality
The relative value of data, which is based on the accuracy of the knowl-
edge that can be generated using that data. High-quality data is consis-
tent, accurate, and unambiguous, and it can be processed efﬁciently.
data silos
A term used to describe the process of keeping data in separate systems 
for use by speciﬁc business units. The information in one silo sometimes 
conﬂicts with information maintained in another silo.
data steward
An individual comfortable with both technology and business problems. 
Stewards are responsible for communicating between the business users 
and the IT community.
data value
In the context of this book, the degree to which information is valued as 
a corporate asset.
data visualization
The process of abstracting data in a schematic form, including attributes 
or variables for information units, and rendering it into visual forms such 
as graphs, charts, diagrams, and animations.
data warehouse
A collection of data that is extracted from one or more sources for the 
purpose of query, reporting, and analysis. Data warehouses are generally 
used for storing large amounts of data that originate in other corporate 
applications or that is extracted from external data sources.
decision making
How decisions are made, based on what types of resources, information, 
and speciﬁc processes are available.
dimension tension
A state in which the maturity level of one or more of the four organiza-
tional pillars does not match the maturity level of the other pillars.
diversity
The mix of skills, backgrounds, and knowledge that employees bring to 
an organization.
domain experts
Also known as subject matter experts, these individuals have an in-depth 
knowledge of a speciﬁc area within their business unit. The input from 

G L O S S A R Y
◂
169
domain experts is critical in making decisions about what data to use and 
how to use it.
dynamics
The nature of interactions among individuals within the organization and 
among the four organizational pillars.
enterprise resource planning (ERP)
An integrated application that controls day-to-day business operations 
such as inventory, sales, ﬁnance, human resources, and distribution. 
From the warehousing perspective, ERP systems differ from standard 
databases in that they have predeﬁned data models that must be under-
stood in order to successfully extract the data.
executive sponsor
C-level individual who sponsors enterprise and strategic changes and ini-
tiatives in an organization.
forecast
A numerical prediction of a future value for a time series. Forecasting 
techniques are used to identify previously unseen trends and anticipate 
ﬂuctuations to facilitate better planning.
globalization
Comprehensive term for the emergence of a global society in which 
economic, political, environmental, and cultural events in one part of 
the world quickly come to have signiﬁcance for people in other parts of the 
world.
grid computing
A type of computing in which large computing tasks are distributed 
among multiple computers on a network.
information access
The ﬂow of meaningful business insight to the business users who need it.
Information Evolution Model (IEM)
The SAS organizational maturity model (patented by the U.S. govern-
ment). The model provides a framework for measuring where an orga-
nization is in terms of generating and using business insight to support 
decisions and validate strategies.
information management process
A comprehensive step-by-step description of how information is collected, 
cleansed, stored, moved, and delivered to support decision making.

170
▸
G L O S S A R Y
information value chain
A detailed layout and description of how an organization creates value 
and output in the form of products and services, including all the steps, 
input, and output required to complete this process.
infrastructure resources
The IT resources used to manage, store, and distribute enterprise infor-
mation including networks, databases, application, solutions, and data 
warehouses.
innovation
The ability of an organization to generate and act on new or different 
ideas, products, or services.
intelligence tools
Applications used to transform raw data into useful knowledge.
IT architecture
The hardware, software, and connectivity that support information ﬂow.
key performance indicator (KPI)
A measurement that shows whether an organization is progressing 
toward its stated goals.
master data
The data that describes the important details of a business subject area 
such as customer, product, or material across the organization. Master 
data allows different applications and lines of business to use the same 
deﬁnitions and data regarding the subject area. Master data gives an accu-
rate, 360-degree view of the business subject.
master data management
The business applications, methods, and tools that implement the poli-
cies, procedures, and infrastructure to support the capture, integration, 
and subsequent shared use of accurate, timely, consistent, and complete 
master data.
maturity model
A framework that describes, for a speciﬁc area of interest, a number of 
levels of sophistication at which activities in this area can be carried out.
metadata
Descriptive data about data that is stored and managed in a database, in 
order to facilitate access to captured and archived data for further use.

G L O S S A R Y
◂
171
metrics
The types of measures that an organization tracks to gauge its success. 
Also see: Key performance indicators.
motivators
The intrinsic and extrinsic forces that drive people to do what they do.
outsourcing
The transfer of the management or day-to-day execution of an entire 
business function to an external service provider.
performance management
The organization’s effort to track, report on, and distribute its business 
performance information to support decision making.
rewards
The compensation structure—formal and informal—and how it shapes 
behavior.
scalability
The ability of a software application to function well and with minimal 
loss of performance, despite changing computing environments; the vol-
ume of computations, users, or data. Scalable software is able to take full 
advantage of increases in computing capability such as those that are pro-
vided by the use of SMP hardware and threaded processing.
service-oriented architecture (SOA)
A software design and software architecture design pattern independent 
of any vendor, product, or technology and based on discrete pieces of 
software providing application functionality as services to other applica-
tions. For instance, this software design deﬁnes how two computing enti-
ties, such as programs, interact in such a way as to enable one entity to 
perform a unit of work on behalf of another entity.
shared services model
A model in which an organization consolidates the offering of a service, 
such as analyzing data or producing business intelligence reports, in one 
business unit. Other units must come to that unit to get this work done.
skills
The capabilities that are sought or nurtured in the organization’s knowl-
edge worker.
social responsibility
The organization’s focus on environmental, social, and humane activities.

172
▸
G L O S S A R Y
static reports
Reports that can’t be automatically updated (or refreshed) by business 
users.
text analytics
Refers generally to the process of deriving patterns and trends from 
unstructured content such as notes, reports, and comments.
transparency
Visibility in contexts related to the behavior of an organization, the man-
ner in which it conducts business, and its relationship to customers, 
employees, and partners.

173
About the Author
Aiman Zeid heads Organizational Transformation Services for SAS 
Institute’s Global Business Consulting unit. He has helped numer-
ous organizations on four continents evaluate their organizational 
maturity and readiness to deploy business analytics. His focus on 
enterprise-wide approaches has made him a sought-after consultant 
for starting Business Analytics Centers of Excellence.
Zeid specializes in evaluating organizational maturity and readi-
ness to deploy and use business analytics. He works with organizations 
in all industries to assess their technical information management 
infrastructure, resources and skills, processes, and culture. He has 28 
years’ experience in information management, business consulting, 
and technical implementation of business analytics and performance 
management solutions.
Zeid is his organization’s in-house expert on SAS methodologies 
and is often called on to talk with analyst groups such as Forrester and 
Gartner. He is SAS’ chief messenger for Business Analytics Centers 
of Excellence and helped develop the SAS Organizational Maturity 
Assessment methodology using the SAS Information Evolution 
Model. He is also a popular keynote speaker, having headlined busi-
ness analytics talks in Greece, Turkey, and the Philippines. He has pre-
sented jointly with noted management consultant and author Robert 
Morison on “Leading an Analytical Enterprise.”
Before joining Global Business Consulting, Zeid led the SAS 
Human Capital Management practice in North America. He holds 
an MBA and a BS in engineering (computer science diploma) from 
George Washington University. Prior to joining SAS he worked as a 
consultant for Battelle Institute and the Hay Group.


175
Index
A
A/B testing, 7
ad hoc, 165
adaptability
in culture at Departmental 
Level, 141
in culture at Individual 
Level, 135
in culture at Innovate 
Level, 161
in culture in Enterprise 
Level organizations, 148
in culture in Optimize Level 
organizations, 155
deﬁned, 165
alignment, 165
analytical thinking
in culture at Departmental 
Level, 142
in culture at Individual Level, 
136
in culture at Innovate 
Level, 162
in culture in Enterprise Level 
organizations, 148–149
in culture in Optimize Level 
organizations, 156
analytics
about, 6–8
deﬁned, 165
in Departmental Level, 138
in Enterprise Level 
organizations, 145
in Individual Level, 133
in Innovate Level, 159
in Optimize Level 
organizations, 152
Ariely, Dan
Predictably Irrational: The Hidden 
Forces That Shape Our 
Decisions, 92
B
banking industry, 4–5
Belhouari, Adil, 116
BICC (Business Intelligence 
Competency Center)
See Center of Excellence 
(CoE)
big bang approach, compared with 
phased approach, 109
big data
deﬁned, 165
in Enterprise Level 
organizations, 62
in Foundational Level 
organizations, 62
“black box” tools, 59
business analytics, 92
business experts, 165
business focus
in Departmental Level, 136
in Enterprise Level 
organizations, 143
in Individual Level, 131
in Innovate Level, 157
in Optimize Level 
organizations, 149

176
▸
I N D E X
business insight, critical role of
about, 1–2, 10, 12
conventional wisdom, 3–5
disruptive nature of data, 2–3
gut instinct, 6–8
people, process, technology, and 
culture, 8–11
speed of data, 5–6
weighing risk, 6–8
business intelligence, 165
Business Intelligence Competency 
Center (BICC)
See Center of Excellence (CoE)
business objectives, aligning 
capabilities with, 20–22
business process, 166
business rule, 166
business transformation, 
121–126
See also speciﬁc topics
business users, 166
C
capabilities
aligning with business 
objectives, 20–22
assessing current, 19–20, 123–
124
current and desired, 123–124
Center of Excellence (CoE)
about, 21, 40, 64, 88, 89–91
accelerating maturity, 97–99
‘big picture’ of information, 
92–93
change agents, 93, 111–112
culture in, 108–109
deﬁned, 166
functions hosted by, 99–103, 
100f
funding mechanisms, 109–110
information processes in, 105
interpretations of structure of, 
98–99
key role of, 104
levels of maturity and, 95–96
location in organizational chart, 
99
naming, 92
organization of, 96–97
people in, 104
phased versus big bang approach 
to starting, 109
roles and responsibilities of, 
92–95
securing organizational pillars 
with, 104–109
selecting personalities for, 110
technical infrastructure in, 
106–108
Challenged Level organizations
about, 26–27
consequences of, 46
culture, 35–37, 44–46
in Departmental level, 37–46
in IEM, 23, 24f
in Individual level, 27–37
information processes, 32–33, 
40–41
strategy objectives for, 46–47
technical infrastructure, 33–35, 
41–44
challenges, to transforming your 
organization, 15–18
change agents
for CoEs, 111–112
deﬁned, 166
as role of CoE, 93
change management
deﬁned, 166
in information processes at 
Departmental Level, 140
in information processes at 
Individual Level, 134
in information processes in 
Enterprise Organizations, 147
in knowledge processes in 

I N D E X
◂
177
Innovate Level, 160
in knowledge processes in 
Optimize Level organizations, 
154
cloud computing, 166
CLV (customer lifetime value), 167
CoE
See Center of Excellence (CoE)
collaboration
in culture in Departmental 
Level, 141
in culture in Enterprise Level 
organizations, 148
in culture in Individual Level, 
135
in culture in Innovate Level, 162
in culture in Optimize Level 
organizations, 155
deﬁned, 166
collaborators, 81–82
competencies, current and desired, 
123–124
consistency
in information processes in 
Departmental Level, 139
in information processes in 
Enterprise Level organizations, 
146
in information processes in 
Individual Level, 133–134
in knowledge processes in 
Innovate Level, 159–160
in knowledge processes in 
Optimize Level organizations, 
153
conventional wisdom, 3–5
credit card fraud, 7–8
cross-functional peer groups, 82
CRV (Customer Risk Value), 
118–120
cultural driver
deﬁned, 166
as role of CoE, 93
culture
as an initiative to achieve 
objectives, 125
in Challenged Level 
organizations, 35–37, 44–46
in CoEs, 108–109
deﬁned, 166
in Departmental Level, 45, 
141–142
in Enterprise Level 
organizations, 61, 147–149
in Individual Level, 36, 135–136
in Innovate Level organizations, 
85–86, 161–163
in Optimize Level organizations, 
78, 155–156
supporting analytics, 8–10
customer lifetime value (CLV), 167
Customer Risk Value (CRV), 
118–120
customer value, 4
D
“daily deal”, 29
dashboard, 167
data
disruptive nature of, 2–3
speed of, 5–6
data cleansing, 167
data complexity, as a challenge to 
organization transformation, 
16
data governance
about, 9
deﬁned, 167
as a function of CoEs, 100f, 103
data management
deﬁned, 167
in Departmental Level, 138
in Enterprise Level 
organizations, 145
as a function of CoEs, 100f,
101–102

178
▸
I N D E X
data management (continued)
in Individual Level, 133
in Innovate Level, 159
in Optimize Level organizations, 
152
data mart, 167
Data Mavericks, 27, 29–32, 
34–37, 38, 167
data modeling, 167
data quality, 168
data silos, 168
data steward, 100f, 103, 168
data value
deﬁned, 168
in Departmental Level, 137
in Enterprise Level 
organizations, 143
in Individual Level, 131
in Innovate Level, 157
in Optimize Level organizations, 
149–150
data visualization, 168
data volume, as a challenge to 
organization transformation, 
15
data warehouse, 168
decision making
deﬁned, 168
in Departmental Level, 137
in Enterprise Level 
organizations, 143
in Individual Level, 131–132
in Innovate Level, 157
in Optimize Level organizations, 
150
degree
in information processes at 
Departmental Level, 139
in information processes at 
Individual Level, 133
in information processes in 
Enterprise Level 
organizations, 146
in knowledge processes at 
Innovate Level, 159
in knowledge processes in 
Optimize Level organizations, 
152–153
Deming, W. Edwards, 24
Departmental Level
about, 136–137
adaptability in culture at, 141
analytical thinking in culture at, 
142
analytics in, 138
business focus in, 136
Challenged Level organizations 
at, 37–46
COEs and, 95
collaboration in culture in, 141
consistency of information 
processes in, 139
culture in, 45, 141–142
data management in, 138
data value in, 137
decision making in, 137
degree in information processes 
at, 139
dynamics of people at, 140
globalization in, 137
governance in information 
processes at, 139–140
in IEM, 23, 24f
information access in, 138
information processes at, 41, 
139–140
infrastructure in, 137–139
innovation in culture at, 141–
142
intelligence tools in, 137–138
internal collaboration in culture 
at, 142
IT architecture in, 137
metrics in information processes 
at, 139
motivators of people at, 140

I N D E X
◂
179
outsourcing in information 
processes at, 140
people in, 38, 140
rewards in culture at, 141
skills of people at, 140
social responsibility in culture 
at, 142
technical infrastructure in, 43
technologies, new in, 138–139
dimension tension, 168
diversity, 168
domain experts, 168–169
dynamics
deﬁned, 169
of people at Departmental Level, 
140
of people at Individual Level, 135
of people at Innovate Level, 161
of people in Enterprise Level 
organizations, 147
of people in Optimize Level 
organizations, 154–155
E
Enterprise Business Analytics 
Program, as a function of 
CoEs, 100f, 102–103
Enterprise Level organizations
about, 34, 142–143
adaptability in culture in, 148
analytical thinking in culture in, 
148–149
analytics in, 145
big data in, 62
business focus in, 143
COEs and, 95
collaboration in culture in, 148
consistency of information 
processes in, 146
culture in, 61, 147–149
data management in, 145
data value in, 143
decision making in, 143
degree in information processes 
in, 146
dynamics of people in, 147
globalization in, 143
governance in information 
processes in, 146
in IEM, 23, 24f
information access in, 144–145
information processes in, 58, 
146–147
infrastructure of, 143–145
innovation in culture in, 148
intelligence tools in, 144
internal collaboration in culture 
in, 148
IT architecture in, 143–144
metrics in information processes 
in, 146
motivators of people in, 147
outsourcing in, 57
outsourcing in information 
processes in, 146–147
people in, 56, 147
rewards in culture in, 147–148
skills of people in, 147
social responsibility in culture 
in, 149
technical infrastructure at, 60
technologies, new in, 145
ERP (enterprise resource 
planning), 33, 169
E.SUN Bank example, 118–121
executive sponsor, 18–19, 169
F
failure, 76
forecast, 169
Forrester, 7
Foundational Level organizations
about, 50
big data in, 62
continuous improvement 
requirements of, 64

180
▸
I N D E X
Foundational Level organizations 
(continued)
Enterprise Level organizations, 
54–61
in IEM, 23, 24f
possibilities of, 51
risks for, 62–64
strategy objectives for, 64–65
value of, 51–54
funding, for CoEs, 109–110
G
Gartner, 26
globalization
deﬁned, 169
in Departmental Level, 137
in Enterprise Level 
organizations, 143
in Individual Level, 132
in Innovate Level, 158
in Optimize Level organizations, 
150
governance
in information processes at 
Departmental Level, 
139–140
in information processes at 
Individual Level, 134
in information processes in 
Enterprise Level organizations, 
146
in knowledge processes at 
Innovate Level, 160
in knowledge processes in 
Optimize Level organizations, 
153
grid computing, 169
gut instinct, 6–8
I
IEM
See Information Evolution 
Model (IEM)
Individual Level
about, 131–132
adaptability in culture at, 135
analytical thinking in culture 
at, 136
analytics in, 133
business focus in, 131
Challenged Level organizations 
at, 27–37
collaboration in culture in, 135
consistency of information 
processes in, 133–134
culture in, 36, 135–136
data management in, 133
data value in, 131
decision making in, 131–132
degree in information processes 
at, 133
dynamics of people at, 135
globalization in, 132
governance in information 
processes at, 134
in IEM, 23, 24f
information access in, 133
information processes at, 33, 
133–134
infrastructure, 132–133
innovation in culture at, 135–136
intelligence tools in, 132
internal collaboration in culture 
at, 136
IT architecture in, 132
metrics in information processes 
at, 134
motivators of people at, 135
outsourcing in information 
processes at, 134
people at in, 32, 134–135
rewards in culture at, 135
skills of people at, 134
social responsibility in culture 
at, 136
technical infrastructure at, 35

I N D E X
◂
181
technologies, new in, 133
information access
deﬁned, 169
in Departmental Level, 138
in Enterprise Level 
organizations, 144–145
in Individual Level, 133
in Innovate Level, 158
in Optimize Level organizations, 
151
information delivery, as a function 
of CoEs, 100f, 102
Information Evolution Model 
(IEM)
about, 10–12, 11f, 22–24
in Challenged Level 
organizations, 23, 24f
deﬁned, 169
Departmental Level, 136–142
Enterprise Level organizations, 
142–149
Individual Level, 131–136
Innovate Level, 156–163
Optimize Level organizations, 
149–156
organizational maturity levels, 
23–24, 24f
information infrastructure, as an 
initiative to achieve objectives, 
125
information management process, 
169
information processes
as an initiative to achieve 
objectives, 125
in Challenged Level 
organizations, 32–33, 40–41
in CoEs, 105
in Departmental Level, 41, 
139–140
in Enterprise Level 
organizations, 58
in Enterprise Level 
Organizations, 146–147
in Individual Level, 33, 
133–134
in Innovate Level organizations, 
83
in Optimized Level 
organizations, 74–75
information value chain, 170
infrastructure
in Departmental Level, 
137–139
in Enterprise Level 
organizations, 143–145
in Individual Level, 132–133
in Innovate Level, 158–159
in Optimize Level organizations, 
150–152
infrastructure resources, 170
Innovate Level organizations
about, 68–69, 79–81, 156–158
adaptability in culture at, 161
analytical thinking in culture 
at, 162
analytics in, 159
business focus in, 157
COEs and, 95–96
collaboration in culture in, 162
collaborators, 81–82
consistency of knowledge 
processes in, 159–160
culture in, 85–86, 161–163
data management in, 159
data value in, 157
decision making in, 157
degree in knowledge processes 
in, 159
dynamics of people at, 161
globalization in, 158
governance in knowledge 
processes in, 160
in IEM, 23, 24f
information access in, 158
information processes in, 83

182
▸
I N D E X
Innovate Level organizations 
(continued)
infrastructure in, 158–159
innovation in culture at, 162
intelligence tools in, 158
internal collaboration in culture 
at, 162
IT architecture in, 158
knowledge process in, 
159–160
managing constant renewal, 83
metrics in knowledge processes 
in, 160
motivators of people at, 161
outsourcing in knowledge 
processes in, 160
people in, 82, 160–161
rewards in culture at, 161
skills of people at, 160–161
social responsibility in culture 
at, 163
striving to be, 86–87
support network for, 83–85
technical infrastructure for, 
84–85
technologies, new in, 159
innovation
in culture at Departmental 
Level, 141–142
in culture at Individual Level, 
135–136
in culture at Innovate Level, 162
in culture in Enterprise Level 
organizations, 148
in culture in Optimize Level 
organizations, 155–156
deﬁned, 170
intelligence tools
deﬁned, 170
in Departmental Level, 137–138
in Enterprise Level 
organizations, 144
in Individual Level, 132
in Innovate Level, 158
in Optimize Level organizations, 
151
internal collaboration
in culture at Departmental 
Level, 142
in culture at Individual Level, 
136
in culture at Innovate 
Level, 162
in culture in Enterprise Level 
organizations, 148
in culture in Optimize Level 
organizations, 156
internal information processes, as a 
function of CoEs, 100f, 103
IT architecture
deﬁned, 170
in Departmental Level, 137
in Enterprise Level 
organizations, 143–144
in Individual Level, 132
in Innovate Level, 158
in Optimize Level organizations, 
150–151
J
Jobs, Steve, 18
K
Key Performance Indicators (KPIs), 
54–56, 170
knowledge process
in Innovate Level, 159–160
in Optimize Level organizations, 
152–154
L
leadership, importance of, 
128–129
Lewis, Michael
Moneyball: The Art of Winning an 
Unfair Game, 3

I N D E X
◂
183
M
master data, 170
master data management, 170
maturity levels
accelerating, 97–99
and CoE, 95–96
organizational, 23–24, 24f
maturity model, 170
metadata, 170
metrics
deﬁned, 171
in information processes at 
Departmental Level, 139
in information processes at 
Individual Level, 134
in information processes in 
Enterprise Level organizations, 
146
in knowledge processes at 
Innovate Level, 160
in knowledge processes in 
Optimize Level organizations, 
153
model building/deployment, 14–15
Moneyball: The Art of Winning an 
Unfair Game (Lewis), 3
motivators
deﬁned, 171
of people at Departmental Level, 
140
of people at Individual Level, 
135
of people at Innovate Level, 161
of people in Enterprise Level 
organizations, 147
of people in Optimize Level 
organizations, 154
N
New York Times, 3
O
Oakland Athletics, 3
operational categories, of maturity 
levels, 23–24, 24f
optimization
about, 69–71
getting the most from, 78–79
Optimize Level organizations
about, 68–71, 149–150
adaptability in culture in, 155
analytical thinking in culture in, 
156
analytics in, 152
business focus in, 149
COEs and, 95–96
collaboration in culture in, 155
consistency of knowledge 
processes in, 153
culture in, 78, 155–156
data management in, 152
data value in, 149–150
decision making in, 150
degree in knowledge processes 
in, 152–153
dynamics of people in, 
154–155
globalization in, 150
governance in knowledge 
processes in, 153
in IEM, 23, 24f
information access in, 151
information processes in, 
74–75
infrastructure in, 150–152
innovation in culture in, 155–
156
intelligence tools in, 151
internal collaboration in culture 
in, 156
IT architecture in, 150–151
knowledge process in, 
152–154
metrics in knowledge processes 
in, 153
motivators of people in, 154

184
▸
I N D E X
Optimize Level organizations 
(continued)
outsourcing in knowledge 
processes in, 154
people in, 73, 154–155
rewards in culture in, 155
self-improvement in, 73–75
self-managing knowledge 
workers, 72–73
skills of people in, 154
social responsibility in culture 
in, 156
stopping at, 86–87
technical infrastructure 
in, 77
technologies, new in, 152
organization transformation
aligning capabilities with 
business objectives, 20–22
approaches to, 13–15
assessing current capabilities, 
19–20
challenges of, 15–17
executive sponsorship, 18–19
ﬁrst steps to, 24
managing challenges of, 17–18
starting the journey, 22–24
outsourcing
deﬁned, 171
in Enterprise Level 
organizations, 57
in information processes at 
Departmental Level, 140
in information processes at 
Individual Level, 134
in information processes in 
Enterprise Level 
organizations, 146–147
in knowledge processes at 
Innovate Level, 160
in knowledge processes in 
Optimize Level 
organizations, 154
P
people
as an initiative to achieve 
objectives, 125
in CoEs, 104
in Departmental Level, 38, 140
in Enterprise Level 
organizations, 56, 147
in Individual Level, 32, 
134–135
in Innovate Level organizations, 
82, 160–161
in Optimize Level organizations, 
73, 154–155
supporting analytics, 8–10
performance management, 126, 
171
phased approach, compared with 
big bang approach, 109
Predictably Irrational: The Hidden 
Forces That Shape Our Decisions
(Ariely), 92
predictive analytics, modeling 
future with, 84
processes, supporting analytics, 
8–10
Progressive organizations, 23, 24f,
68–69
R
renewal, managing constant, 83
rewards
in culture at Departmental 
Level, 141
in culture at Individual Level, 
135
in culture at Innovate 
Level, 161
in culture in Enterprise Level 
organizations, 147–148
in culture in Optimize Level 
organizations, 155
deﬁned, 171

I N D E X
◂
185
risks
facing Enterprise Level 
organizations, 62–64
weighing, 6–8
risk-to-innovation phenomenon, 7
Riyad Bank example, 114–118, 
120–121
S
scalability, 171
self-improvement, in Optimized 
Level organizations, 73–75
self-managing knowledge workers, 
72–73
service-oriented architecture 
(SOA), 171
shared services model, 171
Silver, Nate, 3
skills
as an initiative to achieve 
objectives, 125
deﬁned, 171
of people at Departmental Level, 
140
of people at Individual Level, 
134
of people at Innovate Level, 
160–161
of people in Enterprise Level 
organizations, 147
of people in Optimize Level 
organizations, 154
SOA (service-oriented 
architecture), 171
social responsibility
in culture at Departmental 
Level, 142
in culture at Individual Level, 
136
in culture at Innovate 
Level, 163
in culture in Enterprise Level 
organizations, 149
in culture in Optimize Level 
organizations, 156
deﬁned, 171
static reports, 172
“sticky buttons”, 43
strategy development
about, 113–114
characteristics of, 121–122
E.SUN Bank example, 118–121
guiding principles of, 127–128
identifying starting points for, 
126–127
key components of, 122–126
knowing where to start, 114
leadership, 128–129
Riyad Bank example, 114–118, 
120–121
strategy objectives
approach to achieving, 124–125
for Challenged Level 
organizations, 46–47
clarity of, 122–123
current and desired capabilities 
and competencies, 123–124
for Foundational organizations, 
64–65
organizational initiatives to 
achieve, 125
performance management KPIs, 
126
for Progressive organizations, 
87–88
support network, for Innovate 
Level organizations, 83–85
T
technical infrastructure
as an initiative to achieve 
objectives, 125
in Challenged Level 
organizations, 33–35, 41–44
in CoEs, 106–108
in Departmental Level, 43

186
▸
I N D E X
technical infrastructure (continued)
in Enterprise Level 
organizations, 60
in Individual Level, 35
in Innovate Level organizations, 
84–85
in Optimize Level organizations, 
77
technologies, new
in Departmental Level, 138–139
in Enterprise Level 
organizations, 145
in Individual Level, 133
in Innovate Level, 159
in Optimize Level organizations, 
152
technology, supporting analytics, 
8–10
text analytics, 172
“them,” “us” versus, 44–46
transparency, 172
U
“us,” “them” versus, 44–46
V
value
See also data value
customer, 4
of Foundation organizations, 
51–54
value chain, 52
W
wariness, overcoming, 52–53
Washington Post, 3

