
SmartBook®  
Proven to help students improve grades and 
study more efficiently, SmartBook contains the 
same content within the print book, but actively 
tailors that content to the needs of the individual. 
SmartBook’s adaptive technology provides precise, 
personalized instruction on what the student 
should do next, guiding the student to master 
and remember key concepts, targeting gaps in 
knowledge and offering customized feedback, 
and driving the student toward comprehension 
and retention of the subject matter. Available on 
tablets, SmartBook puts learning at the student’s 
fingertips—anywhere, anytime.
Adaptive
Over 8 billion questions have been 
answered, making McGraw-Hill 
Education products more intelligent, 
reliable, and precise.
THE ADAPTIVE 
READING EXPERIENCE 
DESIGNED TO TRANSFORM 
THE WAY STUDENTS READ
More students earn A’s and 
B’s when they use McGraw-Hill 
Education Adaptive products.
www.mheducation.com


Business 
Driven 
Technology
SEVENTH EDITION
Paige Baltzan
Daniels College of Business
University of Denver

BUSINESS DRIVEN TECHNOLOGY, SEVENTH EDITION
Published by McGraw-Hill Education, 2 Penn Plaza, New York, NY 10121. Copyright © 2017 by McGraw-Hill 
Education. All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. Previous editions © 2015, 2013, 2010, 
and 2009. No part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a 
database or retrieval system, without the prior written consent of McGraw-Hill Education, including, but not limited 
to, in any network or other electronic storage or transmission, or broadcast for distance learning.
Some ancillaries, including electronic and print components, may not be available to customers outside the 
United States.
This book is printed on acid-free paper.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 DOR/DOR 1 0 9 8 7 6 5 4
ISBN 978-1-259-56732-2
MHID 1-259-56732-X
Chief Product Office, SVP Products & Markets: G. Scott Virkler
Director: Scott Davidson
Senior Brand Manager: Wyatt Morris
Development Editor: Kevin White
Digital Development Editor II: Kevin White
Senior Marketing Manager: Tiffany Russell
Director, Content Production: Terri Schiesl
Content Project Manager: Rick Hecker
Media Project Manager: Evan Roberts
Buyer: Jennifer Pickel
Design: Matt Diamond
Content Licensing Specialist: Ann Marie Jannette (image); Shannon Manderscheid (text)
Compositor: SPi Global
Printer: LSC Communications
All credits appearing on page or at the end of the book are considered to be an extension of the copyright page.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Baltzan, Paige, author.
Title: Business driven technology / Paige Baltzan, Daniels College of 
   Business, University of Denver.
Description: Seventh edition. | New York, NY : McGraw-Hill Education, [2018]
Identifiers: LCCN 2016038028 | ISBN 9781259567322 (alk. paper)
Subjects: LCSH: Information technology—Management. | Management information 
   systems. | Information resources management. | Industrial 
   management—Technological innovations.
Classification: LCC HD30.2 .H32 2018 | DDC 658.4/038—dc23 LC record available 
at https://lccn.loc.gov/2016038028
The Internet addresses listed in the text were accurate at the time of publication. The inclusion of a website does not 
indicate an endorsement by the authors or McGraw-Hill Education, and McGraw-Hill Education does not guarantee 
the accuracy of the information presented at these sites.
www.mhhe.com

In memory of Allan R. Biggs, my father, my mentor, 
and my inspiration.
Paige
To my mother Sophie, my father Thomas, my 
brother Tom, and my wonderful husband Mel–
without whom I would not be who I am today. 
Thank you all for your love, support, and undying 
confidence in me.
Patricia
DEDICATION

vi  *  Brief Table of Contents
1.  Achieving Business Success
Chapter 1: Business Driven Technology
Chapter 2: Identifying Competitive Advantages
Chapter 3: Strategic Initiatives for Implementing Competitive Advantages
Chapter 4: Measuring the Success of Strategic Initiatives
Chapter 5: Organizational Structures That Support Strategic Initiatives
2  Exploring Business Intelligence
Chapter 6: Valuing and Storing Organizational Information—Databases
Chapter 7: Accessing Organizational Information—Data Warehouses
Chapter 8: Understanding Big Data and Its Impact on Business
3  Streamlining Business Operations
Chapter 9: Enabling the Organization—Decision Making
Chapter 10: Extending the Organization—Supply Chain Management
Chapter 11: Building a Customer-Centric Organization—Customer Relationship Management
Chapter 12: Integrating the Organization from End to End—Enterprise Resource Planning
4  Building Innovation
Chapter 13: Creating Innovative Organizations
Chapter 14: Ebusiness
Chapter 15: Creating Collaborative Partnerships
Chapter 16: Integrating Wireless Technology in Business
5  Transforming Organizations
Chapter 17: Developing Software to Streamline Operations
Chapter 18: Methodologies for Supporting Agile Organizations
Chapter 19: Managing Organizational Projects
B R I E F  T A B L E  O F  C O N T E N T S
UNITS
B1	
Business Basics
B2	
Business Process
B3	
Hardware and Software Basics
B4	
MIS Infrastructures
B5	
Networks and Telecommunications
B6	
Information Security
B7	
Ethics
B8	
Operations Management
B9	
Sustainable MIS Infrastructures
B10	
Business Intelligence
B11	
Global Information Systems
B12	
Global Trends
T1	
Personal Productivity Using IT
T2	
Basic Skills Using Excel
T3	
Problem Solving Using Excel
T4	
Decision Making Using Excel
T5	
Designing Database Applications
T6	
Basic Skills Using Access
T7	
Problem Solving Using Access
T8	
Decision Making Using Access
T9	
Designing Web Pages
T10	
Creating Web Pages Using HTML
T11	
Creating Gantt Charts with Excel and Microsoft 
Project
BUSINESS PLUG-INS
TECHNOLOGY PLUG-INS (CONNECT ONLY)
Apply Your Knowledge Projects
Glossary
Notes
Index

Table of Contents  *  vii
Metrics for Strategic Initiatives  62
Chapter 4 Case:  Manipulating the Data to Find Your 
Version of the Truth  66
CHAPTER 5: ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURES THAT SUPPORT 
STRATEGIC INITIATIVES  71
Information Ethics  71
Information Does Not Have Ethics: People Do  72
Information Security  73
Security Threats Caused by Hackers and Viruses  74
Chapter 5 Case:  Targeting Target  77
Learning Outcome Review  79
Review Questions  79
Making Business Decisions  79
Unit Summary  82
Key Terms  82
Unit Closing Case One:  The Internet of Things  83
Unit Closing Case Two:  Five Ways Hackers Can Get into 
Your Business  85
Apply Your Knowledge  87
AYK Application Projects  92
UNIT 2  94
Exploring Business Intelligence  94
Big Data, Big Business, Big Opportunities  95
Introduction  98
CHAPTER 6: VALUING AND STORING ORGANIZATIONAL 
INFORMATION—DATABASES  99
The Business Benefits of High-Quality Information  99
Information Type: Transactional and Analytical  100
Information Timeliness  101
Information Quality  101
Information Governance  104
Storing Information Using a Relational Database 
Management System  104
Storing Data Elements in Entities and Attributes  105
Creating Relationships through Keys  105
Coca-Cola Relational Database Example  106
Using a Relational Database for Business Advantages  108
Increased Flexibility  108
Increased Scalability and Performance  108
Reduced Information Redundancy  109
Increased Information Integrity (Quality)  109
Increased Information Security  109
Driving Websites with Data  110
Website Data  110
Integrating Information among Multiple Databases  112
Data Integration  112
Chapter 6 Case:  Political Microtargeting: What Data 
Crunchers Did for Obama  114
T A B L E  O F  C O N T E N T S
About the Author  xi
Preface  xiv
UNIT 1  2
Achieving Business Success  2
Buy Experiences, Not Things  3
Introduction  5
CHAPTER 1: BUSINESS DRIVEN TECHNOLOGY  6
Competing in the Information Age  6
Data  7
Information  9
Business Intelligence  10
Knowledge  11
The Challenge: Departmental Companies  12
The Solution: Management Information Systems  13
Chapter 1 Case:  The World Is Flat—Thomas Friedman  16
CHAPTER 2: IDENTIFYING COMPETITIVE ADVANTAGES  21
Identifying Competitive Advantages  21
SWOT Analysis: Understanding Business Strategies  23
The Five Forces Model—Evaluating Industry 
Attractiveness  24
Buyer Power  24
Supplier Power  25
Threat of Substitute Products or Services  25
Threat of New Entrants  26
Rivalry Among Existing Competitors  26
Analyzing the Airline Industry  26
The Three Generic Strategies—Choosing a Business 
Focus  27
Value Chain Analysis—Executing Business Strategies  28
Chapter 2 Case:  Michael Porter on TED—The Case for 
Letting Business Solve Social Problems  31
CHAPTER 3: STRATEGIC INITIATIVES FOR IMPLEMENTING 
COMPETITIVE ADVANTAGES  36
Business Process Reegineering  36
Business Process Reengineering  37
Business Process Modeling  40
Supply Chain Management  43
Customer Relationship Management  46
Enterprise Resource Planning  49
Chapter 3 Case:  Amazon Drone Knocking  52
CHAPTER 4: MEASURING THE SUCCESS OF STRATEGIC 
INITIATIVES  56
MIS Roles and Responsibilities  56
Metrics: Measuring Success  59
Efficiency and Effectiveness Metrics  60
The Interrelationship between Efficiency and 
Effectiveness MIS Metrics  60

viii  *  Table of Contents
CHAPTER 10: EXTENDING THE ORGANIZATION—SUPPLY CHAIN 
MANAGEMENT  180
Information Technology’s Role in the Supply Chain  180
Technologies Reinventing the Supply Chain  182
3D Printing Supports Procurement  184
RFID Supports Logistics  185
Drones Support Logistics  187
Robotics Supports Materials Management  187
The Extended Supply Chain  188
Chapter 10 Case:  ETSY  189
CHAPTER 11: BUILDING A CUSTOMER-CENTRIC ORGANIZATION—
CUSTOMER RELATIONSHIP MANAGEMENT  194
Customer Relationship Management  194
The Power of the Customer  195
Operational and Analytical CRM  195
Marketing and Operational CRM  195
Sales and Operational CRM  198
Customer Service and Operational CRM  200
Analytical CRM  201
Extending Customer Relationship Management  201
Supplier Relationship Management  202
Partner Relationship Management  202
Employee Relationship Management  203
Chapter 11 Case:  Zappos Is Passionate for Customers  204
CHAPTER 12: INTEGRATING THE ORGANIZATION FROM END TO 
END—ENTERPRISE RESOURCE PLANNING  209
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP)  209
Bringing the Organization Together  210
The Evolution of ERP  211
Integration Tools  212
Core and Extended ERP Components  214
Core ERP Components  214
Extended ERP Components  216
Measuring ERP Success  217
The Future of ERP  218
On-Premise ERP  218
Cloud ERP  218
Hybrid ERP  220
Chapter 12 Case:  Five Famous ERP Failures  222
Learning Outcome Review  224
Review Questions  224
Making Business Decisions  225
Unit Summary  226
Key Terms  226
Unit Closing Case One:  Action Finally  227
Unit Closing Case Two:  Dream It, Design It, 3D 
Print It  229
Apply Your Knowledge  230
AYK Application Projects  236
UNIT 4  238
Building Innovation  238
Slack–Be Less Busy  239
Introduction  241
CHAPTER 13: CREATING INNOVATIVE ORGANIZATIONS  242
Disruptive Technologies and Web 1.0  242
CHAPTER 7: ACCESSING ­ORGANIZATIONAL INFORMATION—DATA 
WAREHOUSES  119
Data Warehousing  119
History of the Data Warehouse  119
Data Mart  121
Information Cleansing (or Scrubbing)  122
Business Intelligence  124
The Problem: Data Rich, Information Poor  125
The Solution: Business Intelligence  125
Chapter 7 Case:  Zillow  127
CHAPTER 8: UNDERSTANDING BIG DATA AND ITS IMPACT ON 
BUSINESS  131
The Power of Big Data  131
Distributed Computing  131
Virtualization  133
Analyzing Big Data  133
Data Mining  134
Data-Mining Process Model  135
Data-Mining Analysis Techniques  135
Data Mining Modeling Techniques for 
Predictions  139
Data Analysis  140
Advanced Data Analytics  141
Data Visualization  142
Chapter 8 Case:  Mining the Data Warehouse  144
Learning Outcome Review  146
Review Questions  146
Making Business Decisions  147
Unit Summary  149
Key Terms  149
Unit Closing Case One:  Data Visualization: Stories for the 
Information Age  150
Unit Closing Case Two:  Informing Information  152
Apply Your Knowledge  155
AYK Application Projects  159
UNIT 3  160
Streamlining Business Operations  160
The Connected Car Revolution  161
Introduction  163
CHAPTER 9: ENABLING THE ORGANIZATION—DECISION 
MAKING  164
Making Business Decisions  164
The Decision-Making Essentials  164
Support: Enhancing Decision Making with MIS  167
Operational Support Systems  167
Managerial Support Systems  169
Strategic Support Systems  170
The Future: Artificial Intelligence  172
Expert Systems  173
Neural Networks  173
Genetic Algorithms  174
Intelligent Agents  175
Virtual Reality  175
Chapter 9 Case:  Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency 
(DARPA) Grand Challenge  176

Table of Contents  *  ix
Wireless MANs  284
Wireless WAN—Cellular Communication System  285
Wireless WAN—Satellite Communication System  287
Protecting Wireless Connections  287
Managing Mobile Devices  288
Business Applications of Wireless Networks  288
Radio-Frequency Identification (RFID)  289
Global Positioning System (GPS)  290
Geographic Information Systems (GIS)  291
Chapter 16 Case:  Square  293
Learning Outcome Review  294
Review Questions  294
Making Business Decisions  294
Unit Summary  297
Key Terms  297
Unit Closing Case One:  Bitcoin  299
Unit Closing Case Two:  Disrupting the Taxi: Uber  300
Apply Your Knowledge  302
AYK Application Projects  306
UNIT 5  308
Transforming Organizations  308
Gamer Delight  309
Introduction  311
CHAPTER 17: DEVELOPING SOFTWARE TO STREAMLINE 
OPERATIONS  312
The Systems Development Life Cycle (SDLC)  312
Phase 1: Planning  314
Phase 2: Analysis  314
Phase 3: Design  315
Phase 4: Development  316
Phase 5: Testing  316
Phase 6: Implementation  318
Phase 7: Maintenance  319
Chapter 17 Case:  Reducing Ambiguity in Business 
Requirements  320
CHAPTER 18: METHODOLOGIES FOR SUPPORTING AGILE 
ORGANIZATIONS  325
Software Development Methodologies  325
Rapid Application Development (RAD) Methodology  327
Extreme Programming Methodology  327
Rational Unified Process (RUP) Methodology  328
Scrum Methodology  328
Developing a Service-Oriented Architecture  328
Interoperability  330
Loose Coupling  330
SOA Service  331
Chapter 18 Case:  Getting Your Project on Track  332
CHAPTER 19: MANAGING ORGANIZATIONAL PROJECTS  338
Using Project Management to Deliver Successful 
Projects  338
Unclear or Missing Business Requirements  339
Skipped Phases  339
Changing Technology  340
The Cost of Finding Errors in the SDLC  340
Balance of the Triple Constraints  341
Disruptive versus Sustaining Technology  242
The Internet and World Wide Web—The Ultimate Business 
Disruptors  244
Web 1.0: The Catalyst for Ebusiness  244
Advantages of Ebusiness  246
Expanding Global Reach  246
Opening New Markets  246
Reducing Costs  246
Improving Effectiveness  248
Chapter 13 Case:  Disruptive Innovation  250
CHAPTER 14: EBUSINESS  255
Ebusiness Models  255
Business-to-Business (B2B)  255
Business-to-Consumer (B2C)  256
Consumer-to-Business (C2B)  256
Consumer-to-Consumer (C2C)  256
Ebusiness Forms and Revenue-Generating Strategies  256
Ebusiness Tools for Connecting and Communicating  258
Email  258
Instant Messaging  259
Podcasting  259
Videoconferencing  259
Web Conferencing  260
Content Management Systems  260
The Challenges of Ebusiness  260
Identifying Limited Market Segments  260
Managing Consumer Trust  261
Ensuring Consumer Protection  261
Adhering to Taxation Rules  261
Chapter 14 Case:  HelloFresh Hello Delicious  261
CHAPTER 15: CREATING COLLABORATIVE PARTNERSHIPS  266
Web 2.0: Advantages of Business 2.0  266
Content Sharing through Open Sourcing  266
User-Contributed Content  267
Collaboration inside the Organization  267
Collaboration outside the Organization  268
Networking Communities with Business 2.0  269
Social Tagging  270
Business 2.0 Tools for Collaborating  271
Blogs  271
Wikis  272
Mashups  272
The Challenges of Business 2.0  273
Technology Dependence  273
Information Vandalism  273
Violations of Copyright and Plagiarism  273
Web 3.0: Defining the Next Generation of Online Business 
Opportunities  273
Egovernment: The Government Moves Online  274
Mbusiness: Supporting Anywhere Business  274
Chapter 15 Case:  Pinterest—Billboards for the Internet  275
CHAPTER 16: INTEGRATING WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY IN 
BUSINESS  282
Wireless Network Categories  282
Personal Area Networks  282
Wireless LANs  283

x  *  Table of Contents
Business Process Modeling Examples  391
Plug-In Summary  394
Key Terms  394
Making Business Decisions  394
B3: Hardware and Software Basics  396
Introduction  396
Hardware Basics  396
Central Processing Unit  397
Primary Storage  398
Secondary Storage  400
Input Devices  401
Communication Devices  403
Computer Categories  403
Software Basics  406
System Software  406
Application Software  407
Distributing Application Software  407
Key Terms  409
Plug-In Summary  409
Making Business Decisions  409
B4: MIS Infrastructures  412
The Business Benefits of a Solid MIS Infrastructure  412
Supporting Operations: Information MIS Infrastructure  413
Backup and Recovery Plan  414
Disaster Recovery Plan  415
Business Continuity Plan  417
Supporting Change: Agile MIS Infrastructure  419
Accessibility  419
Availability  420
Maintainability  421
Portability  421
Reliability  421
Scalability  422
Usability  422
Plug-In Summary  423
Key Terms  423
Making Business Decisions  423
B5: Networks and Telecommunications  428
Introduction  428
Network Basics  428
Architecture  429
Peer-to-Peer Networks  430
Client/Server Networks  431
Topology  431
Protocols  431
Ethernet  432
Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol  433
Media  435
Wire Media  435
Wireless Media  436
Plug-In Summary  437
Key Terms  437
Making Business Decisions  437
Primary Project Planning Diagrams  342
Outsourcing Projects  345
Outsourcing Benefits  346
Outsourcing Challenges  346
Chapter 19 Case:  Disaster at Denver International 
Airport  347
Learning Outcome Review  348
Review Questions  348
Making Business Decisions  349
Unit Summary  351
Key Terms  351
Unit Closing Case One:  To Share—Or Not To Share  352
Unit Closing Case Two:  Box Up Your Data  355
Apply Your Knowledge  357
AYK Application Projects  362
Business Plug-Ins
B1: Business Basics  364
Introduction  364
Types of Business  364
Sole Proprietorship  365
Partnership  365
Corporation  365
Internal Operations of a Corporation  367
Accounting  367
Financial Statements  367
Finance  369
Financial Analysis  369
Human Resources  370
Management Techniques  370
Sales  371
The Sales Process  371
Market Share  371
Marketing  373
Marketing Mix  373
Customer Segmentation  373
The Product Life Cycle  375
Operations/Production  375
Transforming Corporations  375
Management Information Systems  376
Plug-In Summary  378
Key Terms  378
Making Business Decisions  379
B2: Business Process  380
Introduction  380
Examining Business Processes  380
Business Process Improvement  383
Business Process Reengineering (BPR)  384
Business Process Design  385
Business Process Management (BPM)  387
Is BPM for Business or IT?  388
BPM Tools  389
BPM Risks and Rewards  389
Critical Success Factors  390

Table of Contents  *  xi
Business Benefits of BI  492
Categories of BI Benefits  493
Plug-In Summary  496
Key Terms  496
Making Business Decisions  496
B11: Global Information Systems  500
Introduction  500
Globalization  500
Cultural Business Challenges  501
Political Business Challenges  501
Global Geoeconomic Business  
Challenges  502
Global MIS Business Strategies  502
Governance and Compliance  503
Global Enterprise Architectures  505
Global Information Issues  506
Information Privacy  506
Europe  507
The United States  508
Canada  509
Global Systems Development  509
Plug-In Summary  510
Key Terms  510
Making Business Decisions  510
B12: Global Trends  512
Introduction  512
Reasons to Watch Trends  512
Trends Shaping Our Future  513
The World’s Population Will Double in the Next 40 
Years  513
People in Developed Countries Are Living  
Longer  514
The Growth in Information Industries Is Creating a 
Knowledge-Dependent Global Society  514
The Global Economy Is Becoming More  
Integrated  515
The Economy and Society Are Dominated by 
Technology  515
Pace of Technological Innovation Is Increasing  516
Time Is Becoming One of the World’s Most Precious 
Commodities  516
Technologies Shaping Our Future  516
The Digital Mesh  516
Smart Machines  517
The New IT Reality  518
Plug-In Summary  519
Key Terms  519
Making Business Decisions  519
Apply Your Knowledge Projects  AYK-2
Glossary  G-1
Notes  N-1
Index  I-1
B6: Information Security  440
The First Line of Defense—People  440
The Second Line of Defense—Technology  441
People: Authentication and Authorization  441
Data: Prevention and Resistance  444
Attack: Detection and Response  445
Plug-In Summary  447
Key Terms  447
Making Business Decisions  447
B7: Ethics  450
Developing Information Management Policies  450
Ethical Computer Use Policy  450
Information Privacy Policy  451
Acceptable Use Policy  452
Email Privacy Policy  452
Social Media Policy  453
Workplace Monitoring Policy  454
Plug-In Summary  456
Key Terms  456
Making Business Decisions  456
B8: Operations Management  460
Introduction  460
Operations Management Fundamentals  460
MIS’s Role in OM  463
OM Strategic Business Systems  463
Competitive OM Strategy  465
Cost  465
Quality  465
Delivery  466
Flexibility  466
Service  467
OM and the Supply Chain  467
PLUG-IN SUMMARY  468
KEY TERMS  468
MAKING BUSINESS DECISIONS  468
B9: Sustainable MIS Infrastructures  470
MIS and the Environment  470
Increased Electronic Waste  471
Increased Energy Consumption  471
Increased Carbon Emissions  471
Supporting the Environment: Sustainable MIS 
Infrastructure  472
Grid Computing  472
Virtualized Computing  474
Cloud Computing  478
Utility Computing  483
Plug-In Summary  485
Key Terms  485
Making Business Decisions  485
B10: Business Intelligence  490
Operational, Tactical, and Strategic BI  490
BI’S Operational Value  491

xii  *  About the Author
A B O U T  T H E  A U T H O R
Paige Baltzan
Paige Baltzan is an Assistant Teaching Professor in the department of Business Information 
and Analytics at the Daniels College of Business at the University of Denver. She holds a 
BSBA specializing in Accounting/MIS from Bowling Green State University and an MBA 
specializing in MIS from the University of Denver. She is a coauthor of several books, includ­
ing Business Driven Information Systems, Essentials of Business Driven Information Systems, 
and I-Series, and is a contributor to Management Information Systems for the Information Age.
Before joining the Daniels College faculty in 1999, Paige spent several years working for 
a large telecommunications company and an international consulting firm where she partici­
pated in client engagements in the United States as well as South America and Europe. Paige 
lives in Lakewood, Colorado, with her husband, Tony, and daughters, Hannah and Sophie.

The Technology Plug-Ins  *  xiii
The overall goal of the Technology Plug-Ins is to provide additional information not covered in the text such as personal 
productivity using information technology, problem solving using Excel, and decision making using Access. These plug-ins 
also offer an all-in-one text to faculty, avoiding their having to purchase an extra book to support Microsoft Office. These 
plug-ins offer integration with the core chapters and provide critical knowledge using essential business applications, such 
as Microsoft Excel, Microsoft Access, and Microsoft Project with hands-on tutorials for comprehension and mastery. Plug-
Ins T1 to T12 are located in McGraw-Hill Connect at http://connect.mheducation.com.
Plug-In
Description
T1. Personal Productivity 
Using IT
This plug-in covers a number of things to do to keep a personal computer running e­ffectively 
and efficiently. The topics covered in this plug-in are:
■	 Creating strong passwords.
■	 Performing good file management.
■	 Implementing effective backup and recovery strategies.
■	 Using Zip files.
■	 Writing professional emails.
■	 Stopping spam.
■	 Preventing phishing.
■	 Detecting spyware.
■	 Threads to instant messaging.
■	 Increasing PC performance.
■	 Using antivirus software.
■	 Installing a personal firewall.
T2. Basic Skills Using 
Excel
This plug-in introduces the basics of using Microsoft Excel, a spreadsheet program for data analysis, along with 
a few fancy features. The topics covered in this plug-in are:
■	 Workbooks and worksheets.
■	 Working with cells and cell data.
■	 Printing worksheets.
■	 Formatting worksheets.
■	 Formulas.
■	 Working with charts and graphics.
T3. Problem Solving Using 
Excel
This plug-in provides a comprehensive tutorial on how to use a variety of Microsoft Excel functions and features 
for problem solving. The areas covered in this plug-in are:
■	 Lists
■	 Conditional Formatting
■	 AutoFilter
■	 Subtotals
■	 PivotTables
T4. Decision Making Using 
Excel
This plug-in examines a few of the advanced business analysis tools used in ­Microsoft Excel that have the capabil­
ity to identify patterns, trends, and rules, and create “what-if” models. The four topics co­vered in this plug-in are:
■	 IF
■	 Lookup
■	 Goal Seek
■	 Solver
■	 Scenario Manager
T5. Designing Database 
Applications
This plug-in provides specific details on how to design relational database applications. One of the most 
­efficient and powerful information management computer-based applications is the relational database. The 
topics covered in this plug-in are:
■	 Entities and data relationships.
■	 Documenting logical data relationships.
■	 The relational data model.
■	 Normalization.
T H E  T E C H N O L O G Y  P L U G - I N S

xiv  *  The Technology Plug-Ins
Plug-in
Description
T6. Basic Skills Using ­Access
This plug-in focuses on creating a Microsoft Access database file. One of the most efficient 
information management computer-based applications is Microsoft Access. Access provides a ­powerful set of 
tools for creating and maintaining a relational database. The topics covered in this plug-in are:
■	 Create a new database file.
■	 Create and modify tables.
T7. Problem Solving Using 
Access
This plug-in provides a comprehensive tutorial on how to query a database in Microsoft Access. Queries are 
essential for problem solving, allowing a user to sort information, summarize data (display totals, averages, 
counts, and so on), display the results of calculations on data, and choose exactly which fields are shown. The 
topics in this plug-in are:
■	 Create simple queries using the simple query wizard.
■	 Create advanced queries using calculated fields.
■	 Format results displayed in calculated fields.
T8. Decision Making Using 
Access
This plug-in provides a comprehensive tutorial on entering data in a well-designed form and 
creating functional reports using Microsoft Access. A form is essential to use for data entry and a report is an ef­
fective way to present data in a printed format. The topics in this plug-in are:
■	 Creating, modifying, and running forms.
■	 Creating, modifying, and running reports.
T9. Designing Web Pages
This plug-in provides a comprehensive assessment into the functional aspects of web design. ­Websites are 
­beginning to look more alike and to employ the same metaphors and conventions. The web has now become 
an everyday thing whose design should not make users think. The topics in this plug-in are:
■	 The World Wide Web.
■	 Designing for the unknown(s).
■	 The process of web design.
■	 HTML basics.
■	 Web fonts.
■	 Web graphics.
T10. Creating Web Pages Us­
ing HTML
This plug-in provides an overview of creating web pages using the HTML language. HTML is a system of codes 
that you use to create interactive web pages. It provides a means to describe the structure of text-based in­
formation in a document—by denoting certain text as headings, paragraphs, lists, and so on. The topics in this 
plug-in are:
■	 An introduction to HTML.
■	 HTML tools.
■	 Creating, saving, and viewing HTML documents.
■	 Apply style tags and attributes.
■	 Using fancy formatting.
■	 Creating hyperlinks.
■	 Displaying graphics.
T11. Creating Gantt Charts 
with Excel and 
Microsoft Project
This plug-in offers a quick and efficient way to manage projects. Excel and Microsoft Project are great for man­
aging all phases of a project, creating templates, collaborating on planning processes, tracking project prog­
ress, and sharing information with all interested parties. The two topics in this plug-in are:
■	 Creating Gantt Charts with Excel.
■	 Creating Gantt Charts with Microsoft Project.

Preface  *  xv
P R E F A C E
Unlike any other MIS text, Business Driven Technology, 7e, discusses various business initia­
tives first and how technology supports those initiatives second. The premise for this unique 
approach is that business initiatives should drive technology choices. Every discussion in the 
text first addresses the business needs and then addresses the technology that supports those 
needs.
Business Driven Technology offers you the flexibility to customize courses according to 
your needs and the needs of your students by covering only essential concepts and topics in 
the five core units, while providing additional in-depth coverage in the business and technol­
ogy plug-ins.
Business Driven Technology contains 19 chapters (organized into five units), 12 business 
plug-ins, and 11 technology plug-ins offering you the ultimate flexibility in tailoring content 
to the exact needs of your MIS course. The unique construction of this text allows you to 
cover essential concepts and topics in the five core units while providing you with the ability 
to customize a course and explore certain topics in greater detail with the business and tech­
nology plug-ins.
Plug-ins are fully developed modules of text that include student learning outcomes, case 
studies, business vignettes, and end-of-chapter material such as key terms, individual and 
group questions and projects, and case study exercises.
We realize that instructors today require the ability to cover a blended mix of topics in 
their courses. While some instructors like to focus on networks and infrastructure throughout 
their course, others choose to focus on ethics and security. Business Driven Technology was 
developed to easily adapt to your needs. Each chapter and plug-in is independent so you can:
■	 Cover any or all of the chapters as they suit your purpose.
■	 Cover any or all of the business plug-ins as they suit your purpose.
■	 Cover any or all of the technology plug-ins as they suit your purpose.
■	 Cover the plug-ins in any order you wish.
LESS MANAGING. MORE TEACHING. GREATER LEARNING.
McGraw-Hill Connect MIS is an online assignment and assessment solu­
tion that connects students with the tools and resources they’ll need to 
achieve success.
McGraw-Hill Connect MIS helps prepare students for their future by 
enabling faster learning, more efficient studying, and higher retention of 
knowledge.
MCGRAW-HILL CONNECT MIS FEATURES
Connect MIS offers a number of powerful tools and features to make managing assignments 
easier, so faculty can spend more time teaching. With Connect MIS, students can engage with 
their coursework anytime and anywhere, making the learning process more accessible and 
efficient. Connect MIS offers you the features described next.

Simple Assignment Management
With Connect MIS, creating assignments is easier than ever, so you can spend more time 
teaching and less time managing. The assignment management function enables you to:
■	 Create and deliver assignments easily with selectable interactive exercises, scenario-based 
questions, and test bank items.
■	 Streamline lesson planning, student progress reporting, and assignment grading to make 
classroom management more efficient than ever.
■	 Go paperless with the eBook and online submission and grading of student assignments.
Smart Grading
When it comes to studying, time is precious. Connect MIS helps students learn more effi-
ciently by providing feedback and practice material when they need it, where they need it. 
When it comes to teaching, your time also is precious. The grading function enables you to:
■	 Have assignments scored automatically, giving students immediate feedback on their work 
and side-by-side comparisons with correct answers.
■	 Access and review each response; manually change grades or leave comments for students 
to review.
■	 Reinforce classroom concepts with practice tests and instant quizzes.
Instructor Library
The Connect MIS Instructor Library is your repository for additional resources to improve 
student engagement in and out of class. You can select and use any asset that enhances your 
lecture. The Connect MIS Instructor Library includes:
■	 Instructor’s Manual with
■	 Classroom openers and exercises for each chapter.
■	 Case discussion points and solutions.
■	 Answers to all chapter questions and cases.
■	 Video guides–discussion points, questions and answers.
■	 PowerPoint Presentations with detail lecture notes.
■	 Solution files to all Apply Your Knowledge problems.
Student Study Center
■	 The Connect MIS Student Study Center is the place for students to access additional data 
files, student versions of the PowerPoint slides and more.
Student Progress Tracking
Connect MIS keeps instructors informed about how each student, section, and class is per-
forming, allowing for more productive use of lecture and office hours. The progress-tracking 
function enables you to:
■	 View scored work immediately and track individual or group performance with assign-
ment and grade reports.
■	 Access an instant view of student or class performance relative to learning objectives.
■	 Collect data and generate reports required by many accreditation organizations, such as 
AACSB.
Lecture Capture
Increase the attention paid to lecture discussion by decreasing the attention paid to note taking. 
For an additional charge Lecture Capture offers new ways for students to focus on the in-class 
discussion, knowing they can revisit important topics later. Lecture Capture enables you to:
■	 Record and distribute your lecture with a click of a button.
■	 Record and index PowerPoint presentations and anything shown on your computer so it is 
easily searchable, frame by frame.
xvi  *  Preface

Preface  *  xvii
■	 Offer access to lectures anytime and anywhere by computer, iPod, or mobile device.
■	 Increase intent listening and class participation by easing students’ concerns about note 
taking. Lecture Capture will make it more likely you will see students’ faces, not the tops 
of their heads.
McGraw-Hill Connect Plus MIS
McGraw-Hill reinvents the textbook learning experience for the modern student with Connect 
Plus MIS. A seamless integration of an eBook and Connect MIS, Connect Plus MIS provides 
all of the Connect MIS features plus the following:
■	 SmartBook, our adaptive eBook, allowing for anytime, anywhere access to the textbook.
■	 A powerful search function to pinpoint and connect key concepts in a snap.
In short, Connect MIS offers you and your students powerful tools and features that ­optimize 
your time and energies, enabling you to focus on course content, teaching, and student learn­
ing. Connect MIS also offers a wealth of content resources for both instructors and students. 
This state-of-the-art, thoroughly tested system supports you in preparing students for the 
world that awaits.
For more information about Connect, go to connect.mheducation.com, or contact your 
local McGraw-Hill sales representative.
Tegrity Campus: Lectures 24/7
	
	
	
	
  Tegrity Campus is a service that makes class time avail­
able 24/7 by automatically capturing every lecture in a 
searchable format for students to review when they study 
and complete assignments. With a simple one-click start-
and-stop process, you capture all computer screens and corresponding audio. ­Students can 
­replay any part of any class with easy-to-use browser-based viewing on a PC or Mac.
Educators know that the more students can see, hear, and experience class resources, the 
better they learn. In fact, studies prove it. With Tegrity Campus, students quickly recall key mo­
ments by using Tegrity Campus’s unique search feature. This search helps students efficiently 
find what they need, when they need it, across an entire semester of class recordings. Help turn 
all your students’ study time into learning moments immediately supported by your lecture.
Assurance of Learning Ready
Many educational institutions today are focused on the notion of assurance of learning, an 
important element of some accreditation standards. Business Driven Technology, 7e, is designed 
specifically to support your assurance of learning initiatives with a simple yet powerful solution.
Each test bank question for Business Driven Technology maps to a specific chapter learn­
ing outcome/objective listed in the text. You can use our test bank software, EZ Test, or in 
Connect MIS to easily query for learning outcomes/objectives that directly relate to the learn­
ing objectives for your course. You can then use the reporting features of EZ Test to aggre­
gate student results in similar fashion, making the collection and presentation of assurance of 
learning data simple and easy.
McGraw-Hill Customer Contact Information
At McGraw-Hill, we understand that getting the most from new technology can be chal­
lenging. That’s why our services don’t stop after you purchase our products. You can email 
our Product Specialists 24 hours a day to get product-training online. Or you can search 
our knowledge bank of Frequently Asked Questions on our support website. For Customer 
Support, you can call 800-331-5094 or visit www.mhhe.com/support. One of our Technical 
Support Analysts will be able to assist you in a timely fashion.

xviii  *  Walkthrough
Walkthrough
This text is organized around the 
traditional sequence of topics and 
concepts in information technology; 
however, the presentation of this material 
is nontraditional. That is to say, the text is 
divided into four major sections: (1) units, 
(2) chapters, (3) business plug-ins, and 
(4) technology plug-ins. This represents 
a substantial departure from existing 
traditional texts. The goal is to provide both 
students and faculty with only the most 
essential concepts and topical coverage in 
the text, while allowing faculty to customize 
a course by choosing from among a set of 
plug-ins that explore topics in more detail. 
All of the topics that form the core of the 
discipline are covered, including CRM, 
SCM, Porter’s Five Forces Model, value 
chain analysis, competitive advantage, 
information security, and ethics.
Business Driven Technology 
includes four major components:
■	 5 Core Units
■	 19 Chapters
■	 12 Business Plug-Ins
■	 11 Technology Plug-Ins
1. Achieving Business Success
Chapter 1: Business Driven Technology
Chapter 2: Identifying Competitive Advantages
Chapter 3: Strategic Initiatives for Implementing Competitive Advantages
Chapter 4: Measuring the Success of Strategic Initiatives
Chapter 5: Organizational Structures That Support Strategic Initiatives
2 Exploring Business Intelligence
Chapter 6: Valuing and Storing Organizational Information—Databases
Chapter 7: Accessing Organizational Information—Data Warehouses
Chapter 8: Understanding Big Data and Its Impact on Business
3 Streamlining Business Operations
Chapter 9: Enabling the Organization—Decision Making
Chapter 10: Extending the Organization—Supply Chain Management
Chapter 11: Building a Customer-Centric Organization—Customer Relationship Management
Chapter 12: Integrating the Organization from End to End—Enterprise Resource Planning
4 Building Innovation
Chapter 13: Creating Innovative Organizations
Chapter 14: Ebusiness
Chapter 15: Creating Collaborative Partnerships
Chapter 16: Integrating Wireless Technology in Business
5 Transforming Organizations
Chapter 17: Developing Software to Streamline Operations
Chapter 18: Methodologies for Supporting Agile Organizations
Chapter 19: Managing Organizational Projects
UNITS
B1 
Business Basics
B2 
Business Process
B3 
Hardware and Software Basics
B4 
MIS Infrastructures
B5 
Networks and Telecommunications
B6 
Information Security
B7 
Ethics
B8 
Operations Management
B9 
Sustainable MIS Infrastructures
B10 
Business Intelligence
B11 
Global Information Systems
B12 
Global Trends
T1 
Personal Productivity Using IT
T2 
Basic Skills Using Excel
T3 
Problem Solving Using Excel
T4 
Decision Making Using Excel
T5 
Designing Database Applications
T6 
Basic Skills Using Access
T7 
Problem Solving Using Access
T8 
Decision Making Using Access
T9 
Designing Web Pages
T10 
Creating Web Pages Using HTML
T11 
Creating Gantt Charts with Excel and Microsoft 
Project
BUSINESS PLUG-INS
TECHNOLOGY PLUG-INS (CONNECT ONLY)
Apply Your Knowledge Projects
Glossary
Notes
Index

Walkthrough  *  xix
Format, Features, and Highlights
Business Driven Technology, 7e, is state of the art in its discussions, presents concepts in an easy-to-­understand 
format, and allows students to be active participants in learning. The dynamic nature of information technol­
ogy requires all students, more specifically business students, to be aware of both current and emerging tech­
nologies. Students are facing complex subjects and need a clear, concise explanation to be able to understand 
and use the concepts throughout their careers. By engaging students with numerous case studies, exercises, 
projects, and questions that enforce concepts, Business Driven Technology creates a unique learning experi­
ence for both faculty and students.
■	 Logical Layout. Students and faculty will find the text well organized with the topics flowing logically 
from one unit to the next and from one chapter to the next. The definition of each term is provided before it 
is covered in the chapter and an extensive glossary is included at the back of the text. Each core unit offers 
a comprehensive opening case study, introduction, learning outcomes, unit summary, closing case studies, 
key terms, and making business decision questions. The plug-ins follow the same pedagogical elements 
with the exception of the exclusion of opening case and closing case studies in the technology plug-ins.
■	 Thorough Explanations. Complete coverage is provided for each topic that is introduced. Explanations are 
written so that students can understand the ideas presented and relate them to other concepts presented in 
the core units and plug-ins.
■	 Solid Theoretical Base. The text relies on current theory and practice of information systems as they relate 
to the business environment. Current academic and professional journals and websites upon which the text 
is based are found in the References at the end of the book—a road map for additional, pertinent readings 
that can be the basis for learning beyond the scope of the unit, chapter, or plug-in.
■	 Material to Encourage Discussion. All units contain a diverse selection of case studies and individual 
and group problem-solving activities as they relate to the use of information technology in business. Two 
comprehensive cases at the end of each unit reflect the concepts from the chapters. These cases encourage 
students to consider what concepts have been presented and then apply those concepts to a situation they 
might find in an organization. Different people in an organization can view the same facts from different 
points of view and the cases will force students to consider some of those views.
■	 Flexibility in Teaching and Learning. While most textbooks that are “text only” leave faculty on their 
own when it comes to choosing cases, Business Driven Technology goes much further. Several options 
are provided to faculty with case selections from a variety of sources including CIO, Harvard Business 
Journal, Wired, Forbes, and Time, to name just a few. Therefore, faculty can use the text alone, the text and 
a complete selection of cases, or anything in between.
■	 Integrative Themes. Several themes recur throughout the text, which adds integration to the material. 
Among these themes are value-added techniques and methodologies, ethics and social responsibility, glo­
balization, and gaining a competitive advantage. Such topics are essential to gaining a full understanding 
of the strategies that a business must recognize, formulate, and in turn implement. In addition to addressing 
these in the chapter material, many illustrations are provided for their relevance to business practice. These 
include brief examples in the text as well as more detail presented in the corresponding plug-in(s) (business 
or technical).

xx  *  Walkthrough
Visual Content Map
Located at the beginning of the text 
and serving as a logical outline, the 
visual content map illustrates the 
relationship between each unit and 
its associated plug-ins.
Visual Content Map
Introduction
Information is everywhere. Most organizations value information as a strategic asset. Organi-
zational success depends heavily on the ability to gather and analyze information about opera-
tions, suppliers, customers, and markets. Information can answers such questions as who are 
your best and worst customers? How much inventory do you need to meet demand? Where 
can you source the cheapest raw materials? How can you increase sales or reduce costs? 
Answering these questions incorrectly can lead directly to business failure. Estimating too 
many buyers will lead to an excess of inventory; estimating too few buyers will potentially 
lead to lost sales due to lack of product (resulting in even more lost revenues). 
Understanding the direct impact information has on an organization’s bottom line is crucial 
to running a successful business. This text focuses on information, business, technology, and 
the integrated set of activities used to run most organizations. Many of these activities are the 
hallmarks of business today—supply chain management, customer relationship management, 
enterprise resource planning, outsourcing, integration, ebusiness, and others. The five core 
units of this text cover these important activities in detail. Each unit is divided into chapters 
that provide individual learning outcomes and case studies. In addition to the five core units, 
there are technology and business “plug-ins” (see  Figure Unit 1.1) that further explore topics 
presented in the five core units.
The chapters in Unit 1 are:
 ■ Chapter One—Business Driven Technology.
 ■ Chapter Two—Identifying Competitive Advantages.
 ■ Chapter Three—Strategic Initiatives for Implementing Competitive Advantages.
 ■ Chapter Four—Measuring the Success of Strategic Initiatives.
 ■ Chapter Five—Organizational Structures That Support Strategic Initiatives.

Walkthrough  *  xxi
Introduction and Learning Outcomes
Introduction.  Located after the Unit 
Opening Case, the introduction familiarizes 
students with the overall tone of the 
chapters. Thematic concepts are also 
broadly defined.
Learning Outcomes.  These outcomes focus 
on what students should learn and be able 
to answer upon completion of the chapter or 
plug-in.
Introduction
Decision making and problem solving in today’s electronic world encompass large-scale, 
opportunity-oriented, strategically focused solutions. The traditional “cookbook” approach to 
decisions simply will not work in the ebusiness world. Decision-making and problem-solving 
abilities are now the most sought-after traits in up-and-coming executives. To put it mildly, 
decision makers and problem solvers have limitless career potential.
Ebusiness is the conducting of business on the Internet, not only buying and selling, but 
also serving customers and collaborating with business partners. (Unit Four discusses ebusi-
ness in detail.) With the fast growth of information technology and the accelerated use of the 
Internet, ebusiness is quickly becoming standard. This unit focuses on technology to help 
make decisions, solve problems, and find new innovative opportunities. The unit highlights 
how to bring people together with the best IT processes and tools in complete, flexible solu-
tions that can seize business opportunities (see Figure Unit 3.1). The chapters in Unit 3 are:
 ■ Chapter Nine—Enabling the Organization—Decision Making.
 ■ Chapter Ten—Extending the Organization—Supply Chain Management.
 ■ Chapter Eleven—Building a Customer-centric Organization—Customer Relationship 
Management.
 ■ Chapter Twelve—Integrating the Organization from End to End—Enterprise Resource 
Planning.
systems, and explain how managers can use these 
systems to make decisions and gain competitive 
advantages.
 9.3. Describe artificial intelligence, and identify its five  
main types.
LEARNING OUTCOMES
 9.1. Explain the importance of decision making for 
managers at each of the three primary organization 
levels along with the associated decision 
characteristics.
 9.2. Classify the different operational support systems, 
managerial support systems, and strategic support 

xxii  *  Walkthrough
Unit Opening Case. To enhance student 
interest, each unit begins with an opening 
case study that highlights an organization 
that has been time-tested and value-
proven in the business world. This feature 
serves to fortify concepts with relevant 
examples of outstanding companies. 
Discussion of the case is threaded 
throughout the chapters in each unit.
Opening Case Study 
Questions. Located at the 
end of each chapter, pertinent 
questions connect the Unit 
Opening Case with important 
chapter concepts.
U N I T  O N E  O P E N I N G  C A S E
Buy Experiences, Not Things
Retail is one of the most competitive and stingiest industries in America boasting some of the 
most dissatisfied workers across the board. Walmart Stores employees began a week-long 
strike in Miami, Boston, and the San Francisco Bay Area to publicly display their immense dis-
satisfaction with the multinational corporation. Employees at Amazon.com fulfillment center in 
Leipzig, Germany went on strike demanding higher wages and better benefits. Just search retail 
strikes and you will find numerous examples of dissatisfied employees doing what they can to 
improve their situations. However, there is one company that will not appear on the list – Costco 
Wholesale!
Costco Wholesale, the second-largest retailer in the U.S. behind Walmart, is an anomaly in a 
world where retailers are closing their doors due to the inability to compete with online prices. 
Retail stores such as Aeropostale, Sears, and Macy’s are all feeling the pressure of the online 
marketplaces of today’s digital world. Costco requires a $55-a-year membership fee for access 
to its massive warehouses supplied floor to ceiling with generous portions of everything from 
olive oil to paper towels. While many businesses are losing customers to the Internet Costco’s 
sales have grown 40 percent and its stock price has doubled.
Treating employees exceptionally well is the secret to Costco’s success. Costco employees 
make an average of $20 an hour, not including overtime and eighty-eight percent of Costco 
© nadla/Getty Images
© Ariel Skelley/Blend Images LLC
© Hero Images/Getty Images
Unit Opening Case and Opening Case 
Study Questions
 1. What is the ebusiness model implemented by Slack?
 2. What is the revenue model implemented by Slack?
O P E N I N G  C A S E  ST U DY  Q U E ST I O N S

Walkthrough  *  xxiii
Case Studies. This text is packed with 
case studies illustrating how a variety of 
prominent organizations and businesses 
have successfully implemented many of this 
text’s concepts. All cases promote critical 
thinking. Company profiles are especially 
appealing and relevant to your students, 
helping to stir classroom discussion and 
interest.
Apply Your Knowledge. At the end 
of this text is a set of 33 projects 
aimed at reinforcing the business 
initiatives explored in the text. 
These projects help to develop the 
application and problem-solving 
skills of your students through 
challenging and creative business-
driven scenarios.
Projects and Case Studies
Using drones to drop off packages could be great for buyers, who might want to get cert
fast as humanly possible. Back in 2013, when Amazon revealed plans to begin deliverin
via flying drones through Prime Air, some seemed skeptical about the reality of deplo
system. Recently, Amazon doubled down on those claims by releasing information on on
drones in action, and it is seriously impressive.
A new video presented by former Top Gear host Jeremy Clarkson (who is working on
Amazon), takes us through the entire process, from ordering, to warehouse launch, to delive
drone looks a lot different from the one Amazon showed us a couple of years ago. This one
commercial and streamlined look, and instead of showing the package hanging in open 
drone hides the item in a square compartment. Just Google Amazon Prime Air Drone video 
Clarkson to see for yourself this amazing new drone that will dramatically impact the supply
According to Amazon, the drone reaches a height of about 400 feet in vertical mod
switches to horizontal mode to travel up to 15 miles away from the warehouse. During th
drone uses what Amazon calls “sense and avoid technology” to avoid collisions with othe
its flight path.
Toward the end of the video, the drone alights atop an Amazon logo in the yard of 
and spits out the package (in this case, shoes) and then takes off in a matter of seconds. T
process, which Amazon is careful to note is real and not a simulation, comes off seamles
the prospect of drone deliveries seem like something that will be viable just a few month
However, despite the encouraging footage, Amazon is still holding off on announc
when its drones will take to the skies. On the updated Prime Air page featuring the new fli
a message reads, “Putting Prime Air into service will take some time, but we will deplo
have the regulatory support needed to realize our vision.”
The FAA’s Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) Registration Task Force Aviation Rulemak
tee is still hammering out rules for private and commercial drone use in U.S. air space, s
lack of a specific launch timeline for Prime Air is understandable. But based on the video
ing increasingly clear that Prime Air might not be a mere marketing stunt but a real look a
of Amazon deliveries.
Retailers Racing to the Drone Games
Wal-Mart recently applied to U.S. regulators for permission to test drones for home delive
pickup and checking warehouse inventories, a sign it plans to go head-to-head with Ama
drones to fill and deliver online orders. 
Wal-Mart wants to start using drones in an effort to create a more efficient supply cha
nect their network of stores, distribution centers, fulfillment centers and transportatio
world’s largest retailer by revenue has for several months been conducting indoor te
unmanned aircraft systems (drones) and is now seeking for the first time to test the ma
doors. In addition to having drones take inventory of trailers outside its warehouses a
other tasks aimed at making its distribution system more efficient, Wal-Mart is asking the F
tion Administration for permission to research drone use in “deliveries to customers at Wa
ties, as well as to consumer homes.” The move comes as Amazon, Google and other com
d
h
h
h FAA
ll
bl h
l
f
h
d
d
Chapter Three Case: Amazon Drone Knocking
Project 
Number
Project Name
Project Type
Plug-In
Focus Area
Project Level
Skill Set
Page 
Number
  1
Financial  
Destiny
Excel
T2
Personal 
Budget
Introductory
Formulas
AYK.4
  2
Cash Flow
Excel
T2
Cash Flow
Introductory
Formulas
AYK.4
  3
Technology 
Budget
Excel
T1, T2
Hardware and 
Software
Introductory
Formulas
AYK.4
  4
Tracking 
Donations
Excel
T2
Employee 
Relationships
Introductory
Formulas
AYK.4
  5
Convert  
Currency
Excel
T2
Global 
Commerce
Introductory
Formulas
AYK.5
  6
Cost  
Comparison
Excel
T2
Total Cost of 
Ownership
Introductory
Formulas
AYK.5
  7
Time 
Management
Excel or Project
T12
Project 
Management
Introductory
Gantt Charts
AYK.6
  8
Maximize  
Profit
Excel
T2, T4
Strategic 
Analysis
Intermediate
Formulas or 
Solver
AYK.6
  9
Security  
Analysis
Excel
T3
Filtering Data
Intermediate
Conditional 
Formatting, 
Autofilter, 
Subtotal
AYK.7
10
Gathering  
Data
Excel
T3
Data Analysis
Intermediate
Conditional 
Formatting
AYK.8
11
Scanner  
System
Excel
T2
Strategic 
Analysis
Intermediate
Formulas
AYK.8
A P P LY  YO U R  K N O W L E D G E
Apply Your Knowledge Project Overview

xxiv  *  Walkthrough
Making Business Decisions. 
Small scenario-driven projects 
help students focus on decision 
making as they relate to the topical 
elements in the chapters and 
plug-ins.
1. Two Trillion Rows of Data Analyzed Daily—No Problem
eBay is the world’s largest online marketplace, with 97 million global users selling anything to 
 anyone at a yearly total of $62 billion—more than $2,000 every second. Of course with this many 
sales, eBay is collecting the equivalent of the Library of Congress worth of data every three days 
that must be analyzed to run the business successfully. Luckily, eBay discovered Tableau!
Tableau started at Stanford when Chris Stolte, a computer scientist; Pat Hanrahan, an Academy 
Award–winning professor; and Christian Chabot, a savvy business leader, decided to solve the problem 
of helping ordinary people understand big data. The three created Tableau, which bridged two  computer 
science disciplines: computer graphics and databases. No more need to write code or understand the 
relational database keys and categories; users simply drag and drop pictures of what they want to 
 analyze. Tableau has become one of the most successful data visualization tools on the market, winning 
multiple awards, international expansion, and millions in revenue and spawning multiple new inventions.
Tableau is revolutionizing business analytics, and this is only the beginning. Visit the Tableau 
website and become familiar with the tool by watching a few of the demos. Once you have a good 
understanding of the tool, create three questions eBay might be using Tableau to answer, including 
the analysis of its sales data to find patterns, business insights, and trends.
2. Track Your Life
With wearable technology, you can track your entire life. Nike’s Fuelband and Jawbone’s Up tracks all 
of your physical activity, caloric burn, and sleep patterns. You can track your driving patterns, tooth-
brushing habits, and even laundry status. The question now becomes how to track all of your trackers.
A new company called Exist incorporates tracking devices with weather data, music choices, 
 Netflix favorites, and Twitter activity all in one digital dashboard. Exist wants to understand 
every area of your life and provide correlation information between such things as your personal 
 productivity and mood. As the different types of data expand, so will the breadth of correlations 
Exist can point out. For instance, do you tweet more when you are working at home? If so, does this 
increase productivity? Exist wants to track all of your trackers and analyze the information to help 
you become more efficient and more effective.
Create a digital dashboard for tracking your life. Choose four areas you want to track and 
 determine three ways you would measure each area. For example, if you track eating habits, you 
might want to measure calories and place unacceptable levels in red and acceptable levels in green. 
Once completed, determine whether you can find any correlations among the areas in your life.
3. Butterfly Effects
M A K I N G  B U S I N E S S  D E C I S I O N S
Making Business Decisions

Walkthrough  *  xxv
End-of-Unit Elements
Each unit contains complete pedagogical support in the form of:
■	 Unit Summary. Revisiting the unit highlights in summary format.
■	 Key Terms. With page numbers referencing where they are discussed in the text.
■	 Two Closing Case Studies. Reinforcing important concepts with prominent examples from businesses and 
organizations. Discussion questions follow each case study.
■	 Apply Your Knowledge. In-depth projects that help students focus on applying the skills and concepts they have 
learned throughout the unit.
■	 Apply Your Knowledge Application Projects. Highlights the different AYK projects available at the end of the text 
that takes the MIS concepts and challenges the students to apply them using Excel, Access, and other tools.
U N I T  C L O S I N G  C A S E  T W O
Informing Information
Since the beginning of time, man has been using pictures and images to communicate, moving 
Source: NPS photo by Jim Peaco
© Fuse/Getty Images
© C. Borland/PhotoLink/Getty Images
1. Two Trillion Rows of Data Analyzed Daily—No Problem
eBay is the world’s largest online marketplace, with 97 million global users selling anything t
 anyone at a yearly total of $62 billion—more than $2,000 every second. Of course with this m
sales, eBay is collecting the equivalent of the Library of Congress worth of data every three d
that must be analyzed to run the business successfully. Luckily, eBay discovered Tableau!
Tableau started at Stanford when Chris Stolte, a computer scientist; Pat Hanrahan, an Academ
Award–winning professor; and Christian Chabot, a savvy business leader, decided to solve the p
of helping ordinary people understand big data. The three created Tableau, which bridged two  c
science disciplines: computer graphics and databases. No more need to write code or understan
relational database keys and categories; users simply drag and drop pictures of what they want 
 analyze. Tableau has become one of the most successful data visualization tools on the market, 
multiple awards, international expansion, and millions in revenue and spawning multiple new inv
Tableau is revolutionizing business analytics and this is only the beginning Visit the Tabl
M A K I N G  B U S I N E S S  D E C I S I O N S
K E Y  T E R M S
Affinity grouping analysis, 137
Algorithms, 141
Analysis paralysis, 143
Analytical information, 100
Analytics, 141
Anomaly detection, 141
Attribute, 105
Backward integration, 112
Big data, 131
Business-critical integrity 
constraints, 109
Business intelligence dashboard , 
 144
Business rule, 109
Content editor, 110
Cube, 140
Data-driven decision 
management, 126
Data aggregation, 121
Data artist, 143
Database, 104
Database management system 
(DBMS), 104
Data broker, 124
Data dictionary, 105
Data-driven website, 110
Data element (or data field, 104
Data gap analysis, 103

xxvi  *  Walkthrough
The plug-ins are designed to allow faculty to 
customize their course and cover selected 
topics in more detail. Students will read 
core material related to all of the plug-ins in 
the five units.
As an example, students will learn about 
various facets of customer relationship 
management (CRM) most notably in 
Chapter 11. However, customer relationship 
management has its own business plug-in. 
The CRM business plug-in gives both faculty 
and students the ability to cover CRM in 
more detail if desired. Likewise, students 
will receive an introduction to decision 
making in Unit 3. The Excel technology 
plug-ins allow coverage of decision-making 
tools such as PivotTables, Goal Seek, and 
Scenario Manager.
P L U G - I N
Introduction
A sign posted beside a road in Colorado states, “Failing to plan is planning to fail.” Playnix 
Toys posted the sign after successfully completing its 20th year in the toy business in Colo-
rado. The company’s mission is to provide a superior selection of high-end toys for children 
of all ages. When the company began, it generated interest by using unique marketing strate-
gies and promotions. The toy business has a lot of tough competition. Large chain stores such 
as Walmart and Target offer toys at deep discount prices. Finding the right strategy to remain 
competitive is difficult in this industry, as FAO Schwarz discovered when it filed for bank-
ruptcy after 143 years in the toy business.
B1 
Business Basics
LEARNING OUTCOMES
 1. Define the three common business forms.
 2. List and describe the seven departments commonly found in most organizations.
LO 1 Define the three common 
business forms.
About the Plug-Ins
Technical Focus. If hands-on, technical skills are more important, 
include technical plug-ins in your MIS course.
Management Focus. By focusing on the business plug-ins, your 
course will take on a managerial approach to MIS.

Walkthrough  *  xxvii
T
he study of business begins with understanding the different types of businesses including a 
sole proprietorship, partnership, or a corporation. Figure B1.15 highlights seven departments 
found in a typical business.
All of these departments must be able to execute activities specific to their business function and 
also be able to work with the other departments to create synergies throughout the entire business.
P L U G - I N  S U M M A R Y
■  Accounting provides quantitative information about the finances of the business including recording, 
measuring, and describing financial information.
■  Finance deals with the strategic financial issues associated with increasing the value of the business, 
while observing applicable laws and social responsibilities.
■  Human resources (HR) includes the policies, plans, and procedures for the effective management of 
employees (human resources).
■  Sales is the function of selling a good or service and focuses on increasing customer sales, which 
increases company revenues.
■  Marketing is the process associated with promoting the sale of goods or services. The marketing 
department supports the sales department by creating promotions that help sell the company’s 
products.
■  Operations management (also called production management) is the management of systems or 
processes that convert or transform resources (including human resources) into goods and services.
■  Management information systems (MIS) is a general name for the business function and academic 
Each business plug-in contains complete pedagogical support in the form of:
■	 Plug-in Summary. Revisiting the plug-in highlights in summary format.
■	 Key Terms. With page numbers referencing where they are discussed in the text.
■	 Making Business Decisions. Small scenario-driven projects that help students focus individually on decision 
making as they relate to the topical elements in the chapters.
End-of-Plug-In Elements
K E Y  T E R M S
Accounting 367
Accounting department 367
Asset 368
Balance sheet 368
Bookkeeping 367
Break-even point 370
Capital 365
Corporation  
(also called, organization, 
enterprise, or business) 365
Dividend 368
Expense 368
Finance 369
Financial accounting 367
Financial quarter 369
Financial statements 368
For profit corporation 365
Human resources (HR) 370
Income statement  368
Liability 368
Limited liability 365
Limited liability corporation (LLC) 366
Limited partnership 365
Loss 364
Managerial accounting 367
Marketing 373
Marketing communications 373
Marketing mix 373
Market segmentation 373
Net income 368
Not for profit (or nonprofit) 
corporation 365
Operations management 375
Owner’s equity 368
Partnership 365
Partnership agreement 365
Product life cycle 375
Profit 364
Revenue 368
Sales 371
Shareholder 365
Sole proprietorship 365
Solvency 368
Statement of cash flows 369
Statement of owner’s equity 368
Transaction 367
 1. Setting Up a Business
Your friend, Olivia Graves, is going to start her own chocolate shop, called Chocolate-By-Design. 
Olivia is an expert candy maker and one of the city’s top pastry chefs. Olivia has come to you for 
advice on what type of business Chocolate-By-Design should be—a sole proprietorship, partner-
ship, or corporation. Create a report comparing the three different types of businesses, along with 
your recommendation for Chocolate-By-Design’s business structure.
 2. Guest Lecturing on Business
As a recent college graduate, your favorite professor, Dr. Henning, has asked you to come back 
and guest lecture at his introduction to business course. Create a presentation defining the differ-
ent departments in a typical business, what roles each play, and why it is important that they all 
work together.
M A K I N G  B U S I N E S S  D E C I S I O N S

Supplements:
■	 Business Driven Teaching Notes
■	 Instructor Resource Library in 
McGraw-Hill Connect
■	 Instructor’s Manual and Video 
Case Guide
■	 PowerPoint Presentations
■	 Classroom Exercises
■	 Project Files
Support and Supplemental Material
All of the supplemental material supporting Business Driven Technology was 
developed by the author to ensure you receive accurate, high-quality, and in-depth 
content. Included are a complete set of materials that will assist students and faculty 
in accomplishing course objectives.
Video Exercises. Many of the videos that accompany the text are supported by 
detailed teaching notes on how to turn the videos into classroom exercises where 
your students can apply the knowledge they are learning after watching the videos.
Test Bank. This computerized package allows instructors to custom design, save, 
and generate tests. The test program permits instructors to edit, add, or delete 
questions from the test banks; analyze test results; and organize a database of tests 
and student results.
■	 Instructor’s Manual (IM). The IM, written by the author, includes suggestions for 
designing the course and presenting the material. Each chapter is supported by 
answers to end-of-chapter questions and problems and suggestions concerning 
the discussion topics and cases.
■	 PowerPoint Presentations. A set of PowerPoint slides, created by the author, 
accompanies each chapter that features bulleted items that provide a lecture 
outline, plus key figures and tables from the text, and detailed teaching notes on 
each slide.
■	 Classroom Exercises. Choose from over 30 detailed classroom exercises that 
engage and challenge students. For example, if you are teaching systems 
development, start the class with the “Skyscraper Activity” where the students 
build a prototype that takes them through each phase of the systems development 
life cycle. All classroom exercises can be found in the IM.
■	 Project Files. The author has provided files for all projects that need further 
support, such as data files.
■	 Cohesion Case. Now assignable through Connect, The Broadway Cafe is a 
running case instructors can use to reinforce core material such as customer 
relationship management, supply chain management, business intelligence, and 
decision making. The case has 15 sections that challenge students to develop and 
expand their grandfather’s coffee shop. Students receive hands-on experience in 
business and learn technology’s true value of enabling business. Please note that 
the Cohesion Case is not a McGraw-Hill product but a Baltzan direct product. 
■	 Video Content. More than 20 videos accompany this text and cover topics from 
entrepreneurship to disaster recovery. Video IMs are also available so you can turn 
the videos into engaging classroom activities.
xxviii  *  Walkthrough

Walkthrough  *  xxix
McGraw-Hill Higher Education and Blackboard have teamed up. What does this mean 
for you?
	1.	 Your life, simplified. Now you and your students can access McGraw-Hill’s ConnectTM 
and CreateTM right from within your Blackboard course—all with one single sign-on. Say 
good-bye to the days of logging in to multiple applications.
	2.	 Deep integration of content and tools. Not only do you get single sign-on with Con­
nectTM and CreateTM, you also get deep integration of McGraw-Hill content and content 
engines right in Blackboard. Whether you’re choosing a book for your course or building 
ConnectTM assignments, all the tools you need are right where you want them—inside of 
Blackboard.
	3.	 Seamless gradebooks. Are you tired of keeping multiple gradebooks and manually syn­
chronizing grades into Blackboard? We thought so. When a student completes an inte­
grated ConnectTM assignment, the grade for that assignment automatically (and instantly) 
feeds your Blackboard grade ­center.
	4.	 A solution for everyone. Whether your institution is already using Blackboard or you just 
want to try Blackboard on your own, we have a solution for you. McGraw-Hill and Black­
board can now offer you easy access to industry leading technology and content, whether 
your campus hosts it or we do. Be sure to ask your local McGraw-Hill representative for 
details.
Craft your teaching resources to match the way you teach! With McGraw-Hill Create, 
www.mcgrawhillcreate.com, you can easily rearrange chapters, combine material from other 
content sources, and quickly upload content you have written, like your course syllabus or 
teaching notes. Find the content you need in Create by searching through thousands of lead­
ing McGraw-Hill textbooks. Arrange your book to fit your teaching style. Create even allows 
you to personalize your book’s appearance by selecting the cover and adding your name, 
school, and course information. Order a Create book and you’ll receive a complimentary print 
review copy in 3–5 business days or a complimentary electronic review copy (eComp) via 
email in about one hour. Go to www.mcgrawhillcreate.com today and register. Experience 
how McGraw-Hill Create empowers you to teach your students your way.

xxx  *  Contributions By
Etido Akpan
Freed Hardemann University
Dennis Anderson
Bentley University
Kaan Ataman
Chapman University–Orange
Vikram Bhadauria
Southern Arkansas University
Utpal Bose
University of Houston–Downtown
Traci Carte
University of Oklahoma
Carey Cole
James Madison University
Charles DeSassure
Tarrant County College–SE Campus
Mike Eom
University of Portland
Ahmed Eshra 
St. John’s University–Jamaica
Deborah Geil
Bowling Green State University
Naveen Gudigantala 
University of Portland
Saurabh Gupta
University of North Florida
Vernard Harrington
Radford University
Shoreh Hashimi
University of Houston–Downtown
Tracey Hughes
Southern Arkansas University
Keri Larson
The University of Alabama–Birmingham
Linda Lynam
University of Central Missouri
Michael Magro
Shenandoah University
Richard McMahon
University of Houston–Downtown
Don Miller
Avila University
Allison Morgan
Howard University
Vincent Nestler
University of California–San Bernardino
Sandra Newton
Sonoma State University
Ahmet Ozkul
University of New Haven
Susan Peterson
University of California–San Diego
Julie Pettus
Missouri State University
Gerald Plumlee
Southern Arkansas University
Pauline Ratnasingham
University of Central Missouri
Julio Rivera
University of Alabama–Birmingham
Thomas Sandman 
California State University–Sacramento
Dmitriy Shalteyev
Christopher Newport University
Lakisha Simmons
Belmont University
Ron Sones
Liberty University
Nathan Stout
University of Oklahoma
Stephen Taraszewski
Youngstown State University
Sharon Testa
Merrimack College
John Wee
University of Mississippi
Chuck West
Bradley University
Melody White
University of North Texas
Benjamin Yeo 
Chapman University
Zehai Zhou
University of Houston–Downtown
There are numerous people whom we want to heartily thank for their hard work, enthusiasm, 
and dedication on this edition of Business Driven Technology.
To the faculty at the Daniels College of Business at the University of Denver—Richard 
Scudder, Don McCubbrey, Paul Bauer, Hans Hultgren, Daivd Paul, Dan Connolly, and Amy 
Phillips—thank you. Your feedback, advice, and support are truly valued and greatly appreciated.
We offer our sincerest gratitude and deepest appreciation to our valuable reviewers, whose 
feedback was instrumental.
A C K N O W L E D G M E N T S
Patricia A. McQuaid, Ph.D., CISA, is a Professor of Information Systems in the Orfalea 
College of Business at California Polytechnic State University (Cal Poly). She has a doctorate 
in Computer Science and Engineering, an MBA, and an undergraduate degree in Accounting. 
Patricia is a Certified Information Systems Auditor (CISA), and a Certified Tester - Foundation 
Level (CTFL), through the ISTQB, the International Software Testing Qualifications Board. She 
has over 25 years of experience in software engineering, having taught in both the Colleges of 
Business and Engineering throughout her career. She has worked in industry in the banking and 
manufacturing industries as an information systems auditor, is a consultant, and a trainer.
Her research interests include software quality, software testing, project management, and pro­
cess improvement. She is a member of IEEE, and a Senior Member of the American Society for 
Quality (ASQ). She is an Associate Editor for the Software Quality Professional journal, and also 
participates on ASQ’s Software Division Council. Patricia is a frequent speaker and author, both 
internationally and nationally. She is a frequent speaker, both nationally and internationally.
C O N T R I B U T I O N S  B Y

Business 
Driven 
Technology

W h a t ’ s  i n  I T  f o r  M e ?
This unit sets the stage for diving into Business Driven Technology. It starts from the ground floor by providing 
a clear description of what information technology is and how IT fits into business strategies and organizational 
activities. It then provides an overview of how organizations operate in competitive environments and must 
continually define and redefine their business strategies to create competitive advantages. Doing so allows 
organizations to not only survive, but also thrive. Individuals who understand and can access and analyze the 
many different enterprisewide information systems dramatically improve their decision-making and problem-
solving abilities. Most importantly, information technology is shown as a key enabler to help organizations oper­
ate successfully in highly competitive environments.
You, as a business student, must recognize the tight correlation between business and technology. You 
must first understand information technology’s role in daily business activities, and then understand informa­
tion technology’s role in supporting and implementing enterprisewide initiatives and global business strategies. 
After reading this unit, you should have acquired a solid grasp of business driven information systems, technol­
ogy fundamentals, and business strategies. You should also have gained an appreciation of the various kinds of 
information systems employed by organizations and how you can use them to help make strategically informed 
decisions. All leaders must appreciate the numerous ethical and security concerns voiced by customers today. 
These concerns directly influence a customer’s likelihood to embrace electronic technologies and conduct busi­
ness over the web. In this sense, these concerns affect a company’s bottom line. You can find evidence in 
recent news reports about how the stock price of organizations dramatically falls when information privacy and 
security breaches are publicized. Further, organizations face potential litigation if they fail to meet their ethical, 
privacy, and security obligations concerning the handling of information in their companies.
1
U
N
I
T
Achieving Business Success

U N I T  O N E  O P E N I N G  C A S E
Buy Experiences, Not Things
Retail is one of the most competitive and stingiest industries in America boasting some of the 
most dissatisfied workers across the board. Walmart Stores employees began a week-long 
strike in Miami, Boston, and the San Francisco Bay Area to publicly display their immense dis­
satisfaction with the multinational corporation. Employees at Amazon.com fulfillment center in 
Leipzig, Germany went on strike demanding higher wages and better benefits. Just search retail 
strikes and you will find numerous examples of dissatisfied employees doing what they can to 
improve their situations. However, there is one company that will not appear on the list – Costco 
Wholesale!
Costco Wholesale, the second-largest retailer in the U.S. behind Walmart, is an anomaly in a 
world where retailers are closing their doors due to the inability to compete with online prices. 
Retail stores such as Aeropostale, Sears, and Macy’s are all feeling the pressure of the online 
marketplaces of today’s digital world. Costco requires a $55-a-year membership fee for access 
to its massive warehouses supplied floor to ceiling with generous portions of everything from 
olive oil to paper towels. While many businesses are losing customers to the Internet Costco’s 
sales have grown 40 percent and its stock price has doubled.
Treating employees exceptionally well is the secret to Costco’s success. Costco employees 
make an average of $20 an hour, not including overtime and eighty-eight percent of Costco 
employees have company-sponsored health insurance. Costco treats its employees well in the 
belief that a happier work environment will result in a more profitable company. It is obvious 
Costco is thriving in one of the toughest retail markets in history.
The style of Costco is minimalist with no-frills industrial shelving stocking the 4,000 different 
products. Products are marked up 14 percent or less over cost. Items like diapers, suitcases, and 
tissues, which it sells under its in-house Kirkland Signature brand, get a maximum 15 percent 
bump. After accounting for expenses such as real estate costs and wages, Costco barely ekes 
© nadla/Getty Images
© Ariel Skelley/Blend Images LLC
© Hero Images/Getty Images

4
out a profit on many of its products. Eighty percent of its gross profit comes from membership 
fees; customers renew their memberships at a rate of close to 90 percent.
“They are buying and selling more olive oil, more cranberry juice, more throw rugs than 
just about anybody,” says David Schick, an analyst at Stifel Nicolaus. And that allows Costco 
to get bulk discounts from its suppliers, often setting the industry’s lowest price. Even Amazon 
can’t beat Costco’s prices, which means that “showrooming,” or browsing in stores but buy­
ing online for the better price, isn’t much of a concern for Costco.
The company’s obsession with selling brand-name merchandise at cut-rate prices occa­
sionally gets it into trouble. Tiffany filed a multi-million-dollar trademark infringement suit 
against Costco alleging it improperly labeled merchandise as “Tiffany engagement rings.” 
Costco calls it “an honest mistake” and re-branded the label “Tiffany-style.” The suit is 
pending.
Buying Happiness
When you work hard every single day you want to spend your hard-earned funds on what 
science says will make you happy. The Commerce Department released data showing that 
American consumers are spending their disposable income on eating out, upgrading cars, 
renovating houses, sports, health, and beauty. Data shows restaurant spending has increased 
10 percent over the last year, and automotive sales have increased seven percent. Analysts 
say a wider shift is occurring in the mind of the American consumer, spurred by the popular­
ity of a growing body of scientific studies that appear to show that experiences, not objects, 
bring the most happiness. The Internet is bursting with the “Buy Experiences, Not Things” type 
of stories that give retailing executives nightmares. Millennials - the 20- and 30-­something 
­consumers whom marketers covet are actively pursuing this new happiness mentality.
 A 20-year study conducted by Dr. Thomas Gilovich, a psychology professor at Cornell 
University, reached a powerful and straightforward conclusion: don’t spend your money on 
things. The trouble with things is that the happiness they provide fades quickly. New pos­
sessions quickly become old and what once seemed novel and exciting quickly becomes 
the norm. The bar is constantly rising and new purchases lead to new expectations. As soon 
as we get used to a new possession, we look for an even better one. And of course we are 
always comparing ourselves to the neighbors. By nature, we are always comparing our pos­
sessions and as soon as we buy a new car a friend buys a better one—and there’s always 
someone with a better one.
Gilovich is not the only person believing experiences make us happier than possessions. 
Dr. Elizabeth Dunn at the University of British Columbia attributes the temporary happiness 
achieved by buying things to what she calls “puddles of pleasure.” In other words, that kind 
of happiness evaporates quickly and leaves us wanting more. Things may last longer than 
experiences, but the memories that linger are what matter most!1

	
Introduction  *  5
Introduction
Information is everywhere. Most organizations value information as a strategic asset. Organi­
zational success depends heavily on the ability to gather and analyze information about opera­
tions, suppliers, customers, and markets. Information can answers such questions as who are 
your best and worst customers? How much inventory do you need to meet demand? Where 
can you source the cheapest raw materials? How can you increase sales or reduce costs? 
Answering these questions incorrectly can lead directly to business failure. Estimating too 
many buyers will lead to an excess of inventory; estimating too few buyers will potentially 
lead to lost sales due to lack of product (resulting in even more lost revenues). 
Understanding the direct impact information has on an organization’s bottom line is crucial 
to running a successful business. This text focuses on information, business, technology, and 
the integrated set of activities used to run most organizations. Many of these activities are the 
hallmarks of business today—supply chain management, customer relationship management, 
enterprise resource planning, outsourcing, integration, ebusiness, and others. The five core 
units of this text cover these important activities in detail. Each unit is divided into chapters 
that provide individual learning outcomes and case studies. In addition to the five core units, 
there are technology and business “plug-ins” (see ­Figure Unit 1.1) that further explore topics 
presented in the five core units.
The chapters in Unit 1 are:
	■	 Chapter One—Business Driven Technology.
	■	 Chapter Two—Identifying Competitive Advantages.
	■	 Chapter Three—Strategic Initiatives for Implementing Competitive Advantages.
	■	 Chapter Four—Measuring the Success of Strategic Initiatives.
	■	 Chapter Five—Organizational Structures That Support Strategic Initiatives.
FIGURE UNIT 1.1
The Format and Approach of 
This Text.
Business
Plug-Ins
Technology
Plug-Ins
Core
Units

6  *  Unit 1  Achieving Business Success
Business Driven 
Technology
LEARNING OUTCOMES
  1.1.	 Describe the information age and the differences 
among data, information, business intelligence, and 
knowledge.
  1.2.	 Identify the different departments in a company and 
why they must work together to achieve success.
  1.3.	 Explain systems thinking and how management 
information systems enable business 
communications.
Competing in the Information Age
Did you know that . . .
	■	 The movie Avatar took more than four years to create and cost $450 million.
	■	 Lady Gaga’s real name is Stefani Joanne Angelina Germanotta.
	■	 Customers pay $2.6 million for a 30-second advertising time slot during the Super Bowl.2
A fact is the confirmation or validation of an event or object. In the past, people primar­
ily learned facts from books. Today, by simply pushing a button people can find out any­
thing, from anywhere, at any time. We live in the information age, when infinite quantities 
of facts are widely available to anyone who can use a computer. The impact of information 
technology on the global business environment is equivalent to the printing press’s impact 
on publishing and electricity’s impact on productivity. College student startups were mostly 
unheard of before the information age. Now, it’s not at all unusual to read about a business 
student starting a multimillion-dollar company from his or her dorm room. Think of Mark 
­Zuckerberg, who started Facebook from his dorm, or Michael Dell (Dell Computers) and Bill 
Gates (Microsoft), who both founded their legendary companies as college students.
You may think only students well versed in advanced technology can compete in the infor­
mation age. This is simply not true. Many business leaders have created exceptional opportu­
nities by coupling the power of the information age with traditional business methods. Here 
are just a few examples:
	■	 Amazon is not a technology company; its original business focus was to sell books, and it 
now sells nearly everything including technology services.
	■	 Netflix is not a technology company; its primary business focus is to rent videos.
	■	 Zappos is not a technology company; its primary business focus is to sell shoes, bags, 
clothing, and accessories.
Amazon’s founder, Jeff Bezos, at first saw an opportunity to change the way people pur­
chase books. Using the power of the information age to tailor offerings to each customer and 
speed the payment process, he in effect opened millions of tiny virtual bookstores, each with 
a vastly larger selection and far cheaper product than traditional bookstores. The success of 
his original business model led him to expand Amazon to carry many other types of products. 
LO 1.1 Describe the information 
age and the differences among 
data, information, business intel-
ligence, and knowledge.
C H A P T E R  1 

	
Chapter 1   Business Driven Technology   *  7
The founders of Netflix and Zappos have done the same thing for videos and shoes. All these 
entrepreneurs were business professionals, not technology experts. However, they understood 
enough about the information age to apply it to a particular business, creating innovative com­
panies that now lead entire industries.
Over 20 years ago a few professors at MIT began describing the Internet of Things (IoT) a 
world where interconnected Internet-enabled devices or “things” have the ability to collect 
and share data without human intervention. Another term commonly associated with The 
Internet of Things is machine-to-machine (M2M), which refers to devices that connect 
directly to other devices. With advanced technologies devices are connecting in ways not pre­
viously thought possible and researchers predict that over 50 billion IoT devices will be com­
municating by 2020. Kevin Ashton, cofounder and executive director of the Auto-ID Center 
at MIT, first mentioned the Internet of Things in a presentation he made to Procter & Gamble. 
Here’s Ashton explanation of the Internet of Things:
“Today computers—and, therefore, the Internet—are almost wholly dependent on human 
beings for information. Nearly all of the roughly 50 petabytes (a petabyte is 1,024 terabytes) 
of data available on the Internet were first captured and created by human beings by typing, 
pressing a record button, taking a digital picture or scanning a bar code. The problem is, 
people have limited time, attention and accuracy—all of which means they are not very good 
at capturing data about things in the real world. If we had computers that knew everything 
there was to know about things—using data they gathered without any help from us—we 
would be able to track and count everything and greatly reduce waste, loss and cost. We 
would know when things needed replacing, repairing or recalling and whether they were 
fresh or past their best.”3
 IoT is transforming our world into a living information system as we control our intelligent 
lighting from our smart phone to a daily health check from our smart toothbrush. Of course 
with all great technological advances come unexpected risks and you have to be prepared to 
encounter various security issues with IoT. Just imagine if your devices are hacked by some­
one who now has the ability to shut off your water, take control of your car, or unlock the 
doors of your home from thousands of miles away. We are just beginning to understand the 
security issues associated with IoT and M2M and you can be sure that sensitive data leakage 
from your IoT device is something you will most likely encounter in your life.
Students who understand business along with the power associated with the information 
age will create their own opportunities and perhaps even new industries. Realizing the value 
of obtaining real-time data from connected “things” will allow you to make more informed 
decisions, identify new opportunities, and analyze customer patterns to predict new behav­
iors. Our primary goal in this course is to arm you with the knowledge you need to compete in 
the information age. The core drivers of the information age include:
	■	 Data
	■	 Information
	■	 Business intelligence
	■	 Knowledge (see Figure 1.1)
DATA
Data are raw facts that describe the characteristics of an event or object. Before the informa­
tion age, managers manually collected and analyzed data, a time-consuming and complicated 
task without which they would have little insight into how to run their business. Structured 
data has a defined length, type, and format and includes numbers, dates, or strings such as 
Customer Address. Structured data is typically stored in a traditional system such as a rela­
tional database or spreadsheet and accounts for about 20 percent of the data that surrounds us. 
The sources of structured data include:
	■	 Machine-generated data is created by a machine without human intervention. Machine-
generated structured data includes sensor data, point-of-sale data, and web log data.
	■	 Human-generated data is data that humans, in interaction with computers, generate. 
Human-generated structured data includes input data, click-stream data, or gaming data.

8  *  Unit 1  Achieving Business Success
Unstructured data is not defined and does not follow a specified format and is typi­
cally free-form text such as emails, Twitter tweets, and text messages. Unstructured data 
accounts for about 80 percent of the data that surrounds us. The sources of unstructured 
data include:
	■	 Machine-generated unstructured data includes satellite images, scientific atmosphere data, 
and radar data.
	■	 Human-generated unstructured data includes text messages, social media data, and 
emails.
Big data is a collection of large complex data sets, including structured and unstructured 
data, which cannot be analyzed using traditional database methods and tools. Lacking data, 
managers often found themselves making business decisions about how many products to 
make, how much material to order, or how many employees to hire based on intuition or gut 
feelings. In the information age, successful managers compile, analyze, and comprehend mas­
sive amounts of data daily, which helps them make more successful business decisions. 
A snapshot is a view of data at a particular moment in time. Figure 1.2 provides a snap­
shot of sales data for Tony’s Wholesale Company, a fictitious business that supplies snacks 
to stores. The data highlight characteristics such as order date, customer, sales representative, 
product, quantity, and profit. The second line in Figure 1.2, for instance, shows that Roberta 
Cross sold 90 boxes of Ruffles to Walmart for $1,350, resulting in a profit of $450 (note that 
Profit = Sales − Costs). These data are useful for understanding individual sales; however, 
they do not provide us much insight into how Tony’s business is performing as a whole. Tony 
needs to answer questions that will help him manage his day-to-day operations such as:
	■	 Who are my best customers?
	■	 Who are my least-profitable customers?
	■	 What is my best-selling product?
	■	 What is my slowest-selling product?
FIGURE 1.1
The Differences among 
Data, Information, Business 
Intelligence, and Knowledge.
Data
Information
Business
Intelligence
Knowledge
 Data converted
 into a meaningful
 and useful
 context
 Information collected
 from multiple sources
 that analyzes patterns,
 trends, and relationships
 for strategic decision
 making
 The skills, experience,
 and expertise, coupled
 with information and
 intelligence, that creates
 a person’s intellectual
 resources.
 Choosing not to ﬁre a
 sales representative
 who is underperforming
 knowing that person is
 experiencing family
 problems
 Listing products that are
 about to expire ﬁrst on
 the menu or creating
 them as a daily special
 to move the product
 Raw facts that 
 describe the
 characteristics 
 of an event 
 or object
 Order date
 Amount sold
 Customer
 number
 Quantity
 ordered
 Best-selling
 product
 Best customer
 Worst-selling
 product
 Worst
 customer
 Lowest sales per week
 compared with the
 economic interest rates
 Best-selling product by
 month compared to
 sports season and city
 team wins and losses

	
Chapter 1   Business Driven Technology   *  9
	■	 Who is my strongest sales representative?
	■	 Who is my weakest sales representative?
What Tony needs, in other words, is not data but information.
INFORMATION
Information is data converted into a meaningful and useful context. The simple difference 
between data and information is that computers or machines need data and humans need 
information. Data is a raw building block that has not been shaped, processed, or analyzed 
and frequently appears disorganized and unfriendly. Information gives meaning and con­
text to analyzed data making it insightful for humans providing context and structure that is 
extremely valuable when making informed business decisions.
A report is a document containing data organized in a table, matrix, or graphical format 
allowing users to easily comprehend and understand information. Reports can cover a wide 
range of subjects or specific subject for a certain time period or event. A static report is cre­
ated once based on data that does not change. Static reports can include a sales report from 
last year or salary report from five years ago. A dynamic report changes automatically during 
creation. Dynamic reports can include updating daily stock market prices or the calculation 
of available inventory.
Having the right information at the right moment in time can be worth a fortune. Having 
the wrong information at the right moment; or the right information at the wrong moment 
can be disastrous. The truth about information is that its value is only as good as the people 
who use it. People using the same information can make different decisions depending on 
how they interpret or analyze the information. Thus information has value only insofar as the 
people using it do as well.
Tony can analyze his sales data and turn them into information to answer all the above 
questions and understand how his business is operating. Figures 1.3 and 1.4, for instance, 
show us that Walmart is Roberta Cross’s best customer, and that Ruffles is Tony’s best prod­
uct measured in terms of total sales. Armed with this information, Tony can identify and then 
address such issues as weak products and under-performing sales representatives.
A variable is a data characteristic that stands for a value that changes or varies over 
time. For example, in Tony’s data, price and quantity ordered can vary. Changing variables 
allows managers to create hypothetical scenarios to study future possibilities. Tony may 
find it valuable to anticipate how sales or cost increases affect profitability. To estimate 
how a 20 percent increase in prices might improve profits, Tony simply changes the price 
variable for all orders, which automatically calculates the amount of new profits. To esti­
mate how a 10 percent increase in costs hurts profits, Tony changes the cost variable for all 
FIGURE 1.2
Tony’s Snack Company Data.
Order 
Date
Customer
Sales 
Representative
Product
Qty
Unit 
Price
Total 
Sales
Unit 
Cost
Total 
Cost
Profit
4-Jan
Walmart
PJHelgoth
Doritos
41
$24
$   984
$18
$738
$246
4-Jan
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Ruffles
90
$15
$1,350
$10
$900
$450
5-Jan
Safeway
Craig Schultz
Ruffles
27
$15
$   405
$10
$270
$135
6-Jan
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Ruffles
67
$15
$1,005
$10
$670
$335
7-Jan
7-Eleven
Craig Schultz
Pringles
79
$12
$   948
$  6
$474
$474
7-Jan
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Ruffles
52
$15
$   780
$10
$520
$260
8-Jan
Kroger
Craig Schultz
Ruffles
39
$15
$   585
$10
$390
$195
9-Jan
Walmart
Craig Schultz
Ruffles
66
$15
$   990
$10
$660
$330
10-Jan
Target
Craig Schultz
Ruffles
40
$15
$   600
$10
$400
$200
11-Jan
Walmart
Craig Schultz
Ruffles
71
$15
$1,065
$10
$710
$355

10  *  Unit 1  Achieving Business Success
orders, which automatically calculates the amount of lost profits. Manipulating variables is 
an important tool for any business.
BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE
Business intelligence (BI) is information collected from multiple sources such as suppliers, 
customers, competitors, partners, and industries that analyzes patterns, trends, and relation­
ships for strategic decision making. BI manipulates multiple variables and in some cases even 
hundreds of variables including such items as interest rates, weather conditions, and even gas 
prices. Tony could use BI to analyze internal data such as company sales, along with exter­
nal data about the environment such as competitors, finances, weather, holidays, and even 
sporting events. Both internal and external variables affect snack sales, and analyzing these 
variables will help Tony determine ordering levels and sales forecasts. For instance, BI can 
predict inventory requirements for Tony’s business for the week before the Super Bowl if, say, 
FIGURE 1.3
Tony’s Data Sorted by 
Customer “Walmart” and 
Sales Representative 
“Roberta Cross”.
Order 
Date
Customer
Sales 
Representative
Product
Quantity
Unit 
Price
Total 
Sales
Unit 
Cost
Total 
Cost
Profit
26-Apr
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Fritos
86
	$	 19
	$	 1,634
	$	 17
	$	 1,462
	$	 172
29-Aug
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Fritos
76
	$	 19
	$	 1,444
	$	 17
	$	 1,292
	$	 152
7-Sep
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Fritos
20
	$	 19
	$	
380
	$	 17
	$	
340
	$	
40
22-Nov
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Fritos
39
	$	 19
	$	
741
	$	 17
	$	
663
	$	
78
30-Dec
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Fritos
68
	$	 19
	$	 1,292
	$	 17
	$	 1,156
	$	 136
7-Jul
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Pringles
79
	$	 18
	$	 1,422
	$	
8
	$	
632
	$	 790
6-Aug
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Pringles
21
	$	 12
	$	
252
	$	
6
	$	
126
	$	 126
2-Oct
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Pringles
60
	$	 18
	$	 1,080
	$	
8
	$	
480
	$	 600
15-Nov
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Pringles
32
	$	 12
	$	
384
	$	
6
	$	
192
	$	 192
21-Dec
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Pringles
92
	$	 12
	$	 1,104
	$	
6
	$	
552
	$	 552
28-Feb
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Ruffles
67
	$	 15
	$	 1,005
	$	 10
	$	
670
	$	 335
6-Mar
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Ruffles
8
	$	 15
	$	
120
	$	 10
	$	
80
	$	
40
16-Mar
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Ruffles
68
	$	 15
	$	 1,020
	$	 10
	$	
680
	$	 340
23-Apr
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Ruffles
34
	$	 15
	$	
510
	$	 10
	$	
340
	$	 170
4-Aug
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Ruffles
40
	$	 15
	$	
600
	$	 10
	$	
400
	$	 200
18-Aug
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Ruffles
93
	$	 15
	$	 1,395
	$	 10
	$	
930
	$	 465
5-Sep
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Ruffles
41
	$	 15
	$	
615
	$	 10
	$	
410
	$	 205
12-Sep
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Ruffles
8
	$	 15
	$	
120
	$	 10
	$	
80
	$	
40
28-Oct
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Ruffles
50
	$	 15
	$	
750
	$	 10
	$	
500
	$	 250
21-Nov
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Ruffles
79
	$	 15
	$	 1,185
	$	 10
	$	
790
	$	 395
29-Jan
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Sun Chips
5
	$	 22
	$	
110
	$	 18
	$	
90
	$	
20
12-Apr
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Sun Chips
85
	$	 22
	$	 1,870
	$	 18
	$	 1,530
	$	 340
16-Jun
Walmart
Roberta Cross
Sun Chips
55
	$	 22
	$	 1,210
	$	 18
	$	
990
	$	 220
1,206
	$	383
	$	20,243
	$	273
	$	14,385
	$	5,858
Sorting the data reveals the information that Roberta Cross’s total sales to Walmart were $20,243 resulting in a profit of $5,858. 
(Profit $5,858 = Sales $20,243 − Costs $14,385)

	
Chapter 1   Business Driven Technology   *  11
the home team is playing, average temperature is above 80 degrees, and the stock market is 
performing well. This is BI at its finest, incorporating all types of internal and external vari­
ables to anticipate business performance. 
Analytics is the science of fact-based decision making. A big part of business intelligence 
is called predictive analytics, which extracts information from data and uses it to predict 
future trends and identify behavioral patterns. Top managers use predictive analytics to define 
the future of the business, analyzing markets, industries, and economies to determine the 
strategic direction the company must follow to remain profitable. Behavioral analytics uses 
data about people’s behaviors to understand intent and predict future actions. Tony will set the 
strategic direction for his firm, which might include introducing new flavors of potato chips or 
sports drinks as new product lines or schools and hospitals as new market segments based on 
both predictive and behavioral analytics.
KNOWLEDGE
Knowledge includes the skills, experience, and expertise, coupled with information and intel­
ligence, that creates a person’s intellectual resources. Knowledge workers are ­individuals 
valued for their ability to interpret and analyze information. Today’s workers are commonly 
referred to as knowledge workers and they use BI along with personal experience to make 
decisions based on both information and intuition, a valuable resource for any company.
Imagine that Tony analyzes his data and finds his weakest sales representative for this 
period is Craig Schultz. If Tony considered only this information, he might conclude that fir­
ing Craig was a good business decision. However, because Tony has knowledge about how the 
company operates, he knows Craig has been out on medical leave for several weeks; hence, 
his sales numbers are low. Without this additional knowledge, Tony might have executed a 
bad business decision, delivered a negative message to the other employees, and sent his best 
sales representatives out to look for other jobs.
The key point in this scenario is that it is simply impossible to collect all the information 
about every situation, and yet without that, it can be easy to misunderstand the problem. 
Using data, information, business intelligence, and knowledge to make decisions and solve 
FIGURE 1.4
Information Gained after 
Analyzing Tony’s Data.
Tony’s Business Information
Name
Total Profit
Who is Tony’s best customer by total sales?
Walmart
	$	 560,789
Who is Tony’s least-valuable customer by total sales?
Walgreens
	$	
45,673
Who is Tony’s best customer by profit?
7-Eleven
	$	 324,550
Who is Tony’s least-valuable customer by profit?
King Soopers
	$	
23,908
What is Tony’s best-selling product by total sales?
Ruffles
	$	 232,500
What is Tony’s weakest-selling product by total sales?
Pringles
	$	
54,890
What is Tony’s best-selling product by profit?
Tostitos
	$	
13,050
What is Tony’s weakest-selling product by profit?
Pringles
	$	
23,000
Who is Tony’s best sales representative by profit?
R. Cross
	$	1,230,980
Who is Tony’s weakest sales representative by profit?
Craig Schultz
	$	
98,980
What is the best sales representative’s best-selling product by total 
profit?
Ruffles
	$	
98,780
Who is the best sales representative’s best customer by total profit?
Walmart
	$	 345,900
What is the best sales representative’s weakest-selling product by total 
profit?
Sun Chips
	$	
45,600
Who is the best sales representative’s weakest customer by total profit?
Krogers
	$	
56,050

12  *  Unit 1  Achieving Business Success
problems is the key to finding success in business. These core drivers of the information age 
are the building blocks of business systems. Figure 1.5 offers a few different examples of data 
through knowledge. 
The Challenge: Departmental Companies
A business unit is a segment of a company (such as accounting, production, marketing) repre­
senting a specific business function. The terms department, functional area, and business unit 
are used interchangeably and corporations are typically organized by business unit such as:
	■	 Accounting: Records, measures, and reports monetary transactions.
	■	 Finance: Deals with strategic financial issues including money, banking, credit, invest­
ments, and assets.
	■	 Human resources: Maintains policies, plans, and procedures for the effective manage­
ment of employees.
	■	 Marketing: Supports sales by planning, pricing, and promoting goods or services.
	■	 Operations management: Manages the process of converting or transforming resources 
into goods or services.
	■	 Sales: Performs the function of selling goods or services.
An information silo occurs when one business unit is unable to freely communicate 
with other business units making it difficult or impossible for organizations to work cross-­
functionally. Information silos exist because management does not believe there to be enough 
benefit from sharing information across business units and because information might not 
be useful to personnel in other business units. Figure 1.6 provides an example of how an 
organization operates functionally causing information silos as each department performs its 
own activities. Sales and marketing focus on moving goods or services into the hands of 
consumers; they maintain transactional data. Finance and accounting focus on managing the 
company’s resources and maintain monetary data. Operations management focuses on manu­
facturing and maintains production data, while human resources focuses on hiring and train­
ing people and maintains employee data. Although each department has its own focus and 
data, none can work independently if the company is to operate as a whole. 
LO 1.2 Identify the different 
departments in a company and 
why they must work together to 
achieve success.
FIGURE 1.5
Transformation of Data to 
Knowledge.
INFORMATION: The item I have is a product that has the most sales during the
month of December.
BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE: The month of December this year is going to see interest
rates rise by 10 percent and snow stores are expected to cause numerous problems
throughout the East coast.
KNOWLEDGE: Given the unexpected ﬁnancial issues caused by the storms and the
interest rate hike we will oﬀer a discount on purchase in November and December
to ensure sales levels increase by 10 percent.
DATA: I have one item.

	
Chapter 1   Business Driven Technology   *  13
It is easy to see how a business decision made by one department can affect other depart­
ments. Marketing needs to analyze production and sales data to come up with product promo­
tions and advertising strategies. Production needs to understand sales forecasts to determine 
the company’s manufacturing needs. Sales needs to rely on information from operations to 
understand inventory, place orders, and forecast consumer demand. All departments need to 
understand the accounting and finance departments’ information for budgeting. For the firm 
to be successful, all departments must work together as a single unit sharing common infor­
mation and not operate independently or in a silo (see Figure 1.7).
The Solution: Management Information Systems
You probably recall the old story of three blind men attempting to describe an elephant. The 
first man, feeling the elephant’s girth, said the elephant seemed very much like a wall. The 
second, feeling the elephant’s trunk, declared the elephant was like a snake. The third man 
felt the elephant’s tusks and said the elephant was like a tree or a cane. Companies that oper­
ate departmentally are seeing only one part of the elephant, a critical mistake that hinders 
­successful operation.
Successful companies operate cross-functionally, integrating the operations of all depart­
ments. Systems are the primary enabler of cross-functional operations. A system is a collec­
tion of parts that link to achieve a common purpose. A car is a good example of a system, 
since removing a part, such as the steering wheel or accelerator, causes the entire system to 
stop working.
LO 1.3 Explain systems thinking 
and how management informa-
tion systems enable business 
communications.
FIGURE 1.6
Departments Working 
Independently.
Finance
Tracks strategic ﬁnancial
issues including money,
banking, credit,
investments, and assets.
Human resources
Maintains policies, plans,
and procedures for the
eﬀective management of
employees. 
Sales
Performs the function of
selling goods or services.  
Operations
management 
Manages the process of
converting or transforming 
or resources into goods or
services.  
Marketing
Supports sales by
planning, pricing, and
promoting goods or
services.
Accounting
Records, measures, and
reports monetary
transactions.

14  *  Unit 1  Achieving Business Success
Before jumping into how systems work, it is important to have a solid understanding of the 
basic production process for goods and services. Goods are material items or products that 
customers will buy to satisfy a want or need. Clothing, groceries, cell phones, and cars are 
all examples of goods that people buy to fulfill their needs. Services are tasks performed by 
people that customers will buy to satisfy a want or need. Waiting tables, teaching, and cutting 
hair are all examples of services that people pay for to fulfill their needs (see Figure 1.8).
FIGURE 1.7
Departments Working 
Together.
• Transactional data 
• Purchasing data 
• Payroll data
• Tax data
Accounting
Business Decisions
Finance
• Investment data
• Monetary data
• Reporting data
Human resources
• Employee data
• Promotion data
• Vacation data
Marketing
• Promotion data
• Sales data
• Advertising data
Operations management
• Manufacturing data
• Distribution data
• Production data
Sales
• Potential customer data 
• Sales report data
• Commission data
• Customer support data
FIGURE 1.8
Different Types of Goods and 
Services.
Cars
Groceries 
Clothing 
Teaching 
Waiting
tables
Cutting hair
GOODS
Material items or products 
that customers will buy to
satisfy a want or need. 
SERVICES
Tasks performed by people 
that customers will buy
to satisfy a want or need. 

	
Chapter 1   Business Driven Technology   *  15
FIGURE 1.9
Input, Process, Output 
Example.
Input
Output
Process
Lettuce,
tomatoes, patty,
bun, ketchup
Cook the patty, put 
the ingredients 
together
Hamburger
FIGURE 1.10
Overview of Systems 
Thinking.
Process
 Computer program
 that processes the
 data
Output
 The resulting
 information from
 the computer
 program
 Data that is
 entered in a
 computer
 Input
Feedback
 Controls to ensure
 correct processing
Production is the process where a business takes raw materials and processes them or 
converts them into a finished product for its goods or services. Just think about making a 
hamburger (see Figure 1.9). First, you must gather all of the inputs or raw materials such as 
the bun, patty, lettuce, tomato, and ketchup. Second, you process the raw materials, so in this 
example you would need to cook the patty, wash and chop the lettuce and tomato, and place 
all of the items in the bun. Finally, you would have your output or finished product—your 
hamburger! Productivity is the rate at which goods and services are produced based upon 
total output given total inputs. Given our previous example, if a business could produce the 
same hamburger with less expensive inputs or more hamburgers with the same inputs it would 
see a rise in productivity and possibly an increase in profits. Ensuring the input, process, and 
output of goods and services work across all of the departments of a company is where sys­
tems add tremendous value to overall business productivity.
Systems thinking is a way of monitoring the entire system by viewing multiple inputs 
being processed or transformed to produce outputs while continuously gathering feedback on 
each part (see Figure 1.10). Feedback is information that returns to its original transmitter 
(input, transform, or output) and modifies the transmitter’s actions. Feedback helps the sys­
tem maintain stability. For example, a car’s system continuously monitors the fuel level and 
turns on a warning light if the gas level is too low. Systems thinking provides an end-to-end 
view of how operations work together to create a product or service. Business students who 
understand systems thinking are valuable resources because they can implement solutions 
that consider the entire process, not just a single component.
Management information systems (MIS) is a business function, like accounting and 
human resources, which moves information about people, products, and processes across 
the company to facilitate decision making and problem solving. MIS incorporates systems 

16  *  Unit 1  Achieving Business Success
thinking to help companies operate cross-functionally. For example, to fulfill product orders, 
an MIS for sales moves a single customer order across all functional areas including sales, 
order fulfillment, shipping, billing, and finally customer service. Although different func­
tional areas handle different parts of the sale, thanks to MIS, to the customer the sale is one 
continuous process. If one part of the company is experiencing problems, however, then, like 
the car without a steering wheel, the entire system fails. If order fulfillment packages the 
wrong product, it will not matter that shipping, billing, and customer service did their jobs 
right, since the customer will not be satisfied when he or she opens the package. Management 
information systems are the key to breaking down information silos by allowing information 
to flow across the organization. 
MIS can be an important enabler of business success and innovation. This is not to say 
that MIS equals business success and innovation, or that MIS represents business success and 
innovation. MIS is a tool that is most valuable when it leverages the talents of people who 
know how to use and manage it effectively. To perform the MIS function effectively, almost 
all companies, particularly large and medium-sized ones, have an internal MIS department, 
often called information technology (IT), information systems (IS), or management informa­
tion systems (MIS). For the purpose of this text, we will refer to it as MIS.
In his book The World Is Flat, Thomas Friedman describes the unplanned cascade of technological 
and social shifts that effectively leveled the economic world and “accidentally made Beijing, Banga­
lore, and Bethesda next-door neighbors.” Chances are good that Bhavya in Bangalore will read your 
next X-ray, or as Friedman learned firsthand, “Grandma Betty in her bathrobe” will make your JetBlue 
plane reservation from her Salt Lake City home.
Friedman believes this is Globalization 3.0. “In Globalization 1.0, which began around 1492, 
the world went from size large to size medium. In Globalization 2.0, the era that introduced us 
to multinational companies, it went from size medium to size small. And then around 2000 came 
Globalization 3.0, in which the world went from being small to tiny. There is a difference between 
being able to make long-distance phone calls cheaper on the Internet and walking around 
Chapter One Case:  The World Is Flat—Thomas Friedman
	1.	 Imagine you are working for Costco as a manager in its Chicago store. Your boss does not under­
stand the difference between data, information, business intelligence, and knowledge. Using 
examples of products and services available at Costco provide examples of each to help your boss 
understand these important concepts.
	2.	 Explain why it is important for Costco’s corporate accounting, marketing, and operations manage­
ment business units to access and analyze information about your store’s sales. What could hap­
pen if your store sales were not shared with the different business units at Costco’s headquarters?
	3.	 Explain systems thinking and how MIS solves the issue with information silos throughout Costco’s 
entire worldwide organization.
O P E N I N G  C A S E  ST U DY  Q U E ST I O N S

	
Chapter 1   Business Driven Technology   *  17
Riyadh with a PDA where you can have all of Google in your pocket. It is a difference in degree 
that’s so enormous it becomes a difference in kind,” Friedman states. Below are ­Friedman’s list 
of “flatteners.”
Friedman says these flatteners converged around the year 2000 and “created a flat world: a 
global, Web-enabled platform for multiple forms of sharing knowledge and work, irrespective of time, 
distance, geography, and increasingly, language.” At the very moment this platform emerged, three 
huge economies materialized—those of India, China, and the former Soviet Union—“and 3 billion 
people who were out of the game, walked onto the playing field.” A final convergence may determine 
the fate of the United States in this chapter of globalization. A “political perfect storm,” as Friedman 
describes it—the dot-com bust, the attacks of 9/11, and the Enron scandal—“distract us completely 
as a country.” Just when we need to face the fact of globalization and the need to compete in a new 
world, “we’re looking totally elsewhere.”
Friedman believes that the next great breakthrough in bioscience could come from a 5-year-old 
who downloads the human genome in Egypt. Bill Gates’s view is similar: “Twenty years ago, would 
you rather have been a B-student in Poughkeepsie or a genius in Shanghai? Twenty years ago you’d 
rather be a B-student in Poughkeepsie. Today, it is not even close. You’d much prefer to be the genius 
in Shanghai because you can now export your talents anywhere in the world.”4
Questions
	1.	 Do you agree or disagree with Friedman’s assessment that the world is flat? Be sure to justify 
your answer.
	2.	 What are the potential impacts of a flat world for a student performing a job search?
	3.	 What can students do to prepare themselves for competing in a flat world?
	4.	 Identify a current flattener not mentioned on Friedman’s list.
	 1.	 Fall of the Berlin Wall
Opened the world to free markets.
	 2.	 Netscape IPO
Began the gigantic investments in connecting the world with 
­fiber-optic cables.
	 3.	 Work flow software
Allowed employees to communicate and collaborate from all over 
the world.
	 4.	 Open-sourcing
Open source communities began creating free software.
	 5.	 Outsourcing
Using labor from third world countries allowed companies to grow 
while helping grow economies.
	 6.	 Offshoring
Using China to manufacture goods helped the world-wide global 
economy.
	 7.	 Supply-chaining
Businesses gained monumental efficiencies by connecting net­
works of suppliers, retailers, distributors, and customers. 
	 8.	 Insourcing
Small business gained global momentum.  
	 9.	 Informing
Search gave the intelligence to the masses. 
	10.	 Wireless
Business mobility gave the power of collaboration to the people.
Thomas Friedman’s 10 
Forces That Flattened the 
World

18  *  Unit 1  Achieving Business Success
1.1.	 Describe the information age and the differences among data, information, business 
intelligence, and knowledge.
We live in the information age, when infinite quantities of facts are widely available to anyone who 
can use a computer. The core drivers of the information age include data, information, business 
intelligence, and knowledge. Data are raw facts that describe the characteristics of an event or 
object. Information is data converted into a meaningful and useful context. Business intelligence (BI) 
is information collected from multiple sources such as suppliers, customers, competitors, partners, 
and industries that analyzes patterns, trends, and relationships for strategic decision making. Knowl­
edge includes the skills, experience, and expertise, coupled with information and intelligence, that 
create a person’s intellectual resources. As you move from data to knowledge, you include more 
and more variables for analysis, resulting in better, more precise support for decision making and 
problem solving.
1.2.	Identify the different departments in a company and why they must work together to 
achieve success.
■	
Accounting: Records, measures, and reports monetary transactions.
■	
Finance: Deals with strategic financial issues including money, banking, credit, investments, 
and assets.
■	
Human resources: Maintains policies, plans, and procedures for the effective management of 
employees.
■	
Marketing: Supports sales by planning, pricing, and promoting goods or services.
■	
Operations management: Manages the process of converting or transforming resources into 
goods or services.
■	
Sales: Performs the function of selling goods or services.
It is easy to see how a business decision made by one department can affect other departments. 
Marketing needs to analyze production and sales data to come up with product promotions and 
advertising strategies. Production needs to understand sales forecasts to determine the company’s 
manufacturing needs. Sales needs to rely on information from operations to understand inventory, 
place orders, and forecast consumer demand. All departments need to understand the accounting 
and finance departments’ information for budgeting. For the firm to be successful, all departments 
must work together as a single unit sharing common information and not operate independently or 
in a silo.
1.3.	Explain systems thinking and how management information systems enable business 
communications.
A system is a collection of parts that link to achieve a common purpose. Systems thinking is a way of 
monitoring the entire system by viewing multiple inputs being processed or transformed to produce 
outputs while continuously gathering feedback on each part. Feedback is information that returns to 
its original transmitter (input, transform, or output) and modifies the transmitter’s actions. Feedback 
helps the system maintain stability. Management information systems (MIS) is a business func­
tion, like accounting and human resources, which moves information about people, products, and 
processes across the company to facilitate decision making and problem solving. MIS incorporates 
systems thinking to help companies operate cross-functionally. For example, to fulfill product orders, 
an MIS for sales moves a single customer order across all functional areas, including sales, order 
fulfillment, shipping, billing, and finally customer service. Although different functional areas handle 
different parts of the sale, thanks to MIS, to the customer the sale is one continuous process.
L E A R N I N G  O U T C O M E  R E V I E W

	
Chapter 1   Business Driven Technology   *  19
	 1.	What is data? Why is data important to a business?
	 2.	How can a manager turn data into information?
	 3.	What is the relationship between data, information, business intelligence, and knowledge?
	 4.	Why is it important for a company to operate cross-functionally?
	 5.	What is MIS and what role does it plays in an organization?
	 6.	Do you agree that MIS is essential for businesses operating in the information age? Why or 
why not?
	 7.	What type of career are you planning to pursue? How will your specific career use data, 
­information, business intelligence, and knowledge?
	 8.	How does system thinking support business operations?
1.	 View from a Flat World
Bill Gates, founder of Microsoft, stated that 20 years ago most people would rather have been a B 
student in New York City than a genius in China because the opportunities available to students in 
developed countries were limitless. Today, many argue that the opposite is now true due to techno­
logical advances making it easier to succeed as a genius in China than a B student in New York. As a 
group, discuss whether you agree or disagree with Bill Gates’s statement.
2.	 Is Technology Making Us Dumber or Smarter?
There are numerous articles on how Facebook can make you dumber and Twitter can impede your 
ability to make sound decisions. Do you believe technology is making mankind dumber? Choose a 
side and debate the following: 
Side A Living in the information age has made us smarter because we have a huge wealth of knowl­
edge at our fingertips whenever or wherever we need it.
Side B Living in the information age has caused people to become lazy and dumber because they 
are no longer building up their memory banks to solve problems; machines give them the answers 
they need to solve problems.
3.	 IOT in the Room
Each day you are surrounded by millions of bits of data flying around you and you probably have not 
even noticed! As a collective group analyze all of the IOT devices currently in your classroom. What types 
of data are they sending and receiving? How frequently are they sending and receiving the data? What 
types of IOT device information are you using to manage your life? What types of IOT devices will be in 
the room in 5 years and how will they help future students analyze and manage their lives?
4.	 Working for the Best
Each year, Fortune magazine creates a list of the top 100 companies to work for. Find the most 
recent list. What types of data do you think Fortune analyzed to determine the company ranking? 
What issues could occur if the analysis of the data was inaccurate? What types of information can 
you gain by analyzing the list? Create five questions a student performing a job search could answer 
by analyzing this list.
M A K I N G  B U S I N E S S  D E C I S I O N S
R E V I E W  Q U E S T I O N S

20  *  Unit 1  Achieving Business Success
5.	 People in China and India Are Starving for Your Jobs
“When I was growing up in Minneapolis, my parents always said, ‘Tom, finish your dinner. There are 
people starving in China and India.’ Today I tell my girls, ‘Finish your homework, because people in 
China and India are starving for your jobs.’ And in a flat world, they can have them, because there’s 
no such thing as an American job anymore.” Thomas Friedman.
In his book, The World Is Flat, Thomas Friedman describes the unplanned cascade of technologi­
cal and social shifts that effectively leveled the economic world, and “accidentally made Beijing, 
Bangalore, and Bethesda next-door neighbors.” The video of Thomas Friedman’s lecture at MIT 
­discussing the flat world is available at http://mitworld.mit.edu/video/266. If you want to be prepared 
to compete in a flat world you must watch this video and answer the following questions:
■	
Do you agree or disagree with Friedman’s assessment that the world is flat?
■	
What are the potential impacts of a flat world for a student performing a job search?
■	
What can students do to prepare themselves for competing in a flat world?
6.	 Teddy The Guardian
Two London-based entrepreneurs are building an Internet of huggable things for sick children to 
make any hospital visit more like a trip to Disneyland. Teddy The Guardian captures heart rate, tem­
peratures, and blood-oxygen levels when a child grabs it by the paw to give it a cuddle. All measure­
ments are sent wirelessly to nurses and parents, mobile devices. The new cute, cuddly teddy bear 
is packed full of sensors designed to track children’s vital signs and help quickly find out potential 
issues. Teddy The Guardian takes from 5 to 7 seconds to record measurements and is programmed 
to run five times per hour. Future versions of Teddy The Guardian will be interactive, using machine 
learning to find out the child’s favorite song or bedtime story and then play the related content for a 
more soothing hospital visit. Big pharmaceutical companies in the United States have already placed 
over $500,000 in orders and plan to donate the bears to hospitals and clinics.
This is clearly a brilliant idea, and soon we will see Teddy The Guardian in many local hospitals 
and clinics. Can you identify any additional markets where Teddy The Guardian should focus? Can 
you think of any ethical issues related to huggable things? Can you think of any security issues 
related to huggable things?

	
Chapter 2  Identifying Competitive Advantages  *  21
C H A P T E R  2
LEARNING OUTCOMES
  2.1.	 Explain why competitive advantages are temporary 
along with the four key areas of a SWOT analysis.
  2.2.	Describe Porter’s Five Forces Model and explain each 
of the five forces.
  2.3.	Compare Porter’s three generic strategies.
  2.4.	Demonstrate how a company can add value by using 
Porter’s value chain analysis.
Identifying Competitive Advantages
Running a company today is similar to leading an army; the top manager or leader ensures 
all participants are heading in the right direction and completing their goals and objectives. 
Companies lacking leadership quickly implode as employees head in different directions 
attempting to achieve conflicting goals. To combat these challenges, leaders communi­
cate and execute business strategies (from the Greek word stratus for army and ago for 
leading).
A business strategy is a leadership plan that achieves a specific set of goals or objectives 
such as increasing sales, decreasing costs, entering new markets, or developing new products 
or services. A stakeholder is a person or group that has an interest or concern in an organiza­
tion. Stakeholders drive business strategies, and depending on the stakeholder’s perspective, 
the business strategy can change. It is not uncommon to find stakeholders’ business strate­
gies have conflicting interests such as investors looking to increase profits by eliminating 
employee jobs. Figure 2.1 displays the different stakeholders found in an organization and 
their common business interests.
Good leaders also anticipate unexpected misfortunes, from strikes and economic reces­
sions to natural disasters. Their business strategies build in buffers or slack, allowing the com­
pany the ability to ride out any storm and defend against competitive or environmental threats. 
Of course, updating business strategies is a continuous undertaking as internal and external 
environments rapidly change. Business strategies that match core company competencies to 
opportunities result in competitive advantages, a key to success!
A competitive advantage is a feature of a product or service on which customers place a 
greater value than they do on similar offerings from competitors. Competitive advantages 
provide the same product or service either at a lower price or with additional value that can 
fetch premium prices. Unfortunately, competitive advantages are typically temporary, because 
competitors often quickly seek ways to duplicate them. In turn, organizations must develop a 
strategy based on a new competitive advantage. Ways that companies duplicate competitive 
advantages include acquiring the new technology, copying the business operations, and hir­
ing away key employees. The introduction of Apple’s iPod and iTunes, a brilliant merger of 
technology, business, and entertainment, offers an excellent example.
In early 2000, Steve Jobs was fixated on developing video editing software when he sud­
denly realized that millions of people were using computers to listen to music, a new trend 
Identifying Competitive 
Advantages
LO 2.1 Explain why competitive 
advantages are temporary along 
with the four key areas of a SWOT 
analysis.

22  *  Unit 1  Achieving Business Success
in the industry catapulted by illegal online services such as Napster. Jobs was worried that 
he was looking in the wrong direction and had missed the opportunity to jump on the online 
music bandwagon. He moved fast, however, and within four months he had developed the first 
version of iTunes for the Mac. Jobs’s next challenge was to make a portable iTunes player that 
could hold thousands of songs and be completely transportable. Within nine months the iPod 
was born. With the combination of iTunes and iPod, Apple created a significant competitive 
advantage in the marketplace. Many firms began following Apple’s lead by creating portable 
music players to compete with the iPod. In addition, Apple continues to create new and excit­
ing products to gain competitive advantages, such as its iPad, a larger version of the iPod that 
functions more as a computer than a music player.1
When a company is the first to market with a competitive advantage, it gains a particular 
benefit, such as Apple did with its iPod. This first-mover advantage occurs when a com­
pany can significantly increase its market share by being first with a new competitive advan­
tage. FedEx created a first-mover advantage by developing its customer self-service software, 
which allows people to request parcel pickups, print mailing slips, and track parcels online. 
Other parcel delivery companies quickly began creating their own online services. Today, 
customer self-service on the Internet is a standard feature of the parcel delivery business.
Competitive intelligence is the process of gathering information about the competitive 
environment, including competitors’ plans, activities, and products, to improve a company’s 
ability to succeed. It means understanding and learning as much as possible as soon as pos­
sible about what is occurring outside the company to remain competitive. Frito-Lay, a premier 
provider of snack foods such as Cracker Jacks and Cheetos, does not send its sales representa­
tives into grocery stores just to stock shelves; they carry handheld computers and record the 
FIGURE 2.1
Stakeholders’ Interests.
ORGANIZATION
GOVERNMENT
 Adhere to
 Regulations/Laws
 Increase
 Employment
 Ethical Taxation
 Reporting
PARTNERS/
SUPPLIERS
 Reliable Contracts
 Ethical Materials 
 Handling
 Responsible
 Production
SHAREHOLDERS/
INVESTORS
 Maximize Proﬁts
 Grow Market 
 Share
 High Return on
 Investment
COMMUNITY
 Professional
 Associations
 Ethical Recycling
 Increase 
  Employment
EMPLOYEES
 Fair Compensation
 Job Security
 Ethical Conduct/
 Treatment
CUSTOMERS
 Exceptional
 Customer Service
 High-Quality
 Products
 Ethical Dealing

	
Chapter 2  Identifying Competitive Advantages  *  23
product offerings, inventory, and even product locations of competitors. Frito-Lay uses this 
information to gain competitive intelligence on everything from how well competing prod­
ucts are selling to the strategic placement of its own products.2 Managers use four common 
tools to analyze competitive intelligence and develop competitive advantages as displayed 
in Figure 2.2.
SWOT ANALYSIS: UNDERSTANDING BUSINESS STRATEGIES
A SWOT analysis evaluates an organization’s strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and 
threats to identify significant influences that work for or against business strategies (see 
­Figure 2.3). Strengths and weaknesses originate inside an organization, or internally. Oppor­
tunities and threats originate outside an organization, or externally, and cannot always be 
anticipated or controlled.
	■	 Potential Internal Strengths (Helpful): Identify all key strengths associated with the 
competitive advantage including cost advantages, new and/or innovative services, special 
expertise and/or experience, proven market leader, and improved marketing campaigns.
	■	 Potential Internal Weaknesses (Harmful): Identify all key areas that require improve­
ment. Weaknesses focus on the absence of certain strengths, including absence of an 
Internet marketing plan, damaged reputation, problem areas for service, and outdated tech­
nology employee issues.
	■	 Potential External Opportunities (Helpful): Identify all significant trends along with 
how the organization can benefit from each, including new markets, additional customer 
groups, legal changes, innovative technologies, population changes, and competitor issues.
FIGURE 2.2
Business Tools for Analyzing 
Business Strategies.
SWOT ANALYSIS
Evaluates Project
Position
THE THREE GENERIC
STRATEGIES 
Chooses Business
Focus
THE FIVE FORCES MODEL
   
Evaluates Industry
Attractiveness
VALUE CHAIN ANALYSIS
Executes Business
Strategy
FIGURE 2.3
Sample SWOT Analysis
STRENGTHS
Core Competencies
Market Leaders
Cost Advantages
Excellent Management
OPPORTUNITES
Expanded Product Line
Increase in Demand
New Markets
New Regulations
WEAKNESSES
Lack of Strategic Direction
Obsolete Technologies
Lack of Managerial Talent
Outdated Product Line
THREATS
New Entrants
Substitute Products
Shrinking Markets
Costly Regulatory
Requirements
HELPFUL
INTERNAL
EXTERNAL
HARMFUL

24  *  Unit 1  Achieving Business Success
	■	 Potential External Threats (Harmful): Identify all threats or risks detrimental to your 
organization, including new market entrants, substitute products, employee turnover, differ­
entiating products, shrinking markets, adverse changes in regulations, and economic shifts.
The Five Forces Model—Evaluating Industry 
Attractiveness
Michael Porter, a university professor at Harvard Business School, identified the following 
pressures that can hurt potential sales:
	■	 Knowledgeable customers can force down prices by pitting rivals against each other.
	■	 Influential suppliers can drive down profits by charging higher prices for supplies.
	■	 Competition can steal customers.
	■	 New market entrants can steal potential investment capital.
	■	 Substitute products can steal customers.
Formally defined, Porter’s Five Forces Model analyzes the competitive forces within the 
environment in which a company operates to assess the potential for profitability in an indus­
try. Its purpose is to combat these competitive forces by identifying opportunities, competitive 
advantages, and competitive intelligence. If the forces are strong, they increase competition; if 
the forces are weak, they decrease competition. This section details each of the forces and its 
associated MIS business strategy (see Figure 2.4).3
BUYER POWER
Buyer power is the ability of buyers to affect the price they must pay for an item. Factors used 
to assess buyer power include number of customers, their sensitivity to price, size of orders, 
differences between competitors, and availability of substitute products. If buyer power is 
high, customers can force a company and its competitors to compete on price, which typically 
drives prices down.
One way to reduce buyer power is by manipulating switching costs, costs that make cus­
tomers reluctant to switch to another product or service. Switching costs include financial as 
well as intangible values. The cost of switching doctors, for instance, includes the powerful 
intangible components of having to build relationships with the new doctor and nurses, as well 
LO 2.2 Describe Porter’s Five 
Forces Model and explain each of 
the five forces.
FIGURE 2.4
Porter’s Five Forces Model.
Threat of Substitute
Products or Services
The power of customers
to purchase alternatives
Rivalry among
Existing Competitors
The power of
competitors 
Buyer Power
The power of customers
to drive down prices
Threat of New Entrants
The power of competitors to
enter a market
Supplier Power
The power of suppliers
to drive up prices of materials

	
Chapter 2  Identifying Competitive Advantages  *  25
as transferring all your medical history. With MIS, however, patients can store their medical 
records on DVDs or thumb drives, allowing easy transferability. The Internet also lets patients 
review websites for physician referrals, which takes some of the fear out of trying someone new.4
Companies can also reduce buyer power with loyalty programs, which reward custom­
ers based on their spending. The airline industry is famous for its frequent-flyer programs, 
for instance. Because of the rewards travelers receive (free airline tickets, upgrades, or hotel 
stays), they are more likely to be loyal to or give most of their business to a single com­
pany. Keeping track of the activities and accounts of many thousands or millions of customers 
­covered by loyalty programs is not practical without large-scale business systems, however. 
Loyalty programs are thus a good example of using MIS to reduce buyer power.5
SUPPLIER POWER
A supply chain consists of all parties involved, directly or indirectly, in obtaining raw materi­
als or a product. In a typical supply chain, a company will be both a supplier (to customers) 
and a customer (of other suppliers), as illustrated in Figure 2.5. Supplier power is the sup­
pliers’ ability to influence the prices they charge for supplies (including materials, labor, and 
services). Factors used to appraise supplier power include number of suppliers, size of suppli­
ers, uniqueness of services, and availability of substitute products. If supplier power is high, 
the supplier can influence the industry by:
	■	 Charging higher prices.
	■	 Limiting quality or services.
	■	 Shifting costs to industry participants.6
Typically, when a supplier raises prices, the buyers will pass on the increase to their cus­
tomers by raising prices on the end product. When supplier power is high, buyers lose revenue 
because they cannot pass on the raw material price increase to their customers. Some power­
ful suppliers, such as pharmaceutical companies, can exert a threat over an entire industry 
when substitutes are limited and the product is critical to the buyers. Patients who need to 
purchase cancer-fighting drugs have no power over price and must pay whatever the drug 
company asks because there are few available alternatives.
Using MIS to find alternative products is one way of decreasing supplier power. Cancer 
patients can now use the Internet to research alternative medications and practices, something 
that was next to impossible just a few decades ago. Buyers can also use MIS to form groups 
or collaborate with other buyers, increasing the size of the buyer group and reducing supplier 
power. For a hypothetical example, the collective group of 30,000 students from a university 
has far more power over price when purchasing laptops than a single student.7
THREAT OF SUBSTITUTE PRODUCTS OR SERVICES
The threat of substitute products or services is high when there are many alternatives to a 
product or service and low when there are few alternatives from which to choose. For exam­
ple, travelers have numerous substitutes for airline transportation including automobiles, 
trains, and boats. Technology even makes videoconferencing and virtual meetings possible, 
eliminating the need for some business travel. Ideally, a company would like to be in a market 
in which there are few substitutes for the products or services it offers.
Polaroid had this unique competitive advantage for many years until it forgot to observe 
competitive intelligence. Then the firm went bankrupt when people began taking digital pic­
tures with everything from video cameras to cell phones.
A company can reduce the threat of substitutes by offering additional value through wider 
product distribution. Soft-drink manufacturers distribute their products through vending 
FIGURE 2.5
Traditional Supply Chain.
Suppliers
Company
Customers

26  *  Unit 1  Achieving Business Success
machines, gas stations, and convenience stores, increasing the availability of soft drinks rela­
tive to other beverages. Companies can also offer various add-on services, making the substi­
tute product less of a threat. For example, iPhones include capabilities for games, videos, and 
music, making a traditional cell phone less of a substitute.8
THREAT OF NEW ENTRANTS
The threat of new entrants is high when it is easy for new competitors to enter a market and 
low when there are significant entry barriers to joining a market. An entry barrier is a feature 
of a product or service that customers have come to expect and entering competitors must 
offer the same for survival. For example, a new bank must offer its customers an array of 
MIS-enabled services, including ATMs, online bill paying, and online account monitoring. 
These are significant barriers to new firms entering the banking market. At one time, the first 
bank to offer such services gained a valuable first-mover advantage, but only temporarily, as 
other banking competitors developed their own MIS services.9
RIVALRY AMONG EXISTING COMPETITORS
Rivalry among existing competitors is high when competition is fierce in a market and low 
when competitors are more complacent. Although competition is always more intense in some 
industries than in others, the overall trend is toward increased competition in almost every 
industry. The retail grocery industry is intensively competitive. Kroger, Safeway, and Albert­
sons in the United States compete in many different ways, essentially trying to beat or match 
each other on price. Most supermarket chains have implemented loyalty programs to provide 
customers special discounts while gathering valuable information about their purchasing hab­
its. In the future, expect to see grocery stores using wireless technologies that track customer 
movements throughout the store to determine purchasing sequences.
Product differentiation occurs when a company develops unique differences in its prod­
ucts or services with the intent to influence demand. Companies can use differentiation to 
reduce rivalry. For example, while many companies sell books and videos on the Internet, 
Amazon differentiates itself by using customer profiling. When a customer visits Amazon.
com repeatedly, Amazon begins to offer products tailored to that particular customer based on 
his or her profile. In this way, Amazon has reduced its rivals’ power by offering its customers 
a differentiated service.
To review, the Five Forces Model helps managers set business strategy by identifying the 
competitive structure and economic environment of an industry. If the forces are strong, they 
increase competition; if the forces are weak, they decrease it (see Figure 2.6).10
ANALYZING THE AIRLINE INDUSTRY
Let us bring Porter’s five forces together to look at the competitive forces shaping an industry 
and highlight business strategies to help it remain competitive. Assume a shipping company is 
 
Weak Force: Decreases 
Competition or Few Competitors
Strong Force: Increases 
Competition or Lots of Competitors
Buyer Power
An international hotel chain 
purchasing milk
A single consumer purchasing milk
Supplier Power
A company that makes airline 
engines
A company that makes pencils
Threat of Substitute 
Products or Services
Cancer drugs from a 
pharmaceutical company
Coffee from McDonald’s
Threat of New Entrants
A professional hockey team
A dog walking business
Rivalry among 
Existing Competitors
Department of Motor Vehicles
A coffee shop
FIGURE 2.6
Strong and Weak Examples 
of Porter’s Five Forces.

	
Chapter 2  Identifying Competitive Advantages  *  27
deciding whether to enter the commercial airline industry. If performed correctly, an analysis 
of the five forces should determine that this is a highly risky business strategy because all five 
forces are strong. It will thus be difficult to generate a profit.
	■	 Buyer power: Buyer power is high because customers have many airlines to choose from 
and typically make purchases based on price, not carrier.
	■	 Supplier power: Supplier power is high since there are limited plane and engine man­
ufacturers to choose from, and unionized workforces (suppliers of labor) restrict airline 
profits.
	■	 Threat of substitute products or services: The threat of substitute products is high from 
many transportation alternatives including automobiles, trains, and boats, and from trans­
portation substitutes such as videoconferencing and virtual meetings.
	■	 Threat of new entrants: The threat of new entrants is high because new airlines are con­
tinuously entering the market, including sky taxies offering low-cost on-demand air taxi 
service.
	■	 Rivalry among existing competitors: Rivalry in the airline industry is high, and websites 
such as Travelocity.com force them to compete on price (see Figure 2.7).11
The Three Generic Strategies—Choosing 
a Business Focus
Once top management has determined the relative attractiveness of an industry and decided 
to enter it, the firm must formulate a strategy for doing so. If our sample company decided to 
join the airline industry, it could compete as a low-cost, no-frills airline or as a luxury airline 
providing outstanding service and first-class comfort. Both options offer different ways of 
achieving competitive advantages in a crowded marketplace. The low-cost operator saves on 
expenses and passes the savings along to customers in the form of low prices. The luxury 
airline spends on high-end service and first-class comforts and passes the costs on to the cus­
tomer in the form of high prices.
Porter’s three generic strategies are generic business strategies that are neither organiza­
tion nor industry specific and can be applied to any business, product, or service. These three 
generic business strategies for entering a new market are: (1) broad cost leadership, (2) broad 
differentiation, and (3) focused strategy. Broad strategies reach a large market segment, while 
focused strategies target a niche or unique market with either cost leadership or differentia­
tion. Trying to be all things to all people is a recipe for disaster, since doing so makes it dif­
ficult to project a consistent image to the entire marketplace. For this reason, Porter suggests 
adopting only one of the three generic strategies illustrated in Figure 2.8.12
LO 2.3 Compare Porter’s three 
generic strategies.
FIGURE 2.7
Five Forces Model in the 
Airline Industry.
 
Strong (High) Force: Increases Competition 
or Lots of Competitors
Buyer Power
Many airlines for buyers to choose from forcing competition 
based on price.
Supplier Power
Limited number of plane and engine manufacturers to choose 
from along with unionized workers.
Threat of Substitute Products 
or Services
Many substitutes including cars, trains, and buses. 
Even substitutes to travel such as video conferencing and 
virtual meetings.
Threat of New Entrants
Many new airlines entering the market all the time including 
the latest sky taxis.
Rivalry among Existing Competitors
Intense competition–many rivals.

28  *  Unit 1  Achieving Business Success
Figure 2.9 applies the three strategies to real companies, demonstrating the relationships 
among strategies (cost leadership versus differentiation) and market segmentation (broad ver­
sus focused).
	■	 Broad market and low cost: Walmart competes by offering a broad range of products 
at low prices. Its business strategy is to be the low-cost provider of goods for the cost-
conscious consumer.
	■	 Broad market and high cost: Neiman Marcus competes by offering a broad range of dif­
ferentiated products at high prices. Its business strategy offers a variety of specialty and 
upscale products to affluent consumers.
	■	 Narrow market and low cost: Payless competes by offering a specific product, shoes, at 
low prices. Its business strategy is to be the low-cost provider of shoes. Payless competes 
with Walmart, which also sells low-cost shoes, by offering a far bigger selection of sizes 
and styles.
	■	 Narrow market and high cost: Tiffany & Co. competes by offering a differentiated prod­
uct, jewelry, at high prices. Its business strategy allows it to be a high-cost provider of 
premier designer jewelry to affluent consumers.
Value Chain Analysis—Executing 
Business Strategies
Firms make profits by taking raw inputs and applying a business process to turn them into a 
product or service that customers find valuable. A business process is a standardized set of 
activities that accomplish a specific task, such as processing a customer’s order. Once a firm 
identifies the industry it wants to enter and the generic strategy it will focus on, it must then 
choose the business processes required to create its products or services. Of course, the firm 
LO 2.4 Demonstrate how a 
company can add value by using 
Porter’s value chain analysis.
FIGURE 2.8
Porter’s Three Generic 
Strategies.
Cost Leadership
Diﬀerentiation
Focused Strategy
Low Cost
High Cost
Cost Strategy
Broad
Market
Narrow
Market
Competitive
Scope
FIGURE 2.9
Examples of Porter’s Three 
Generic Strategies.
Walmart
Neiman Marcus
Payless Shoes
Tiﬀany & Co. 
Low Cost
High Cost
Cost Strategy
Broad
Market
Narrow
Market
Competitive
Scope

	
Chapter 2  Identifying Competitive Advantages  *  29
will want to ensure the processes add value and create competitive advantages. To identify 
these competitive advantages, Michael Porter created value chain analysis, which views a 
firm as a series of business processes that each add value to the product or service.
Value chain analysis is a useful tool for determining how to create the greatest possible 
value for customers (see Figure 2.10). The goal of value chain analysis is to identify processes 
in which the firm can add value for the customer and create a competitive advantage for itself, 
with a cost advantage or product differentiation.
The value chain groups a firm’s activities into two categories, primary value activities, and 
support value activities. Primary value activities, shown at the bottom of the value chain in 
Figure 2.10, acquire raw materials and manufacture, deliver, market, sell, and provide after-
sales services.
	1.	 Inbound logistics: acquires raw materials and resources and distributes to manufacturing 
as required.
	2.	 Operations: transforms raw materials or inputs into goods and services.
	3.	 Outbound logistics: distributes goods and services to customers.
	4.	 Marketing and sales: promotes, prices, and sells products to customers.
	5.	 Service: Provides customer support after the sale of goods and services.13
Support value activities, along the top of the value chain in Figure 2.10, include firm 
infrastructure, human resource management, technology development, and procurement. Not 
surprisingly, these support the primary value activities.
	■	 Firm infrastructure: includes the company format or departmental structures, environ­
ment, and systems.
	■	 Human resource management: provides employee training, hiring, and compensation.
	■	 Technology development: applies MIS to processes to add value.
	■	 Procurement: purchases inputs such as raw materials, resources, equipment, and supplies.
It is easy to understand how a typical manufacturing firm takes raw materials such as 
wood pulp and transforms it into paper. Adding value in this example might include using 
high-quality raw materials or offering next-day free shipping on any order. How, though, 
might a typical service firm take raw inputs such as time, knowledge, and MIS and trans­
form them into valuable customer service knowledge? A hotel might use MIS to track cus­
tomer reservations and then inform front-desk employees when a loyal customer is checking 
in so the employee can call the guest by name and offer additional services, gift baskets, 
or upgraded rooms. Examining the firm as a value chain allows managers to identify the 
important business processes that add value for customers and then find MIS solutions that 
support them.
FIGURE 2.10
The Value Chain.
Support
Value
Activities  
Primary
Value
Activities
Firm infrastructure (3.1%)
Human resource management (7.1%)
Technology development (and R&D) (4.2%)
Procurement (27%)
Receive
and
store raw
materials
(5.2%)
Make the
product or
service
(40.3%)
Deliver the
product or
service
(6.6%)
Market and
sell the
product or
service
(4.3%)
Service
after
the sale
(2.2%)
Value Added

30  *  Unit 1  Achieving Business Success
When performing a value chain analysis, a firm could survey customers about the extent 
to which they believe each activity adds value to the product or service. This step gener­
ates responses the firm can measure, shown as percentages in Figure 2.10, to describe how 
each activity adds (or reduces) value. Then the competitive advantage decision for the firm 
is whether to (1) target high value-adding activities to further enhance their value, (2) tar­
get low value-adding activities to increase their value, or (3) perform some combination of 
the two.
MIS adds value to both primary and support value activities. One example of a primary 
value activity facilitated by MIS is the development of a marketing campaign management 
system that could target marketing campaigns more efficiently, thereby reducing market­
ing costs. The system would also help the firm better pinpoint target market needs, thereby 
increasing sales. One example of a support value activity facilitated by MIS is the develop­
ment of a human resources system that could more efficiently reward employees based on 
performance. The system could also identify employees who are at risk of quitting, allowing 
a manager time to find additional challenges or opportunities that would help retain these 
employees and thus reduce turnover costs.
Value chain analysis is a highly useful tool that provides hard and fast numbers for 
evaluating the activities that add value to products and services. Managers can find addi­
tional value by analyzing and constructing the value chain in terms of Porter’s Five Forces 
Model (see Figure 2.11). For example, if the goal is to decrease buyer power, a company 
can construct its value chain activity of “service after the sale” by offering high levels of 
customer service. This will increase customers’ switching costs and reduce their power. 
Analyzing and constructing support value activities can help decrease the threat of new 
entrants. Analyzing and constructing primary value activities can help decrease the threat 
of substitute products or services. Revising Porter’s three business strategies is critical. 
Firms must continually adapt to their competitive environments, which can cause business 
strategy to shift.14
FIGURE 2.11
The Value Chain and Porter’s 
Five Forces Model.
Firm infrastructure (3.1%)
Human resource management (7.1%)
Technology development (and R&D) (4.2%)
Procurement (27%)
Receive
and
store raw
materials
(5.2%)
Make the
product or
service
(40.3%)
Deliver the
product or
service
(6.6%)
Market and
sell the
product or
service
(4.3%)
Service
after
the sale
(2.2%)
Value Added
Threat of New
Entrants
The power of competitors
to enter a market
Buyer Power
The power of
customers to drive
down prices
Supplier Power
The power of
suppliers to drive up
prices of materials
Threat of Substitute
Products or Services
The power of customers
to purchase alternatives

	
Chapter 2  Identifying Competitive Advantages  *  31
Micheal Porter is a university professor at Harvard Business School, where he leads the Institute 
on Strategy and Competitiveness, studying competitiveness for companies and nations—and as a 
solution to social problems. He is the founder of numerous nonprofits, including The Initiative for 
a Competitive Inner City, a nonprofit, private-sector organization to catalyze inner-city business 
development.
Fortune magazine calls Michael Porter simply “the most famous and influential business professor 
who has ever lived.” His books are part of foundational coursework for business students around the 
world; he’s applied sharp insight to health care systems, American competitiveness, development in 
rural areas. Now he’s taking on a massive question: the perceived disconnect between corporations 
and society. He argues that companies must begin to take the lead in reconceiving the intersec­
tion between society and corporate interests—and he suggests a framework, that of “shared value,” 
which involves creating economic value in a way that also creates value for society.15
Visit TED.com to watch Michael Porter’s video on why business can be good at solving social 
problems.
https://www.ted.com/talks/michael_porter_why_business_can_be_good_at_solving_social_­
problems
Questions
	1.	 In today’s global business environment, does the physical location of a business matter?
	2.	 Do you agree or disagree that business can solve social problems? Justify your answer.
Chapter Two Case:  Michael Porter on TED—The Case for Letting 
Business Solve Social Problems
	1.	 Imagine you are working for Costco as a manager in its Chicago store. Using Porter’s Five Forces 
Model, analyze buyer power and supplier power for Costco.
	2.	 Which of the three generic strategies is Costco following?
	3.	 Only members of Costco can purchase products at Costco. Which of Porter’s Five Forces did 
Costco address through the introduction of its members-only program?
O P E N I N G  C A S E  ST U DY  Q U E ST I O N S

32  *  Unit 1  Achieving Business Success
2.1.	 Explain why competitive advantages are temporary along with the four key areas of a 
SWOT analysis.
A competitive advantage is a feature of a product or service on which customers place a greater 
value than they do on similar offerings from competitors. Competitive advantages provide the same 
product or service either at a lower price or with additional value that can fetch premium prices. 
Unfortunately, competitive advantages are typically temporary because competitors often quickly 
seek ways to duplicate them. In turn, organizations must develop a strategy based on a new com­
petitive advantage. Ways that companies duplicate competitive advantages include acquiring the 
new technology, copying business processes, and hiring away employees.
A SWOT analysis evaluates an organization’s strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats 
to identify significant influences that work for or against business strategies. Strengths and weak­
nesses originate inside an organization, or internally. Opportunities and threats originate outside an 
organization, or externally, and cannot always be anticipated or controlled.
2.2.	Describe Porter’s Five Forces Model and explain each of the five forces.
Porter’s Five Forces Model analyzes the competitive forces within the environment in which a 
­company operates, to assess the potential for profitability in an industry.
	■	 Buyer power is the ability of buyers to affect the price they must pay for an item.
	■	 Supplier power is the suppliers’ ability to influence the prices they charge for supplies (including 
materials, labor, and services).
	■	 Threat of substitute products or services is high when there are many alternatives to a product or 
service and low when there are few alternatives from which to choose.
	■	 Threat of new entrants is high when it is easy for new competitors to enter a market and low 
when there are significant entry barriers to entering a market.
	■	 Rivalry among existing competitors is high when competition is fierce in a market and low when 
competition is more complacent.
2.3.	 Compare Porter’s three generic strategies.
Organizations typically follow one of Porter’s three generic strategies when entering a new market: 
(1) broad cost leadership, (2) broad differentiation, and (3) focused strategy. Broad strategies reach a 
large market segment. Focused strategies target a niche market. Focused strategies concentrate on 
either cost leadership or differentiation.
2.4.	 Demonstrate how a company can add value by using Porter’s value chain 
analysis.
To identify competitive advantages, Michael Porter created value chain analysis, which views a firm 
as a series of business processes, each of which adds value to the product or service. The goal of 
value chain analysis is to identify processes in which the firm can add value for the customer and 
create a competitive advantage for itself, with a cost advantage or product differentiation. The 
value chain groups a firm’s activities into two categories—primary value activities and support value 
activities. Primary value activities acquire raw materials and manufacture, deliver, market, sell, and 
provide after-sales services. Support value activities, along the top of the value chain in the figure, 
include firm infrastructure, human resource management, technology development, and procure­
ment. Not surprisingly, these support the primary value activities.
L E A R N I N G  O U T C O M E  R E V I E W

	
Chapter 2  Identifying Competitive Advantages  *  33
1.	 SWOT Your Students
What is your dream job? Do you have the right skills and abilities to land the job of your dreams? If 
not, do you have a plan to acquire those sought-after skills and abilities? Do you have a personal 
career plan or strategy? Just like a business, you can perform a personal SWOT analysis to ensure 
your career plan will be successful. You want to know your strengths and recognize career oppor­
tunities while mitigating your weaknesses and any threats that can potentially derail your career 
plans. A key area where many people struggle is technology, and without the right technical skills, 
you might find you are not qualified for your dream job. One of the great benefits of this course is its 
ability to help you prepare for a career in business by understanding the key role technology plays 
in the different industries and functional areas. Regardless of your major, you will all use business 
driven information systems to complete the tasks and assignments associated with your career.
Perform a personal SWOT analysis for your career plan, based on your current skills, talents, and 
knowledge. Be sure to focus on your personal career goals, including the functional business area in 
which you want to work and the potential industry you are targeting, such as health care, telecom­
munications, retail, or travel.
M A K I N G  B U S I N E S S  D E C I S I O N S
	 1.	What is the relationship between a business strategy and stakeholders?
	 2.	Who are the top three most important stakeholders in a business?
	 3.	When would you use a SWOT analysis to help you make business decisions?
	 4.	What is the role Porter’s Five Forces Model plays in decision making?
	 5.	How could a company use loyalty programs to influence buyer power? 
	 6.	How could a company use switching costs to lock in customers and suppliers?
	 7.	What are Porter’s three generic strategies and why would a company want to follow only one?
	 8.	How can a company use Porter’s value chain analysis to measure customer satisfaction?
R E V I E W  Q U E S T I O N S
Personal Career SWOT 
Analysis
STRENGTHS
OPPORTUNITIES
WEAKNESSES
THREATS
PERSONAL CAREER SWOT ANALYSIS

34  *  Unit 1  Achieving Business Success
After completing your personal SWOT analysis, take a look at the table of contents in this text and 
determine whether this course will eliminate any of your weaknesses or create new strengths. Deter­
mine whether you can find new opportunities or mitigate threats based on the material we cover 
over the next several weeks. For example, project management is a key skill for any business profes­
sional who must run a team. Learning how to assign and track work status will be a key tool for any 
new business professional. Where would you place this great skill in your SWOT analysis? Did it help 
eliminate any of your weaknesses? When you have finished this exercise, compare your SWOT with 
your peers to see what kind of competition you will encounter when you enter the workforce.
2.	 Keeping Sensitive Data Safe When It’s Not in a Safe
In the past few years, data collection rates have skyrocketed, and some estimate we have ­collected 
more data in the past four years than since the beginning of time. According to International Data 
Corporation (IDC), data collection amounts used to double every four years. With the massive 
growth of smart phones, tablets, and wearable technology devices, it seems as though data is being 
­collected from everything, everywhere, all the time. It is estimated that data collection is doubling 
every two years, and soon it will double every six months. That is a lot of data! With the explosion 
of data collection, CTOs, CIOs, and CSOs are facing extremely difficult times as the threats to steal 
corporate sensitive data grows. Hackers and criminals have recently stolen sensitive data from retail 
giant Target, Home Depot, TJ Maxx, and even the Federal Reserve Bank.
To operate, sensitive data has to flow outside an organization to partners, suppliers, community, 
government, and shareholders. List 10 types of sensitive data found in a common organization. 
Review the list of stakeholders; determine which types of sensitive data each has access to and 
whether you have any concerns about sharing this data. Do you have to worry about employees and 
sensitive data? How can using one of the four business strategies discussed in this section help you 
address your data leakage concerns?
3.	 Pursuing Porter
There is no doubt that Michael Porter is one of the more influential business strategists of the 21st 
century. Research Michael Porter on the Internet for interviews, additional articles, and new or 
updated business strategies. Create a summary of your findings to share with your class. How can 
learning about people such as Thomas Friedman and Michael Porter help prepare you for a career in 
business? Name three additional business professionals you should follow to help prepare for your 
career in business.
4.	 Choosing a Career
Choosing a career can be an overwhelming task! Let’s face facts, you are going to spend countless 
hours working day-and-night at your job. If you choose the right career you can lead a life filled 
with excitement, opportunities, and happiness. Choose the wrong career and you can lead a life 
filled with boredom, suffering, and pain. The good news is the choice is yours! Create a list of your 
top three career choices and then perform a SWOT analysis of each career. Be sure to include such 
things as expectations, longevity, perks, benefits, and personal career goals. Hopefully, this great 
little exercise can start you thinking about the numerious opportunties that will be available to you in 
the near future.
5.	 Death of a Product
Porter’s Five Forces Model is an essential framework for understanding industries and market 
forces. Choose one of the categories listed here and analyze what happened to the market using 
Porter’s Five Forces:
■	
PDA and laptop computer.
■	
On-Demand Movies and Blue-ray player.

	
Chapter 2  Identifying Competitive Advantages  *  35
■	
Digital camera and Polaroid camera.
■	
GPS device and a road atlas.
■	
Digital books and printed books.
■	
High-definition TV and radio.
6.	 Applying the Three Generic Strategies
The chapter discussed examples of companies that pursue differentiated strategies so that they are 
not forced into positions where they must compete solely on the basis of price. Pick an industry and 
have your team members find and compare two companies, one that is competing on the basis of 
price and another that has chosen to pursue a differentiated strategy enabled by the creative use of 
MIS. Some industries you may want to consider are clothing retailers, grocery stores, airlines, and 
personal computers. Prepare a presentation for the class on the ways that MIS is being used to help 
the differentiating company compete against the low-cost provider. Before you begin, spend some 
class time to make sure each team selects a different industry if at all possible.
7.	 IOT Time Management
There is no doubt about it, poor time management is one of the leading causes of failure among 
students. Without being able to manage due dates, deliverables, work, and of course life students 
find themselves sinking instead of swimming in the vast college pool. You have decided that enough 
is enough and you and a few friends are going to take advantage of technology to create an innova­
tive new IOT device to solve this monumental problem. In a group, brainstorm your new time man­
agement IOT device and then apply a Porter’s Five Forces model. Use the model to determine the 
chances of success for your new product.

36  *  Unit 1  Achieving Business Success
Business Process Reegineering
This chapter introduces high-profile strategic initiatives that an organization can undertake to 
help it gain competitive advantages and business efficiencies—business process reengineer­
ing, supply chain management, customer relationship management, and enterprise resource 
planning (see Figure 3.1). Each of these strategic initiatives is covered in detail throughout 
this text. This chapter provides a brief introduction only.
Most companies pride themselves on providing breakthrough products and services for 
customers. But if customers do not receive what they want quickly, accurately, and hassle-
free, even fantastic offerings will not prevent a company from annoying customers and ulti­
mately eroding its own financial performance. To avoid this pitfall and protect its competitive 
advantage, a company must continually evaluate all the business processes in its value chain. 
LO 3.1 Identify how an organiza-
tion can use business process 
reengineering to improve its 
business.
  3.3.	Explain customer relationship management systems 
and how they can help organizations understand their 
customers.
  3.4.	Summarize the importance of enterprise resource 
planning systems.
  3.1.	 Identify how an organization can use 
business process reengineering to improve its 
business.
  3.2.	Explain supply chain management and its role 
in business.
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Strategic Initiatives for 
Implementing Competitive 
Advantages
C H A P T E R  3
FIGURE 3.1
Strategic Initiatives for 
Competitive Advantages.
Business
Process
Reengineering
Supply Chain
Management
Enterprise
Resource
Planning
Customer
Relationship
Management

	
Chapter 3  Strategic Initiatives for Implementing Competitive Advantages  *  37
A business process is a standardized set of activities that accomplish a specific task, such 
as processing a customer’s order. Business processes transform a set of inputs into a set 
of ­outputs—goods or services—for another person or process by using people and tools. 
­Workflow includes the tasks, activities, and responsibilities required to execute each step in 
a business process. Understanding business processes, workflow, customers’ expectations, 
and the competitive environment provides managers with the necessary ingredients to design 
and evaluate alternative business processes in order to maintain competitive advantages when 
internal or external circumstances change. Workflow control systems monitor processes to 
ensure tasks, activities, and responsibilities are executed as specified. 
A static process uses a systematic approach in an attempt to improve business effec­
tiveness and efficiency continuously. Managers constantly attempt to optimize static pro­
cess. Examples of static processes include running payroll, calculating taxes, and creating 
financial statements. A dynamic process is continuously changing and provides business 
solutions to ever-changing business operations. As the business and its strategies change, 
so do the dynamic processes. Examples of dynamic processes include managing layoffs of 
employees, changing order levels based on currency rates, and canceling business travel due 
to extreme weather.
Systems thinking offers a great story to help differentiate between static and dynamic 
processes. If you throw a rock in the air, you can predict where it will land. If you throw 
a bird in the air you can’t predict where it will land. The bird, a living dynamic, system, 
will sense its environment and fly in any direction. The bird gathers and processes input 
and interacts with its environment. The rock is an example of a static process and the bird 
is an example of a dynamic process. Organizations have people and are characteristically 
dynamic, making it difficult to predict how the business will operate. Managers must antici­
pate creating and deploying both static and dynamic processes to keep pace with the every 
changing business needs. 
The business processes outlined in Figure 3.2 reflect functional thinking. Some processes, 
such as a programming process, may be contained wholly within a single department. How­
ever, most, such as ordering a product, are cross-functional or cross-departmental processes 
and span the entire organization. The process of “order to delivery” focuses on the entire 
customer order process across functional departments (see Figure 3.3). Another example is 
“product realization,” which includes not only the way a product is developed, but also the 
way it is marketed and serviced. Some other cross-functional business processes are taking a 
product from concept to market, acquiring customers, loan processing, providing post-sales 
service, claim processing, and reservation handling.
Customer-facing processes, also called front-office processes, result in a product or ser­
vice received by an organization’s external customer. They include fulfilling orders, commu­
nicating with customers, and sending out bills and marketing information. Business-facing 
­processes, also called back-office processes, are invisible to the external customer but essential 
to the effective management of the business; they include goal setting, day-to-day planning, 
giving performance feedback and rewards, and allocating resources. Figure 3.4 displays the 
different categories of customer-facing and business-facing processes along with an example 
of each. A company’s strategic vision should provide guidance on which business processes 
are core, that is, which are directly linked to the firm’s critical success factors. Mapping these 
core business processes to the value chain reveals where the processes touch the customers 
and affect their perceptions of value.
BUSINESS PROCESS REENGINEERING
Business process reengineering (BPR) is the analysis and redesign of workflow within and 
between enterprises. During a BPR effort a company begins with a blank sheet of paper 
evaluating existing processes to create new processes that deliver added-value to customers 
and eliminate redundancies in workflows. The primary goals of BPR efforts are to reduce 
organizational layers and eliminate unproductive activities by redesigning functional depart­
ments into cross-functional teams and promote the dissemination of information throughout 
the organizations.

38  *  Unit 1  Achieving Business Success
FIGURE 3.3
Five Steps in the Order-to-
Delivery Business Process.
Marketing
Sales
Operations
Management
Accounting and
Finance
Customer
Service
 Create campaign
 Check inventory
Step One
 Place order
 Notify production
 Check credit
Step Two
 Manufacture goods
Step Three
 Deliver goods
 Bill customer
Step Four
 Support sale
Step Five
FIGURE 3.2
Sample Business Processes.
Human Resources
 Hiring employees
 Enrolling employees in health care
 Tracking vacation and sick time
Operations Management
 Ordering inventory
 Creating production schedules
 Manufacturing goods
Marketing and Sales
 Promoting of discounts
 Communicating marketing campaigns
 Attracting customers
 Processing sales
Accounting and Finance
 Creating ﬁnancial statements
 Paying of Accounts Payable
 Collecting of Accounts Receivable
Figure 3.5 highlights an analogy to business process reengineering by explaining the dif­
ferent means of traveling along the same route. A company could improve the way it travels 
by changing from foot to horse and then from horse to car. With a BPR mind-set, however, 
it would look beyond automating and streamlining to find a completely different approach. 
It would ignore the road and travel by air to get from point A to point B. Companies often 

	
Chapter 3  Strategic Initiatives for Implementing Competitive Advantages  *  39
follow the same indirect path for doing business, not realizing there might be a different, 
faster, and more direct way.
Creating value for the customer is the leading reason for instituting BPR, and MIS often 
plays an important enabling role. Fundamentally new business processes enabled Progres­
sive Insurance to slash its claims settlement time from 31 days to four hours, for instance. 
Typically, car insurance companies follow this standard claims resolution process: The cus­
tomer gets into an accident, has the car towed, and finds a ride home. The customer then 
calls the insurance company to begin the claims process, which includes an evaluation of 
the damage, assignment of fault, and an estimate of the cost of repairs, which usually takes 
about a month (see Figure 3.6). Progressive Insurance’s innovation was to offer a mobile 
claims process. When a customer has a car accident, he or she calls in the claim on the 
spot. The Progressive claims adjuster comes to the accident site, surveys the scene, and 
takes digital photographs. The adjuster then offers the customer on-site payment, towing 
services, and a ride home. A true BPR effort does more for a company than simply improve 
FIGURE 3.4
Customer-Facing, Industry-
Specific, and Business-
Facing Processes.
Order processing
Customer service
Sales process
Customer billing
Order shipping
Customer-Facing
Processes
Banking—Loan processing
Insurance—Claims processing
Government—Grant allocation
Hotel—Reservation handling
Airline—Baggage handling
Industry-Speciﬁc Customer
Facing Processes
Strategic planning
Tactical planning
Budget forecasting
Training
Purchasing raw materials
Business-Facing
Processes
FIGURE 3.5
Different Ways to Travel the 
Same Route.
Better, Faster, Cheaper
FIGURE 3.6
Auto Insurance Claims 
Processes Reengineering.
Progressive Insurance: Claims Resolution Process
Resolution Cycle Time: 30 minutes–3 hours
Company A: Claims Resolution Process
Resolution Cycle Time: 3–8 weeks

40  *  Unit 1  Achieving Business Success
a process by performing it better, faster, and cheaper. Progressive Insurance’s BPR effort 
redefined best practices for an entire industry.
When selecting a business process to reengineer, wise managers focus on those core pro­
cesses that are critical to performance, rather than marginal processes that have little impact. 
The effort to reengineer a business process as a strategic activity requires a different mind-set 
than that required in continuous business process improvement programs. Because companies 
have tended to overlook the powerful contribution that processes can make to strategy, they 
often undertake process improvement efforts using their current processes as the starting point. 
Managers focusing on reengineering can instead use several criteria to identify opportunities:
	■	 Is the process broken?
	■	 Is it feasible that reengineering of this process will succeed?
	■	 Does it have a high impact on the agency’s strategic direction?
	■	 Does it significantly impact customer satisfaction?
	■	 Is it antiquated?
	■	 Does it fall far below best-in-class?
	■	 Is it crucial for productivity improvement?
	■	 Will savings from automation be clearly visible?
	■	 Is the return on investment from implementation high and preferably immediate?
A business process patent is a patent that protects a specific set of procedures for conduct­
ing a particular business activity. A firm can create a value chain map of the entire industry 
to extend critical success factors and business process views beyond its boundaries. Core 
­processes are business processes, such as manufacturing goods, selling products, and provid­
ing service, that make up the primary activities in a value chain.
BUSINESS PROCESS MODELING
Business process modeling, or mapping, is the activity of creating a detailed flowchart 
or ­process map of a work process that shows its inputs, tasks, and activities in a structured 
sequence. A business process model is a graphic description of a process, showing the 
sequence of process tasks, which is developed for a specific purpose and from a selected 
viewpoint. A set of one or more process models details the many functions of a system or 
subject area with graphics and text, and its purpose is to:
	■	 Expose process detail gradually and in a controlled manner.
	■	 Encourage conciseness and accuracy in describing the process model.
	■	 Focus attention on the process model interfaces.
	■	 Provide a powerful process analysis and consistent design vocabulary. (See the end of the 
chapter for business process model examples.)
Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN) is a graphical notation that depicts the 
steps in a business process. BPMN provides businesses with a graphical view of the end-
to-end flow of their business processes. Diagramming business processes allows for easy 
communication and understanding of how core business processes are helping or hindering 
the business. Figure 3.7 displays the standard notation from www.BPMN.org and Figure 3.8 
displays a sample BPMN diagram for hiring a taxi cab. 
Business process modeling usually begins with a functional process representation of the 
process problem, or an As-Is process model. As-Is process models represent the current state 
of the operation that has been mapped, without any specific improvements or changes to 
existing processes. The next step is to build a To-Be process model that displays how the pro­
cess problem will be solved or implemented. To-Be process models show the results of apply­
ing change improvement opportunities to the current (As-Is) process model. This approach 
ensures that the process is fully and clearly understood before the details of a process solution 
are decided on. The To-Be process model shows how “the what” is to be realized. You need 
to be careful not to become inundated in excessive detail when creating an As-Is process model. 

	
Chapter 3  Strategic Initiatives for Implementing Competitive Advantages  *  41
The primary goal is to simplify, eliminate, and improve the To-Be processes. Process improve­
ment efforts focus on defining the most efficient and effective process identifying all of the 
illogical, missing, or irrelevant processes. Figure 3.9 displays the As-Is and To-Be process 
models for ordering a hamburger.
As-Is and To-Be process models are both integral in business process reengineering 
projects because these diagrams are very powerful in visualizing the activities, processes, 
and data flow of an organization. A swimlane diagram (or cross-functional diagram) docu­
ments the steps or activities of a workflow by grouping activities into swimlanes, which are 
FIGURE 3.7
BPMN Notation.
  BUSINESS PROCESS MODEL AND NOTATION (BPMN)  
  EVENT      
BPMN event  is anything that happens during the course of a business process. 
An event is represented by a circle in a business process model. In Figure  3.8 , 
the events include customer requests, time requests, or the end of the process. 
ACTIVITY      
BPMN activity  is a task in a business process. An activity is any work that is 
being performed in a process. An activity is represented by a rounded-corner 
rectangle in a business process model. In Figure 3.8, the activities include
checking availability, picking up the customers, and conﬁrming the booking. 
      
request. 
FLOW
BPMN ﬂows  display the path in which the process ﬂows. Flows are represented 
by arrows in a business process model. In Figure 3.8, the arrows show the path
the customer takes through the taxi cab booking process.12
GATEWAY
BPMN gateway  is used to control the ﬂow of a process. Gateways handle the 
forking, merging, and joining of paths within a process. Gateways are repre-
sented by a diamond shape in a business process model. In Figure 3.8, the
gateways include determining availability status or accepting/declining the 
FIGURE 3.8
BPMN Sample Diagram for 
Hiring a Taxi Cab.
Request
Booking
Calls for
Cab Booking
Get
Booking
Request
Check
Availability
Get
Alternative
Time
Propose
Booking Status
Not Accepted
Assign Cab
Operator
Notify Agent
Complete
Assignment
Pick Up
Customer
End
Accepted
Conﬁrm
Booking
End
Response
Availability
Status
Assignment
Complete
Booking Details
Cab Booking Process Diagram
Customer
Travel Agent
Cab Driver

42  *  Unit 1  Achieving Business Success
horizontal or vertical columns containing all associated activities for that category or depart­
ment. A process owner is the person responsible for the end-to-end functioning of a business 
process. Swimlane diagrams help identify process owners who can repair delays, bottlenecks, 
or redundancies. Figure 3.10 illustrates an As-Is process model of the order-to-delivery pro­
cess, using swimlanes to represent the relevant departments. 
Investigating business processes can help an organization find bottlenecks, remove redun­
dant tasks, and recognize smooth-running processes. For example, a florist might have a key 
success factor of reducing delivery time. A florist that has an inefficient ordering process or 
a difficult distribution process will be unable to achieve this goal. Taking down inaccurate 
orders, recording incorrect addresses, or experiencing shipping delays can cause errors in 
the delivery process.
FIGURE 3.9
As-Is and To-Be Process 
Models for Ordering a 
Hamburger.
Order
Combo
Meal
Customer
Approaches
Cashier
Customer
Pays
Cashier
To-Be Burger Order Process
As-Is Burger Order Process
Order
Fries
Want Fries?
Customer
Pays
Cashier
Order
Drink
No
Yes
Yes
No
Order
Burger
Customer
Approaches
Cashier
Want Drink?
FIGURE 3.10
As-Is Process Model for 
Order Fulfillment.
As-Is Order Fulﬁllment Process
Customer
Order
Submitted
Order
Generated
Order
Received
Credit
Checked
Credit
OK?
Credit
OK?
Invoice
Prepared
Credit
Issues
Assessed
Order
Canceled
Credit
Approved
Order
Entered
Inventory
Available?
Inventory
Ordered
Order
Shipped
Order
Picked and
Packaged
Process
Payment
Shipped
Order?
Invoice
Sent
Billing
Inventory
Shipping
Sales
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
No

	
Chapter 3  Strategic Initiatives for Implementing Competitive Advantages  *  43
Improving order entry, production, or scheduling processes can improve the delivery pro­
cess. Business processes should drive MIS choices and should be based on business strategies 
and goals (see Figure 3.11 A). Only after determining the most efficient and effective busi­
ness process should an organization choose the MIS that supports that business process. Of 
course, this does not always happen, and managers may find themselves in the difficult posi­
tion of changing a business process because the system cannot support the ideal solution (see 
Figure 3.11 B). Managers who make MIS choices and only then determine how their business 
processes should perform typically fail.
Supply Chain Management
Trek, a leader in bicycle products and accessories, gained more than 30 percent of the 
worldwide market by streamlining operations through the implementation of several MIS 
systems. According to Jeff Stang, director of MIS and operational accounting, the most 
significant improvement realized from the new systems was the ability to obtain key man­
agement information to drive business decisions in line with the company’s strategic goals. 
Other system results included a highly successful website developed for the 1,400 Trek 
dealers where they could enter orders directly, check stock availability, and view accounts 
LO 3.2 Explain supply chain 
­management and its role in 
business.
FIGURE 3.11
For Best Results, Business 
Processes Should Drive MIS 
Choices.
Order to Delivery
Product Realization
Customer
Acquisition
Order to Delivery
Product Realization
Customer
Acquisition
A)
B)

44  *  Unit 1  Achieving Business Success
receivable and credit summaries. Tonja Green, Trek channel manager for North America, 
stated, “We wanted to give our dealers an easier and quicker way to enter their orders and 
get information. Every week the number of web orders increases by 25 to 30 percent due to 
the new system.”
A supply chain includes all parties involved, directly or indirectly, in obtaining raw materi­
als or a product. To understand a supply chain, consider a customer purchasing a Trek bike 
from a dealer. On one end, the supply chain has the customer placing an order for the bike 
with the dealer. The dealer purchases the bike from the manufacturer, Trek. Trek purchases 
raw materials such as packaging material, metal, and accessories from many different suppli­
ers to make the bike. The supply chain for Trek encompasses every activity and party involved 
in the process of fulfilling the order from the customer for the new bike. Figure 3.12 displays 
a typical supply chain for a bike manufacturer including all processes and people required 
to fulfill the customer’s order. Figure 3.13 highlights the five basic supply chain activities a 
company undertakes to manufacture and distribute products. 
Supply chain management (SCM) is the management of information flows between and 
among activities in a supply chain to maximize total supply chain effectiveness and corpo­
rate profitability. Complex SCM systems provide demand forecasting, inventory control, and 
information flows between suppliers and customers.
 In the past, manufacturing efforts focused primarily on quality improvement efforts within 
the company; today these efforts reach across the entire supply chain, including customers, 
customers’ customers, suppliers, and suppliers’ suppliers. Today’s supply chain is an intricate 
network of business partners linked through communication channels and relationships. Sup­
ply chain management systems manage and enhance these relationships with the primary goal 
of creating a fast, efficient, and low-cost network of business relationships that take products 
from concept to market. SCM systems create the integrations or tight process and information 
linkages between all participants in the supply chain.
Walmart and Procter & Gamble (P&G) implemented a tremendously successful SCM 
system. The system linked Walmart distribution centers directly to P&G’s manufacturing 
centers. Every time a Walmart customer purchases a P&G product, the system sends a mes­
sage directly to the factory alerting P&G to restock the product. The system also sends an 
automatic alert to P&G whenever a product is running low at one of Walmart’s distribution 
centers. This real-time information allows P&G to efficiently make and deliver products to 
Walmart without having to maintain large inventories in its warehouses. The system also 
generates invoices and receives payments automatically. The SCM system saves time, reduces 
inventory, and decreases order-processing costs for P&G. P&G passes on these savings to 
Walmart in the form of discounted prices.1
FIGURE 3.12
Supply Chain for a Bike 
Manufacturer.
Distribution of
Finished Bikes
to Retailers
Bike
Production
Aluminum Manufacturer
Tire Manufacturer
Brake Manufacturer
Packaging Manufacturer
Bike Accessory
Manufacturers
Customer
Raw Materials
Storage
Retailer

	
Chapter 3  Strategic Initiatives for Implementing Competitive Advantages  *  45
Figure 3.14 diagrams the stages of the SCM system for a customer purchasing a product from 
Walmart. The diagram demonstrates how the supply chain is dynamic and involves the constant 
flow of information between the different parties. For example, the customer generates order 
information by purchasing a product from Walmart. Walmart supplies the order information to 
its warehouse or distributor. The warehouse or distributor transfers the order information to the 
manufacturer, who provides pricing and availability information to the store and replenishes the 
product to the store. Payment funds among the various partners are transferred electronically.
FIGURE 3.13
The Five Basic Supply Chain 
Activities.
PLAN
SOURCE
MAKE
DELIVER
Prepare to manage
all resources required
to meet demand
Build relationships
with suppliers to
procure raw materials
Manufacture
products and create
production schedules
Plan for
transportation of
goods to customers
Support
customers and
product returns
RETURN
FIGURE 3.14
Supply Chain for a Product 
Purchased from Walmart.
Procter &
Gamble
Walmart
warehouse
or distributor
Indicates information ﬂows for products,
pricing, scheduling, and availability
Paper
manufacturer
Packaging
supplier
Scented oil
manufacturer
Cocoa oil
manufacturer
Walmart
store
Customer

46  *  Unit 1  Achieving Business Success
Effective and efficient supply chain management systems can enable an organization to:
	■	 Decrease the power of its buyers.
	■	 Increase its own supplier power.
	■	 Increase switching costs to reduce the threat of substitute products or services.
	■	 Create entry barriers thereby reducing the threat of new entrants.
	■	 Increase efficiency while seeking a competitive advantage through cost leadership (see 
Figure 3.15).
Customer Relationship Management
Today, most competitors are simply a mouse-click away. This intense marketplace has forced 
organizations to switch from being sales focused to being customer focused. Customer 
­relationship management (CRM) involves managing all aspects of a customer’s relationship 
with an organization to increase customer loyalty and retention and an organization’s profit­
ability. CRM allows an organization to gain insights into customers’ shopping and buying 
behaviors in order to develop and implement enterprisewide strategies. The key players in 
CRM ­initiatives are outlined in Figure 3.16. CRM strategic goals include:
	■	 Identify sales opportunities.
	■	 Classify low-value customers and create marketing promotions to increase consumer 
spending.
LO 3.3 Explain customer relation-
ship management systems and 
how they can help organizations 
understand their customers.
FIGURE 3.15
Effective and Efficient Supply 
Chain Management’s Effect 
on Porter’s Five Forces.
Decrease
Increase
Organization’s
Supply Chain
 Supplier Power
 Buyer Power
 Threat of Substitute
 Products or Services
 Threat of New
 Entrants
FIGURE 3.16
Customer Relationship 
Management Key Players.
Account: An existing business
relationship exists and can
include customers, prospects,
partners, and competitors.
Contact: Speciﬁc individual
representing the account.
Sales Opportunity: An opportunity
exists for a potential sale of goods
or services related to an account
or contact.
Lead: A person or company
that is unknown to your business.

	
Chapter 3  Strategic Initiatives for Implementing Competitive Advantages  *  47
	■	 Classify high-value customers and create marketing promotions to increase consumer 
loyalty.
	■	 Analyze marketing promotions by product, market segment, and sales region.
	■	 Identify customer relationship issues along with strategies for quick resolution.
The complicated piece of the CRM puzzle is identifying customers and the many commu­
nication channels they use to contact companies including call centers, web access, email, 
sales representatives, faxes, and cell phones. A single customer may access an organization 
multiple times through many different channels (see Figure 3.17). CRM systems can help 
to collect all of the points of customer contact along with sales and financial information 
to provide a complete view of each customer (see Figure 3.18). CRM systems track every 
communication between the customer and the organization and provide access to cohesive 
customer information for all business areas from accounting to order fulfillment. Under­
standing all customer communications allows the organization to communicate effectively 
with each customer. It gives the organization a detailed understanding of each customer’s 
products and services record regardless of the customer’s preferred communication channel. 
For example, a customer service representative can easily view detailed account informa­
tion and history through a CRM system when providing information to a customer such as 
expected delivery dates, complementary product information, and customer payment and 
billing information.
Companies that understand individual customer needs are best positioned to achieve suc­
cess. Of course, building successful customer relationships is not a new business practice; 
however, implementing CRM systems allows a company to operate more efficiently and 
effectively in the area of supporting customer needs. CRM moves far beyond technology by 
identifying customer needs and designing specific marketing campaigns tailored to each. This 
enables a firm to treat customers as individuals, gaining important insights into their buying 
preferences and shopping behaviors. Firms that treat their customers well reap the rewards 
and generally see higher profits and highly loyal customers. Identifying the most valuable 
customers allows a firm to ensure that these customers receive the highest levels of customer 
service and are offered the first opportunity to purchase new products. Customer analytics 
involves gathering, classifying, comparing, and studying customer data to identify buying 
trends, at-risk customers, and potential future opportunities. Sales analytics involves gather­
ing, classifying, comparing, and studying company sales data to analyze product cycles, sales 
FIGURE 3.17
Customer Contact Points.
Text Message
Instant Message
Twitter
Facebook
Blog
Customer
Meeting or
Customer
Service Call
Web Order
Phone Order
Email
Letter
Voice Mail
Voice Call

48  *  Unit 1  Achieving Business Success
pipelines, and competitive intelligence. Software with advanced analytics capabilities helps 
you attract and retain loyal and profitable customers and gives you the insight you need to 
increase revenues, customer satisfaction, and customer loyalty.
Firms can find their most valuable customers by using the RFM formula—recency, 
­frequency, and monetary value. In other words, an organization must track:
	■	 How recently a customer purchased items.
	■	 How frequently a customer purchases items.
	■	 The monetary value of each customer purchase.
After gathering this initial CRM information, the firm can analyze it to identify patterns 
and create marketing campaigns and sales promotions for different customer segments. For 
example, if a customer buys only at the height of the season, the firm should send a special 
offer during the off-season. If a certain customer segment purchases shoes but never acces­
sories, the firm can offer discounted accessories with the purchase of a new pair of shoes. If 
the firm determines that its top 20 percent of customers are responsible for 80 percent of the 
revenue, it can focus on ensuring these customers are always satisfied and receive the highest 
levels of customer service.
There are three phases of CRM: (1) reporting, (2) analyzing, and (3) predicting. CRM 
reporting technologies help organizations identify their customers across other applica­
tions. CRM analysis technologies help organizations segment their customers into categories 
such as best and worst customers. CRM predicting technologies help organizations predict 
FIGURE 3.18
CRM Overview.
Customer
service
system
Inventory
system
Order
fulﬁllment
system
Accounting
system
Customer Relationship Management System
Customer information ﬂows
are represented by arrows.

	
Chapter 3  Strategic Initiatives for Implementing Competitive Advantages  *  49
customer behavior, such as which customers are at risk of leaving. Figure 3.19 highlights 
a few of the important questions an organization can answer in these areas by using CRM 
technologies.
Enterprise Resource Planning
Today’s business leaders need significant amounts of information to be readily accessible 
with real-time views into their businesses so that decisions can be made when they need 
to be, without the added time of tracking data and generating reports. Enterprise resource 
planning (ERP) integrates all departments and functions throughout an organization into 
a single system (or integrated set of MIS systems) so that employees can make decisions 
by viewing enterprisewide information on all business operations. To truly understand the 
complexity of ERP systems you must think about the many different functional business 
areas and their associated business processes as well as cross-functional business processes 
such as supply chain management and customer relationship management and beyond. At 
its most basic level, ERP software integrates these various business functions into one com­
plete system to streamline business processes and information across the entire organiza­
tion. Essentially, ERP helps employees do their jobs more efficiently by breaking down 
barriers between business units.
Many organizations fail to maintain consistency across business operations. If a single 
department, such as sales, decides to implement a new system without considering the other 
departments, inconsistencies can occur throughout the company. Not all systems are built to 
talk to each other and share data, and if sales suddenly implements a new system that mar­
keting and accounting cannot use or is inconsistent in the way it handles information, the 
company’s operations become siloed. Figure 3.20 displays sample data from a sales database, 
and Figure 3.21 displays samples from an accounting database. Notice the differences in data 
formats, numbers, and identifiers. Correlating this data would be difficult, and the inconsis­
tencies would cause numerous reporting errors from an enterprisewide perspective.
The two key components of an ERP system help to resolve these issues and include a 
common data repository and modular software design. A common data repository allows 
every department of a company to store and retrieve information in real-time allowing infor­
mation to be more reliable and accessible. Module software design divides the system into 
a set of functional units (named modules) that can be used independently or combined with 
other modules for increased business flexibility. Module software design allows customers to 
mix-and-match modules so they purchase only the required modules. If a company wants to 
LO 3.4 Summarize the importance 
of enterprise resource planning 
systems.
FIGURE 3.19
Three Phases of CRM.
ANALYZING
Customer Segmentation:
Asking Why It Happened
 Why did sales not meet
 forecasts?
 Why was production so
 low?
 Why did we not sell as
 many units as previous
 years?
 Who are our customers?
 Why was revenue
 so high?
 Why are inventory
 levels low?
PREDICTING
Customer Prediction:
Asking What Will Happen
 What customers are at
 risk of leaving?
 Which products will our
 customers buy?
 Who are the best
 customers for a
 marketing campaign?
 How do we reach our
 customers?
 What will sales be this
 year?
 How much inventory do
 we need to preorder?
REPORTING
Customer Identiﬁcation:
Asking What Happened
 What is the total
 revenue by customer?
 How many units did we
 make?
 What were total sales
 by product?
 How many customers
 do we have?
 What are the current
 inventory levels?

50  *  Unit 1  Achieving Business Success
implement the system slowly it can begin with just one module, such as accounting, and then 
incorporate additional modules such as purchasing and scheduling.
ERP systems share data supporting business processes within and across departments. 
In practice, this means that employees in different divisions—for example, accounting and 
sales—can rely on the same information for their specific needs. ERP software also offers 
some degree of synchronized reporting and automation. Instead of forcing employees to 
FIGURE 3.21
Accounting Information 
Sample. 
FIGURE 3.20
Sales Information Sample.
Source: Microsoft Office 2016
Source: Microsoft Office 2016

	
Chapter 3  Strategic Initiatives for Implementing Competitive Advantages  *  51
maintain separate databases and spreadsheets that have to be manually merged to generate 
reports, some ERP solutions allow staff to pull reports from one system. For instance, with 
sales orders automatically flowing into the financial system without any manual re-keying, 
the order management department can process orders more quickly and accurately, and the 
finance department can close the books faster. Other common ERP features include a por­
tal or dashboard to enable employees to quickly understand the business’s performance on 
key metrics.
 Figure 3.22 shows how an ERP system takes data from across the enterprise, consolidates 
and correlates it, and generates enterprisewide organizational reports. Original ERP imple­
mentations promised to capture all information onto one true “enterprise” system, with the 
ability to touch all the business processes within the organization. Unfortunately, ERP solu­
tions have fallen short of these promises, and typical implementations have penetrated only 
15 to 20 percent of the organization. The issue ERP intends to solve is that knowledge within 
a majority of organizations currently resides in silos that are maintained by a select few, with­
out the ability to be shared across the organization, causing inconsistency across business 
operations.
FIGURE 3.22
Enterprise Resource 
Planning System.
A
B
C
D
E
F
Corporate Data
Employees
Orders
Customers
Sales
Inventory
Global Shipping Report
Global Manufacturing Report
Global Sales Report
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
A
B
C
D
E
F
ERP
	1.	 Imagine you are working for Apple as a manager in its Chicago store. Explain how you could use a 
CRM system to help support customers.
	2.	 Create an argument against the following statement: “Apple should not invest any resources to 
build a supply chain management system.”
	3.	 Explain how an ERP system can help Apple run its business.
O P E N I N G  C A S E  ST U DY  Q U E ST I O N S

52  *  Unit 1  Achieving Business Success
Using drones to drop off packages could be great for buyers, who might want to get certain items as 
fast as humanly possible. Back in 2013, when Amazon revealed plans to begin delivering packages 
via flying drones through Prime Air, some seemed skeptical about the reality of deploying such a 
system. Recently, Amazon doubled down on those claims by releasing information on one of its new 
drones in action, and it is seriously impressive.
A new video presented by former Top Gear host Jeremy Clarkson (who is working on a show for 
Amazon), takes us through the entire process, from ordering, to warehouse launch, to delivery. The new 
drone looks a lot different from the one Amazon showed us a couple of years ago. This one has a more 
commercial and streamlined look, and instead of showing the package hanging in open air, the new 
drone hides the item in a square compartment. Just Google Amazon Prime Air Drone video with Jeremy 
Clarkson to see for yourself this amazing new drone that will dramatically impact the supply chain.
According to Amazon, the drone reaches a height of about 400 feet in vertical mode and then 
switches to horizontal mode to travel up to 15 miles away from the warehouse. During the flight, the 
drone uses what Amazon calls “sense and avoid technology” to avoid collisions with other objects in 
its flight path.
Toward the end of the video, the drone alights atop an Amazon logo in the yard of a consumer 
and spits out the package (in this case, shoes) and then takes off in a matter of seconds. The delivery 
process, which Amazon is careful to note is real and not a simulation, comes off seamlessly, making 
the prospect of drone deliveries seem like something that will be viable just a few months from now.
However, despite the encouraging footage, Amazon is still holding off on announcing exactly 
when its drones will take to the skies. On the updated Prime Air page featuring the new flight footage, 
a message reads, “Putting Prime Air into service will take some time, but we will deploy when we 
have the regulatory support needed to realize our vision.”
The FAA’s Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) Registration Task Force Aviation Rulemaking Commit­
tee is still hammering out rules for private and commercial drone use in U.S. air space, so Amazon’s 
lack of a specific launch timeline for Prime Air is understandable. But based on the video, it’s becom­
ing increasingly clear that Prime Air might not be a mere marketing stunt but a real look at the future 
of Amazon deliveries.
Retailers Racing to the Drone Games
Wal-Mart recently applied to U.S. regulators for permission to test drones for home delivery, curbside 
pickup and checking warehouse inventories, a sign it plans to go head-to-head with Amazon in using 
drones to fill and deliver online orders. 
Wal-Mart wants to start using drones in an effort to create a more efficient supply chain, and con­
nect their network of stores, distribution centers, fulfillment centers and transportation fleet. The 
world’s largest retailer by revenue has for several months been conducting indoor tests of small 
unmanned aircraft systems (drones) and is now seeking for the first time to test the machines out­
doors. In addition to having drones take inventory of trailers outside its warehouses and perform 
other tasks aimed at making its distribution system more efficient, Wal-Mart is asking the Federal Avia­
tion Administration for permission to research drone use in “deliveries to customers at Walmart facili­
ties, as well as to consumer homes.” The move comes as Amazon, Google and other companies test 
drones in the expectation that the FAA will soon establish rules for their widespread commercial use.2
Questions
	1.	 How will drones impact the supply chain?
	2.	 Why are big retailers racing to be the first to market with drone home delivery?
	3.	 How can a CRM system help communicate issues in the supply chain between customers and drones?
	4.	 How could BPR help uncover issues in a company’s supply chain that uses drones?
	5.	 What are the pros and cons of using a drone to deliver packages?
Chapter Three Case:  Amazon Drone Knocking

	
Chapter 3  Strategic Initiatives for Implementing Competitive Advantages  *  53
3.1.	 Identify how an organization can use business process reengineering to improve its 
business. 
A business process is a standardized set of activities that accomplish a specific task, such as pro­
cessing a customer’s order. Business processes transform a set of inputs into a set of outputs (goods 
or services) for another person or process by using people and tools. Without processes, organiza­
tions would not be able to complete activities.
3.2.	 Explain supply chain management and its role in business. 
A supply chain consists of all parties involved, directly or indirectly, in obtaining raw materials or 
a product. To automate and enable sophisticated decision making in these critical areas, compa­
nies are turning to systems that provide demand forecasting, inventory control, and information 
flows between suppliers and customers. Supply chain management (SCM) is the management of 
information flows between and among activities in a supply chain to maximize total supply chain 
effectiveness and corporate profitability. In the past, manufacturing efforts focused primarily on 
quality improvement efforts within the company; today these efforts reach across the entire sup­
ply chain, including customers, customers’ customers, suppliers, and suppliers’ suppliers. Today’s 
supply chain is an intricate network of business partners linked through communication channels 
and relationships. Improved visibility across the supply chain and increased profitability for the 
firm are the primary business benefits received when implementing supply chain management 
systems. Supply chain visibility is the ability to view all areas up and down the supply chain in real 
time. The primary challenges associated with supply chain management include costs and com­
plexity. The next wave in supply chain management will be home-based supply chain fulfillment. 
No more running to the store to replace your products because your store will come to you as 
soon as you need a new product.
3.3.	 Explain customer relationship management systems and how they can help 
organizations understand their customers. 
Customer relationship management (CRM) is a means of managing all aspects of a customer’s 
relationship with an organization to increase customer loyalty and retention and an organization’s 
profitability. CRM allows an organization to gain insights into customers’ shopping and buying 
behaviors. Every time a customer communicates with a company, the firm has the chance to 
build a trusting relationship with that particular customer. Companies that understand individual 
customer needs are best positioned to achieve success. Building successful customer relation­
ships is not a new business practice; however, implementing CRM systems allows a company to 
operate more efficiently and effectively in the area of supporting customer needs. CRM moves far 
beyond technology by identifying customer needs and designing specific marketing campaigns 
tailored to each.
3.4.	 Summarize the importance of enterprise resource planning systems.
Enterprise resource planning (ERP) integrates all departments and functions throughout an organiza­
tion into a single IT system (or integrated set of IT systems) so employees can make decisions by 
viewing enterprisewide information about all business operations.
L E A R N I N G  O U T C O M E  R E V I E W

54  *  Unit 1  Achieving Business Success
	 1.	What is a business process and what role does it play in an organization?
	 2.	Why do managers need to understand business processes? Can you make a correlation 
between systems thinking and business processes?
	 3.	Why would a manager need to review an As-Is and To-Be process model?
	 4.	How can a manager use automation, streamlining, and business process reengineering to gain 
operational efficiency and effectiveness?
	 5.	Explain the difference between customer-facing processes and business-facing processes. 
Which one is more important to an organization?
	 6.	Explain how finding different ways to travel the same road relates to automation, streamlining, 
and business process reengineering.
	 7.	What is supply chain management and why is it important to a company?
	 8.	What are the five primary activities in a supply chain?
	 9.	What is a supply chain inventory visibility system?
	10.	Why are customer relationships important to an organization? Do you agree that every business 
needs to focus on customers to survive in the information age?
	11.	What is an enterprise resource planning system?
	12.	What does a company need to integrate to become connected?
R E V I E W  Q U E S T I O N S
M A K I N G  B U S I N E S S  D E C I S I O N S
1.	 Cool College Start-Ups
Not long ago, people would call college kids who started businesses quaint. Now they call them the 
boss. For almost a decade, Inc. magazine has been watching college start-ups and posting a list of 
the nation’s top start-ups taking campuses by storm. Helped in part by low-cost technologies and 
an increased prevalence of entrepreneurship training at the university level, college students—and 
indeed those even younger—are making solid strides at founding companies. And they’re not just 
launching local pizza shops and fashion boutiques. They are starting up businesses that could scale 
into much bigger companies and may already cater to a national audience. 
Research Inc. magazine at www.inc.com and find the year’s current Coolest College Start-up 
listing. Choose one of the startups and explain how the business can use BPR, CRM, SCM, and ERP 
to help it gain traction in the market. Be sure to explain how the company can gain a competitive 
advantage by using each enterprise system efficiently and effectively. 
2.	 Managing Bad Customer Relationships
There is a common saying that the customer is always right. Clearly this can create many issues with 
customer relationship management as many times the customer is actually incorrect, but you can’t 
tell the customer they are wrong. Research the Internet and find an example of a customer relation­
ship gone wrong and determine if the customer was at fault for the problem. What can you do as a 
manager when a customer is angry but clearly wrong about a situation? What strategies can a man­
ager use when dealing with angry customers?

	
Chapter 3  Strategic Initiatives for Implementing Competitive Advantages  *  55
3.	 Fixing Broken School Processes
There are numerous simultaneous business processes occurring to keep your school running. 
Choose one area of your school and diagram all of the business processes occurring in one common 
day. For example, administration is registering students, creating class schedules, hiring faculty, 
recruiting students, and finding graduates jobs. Imagine the level of effort it takes to keep your 
school running day after day. List all of the processes associated with your chosen area.
4.	 School Supply Chains
The food industry has to operate tough schedules with supplies that have limited shelf-life and 
quickly approaching expiration dates. Imagine all of the food coming into your school to feed the 
students living in the dorms. List the different types of products being sourced by your school and 
what types of issues they might be encountering. What does your school do with out-dated prod­
ucts? How does your school estimate the food demand? What does your school do with leftover 
food? How can you improve your school’s supply chain? 

56  *  Unit 1  Achieving Business Success
C H A P T E R  4
Measuring the Success of 
Strategic Initiatives
LEARNING OUTCOMES
  4.1.	 Define the primary MIS roles along with their 
associated responsibilities.
  4.2.	Define critical success factors (CSFs) and key performance 
indicators (KPIs), and explain how managers use them to 
measure the success of MIS projects.
  4.3.	Explain why a business would use metrics to measure 
the success of strategic initiatives.
MIS Roles and Responsibilities
Management information systems is a relatively new functional area, having been around for­
mally in most organizations only for about 40 years. Job titles, roles, and responsibilities often 
differ dramatically from organization to organization. Nonetheless, clear trends are develop­
ing toward elevating some MIS positions within an organization to the strategic level.
Most organizations maintain positions such as chief executive officer (CEO), chief finan­
cial officer (CFO), and chief operations officer (COO) at the strategic level. Recently there 
are more MIS-related strategic positions such as chief information officer (CIO), chief data 
officer (CDO), chief technology officer (CTO), chief security officer (CSO), chief privacy 
officer (CPO), and chief knowledge officer (CKO). See Figure 4.1.
The chief information officer (CIO) is responsible for (1) overseeing all uses of infor­
mation technology and (2) ensuring the strategic alignment of MIS with business goals and 
objectives. The CIO often reports directly to the CEO. CIOs must possess a solid and detailed 
understanding of every aspect of an organization coupled with tremendous insight into the 
capability of MIS. Broad functions of a CIO include:
	1.	 Manager—ensure the delivery of all MIS projects, on time and within budget.
	2.	 Leader—ensure the strategic vision of MIS is in line with the strategic vision of the 
organization.
	3.	 Communicator—advocate and communicate the MIS strategy by building and maintaining 
strong executive relationships.
The chief data officer (CDO) is responsible for determining the types of information 
the enterprise will capture, retain, analyze, and share. The difference between the CIO and 
CDO is that the CIO is responsible for the information systems through which data is stored 
and processed, while the CDO is responsible for the data, regardless of the information 
system.
The chief technology officer (CTO) is responsible for ensuring the throughput, speed, 
accuracy, availability, and reliability of an organization’s information technology. CTOs are 
similar to CIOs, except that CIOs take on the additional responsibility for effectiveness of 
ensuring that MIS is aligned with the organization’s strategic initiatives. CTOs have direct 
responsibility for ensuring the efficiency of MIS systems throughout the organization. 
LO 4.1 Define the primary 
MIS roles along with their 
associated responsibilities.

	
Chapter 4  Measuring the Success of Strategic Initiatives  *  57
Most CTOs possess well-rounded knowledge of all aspects of MIS, including hardware, soft­
ware, and telecommunications.
The chief security officer (CSO) is responsible for ensuring the security of MIS systems 
and developing strategies and MIS safeguards against attacks from hackers and viruses. The 
role of a CSO has been elevated in recent years because of the number of attacks from hack­
ers and viruses. Most CSOs possess detailed knowledge of networks and telecommunica­
tions because hackers and viruses usually find their way into MIS systems through networked 
computers.
The chief privacy officer (CPO) is responsible for ensuring the ethical and legal use of 
information within an organization. CPOs are the newest senior executive position in MIS. 
Recently, 150 of the Fortune 500 companies added the CPO position to their list of senior 
executives. Many CPOs are lawyers by training, enabling them to understand the often 
­complex legal issues surrounding the use of information.1
FIGURE 4.1
The Roles and 
Responsibilities of MIS.
MIS Department Roles 
and Responsibilities
Chief information oﬃcer (CIO) 
Chief knowledge oﬃcer (CKO) 
Responsible for collecting,
maintaining, and distributing
company knowledge.
Chief privacy oﬃcer (CPO) 
Responsible for ensuring the ethical and 
legal use of information within a 
company.
Chief data oﬃcer (CDO) 
Responsible for determining the types of
information the enterprise will capture, retain,
analyze, and share.
Chief security oﬃcer (CSO) 
Responsible for ensuring the security 
of business systems and developing 
strategies and safeguards against 
attacks by hackers and viruses.
Chief technology oﬃcer (CTO) 
Responsible for ensuring the 
speed, accuracy, availability,
and reliability of the MIS.
Responsible for (1) overseeing all uses of 
MIS and (2) ensuring that MIS strategically  
aligns with business goals and objectives.

58  *  Unit 1  Achieving Business Success
The chief knowledge officer (CKO) is responsible for collecting, maintaining, and dis­
tributing the organization’s knowledge. The CKO designs programs and systems that make it 
easy for people to reuse knowledge. These systems create repositories of organizational docu­
ments, methodologies, tools, and practices, and they establish methods for filtering the infor­
mation. The CKO must continuously encourage employee contributions to keep the systems 
up-to-date. The CKO can contribute directly to the organization’s bottom line by reducing the 
learning curve for new employees or employees taking on new roles.
Danny Shaw was the first CKO at Children’s Hospital in Boston. His initial task was to 
unite information from disparate systems to enable analysis of both the efficiency and effec­
tiveness of the hospital’s care. Shaw started by building a series of small, integrated informa­
tion systems that quickly demonstrated value. He then gradually built on those successes, 
creating a knowledge-enabled organization one layer at a time. Shaw’s information systems 
have enabled administrative and clinical operational analyses.2
With the election of President Barack Obama comes the appointment of the first-ever 
national chief technology officer (CTO). The job description, as listed on Change.gov, states 
that the first CTO must “ensure the safety of our networks and lead an interagency effort, 
working with chief technology and chief information officers of each of the federal agencies, 
to ensure that they use best-in-class technologies and share best practices.” A federal-level 
CTO demonstrates the ongoing growth of technology positions outside corporate America. 
In the future expect to see many more technology positions in government and nonprofit 
organizations.
All the above MIS positions and responsibilities are critical to an organization’s success. 
While many organizations may not have a different individual for each of these positions, they 
must have leaders taking responsibility for all these areas of concern. The individuals respon­
sible for enterprisewide MIS and MIS-related issues must provide guidance and support to the 
organization’s employees. According to Fast Company magazine a few executive levels you 
might see created over the next decade include:
	■	 Chief intellectual property officer will manage and defend intellectual property, copy­
rights, and patents. The world of intellectual property law is vast and complicated as new 
innovations continually enter the market. Companies in the near future will need a core 
leadership team member who can not only wade through the dizzying sea of intellectual 
property laws and patents to ensure their own compliance, but also remain vigilant to pro­
tect their own company against infringement.
	■	 Chief automation officer determines if a person or business process can be replaced by a 
robot or software. As we continue to automate jobs a member of the core leadership team 
of the future will be put in charge of identifying opportunities for companies to become 
more competitive through automation.
	■	 Chief user experience officer will create the optimal relationship between user and 
­technology. User experience used to be an afterthought for hardware and software design­
ers. Now that bulky instruction manuals are largely (and thankfully) a thing of the past, 
technology companies need to ensure that their products are intuitive from the moment they 
are activated.3
MIS skills gap is the difference between existing MIS workplace knowledge and the 
knowledge required to fulfill the business goals and strategies. Closing the MIS skills gap by 
aligning the current workforce with potential future business needs is a complicated propo­
sition. Today, employers often struggle to locate and retain qualified MIS talent, especially 
individuals with application development, information security, and data analysis skills.
Common approaches to closing an MIS skills gap include social recruiting, off-site train­
ing, mentoring services, and partnerships with universities. In many instances, an MIS job 
will remain unfilled for an extended period of time when an employer needs to hire someone 
who has a very specific set of skills. In recruiting lingo, such candidates are referred to as 
purple squirrels. Because squirrels in the real world are not often purple, the implication 
is that finding the perfect job candidate with exactly the right qualifications, education and 
­salary expectations can be a daunting—if not impossible—task.

	
Chapter 4  Measuring the Success of Strategic Initiatives  *  59
Metrics: Measuring Success
A project is a temporary activity a company undertakes to create a unique product, service, or 
result. For example, the construction of a new subway station is a project, as is a movie theater 
chain’s adoption of a software program to allow online ticketing. Peter Drucker, a famous 
management writer, once said that if you cannot measure something, you cannot manage it. 
How do managers measure the progress of a complex business project?
Metrics are measurements that evaluate results to determine whether a project is meet­
ing its goals. Two core metrics are critical success factors and key performance indicators. 
Critical success factors (CSFs) are the crucial steps companies perform to achieve their goals 
and objectives and implement their strategies (see Figure 4.2). Key performance indicators 
(KPIs) are the quantifiable metrics a company uses to evaluate progress toward critical suc­
cess factors. KPIs are far more specific than CSFs.
It is important to understand the relationship between critical success factors and key per­
formance indicators. CSFs are elements crucial for a business strategy’s success. KPIs mea­
sure the progress of CSFs with quantifiable measurements, and one CSF can have several 
KPIs. Of course, both categories will vary by company and industry. Imagine improve gradu­
ation rates as a CSF for a college. The KPIs to measure this CSF can include:
	■	 Average grades by course and gender.
	■	 Student dropout rates by gender and major.
	■	 Average graduation rate by gender and major.
	■	 Time spent in tutoring by gender and major.
KPIs can focus on external and internal measurements. A common external KPI is market 
share, or the proportion of the market that a firm captures. We calculate it by dividing the 
firm’s sales by the total market sales for the entire industry. Market share measures a firm’s 
external performance relative to that of its competitors. For example, if a firm’s total sales 
(revenues) are $2 million and sales for the entire industry are $10 million, the firm has cap­
tured 20 percent of the total market (2/10 = 20%) or a 20 percent market share.
LO 4.2 Define critical success fac-
tors (CSFs) and key performance 
indicators (KPIs), and explain how 
managers use them to measure 
the success of MIS projects.
FIGURE 4.2
CSF and KPI Metrics.
Crucial steps companies 
perform to achieve their 
goals and objectives and 
implement their strategies
 Create high-quality 
 products 
 Retain competitive 
    advantages 
 Reduce product costs 
 Increase customer
 satisfaction 
 Hire and retain the best 
 business professionals 
Critical 
Success 
Factors  
Quantiﬁable metrics a 
company uses to evaluate 
progress toward critical 
success factors 
 Turnover rates of 
 employees 
 Percentage of help desk 
 calls answered in the ﬁrst 
 minute 
 Number of product 
 returns 
 Number of new 
 customers 
 Average customer 
 spending 
Key 
Performance 
Indicators 

60  *  Unit 1  Achieving Business Success
A common internal KPI is return on investment (ROI), which indicates the earning power 
of a project. We measure it by dividing the profitability of a project by the costs. This sounds 
easy, and for many departments where the projects are tangible and self-contained it is; how­
ever, for projects that are intangible and cross departmental lines (such as MIS projects), ROI 
is challenging to measure. Imagine attempting to calculate the ROI of a fire extinguisher. If 
the fire extinguisher is never used, its ROI is low. If the fire extinguisher puts out a fire that 
could have destroyed the entire building, its ROI is astronomically high.
Creating KPIs to measure the success of an MIS project offers similar challenges. Think 
about a firm’s email system. How could managers track departmental costs and profits 
associated with company email? Measuring by volume does not account for profitability, 
because one sales email could land a million-dollar deal while 300 others might not gener­
ate any revenue. Non-revenue-generating departments such as human resources and legal 
require email but will not be using it to generate profits. For this reason, many managers 
turn to higher-level metrics, such as efficiency and effectiveness, to measure MIS projects. 
Best practices are the most successful solutions or problem-solving methods that have been 
developed by a specific organization or industry. Measuring MIS projects helps determine 
the best practices for an industry.
EFFICIENCY AND EFFECTIVENESS METRICS
Efficiency MIS metrics measure the performance of MIS itself, such as throughput, transac­
tion speed, and system availability. Effectiveness MIS metrics measure the impact MIS has 
on business processes and activities, including customer satisfaction and customer conversion 
rates. Efficiency focuses on the extent to which a firm is using its resources in an optimal way, 
while effectiveness focuses on how well a firm is achieving its goals and objectives. Peter 
Drucker offers a helpful distinction between efficiency and effectiveness: Doing things right 
addresses efficiency—getting the most from each resource. Doing the right things addresses 
effectiveness—setting the right goals and objectives and ensuring they are accomplished. 
­Figure 4.3 describes a few of the common types of efficiency and effectiveness MIS metrics. 
KPIs that measure MIS projects include both efficiency and effectiveness metrics. Of course, 
these metrics are not as concrete as market share or ROI, but they do offer valuable insight 
into project performance.4
Large increases in productivity typically result from increases in effectiveness, which 
focus on CSFs. Efficiency MIS metrics are far easier to measure, however, so most manag­
ers tend to focus on them, often incorrectly, to measure the success of MIS projects. Con­
sider measuring the success of automated teller machines (ATMs). Thinking in terms of MIS 
efficiency metrics, a manager would measure the number of daily transactions, the average 
amount per transaction, and the average speed per transaction to determine the success of the 
ATM. Although these offer solid metrics on how well the system is performing, they miss 
many of the intangible or value-added benefits associated with ATM effectiveness. Effective­
ness MIS metrics might measure how many new customers joined the bank due to its ATM 
locations or the ATMs’ ease of use. They can also measure increases in customer satisfaction 
due to reduced ATM fees or additional ATM services such as the sale of stamps and movie 
tickets, significant time savers and value-added features for customers. Being a great manager 
means taking the added viewpoint offered by effectiveness MIS metrics to analyze all benefits 
associated with an MIS project.
THE INTERRELATIONSHIP BETWEEN EFFICIENCY AND EFFECTIVENESS MIS METRICS
Efficiency and effectiveness are definitely related. However, success in one area does not 
necessarily imply success in the other. Efficiency MIS metrics focus on the technology 
itself. While these efficiency MIS metrics are important to monitor, they do not always 
guarantee effectiveness. Effectiveness MIS metrics are determined according to an orga­
nization’s goals, strategies, and objectives. Here, it becomes important to consider a com­
pany’s CSFs, such as a broad cost leadership strategy (Walmart, for example), as well as 
KPIs such as increasing new customers by 10 percent or reducing new-product develop­
ment cycle times to six months. 

	
Chapter 4  Measuring the Success of Strategic Initiatives  *  61
Figure 4.4 depicts the interrelationships between efficiency and effectiveness. Ideally, a 
firm wants to operate in the upper right-hand corner of the graph, realizing both significant 
increases in efficiency and effectiveness. However, operating in the upper left-hand corner 
(minimal effectiveness with increased efficiency) or the lower right-hand corner (significant 
effectiveness with minimal efficiency) may be in line with an organization’s particular strate­
gies. In general, operating in the lower left-hand corner (minimal efficiency and minimal 
effectiveness) is not ideal for the operation of any organization.
Regardless of what process is measured, how it is measured, and whether it is performed 
for the sake of efficiency or effectiveness, managers must set benchmarks, or baseline val­
ues the system seeks to attain. Benchmarking is a process of continuously measuring sys­
tem results, comparing those results to optimal system performance (benchmark values), and 
identifying steps and procedures to improve system performance. Benchmarks help assess 
how an MIS project performs over time. For instance, if a system held a benchmark for a 
response time of 15 seconds, the manager would want to ensure response time continued to 
decrease until it reached that point. If response time suddenly increased to 1 minute, the man­
ager would know the system was not functioning correctly and could start looking into poten­
tial problems. Continuously measuring MIS projects against benchmarks provides feedback 
so managers can control the system.
FIGURE 4.3
Common Types of Efficiency 
and Effectiveness Metrics.
Throughput—The amount of information
that can travel through a system at any
point in time.
Eﬃciency Metrics
Eﬀectiveness
Metrics
Usability—The ease with which people perform
transactions and/or ﬁnd information.
Customer satisfaction—Measured by
satisfaction surveys, percentage of existing
customers retained, and increases in revenue
dollars per customer.
Conversion rates—The number of customers
an organization “touches” for the ﬁrst time and
persuades to purchase its products or services.
This is a popular metric for evaluating the
eﬀectiveness of banner, pop-up, and pop-under
ads on the Internet.
Financial—Such as return on investment (the
earning power of an organization’s assets), cost-
beneﬁt analysis (the comparison of projected
revenues and costs including development,
maintenance, ﬁxed, and variable), and break-
even analysis (the point at which constant
revenues equal ongoing costs).
Transaction speed—The amount of time
a system takes to perform a transaction.
System availability—The number of
hours a system is available for users.
Information accuracy—The extent to
which a system generates the correct
results when executing the same
transaction numerous times.
Response time—The time it takes to
respond to user interactions such as a
mouse click.

62  *  Unit 1  Achieving Business Success
Metrics for Strategic Initiatives
What is a metric? A metric is nothing more than a standard measure to assess performance 
in a particular area. Metrics are at the heart of a good, customer-focused management system 
and any program directed at continuous improvement. A focus on customers and performance 
standards shows up in the form of metrics that assess the ability to meet customers’ needs and 
business objectives.
Business leaders want to monitor key metrics in real time to actively track the health of 
their business. Most business professionals are familiar with financial metrics. Different 
financial ratios are used to evaluate a company’s performance. Companies can gain additional 
insight into their performance by comparing financial ratios against other companies in their 
industry. A few of the more common financial ratios include:
	■	 Internal rate of return (IRR)—the rate at which the net present value of an investment 
equals zero.
	■	 Return on investment (ROI)—indicates the earning power of a project and is measured by 
dividing the benefits of a project by the investment.
	■	 Payback method—number of years to recoup the cost of an initiative based on projected 
annual net cash flow.
	■	 Break-even analysis—determines the volume of business required to make a profit at the cur­
rent prices charged for the products or services. For example, if a promotional mailing costs 
$1,000 and each item generates $50 in revenue, the company must generate 20 sales to break 
even and cover the cost of the mailing. The break-even point is the point at which revenues equal 
costs. The point is located by performing a break-even analysis. All sales over the break-even 
point produce profits; any drop in sales below that point will produce losses (see Figure 4.5).
LO 4.3 Explain why a business 
would use metrics to measure the 
success of strategic initiatives.
FIGURE 4.4
The Interrelationships 
between Efficiency and 
Effectiveness.
High
Eﬃciency
Low
Low
High
Eﬀectiveness
Optimal area
in which to
operate
FIGURE 4.5
Break-Even Analysis.
Break-Even
Point
Break-Even Point
Quantity
Dollars
Costs
Sales
Proﬁt

	
Chapter 4  Measuring the Success of Strategic Initiatives  *  63
Most managers are familiar with financial metrics but unfamiliar with information system 
metrics. Most companies measure the traffic on a website as the primary determinant of the 
website’s success. However, heavy website traffic does not necessarily indicate large sales. 
Many organizations with lots of website traffic have minimal sales. A company can use web 
traffic analysis or web analytics to determine the revenue generated, the number of new 
customers acquired, any reductions in customer service calls, and so on. Figure 4.6 displays 
a few metrics managers should be familiar with to help measure website success along with 
an organization’s strategic initiatives. A web-centric metric is a measure of the success of 
web and ebusiness initiatives. Of the hundreds of web-centric metrics available, some are 
general to almost any web or ebusiness initiative and others are dependent on the particular 
initiative.5
Supply chain management metrics can help an organization understand how it’s operat­
ing over a given time period. Supply chain measurements can cover many areas includ­
ing procurement, production, distribution, warehousing, inventory, transportation, and 
customer service. However, a good performance in one part of the supply chain is not 
sufficient. A supply chain is only as strong as its weakest link. The solution is to measure 
all key areas of the supply chain. Figure 4.7 displays common supply chain management 
metrics.6
Wondering what CRM metrics to track and monitor using reporting and real-time per­
formance dashboards? Best practice is no more than seven (plus or minus two) metrics out 
Website Metrics
■  Abandoned registrations: Number of visitors who start the process of completing a registration page 
and then abandon the activity.
■  Abandoned shopping carts: Number of visitors who create a shopping cart and start shopping and 
then abandon the activity before paying for the merchandise.
■  Click-through: Count of the number of people who visit a site, click on an ad, and are taken to the site 
of the advertiser.
■  Conversion rate: Percentage of potential customers who visit a site and actually buy something.
■  Cost-per-thousand (CPM): Sales dollars generated per dollar of advertising. This is commonly used to 
make the case for spending money to appear on a search engine.
■  Page exposures: Average number of page exposures to an individual visitor.
■  Total hits: Number of visits to a website, many of which may be by the same visitor.
■  Unique visitors: Number of unique visitors to a site in a given time. This is commonly used by Nielsen/
Net ratings to rank the most popular websites.
FIGURE 4.6
Website Metrics.
FIGURE 4.7
Supply Chain Management 
Metrics.
Supply Chain Management Metrics
■  Back order: An unfilled customer order. A back order is demand (immediate or past due) against an 
item whose current stock level is insufficient to satisfy demand.
■  Customer order promised cycle time: The anticipated or agreed upon cycle time of a purchase order. 
It is a gap between the purchase order creation date and the requested delivery date.
■  Customer order actual cycle time: The average time it takes to actually fill a customer’s purchase 
order. This measure can be viewed on an order or an order line level.
■  Inventory replenishment cycle time: Measure of the manufacturing cycle time plus the time included 
to deploy the product to the appropriate distribution center.
■  Inventory turns (inventory turnover): The number of times that a company’s inventory cycles or turns 
over per year. It is one of the most commonly used supply chain metrics.

64  *  Unit 1  Achieving Business Success
of the hundreds possible should be used at any given management level. Figure 4.8 displays 
­common CRM metrics tracked by organizations.7
Business process reengineering and enterprise resource planning are large, organization­
wide initiatives. Measuring these types of strategic initiatives is extremely difficult. One of 
the best methods is the balanced scorecard. This approach to strategic management was devel­
oped in the early 1990s by Dr. Robert Kaplan of the Harvard Business School and Dr. David 
Norton. Addressing some of the weaknesses and vagueness of previous measurement tech­
niques, the balanced scorecard approach provides a clear prescription as to what companies 
should measure in order to balance the financial perspective.
The balanced scorecard is a management system, in addition to a measurement system, 
that enables organizations to clarify their vision and strategy and translate them into action. 
It provides feedback around both the internal business processes and external outcomes in 
order to continuously improve strategic performance and results. When fully deployed, the 
balanced scorecard transforms strategic planning from an academic exercise into the nerve 
center of an enterprise. Kaplan and Norton describe the innovation of the balanced score­
card as follows:
The balanced scorecard retains traditional financial measures. But financial measures tell the story 
of past events, an adequate story for industrial age companies for which investments in long-term 
capabilities and customer relationships were not critical for success. These financial measures are 
inadequate, however, for guiding and evaluating the journey that information age companies must 
make to create future value through investment in customers, suppliers, employees, processes, tech­
nology, and innovation.8
The balanced scorecard views the organization from four perspectives, and users should 
develop metrics, collect data, and analyze their business relative to each of these perspectives:
	■	 The learning and growth perspective.
	■	 The internal business process perspective.
	■	 The customer perspective.
	■	 The financial perspective (see Figure 4.9).
FIGURE 4.8
CRM Metrics.
Sales Metrics
Service Metrics
Marketing Metrics
■  Number of prospective 
customers
■  Cases closed same day
■  Number of marketing 
campaigns
■  Number of new customers
■  Number of cases handled 
by agent
■  New customer retention 
rates
■  Number of retained customers
■  Number of service calls
■  Number of responses by 
marketing campaign
■  Number of open leads
■  Average number of service 
requests by type
■  Number of purchases by 
marketing campaign
■  Number of sales calls
■  Average time to resolution
■  Revenue generated by 
marketing campaign
■  Number of sales calls per lead
■  Average number of service 
calls per day
■  Cost per interaction by 
marketing campaign
■  Amount of new revenue
■  Percentage compliance with 
service-level agreement
■  Number of new customers 
acquired by marketing 
campaign
■  Amount of recurring revenue
■  Percentage of service 
renewals
■  Customer retention rate
■  Number of proposals given
■  Customer satisfaction level
■  Number of new leads by 
product

	
Chapter 4  Measuring the Success of Strategic Initiatives  *  65
FIGURE 4.9
The Four Primary 
Perspectives of the Balanced 
Scorecard.
Financial
Objectives
Measures
Targets
Initiatives
“To succeed
ﬁnancially, how
should we
appear to our
shareholders?”
Learning and
Growth
Objectives
Measures
Targets
Initiatives
“To achieve our
vision, how will
we sustain our
ability to
change and
improve?”
Customer
Objectives
Measures
Targets
Initiatives
“To achieve our
vision, how
should we
appear to our
customers?”
Internal Business
Processes
Objectives
Measures
Targets
Initiatives
“To satisfy our
shareholders
and customers,
what business
processes must
we excel at?”
Vision
and
Strategy
Recall that companies cannot manage what they cannot measure. Therefore, metrics must 
be developed based on the priorities of the strategic plan, which provides the key business 
drivers and criteria for metrics that managers most desire to watch.
One warning regarding metrics—do not go crazy. The trick is to find a few key metrics to 
track that provide significant insight. Remember to tie metrics to other financial and business 
objectives in the firm. The key is to get good insight without becoming a slave to metrics. The 
rule of thumb is to develop seven key metrics, plus or minus two.
	1.	 Explain the difference between efficiency MIS metrics and effectiveness MIS metrics.
	2.	 Imagine you are working for Costco as a manager in its Chicago store. List three CRM metrics 
Costco should track, along with the reasons these metrics will add value to Costco’s business 
strategy.
	3.	 List three SCM metrics Costco should track, along with the reasons these metrics will add value to 
Costco’s business strategy.
	4.	 How can Costco use the balanced scorecard to make its business more efficient?
O P E N I N G  C A S E  ST U DY  Q U E ST I O N S

66  *  Unit 1  Achieving Business Success
How can global warming be real when there is so much snow and cold weather? That’s what some 
people wondered after a couple of massive snowstorms buried Washington, DC, in the winter of 
2009–2010. Politicians across the capital made jokes and built igloos as they disputed the existence 
of climate change. Some concluded the planet simply could not be warming with all the snow on 
the ground.
These comments frustrated Joseph Romm, a physicist and climate expert with the Center for 
American Progress. He spent weeks turning data into information and graphs to educate anyone 
who would listen as to why this reasoning was incorrect. Climate change is all about analyzing data, 
turning it into information to detect trends. You cannot observe climate change by looking out the 
window; you have to review decades of weather data with advanced tools to really understand 
the trends.
Increasingly we see politicians, economists, and newscasters taking tough issues and boiling 
them down to simplistic arguments over what the data mean, each interpreting the data and spinning 
the data to support their views and agendas. You need to understand the data and turn them into 
useful information or else you will not understand when someone is telling the truth and when you 
are being lied to.
Brainstorm two or three types of data economists use to measure the economy.9
Questions
	1.	 How do they turn the data into information?
	2.	 What issues do they encounter when attempting to measure the economy?
	3.	 As a manager, what do you need to understand when reading or listening to economic and busi­
ness reports?
Chapter Four Case:  Manipulating the Data to Find Your Version 
of the Truth

	
Chapter 4  Measuring the Success of Strategic Initiatives  *  67
R E V I E W  Q U E S T I O N S
	 1.	What are the responsibilities of a chief information officer?
	 2.	What are the responsibilities of a chief privacy officer?
	 3.	What are the responsibilities of a chief data officer?
	 4.	What are the responsibilities of a chief security officer?
	 5.	Why would a company want to have a CIO, CPO, and CSO?
	 6.	What is the difference between MIS efficiency metrics and MIS effectiveness metrics?
	 7.	What is the difference between CSFs and KPIs?
	 8.	How can metrics be used to measure the success of supply chain management systems and 
CRM systems?
	 9.	What is the purpose of the balanced scorecard?
4.1.	 Define the primary MIS roles along with their associated responsibilities.
The chief information officer (CIO)is responsible for (1) overseeing all uses of information technology 
and (2) ensuring the strategic alignment of MIS with business goals and objectives. The chief data 
officer (CDO) is responsible for determining the types of information the enterprise will ­capture, 
retain, analyze, and share. The chief technology officer (CTO) is responsible for ensuring the 
throughput, speed, accuracy, availability, and reliability of an organization’s information technology. 
The chief security officer (CSO) is responsible for ensuring the security of MIS systems and develop­
ing strategies and MIS safeguards against attacks from hackers and viruses. The chief privacy officer 
(CPO) is responsible for ensuring the ethical and legal use of information within an organization. The 
chief knowledge officer (CKO) is responsible for collecting, maintaining, and distributing the organi­
zation’s knowledge.
4.2.	 Define critical success factors (CSFs) and key performance indicators (KPIs), and 
explain how managers use them to measure the success of MIS projects.
Metrics are measurements that evaluate results to determine whether a project is meeting its goals. 
Two core metrics are critical success factors and key performance indicators. Critical success factors 
(CSFs) are the crucial steps companies perform to achieve their goals and objectives and implement 
their strategies. Key performance indicators (KPIs) are the quantifiable metrics a company uses to 
evaluate progress toward critical success factors. KPIs are far more specific than CSFs.
4.3.	 Explain why a business would use metrics to measure the success of strategic 
initiatives.
Business leaders want to monitor key metrics in real time to actively track the health of their 
­business. Most business professionals are familiar with financial metrics. Different financial ratios are 
used to evaluate a company’s performance. Companies can gain additional insight into their perfor­
mance by comparing financial ratios against other companies in their industry
L E A R N I N G  O U T C O M E  R E V I E W

68  *  Unit 1  Achieving Business Success
1. Who Really Won the Winter Olympics?
If you were watching the 2014 Winter Olympics, I bet you were excited to see your country and its 
amazing athletes compete. As you were following the Olympics day by day, you were probably 
checking different websites to see how your country ranked. And depending on the website you 
visited, you could get a very different answer to this seemingly easy question. On the NBC and ESPN 
networks, the United States ranked second, and on the official Sochie Olympic website, the United 
States ranked fourth. The simple question of who won the 2014 Winter Olympics changes signifi­
cantly, depending on whom you asked. 
In a group, take a look at the following two charts and brainstorm the reasons each internation­
ally recognized source has a different listing for the top five winners. What measurement is each 
chart using to determine the winner? Who do you believe is the winner? As a manager, what do you 
need to understand when reading or listening to business forecasts and reports?
M A K I N G  B U S I N E S S  D E C I S I O N S
Winter Olympics 2014 Medal Ranking According to Oﬃcial Sochie Olympic Website
Rank
Country
Gold
Silver
Bronze
Total
1
Russian Fed.
13
11
 9
33
2
Norway
11
 5
10
26
3
Canada
10
10
 5
25
4
United States
 9
 7
12
28
5
Netherlands
 8
 7
 9
24
Winter Olympics 2014 Medal Ranking According to NBC News
Rank
Country
Gold
Silver
Bronze
Total
1
Russian Fed.
13
11
 9
33
2
United States 
9
 
7
12
28
3
Norway 
11 
 5
10
4
Canada  
            10
 10
5
25
26
5
Netherlands
 8
 7
 9
24
2. Starting Your Own Business
Josh James recently sold his web analytics company, Omniture, to Adobe for $1.8 billion. Yes, James 
started Omniture from his dorm room! Have you begun to recognize the unbelievable opportunities 
available to those students who understand the power of MIS, regardless of their major? What’s 
stopping you from starting your own business today? You are living in the information age and, with 
the power of MIS, it is easier than ever to jump into the business game with very little capital invest­
ment. Why not start your own business today?
■	
Why is it so easy today for students to create start-ups while still in college and how can this 
course help prepare you to start your own business?
■	
Explain three CSFs and KPIs you would use to measure the success of your business.
■	
Choose two CRM and SCM metrics you could use to measure your business and explain how 
they can help you achieve success.

	
Chapter 4  Measuring the Success of Strategic Initiatives  *  69
3. The Competitive Landscape for Students
According to the Economic Policy Institute, over the past decade the United States has lost an 
­estimated 2.4 million factory jobs to China. Factories in South Korea, Taiwan, and China are produc­
ing toys, toothpaste, running shoes, computers, appliances, and cars. For a long time, U.S. firms did 
not recognize these products as competition; they regarded Asia’s high-tech products as second-
rate knockoffs and believed Asian countries maintained a factory culture—they could imitate but 
not innovate.
In hindsight, it is obvious that once these countries did begin designing and creating high-end 
products, they would have obvious competitive advantages, with high-value research and devel­
opment coupled with low-cost manufacturing of unbeatable goods and services. Asia is now on 
the rise in all industries from wind turbines to high-speed bullet trains. According to Bloomberg 
­Businessweek ’s ranking of the most innovative companies, 15 of the top 50 are Asian, up from just 
5 in the previous year. In fact, for the first time, the majority of the top 25 are based outside the 
United States.
How do you, as a business student, view these statistics? What type of global business climate 
will you be competing in when you graduate? If you wanted to gather competitive intelligence 
about the job market, where would you look and what types of data would you want to analyze? 
What can you do to create personal competitive advantages to differentiate yourself when search­
ing for a job?
4. Roles and Responsibilities
You are the chief executive officer for a start-up telecommunications company. The company 
­currently has 50 employees and plans to ramp up to 3,000 by the end of the year.
Your first task is to determine how you are going to model your organization. You decide to 
address the MIS department’s organizational structure first. You need to consider if you want to have 
a CIO, CPO, CSO, CTO, CDO, and CKO, and if so, what their reporting structure will look like and why. 
You also need to determine the different roles and responsibilities for each executive position. Once 
you have compiled this information, put together a presentation describing your MIS department’s 
organizational structure.
5. One Laptop per Child
Nicholas Negroponte is the founder of the MIT Media Lab and has spent his career pushing the 
edge of the information revolution as an inventor, thinker, and angel investor. His latest project, One 
Laptop per Child, plans to build $100 laptops that he hopes to put in the hands of the millions of 
children in developing countries around the globe. The XO (the “$100 laptop”) is a wireless, Internet-
enabled, pedal-powered computer costing roughly $100. What types of competitive advantages 
could children gain from Negroponte’s $100 laptop? What types of issues could result from the $100 
laptop? Explain each of the efficiency metrics and effectiveness metrics that are required for each 
laptop to be considered successful.
6. Is it Effective or Is It Efficient?
Making business decisions is a key skill for all managers. Review the following list and, in a group, 
determine whether the question is focusing on efficiency, effectiveness, or both.

70  *  Unit 1  Achieving Business Success
Business Decision
Efficiency
Effectiveness
What is the best route for dropping off products?
Should we change suppliers?
Should we reduce costs by buying lower-quality materials?
Should we sell products to a younger market?
Did we make our sales targets?
What was the turnover rate of employees?
What is the average customer spending?
How many new customers purchased products?
Did the amount of daily transactions increase?
Is there a better way to restructure a store to increase sales?

	
Chapter 5  Organizational Structures That Support Strategic Initiatives  *  71
C H A P T E R  5
LEARNING OUTCOMES
  5.1.	 Explain information ethics and its associated issues.
  5.2.	Describe information security and the difference 
between hackers and viruses.
Information Ethics
Ethics and security are two fundamental building blocks for all organizations. In recent years, 
enormous business scandals along with 9/11 have shed new light on the meaning of ethics and 
security. When the behavior of a few individuals can destroy billion-dollar organizations, the 
value of ethics and security should be evident.
Copyright is the legal protection afforded an expression of an idea, such as a song, book, 
or video game. Intellectual property is intangible creative work that is embodied in physical 
form and includes copyrights, trademarks, and patents. A patent is an exclusive right to make, 
use, and sell an invention and is granted by a government to the inventor. As it becomes easier 
for people to copy everything from words and data to music and video, the ethical issues sur­
rounding copyright infringement and the violation of intellectual property rights are consum­
ing the ebusiness world. Technology poses new challenges for our ethics—the principles and 
standards that guide our behavior toward other people.
The protection of customers’ privacy is one of the largest, and murkiest, ethical issues 
facing organizations today. Privacy is the right to be left alone when you want to be, to have 
control over your personal possessions, and not to be observed without your consent. Privacy 
is related to confidentiality, which is the assurance that messages and information remain 
available only to those authorized to view them. Each time  employees make a decision about 
a privacy issue, the outcome could sink the company.
Trust among companies, customers, partners, and suppliers is the support structure of 
ebusiness. Privacy is one of its main ingredients. Consumers’ concerns that their privacy will 
be violated because of their interactions on the web continue to be one of the primary barriers 
to the growth of ebusiness.
Information ethics govern the ethical and moral issues arising from the development 
and use of information technologies as well as the creation, collection, duplication, distribu­
tion, and processing of information itself (with or without the aid of computer technologies). 
Ethical dilemmas in this area usually arise not as simple, clear-cut situations but as clashes 
among competing goals, responsibilities, and loyalties. Inevitably, there will be more than one 
socially acceptable or correct decision. The two primary areas concerning software include 
pirated software and counterfeit software. Pirated software is the unauthorized use, dupli­
cation, distribution, or sale of copyrighted software. Counterfeit software is software that 
is manufactured to look like the real thing and sold as such. Digital rights management is 
a technological solution that allows publishers to control their digital media to discourage, 
limit, or prevent illegal copying and distribution. Figure 5.1 contains examples of ethically 
questionable or unacceptable uses of information technology.
LO 5.1 Explain information ethics 
and its associated issues.
Organizational Structures 
That Support Strategic 
Initiatives

72  *  Unit 1  Achieving Business Success
Unfortunately, few hard and fast rules exist for always determining what is ethical. Many 
people can either justify or condemn the actions in Figure 5.1, for example. Knowing the law 
is important, but that knowledge will not always help because what is legal might not always 
be ethical, and what might be ethical is not always legal. For example, Joe ­Reidenberg received 
an offer for AT&T cell phone service. AT&T used Equifax, a credit reporting agency, to iden­
tify potential customers such as Joe Reidenberg. Overall, this seemed like a good business 
opportunity between Equifax and AT&T wireless. Unfortunately, the Fair Credit Reporting 
Act (FCRA) forbids repurposing credit information except when the information is used for 
“a firm offer of credit or insurance.” In other words, the only product that can be sold based on 
credit information is credit. A representative for Equifax stated, “As long as AT&T ­Wireless 
(or any company for that matter) is offering the cell phone service on a credit basis, such as 
allowing the use of the service before the consumer has to pay, it is in compliance with the 
FCRA.” However, the question remains—is it ethical?1
Figure 5.2 shows the four quadrants where ethical and legal behaviors intersect. The goal 
for most businesses is to make decisions within quadrant I that are both legal and ethical. 
There are times when a business will find itself in the position of making a decision in quad­
rant III, such as hiring child labor in foreign countries, or in quadrant II when a business might 
pay a foreigner who is getting her immigration status approved because the company is in 
the process of hiring the person. A business should never find itself operating in quadrant IV. 
­Ethics are critical to operating a successful business today.
INFORMATION DOES NOT HAVE ETHICS: PEOPLE DO
Information itself has no ethics. It does not care how it is used. It will not stop itself from 
spamming customers, sharing itself if it is sensitive or personal, or revealing details to third 
parties. Information cannot delete or preserve itself. Therefore, it falls to those who own the 
information to develop ethical guidelines about how to manage it.
FIGURE 5.1
Ethically Questionable or 
Unacceptable Information 
Technology Use.
 Individuals copy, use, and distribute software. 
 Employees search organizational databases for sensitive corporate and personal information. 
 Organizations collect, buy, and use information without checking the validity or accuracy of the information.
 Individuals create and spread viruses that cause trouble for those using and maintaining IT systems. 
 Individuals hack into computer systems to steal proprietary information. 
 Employees destroy or steal proprietary organization information such as schematics, sketches, customer 
lists, and reports. 
FIGURE 5.2
Acting Ethically and Acting 
Legally Are Not Always the 
Same Thing.
UNETHICAL
ETHICAL
LEGAL
ILLEGAL
Quadrant III
Legal but Unethical
Quadrant IV
Illegal and Unethical
Quadrant I
Legal and Ethical
Quadrant II
Illegal but Ethical

	
Chapter 5  Organizational Structures That Support Strategic Initiatives  *  73
A few years ago, the ideas of information management, governance, and compliance 
were relatively obscure. Today, these concepts are a must for virtually every company, both 
domestic and global, primarily due to the role digital information plays in corporate legal 
proceedings or litigation. Frequently, digital information serves as key evidence in legal 
proceedings, and it is far easier to search, organize, and filter than paper documents. Digital 
information is also extremely difficult to destroy, especially if it is on a corporate network 
or sent by email. In fact, the only reliable way to obliterate digital information reliably is to 
destroy the hard drives on which the file was stored. Ediscovery (or electronic discovery) 
refers to the ability of a company to identify, search, gather, seize, or export digital informa­
tion in responding to a litigation, audit, investigation, or information inquiry. As the impor­
tance of ediscovery grows, so does information governance and information compliance. 
The Child Online Protection Act (COPA) was passed to protect minors from accessing 
inappropriate material on the Internet. Figure 5.3 displays the ethical guidelines for infor­
mation management.
Information Security
To reflect the crucial interdependence between MIS and business processes accurately, we 
should update the old business axiom “Time is money” to say “Uptime is money.” Downtime 
refers to a period of time when a system is unavailable. Unplanned downtime can strike at any 
time for any number of reasons, from tornadoes to sink overflows to network failures to power 
outages (see Figure 5.4). Although natural disasters may appear to be the most devastating 
LO 5.2 Describe information 
security and the difference 
between hackers and viruses.
FIGURE 5.3
Ethical Guidelines for 
Information Management.
Information Secrecy 
The category of computer security 
that addresses the protection of 
data from unauthorized disclosure 
and conﬁrmation of data source 
authenticity.
Information Management 
Examines the organizational resource 
of information and regulates its 
deﬁnitions, uses, value, and 
distribution, ensuring that it has the
types of data/information required
to function and grow eﬀectively.
Information Property 
An ethical issue that focuses on who 
owns information about individuals and 
how information can be sold and 
exchanged.
Information Compliance 
The act of conforming, acquiescing, 
or yielding information.
Information Governance
A method or system of government 
for information management or 
control. 

74  *  Unit 1  Achieving Business Success
causes of MIS outages, they are hardly the most frequent or most expensive. A few questions 
managers should ask when determining the cost of downtime are:
	■	 How many transactions can the company afford to lose without significantly harming business?
	■	 Does the company depend on one or more mission-critical applications to conduct business?
	■	 How much revenue will the company lose for every hour a critical application is unavailable?
	■	 What is the productivity cost associated with each hour of downtime?
	■	 How will collaborative business processes with partners, suppliers, and customers be affected 
by an unexpected MIS outage?
	■	 What is the total cost of lost productivity and lost revenue during unplanned downtime?
The reliability and resilience of MIS systems have never been more essential for success 
as businesses cope with the forces of globalization, 24/7 operations, government and trade 
regulations, global recession, and overextended MIS budgets and resources. Any unexpected 
downtime in today’s business environment has the potential to cause both short- and long-
term costs with far-reaching consequences. Figure 5.5 demonstrates that the costs of down­
time are associated not only with lost revenues but also with financial performance, damage 
to reputations, and even travel or legal expenses.
Information security is a broad term encompassing the protection of information from 
accidental or intentional misuse by persons inside or outside an organization. Information 
security is perhaps the most fundamental and critical of all the technologies/disciplines an 
organization must have squarely in place to execute its business strategy. Without solid secu­
rity processes and procedures, none of the other technologies can develop business advan­
tages. Understanding how to secure information systems is critical to keeping downtime to a 
minimum and uptime to a maximum. Hackers and viruses are two of the hottest issues cur­
rently facing information security.
SECURITY THREATS CAUSED BY HACKERS AND VIRUSES
Hackers are experts in technology who use their knowledge to break into computers and 
computer networks, either for profit or simply for the challenge. Smoking is not just bad for 
a person’s health; it seems it is also bad for company security because hackers regularly use 
FIGURE 5.4
Sources of Unplanned 
Downtime.
Sources of Unplanned Downtime
Bomb threat
Frozen Pipe
Snowstorm
Burst pipe
Hail
Sprinkler malfunction
Chemical spill
Hurricane
Static electricity
Construction
Ice storm
Strike
Corrupted data
Insects
Terrorism
Earthquake
Lightning
Theft
Electrical short
Network failure
Tornado
Epidemic
Plane crash
Train derailment
Equipment failure
Power interruption
Smoke damage
Evacuation
Power outage
Vandalism
Explosion
Power surge
Vehicle crash
Fire
Rodents
Virus
Flood
Sabotage
Water damage (various)
Fraud
Shredded data
Wind

	
Chapter 5  Organizational Structures That Support Strategic Initiatives  *  75
smoking entrances to gain building access. Once inside, they pose as employees from the MIS 
department and either ask for permission to use an employee’s computer to access the corpo­
rate network or find a conference room where they simply plugin their own laptop. Drive-by 
hacking is a computer attack by which an attacker accesses a wireless computer network, 
intercepts data, uses network services, and/or sends attack instructions without entering the 
office or organization that owns the network. Figure 5.6 lists the various types of hackers for 
organizations to be aware of, and Figure 5.7 shows how a virus is spread.
One of the most common forms of computer vulnerabilities is a virus. A virus is software 
written with malicious intent to cause annoyance or damage. Some hackers create and leave 
viruses, causing massive computer damage. A worm spreads itself not only from file to file 
but also from computer to computer. The primary difference between a virus and a worm is 
that a virus must attach to something, such as an executable file, to spread. Worms do not 
FIGURE 5.5
The Cost of Downtime.
Financial Performance
Revenue recognition
Cash ﬂow
Payment guarantees
Credit rating
Stock price
Revenue
Direct loss
Compensatory payments
Lost future revenue
Billing losses
Investment losses
Lost productivity
Damaged Reputation
Customers
Suppliers
Financial markets
Banks
Business partners
Other Expenses
Temporary employees
Equipment rentals
Overtime costs
Extra shipping charges
Travel expenses
Legal obligations
Know your cost of
downtime per hour,
 per day, per week.
FIGURE 5.6
Hacker Overview.
  Common Types of Hackers  
  Crackers    have criminal intent when hacking. 
  Black-hat hackers    break into other people’s computer systems and may just look around or may steal and destroy information. 
  Cyberterrorists    seek to cause harm to people or to destroy critical systems or information and use the Internet as a weapon of mass destruction. 
  Hactivists    have philosophical and political reasons for breaking into systems and will often deface the website as a protest. 
  Script kiddies    or    script bunnies    ﬁnd hacking code on the Internet and click-and-point their way into systems to cause damage or spread viruses. 
  White-hat hackers    work at the request of the system owners to ﬁnd system vulnerabilities and plug the holes. 

76  *  Unit 1  Achieving Business Success
need to attach to anything to spread and can tunnel themselves into computers. Figure 5.8 
provides an overview of the most common types of viruses.
Two additional computer vulnerabilities include adware and spyware. Adware is software 
that, although purporting to serve some useful function and often fulfilling that function, also 
allows Internet advertisers to display advertisements without the consent of the computer 
user. Spyware is a special class of adware that collects data about the user and transmits 
it over the Internet without the user’s knowledge or permission. Spyware programs collect 
specific data about the user, ranging from general demographics such as name, address, and 
browsing habits to credit card numbers, Social Security numbers, and user names and pass­
words. Not all adware programs are spyware and, used correctly, it can generate revenue 
for a company, allowing users to receive free products. Spyware is a clear threat to privacy. 
Ransomware is a form of malicious software that infects your computer and asks for money. 
Simplelocker is a new ransomware program that encrypts your personal files and demands 
payment for the files’ decryption keys. Figure 5.9 displays a few additional weapons hackers 
use for launching attacks.
Organizational information is intellectual capital. Just as organizations protect their tan­
gible assets—keeping their money in an insured bank or providing a safe working environ­
ment for employees—they must also protect their intellectual capital, everything from patents 
to transactional and analytical information. With security breaches and viruses on the rise and 
computer hackers everywhere, an organization must put in place strong security measures to 
survive.
FIGURE 5.7
How Computer Viruses 
Spread.
A hacker creates a
virus and attaches
it to a program,
document, or
website.   
Thinking the ﬁle is legitimate,
the user downloads it, and the
virus infects other ﬁles and
programs on the computer.
Quickly, the virus spreads in
email attachments and shared
ﬁles to co-workers and friends.  
FIGURE 5.8
Common Forms of Viruses.
Backdoor programs  open a way into the network for future attacks. 
Denial-of-service attack (DoS)  ﬂoods a website with so many requests for service that it slows down or 
crashes. 
Distributed denial-of-service attack (DDoS)  attacks from multiple computers that ﬂood a website with so 
many requests for service that it slows down or crashes. A common type is the Ping of Death, in which thou-
sands of computers try to access a website at the same time, overloading it and shutting it down. 
Polymorphic viruses and worms  change their form as they propagate. 
Trojan-horse virus  hides inside other software, usually as an attachment or a downloadable ﬁle. 

	1.	 Imagine you are working for Apple as a manager in its Chicago store. Explain why it would be 
unethical for Apple to allow its customers to download free music from iTunes.
	2.	 Evaluate the effects on Apple’s business if it failed to secure its customer information and all of it 
was accidentally posted to an anonymous website.
O P E N I N G  C A S E  ST U DY  Q U E ST I O N S
	
Chapter 5  Organizational Structures That Support Strategic Initiatives  *  77
FIGURE 5.9
Hacker Weapons.
  Elevation of privilege  is a process by which a user misleads a system into granting unauthorized rights, usually for the purpose of compromising or 
destroying the system. For example, an attacker might log on to a network by using a guest account and then exploit a weakness in the software that 
lets the attacker change the guest privileges to administrative privileges. 
  Hoaxes  attack computer systems by transmitting a virus hoax with a real virus attached. By masking the attack in a seemingly legitimate message, 
unsuspecting users more readily distribute the message and send the attack on to their co-workers and friends, infecting many users along the way. 
  Malicious code  includes a variety of threats such as viruses, worms, and Trojan horses. 
  Packet tampering  consists of altering the contents of packets as they travel over the Internet or altering data on computer disks after penetrating a 
network. For example, an attacker might place a tap on a network line to intercept packets as they leave the computer. The attacker could eavesdrop 
or alter the information as it leaves the network. 
 A sniﬀer  is a program or device that can monitor data traveling over a network. Sniﬀers can show all the data being transmitted over a network,   
including passwords and sensitive information. Sniﬀers tend to be a favorite weapon in the hacker’s arsenal. 
  Spooﬁng  consists of forging the return address on an email so that the message appears to come from someone other than the actual sender. This 
is not a virus but rather a way by which virus authors conceal their identities as they send out viruses. 
  Splogs (spam blogs)  are fake blogs created solely to raise the search engine rank of aﬃliated websites. Even blogs that are legitimate are plagued 
by spam, with spammers taking advantage of the Comment feature of most blogs to comment with links to spam sites. 
  Spyware  is software that comes hidden in free downloadable software and tracks online movements, mines the information stored on a computer, 
or uses a computer’s CPU and storage for some task the user knows nothing about. 
The biggest retail hack in U.S. history wasn’t particularly inventive, nor did it appear destined for 
success. In the days prior to Thanksgiving 2013, someone installed malware in Target’s security and 
payments system designed to steal every credit card used at the company’s 1,797 U.S. stores. At the 
critical moment—when the Christmas gifts had been scanned and bagged and the cashier asked for a 
swipe—the malware would step in, capture the shopper’s credit card number, and store it on a Target 
server commandeered by the hackers.
It’s a measure of how common these crimes have become, and how conventional the hackers’ 
approach in this case, that Target was prepared for such an attack. Six months earlier, the company 
began installing a $1.6 million malware detection tool made by the computer security firm FireEye, 
whose customers also include the CIA and the Pentagon. Target had a team of security specialists 
in Bangalore to monitor its computers around the clock. If Bangalore noticed anything suspicious, 
Target’s security operations center in Minneapolis would be notified.
On Saturday, Nov. 30, 2013, the hackers had set their traps and had just one thing to do before 
starting the attack: plan the data’s escape route. As they uploaded exfiltration malware to move 
Chapter Five Case:  Targeting Target

78  *  Unit 1  Achieving Business Success
stolen credit card numbers—first to staging points spread around the U.S. to cover their tracks, then 
into their computers in Russia—FireEye spotted them. Bangalore got an alert and flagged the security 
team in Minneapolis. And then . . .
Nothing Happened!
For some reason, Minneapolis didn’t react to the sirens. Bloomberg Businessweek spoke to more 
than 10 former Target employees familiar with the company’s data security operation, as well as eight 
people with specific knowledge of the hack and its aftermath, including former employees, security 
researchers, and law enforcement officials. The story they tell is of an alert system, installed to pro­
tect the bond between retailer and customer, that worked beautifully. But then, Target stood by as 
40 ­million credit card numbers—and 70 million addresses, phone numbers, and other pieces of per­
sonal information—gushed out of its mainframes.
When asked to respond to a list of specific questions about the incident and the company’s 
lack of an immediate response to it, Target chairman, president, and chief executive officer Gregg 
­Steinhafel issued an emailed statement: “Target was certified as meeting the standard for the pay­
ment card industry (PCI) in September 2013. Nonetheless, we suffered a data breach. As a result, we 
are conducting an end-to-end review of our people, processes and technology to understand our 
opportunities to improve data security and are committed to learning from this experience. While we 
are still in the midst of an ongoing investigation, we have already taken significant steps, including 
beginning the overhaul of our information security structure and the acceleration of our transition to 
­chip-enabled cards. However, as the investigation is not complete, we don’t believe it’s constructive 
to engage in speculation without the benefit of the final analysis.”
More than 90 lawsuits have been filed against Target by customers and banks for negligence 
and compensatory damages. That’s on top of other costs, which analysts estimate could run into the 
­billions. Target spent $61 million through February 1, 2014, responding to the breach, according to its 
fourth-quarter report to investors. It set up a customer response operation, and in an effort to regain 
lost trust, Steinhafel promised that consumers won’t have to pay any fraudulent charges stemming 
from the breach. Target’s profit for the holiday shopping period fell 46 percent from the same quar­
ter the year before; the number of transactions suffered its biggest decline since the retailer began 
reporting the statistic in 2008.15 Questions How did the hackers steal Target’s customer data? What 
types of technology could big retailers use to prevent identity thieves from stealing information? What 
can organizations do to protect themselves from hackers looking to steal account data? In a team, 
research the Internet and find the best ways to protect yourself from identity theft.
Questions
	1.	 Identify the different types of hackers and viruses and explain how a company can protect itself 
from hackers looking to steal account data.
	2.	 Authorities frequently tap online service providers to track down hackers. Do you think it is ethical 
for authorities to tap an online service provider and read people’s email? Why or why not?
	3.	 Do you think it was ethical for authorities to use one of the high-ranking members to trap other 
gang members? Why or why not?
	4.	 In a team, research the Internet and find the best ways to protect yourself from identity theft.

	
Chapter 5  Organizational Structures That Support Strategic Initiatives  *  79
	 1.	What are ethics and why are they important to a company?
	 2.	What is the correlation between privacy and confidentiality?
	 3.	What is the difference between pirated software and counterfeit software?
	 4.	What are the reasons a company experiences downtime?
	 5.	What are the costs associated with downtime?
	 6.	What is the relationship between adware and spyware?
	 7.	What are the positive and negative effects associated with monitoring employees?
	 8.	What is the relationship between hackers and viruses?
R E V I E W  Q U E S T I O N S
5.1.	 Explain information ethics and its associated issues.
Information ethics govern the ethical and moral issues arising from the development and use of 
information technologies as well as the creation, collection, duplication, distribution, and processing 
of information itself (with or without the aid of computer technologies). Ethical dilemmas in this area 
usually arise not as simple, clear-cut situations but as clashes among competing goals, responsibili­
ties, and loyalties. Inevitably, there will be more than one socially acceptable or correct decision.
5.2.	Describe information security and the difference between hackers and viruses.
Information security is a broad term encompassing the protection of information from accidental or 
intentional misuse by persons inside or outside an organization. Information security is perhaps the 
most fundamental and critical of all the technologies/disciplines an organization must have squarely 
in place to execute its business strategy. Without solid security processes and procedures, none of 
the other technologies can develop business advantages. Understanding how to secure informa­
tion systems is critical to keeping downtime to a minimum and uptime to a maximum. Hackers and 
viruses are two of the hottest issues currently facing information security. Hackers are experts in 
technology who use their knowledge to break into computers and computer networks, either for 
profit or simply for the challenge. A virus is software written with malicious intent to cause annoy­
ance or damage.
L E A R N I N G  O U T C O M E  R E V I E W
M A K I N G  B U S I N E S S  D E C I S I O N S
1.	 The Internet of Things Is Wide Open—for Everyone!
IoT is transforming our world into a living information system as we control our intelligent lighting 
from our smartphone to a daily health check from our smart toilet. Of course, with all great techno­
logical advances come unexpected risks, and you have to be prepared to encounter various security 
issues with IoT. Just imagine if your devices are hacked by someone who now can shut off your 
water, take control of your car, or unlock the doors of your home from thousands of miles away. 

80  *  Unit 1  Achieving Business Success
We are just beginning to understand the security issues associated with IoT and M2M, and you can 
be sure that sensitive data leakage from your IoT device is something you will most likely encounter 
in your life.
In a group, identify a few IoT devices you are using today. These can include fitness trackers that 
report to your iPhone, sports equipment that provides immediate feedback to an app, or even smart 
vacuum cleaners. If you are not using any IoT devices today, brainstorm a few you might purchase 
in the future. How could a criminal or hacker use your IoT to steal your sensitive data? What poten­
tial problems or issues could you experience from these types of illegal data thefts? What might be 
some of the signs that someone had accessed your IoT data illegally? What could you do to protect 
the data in your device?
2.	 Information Issues in the Information Age
We live in the information age, when the collection, storage, and use of data are hot topics. One 
example of inappropriate data handling occurred at a college where the monitoring of restrooms 
occurred every 15 seconds to observe the use of toilets, mirrors, and sinks. Students, faculty, and 
staff began complaining that the data collection was an invasion of their privacy and a violation of 
their rights.
Another example of inappropriate data handling occurred when a professor of accounting at 
a college lost a flash drive containing information for more than 1,800 students, including Social 
­Security numbers, grades, and names. Social Security numbers were included because the data 
went back to before 1993, when the college used Social Security numbers to identify students.
What types of student data does your college collect? What could happen if your professor lost a 
thumb drive with all of your personal information? What types of issues could you encounter if some­
one stole your personal data? What can your college do to ensure this type of data storage violation 
does not occur?
3.	 WikiBlunders—Thin Ice Reports
According to PC World these false facts all appeared on Wikipedia:
■	
David Beckham was a Chinese goalkeeper in the 18th century.
■	
Paul Reiser’s dead. (Reiser is an actor.)
■	
Sinbad’s dead. (Sinbad is an actor.)
■	
Sergey Brin’s sexy, dating Jimmy Wales, and both are dead. (Brin founded Google and Wales 
founded Wikipedia.)
■	
Tony Blair worships Hitler. (Blair is the former prime minister of the United Kingdom.)
■	
The Duchess of Cornwall’s Christian name is Cow-miller.
■	
The University of Cincinnati’s former president is a lady of the night.
■	
Conan O’Brien assaults sea turtles while canoeing.
We know that people use information technology to work with information. Knowing this, how could 
these types of errors occur? What could happen if you decided to use Wikipedia to collect business 
intelligence for a research paper? What could Wikipedia do to help prevent these types of errors?
4.	 Yes, I Started the Internet
Imagine your favorite co-worker Mary, a hard working employee who is excelling at her job and 
continuously receives outstanding performance reviews. Suddenly, after two years of hard work, 
Mary is fired and you are wondering what happened. What will you say when you find out that Mary 
lied on her résumé about having a master’s degree? Will you feel that Mary got what she deserved, 
or should her outstanding job performance have helped management look past this issue? After all, 
she is excellent at her job.

	
Chapter 5  Organizational Structures That Support Strategic Initiatives  *  81
Every student should know that if dishonesty is discovered, it is often grounds for termination 
and possibly legal action. Information integrity is a measure of the quality of information. According 
to Steven D. Levitt, co-author of Freakonomics and a renowned economics professor at the Univer­
sity of Chicago, more than 50 percent of people lie on their résumés. Given such repercussions as 
Mary’s fate, you will want to think twice before ever lying on your résumé. The integrity of the infor­
mation on your résumé is a direct representation of your personal integrity. How would you handle 
Mary’s situation if you were her manager?
5.	 What Happens on YouTube Stays on YouTube FOREVER!
Are you looking for great career advice? Here it is: Never post anything on publicly accessible 
websites that you would not feel comfortable showing a recruiter or hiring manager. This includes 
inappropriate photos; negative comments about jobs, professors, or people; and binge drinking at a 
holiday party. Future employers will Google you!
The bad news: You have to continue to keep your cyber profile squeaky clean for the rest of 
your life. Companies can and will fire you for inappropriate online postings. One interesting story 
occurred when two employees created a private, password-protected group on Facebook where 
they would complain about their jobs, post derogatory comments about their managers, and high­
light new top-secret product information. The managers, being computer savvy, obtained the pass­
word and immediately fired the two individuals after reviewing the site. Now one of the individuals is 
suing the former managers for invasion of privacy.
Do you agree that if you post something online it is open for the world to see? What do you con­
sider is inappropriate material that you should never post to the web? What can you do to remove 
inappropriate material posted to the web by a friend that identifies you? How do efficiency and 
effectiveness enter into this scenario? Was social media the most efficient and effective way for 
the two employees to communicate? What is the potential argument each of these sides might use 
in order to win the lawsuit?

82  *  Unit 1  Achieving Business Success
U
nderstanding and working with technology have become an integral part of business. Most 
students take courses in various disciplines in their educational careers, such as in market­
ing, operations management, management, finance, accounting, and information systems, 
each of which is designed to provide insight into the tasks of each functional area. In the business 
world, these are all intertwined and inextricably linked.
Management information systems can be an important enabler of business success and innova­
tion and is most useful when it leverages the talents of people. Technology in and of itself is not useful 
unless the right people know how to use and manage it effectively.
Organizations use management information systems to capture, process, organize, distribute, and 
massage information. MIS enables an organization to:
	■	
Integrate all functional areas and the tasks they perform.
	■	
Gain an enterprisewide view of its operations.
	■	
Efficiently and effectively utilize resources.
	■	
Realize tremendous market and industry growth by gaining insight into the market at large 
(through environmental scanning) and insight into internal operations.
U N I T  S U M M A R Y
K E Y  T E R M S
Adware  76
Analytics  11
As-Is Process Model  40
Balanced scorecard  64
Behavioral analytics  11
Benchmark  61
Benchmarking  61
Best practices  60
Business-facing processes  37
Business intelligence (BI)  10
Business process  28
Business process model  40
Business process modelling  40
Business Process Model and 
Notation (BPMN)  40
Business process patent  40
Business process reengineering 
(BPR)  37
Business strategy  21
Buyer power  24
Business unit  12
Chief automation officer  58
Chief data officer (CDO)  56
Chief information officer (CIO)  56
Chief intellectual property 
officer  58
Chief knowledge officer (CKO)  58
Chief privacy officer (CPO)  57
Chief security officer (CSO)  57
Chief technology officer (CTO)  56
Chief user experience officer  58
Child Online Protection Act 
(COPA)  73
Common data repository  49
Competitive advantage  21
Competitive intelligence  22
Confidentiality  71
Copyright  71
Counterfeit software  71
Critical success factors (CSFs)  59
CRM reporting technologies  48
CRM analysis technologies  48
CRM predicting technologies  48
Customer analytics  47
Customer-facing processes  37
Customer relationship 
management (CRM)  46
Data  7
Digital rights management  71
Downtime  73
Drive-by hacking  75
Dynamic process  37
Dynamic report  9
Ediscovery  73
Efficiency MIS metrics  60
Effectiveness MIS metrics  60
Enterprise resource planning 
(ERP)  49
Entry barrier  26
Fact  6
Feedback  15
First-mover advantage  22
Goods  14
Hacker  74
Human-generated data  7
Information  9
Information age  6
Information ethics  71
Information security  74
Information silo  12
Intellectual property  71
Internet of things (IOT)  7
Key performance indicator 
(KPI)  59
Knowledge  11
Knowledge workers  11
Loyalty program  25
Machine-to-machine (M2M)  7
Machine-generated data  7
Management information systems 
(MIS)  15
Market share  59
Metrics  59
MIS skills gap  58
Module software design  49
Patent  71
Pirated software  71
Porter’s Five Forces Model  24
Predictive analytics  11
Primary value activities  29
Privacy  71
Process owner  42
Production  15
Productivity  15
Project  59
Product differentiation  26
Ransomware  76
Report  9
Return on investment (ROI)  60

	
Chapter 5  Organizational Structures That Support Strategic Initiatives  *  83
The Internet of Things
Over 20 years ago a few professors at MIT began describing The Internet of Things (IoT), which is a 
world where interconnected Internet-enabled devices or “things” have the ability to collect and share 
data without human intervention. Another term for The Internet of Things is machine-to-machine 
(M2M), which allows devices to connect directly to other devices. With advanced technologies devices 
are connecting in ways not previously thought possible and researchers predict that over 50 billion 
IoT devices will be communicating by 2020. Kevin Ashton, cofounder and executive director of the 
Auto-ID Center at MIT, first mentioned the Internet of Things in a presentation he made to Procter & 
Gamble. Here’s Ashton explanation of the Internet of Things:
“Today computers—and, therefore, the Internet—are almost wholly dependent on human beings 
for information. Nearly all of the roughly 50 petabytes (a petabyte is 1,024 terabytes) of data available 
on the Internet were first captured and created by human beings by typing, pressing a record button, 
taking a digital picture or scanning a bar code.
The problem is, people have limited time, attention and accuracy—all of which means they are not 
very good at capturing data about things in the real world. If we had computers that knew everything 
there was to know about things—using data they gathered without any help from us—we would be 
able to track and count everything and greatly reduce waste, loss and cost. We would know when 
things needed replacing, repairing or recalling and whether they were fresh or past their best.”
Imagine your toothbrush telling you to visit your dentist because it senses a cavity. How would you 
react if your refrigerator placed an order at your local grocery store because your milk and eggs had 
expired? Predictions indicate that over the next decade almost every device you own—and almost 
every object imaginable—will be connected to the Internet as people share, store, and manage 
their lives online. Smoke detectors, alarms, refrigerators, stoves, and windows are just a few home 
devices already connected to the Internet sharing information on how to make everything in your life 
more efficient, effective, safe, and healthy. The Internet of Things is reaching further into our daily 
lives by combining data from sensors in wearable devices and equipment with analytic programs to 
© Phil Boorman/Getty Images
© Ariel Skelley/Blend Images LLC
© C. Sherburne/Photo Link/Getty Images
U N I T  C L O S I N G  C A S E  O N E
Rivalry among existing 
competitors  26
Sales analytics  47
Services  14
Snapshot  8
Spyware  76
Stakeholder  21
Static process  37
Static report  9
Structured data  7
Supplier power  25
Supply chain  25
Supply chain management 
(SCM)  44
Support value activities  29
Swimlane diagram  41
SWOT analysis  21
System  13
Systems thinking  15
Switching cost  24
To-Be process  40
Threat of new entrants  26
Threat of substitute products or 
services  27
Unstructured data  8
Value chain analysis  29
Variable  9
Virus  75
Workflow  37
Workflow control systems  37
Worm  75

84  *  Unit 1  Achieving Business Success
help improve the performance of individuals by gaining insights that were traditionally impossible to 
detect. A few examples of the incredible power of the IoT era include:
	■	
Smart Yoga Mat: Smart yoga mats include sensors that provide feedback on yoga postures, calo­
ries burned, and can even provide users with guided practice in the comfort of their own home.
	■	
Smart Thermostats: IoTs share information in real-time to help homeowners manage energy 
more efficiently. The system will notify the homeowner if a door is left open, change the tempera­
ture in each room when it is occupied, and turn the furnace up or down depending on the weather 
and homeowner preferences.
	■	
Smart Diapers: Pixie Scientific created disposable diapers with sensors that monitor babies’ 
urine for signs of infection, dehydration, or kidney problems before symptoms appear.
	■	
Smart Trash Cans: In Allentown, Pennsylvania, the city connected community trash and recycling 
cans allowing them to monitor fill rates, which are then used to recommend the most efficient 
routes for trash pickup services.
	■	
Smart Tennis Racket: Babolat, a French tennis racket manufacturer, created the Play Pure Drive, 
a $400 smart tennis racket that has the capability to record data on every single shot a user takes 
and sends the data along with an analysis to the user’s smartphone.
	■	
Smart Frying Pan: Pantelligent is an innovative sensor-embedded frying pan that actually helps 
its users learn how to cook by measuring the temperature of the food and communicating with a 
smartphone when to add ingredients, change heat, flip, cover, and even when the food is done.
The future of business will focus on big data as IoT devices create, capture, and share massive amounts 
of data. The business environment is currently collecting more data from IoT devices in one second than 
all of the data collected from the beginning of time until the year 2000. In fact, over 90% of the data in the 
world was created over the last two years. Every minute over 204 million emails are sent and 200 thou­
sand photos are uploaded to Facebook. The terms analytics, data analysis, and business intelligence are 
all referring to big data and the massive volumes of data being generated around the globe.
Understanding big data will be a critical skill for knowledge workers in every business regard­
less of size, focus, or industry. Future managers will be responsible for analyzing data in ways that 
were not even possible a decade ago allowing managers to predict customer behaviors, optimize and 
improve business processes, and analyze multiple variables for trends and patterns. The total amount 
of business data roughly doubles every 1.2 years. Estimates predict that a total of 6 million new jobs 
were created thanks to big data and will assist companies by the following:
	■	
Understand consumer behaviors by combining purchasing data with social media data, weather 
data, competitor data, and economic data.
	■	
Improve the delivery of products by combining delivery process information with current traffic 
data, vehicle maintenance data, and map data.
	■	
Optimize health care treatments by capturing diagnosis, tracking pharmaceuticals, and eventu­
ally predicting diseases.
	■	
Prevent cyber-attacks by analyzing credit card fraud, security system data, and police data.2
Questions
1.	 Explain the Internet of Things along with its potential impact on business. Also, list three IoT 
devices that you are currently using in your own personal life.
2.	 Explain why it is important for business managers to understand that data collection rates from 
IoT devices is increasing exponentially.
3.	 Demonstrate how data from an IoT device can be transformed into information and business intelligence.
4.	 Propose a plan for how a start-up company can use IoT device data to make better business decisions.
5.	 Argue for or against the following statement: “The Internet of Things is just a passing fad and will 
be gone within a decade.”

	
Chapter 5  Organizational Structures That Support Strategic Initiatives  *  85
Five Ways Hackers Can Get Into Your Business
Did you know:
	■	
Once every 3 minutes, the average company comes into contact with viruses and malware.
	■	
One in every 291 email messages contains a virus.
	■	
Three things hackers want most are customer data, intellectual property, and bank account 
information.
	■	
The top five file names used in phishing scams are Details.zip, UPS_document.zip, DCIM.zip, 
Report.zip, and Scan.zip.
	■	
The average annual cost of a cyberattack on a small or medium-sized business is $188,242.
Cyberthieves are always looking for new ways to gain access to your business data, business 
networks, and business applications. The best way to protect your business from cybertheft is to build 
U N I T  C L O S I N G  C A S E  T W O
© Chad Baker/Ryan McVay/Getty Images RF
© Image Source RF, all rights reserved.
© Mikkel William Nielsen/Getty Images RF
  WEAK PASSWORDS 
With a $300 graphics card, a hacker can run 420 billion simple, lowercase, eight-character pass-
word combinations a minute.  
Cyberattacks involve weeak passwords 80% of the time, 55% of people use one password
for all logins
In 2012, hackers cracked 6.4 million LinkedIn passwords and 1.5 million eHarmony passwords in 
separate attacks.    
  Your Best Defense: 
Use a unique password for each account.  
Aim for at least 20 characters and preferably gibberish, not real words.  
Insert special characters: @#$*&.  
Try a password manager such as LastPass or Dashlane.    
  MALWARE ATTACKS 
An infected website, USB drive, or application delivers software that can capture keystrokes, pass-
words, and data.  
An 8% increase in malware attacks against small businesses has occurred since 2012; the average 
loss from a targeted attack was $92,000.  
In February, hackers attacked about 40 companies, including Apple, Facebook, and Twitter, by ﬁrst 
infecting a mobile developer’s site.    
  Your Best Defense: 
Run robust malware-detection software such as Norton Toolbar.  
Keep existing software updated.  
Use an iPhone— Android phones are targeted more than any other mobile operating system.
FIGURE UNIT 1.2
Five ways hackers gain 
access to your business.

86  *  Unit 1  Achieving Business Success
  PHISHING EMAILS 
Bogus but oﬃcial-looking emails prompt you to enter your password or click links to infected 
websites.  
A 125% rise in social-media phishing attacks has occurred since 2012. Phishers stole $1 billion 
from small businesses in 2012.  
Many small businesses were targeted in 2012 with phishing emails designed to look like Better 
Business Bureau warnings.    
  Your Best Defense: 
Keep existing software, operating systems, and browsers updated with the latest patches.  
Don’t automatically click links in emails to external sites—retype the URL in your browser.    
  SOCIAL ENGINEERING 
Think 21st-century con artist tactics, e.g., hackers pretend to be you to reset your passwords.  
Twenty-nine percent of all security breaches involve some form of social engineering. Average loss 
is $25,000 to $100,000 per incident.  
In 2009, social engineers posed as Coca-Cola’s CEO, persuading an exec to open an email with 
software that inﬁltrated the network.    
  Your Best Defense: 
Rethink what you reveal on social media—it’s all fodder for social engineers.  
Develop policies for handling sensitive requests such as password resets over the phone.  
Have a security audit done.    
  RANSOMWARE 
Hackers hold your website hostage, often posting embarrassing content such as porn, until you pay 
a ransom.  
Five million dollars is extorted each year. The real cost is the data loss—paying the ransom doesn’t 
mean you get your ﬁles back.  
Hackers locked the network at an Alabama ABC TV station, demanding a ransom to remove a red 
screen on every computer.    
  Your Best Defense: 
As with malware, do not click suspicious links or unknown websites.  
Regularly back up your data.  
Use software that speciﬁcally checks for new exploits. 1
FIGURE UNIT 1.2
Continued
a strong defense and be able to identify vulnerabilities and weak spots. According to John Brandon 
of Inc. magazine, the top five ways hackers will try to gain access to your businesses are highlighted 
in Figure Unit 1.2. (Please note that there are far more than five ways; these are just the five most 
common.)
Questions
1.	 Explain why data, information, business intelligence, and knowledge are important to success­
fully running a business. Be sure to list examples of for each.
2.	 Why would hackers want to steal organizational information?
3.	 What problems can occur for a business that experiences a data theft from a CRM system? Would 
the problems be the same is the data theft occurred from an SCM system? Why or why not?
4.	 Define information ethics and information security and explain whether they are important to help 
prevent hackers from gaining access to an organization.
5.	 What type of metrics would an organization gather to help identify illegal system access?

	
Chapter 5  Organizational Structures That Support Strategic Initiatives  *  87
A P P LY  Y O U R  K N O W L E D G E
1.	 Capitalizing on Your Career
Business leaders need to be involved in information technology—any computer-based tool that 
people use to work with information and support the information and information-processing needs 
of an organization—for the following (primary) reasons:
■	
The sheer magnitude of the dollars spent on MIS must be managed to ensure business value.
■	
Research has consistently shown that when business leaders are involved in information tech­
nology, it enables a number of business initiatives, such as gaining a competitive advantage, 
streamlining business processes, and even transforming entire organizations.
■	
Research has consistently shown that when business leaders are not involved in MIS, systems 
fail, revenue is lost, and even entire companies can fail as a result of poorly managed MIS.
One of the biggest challenges facing organizations is, “How do we get general business leaders 
involved in MIS?” Research has shown that involvement is highly correlated with personal experience 
with MIS and MIS education, including university classes and MIS executive seminars. Once general 
business leaders understand MIS through experience and education, they are more likely to be 
involved in MIS, and more likely to lead their organizations in achieving business success through MIS.
1.	 Search the Internet to find examples of the types of technologies that are currently used in 
the field or industry that you plan to pursue. For example, if you are planning on a career 
in accounting or finance, you should become familiar with financial systems such as Oracle 
Financials. If you are planning a career in logistics or distribution, you should research supply 
chain management systems. If you are planning a career in marketing, you should research 
customer relationship management systems, blogs, and emarketing.
2.	 MIS is described as an enabler/facilitator of competitive advantage, organizational effec­
tiveness, and organizational efficiency. As a competitive tool, MIS can differentiate an orga­
nization’s products, services, and prices from its competitors by improving product quality, 
shortening product development or delivery time, creating new MIS-based products and 
services, and improving customer service before, during, and after a transaction. Search the 
Internet and find several examples of companies in the industry where you plan to work that 
have achieved a competitive advantage through MIS.
3.	 Create a simple report of your findings; include a brief overview of the type of technologies you 
found and how organizations are using them to achieve a competitive advantage.
2.	 Achieving Alignment
Most companies would like to be in the market-leading position of JetBlue, Dell, or Walmart, all of 
which have used information technology to secure their respective spots in the marketplace. These 
companies have a relentless goal of keeping the cost of technology down by combining the best of 
MIS and business leadership.
It takes more than a simple handshake between groups to start on the journey toward financial 
gains; it requires operational discipline and a linkage between business and technology units. Only 
recently have companies not on the “path for profits” followed the lead of their successful counter­
parts, requiring more operational discipline from their MIS groups as well as more MIS participation 
from their business units. Bridging this gap is one of the greatest breakthroughs a company can make.
Companies that master the art of finely tuned, cost-effective MIS management will have a major 
advantage. Their success will force their competitors to also master the art or fail miserably. This 
phenomenon has already occurred in the retail and wholesale distribution markets, which have 
had to react to Walmart’s MIS mastery, as one example. Other industries will follow. This trend will 
change not only the face of MIS, but also the future of corporate America.

88  *  Unit 1  Achieving Business Success
As world markets continue to grow, the potential gains are greater than ever. However, so are the 
potential losses. The future belongs to those who are perceptive enough to grasp the significance of 
MIS and resourceful enough to synchronize business management and information technology.
1.	 Use any resource to answer the question, “Why is business-MIS alignment so difficult?” Use the 
following questions to begin your analysis:
a.	 How do companies prioritize the demands of various business units as they relate to MIS?
b.	 What are some of the greatest MIS challenges for the coming year?
c.	 What drives MIS decisions?
d.	 Who or what is the moving force behind MIS decisions?
e.	 What types of efficiency metrics and effectiveness metrics might these companies use to 
measure the impact of MIS?
f.	 How can a company use financial metrics to monitor and measure MIS investments?
g.	 What are some of the issues with using financial metrics to evaluate MIS?
3.	 Market Dissection
To illustrate the use of the three generic strategies, consider Figure AYK.1. The matrix shown dem­
onstrates the relationships among strategies (cost leadership versus differentiation) and market 
segmentation (broad versus focused).
■	
Hyundai is following a broad cost leadership strategy. Hyundai offers low-cost vehicles, in 
each particular model stratification, that appeal to a large audience.
■	
Audi is pursuing a broad differentiation strategy with its Quattro models available at several 
price points. Audi’s differentiation is safety and it prices its various Quattro models (higher 
than Hyundai) to reach a large, stratified audience.
■	
Kia has a more focused cost leadership strategy. Kia mainly offers low-cost vehicles in the 
lower levels of model stratification.
■	
Hummer offers the most focused differentiation strategy of any in the industry (including 
Mercedes-Benz).
FIGURE AYK.1
Porter’s Three Generic 
Strategies
Broad market
Cost leadership strategy
Diﬀerentiation strategy
Focused market
(top left): © otomobil/Shutterstock    (top right): © Yauhen_D/Shutterstock    
(bottom left): © Zavatskiy Aleksandr/Shutterstock    (bottom right): © Getty Images.

	
Chapter 5  Organizational Structures That Support Strategic Initiatives  *  89
Create a similar graph displaying each strategy for a product of your choice. The strategy must 
include an example of the product in each of the following markets: (1) cost leadership, broad mar­
ket, (2) differentiation, broad market, (3) cost leadership, focused market, and (4) differentiation, 
focused market. Potential products include:
■	
Cereal
■	
Dog food
■	
Soft drinks
■	
Computers
■	
Shampoo
■	
Snack foods
■	
Jeans
■	
Sneakers
■	
Sandals
■	
Mountain bikes
■	
TV shows
■	
Movies
4.	 Measuring Efficiency and Effectiveness
In a group, create a plan to measure the efficiency and effectiveness of this course and recom­
mendations on how you could improve the course to make it more efficient and more effective. You 
must determine ways to benchmark current efficiency and effectiveness and ways to continuously 
monitor and measure against the benchmarks to determine if the course is becoming more or less 
efficient and effective (class quizzes and exams are the most obvious benchmarks). Be sure your 
plan addresses the following:
■	
Design of the classroom.
■	
Room temperature.
■	
Lighting and electronic capabilities of the classroom.
■	
Technology available in the classroom.
■	
Length of class.
■	
Email and instant messaging.
■	
Students’ attendance.
■	
Students’ preparation.
■	
Students’ arrival time.
■	
Quizzes and exams (frequency, length, grades).
5.	 Adding Value
To identify these competitive advantages, Michael Porter created value chain analysis, which views 
a firm as a series of business processes that each add value to the product or service. Value chain 
analysis is a useful tool for determining how to create the greatest possible value for customers. The 
goal of value chain analysis is to identify processes in which the firm can add value for the customer 
and create a competitive advantage for itself, with a cost advantage or product differentiation.
Starbucks has hired you after your graduation for a temporary position that could turn into a 
full-time opportunity. With new cafés and juice shops popping up on every corner, coupled with the 
global recession, Starbucks is worried about losing market share to competitors. Your boss, Heather 
Sweitzer, is out of ideas for ways to improve the company’s profitability. You decide that one of the 
most useful tools for identifying competitive advantages is Porter’s value chain analysis. Of course, 

90  *  Unit 1  Achieving Business Success
you do not yet have the detailed knowledge to complete all of the elements required, but you know 
enough to get started and plan to take your draft to Sweitzer next week. Using your knowledge of 
Starbucks, create a value chain analysis. Feel free to make assumptions about operations; just be 
sure to list any that you make. Also, be sure to write an overview of the tool and its potential value 
so Sweitzer can understand how it works.
6.	 I Love TED!
A small nonprofit started in 1984, TED (Technology, Entertainment, Design) hosts conferences for 
Ideas Worth Spreading. TED brings people from all over the globe to share award-winning talks 
covering the most innovative, informative, and exciting speeches ever given in 20 minutes. You can 
find TED talks by Al Gore, Bill Gates, Steve Jobs, Douglas Adams, Steven Levitt, Seth Godin, Malcolm 
Gladwell, and so on.
Visit www.ted.com and peruse the thousands of videos that are available; then answer the 
following:
■	
Review the TED website and find three talks you would want to watch. Why did you pick these 
three and will you make time outside of class to watch them?
■	
How can you gain a competitive advantage by watching TED?
■	
How can you find innovative ideas for a start-up by watching TED?
■	
How can you find competitive intelligence by watching TED?
7.	 Listen to Spider-Man; He Knows What He’s Talking About!
Spider-Man’s infamous advice—“With great power comes great responsibility”—should be applied to 
every type of technology you encounter in business. Technology provides countless opportunities for 
businesses, but it can also lead to countless pitfalls and traps. A great example is how many compa­
nies profited from online trading and how many people lost their life savings in online trading scams. 
For example, Bernard Madoff, the owner of a high-profile New York investment company, was able 
to forge investment statements and allegedly spent almost $50 billion of his client’s money.
Texting and email are great assets for any company that require instant communication, but they 
also digitize conversations that can be tracked and retrieved. David Petraeus, director of the CIA, 
resigned after investigators found evidence from his emails indicating an extramarital affair with his 
biographer, Paula Broadwell. It should be crystal clear that email is a dangerous tool if it has the abil­
ity to take down the director of the CIA.
Craigslist allows anyone to become a provider of goods and services. Unfortunately, Craigslist 
does not describe exactly what types of goods and services are allowed. Adam Vitale was sentenced 
to two years in prison after he found a way to bypass Craigslist security and was caught running an 
online prostitution ring through Craigslist.
When competing in business, you must analyze the good and the bad associated with every 
technology you encounter. Choose a company that primarily operates online—such as eBay, Netflix, 
or Amazon—and analyze all of the business opportunities along with the potential pitfalls you might 
encounter if you were the owner of the company.
8.	 Fixing the Post Office
Is there anything more frustrating than waiting in line at the post office? Not only are those lines 
frustrating, but they are also unprofitable. The U.S. Postal Service has faced multibillion-dollar losses 
every year for the past few years, making for one of the greatest challenges in its history. What is 
killing the post office? Perhaps it is Stamps.com, a website that allows you to customize and print 
your own stamps 24 hours a day. Getting married? Place a photo of the happy couple right on the 
stamp for the invitations. Starting a business? Place your business logo on your stamps. Stamps.com 
even keeps track of a customer’s postal spending and can recommend optimal delivery methods. 
Plus, Stamps.com gives you postage discounts you can’t get at the post office or with a postage 

	
Chapter 5  Organizational Structures That Support Strategic Initiatives  *  91
meter. Evaluate the U.S. Postal Service, using Porter’s Five Forces Model. How could the Postal Ser­
vice create new products and services to help grow its business? What types of competitive advan­
tages can you identify for the Postal Service? Can you fix or create any new business processes that 
could fundamentally change the way the post office operates to reduce costs or increase revenues?
9.	 The iPad—the Greatest Product in History or Just Another Gadget?
Apple sold 300,000 units of its highly anticipated iPad in the first 15 hours it was available for sale. 
Hundreds of thousands of Apple devotees flocked to stores during Passover and Easter to be the 
first to obtain the new device, even though it is neither a phone nor a laptop computer and many 
people are still wondering what it’s for. The controversy over the usefulness of Apple’s portable tab­
let began as soon as Apple announced the device was heading to market. At first glance, the iPad 
is little more than a touch screen the size of a slim book, with a few control buttons along the edges 
and a home button at the bottom. Shrink it, and it would look like an iPod Touch. What is the value of 
this device? That’s the question everyone wants to answer.
The iPad’s modest features might represent an entirely new way of consuming media—video, 
web pages, music, pictures, and even books. Break into groups and review the current value of the 
iPad for business. Find three examples of the ways businesses are using, or could use, the iPad. Do 
you consider it the next revolutionary device or just an overpriced music player?
10. Finding Your College Start-up
Derek Johnson, a student at the University of Houston, was having lunch with his friend who hap­
pened to be the communications director for her sorority. During lunch, Derek’s friend was telling 
him how hard it was to communicate with all of her sisters in the sorority. She had to send out 
important announcements about meetings, charitable events, and even dues. She had tried every­
thing, including Facebook, email, and message boards, but so far nothing was working. As Derek 
pondered his friend’s dilemma, he came up with a solution: mass text messaging. Johnson began 
researching mass text messaging products and was surprised to find that none existed for the aver­
age consumer. Spotting an entrepreneurial opportunity, Derek quickly began working on a product. 
Within a few months, he launched his website, Tatango, and began offering group text messaging 
at a reasonable price. Now, a few years later, Tatango offers customers subscription plans starting 
under $20 a month that allow groups to send text messages to all members at once—whether 10 or 
10,000—from any device.
In a group, brainstorm a list of problems you are currently experiencing. Decide whether any 
present potential new business opportunities and, if so, analyze the potential, using the tools intro­
duced in this unit. Be prepared to present your new business to the class.
11. Get the Cow Out of the Ditch
Fortune magazine asked Anne Mulcahy, former Chairman and CEO of Xerox, what the best advice 
she had ever received in business was. She said it occurred at a breakfast meeting in Dallas, to 
which she had invited a group of business leaders. One of them, a plainspoken, self-made, street­
wise guy, came up to Mulcahy and said:
When everything gets really complicated and you feel overwhelmed, think about it this way. You 
gotta do three things. First, get the cow out of the ditch. Second, find out how the cow got into the 
ditch. Third, make sure you do whatever it takes so the cow doesn’t go into the ditch again.
You are working for an international app developer that produces games. For months, you have 
been collecting metrics on usage by players from all over the world. You notice the metrics on 
the Asian and European players are falling sharply and sales are dropping. The United States and 
Canada metrics are still growing strongly, and sales are increasing. What can you do to get this cow 
out of the ditch?

92  *  Unit 1  Achieving Business Success
If you are looking for Excel projects to incorporate into your class, try any of the following to test 
your knowledge.
A Y K  A P P L I C A T I O N  P R O J E C T S
Project 
Number
Project Name
Project 
Type
Plug-In 
Focus Area
Project Level
Skill Set
Page 
Number
1
Financial 
Destiny
Excel
T2
Personal 
Budget
Introductory 
Formulas
AYK.4
2
Cash Flow
Excel
T2
Cash Flow
Introductory 
Formulas
AYK.4
3
Technology 
Budget
Excel
T1, T2
Hardware 
and Software
Introductory 
Formulas
AYK.4
4
Tracking 
Donations
Excel
T2
Employee 
Relationships
Introductory 
Formulas
AYK.4
5
Convert 
Currency
Excel
T2
Global 
Commerce
Introductory 
Formulas
AYK.5
6
Cost 
Comparison
Excel
T2
Total Cost of 
Ownership
Introductory 
Formulas
AYK.5
7
Time 
Management
Excel or 
Project
T12
Project 
Management
Gantt 
Charts
AYK.6


This unit introduces the concept of information and its relative importance to organizations. It distinguishes 
between data stored in transactional databases and information housed in enterprise data warehouses. This 
unit also provides an overview of database fundamentals and the steps required to integrate various bits of 
data stored across multiple, operational data stores into a comprehensive and centralized repository of sum­
marized information, which can be turned into powerful business intelligence.
You, as a business student, must understand the difference between transactional data and summarized 
information and the different types of questions you would use a transactional database or enterprise data 
warehouse to answer. You need to be aware of the complexity of storing data in databases and the level of 
effort required to transform operational data into meaningful, summarized information. You need to realize 
the power of information and the competitive advantage a data warehouse brings an organization in terms of 
facilitating business intelligence. Understanding the power of information will help you prepare to compete in a 
global marketplace. Armed with the power of information, you will make smart, informed, and data-supported 
managerial decisions.
W h a t ’ s  i n  I T  f o r  M e ?
Exploring Business 
Intelligence
2
U
N
I
T

Big Data, Big Business, Big Opportunities
Imagine working 10 years to become the lead marketing executive at a large retail organization 
to find that your competitor is invading your market share by 20 percent each year. You quickly 
decided to launch several online marketing promotions while improving your products only to 
find your efforts are fruitless as your competitor continues to steal your customers destroying 
your profits while raising its own.
As you begin to analyze your competitor’s business strategy you find that while you were 
focused on sales reports, product inventory analysis, and other traditional marketing efforts 
your competitor was making a massive investment in upgrading all of its management infor­
mation systems. This included systems capable of collecting, storing, and analyzing data from 
every store, product, and sales representative in the market. In fact, your competitor now knows 
more about your products and sales cycles than you do. The new systems not only collect data 
throughout its company, but also from a group of suppliers, retailers, and distributors around 
the globe. These new systems provide your competitor with the ability to adjust prices instantly 
based on daily customer traffic patterns, reorder automatically from every entity in the supply 
chains, and even move items within a store or between stores for maximum selling efficiencies. 
Your competitor has won and not because it had a higher quality product or better sales and 
marketing strategies, but because it identified the value of management information systems 
coupled with the ability to instantly access big data within and beyond the organization. You 
quickly realize that your competitor’s agility simply cannot be mimicked offering it a huge com­
petitive advantage. You sigh as you realize your company is in big trouble because it did not 
understand the dynamics of the big data age.
We are all familiar with the information age and the improvements made to organizations 
around the world as they are able to better manage employees, track sales information, and ana­
lyze customer purchasing patterns. However, this scenario is an example of the game-changing 
U N I T  T W O  O P E N I N G  C A S E
© Image Source/Getty Images RF
© Maciej Frolow/Getty Images RF
© C. Zachariasen/PhotoAlto

96
impact of big data, the massive amounts of data being collected by humans and machines 
over the last few years. Companies are now capturing hundreds of terabytes of data on every­
thing from operations and finances to weather patterns and stock market trends. Sensors are 
now embedded in everything from products and machines to store floors collecting real time 
data on operations and customers. Radical customization, continuous experimentation, and 
information-driven business models are the new trademarks of competition as organizations 
analyze massive volumes of data. Data volumes are exploding and more data has been cre­
ated in the past two years than in the entire previous history of the human race. Here are the 
top twenty facts every manager should know about big data according to Forbes magazine.1 
	■	
Data volumes are exploding and more data has been created in the past 2 years than in 
the entire previous history of the human race.
	■	
Data is growing faster than ever before and by the year 2020, about 1.7 megabytes of 
new information will be created every second for every human being on the planet.
	■	
By 2020 our accumulated digital universe of data will grow from 4.4 zettabytes today to 
around 44 zettabytes, or 44 trillion gigabytes.
■	 Every second we create new data. For example, we perform 40,000 search queries every 
second (on Google alone), which makes it 3.5 searches per day and 1.2 trillion searches 
per year.
■	 In 2015 over 1 billion people used Facebook each day.
■	 Facebook users send on average 31.25 million messages and view 2.77 million videos 
every minute.
■	 Every minute up to 300 hours of video are uploaded to YouTube alone.
■	 In 2015, a staggering 1 trillion photos will be taken and billions of them will be shared 
online. By 2017, nearly 80% of photos will be taken on smart phones.
■	 This year, over 1.4 billion smart phones will be shipped—all packed with sensors capable 
of collecting all kinds of data, not to mention the data the users create themselves.
■	 By 2020, we will have over 6.1 billion smartphone users globally (overtaking basic fixed 
phone subscriptions).
■	 Within five years there will be over 50 billion smart connected devices in the world, all 
developed to collect, analyze, and share data.
■	 By 2020, at least a third of all data will pass through the cloud (a network of servers con­
nected over the Internet).
■	 Distributed computing (performing computing tasks using a network of computers in the 
cloud) is very real. Google uses it every day to involve about 1,000 computers in answer­
ing a single search query, which takes no more than a second to complete.
■	 The Hadoop (open source software for distributed computing) market is forecast to grow 
at a compound annual growth rate 58% surpassing $1 billion by 2020.
■	 Estimates suggest that by better integrating big data, healthcare could save as much 
as $300 billion a year—that’s equal to reducing costs by $1,000 a year for every man, 
woman, and child.
■	 The White House has already invested more than $200 million in big data projects.

97
■	 For a typical Fortune 1000 company, just a 10% increase in data accessibility will result in 
more than $65 million additional net income.
■	 Retailers who leverage the full power of big data could increase their operating margins 
by as much as 60%.
■	 Almost eighty percent of organizations have already invested or plan to invest in big data.
■	 At the moment less than 0.5% of all data is ever analyzed or used.

98  *  Unit 2  Exploring Business Intelligence
Introduction
Information is powerful. Information is useful in telling an organization how its current oper­
ations are performing and estimating and strategizing how future operations might perform. 
New perspectives open up when people have the right information and know how to use it. 
The ability to understand, digest, analyze, and filter information is a key to success for any 
professional in any industry. Unit Two demonstrates the value an organization can uncover 
and create by learning how to manage, access, analyze, and protect organizational informa­
tion. The chapters in Unit Two are:
	■	 Chapter Six—Valuing and Storing Organizational Information—Databases
	■	 Chapter Seven—Accessing Organizational Information—Data Warehouses
	■	 Chapter Eight—Understanding Big Data and Its Impact on Business 
© Digital Vision/Getty Images

	
Chapter 6  Valuing and  Storing Organizational  Information—Databases  *  99
The Business Benefits of High-Quality 
Information
Information is powerful. Information can tell an organization how its current operations are 
performing and help it estimate and strategize about how future operations might perform. 
The ability to understand, digest, analyze, and filter information is key to growth and success 
for any professional in any industry. Remember that new perspectives and opportunities can 
open up when you have the right data that you can turn into information and ultimately busi­
ness intelligence.
Information is everywhere in an organization. Managers in sales, marketing, human 
resources, and management need information to run their departments and make daily deci­
sions. When addressing a significant business issue, employees must be able to obtain and 
analyze all the relevant information so they can make the best decision possible. Information 
comes at different levels, formats, and granularities. Information granularity refers to the 
extent of detail within the information (fine and detailed or coarse and abstract). Employees 
must be able to correlate the different levels, formats, and granularities of information when 
making decisions. For example, a company might be collecting information from various 
suppliers to make needed decisions, only to find that the information is in different lev­
els, formats, and granularities. One supplier might send detailed information in a spread­
sheet, while another supplier might send summary information in a Word document, and still 
another might send a collection of information from emails. Employees will need to com­
pare these different types of information for what they commonly reveal to make strategic 
decisions. Figure 6.1 displays the various levels, formats, and granularities of organizational 
information.
Successfully collecting, compiling, sorting, and finally analyzing information from mul­
tiple levels, in varied formats, and exhibiting different granularities can provide tremendous 
insight into how an organization is performing. Exciting and unexpected results can include 
potential new markets, new ways of reaching customers, and even new methods of doing 
business. After understanding the different levels, formats, and granularities of informa­
tion, managers next want to look at the four primary traits that help determine the value of 
information (see Figure 6.2).
  6.4.	Explain the business benefits of a data-driven website.
  6.5.	Explain why an organization would want to integrate its 
databases.
  6.1.	 Explain the four primary traits that determine the value 
of information.
  6.2.	Describe a database, a database management system, 
and the relational database model.
  6.3.	Identify the business advantages of a relational 
database.
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Valuing and 
Storing Organizational 
Information—Databases
C H A P T E R  6
LO 6.1 Explain the four primary 
traits that determine the value of 
information.

100  *  Unit 2  Exploring Business Intelligence
INFORMATION TYPE: TRANSACTIONAL AND ANALYTICAL
Transactional information encompasses all of the information contained within a single 
business process or unit of work, and its primary purpose is to support daily operational tasks. 
Organizations need to capture and store transactional information to perform operational 
tasks and repetitive decisions such as analyzing daily sales reports and production sched­
ules to determine how much inventory to carry. Consider Walmart, which handles more than 
1 million customer transactions every hour, and Facebook, which keeps track of 400 million 
active users (along with their photos, friends, and web links). In addition, every time a cash 
register rings up a sale, a deposit or withdrawal is made from an ATM, or a receipt is given at 
the gas pump, capturing and storing of the transactional information are required.
Analytical information encompasses all organizational information, and its primary purpose 
is to support the performing of managerial analysis tasks. Analytical information is useful when 
making important decisions such as whether the organization should build a new manufacturing 
plant or hire additional sales personnel. Analytical information makes it possible to do many 
things that previously were difficult to accomplish, such as spot business trends, prevent diseases, 
and fight crime. For example, credit card companies crunch through billions of transactional pur­
chase records to identify fraudulent activity. Indicators such as charges in a foreign country or 
consecutive purchases of gasoline send a red flag highlighting potential fraudulent activity.
FIGURE 6.2
The Four Primary Traits of 
the Value of Information.
Information Type 
Information Timeliness 
Information Quality 
Information Governance 
FIGURE 6.1
Levels, Formats, 
and Granularities of 
Organizational Information.
Information Granularities
Detail (Fine), Summary, Aggregate
(Coarse) 
Individual knowledge,
goals, and strategies
Departmental goals,
revenues, expenses,
processes, and strategies 
Enterprise revenues,
expenses, processes, and
strategies    
Letters, memos, faxes, emails, reports,
marketing materials, and training materials
Product, strategy, process, ﬁnancial,
customer, and competitor
Sales, marketing, industry, ﬁnancial,
competitor, customer, and order
spreadsheets 
Customer, employee, sales, order,
supplier, and manufacturer databases
Reports for each salesperson, product, and part
Reports for all sales personnel, all products, and
all parts
Reports across departments, organizations, and
companies
Information Levels
Individual, Department, Enterprise
Information Formats
Document, Presentation, Spreadsheet,
Database

	
Chapter 6  Valuing and Storing Organizational Information—Databases    *  101
Walmart was able to use its massive amount of analytical information to identify many 
unusual trends, such as a correlation between storms and Pop-Tarts. Yes, Walmart discovered an 
increase in the demand for Pop-Tarts during the storm season. Armed with the valuable infor­
mation the retail chain was able to stock up on Pop-Tarts that were ready for purchase when cus­
tomers arrived. Figure 6.3 displays different types of transactional and analytical information.
INFORMATION TIMELINESS
Timeliness is an aspect of information that depends on the situation. In some firms or indus­
tries, information that is a few days or weeks old can be relevant, while in others information 
that is a few minutes old can be almost worthless. Some organizations, such as 911 response 
centers, stock traders, and banks, require up-to-the-second information. Other organizations, 
such as insurance and construction companies, require only daily or even weekly information.
Real-time information means immediate, up-to-date information. Real-time systems pro­
vide real-time information in response to requests. Many organizations use real-time systems 
to uncover key corporate transactional information. The growing demand for real-time infor­
mation stems from organizations’ need to make faster and more effective decisions, keep 
smaller inventories, operate more efficiently, and track performance more carefully. Infor­
mation also needs to be timely in the sense that it meets employees’ needs, but no more. If 
employees can absorb information only on an hourly or daily basis, there is no need to gather 
real-time information in smaller increments.
Most people request real-time information without understanding one of the biggest pitfalls 
associated with real-time information—continual change. Imagine the following scenario: Three 
managers meet at the end of the day to discuss a business problem. Each manager has gathered 
information at different times during the day to create a picture of the situation. Each manager’s 
picture may be different because of the time differences. Their views on the business problem 
may not match because the information they are basing their analysis on is continually changing. 
This approach may not speed up decision making, and it may actually slow it down. Business 
decision makers must evaluate the timeliness for the information for every decision. Organiza­
tions do not want to find themselves using real-time information to make a bad decision faster.
INFORMATION QUALITY
Business decisions are only as good as the quality of the information used to make them. 
Information inconsistency occurs when the same data element has different values. Take 
for example the amount of work that needs to occur to update a customer who had changed 
her last name due to marriage. Changing this information in only a few organizational sys­
tems will lead to data inconsistencies causing customer 123456 to be associated with two last 
names. Information integrity is a measure of the quality of information. Data integrity issues 
can cause managers to consider the system reports invalid and will make decisions based on 
other sources.
FIGURE 6.3
Transactional versus 
Analytical Information.
Packing Slip
Airline Ticket
Sales
Receipt
Database
Transactional Information
Trends
Sales
Projections
Analytical Information
Future
Growth 
Product
Statistics

102  *  Unit 2  Exploring Business Intelligence
To ensure your systems do not suffer from data integrity issues, review Figure 6.4 for 
the five characteristics common to high-quality information: accuracy, completeness, consis­
tency, timeliness, and uniqueness. Figure 6.5 provides an example of several problems associ­
ated with using low-quality information including: 
	1.	 Completeness. The customer’s first name is missing.
	2.	 Another issue with completeness. The street address contains only a number and not a 
street name.
	3.	 Consistency. There may be a duplication of information since there is a slight difference 
between the two customers in the spelling of the last name. Similar street addresses and 
phone numbers make this likely.
	4.	 Accuracy. This may be inaccurate information because the customer’s phone and fax num­
bers are the same. Some customers might have the same number for phone and fax, but the 
fact that the customer also has this number in the email address field is suspicious.
FIGURE 6.4
Five Common Characteristics 
of High-Quality Information.
 Is there an incorrect value in the information?
 Example: Is the name spelled correctly? Is the dollar amount
 recorded properly?
 Is a value missing from the information?
 Example: Is the address complete including street, city, state,
 and zip code?
 Is aggregate or summary information in agreement with detailed
 information?
 Example: Do all total columns equal the true total of the individual item?
 Is the information current with respect to business needs?
 Example: Is information updated weekly, daily, or hourly?
 Is each transaction and event represented only once in the 
 information?
 Example: Are there any duplicate customers?
Timely
Consistent
Complete
Unique
Accurate
FIGURE 6.5
Example of Low-Quality 
Information.
113
114
115
116
Smith
Jones
Roberts
Robert
First
Name
City
Jeﬀ
Jenny
Jenny
1. Missing information
 (no ﬁrst name)
3. Probable duplicate information
 (similar names, same
 address, phone number)
4. Potential wrong information
 (are the phone and fax numbers
 the same or is this an error?)
5. Inaccurate information
 (invalid email)
6. Incomplete information
 (missing area codes)
Street
123 S. Main
12A
1244 Colfax
1244 Colfax
Denver
Denver
Denver
Denver
State
CO
CO
CO
CO
Zip
80210
80224
85231
85231
Phone
(303) 777-1258
(303) 666-6868
759-5654
759-5654
Fax
(303) 777-5544
(303) 666-6868
853-6584
853-6584
Email
ssmith@aol.com
(303) 666-6868
jr@msn.com
jr@msn.com
ID
Last
Name
2. Incomplete information
 (no street)

	
Chapter 6  Valuing and Storing Organizational Information—Databases    *  103
	5.	 Another issue with accuracy. There is inaccurate information because a phone number is 
located in the email address field.
	6.	 Another issue with completeness. The information is incomplete because there is not a 
valid area code for the phone and fax numbers.
Nestlé uses 550,000 suppliers to sell more than 100,000 products in 200 countries. How­
ever, due to poor information, the company was unable to evaluate its business effectively. 
After some analysis, it found that it had 9 million records of vendors, customers, and materials, 
half of which were duplicated, obsolete, inaccurate, or incomplete. The analysis discovered that 
some records abbreviated vendor names while other records spelled out the vendor names. 
This created multiple accounts for the same customer, making it impossible to determine the 
true value of Nestlé’s customers. Without being able to identify customer profitability, a com­
pany runs the risk of alienating its best customers.2
Knowing how low-quality information issues typically occur can help a company correct 
them. Addressing these errors will significantly improve the quality of company informa­
tion and the value to be extracted from it. The four primary reasons for low-quality infor­
mation are:
	1.	 Online customers intentionally enter inaccurate information to protect their privacy.
	2.	 Different systems have different information entry standards and formats.
	3.	 Data-entry personnel enter abbreviated information to save time or erroneous information 
by accident.
	4.	 Third-party and external information contains inconsistencies, inaccuracies, and errors.
Understanding the Costs of Using Low-Quality Information
Using the wrong information can lead managers to make erroneous decisions. Erroneous 
decisions in turn can cost time, money, reputations, and even jobs. Some of the serious busi­
ness consequences that occur due to using low-quality information to make decisions are:
	■	  Inability to accurately track customers.
	■	  Difficulty identifying the organization’s most valuable customers.
	■	  Inability to identify selling opportunities.
	■	  Lost revenue opportunities from marketing to nonexistent customers.
	■	  The cost of sending non-deliverable mail.
	■	  Difficulty tracking revenue because of inaccurate invoices.
	■	  Inability to build strong relationships with customers.
A data gap analysis occurs when a company examines its data to determine if it can meet 
business expectations, while identifying possible data gaps or where missing data might exist. 
Understanding the Benefits of Using High-Quality Information
High-quality information can significantly improve the chances of making a good decision 
and directly increase an organization’s bottom line. Data stewardship is the management and 
oversight of an organization’s data assets to help provide business users with high-quality 
data that is easily accessible in a consistent manner. A data steward is responsible for ensur­
ing the policies and procedures are implemented across the organization and acts as a liaison 
between the MIS department and the business. One company discovered that even with its 
large number of golf courses, Phoenix, Arizona, is not a good place to sell golf clubs. An 
analysis revealed that typical golfers in Phoenix are tourists and conventioneers who usually 
bring their clubs with them. The analysis further revealed that two of the best places to sell 
golf clubs in the United States are Rochester, New York, and Detroit, Michigan. Equipped 
with this valuable information, the company was able to strategically place its stores and 
launch its marketing campaigns.
High-quality information does not automatically guarantee that every decision made is 
going to be a good one, because people ultimately make decisions and no one is perfect. 

104  *  Unit 2  Exploring Business Intelligence
However, such information ensures that the basis of the decisions is accurate. The success of 
the organization depends on appreciating and leveraging the true value of timely and high-
quality information.
INFORMATION GOVERNANCE
Information is a vital resource and users need to be educated on what they can and cannot do 
with it. To ensure a firm manages its information correctly, it will need special policies and 
procedures establishing rules on how the information is organized, updated, maintained, and 
accessed. Every firm, large and small, should create an information policy concerning data 
governance. Data governance refers to the overall management of the availability, usability, 
integrity, and security of company data. Master data management (MDM) is the practice of 
gathering data and ensuring that it is uniform, accurate, consistent, and complete, including 
such entities as customers, suppliers, products, sales, employees, and other critical entities 
that are commonly integrated across organizational systems. MDM is commonly included 
in data governance. A company that supports a data governance program has a defined a 
policy that specifies who is accountable for various portions or aspects of the data, includ­
ing its accuracy, accessibility, consistency, timeliness, and completeness. The policy should 
clearly define the processes concerning how to store, archive, back up, and secure the data. 
In addition, the company should create a set of procedures identifying accessibility levels for 
employees. Then, the firm should deploy controls and procedures that enforce government 
regulations and compliance with mandates such as Sarbanes-Oxley.
It is important to note the difference between data governance and data stewardship.  Data 
governance focuses on enterprisewide policies and procedures, while data stewardship 
focuses on the strategic implementation of the policies and procedures.  Data validation 
includes the tests and evaluations used to determine compliance with data governance 
polices to ensure correctness of data. Data validation helps to ensure that every data value 
is correct and accurate.  In Excel you can use data validation to control the type of data or 
the values that users enter into a cell. For example, you may want to restrict data entry to a 
certain range of dates, limit choices by using a list, or make sure that only positive whole 
numbers are entered.
Storing Information Using a Relational Database 
Management System
The core component of any system, regardless of size, is a database and a database man­
agement system. Broadly defined, a database maintains information about various types of 
objects (inventory), events (transactions), people (employees), and places (warehouses). A 
database management system (DBMS) creates, reads, updates, and deletes data in a database 
while controlling access and security. Managers send requests to the DBMS, and the DBMS 
performs the actual manipulation of the data in the database. Companies store their informa­
tion in databases, and managers access these systems to answer operational questions such as 
how many customers purchased Product A in December or what were the average sales by 
region. There are two primary tools available for retrieving information from a DBMS. First 
is a query-by-example (QBE) tool that helps users graphically design the answer to a question 
against a database. Second is a structured query language (SQL) that asks users to write lines 
of code to answer questions against a database. Managers typically interact with QBE tools, 
and MIS professionals have the skills required to code SQL. Figure 6.6 displays the relation­
ship between a database, a DBMS, and a user. Some of the more popular examples of DBMS 
include MySQL, Microsoft Access, SQL Server, and Oracle.
A data element (or data field) is the smallest or basic unit of information. Data elements 
can include a customer’s name, address, email, discount rate, preferred shipping method, 
product name, quantity ordered, and so on. Data models are logical data structures that detail 
the relationships among data elements using graphics or pictures.
LO 6.2 Describe a database, a 
database management system, 
and the relational database 
model.

	
Chapter 6  Valuing and Storing Organizational Information—Databases    *  105
FIGURE 6.6
Relationship of Database, 
DBMS, and User.
Metadata provides details about data. For example, metadata for an image could include 
its size, resolution, and date created. Metadata about a text document could contain document 
length, data created, author’s name, and summary. Each data element is given a description, 
such as Customer Name; metadata is provided for the type of data (text, numeric, alphanu­
meric, date, image, binary value) and descriptions of potential predefined values such as a 
certain area code; and finally the relationship is defined. A data dictionary compiles all of 
the metadata about the data elements in the data model. Looking at a data model along with 
reviewing the data dictionary provides tremendous insight into the database’s functions, pur­
pose, and business rules.
DBMS use three primary data models for organizing information—hierarchical, network, 
and the relational database, the most prevalent. A relational database model stores information 
in the form of logically related two-dimensional tables. A relational database management 
system allows users to create, read, update, and delete data in a relational database. Although 
the hierarchical and network models are important, this text focuses only on the relational 
database model.
STORING DATA ELEMENTS IN ENTITIES AND ATTRIBUTES
For flexibility in supporting business operations, managers need to query or search for the 
answers to business questions such as which artist sold the most albums during a certain month. 
The relationships in the relational database model help managers extract this information. 
Figure 6.7  illustrates the primary concepts of the relational database model—entities, attri­
butes, keys, and relationships. An entity (also referred to as a table) stores information about 
a person, place, thing, transaction, or event. The entities, or tables, of interest in Figure 6.7  
are TRACKS, RECORDINGS, MUSICIANS, and CATEGORIES. Notice that each entity is 
stored in a different two-dimensional table (with rows and columns).
Attributes (also called columns or fields) are the data elements associated with an entity. 
In Figure 6.7 the attributes for the entity TRACKS are TrackNumber, TrackTitle, TrackLength, 
and RecordingID. Attributes for the entity MUSICIANS are MusicianID, MusicianName, 
MusicianPhoto, and MusicianNotes. A record is a collection of related data elements (in the 
MUSICIANS table these include “3, Lady Gaga, gag.tiff, Do not bring young kids to live 
shows”). Each record in an entity occupies one row in its respective table.
CREATING RELATIONSHIPS THROUGH KEYS
To manage and organize various entities within the relational database model, you use pri­
mary keys and foreign keys to create logical relationships. A primary key is a field (or group 
of fields) that uniquely identifies a given record in a table. In the table RECORDINGS, the 
primary key is the field RecordingID that uniquely identifies each record in the table. Primary 
keys are a critical piece of a relational database because they provide a way of distinguish­
ing each record in a table; for instance, imagine you need to find information on a customer 
named Steve Smith. Simply searching the customer name would not be an ideal way to find 
the information because there might be 20 customers with the name Steve Smith. This is 
Customers
Orders
Products
Distributors
DBMS
Database
1. Enter New
    Customer
2. Find Customer
    Order
3. Enter New
    Products
User

106  *  Unit 2  Exploring Business Intelligence
the reason the relational database model uses primary keys to uniquely identify each record. 
Using Steve Smith’s unique ID allows a manager to search the database to identify all infor­
mation associated with this customer.
A foreign key is a primary key of one table that appears as an attribute in another table 
and acts to provide a logical relationship between the two tables. For instance, Black Eyed 
Peas in Figure 6.7  is one of the musicians appearing in the MUSICIANS table. Its primary 
key, MusicianID, is “2.” Notice that MusicianID also appears as an attribute in the RECORD­
INGS table. By matching these attributes, you create a relationship between the MUSICIANS 
and RECORDINGS tables that states the Black Eyed Peas (MusicianID 2) have several 
recordings including The E.N.D., Monkey Business, and Elepunk. In essence, MusicianID 
in the RECORDINGS table creates a logical relationship (who was the musician that made 
the recording) to the MUSICIANS table. Creating the logical relationship between the tables 
allows managers to search the data and turn it into useful information.
COCA-COLA RELATIONAL DATABASE EXAMPLE
Figure 6.8 illustrates the primary concepts of the relational database model for a sample order 
of soda from Coca-Cola. Figure 6.8 offers an excellent example of how data is stored in a 
database. For example, the order number is stored in the ORDER table and each line item 
is stored in the ORDER LINE table. Entities include CUSTOMER, ORDER, ORDER LINE, 
PRODUCT, and DISTRIBUTOR. Attributes for CUSTOMER include Customer ID, Customer 
Name, Contact Name, and Phone. Attributes for PRODUCT include Product ID, Description, 
and Price. The columns in the table contain the attributes. Consider Hawkins Shipping, one 
of the distributors appearing in the DISTRIBUTOR table. Its primary key, Distributor ID, is 
DEN8001. Notice that Distributor ID also appears as an attribute in the ORDER table. This 
establishes the fact that Hawkins Shipping (Distributor ID DEN8001) was responsible for 
delivering orders 34561 and 34562 to the appropriate customer(s). Therefore, Distributor ID 
in the ORDER table creates a logical relationship (who shipped what order) between ORDER 
and DISTRIBUTOR.
Attributes
1
2
3
4
5
6
Pop
R&B
Rock
Country
Blues
Classical
Entities
Foreign keys
TRACKS
TrackNumber
TrackTitle
TrackLength
RecordingID
1
I Won't
3:45
1
RECORDINGS
RecordingID
RecordingTitle
MuscianID
CategoryID
1
Breakthrough
1
1
Primary
keys
3
You Got Me
4:00
1
4
Fallin For you
3:35
1
1
I Gotta Feelin
4:49
2
2
Imma Be
4:17
2
2
The E.N.D.
2
1
3
4
5
3
Boom Boom Pow
4:11
2
4
Meet Me Halfway
4:44
2
6
Monkey Business
Elephunk
The Fame Monster
Raymond v. Raymond
2
2
3
4
1
1
1
2
MUSICIANS
MusicianID
MusicianName
MusicianPhoto
MusicianNotes
1
Colby Caillat
Colby.jpg
Next concert in Boston 7/1/2011
CategoryID
CategoryName
2
Black Eyed  Peas
BYP.bmp
New album due 12/25/2011
3
Lady Gaga
Gaga.tiﬀ
Do not bring young kids to live shows
4
Usher
Usher.bmp
Current album #1 on Billboard
Records
2
Begin Again
4:14
1
CATEGORIES
FIGURE 6.7
Primary Concepts of the 
Relational Database Model.

	
Chapter 6  Valuing and Storing Organizational Information—Databases    *  107
FIGURE 6.8
Potential Relational 
Database for Coca-Cola 
Bottling Company of Egypt 
(TCCBCE).
CUSTOMER
Customer ID
Customer Name
Contact Name
Phone
23
Dave’s Sub Shop
David Logan
(555)333-4545
43
Pizza Palace
Debbie Fernandez
(555)345-5432
765
T’s Fun Zone
Tom Repicci
(555)565-6655
ORDER LINE
Order ID
Line Item
Product ID
Quantity
34561
1
12345AA
75
34561
2
12346BB
50
34561
3
12347CC
100
34562
1
12349EE
100
34563
1
12345AA
100
34563
2
12346BB
100
34563
3
12347CC
50
34563
4
12348DD
50
34563
5
12349EE
100
DISTRIBUTOR
Distributor ID
Distributor Name
Hawkins Shipping
ABC Trucking
DEN8001
CHI3001
NY9001
Van Distributors
PRODUCT
Product ID
Product Description
Price
12345AA
12346BB
12347CC
12348DD
12349EE
Coca-Cola
Diet Coke
Sprite
Diet Sprite
Vanilla Coke
$0.55
$0.55
$0.55
$0.55
$0.55
ORDER
Order ID
Order Date
Customer ID
Distributor ID
Distributor Fee
Total Due 
34561
7/4/2008
23
DEN8001
$22.00
34562
8/6/2008
23
DEN8001
$12.95
34563
6/5/2008
765
NY9001
$29.50
$145.75
$67.95
$249.50
Coca-Cola Bottling Company of Egypt
Sample Sales Order
Order Number:  34562
Date:
Customer: 
8/6/2008
Dave’s Sub Shop
Product
Quantity
Order Total
Price
Amount
Vanilla Coke
100
$0.55
$55
$67.95
$12.95
Distributor Fee

108  *  Unit 2  Exploring Business Intelligence
Using a Relational Database for Business 
Advantages
Many business managers are familiar with Excel and other spreadsheet programs they can use 
to store business data. Although spreadsheets are excellent for supporting some data analy­
sis, they offer limited functionality in terms of security, accessibility, and flexibility and can 
rarely scale to support business growth. From a business perspective, relational databases 
offer many advantages over using a text document or a spreadsheet, as displayed in Figure 6.9.
INCREASED FLEXIBILITY
Databases tend to mirror business structures, and a database needs to handle changes quickly 
and easily, just as any business needs to be able to do. Equally important, databases need to 
provide flexibility in allowing each user to access the information in whatever way best suits 
his or her needs. The distinction between logical and physical views is important in under­
standing flexible database user views. The physical view of information deals with the physi­
cal storage of information on a storage device. The logical view of information focuses on 
how individual users logically access information to meet their own particular business needs.
In the database illustration from Figure 6.7 , for example, one user could perform a query 
to determine which recordings had a track length of four minutes or more. At the same time, 
another user could perform an analysis to determine the distribution of recordings as they 
relate to the different categories. For example, are there more R&B recordings than rock, or 
are they evenly distributed? This example demonstrates that while a database has only one 
physical view, it can easily support multiple logical views that provides for flexibility.
Consider another example—a mail-order business. One user might want a report presented 
in alphabetical format, in which case last name should appear before first name. Another user, 
working with a catalog mailing system, would want customer names appearing as first name 
and then last name. Both are easily achievable, but different logical views of the same physi­
cal information.
INCREASED SCALABILITY AND PERFORMANCE
In its first year of operation, the official website of the American Family Immigration History 
Center, www.ellisisland.org, generated more than 2.5 billion hits. The site offers immigration 
information about people who entered America through the Port of New York and Ellis Island 
between 1892 and 1924. The database contains more than 25 million passenger names that 
are correlated to 3.5 million images of ships’ manifests.3
FIGURE 6.9
Business Advantages of a 
Relational Database.
Increased
Flexibility
Increased
Scalability
and
Performance
Increased
Information
Security
Increased
Information
Integrity
Reduced
Information
Redundance
LO 6.3 Identify the business 
advantages of a relational 
database.

	
Chapter 6  Valuing and Storing Organizational Information—Databases    *  109
The database had to be scalable to handle the massive volumes of information and the large 
numbers of users expected for the launch of the website. In addition, the database needed to per­
form quickly under heavy use. Data latency is the time it takes for data to be stored or retrieved. 
Some organizations must be able to support hundreds or thousands of users including employ­
ees, partners, customers, and suppliers, who all want to access and share the same information 
with minimal data latency. Databases today scale to exceptional levels, allowing all types of 
users and programs to perform information-processing and information-searching tasks.
REDUCED INFORMATION REDUNDANCY
Information redundancy is the duplication of data, or the storage of the same data in multiple 
places. Redundant data can cause storage issues along with data integrity issues, making it 
difficult to determine which values are the most current or most accurate. Employees become 
confused and frustrated when faced with incorrect information causing disruptions to business 
processes and procedures. One primary goal of a database is to eliminate information redun­
dancy by recording each piece of information in only one place in the database. This saves disk 
space, makes performing information updates easier, and improves information quality. 
INCREASED INFORMATION INTEGRITY (QUALITY)
Information integrity is a measure of the quality of information. Integrity constraints are 
rules that help ensure the quality of information. The database design needs to consider integ­
rity constraints. The database and the DBMS ensure that users can never violate these con­
straints. There are two types of integrity constraints: (1) relational and (2) business critical.
Relational integrity constraints are rules that enforce basic and fundamental information-
based constraints. For example, a relational integrity constraint would not allow someone to 
create an order for a nonexistent customer, provide a markup percentage that was negative, or 
order zero pounds of raw materials from a supplier. A business rule defines how a company 
performs certain aspects of its business and typically results in either a yes/no or true/false 
answer. Stating that merchandise returns are allowed within 10 days of purchase is an example 
of a business rule. Business-critical integrity constraints enforce business rules vital to an 
organization’s success and often require more insight and knowledge than relational integ­
rity constraints. Consider a supplier of fresh produce to large grocery chains such as Kroger. 
The supplier might implement a business-critical integrity constraint stating that no product 
returns are accepted after 15 days past delivery. That would make sense because of the chance 
of spoilage of the produce. Business-critical integrity constraints tend to mirror the very rules 
by which an organization achieves success.
The specification and enforcement of integrity constraints produce higher-quality infor­
mation that will provide better support for business decisions. Organizations that establish 
specific procedures for developing integrity constraints typically see an increase in accuracy, 
which then increases the use of organizational information by business professionals.
INCREASED INFORMATION SECURITY
Managers must protect information, like any asset, from unauthorized users or misuse. As 
systems become increasingly complex and highly available over the Internet on many differ­
ent devices, security becomes an even bigger issue. Databases offer many security features 
including passwords to provide authentication, access levels to determine who can access the 
data, and access controls to determine what type of access they have to the information.
For example, customer service representatives might need read-only access to customer 
order information so they can answer customer order inquiries; they might not have or need the 
authority to change or delete order information. Managers might require access to employee 
files, but they should have access only to their own employees’ files, not the employee files 
for the entire company. Various security features of databases can ensure that individuals have 
only certain types of access to certain types of information.
Identity management is a broad administrative area that deals with identifying individu­
als in a system (such as a country, a network, or an enterprise) and controlling their access to 

110  *  Unit 2  Exploring Business Intelligence
resources within that system by associating user rights and restrictions with the established 
identity. Security risks are increasing as more and more databases and DBMS systems are 
moving to data centers run in the cloud. The biggest risks when using cloud computing are 
ensuring the security and privacy of the information in the database. Implementing data gov­
ernance policies and procedures that outline the data management requirements can ensure 
safe and secure cloud computing.
Driving Websites with Data
Websites change for site visitors depending on the type of information they request. Con­
sider, for example, an automobile dealer. The dealer would create a database containing 
data elements for each car it has available for sale including make, model, color, year, miles 
per gallon, a photograph, and so on. Website visitors might click on Porsche and then enter 
their specific requests such as price range or year made. Once the user hits “go” the website 
automatically provides a custom view of the requested information. The dealer must create, 
update, and delete automobile information as the inventory changes.
A data-driven website is an interactive website kept constantly updated and relevant to 
the needs of its customers using a database. Data-driven capabilities are especially useful 
when a firm needs to offer large amounts of information, products, or services. Visitors can 
become quickly annoyed if they find themselves buried under an avalanche of information 
when searching a website. A data-driven website can help limit the amount of information 
displayed to customers based on unique search requirements. Companies even use data-
driven websites to make information in their internal databases available to customers and 
business partners.
There are a number of advantages to using the web to access company databases. First, web 
browsers are much easier to use than directly accessing the database using a custom-query 
tool. Second, the web interface requires few or no changes to the database model. Finally, it 
costs less to add a web interface in front of a DBMS than to redesign and rebuild the system 
to support changes. Additional data-driven website advantages include:
	■	 Easy to manage content: Website owners can make changes without relying on MIS pro­
fessionals; users can update a data-driven website with little or no training.
	■	 Easy to store large amounts of data: Data-driven websites can keep large volumes of 
information organized. Website owners can use templates to implement changes for lay­
outs, navigation, or website structure. This improves website reliability, scalability, and 
performance.
	■	 Easy to eliminate human errors: Data-driven websites trap data-entry errors, eliminating 
inconsistencies while ensuring all information is entered correctly.
WEBSITE DATA
A content creator is the person responsible for creating the original website content. A 
content editor is the person responsible for updating and maintaining website content. 
Static information includes fixed data incapable of change in the event of a user action. 
Dynamic information includes data that change based on user actions. For example, static 
websites supply only information that will not change until the content editor changes the 
information. Dynamic information changes when a user requests information. A dynamic 
website changes information based on user requests such as movie ticket availability, airline 
prices, or restaurant reservations. Dynamic website information is stored in a dynamic cata­
log, or an area of a website that stores information about products in a database.
Zappos credits its success as an online shoe retailer to its vast inventory of nearly 3 million 
products available through its dynamic data-driven website. The company built its data-
driven website catering to a specific niche market: consumers who were tired of finding that 
their most-desired items were always out of stock at traditional retailers. Zappos’s highly 
LO 6.4 Explain the business ben-
efits of a data-driven website.

	
Chapter 6  Valuing and Storing Organizational Information—Databases    *  111
flexible, scalable, and secure database helped it rank as the most-available Internet retailer. 
Figure 6.10 displays Zappos’s data-driven website illustrating a user querying the database 
and receiving information that satisfies the user’s request.4
Companies can gain valuable business knowledge by viewing the data accessed and ana­
lyzed from their website. Figure 6.11 displays how running queries or using analytical tools, 
such as a PivotTable, on the database that is attached to the website can offer insight into the 
business, such as items browsed, frequent requests, items bought together, and so on.
FIGURE 6.10
Zappos.com—a Data-Driven 
Website.
Source: Zappos.com
Search
query
Zappos Web Server
Results
Database
FIGURE 6.11
BI in a Data-Driven Website.
Source: Best Mobile
Web Page
Database
1
2
PivotTable
3

112  *  Unit 2  Exploring Business Intelligence
Integrating Information among Multiple 
Databases
Until the 1990s, each department in the United Kingdom’s Ministry of Defense (MOD) and 
army headquarters had its own systems, each system had its own database, and sharing infor­
mation among the departments was difficult. Manually inputting the same information mul­
tiple times into the different systems was also time consuming and inefficient. In many cases, 
management could not even compile the information it required to answer questions and make 
decisions.
The army solved the problem by integrating its systems, or building connections between 
its many databases. These integrations allow the army’s multiple systems to automatically 
communicate by passing information between the databases, eliminating the need for manual 
information entry into multiple systems because after entering the information once, the inte­
grations send the information immediately to all other databases. The integrations not only 
enable the different departments to share information but have also dramatically increased the 
quality of the information. The army can now generate reports detailing its state of readiness 
and other vital issues, nearly impossible tasks before building the integrations among the 
separate systems.
DATA INTEGRATION
An integration allows separate systems to communicate directly with each other, eliminating 
the need for manual entry into multiple systems. Similar to the UK’s army, an organization 
will probably maintain multiple systems, with each system having its own database. Without 
integrations, an organization will (1) spend considerable time entering the same information 
in multiple systems and (2) suffer from the low quality and inconsistency typically embedded 
in redundant information. While most integrations do not completely eliminate redundant 
information, they can ensure the consistency of it across multiple systems.
An organization can choose from two integration methods. The first is to create forward 
and backward integrations that link processes (and their underlying databases) in the value 
chain. A forward integration takes information entered into a given system and sends it 
automatically to all downstream systems and processes. A backward integration takes infor­
mation entered into a given system and sends it automatically to all upstream systems and 
processes.
Figure 6.12  demonstrates how this method works across the systems or processes of 
sales, order entry, order fulfillment, and billing. In the order entry system, for example, an 
employee can update the information for a customer. That information, via the integrations, 
would be sent upstream to the sales system and downstream to the order fulfillment and bill­
ing systems.
LO 6.5 Explain why an  
organization would want to  
integrate its databases.
FIGURE 6.12
A Forward and Backward 
Customer Information 
Integration Example.
Forward integration of
customer information
Backward integration of
customer information
PB0092
Craig Schultz
PB0092
Craig Schultz
PB0092
Craig Schultz
PB0092
Craig Schultz
Sales System
Order Entry
System
Order Fulﬁllment
System
Billing System

	
Chapter 6  Valuing and Storing Organizational Information—Databases    *  113
Ideally, an organization wants to build both forward and backward integrations, which pro­
vide the flexibility to create, update, and delete information in any of the systems. However, 
integrations are expensive and difficult to build and maintain and most organizations build 
only forward integrations (sales through billing in Figure 6.12). Building only forward inte­
grations implies that a change in the initial system (sales) will result in changes occurring in 
all the other systems. Integration of information is not possible for any changes occurring 
outside the initial system, which again can result in inconsistent organizational information. 
To address this issue, organizations can enforce business rules that all systems, other than the 
initial system, have read-only access to the integrated information. This will require users to 
change information in the initial system only, which will always trigger the integration and 
ensure that organizational information does not get out of sync.
The second integration method builds a central repository for a particular type of infor­
mation. Figure 6.13  provides an example of customer information integrated using this 
method across four different systems in an organization. Users can create, update, and delete 
customer information only in the central customer information database. As users perform 
these tasks on the central customer information database, integrations automatically send 
the new and/or updated customer information to the other systems. The other systems limit 
users to read-only access of the customer information stored in them. Again, this method 
does not eliminate redundancy—but it does ensure consistency of the information among 
multiple systems.
FIGURE 6.13
Integrating Customer 
Information among 
Databases.
Sales System
Order Entry
System
Order Fulﬁllment
System
Customer Information
System
Billing System
PB0092
Craig Schultz
PB0092
Craig Schultz
PB0092
Craig Schultz
PB0092
Craig Schultz
PB0092
Craig Schultz
	1.	 Categorize the five common characteristics of high-quality information and rank them in order of 
importance for big data.
	2.	  Explain how issues with low-quality information will impact big data. 
	3.	 Develop a list of some possible entities located in a database that tracks students and grades. 
	4.	 Develop a list of some possible attributes located in a database that tracks students and grades. 
O P E N I N G  C A S E  ST U DY  Q U E ST I O N S

114  *  Unit 2  Exploring Business Intelligence
In his presidential inauguration speech, President Barack Obama spoke a word rarely expressed—
data—referencing indicators of economic and other crises. It is not surprising that the word data 
was spoken in his inauguration speech because capturing and analyzing data has been crucial to 
Obama’s rise to power. Throughout Obama’s historic campaign he used the Internet not only for 
social networking and fund raising, but also to identify potential swing voters. Obama’s team carefully 
monitored contested states and congressional districts, because 1,000 to 2,000 voters could prove 
decisive—meaning the focus was on only a tiny fraction of the voting public. Both political parties 
hired technology wizards to help sift through the mountains of consumer and demographic details to 
recognize these important voters.
Ten “Tribes”
Spotlight Analysis, a Democratic consultancy, used political microtargeting to analyze neighborhood 
details, family sizes, and spending patterns to categorize every American of voting age—175 million of 
us—into 10 “values tribes.” Individual tribe members do not necessarily share the same race, religion, 
or income bracket, but they have common mind-sets about political issues: God, community, respon­
sibility, opportunity. Spotlight identified a particular morally guided (but not necessarily religious) tribe 
of some 14 million voters that it dubbed “Barn Raisers.” Barn Raisers comprise many races, religions, 
and ethnic groups and around 40 percent of Barn Raisers favor Democrats and 27 percent favor 
Republicans. Barn Raisers are slightly less likely to have a college education than Spotlight’s other 
swing groups. They are active in community organizations, are ambivalent about government, and 
care deeply about “playing by the rules” and “keeping promises,” to use Spotlight’s definitions. Spot­
light believed that the Barn Raisers held the key to the race between Obama and his Republican chal­
lenger, Arizona Senator John McCain.
Not typically seen outside of such corporate American icons as Google, Amazon, and eBay, political 
microtargeting, which depends on data, databases, and data analysis techniques, is turning political 
parties into sophisticated, intelligent, methodical machines. In nanoseconds, computers sort 175 million 
voters into segments and quickly calculate the potential that each individual voter has to swing from 
red or purple to blue or vice versa.
For some, political microtargeting signals the dehumanization of politics. For others, this type of 
sophisticated analysis is a highly efficient way of pinpointing potential voters. For example, analyzing 
a voter in Richmond, Virginia, traditionally simply identifies the number of school-age children, type of 
car, zip code, magazine subscriptions, and mortgage balance. But data crunching could even indicate 
if the voter has dogs or cats. (Cat owners lean slightly for Democrats, dog owners trend Republican.) 
After the analysis, the voter is placed into a political tribe, and analyzers can draw conclusions about 
the issues that matter to this particular voter. Is that so horrible?
Behavioral Grouping
For generations, governments lacked the means to study individual behaviors and simply placed all 
citizens into enormous groupings such as Hispanics, Jews, union members, hunters, soccer moms, 
etc. With the use of sophisticated databases and data analysis techniques, companies such as Spot­
light can group individuals based more on specific behavior and choices and less on the names, 
colors, and clans that mark us from birth.
When Spotlight first embarked on its research, the company interviewed thousands of voters the 
old-fashioned way. At first, the Barn Raisers did not seem significant and the tribe represented about 
9 percent of the electorate. However, when Spotlight’s analysts dug deeper, they discovered that 
Barn Raisers stood at the epicenter of America’s political swing. In 2004, 90 percent of them voted 
for President Bush, but then the group’s political leanings shifted, with 64 percent of them saying 
Chapter Six Case:  Political Microtargeting: What Data Crunchers 
Did for Obama

	
Chapter 6  Valuing and Storing Organizational Information—Databases    *  115
they voted for Democrats in the 2006 election. Spotlight surveys showed that political scandals, tax-
funded boondoggles like Alaska’s Bridge to Nowhere, and the botched job on Hurricane Katrina sent 
them packing.
Suddenly, Spotlight identified millions of potential swing voters. The challenge then became locat­
ing the swing voters by states. For this, the company analyzed the demographics and buying patterns 
of the Barn Raisers they surveyed personally. Then it began correlating data from the numerous com­
mercially available databases with matching profiles. By Spotlight’s count, this approach nailed Barn 
Raisers three times out of four. So Democrats could bet that at least three-quarters of them would be 
likely to welcome an appeal stressing honesty and fair play.
Still Swing Voters
It is still undetermined to what extent Spotlight’s strategy worked, and the company has not corre­
lated the Barn Raisers to their actual votes. However, it is reasonable to presume that amid that sea of 
humanity stretched out before Obama on Washington’s Mall on January 20, 2008, at least some were 
moved by microtargeted appeals. And if Obama and his team fail to honor their mathematically honed 
vows, the Barn Raisers may abandon them in droves. They are swing voters, after all.5
QUESTIONS
	1.	 Describe the difference between transactional and analytical information, and determine which 
of these types Spotlight used to identify its 10 tribes.
	2.	 Explain the importance of high-quality information for political microtargeting.
	3.	 Review the five common characteristics of high-quality information, and rank them in order of 
importance for political microtargeting.
	4.	 In terms of political microtargeting, explain the following sentence: It is never possible to have all 
of the information required to make a 100 percent accurate prediction.
	5.	 Do you agree that political microtargeting signals the dehumanization of politics?

116  *  Unit 2  Exploring Business Intelligence
6.1.	 Explain the four primary traits that determine the value of information. 
Information is data converted into a meaningful and useful context. Information can tell an organiza­
tion how its current operations are performing and help it estimate and strategize about how future 
operations might perform. It is important to understand the different levels, formats, and granulari­
ties of information along with the four primary traits that help determine the value of information, 
which include (1) information type: transactional and analytical; (2) information timeliness; (3) infor­
mation quality; and (4) information governance.
6.2.	Describe a database, a database management system, and the relational database 
model. 
A database maintains information about various types of objects (inventory), events (transactions), 
people (employees), and places (warehouses). A database management system (DBMS) creates, 
reads, updates, and deletes data in a database while controlling access and security. A DBMS pro­
vides methodologies for creating, updating, storing, and retrieving data in a database. In addition, a 
DBMS provides facilities for controlling data access and security, allowing data sharing and enforc­
ing data integrity. The relational database model allows users to create, read, update, and delete 
data in a relational database.
6.3.	Identify the business advantages of a relational database. 
Many business managers are familiar with Excel and other spreadsheet programs they can use to 
store business data. Although spreadsheets are excellent for supporting some data analysis, they 
offer limited functionality in terms of security, accessibility, and flexibility and can rarely scale to 
support business growth. From a business perspective, relational databases offer many advantages 
over using a text document or a spreadsheet, including increased flexibility, increased scalability 
and performance, reduced information redundancy, increased information integrity (quality), and 
increased information security.
6.4.	Explain the business benefits of a data-driven website. 
A data-driven website is an interactive website kept constantly updated and relevant to the needs 
of its customers using a database. Data-driven capabilities are especially useful when the website 
offers a great deal of information, products, or services because visitors are frequently annoyed if 
they are buried under an avalanche of information when searching a website. Many companies use 
the web to make some of the information in their internal databases available to customers and 
business partners.
6.5.	Explain why an organization would want to integrate its databases.
An integration allows separate systems to communicate directly with each other. An organization 
can choose from two integration methods. The first is to create forward and backward integrations 
that link processes (and their underlying databases) in the value chain. A forward integration takes 
information entered into a given system and sends it automatically to all downstream systems and 
processes. A backward integration takes information entered into a given system and sends it auto­
matically to all upstream systems and processes.
L E A R N I N G  O U T C O M E  R E V I E W

	
Chapter 6  Valuing and Storing Organizational Information—Databases    *  117
Determining Information Quality Issues
ID
First Name
Middle 
Initial
Last Name
Street
City
State
Zip 
Code
433
M
J
Jones
13 Denver
Denver
CO
87654
434
Margaret
J
Jones
13 First Ave.
Denver
CO
87654
434
Brian
F
Hoover
Lake Ave.
Columbus
OH
87654
435
Nick
H
Schweitzer
65 Apple Lane
San Francisco
OH
65664
436
Richard
A
567 55th St.
New York
CA
98763
437
Alana
B
Smith
121 Tenny Dr.
Buffalo
NY
142234
438
Trevor
D
Darrian
90 Fresrdestil
Dallas
TX
74532
1.	 Determining Information Quality Issues
Real People magazine is geared toward working individuals and provides articles and advice on 
everything from car maintenance to family planning. The magazine is currently experiencing prob­
lems with its distribution list. More than 30 percent of the magazines mailed are returned because 
of incorrect address information, and each month it receives numerous calls from angry customers 
complaining that they have not yet received their magazines. Below is a sample of Real People ’s 
customer information. Create a report detailing all the issues with the information, potential causes 
of the information issues, and solutions the company can follow to correct the situation.
M A K I N G  B U S I N E S S  D E C I S I O N S
	1.	How does a database turn data elements into information?
	2.	Why does a business need to be concerned with the quality of its data?
	3.	Why would a company care about the timeliness of its data?
	4.	What are the five characteristics common to high-quality information?
	5.	What is data governance and why is it important to a company?
	6.	What are the four primary traits that help determine the value of information?
	7.	What is the difference between an entity and an attribute?
	8.	What are the advantages of a relational database?
	9.	What are the advantages of a data-driven website?
R E V I E W  Q U E S T I O N S
2.	 Excel or Access?
Excel is a great tool with which to perform business analytics. Your friend, John Cross, owns a suc­
cessful publishing company specializing in Do It Yourself books. John started the business 10 years 
ago and it has slowly grown to 50 employees and $1 million in sales. John has been using Excel to 
run the majority of his business, tracking book orders, production orders, shipping orders, and bill­
ing. John even uses Excel to track employee payroll and vacation dates. To date, Excel has done the 
job, but as the company continues to grow, the tool is becoming inadequate. 

118  *  Unit 2  Exploring Business Intelligence
You believe John could benefit from moving from Excel to Access. John is skeptical of the change 
because Excel has done the job up to now, and his employees are comfortable with the current pro­
cesses and technology. John has asked you to prepare a presentation explaining the limitations of 
Excel and the benefits of Access. In a group, prepare the presentation that will help convince John to 
make the switch.
3.	 Improving Information Quality
HangUps Corporation designs and distributes closet organization structures. The company operates 
five different systems: order entry, sales, inventory management, shipping, and billing. The company 
has severe information quality issues including missing, inaccurate, redundant, and incomplete 
information. The company wants to implement a data warehouse containing information from the 
five different systems to help maintain a single customer view, drive business decisions, and perform 
multidimensional analysis. Identify how the organization can improve its information quality when it 
begins designing and building its data warehouse.
4.	 Information Timeliness
Information timeliness is a major consideration for all organizations. Organizations need to decide 
the frequency of backups and the frequency of updates to a data warehouse. In a team, describe the 
timeliness requirements for backups and updates to a data warehouse for
■	
Weather tracking systems.
■	
Car dealership inventories.
■	
Vehicle tire sales forecasts.
■	
Interest rates.
■	
Restaurant inventories.
■	
Grocery store inventories.
5.	 Entities and Attributes
Martex Inc. is a manufacturer of athletic equipment and its primary lines of business include running, 
tennis, golf, swimming, basketball, and aerobics equipment. Martex currently supplies four primary 
vendors including Sam’s Sports, Total Effort, The Underline, and Maximum Workout. Martex wants 
to build a database to help it organize its products. In a group, identify the different types of entity 
classes and the related attributes that Martex will want to consider when designing the database.
6.	 Integrating Information
You are currently working for the Public Transportation Department of Chatfield. The department 
controls all forms of public transportation including buses, subways, and trains. Each department has 
about 300 employees and maintains its own accounting, inventory, purchasing, and human resource 
systems. Generating reports across departments is a difficult task and usually involves gathering and 
correlating the information from the many different systems. It typically takes about two weeks to 
generate the quarterly balance sheets and profit and loss statements. Your team has been asked 
to compile a report recommending what the Public Transportation Department of Chatfield can do to 
alleviate its information and system issues. Be sure that your report addresses the various reasons 
departmental reports are presently difficult to obtain as well as how you plan to solve this problem.
7.	 Explaining Relational Databases
You have been hired by Vision, a start-up clothing company. Your manager, Holly Henningson, is 
unfamiliar with databases and their associated business value. Henningson has asked you to create 
a report detailing the basics of databases. She would also like you to provide a detailed explanation 
of relational databases along with their associated business advantages.

	
Chapter 7  Accessing ­Organizational Information—Data Warehouses  *  119
C H A P T E R  7
Accessing ­Organizational 
Information—Data 
Warehouses
LEARNING OUTCOMES
  7.1.	 Describe the roles and purposes of data warehouses 
and data marts in an organization.
  7.2.	Identify the advantages of using business intelligence 
to support managerial decision making.
Data Warehousing
Applebee’s Neighborhood Grill & Bar posts annual sales in excess of $3.2 billion and is 
actively using information from its data warehouse to increase sales and cut costs. The com­
pany gathers daily information for the previous day’s sales into its data warehouse from 
1,500 restaurants located in 49 states and seven countries. Understanding regional prefer­
ences, such as patrons in Texas preferring steaks more than patrons in New England, allows 
the company to meet its corporate strategy of being a neighborhood grill appealing to local 
tastes. The company has found tremendous value in its data warehouse by being able to make 
business decisions about customers’ regional needs. The company also uses data warehouse 
information to perform the following:
	■	 Base labor budgets on actual number of guests served per hour.
	■	 Develop promotional sale item analysis to help avoid losses from overstocking or under­
stocking inventory.
	■	 Determine theoretical and actual costs of food and the use of ingredients.
HISTORY OF THE DATA WAREHOUSE
In the 1990s as organizations began to need more timely information about their business, 
they found that traditional management information systems were too cumbersome to pro­
vide relevant information efficiently and effectively. Most of the systems were in the form of 
operational databases that were designed for specific business functions, such as accounting, 
order entry, customer service, and sales, and were not appropriate for business analysis for the 
reasons shown in Figure 7.1.
During the latter half of the 20th century, the numbers and types of operational databases 
increased. Many large businesses found themselves with information scattered across multiple 
systems with different file types (such as spreadsheets, databases, and even word processing 
files), making it almost impossible for anyone to use the information from multiple sources. 
Completing reporting requests across operational systems could take days or weeks using 
antiquated reporting tools that were ineffective for running a business. From this idea, the data 
warehouse was born as a place where relevant information could be stored and accessed for 
making strategic queries and reports.
A repository is a central location in which data is stored and managed. A data ­warehouse is 
a logical collection of information—gathered from many different operational databases—that 
supports business analysis activities and decision-making tasks. The primary purpose of a data 
warehouse is to combine information, more specifically, strategic information, throughout an 
LO 7.1 Describe the roles and 
purposes of data warehouses and 
data marts in an organization.

120  *  Unit 2  Exploring Business Intelligence
organization into a single repository in such a way that the people who need that information 
can make decisions and undertake business analysis. A key idea within data warehousing 
is to collect information from multiple systems in a common location that uses a universal 
querying tool. This allows operational databases to run where they are most efficient for the 
business, while providing a common location using a familiar format for the strategic or enter­
prisewide reporting information.
Data warehouses go even a step further by standardizing information. Gender, for instance 
can be referred to in many ways (Male, Female, M/F, 1/0), but it should be standardized on 
a data warehouse with one common way of referring to each data element that stores gender 
(M/F). Standardization of data elements allows for greater accuracy, completeness, and con­
sistency and increases the quality of the information in making strategic business decisions. 
The data warehouse then is simply a tool that enables business users, typically managers, to 
be more effective in many ways, including:
	■	 Developing customer profiles.
	■	 Identifying new-product opportunities.
	■	 Improving business operations.
	■	 Identifying financial issues.
	■	 Analyzing trends.
	■	 Understanding competitors.
	■	 Understanding product performance. (See Figure 7.2.) 
FIGURE 7.1
Reasons Business Analysis 
Is Difficult from Operational 
Databases.
Every department had its own method for recording
data so when trying to share information, data did
not match and users did not get the data they really
needed. 
Inconsistent
Data Deﬁnitions
Managers needed to perform cross-functional
analysis using data from all departments, which
diﬀered in granularities, formats, and levels.
Lack of Data
Standards
Users could not get the data they needed; what was
collected was not always useful for intended
purposes. 
Inadequate Data
Usefulness
Most data stored in operational databases did not
allow users direct access; users had to wait to have
their queries or questions answered by MIS
professionals who could code SQL.
Ineﬀective
Direct Data
Access 
The data, if available, were often incorrect or
incomplete. Therefore, users could not rely on the
data to make decisions.
Poor Data
Quality
FIGURE 7.2
Data Warehousing 
Components.
Data Mart
Information
Cleansing
Business
Intelligence

	
Chapter 7  Accessing ­Organizational Information—Data Warehouses  *  121
DATA MART
Data aggregation is the collection of data from various sources for the purpose of data pro­
cessing. One example of a data aggregation is to gather information about particular groups 
based on specific variables such as age, profession, or income. Businesses collect a tremen­
dous amount of transactional information as part of their routine operations. Marketing, sales, 
and other departments would like to analyze these data to understand their operations better. 
Although databases store the details of all transactions (for instance, the sale of a product) and 
events (hiring a new employee), data warehouses store that same information but in an aggre­
gated form more suited to supporting decision-making tasks. Aggregation, in this instance, 
can include totals, counts, averages, and the like.
The data warehouse modeled in Figure 7.3 compiles information from internal databases or 
transactional/operational databases and external databases through extraction, ­transformation, 
and loading (ETL), which is a process that extracts information from internal and external data­
bases, transforms the information using a common set of enterprise definitions, and loads the 
information into a data warehouse. The data warehouse then sends subsets of the information to 
data marts. A data mart contains a subset of data warehouse information. To distinguish between 
data warehouses and data marts, think of data warehouses as having a more organizational focus 
and data marts as having focused information subsets particular to the needs of a given business 
unit such as finance or production and operations. Figure 7.3 provides an illustration of a data 
warehouse and its relationship to internal and external databases, ETL, and data marts.
Lands’ End created an organization-wide data warehouse so all its employees could access 
organizational information. Lands’ End soon found out that there could be “too much of a 
good thing.” Many of its employees would not use the data warehouse because it was simply 
too big, was too complicated, and had too much irrelevant information. Lands’ End knew 
there was valuable information in its data warehouse, and it had to find a way for its employ­
ees to easily access the information. Data marts were the perfect solution to the company’s 
information overload problem. Once the employees began using the data marts, they were 
ecstatic at the wealth of information. Data marts were a huge success for Lands’ End.
FIGURE 7.3
Model of a Typical 
Data Warehouse.
Data Warehouse
Data Warehouse Model
Marketing
Sales
ETL
ETL
Inventory
Billing
Competitor
information
Industry
information
Mailing
lists
Stock market
analysis
Internal Databases
External Databases
Marketing
data
mart
Inventory
data
mart
Exploring
and
mining
• Marketing information
• Inventory information
• Sales information
• Billing information
• Competitor information
• Industry information
• Mailing list information
• Stock market analysis
ETL
ETL
ETL

122  *  Unit 2  Exploring Business Intelligence
INFORMATION CLEANSING (OR SCRUBBING)
Maintaining quality information in a data warehouse or data mart is extremely important. 
The Data Warehousing Institute estimates that low-quality information costs U.S. businesses 
$600 billion annually. That number may seem high, but it is not. If an organization is using 
a data warehouse or data mart to allocate dollars across advertising strategies, low-quality 
information will definitely have a negative impact on its ability to make the right decision.
Dirty data is erroneous or flawed data (see Figure 7.4). The complete removal of dirty data 
from a source is impractical or virtually impossible. According to Gartner Inc., dirty data is a 
business problem, not an MIS problem. Over the next two years, more than 25 percent of criti­
cal data in Fortune 1000 companies will continue to be flawed; that is, the information will be 
inaccurate, incomplete, or duplicated.
Obviously, maintaining quality information in a data warehouse or data mart is extremely 
important. To increase the quality of organizational information and thus the effectiveness of 
decision making, businesses must formulate a strategy to keep information clean. ­Information 
cleansing or scrubbing is a process that weeds out and fixes or discards inconsistent, incor­
rect, or incomplete information.
Specialized software tools exist that use sophisticated procedures to analyze, standardize, 
correct, match, and consolidate data warehouse information. This step is vitally important 
because data warehouses often contain information from several databases, some of which can 
be external to the organization. In a data warehouse, information cleansing occurs first dur­
ing the ETL process and again once the information is in the data warehouse. Companies can 
choose information cleansing software from several vendors, including Oracle, SAS, ­Ascential 
Software, and Group 1 Software. Ideally, scrubbed information is accurate and consistent.
Looking at customer information highlights why information cleansing is necessary. Cus­
tomer information exists in several operational systems. In each system, all the details could 
change—from the customer ID to contact information—depending on the business process 
the user is performing (see Figure 7.5).
Figure 7.6 displays a customer name entered differently in multiple operational systems. 
Information cleansing allows an organization to fix these types of inconsistencies and cleans 
the information in the data warehouse. Figure 7.7 displays the typical events that occur during 
information cleansing. 
Achieving perfect information is almost impossible. The more complete and accurate an 
organization wants its information to be, the more it costs (see Figure 7.8). The trade-off for 
perfect information lies in accuracy versus completeness. Accurate information means it is 
FIGURE 7.4
Dirty Data Problems.
Duplicate
Data
 
Inaccurate
Data
 
 
Non-
integrated
Data
 
Violates
Business
Rules
Data
 
Misleading
Data
 
Incorrect
Data
Non-
formatted
Data
 
DIRTY DATA

	
Chapter 7  Accessing ­Organizational Information—Data Warehouses  *  123
correct, while complete information means there are no blanks. A birth date of 2/31/10 is 
an example of complete but inaccurate information (February 31 does not exist). An address 
containing Denver, Colorado, without a zip code is an example of incomplete information that 
is accurate. For their information, most organizations determine a percentage high enough to 
make good decisions at a reasonable cost, such as 85 percent accurate and 65 percent complete.
FIGURE 7.5
Contact Information in 
Operational Systems.
Billing
Sales
Contact:  Paul Bauer 555-2211
Contact:  Don McCubbrey 555-3434
Contact:  Paul Bauer 555-2211
Contact:  Don McCubbrey 555-3434
Marketing
Customer Service
Contact:  Hans Hultgren 555-1211
Contact:  Anne Logan 555-1288
Contact:  Deborah Bridge 555-6543
The billing system has “accounts payable”
customer contact information.
The marketing and sales system has “decision maker” customer contact information.
The customer service system has the “product”
customer contact information.
FIGURE 7.6
Standardizing Customer 
Name from Operational 
Systems.
Customers:
JD0021
Jane Doe
BL0557
Bob Lake
JS0288
Judy Smith
PB0092
Pat Burton
Sales
Customers:
000980 
Burton, Tricia
002670
Smith, Judie
000466
Burton, Patricia
006777
Lake, RobertP.
Billing
Customers:
10622FA
Susan Brown
10472FB
Judie R Smithe
10772FA
Patti Burten
10922MC
Larry Trump
Customer Service
Customers:
10001
Jane Doe
10002
Robert P. Lake
10003
Judie R. Smith
10004
Patricia Burton
Customer Information
FIGURE 7.7
Information Cleansing 
Activities.
Cleansing
Missing records or attributes
Redundant records
Missing keys or other required data
Erroneous relationships
Inaccurate data

124  *  Unit 2  Exploring Business Intelligence
Business Intelligence
Many organizations today find it next to impossible to understand their own strengths and weak­
nesses, let alone their biggest competitors’, because the enormous volume of organizational data 
is inaccessible to all but the MIS department. A data point is an individual item on a graph or a 
chart. Organizational data includes far more than simple structured data elements in a database; 
the set of data also includes unstructured data such as voice mail, customer phone calls, text 
messages, video clips, along with numerous new forms of data, such as tweets from Twitter.
An early reference to business intelligence occurs in Sun Tzu’s book titled The Art of War. 
Sun Tzu claims that to succeed in war, one should have full knowledge of one’s own strengths 
and weaknesses and full knowledge of the enemy’s strengths and weaknesses. Lack of either 
one might result in defeat. A certain school of thought draws parallels between the challenges 
in business and those of war, specifically:
	■	 Collecting information.
	■	 Discerning patterns and meaning in the information.
	■	 Responding to the resultant information.
Before the start of the information age in the late 20th century, businesses sometimes 
collected information from non-automated sources. Businesses then lacked the computing 
resources to properly analyze the information and often made commercial decisions based 
primarily on intuition. A data broker is a business that collects personal information about 
consumers and sells that information to other organizations.
As businesses started automating more and more systems, more and more information 
became available. However, collection remained a challenge due to a lack of infrastructure 
for information exchange or to incompatibilities between systems. Reports sometimes took 
months to generate. Such reports allowed informed long-term strategic decision making. How­
ever, short-term tactical decision making continued to rely on intuition. In modern businesses, 
increasing standards, automation, and technologies have led to vast amounts of available 
information. Data warehouse technologies have set up repositories to store this information. 
Improved ETL has increased the speedy collecting of information. Business intelligence has 
now become the art of sifting through large amounts of data, extracting information, and turn­
ing that information into actionable knowledge.
A data lake is a storage repository that holds a vast amount of raw data in its original 
format until the business needs it. While a traditional data warehouse stores data in files or 
folders, a data lake uses a flat architecture to store data. Each data element in a data lake is 
assigned a unique identifier and tagged with a set of extended metadata tags. When a business 
question arises, the data lake can be queried for all of the relevant data providing a smaller 
data set that can then be analyzed to help answer the question.
LO 7.2 Identify the advantages  
of using business intelligence  
to support managerial  
decision making.
FIGURE 7.8
Accurate and Complete 
Information.
100% Completeness
100%
Accuracy
Complete but
with known
errors
Not very useful
May be a proto-
type only
Perfect
information
Pricey
Very incomplete
but accurate
Quality Management

	
Chapter 7  Accessing ­Organizational Information—Data Warehouses  *  125
THE PROBLEM: DATA RICH, INFORMATION POOR
An ideal business scenario would be as follows: As a business manager on his way to meet with a 
client reviews historical customer data, he realizes that the client’s ordering volume has substan­
tially decreased. As he drills down into the data, he notices the client had a support issue with a par­
ticular product. He quickly calls the support team to find out all of the information and learns that 
a replacement for the defective part can be shipped in 24 hours. In addition, he learns that the client 
has visited the website and requested information on a new product line. Armed with all this infor­
mation, the business manager is prepared for a productive meeting with his client. He now under­
stands the client’s needs and issues, and he can address new sales opportunities with confidence.
For many companies the above example is simply a pipe dream. Attempting to gather all of the 
client information would actually take hours or even days to compile. With so much data available, 
it is surprisingly hard for managers to get information, such as inventory levels, past order history, 
or shipping details. Source data identifies the primary location where data is collected. Source 
data can include invoices, spreadsheets, time-sheets, transactions, and electronic sources such as 
other databases. Managers send their information requests to the MIS department where a dedi­
cated person compiles the various reports. In some situations, responses can take days, by which 
time the information may be outdated and opportunities lost. Many organizations find themselves 
in the position of being data rich and information poor. Even in today’s electronic world, manag­
ers struggle with the challenge of turning their business data into business intelligence.
THE SOLUTION: BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE
Employee decisions are numerous and they include providing service information, offering 
new products, and supporting frustrated customers. A data set is an organized collection of 
data. A comparative analysis can compare two or more data sets to identify patterns and trends. 
Employees can base their decisions on data sets, experience, or knowledge and preferably a 
combination of all three. Business intelligence can provide managers with the ability to make 
better decisions. A few examples of how different industries use business intelligence include:
	■	 Airlines: Analyze popular vacation locations with current flight listings.
	■	 Banking: Understand customer credit card usage and nonpayment rates.
	■	 Health care: Compare the demographics of patients with critical illnesses.
	■	 Insurance: Predict claim amounts and medical coverage costs.
	■	 Law enforcement: Track crime patterns, locations, and criminal behavior.
	■	 Marketing: Analyze customer demographics.
	■	 Retail: Predict sales, inventory levels, and distribution.
	■	 Technology: Predict hardware failures.
Figure 7.9 displays how organizations using BI can find the cause to many issues and prob­
lems simply by asking “Why?” The process starts by analyzing a report such as sales amounts 
by quarter. Managers will drill down into the report looking for why sales are up or why sales 
are down. Once they understand why a certain location or product is experiencing an increase 
in sales, they can share the information in an effort to raise enterprisewide sales. Once they 
understand the cause for a decrease in sales, they can take effective action to resolve the issue. 
BI can help managers with competitive monitoring where a company keeps tabs of its com­
petitor’s activities on the web using software that automatically tracks all competitor website 
activities such as discounts and new products. Here are a few examples of how managers can 
use BI to answer tough business questions:
	■	 Where has the business been? Historical perspective offers important variables for deter­
mining trends and patterns.
	■	 Where is the business now? Looking at the current business situation allows managers to 
take effective action to solve issues before they grow out of control.
	■	 Where is the business going? Setting strategic direction is critical for planning and creat­
ing solid business strategies.

126  *  Unit 2  Exploring Business Intelligence
Ask a simple question—such as who is my best customer or what is my worst-selling prod­
uct—and you might get as many answers as you have employees. Databases, data warehouses, 
and data marts can provide a single source of “trusted” data that can answer questions about 
customers, products, suppliers, production, finances, fraud, and even employees. A data map 
is a technique for establishing a match, or balance, between the source data and the target data 
warehouse. This technique identifies data shortfalls and recognizes data issues. They can also 
alert managers to inconsistencies or help determine the cause and effects of enterprisewide 
business decisions.
All business aspects can benefit from the added insights provided by business intelligence, 
and you, as a business student, will benefit from understanding how MIS can help you make 
data-driven decisions. Data-driven decision management is an approach to business gov­
ernance that values decisions that can be backed up with verifiable data. The success of the 
data-driven approach is reliant upon the quality of the data gathered and the effectiveness of 
its analysis and interpretation.
In the early days of computing, it usually took a specialist with a strong background in 
technology to mine data for information because it was necessary for that person to under­
stand how databases and data warehouses worked. Today, business intelligence tools often 
require very little, if any, support from the MIS department. Business managers can customize 
dashboards to display the data they want to see and run custom reports on the fly. The changes 
in how data can be mined and visualized allows business executives who have no technology 
backgrounds to be able to work with analytics tools and make data-driven decisions.
Data-driven decision management is usually undertaken as a way to gain a competitive 
advantage. A study from the MIT Center for Digital Business found that organizations driven 
most by data-based decision making had 4% higher productivity rates and 6% higher profits. 
However, integrating massive amounts of information from different areas of the business and 
combining it to derive actionable data in real time can be easier said than done. Errors can 
creep into data analytics processes at any stage of the endeavor, and serious issues can result 
when they do.
FIGURE 7.9
How BI Can Answer Tough 
Customer Questions.
Why are sales below target?
Why did we sell less in the West?
Why did X sales drop?
Why did customer
complaints increase?
Because we sold less
in the Western region.
Because sales of product X
dropped.
Because customer
complaints increased.
Because late deliveries went up
60 percent.
Answer
Question
	1.	 Explain how a data warehouse stores enterprisewide data.
	2.	 List the different types of dirty data and why it is important to cleanse data.
	3.	 Describe how the marketing department could use a data mart that includes external and internal 
data to help analyze sales patterns.
O P E N I N G  C A S E  ST U DY  Q U E ST I O N S

	
Chapter 7  Accessing ­Organizational Information—Data Warehouses  *  127
Zillow.com is an online, web-based real estate site helping homeowners, buyers, sellers, renters, 
real estate agents, mortgage professionals, property owners, and property managers find and 
share information about real estate and mortgages. Zillow allows users to access, anonymously 
and free of charge, the kinds of tools and information previously reserved for real estate profes­
sionals. ­Zillow’s databases cover more than 90 million homes, which represents 95 percent of the 
homes in the United States. Adding to the sheer size of its databases, Zillow recalculates home 
valuations for each property every day, so it can provide historical graphs on home valuations over 
time. In some areas, Zillow is able to display 10 years of valuation history, a value-added benefit for 
many of its customers. This collection of data represents an operational data warehouse for anyone 
visiting the website.
As soon as Zillow launched its website, it immediately generated a massive amount of traffic. As 
the company expanded its services, the founders knew the key to its success would be the site’s 
ability to process and manage massive amounts of data quickly, in real time. The company identi­
fied a need for accessible, scalable, reliable, secure databases that would enable it to continue to 
increase the capacity of its infrastructure indefinitely without sacrificing performance. Zillow’s traffic 
continues to grow despite the weakened real estate market; the company is experiencing annual 
traffic growth of 30 percent, and about a third of all U.S. mortgage professionals visit the site in 
a given month.
Business Intelligence
Zestimate values on Zillow use data-mining features for spotting trends across property valuations. 
Data mining also allows the company to see how accurate Zestimate values are over time. Zillow has 
also built the industry’s first search by monthly payment, allowing users to find homes that are for sale 
and rent based on a monthly payment they can afford. Along with the monthly payment search, users 
can also enter search criteria such as the number of bedrooms or bathrooms.
Zillow also launched a new service aimed at changing the way Americans shop for mortgages. 
Borrowers can use Zillow’s new Mortgage Marketplace to get custom loan quotes from lenders 
without having to give their names, addresses, phone numbers, or Social Security numbers, or field 
unwanted telephone calls from brokers competing for their business. Borrowers reveal their identities 
only after contacting the lender of their choice. The company is entering a field of established mort­
gage sites such as LendingTree.com and Experian Group’s Lowermybills.com, which charge mortgage 
companies for borrower information. Zillow, which has an advertising model, says it does not plan 
to charge for leads.
For mortgage companies, the anonymous leads come free; they can make a bid based on 
information provided by the borrower, such as salary, assets, credit score, and the type of loan. 
Lenders can browse borrower requests and see competing quotes from other brokers before mak­
ing a bid.1
Questions
	1.	 What is the source data for Zillow?
	2.	 Describe how Zillow uses business intelligence to create a unique product for its customers.
	3.	 Why would a person searching Zillow want to use a data mart?
	4.	 Why would Zillow use a data lake?
	5.	 Explain dirty data and its impact on a business.
	6.	 What would happen to Zillow if it experienced dirty data?
Chapter Seven Case:  Zillow

128  *  Unit 2  Exploring Business Intelligence
7.1.	 Describe the roles and purposes of data warehouses and data marts in an 
organization.
A data warehouse is a logical collection of information, gathered from many different operational 
databases, that supports business analysis and decision making. The primary value of a data ware­
house is to combine information, more specifically, strategic information, throughout an organization 
into a single repository in such a way that the people who need that information can make decisions 
and undertake business analysis.
7.2.	Identify the advantages of using business intelligence to support managerial 
decision making.
Many organizations today find it next to impossible to understand their own strengths and weak­
nesses, let alone their biggest competitors’, due to enormous volumes of organizational data being 
inaccessible to all but the MIS department. Organizational data includes far more than simple struc­
tured data elements in a database; the set of data also includes unstructured data such as voice 
mail, customer phone calls, text messages, video clips, along with numerous new forms of data, 
such as tweets from Twitter. Managers today find themselves in the position of being data rich and 
information poor, and they need to implement business intelligence systems to solve this challenge.
L E A R N I N G  O U T C O M E  R E V I E W
R E V I E W  Q U E S T I O N S
	1.	 What is a data warehouse and why would a business want to implement one?
	2.	 How does ETL help transfer data in and out of the data warehouse?
	3.	 What is the purpose of information cleansing (or scrubbing)?
	4.	 What are the causes of dirty data?
	5.	 What is business intelligence and how can it help a company achieve success?
	6.	 What is the difference between business intelligence and data?
	7.	 Why would a marketing department want a data mart instead of just accessing the entire 
data warehouse?
	8.	 Why would a business be data rich but information poor?

	
Chapter 7  Accessing ­Organizational Information—Data Warehouses  *  129
1.	 Gathering Business Intelligence
When considering new business opportunities, you need knowledge about the competition. One 
of the things many new business owners fail to do is to gather business intelligence on their 
­competitors, such as how many there are and what differentiates each of them. You may find there 
are too many and that they would be tough competition for you. Or, you may find that there are 
few competitors and the ones who are out there offer very little value.
Generate a new business idea you could launch on the Internet. Research the Internet to find 
similar businesses in the area you have chosen. How many sites did you find that are offering the 
same products or services you are planning to offer? Did you come across any sites from another 
country that have a unique approach that you did not see on any of the sites in your own country? 
How would you use this information in pursuing your business idea?
2.	 Information—Business Intelligence or a Diversion from the Truth?
President Obama used part of his commencement address at Virginia’s Hampton University to 
­criticize the flood of incomplete information or downright incorrect information that flows in the 
24-hour news cycle. The president said, “You’re coming of age in a 24/7 media environment 
that bombards us with all kinds of content and exposes us to all kinds of arguments, some of 
which don’t always rank all that high on the truth meter. With iPods and iPads and Xboxes and 
­PlayStations—none of which I know how to work—information becomes a distraction, a diversion, a 
form of entertainment, rather than a tool of empowerment, rather than the means of emancipation.”
Do you agree or disagree with President Obama’s statement? Who is responsible for verifying the 
accuracy of online information? What should happen to companies that post inaccurate information? 
What should happen to individuals who post inaccurate information? What should you remember 
when reading or citing sources for online information?
3.	 Google Books
Google is scanning all or parts of the book collections of the University of Michigan, Harvard 
­University, Stanford University, the New York Public Library, and Oxford University as part of its 
Google Print Library Project. It intends to make those texts searchable on Google. The Authors 
Guild filed a ­lawsuit against Google, alleging that its scanning and digitizing of library books 
­constitutes a “massive” ­copyright infringement. Do you view Google’s Print Library Project as a 
violation of copyright laws? If you were a publisher, how would you feel about Google’s project? 
If you were an author, how would you feel about having your book posted for free on Google 
Books? What do you think the future of the book publishing industry will look like based on 
Google’s radical new Google Book’s website?
4.	 That Is Not My Mother in the Casket
Information—you simply can’t put a value on having the right (or the cost of having the wrong) 
­information. Just look at the mistake made at the Crib Point cemetery in Victoria, Australia, when 
they were burying Mrs. Ryan, an 85-year-old woman with almost 70 children, grandchildren, and 
great-grandchildren attending her funeral. The bereaved family of Mrs. Ryan was shocked to lift the 
lid of her coffin during the funeral to discover another woman lying in her clothes and jewelry. Where 
was the body of Mrs. Ryan? Mrs. Ryan had been buried earlier that day in the other woman’s clothes, 
jewelry, and plot. What type of information blunder could possibly occur to allow someone to be 
buried in the wrong clothes, coffin, and plot? What could the cemetery do to ensure its customers 
are buried in the correct places? Why is the quality of information important to any business? What 
issues can occur when a business uses low-quality information to make decisions?
M A K I N G  B U S I N E S S  D E C I S I O N S

130  *  Unit 2  Exploring Business Intelligence
5.	 Data Storage
Information is one of the most important assets of any business. Businesses must ensure information 
accuracy, completeness, consistency, timeliness, and uniqueness. In addition, business must have 
a reliable backup service. In part thanks to cloud computing, there are many data storage services 
on the Internet. These sites offer storage of information that can be accessed from anywhere in the 
world. These data storage services include Google Docs, Box, and DropBox to name a few.
Visit a few of these sites along with several others you find through research. Which sites are 
free? Are there limits to how much you can store? If so, what is the limit? What type of information 
can you store (video, text, photos, etc.)? Can you allow multiple users with different passwords to 
access your storage area? Are you contractually bound for a certain duration (annual, etc.)? Does 
it make good business sense to store business data on the Internet? What about personal data?
6.	 Sorry, I Didn’t Mean to Post Your Social Security Number on the Internet
Programming 101 teaches all students that security is the crucial part of any system. You must secure 
your data! It appears that some people working for the State of Oklahoma forgot this ­important lesson 
when tens of thousands of Oklahoma residents had their sensitive data—including numbers—posted 
on the Internet for the general public to access. You have probably heard this type of report before, 
but have you heard that the error went unnoticed for three years? A programmer reported the prob­
lem, explaining how he could easily change the page his browser was pointing to and grab the entire 
database for the State of Oklahoma. Also, because of the programming, malicious users could easily 
tamper with the database by changing data or adding fictitious data. If you are still thinking that isn’t 
such a big deal, it gets worse. The website also posted the Sexual and Violent Offender Registry. Yes, 
the Department of Corrections employee data were also available for the general public to review.
In a group, discuss the following:
■	
Why is it important to secure data?
■	
What can happen if someone accesses your customer database?
■	
What could happen if someone changes the information in your customer database and adds 
fictitious data?
■	
Who should be held responsible for the State of Oklahoma data breech?
■	
What are the business risks associated with database security?

	
Chapter 8  Understanding Big Data  and Its Impact on Business  *  131
C H A P T E R  8
Understanding Big Data 
and Its Impact on Business
LEARNING OUTCOMES
  8.1.	 Identify the four common characteristics of big data.
  8.2.	Explain data mining and identify the three elements of 
data mining.
  8.3.	Explain the importance of data analytics and data 
visualization.
The Power of Big Data
Big data is a collection of large, complex data sets, including structured and unstructured 
data, which cannot be analyzed using traditional database methods and tools. Big data 
came into fruition primary due to the last 50 years of technology evolution. Revolutionary 
technological advances in software, hardware, storage, networking, and computing models 
have transformed the data landscape, making new opportunities for data collection pos­
sible. Big data is one of the latest trends emerging from the convergence of technological 
factors. For example, cell phones generate tremendous amounts of data and much of it is 
available for use with analytical applications. Big data includes data sources that include 
extremely large volumes of data, with high velocity, wide variety, and an understanding of 
the data veracity. The four common characteristics of big data are detailed in Figure 8.1 
and Figure 8.2.
The move to big data combines business with science, research, and government activ­
ities. A company can now analyze petabytes of data for patterns, trends, and anomalies 
gaining insights into data in new and exciting ways. A petabyte of data is equivalent to 
20 million four-drawer file cabinets filled with text files or 13 years of HDTV content. Big 
data requires sophisticated tools to analyze all of the structured and unstructured data from 
millions of customers, devices, and machine interactions (see Figure 8.3). The two primary 
computing models that have shaped the collection of big data include distributed computing 
and vitalization.
DISTRIBUTED COMPUTING
Distributed computing processes and manages algorithms across many machines in a 
computing environment (see Figure 8.4). A key component of big data is a distributed 
computing environment that shares resources ranging from memory to networks to stor­
age. With distributed computing individual computers are networked together across geo­
graphical areas and work together to execute a workload or computing processes as if they 
were one single computing environment. For example, you can distribute a set of programs 
on the same physical server and use a message service to allow them to communicate and 
pass information. You can also have a distributed computing environment where many dif­
ferent systems or servers, each with its own computing memory, work together to solve a 
common problem.
LO 8.1 Identify the four common 
characteristics of big data.

132  *  Unit 2  Exploring Business Intelligence
FIGURE 8.1
Four Common 
Characteristics of Big Data.
VARIETY
VERACITY
VOLUME
VELOCITY
Diﬀerent forms of structured and unstructured 
data
Data from spreadsheets and databases as well
as from email, videos, photos, and PDFs, all of
which must be analyzed
The uncertainty of data, including biases, noise,
and abnormalities
The scale of data
Includes enormous volumes of data
generated daily
Massive volume created by machines and
networks
Big data tools necessary to analyze zettabytes and
brontobytes
The analysis of streaming data as it travels
around the Internet
Analysis necessary of social media messages
spreading globally
Uncertainty or untrustworthiness of data
Data must be meaningful to the problem
being analyzed
Must keep data clean and implement
processes to keep dirty data from accumulating
in systems
FIGURE 8.2
Four V’s of Big Data.
Big Data Will Create 4.4 Million Global MIS Jobs
VOLUME
Scale of Data
VELOCITY
Analysis of Streaming Data
VERACITY
Uncertainty of Data
VARIETY
Diﬀerent Forms of Data
•  40 Zettabytes of Data Created by 2020
•  2.5 Quintillion Bytes of Data Created
    Daily (10 Million Blue-Rays)
•  100 Terabytes of Data per Company
•  6 Billion Cell Phones Creating Data
•  90 Percent of Data has been Created
    Daily (10 Million Blue-Rays)
•  Every Minute We Create 72 Hours of
    You Tube Video, 200,000 Instagram
    Posts, 205 Million Emails
•  100 Sensors in Every Connetced Cars
•  19 Billion Network Connections
•  90 Percent of Data Created is
    Unstructured
•  400 Million Wireless Monitors
•  4 Billion Hours of Video Created
•  400 Million Tweets
•  30 Billion Pieces of Content Shared on
    Facebook Monthly
•  1 in 3 Business Leaders Do Not Trust
    Data to Make Decisions
•  $3.1 Trillion in Poor Data Costs per Year
Copyright © IBM Used with permission.

	
Chapter 8  Understanding Big Data and Its Impact on Business   *  133
VIRTUALIZATION
Virtualization is the creation of a virtual (rather than actual) version of computing resources, 
such as an operating system, a server, a storage device, or network resources (see Figure 8.5). 
With big data it is now possible to virtualize data so that it can be stored efficiently and 
cost-effectively. Improvements in network speed and network reliability have removed the 
physical limitations of being able to manage massive amounts of data at an acceptable pace. 
The decrease in price of storage and computer memory allow companies to leverage data that 
would have been inconceivable to collect only 10 years ago.
ANALYZING BIG DATA
With the onset of big data, organizations are collecting more data than ever. Historically, 
data were housed in functional systems that were not integrated, such as customer service, 
finance, and human resources. Today companies can gather all of the functional data together 
by the petabyte, but finding a way to analyze the data is incredibly challenging. Figure 8.6 
displays the three focus areas business are using to dissect, analyze, and understand organi­
zational data.
Structured Data
Unstructured Data
Sensor Data
Satellite Images
Weblog Data
Photographic Data
Financial Data
Video Data
Click-stream Data
Social Media Data
Point of Sale Data
Text Messages
Accounting Data
Voice Mail Data
FIGURE 8.3
Structured and Unstructured 
Data Examples.
FIGURE 8.4
Distributed Computing 
Environment.
Internet
Server
Server
Server
Distributed
Computing
Environment

134  *  Unit 2  Exploring Business Intelligence
Data Mining
Reports piled on a manager’s desk provide summaries of past business activities and stock 
market data. Unfortunately, these reports don’t offer much insight into why these things 
are happening or what might happen over the next few months. Data mining to the rescue! 
Data mining is the process of analyzing data to extract information not offered by the raw 
data alone. Data mining can also begin at a summary information level (coarse granularity) 
LO 8.2 Explain data mining  
and identify the three elements  
of data mining.
FIGURE 8.6
Business Focus Areas 
of Big Data.
Data Visualization
Data Analysis
Data Mining
FIGURE 8.5
Virtualization Example.
Application
Traditional Computing
Environment
Virtualized Computing
Environment
Application
Application
Application
Application
Application
Operating System
Operating System
Application
Server
Server

	
Chapter 8  Understanding Big Data and Its Impact on Business   *  135
and progress through increasing levels of detail (drilling down) or the reverse (drilling up). 
Companies use data-mining techniques to compile a complete picture of their operations, all 
within a single view, allowing them to identify trends and improve forecasts. The three ele­
ments of data mining include:
	1.	 Data: Foundation for data-directed decision making.
	2.	 Discovery: Process of identifying new patterns, trends, and insights.
	3.	 Deployment: Process of implementing discoveries to drive success.
One retailer discovered that loyalty program customers spent more over time and it stra­
tegically invested in specific marketing campaigns focusing on these high spenders, thereby 
maximizing revenue and reducing marketing costs. One manufacturer discovered a sequence 
of events that preceded accidental releases of toxic chemicals, allowing the factory to remain 
operational while it prevented dangerous accidents. One insurance company discovered that 
one of its offices was able to process certain common claim types more quickly than others of 
comparable size. Armed with this valuable information the company mimicked this office’s 
best practices across its entire organization, improving customer service.
DATA-MINING PROCESS MODEL
Data mining is a continuous process or cycle of activity where you continually revisit the 
problems with new projects. This allows past models to be effectively reused to look for 
new opportunities in the present and future. Data mining allows users to recycle their work 
to become more effective and efficient on solving future problems. It is similar to creating a 
household budget and reusing the same basic budget year after year even though expenses 
and income change. There are six primary phases in the data-mining process, outlined in 
Figure 8.7 and detailed in Figure 8.8.
DATA-MINING ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES
Data profiling is the process of collecting statistics and information about data in an existing 
source. Insights extracted from data profiling can determine how easy or difficult it will be to use 
existing data for other purposes along with providing metrics on data quality. Data replication 
is the process of sharing information to ensure consistency between multiple data sources. 
FIGURE 8.7
Data-Mining Process 
Model Overview.
Data
3. Data
Preparation
2. Data
Understanding
1. Business
Understanding
4. Data Modeling
5. Evaluation
6. Deployment

136  *  Unit 2  Exploring Business Intelligence
Data mining can determine relationships among such internal factors as price, product posi­
tioning, or staff skills, and external factors such as economic indicators, competition, and cus­
tomer demographics. In addition, it can determine the impact on sales, customer satisfaction, 
and corporate profits and drill down into summary information to view detailed transactional 
data. With data mining, a retailer could use point-of-sale records of customer purchases to 
send targeted promotions based on an individual’s purchase history. By mining demographic 
data from comment or warranty cards, the retailer could develop products and promotions to 
appeal to specific customer segments.
A recommendation engine is a data-mining algorithm that analyzes a customer’s pur­
chases and actions on a website and then uses the data to recommend complementary prod­
ucts. Netflix uses a recommendation engine to analyze each customer’s film-viewing habits 
to provide recommendations for other customers with Cinematch, its movie recommendation 
system. Using Cinematch, Netflix can present customers with a number of additional movies 
they might want to watch based on the customer’s current preferences. Netflix’s innovative 
use of data mining provides its competitive advantage in the movie rental industry. Figure 8.9 
displays the common data-mining techniques used to perform advanced analytics such as 
Netflix’s Cinematch.
Estimation Analysis
An estimation analysis determines values for an unknown continuous variable behavior or 
estimated future value. Estimation models predict numeric outcomes based on historical 
data. For example, the percentage of high school students that will graduate based on stu­
dent-teacher ratio or income levels. An estimate is similar to a guess and is one of the least 
expensive modeling techniques. Many organizations use estimation analysis to determine the 
Phase
Definition
Activities
1
Business Understanding
Gain a clear understanding of 
the business problem that must 
be solved and how it impacts 
the company
	■	 Identify business goals
	■	 Situation assessment
	■	 Define data-mining goals
	■	 Create project plan
2
Data Understanding
Analysis of all current data along 
with identifying any data quality 
issues
	■	 Gather data
	■	 Describe data
	■	 Explore data
	■	 Verify data quality
3
Data Preparation
Gather and organize the data in 
the correct formats and structures 
for analysis
	■	 Select data
	■	 Cleanse data
	■	 Integrate data
	■	 Format data
4
Data Modeling
Apply mathematical techniques 
to identify trends and patterns in 
the data
	■	 Select modeling technique
	■	 Design tests
	■	 Build models
5
Evaluation
Analyze the trends and patterns 
to assess the potential for solving 
the business problem
	■	 Evaluate results
	■	 Review process
	■	 Determine next steps
6
Deployment
Deploy the discoveries to the 
organization for work in everyday 
business
	■	 Plan deployment
	■	 Monitor deployment
	■	 Analyze results
	■	 Review final reports
FIGURE 8.8
Data-Mining Process 
Model Activities

	
Chapter 8  Understanding Big Data and Its Impact on Business   *  137
overall costs of a project from start to completion or estimates on the profits from introducing 
a new product line.
Affinity Grouping Analysis
Affinity grouping analysis reveals the relationship between variables along with the nature 
and frequency of the relationships. Many people refer to affinity grouping algorithms as asso­
ciation rule generators because they create rules to determine the likelihood of events occur­
ring together at a particular time or following each other in a logical progression. Percentages 
usually reflect the patterns of these events, for example, “55 percent of the time, events A and 
B occurred together” or “80 percent of the time that items A and B occurred together, they 
were followed by item C within three days.”
One of the most common forms of association detection analysis is market basket analysis. 
Market basket analysis evaluates such items as websites and checkout scanner information to 
detect customers’ buying behavior and predict future behavior by identifying affinities among 
customers’ choices of products and services (see Figure 8.10). Market basket analysis is fre­
quently used to develop marketing campaigns for cross-selling products and services (espe­
cially in banking, insurance, and finance) and for inventory control, shelf-product placement, 
and other retail and marketing applications.
Cluster Analysis
Cluster analysis is a technique used to divide an information set into mutually exclusive 
groups such that the members of each group are as close together as possible to one another 
and the different groups are as far apart as possible. Cluster analysis identifies similari­
ties and differences among data sets allowing similar data sets to be clustered together. A 
customer database includes attributes such as name and address, demographic information 
such as gender and age, and financial attributes such as income and revenue spent. A cluster 
analysis groups similar attributes together to discover segments or clusters, and then exam­
ine the attributes and values that define the clusters or segments. Marketing managers can 
drive promotion strategies that target the specific group identified by the cluster analysis 
(see Figure 8.11).
A great example of using cluster analysis in business is to create target-marketing strat­
egies based on zip codes. Evaluating customer segments by zip code allows a business to 
FIGURE 8.9
Data-Mining Techniques.
Estimation Analysis
Determines values for an unknown continuous
variable behavior or estimated future value.
Aﬃnity Grouping Analysis
Reveals the relationship between variables
along with the nature and frequency
of the relationships.
Cluster Analysis
A technique used to divide an information
set into mutually exclusive groups such that
the members of each group are as close
together as possible to one another and
the diﬀerent groups are as far apart
as possible.
Classiﬁcation Analysis
The process of organizing data into
categories or groups for its most
eﬀective and eﬃcient use.

138  *  Unit 2  Exploring Business Intelligence
assign a level of importance to each segment. Zip codes offer valuable insight into such things 
as income levels, demographics, lifestyles, and spending habits. With target marketing, a busi­
ness can decrease its costs while increasing the success rate of the marketing campaign.
Classification Analysis
Classification analysis is the process of organizing data into categories or groups for its most 
effective and efficient use. For example, groups of political affiliation and charity donors. The 
primary goal of a classification analysis is not to explore data to find interesting segments, but 
FIGURE 8.11
Example of Cluster Analysis.
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
FIGURE 8.10
Market Basket Analysis 
Example.
© Purestock/Superstock

	
Chapter 8  Understanding Big Data and Its Impact on Business   *  139
to decide the best way to classify records. It is important to note that classification analysis 
is similar to cluster analysis because it segments data into distinct segments called classes; 
however, unlike cluster analysis, a classification analysis requires that all classes are defined 
before the analysis begins. For example, in a classification analysis the analyst defines two 
classes: (1) a class for customers who default on a loan; (2) a class for customers who did not 
default on a loan. Cluster analysis is exploratory analysis and classification analysis is much 
less exploratory and more grouping. (See Figure 8.12.)
DATA MINING MODELING TECHNIQUES FOR PREDICTIONS
To perform data mining, users need data-mining tools. Data mining tools use a variety of 
techniques to find patterns and relationships in large volumes of information that predict 
future behavior and guide decision making. Data mining uncovers trends and patterns, which 
analysts use to build models that, when exposed to new information sets, perform a variety 
of information analysis functions. Data-mining tools for data warehouses help users uncover 
business intelligence in their data. Data mining uncovers patterns and trends for business 
analysis such as:
	■	 Analyzing customer buying patterns to predict future marketing and promotion campaigns.
	■	 Building budgets and other financial information.
	■	 Detecting fraud by identifying deceptive spending patterns.
	■	 Finding the best customers who spend the most money.
	■	 Keeping customers from leaving or migrating to competitors.
	■	 Promoting and hiring employees to ensure success for both the company and the individual.
A prediction is a statement about what will happen or might happen in the future, for 
example, predicting future sales or employee turnover. Figure 8.13 displays the three common 
data-mining techniques for predictions. Please note the primary difference between forecasts 
FIGURE 8.12
Classification Analysis 
Example.
CREDIT
SCRORE
STUDENT
YES
NO
YES
NO
Young
Old
AGE
CR
SCR
CRE
RO
REDIT
ORE
RE
O
CR
R
CREDIT
SCRORE
DE
STUDENT
STUDENT
NOO
YES
YES
YES
ES
ES
YES
NO
NOO
YES
YES
YES
ES
ES
YES
NO
Young
Old

140  *  Unit 2  Exploring Business Intelligence
FIGURE 8.14
A Cube of Information 
for Performing a 
Multidimensional Analysis 
on Three Different Stores, 
for Five Different Products, 
and Four Different 
Promotions.
Promo I
Product A
Store 1
Store 2
Store 3
Cube a
Product B
Product C
Product D
Product E
Promo II
Promo III
Promo IV
Promo I
Product A
Store 1
Store 2
Store 3
Cube b
Product B
Product C
Product D
Product E
Promo II
Promo III
Promo IV
Promo I
Product A
Store 1
Store 2
Store 3
Cube c
Product B
Product C
Product D
Product E
Promo II
Promo III
Promo IV
Prediction Model
Definition
Example
Optimization Model
A statistical process that finds the way to make a design, 
system, or decision as effective as possible, for example, 
finding the values of controllable variables that determine 
maximal productivity or minimal waste.
	■	 Determine which products to produce given 
a limited amount of ingredients
	■	 Choose a combination of projects to maximize 
overall earnings
Forecasting Model
Time-series information is time-stamped information 
collected at a particular frequency. Forecasts are predictions 
based on time-series information allowing users to 
manipulate the time series for forecasting activities.
	■	 Web visits per hour
	■	 Sales per month
	■	 Customer service calls per day
Regression Model
A statistical process for estimating the relationships among 
variables. Regression models include many techniques for 
modeling and analyzing several variables when the focus is 
on the relationship between a dependent variable and one 
or more independent variables.
	■	 Predict the winners of a marathon based 
on gender, height, weight, hours of training
	■	 Explain how the quantity of weekly sales of 
a popular brand of beer depends on its price 
at a small chain of supermarkets
FIGURE 8.13
Data Mining Modeling 
Techniques for Predictions.
and predictions. All forecasts are predictions, but not all predictions are forecasts. For exam­
ple, when you would use regression to explain the relationship between two variables this is a 
prediction but not a forecast.
Data Analysis
A relational database contains information in a series of two-dimensional tables. With big data 
information is multidimensional, meaning it contains layers of columns and rows. A dimen­
sion is a particular attribute of information. Each layer in big data represents information 
according to an additional dimension. A cube is the common term for the representation of 
multidimensional information. Figure 8.14 displays a cube (cube a) that represents store infor­
mation (the layers), product information (the rows), and promotion information (the columns).
Once a cube of information is created, users can begin to slice and dice the cube to drill 
down into the information. The second cube (cube b) in Figure 8.14 displays a slice rep­
resenting promotion II information for all products, at all stores. The third cube (cube c) 
in Figure 8.14 displays only information for promotion III, product B, at store 2. By using 
multidimensional analysis, users can analyze information in a number of different ways and 
with any number of different dimensions. For example, users might want to add dimensions 
of information to a current analysis including product category, region, and even forecasts for 
LO 8.3 Explain the importance 
of data analytics and data 
visualization.

	
Chapter 8  Understanding Big Data and Its Impact on Business   *  141
actual weather. The true value of big data is its ability to provide multidimensional analysis 
that allows users to gain insights into their information.
Big data is ideal for off-loading some of the querying against a database. For example, 
querying a database to obtain an average of sales for product B at store 2 while promotion III 
is under way might create a considerable processing burden for a database, essentially slow­
ing down the time it takes another person to enter a new sale into the same database. If an 
organization performs numerous queries against a database (or multiple databases), aggregat­
ing that information into big data databases could be beneficial.
ADVANCED DATA ANALYTICS
Algorithms are mathematical formulas placed in software that performs an analysis on a data 
set. Analytics is the science of fact-based decision making. Analytics uses software-based 
algorithms and statistics to derive meaning from data. Advanced analytics uses data pat­
terns to make forward-looking predictions to explain to the organization where it is headed. 
­Anomaly detection is the process of identifying rare or unexpected items or events in a data 
set that do not conform to other items in the data set. One of the key advantages of perform­
ing advanced analytics is to detect anomalies in the data to ensure they are not used in models 
creating false results. An outlier is a data value that is numerically distant from most of the 
other data points in a set of data. Anomaly detection helps to identify outliers in the data that 
can cause problems with mathematical modeling.
Fast data is the application of big data analytics to smaller data sets in near-real or real-
time in order to solve a problem or create business value. The term fast data is often associ­
ated with business intelligence and the goal is to quickly gather and mine structured and 
unstructured data so that action can be taken. As the flood of data from sensors, actuators 
and machine-to-machine (M2M) communication in the Internet of Things (IoT) continues to 
grow, it has become more important than ever for organizations to identify what data is time-
sensitive and should be acted upon right away and what data can sit in a data warehouse or 
data lake until there is a reason to mine it.
A data scientist extracts knowledge from data by performing statistical analysis, data min­
ing, and advanced analytics on big data to identify trends, market changes, and other relevant 
information. Figure 8.15 displays the techniques a data scientist will use to perform big data 
advanced analytics.
FIGURE 8.15
Advanced Data Analytics.
Analytics
Description
Behavioral Analysis
Using data about people’s behaviors to understand intent and predict future actions.
Correlation Analysis
Determines a statistical relationship between variables, often for the purpose of identifying predictive 
factors among the variables.
Exploratory Data Analysis
Identifies patterns in data, including outliers, uncovering the underlying structure to understand 
relationships between the variables.
Pattern Recognition Analysis
The classification or labeling of an identified pattern in the machine learning process.
Social Media Analysis
Analyzes text flowing across the Internet, including unstructured text from blogs and messages.
Speech Analysis
The process of analyzing recorded calls to gather information; brings structure to customer interactions and 
exposes information buried in customer contact center interactions with an enterprise. Speech analysis is 
heavily used in the customer service department to help improve processes by identifying angry customers 
and routing them to the appropriate customer service representative.
Text Analysis
Analyzes unstructured data to find trends and patterns in words and sentences. Text mining a firm’s 
customer support email might identify which customer service representative is best able to handle the 
question, allowing the system to forward it to the right person.
Web Analysis
Analyzes unstructured data associated with websites to identify consumer behavior and website navigation.

142  *  Unit 2  Exploring Business Intelligence
DATA VISUALIZATION
Traditional bar graphs and pie charts are boring and at best confusing and at worst misleading. 
As databases and graphics collide more and more, people are creating infographics, which 
display information graphically so it can be easily understood. Infographics (information 
­graphics) present the results of data analysis, displaying the patterns, relationships, and trends 
in a graphical format. Infographics are exciting and quickly convey a story users can understand 
without having to analyze numbers, tables, and boring charts (see Figure 8.16 and Figure 8.17).
FIGURE 8.16
Infographic News Example.

	
Chapter 8  Understanding Big Data and Its Impact on Business   *  143
FIGURE 8.17
Infographic Health Example.
NORMAL WEIGHT
LOW WEIGHT
OVERWEIGHT
OBESE
AGE GROUPS
18–34
35–49
50–64
65–74
75+
A data artist is a business analytics specialist who uses visual tools to help people under­
stand complex data. Great data visualizations provide insights into something new about the 
underlying patterns and relationships. Just think of the periodic table of elements and imagine 
if you had to look at an Excel spreadsheet showing each element and the associated attributes 
in a table format. This would be not only difficult to understand but easy to misinterpret. By 
placing the elements in the visual periodic table, you quickly grasp how the elements relate 
and the associated hierarchy and data artists are experts at creating a story from the informa­
tion. Infographics perform the same function for business data as the periodic table does for 
chemical elements.
Analysis paralysis occurs when the user goes into an emotional state of over-analysis 
(or over-thinking) a situation so that a decision or action is never taken, in effect paralyzing 
the outcome. In the time of big data, analysis paralysis is a growing problem. One solu­
tion is to use data visualizations to help people make decisions faster. Data visualization 
describes technologies that allow users to see or visualize data to transform information into 
© Echelon Insights
FIGURE 8.16 (Continued)
Infographic News Example.

144  *  Unit 2  Exploring Business Intelligence
a business perspective. Data visualization is a powerful way to simplify complex data sets 
by placing data in a format that is easily grasped and understood far quicker than the raw 
data alone. Data visualization tools move beyond Excel graphs and charts into sophisticated 
analysis techniques such as controls, instruments, maps, time-series graphs, and more. Data 
visualization tools can help uncover correlations and trends in data that would otherwise 
go unrecognized.
Business intelligence dashboards track corporate metrics such as critical success fac­
tors and key performance indicators and include advanced capabilities such as interactive 
controls, allowing users to manipulate data for analysis. The majority of business intel­
ligence software vendors offer a number of data visualization tools and business intel­
ligence dashboards.
Big data is one of the most promising technology trends occurring today. Of course, nota­
ble companies such as Facebook, Google, and Netflix are gaining the most business insights 
from big data currently, but many smaller markets are entering the scene, including retail, 
insurance, and health care. Over the next decade, as big data starts to improve your everyday 
life by providing insights into your social relationships, habits, and careers, you can expect to 
see the need for data scientists and data artists dramatically increase.
	1.	 List the reasons a business would want to display big data in a graphic or visual format.
	2.	 Describe how a business could use a few of the data analysis techniques to understand how the 
business is operating.
	3.	 Explain how a marketing department could use data visualization tools to help with the release of 
a new product.
O P E N I N G  C A S E  ST U DY  Q U E ST I O N S
According to a Merrill Lynch survey in 2006, business intelligence software and data-mining tools 
were at the top of CIOs’ technology spending list. Following are a few examples of how companies 
are using data warehousing and data-mining tools to gain valuable business intelligence.
Ben & Jerry’s
These days, when we all scream for ice cream, Ben & Jerry’s cuts through the din by using inte­
grated query, reporting, and online analytical processing technology from BI software vendor Busi­
ness Objects. Through an Oracle database and with BI from Business Objects, Ben & Jerry’s tracks 
the ingredients and life of each pint. If a consumer calls in with a complaint, the consumer affairs staff 
matches the pint with which supplier’s milk, eggs, cherries, or whatever did not meet the organiza­
tion’s near-obsession with quality.
The BI tools let Ben & Jerry’s officials access, analyze, and act on customer information collected 
by the sales, finance, purchasing, and quality-assurance departments. The company can determine 
what milk customers prefer in the making of the ice cream. The technology helped Ben & Jerry’s track 
more than 12,500 consumer contacts in 2005. The information ranged from comments about the 
ingredients used in ice cream to queries about social causes supported by the company.
Chapter Eight Case:  Mining the Data Warehouse

	
Chapter 8  Understanding Big Data and Its Impact on Business   *  145
California Pizza Kitchen
California Pizza Kitchen (CPK) is a leading casual dining chain in the premium pizza segment with a 
recognized consumer brand and an established, loyal customer base. Founded in 1985, there are 
currently more than 130 full-service restaurants in more than 26 states, the District of Columbia, and 
five foreign countries.
Before implementing its BI tool, Cognos, CPK used spreadsheets to plan and track its financial 
statements and line items. The finance team had difficulty managing the volumes of data, complex 
calculations, and constant changes to the spreadsheets. It took several weeks of two people working 
full-time to obtain one version of the financial statements and future forecast. In addition, the team 
was limited by the software’s inability to link cells and calculations across multiple spreadsheets, so 
updating other areas of corporate records became a time-consuming task. With Cognos, quarterly 
forecasting cycles have been reduced from eight days to two days. The finance team can now spend 
more time reviewing the results rather than collecting and entering the data.
Noodles & Company
Noodles & Company has more than 70 restaurants throughout Colorado, Illinois, Maryland, Michigan, 
Minnesota, Texas, Utah, Virginia, and Wisconsin. The company recently purchased Cognos BI tools 
to help implement reporting standards and communicate real-time operational information to field 
management throughout the United States.
Before implementing the first phase of the Cognos solution, IT and finance professionals spent 
days compiling report requests from numerous departments including sales and marketing, human 
resources, and real estate. Since completing phase one, operational Cognos reports are being 
accessed on a daily basis through the Noodles & Company website. This provides users with a single, 
360-degree view of the business and consistent reporting throughout the enterprise.
Noodles & Company users benefit from the flexible query and reporting capabilities, allowing them 
to see patterns in the data to leverage new business opportunities. Cognos tools can pull information 
directly from a broad array of relational, operational, and other systems.1
Questions
	1.	 Explain how Ben & Jerry’s is using business intelligence tools to remain successful and competi­
tive in a saturated market.
	2.	 Identify why information cleansing is critical to California Pizza Kitchen’s business intelligence 
tool’s success.
	3.	 Illustrate why 100 percent accurate and complete information is impossible for Noodles & Com­
pany to obtain.
	4.	 Describe how each of the companies above is using BI to gain a competitive advantage.

146  *  Unit 2  Exploring Business Intelligence
8.1.	 Identify the four common characteristics of big data.
The four V’s of big data include variety, veracity, voluminous, and velocity. Variety includes ­different 
forms of structured and unstructured data. Veracity includes the uncertainty of data, ­including 
biases, noise, and abnormalities. Voluminous is the scale of data. Velocity is the analysis of 
­streaming data as it travels around the Internet.
8.2.	Explain data mining and identify the three elements of data mining.
Data mining is the process of analyzing data to extract information not offered by the raw data 
alone. The three elements of data mining include data, discovery, and deployment.
■	
Data: Foundation for data-directed decision making.
■	
Discovery: Process of identifying new patterns, trends, and insights.
■	
Deployment: Process of implementing discoveries to drive success.
8.3.	Explain the importance of data analytics and data visualization.
Algorithms are mathematical formulas placed in software that performs an analysis on a data set. 
Analytics is the science of fact-based decision making. Analytics uses software-based algorithms 
and statistics to derive meaning from data. Advanced analytics uses data patterns to make 
forward-looking predictions to explain to the organization where it is headed. Data visualization 
describes technologies that allow users to see or visualize data to transform information into a 
­business perspective. Data visualization is a powerful way to simplify complex data sets by placing 
data in a format that is easily grasped and understood far quicker than the raw data alone.
L E A R N I N G  O U T C O M E  R E V I E W
R E V I E W  Q U E S T I O N S
	1.	 What is big data?
	2.	 What are the four common characteristics of big data?
	3.	 What is distributed computing and how has it helped drive the big data era?
	4.	 What is virtualization and how has it helped drive the big data era?
	5.	 What are the six steps in the data-mining process and why is each important?
	6.	 What are the four data-mining techniques? Provide examples of how you would use each one 
in business.
	7.	 What is data-driven decision management?
	8.	 What are the four data-mining techniques for predictions and why are they important to 
a business?

	
Chapter 8  Understanding Big Data and Its Impact on Business   *  147
1. Two Trillion Rows of Data Analyzed Daily—No Problem
eBay is the world’s largest online marketplace, with 97 million global users selling anything to 
­anyone at a yearly total of $62 billion—more than $2,000 every second. Of course with this many 
sales, eBay is collecting the equivalent of the Library of Congress worth of data every three days 
that must be analyzed to run the business successfully. Luckily, eBay discovered Tableau!
Tableau started at Stanford when Chris Stolte, a computer scientist; Pat Hanrahan, an Academy 
Award–winning professor; and Christian Chabot, a savvy business leader, decided to solve the problem 
of helping ordinary people understand big data. The three created Tableau, which bridged two ­computer 
science disciplines: computer graphics and databases. No more need to write code or understand the 
relational database keys and categories; users simply drag and drop pictures of what they want to 
­analyze. Tableau has become one of the most successful data visualization tools on the market, winning 
multiple awards, international expansion, and millions in revenue and spawning multiple new inventions.
Tableau is revolutionizing business analytics, and this is only the beginning. Visit the Tableau 
website and become familiar with the tool by watching a few of the demos. Once you have a good 
understanding of the tool, create three questions eBay might be using Tableau to answer, including 
the analysis of its sales data to find patterns, business insights, and trends.
2. Track Your Life
With wearable technology, you can track your entire life. Nike’s Fuelband and Jawbone’s Up tracks all 
of your physical activity, caloric burn, and sleep patterns. You can track your driving patterns, tooth-
brushing habits, and even laundry status. The question now becomes how to track all of your trackers.
A new company called Exist incorporates tracking devices with weather data, music choices, 
­Netflix favorites, and Twitter activity all in one digital dashboard. Exist wants to understand 
every area of your life and provide correlation information between such things as your personal 
­productivity and mood. As the different types of data expand, so will the breadth of correlations 
Exist can point out. For instance, do you tweet more when you are working at home? If so, does this 
increase productivity? Exist wants to track all of your trackers and analyze the information to help 
you become more efficient and more effective.
Create a digital dashboard for tracking your life. Choose four areas you want to track and 
­determine three ways you would measure each area. For example, if you track eating habits, you 
might want to measure calories and place unacceptable levels in red and acceptable levels in green. 
Once completed, determine whether you can find any correlations among the areas in your life.
3. Butterfly Effects
The butterfly effect, an idea from chaos theory in mathematics, refers to the way a minor event—like 
the movement of a butterfly’s wing—can have a major impact on a complex system like the weather. 
Dirty data can have the same impact on a business as the butterfly effect. Organizations depend 
on the movement and sharing of data throughout the organization, so the impact of data quality 
errors are costly and far-reaching. Such data issues often begin with a tiny mistake in one part of 
the ­organization, but the butterfly effect can produce disastrous results, making its way through 
MIS systems to the data warehouse and other enterprise systems. When dirty data or low-quality 
data enters organizational systems, a tiny error such as a spelling mistake can lead to revenue loss, 
­process inefficiency, and failure to comply with industry and government regulations. Explain how 
the following errors can affect an organization:
■	
A cascading spelling mistake.
■	
Inaccurate customer records.
■	
Incomplete purchasing history.
M A K I N G  B U S I N E S S  D E C I S I O N S

148  *  Unit 2  Exploring Business Intelligence
■	
Inaccurate mailing address.
■	
Duplicate customer numbers for different customers.
4. Unethical Data Mining
Mining large amounts of data can create a number of benefits for business, society, and governments, 
but it can also create a number of ethical questions surrounding an invasion of privacy or misuse of infor­
mation. Facebook recently came under fire for its data-mining practices as it followed 700,000 accounts 
to determine whether posts with highly emotional content are more contagious. The study concluded that 
highly emotional texts are contagious, just as with real people. Highly emotional positive posts received 
multiple positive replies, whereas highly emotional negative posts received multiple negative replies. 
Although the study seems rather innocent, many Facebook users were outraged; they felt the study was 
an invasion of privacy because the 700,000 accounts had no idea Facebook was mining their posts.
As a Facebook user, you willingly consent that Facebook owns every bit and byte of data you post and, 
once you press submit, Facebook can do whatever it wants with your data. Do you agree or disagree that 
Facebook has the right to do whatever it wants with the data its 1.5 billion users post on its site?
5. News Dots
Gone are the days of staring at boring spreadsheets and trying to understand how the data ­correlate. 
With innovative data visualization tools, managers can arrange different ways to view the data, 
­providing new forms of pattern recognition not offered by simply looking at numbers. Slate, a 
news publication, developed a new data visualization tool, called News Dots, that offers readers a 
­different way of viewing the daily news through trends and patterns. The News Dots tool scans about 
500 ­stories a day from major publications and then tags the content with important keywords such as 
people, places, companies, and topics. Surprisingly, the majority of daily news overlaps as the people, 
places, and stories are frequently connected. Using News Dots, you can visualize how the news fits 
together, almost similar to a giant social network. News Dots uses circles (or dots) to represent the 
tagged content and arranges them according to size. The more frequently a certain topic is tagged, 
the larger the dot and its relationship to other dots. The tool is interactive and users simply click a dot 
to view which stories mention that topic and which other topics it connects to in the network such as 
a correlation among the U.S. government, Federal Reserve, Senate, bank, and Barack Obama.
How can data visualization help identify trends? What types of business intelligence could you 
identify if your college used a data visualization tool to analyze student information? What types of 
business intelligence could you identify if you used a data visualization tool to analyze the industry 
in which you plan to compete?
6. Free Data!
The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics states that its role is as the “principal fact-finding agency for 
the federal government in the broad field of labor economics and statistics.” And the data that the 
bureau provides via its website are available to anyone, free. This can represent a treasure trove of 
business intelligence and data mining for those who take advantage of this resource.
Visit the website www.bls.gov. What type of information does the site provide? What information do 
you find most useful? What sort of information concerning employment and wages is available? How 
is this information categorized? How would this type of information be helpful to a business manager? 
What type of demographic information is available? How could this benefit a new start-up business?
7. Follow the Data
There is a classic line in the movie All the President’s Men, which covers the Watergate ­investigation, 
where Deep Throat meets with Bob Woodward and coolly advises him to “follow the money.” ­Woodward 
follows the money, and the Watergate investigation ends with President Nixon’s resignation. If you want 
to find out what is happening in today’s data-filled world, you could probably change those words to 
­“follow the data.”

	
Chapter 8  Understanding Big Data and Its Impact on Business   *  149
T
he five common characteristics of quality information are accuracy, completeness, consistency, 
uniqueness, and timeliness. The costs to an organization of having low-quality information can 
be enormous and could result in revenue losses and ultimately business failure. Databases main­
tain information about various types of objects, events, people, and places and help to alleviate many of 
the problems associated with low-quality information such as redundancy, integrity, and security.
A data warehouse is a logical collection of information—gathered from many different operational 
databases—that supports business analysis activities and decision-making tasks. Data marts contain 
a subset of data warehouse information. Organizations gain tremendous insight into their business by 
mining the information contained in data warehouses and data marts. As we enter the era of big data 
the data-mining and data analysis techniques will become of critical importance to any company that 
wants to succeed in business.
Understanding the value of information is key to business success. Employees must be able to 
optimally access and analyze organizational information. The more knowledge employees have con­
cerning how the organization stores, maintains, provides access to, and protects information the bet­
ter prepared they will be when they need to use that information to make critical business decisions.
U N I T  S U M M A R Y
One of the newest forms of legal requirements emerging from the data explosion is ediscovery, the 
legal requirements mandating that an organization must archive all forms of software communications, 
including email, text messages, and ­multimedia. Yes, the text ­message you sent four years ago could 
come back to haunt you.
Organizations today have more data than they know what to do with and are frequently 
­overwhelmed with data management. Getting at such data and presenting them in a useful manner 
for cogent analysis is a tremendous task that haunts managers. What do you think is involved in 
data management? What is contained in the zettabytes of data stored by organizations? Why would 
an organization store data? How long should an organization store its data? What are the risks 
­associated with failing to store organizational data?
K E Y  T E R M S
Affinity grouping analysis,  137
Algorithms,  141
Analysis paralysis,  143
Analytical information,  100
Analytics,  141
Anomaly detection,  141
Attribute,  105
Backward integration,  112
Big data,  131
Business-critical integrity 
constraints,  109
Business intelligence dashboard	,
  144
Business rule,  109
Classification analysis,  138
Cluster analysis,  137
Comparative analysis,  125
Competitive monitoring,  125
Content creator,  110
Content editor,  110
Cube,  140
Data-driven decision 
management,  126
Data aggregation,  121
Data artist,  143
Database,  104
Database management system 
(DBMS),  104
Data broker,  124
Data dictionary,  105
Data-driven website,  110
Data element (or data field,  104
Data gap analysis,  103
Data governance,  104
Data lake,  124
Data latency,  109
Data map,  126
Data mart,  121
Data mining,  134
Data mining tools,  139
Data model,  104
Data point,  124
Data profiling,  135
Data replication,  135
Data scientist,  141
Data set,  125
Data steward,  103
Data stewardship,  103
Data validation,  104
Data visualization,  143
Data visualization tools,  144
Data warehouse,  119
Dirty data,  122
Distributed computing,  131
Dynamic catalog,  110
Dynamic information,  110
Entity,  105

150  *  Unit 2  Exploring Business Intelligence
Data Visualization: Stories for the Information Age
At the intersection of art and algorithm, data visualization schematically abstracts information to bring 
about a deeper understanding of the data, wrapping it in an element of awe. While the practice of 
visually representing information is arguably the foundation of all design, a newfound fascination with 
data visualization has been emerging. After The New York Times and The Guardian recently opened 
their online archives to the public, artists rushed to dissect nearly two centuries worth of information, 
elevating this art form to new prominence.
For artists and designers, data visualization is a new frontier of self-expression, powered by the 
proliferation of information and the evolution of available tools. For enterprise, it is a platform for 
­displaying products and services in the context of the cultural interaction that surrounds them, reflect­
ing consumers’ increasing demand for corporate transparency.
“Looking at something ordinary in a new way makes it extraordinary,” says Aaron Koblin, one of the 
more recent pioneers of the discipline. As technology lead of Google’s Creative Labs in San ­Francisco, 
he spearheaded the search giant’s Chrome Experiments series designed to show off the speed and 
reliability of the Chrome browser.
Forget Pie Charts and Bar Graphs
Data visualization has nothing to do with pie charts and bar graphs. And it’s only marginally related to 
“infographics,” information design that tends to be about objectivity and clarification. Such represen­
tations simply offer another iteration of the data—restating it visually and making it easier to digest. 
Data visualization, on the other hand, is an interpretation, a different way to look at and think about 
data that often exposes complex patterns or correlations.
U N I T  C L O S I N G  C A S E  O N E
Estimation analysis,  136
Extraction, transformation, and 
loading (ETL),  121
Fast data,  141
Foreign key,  106
Forward integration,  112
Identity management,  109
Infographics (information 
graphics),  142
Information cleansing or 
scrubbing,  122
Information granularity,  99
Information inconsistency,  101
Information integrity,  101, 109
Information integrity issues,  101
Information redundancy,  109
Integration,  112
Integrity constraint,  109
Logical view of information,  108
Market basket analysis,  137
Metadata,  105
Outlier,  141
Physical view of information,  108
Prediction,  139
Primary key,  105
Query-by-example (qbe) tool,  104
Real-time information,  101
Real-time system,  101
Recommendation engine,  136
Record,  105
Relational database management 
system,  105
Relational database model,  105
Relational integrity constraints,  109
Repository,  119
Source data,  125
Static information,  110
Structured query language 
(SQL),  104
Transactional information,  100
Virtualization,  133
© Roz Woodward/Getty Images
© Getty Images/Digital Vision
© Epoxy/Getty Images

	
Chapter 8  Understanding Big Data and Its Impact on Business   *  151
Data visualization is a way to make sense of the ever-increasing stream of information with which 
we’re bombarded and provides a creative antidote to the analysis paralysis that can result from the 
burden of processing such a large volume of information. “It’s not about clarifying data,” says Koblin. 
“It’s about contextualizing it.”
Today algorithmically inspired artists are reimagining the art-science continuum through work 
that frames the left-brain analysis of data in a right-brain creative story. Some use data visualiza­
tion as a bridge between alienating information and its emotional impact—see Chris Jordan’s por­
traits of global mass culture. Others take a more technological angle and focus on cultural utility—the 
­Zoetrope ­project offers a temporal and historical visualization of the ephemeral web. Still others are 
pure artistic ­indulgence—like Koblin’s own Flight Patterns project, a visualization of air traffic over 
North America.
How Business Can Benefit
There are real implications for business here. Most cell phone providers, for instance, offer a state­
ment of a user’s monthly activity. Most often it’s an overwhelming table of various numerical mea­
sures of how much you talked, when, with whom, and how much it cost. A visual representation of 
these data might help certain patterns emerge, revealing calling habits and perhaps helping users 
save money.
Companies can also use data visualization to gain new insight into consumer behavior. By observ­
ing and understanding what people do with the data—what they find useful and what they dismiss as 
worthless—executives can make the valuable distinction between what consumers say versus what 
they do. Even now, this can be a tricky call to make from behind the two-way mirror of a traditional 
qualitative research setting.
It’s essential to understand the importance of creative vision along with the technical mastery of soft­
ware. Data visualization isn’t about using all the data available, but about deciding which patterns and ele­
ments to focus on, building a narrative, and telling the story of the raw data in a different, compelling way.
Ultimately, data visualization is more than complex software or the prettying up of spreadsheets. 
It’s not innovation for the sake of innovation. It’s about the most ancient of social rituals: storytelling. 
It’s about telling the story locked in the data differently, more engagingly, in a way that draws us in, 
makes our eyes open a little wider and our jaw drop ever so slightly. And as we process it, it can 
sometimes change our perspective altogether.2
Questions
1.	 Identify the effects poor information might have on a data visualization project.
2.	 How does data visualization use database technologies?
3.	 How could a business use data visualization to identify new trends?
4.	 What is the correlation between data mining and data visualization?
5.	 Is data visualization a form of business intelligence? Why or why not?
6.	 What security issues are associated with data visualization?
7.	 What could happen to a data visualization project if it failed to cleanse or scrub its data?

U N I T  C L O S I N G  C A S E  T W O
152  *  Unit 2  Exploring Business Intelligence
Informing Information
Since the beginning of time, man has been using pictures and images to communicate, moving from 
caveman drawings to hieroglyphics to the Internet. Today, it is easier than ever to paint a picture 
worth 100,000 words, thanks to technological advances. The primary advantages are databases 
and data warehouses that capture enormous amounts of data. Informing means accessing large 
amounts of data from different management information systems. According to a recent analysis of 
press releases by PR Newswire, an article or advertisement that uses visual images can significantly 
improve the number of views a message generates. This can be a true competitive advantage in the 
digital age.
An infographic (or information graphic) displays information graphically so it can be more easily 
understood. Infographics cut straight to the point by taking complex information and presenting it in 
a simple visual format. Infographics can present the results of large data analysis, looking for pat­
terns and relationships that monitor changes in variables over time. Because infographics can easily 
become overwhelming, users need to be careful to not display too much data or the resulting info­
graphics can result in information overload. Effective infographics can achieve outstanding results for 
marketing, advertising, and public relations. According to PR Newswire, infographics gain the great­
est competitive advantage when they have the following:
	■	
Survey results that are too hard to understand in text format.
	■	
Statistical data that are not interesting for readers.
	■	
Comparison research where the impact can be far more dramatic when presented visually.
	■	
Messages for multilingual audiences.
	■	
Any information that can use a visual element to make it more interesting (see Figure Unit 6.1 
through Figure Unit 6.3 for examples).3
Source: NPS photo by Jim Peaco
© Fuse/Getty Images
© C. Borland/PhotoLink/Getty Images

	
Chapter 8  Understanding Big Data and Its Impact on Business   *  153
FIGURE UNIT 6.1
Hotels.com Travel 
Infographic.

154  *  Unit 2  Exploring Business Intelligence
FIGURE UNIT 6.2
Emerson’s Food Waste 
Infographic.
FIGURE UNIT 6.3
SC Johnson Consumer 
Environmental 
Behaviors Infographic.

	
Chapter 8  Understanding Big Data and Its Impact on Business   *  155
A P P LY  Y O U R  K N O W L E D G E
1. Mining the Data Warehouse
Alana Smith is a senior buyer for a large wholesaler that sells different types of arts and crafts 
to greeting card stores such as Hallmark. Alana’s latest marketing strategy is to send all of her 
­customers a new line of hand-made picture frames from Russia. Alana’s data support her decision 
for the new line. Her analysis predicts that the frames should sell an average of 10 to 15 per store, 
per day. Alana is excited about the new line and is positive it will be a success.
One month later Alana learns that the frames are selling 50 percent below expectations and 
averaging between five and eight frames sold daily in each store. Alana decides to access the 
­company’s data warehouse to determine why sales are below expectations. Identify several 
­different dimensions of data that Alana will want to analyze to help her decide what is causing 
the problems with the picture frame sales.
2. Cleansing Information
You are working for BI, a start-up business intelligence consulting company. You have a new client 
that is interested in hiring BI to clean up its information. To determine how good your work is, the 
­client would like your analysis of the spreadsheet in Figure AYK.1.
3. Different Dimensions
The focus of data warehousing is to extend the transformation of data into information. Data 
­warehouses offer strategic-level, external, integrated, and historical information so businesses can 
make projections, identify trends, and make key business decisions. The data warehouse collects 
and stores integrated sets of historical information from multiple operational systems and feeds 
them to one or more data marts. It may also provide end-user access to support enterprisewide 
views of information.
Project Focus
You are currently working on a marketing team for a large corporation that sells jewelry around the 
world. Your boss has asked you to look at the following dimensions of data to determine which ones 
you want in your data mart for performing sales and market analysis (see Figure AYK.2). As a team, 
categorize the different dimensions, ranking them from 1 to 5, with 1 indicating that the dimension 
offers the highest value and must be in your data mart and 5 indicating that the dimension offers the 
lowest value and does not need to be in your data mart.
4. Understanding Search
Pretend that you are a search engine. Choose a topic to query. It can be anything such as your 
favorite book, movie, band, or sports team. Search your topic on Google, pick three or four pages 
from the results, and print them out. On each printout, find the individual words from your query 
(such as “Boston Red Sox” or “The Godfather”) and use a highlighter to mark each word with color. 
Do that for each of the documents that you print out. Now tape those documents on a wall, step 
back a few feet, and review your documents. If you did not know what the rest of a page said and 
could only judge by the colored words, which document do you think would be most relevant? Is 
there anything that would make a document look more relevant? Is it better to have the words be 
in a large heading or to occur several times in a smaller font? Do you prefer it if the words are at 
the top or the bottom of the page? How often do the words need to appear? Come up with two or 
three things you would look for to see if a document matched a query well. This exercise mimics 
search engine processes and should help you understand why a search engine returns certain 
results over others.

156  *  Unit 2  Exploring Business Intelligence
CUST ID
First Name
Last Name
Address
City
State
ZIP
Phone
Last Order 
Date
233620
Christopher
Lee
12421 W Olympic Blvd
Los Angeles
CA
75080-1100
(972)680-7848
4/18/2002
233621
Bruce
Brandwen
268 W 44th St
New York
PA
10036-3906
(212)471-6077
5/3/2002
233622
Glr
Johnson
4100 E Dry Creek Rd
Littleton
CO
80122-3729
(303)712-5461
5/6/2002
233623
Dave
Owens
466 Commerce Rd
Staunton
VA
24401-4432
(540)851-0362
3/19/2002
233624
John
Coulbourn
124 Action St
Maynard
MA
1754
(978)987-0100
4/24/2002
233629
Dan
Gagliardo
2875 Union Rd
Cheektowaga
NY
14227-1461
(716)558-8191
5/4/2002
23362
Damanceee
Allen
1633 Broadway
New York
NY
10019-6708
(212)708-1576
 
233630
Michael
Peretz
235 E 45th St
New York
NY
10017-3305
(212)210-1340
4/30/2002
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(608)238-9690
 
233631
Jody
Veeder
440 Science Dr
Madison
WI
53711-1064
X227
3/27/2002
233632
Michael
Kehrer
3015 SSE Loop 323
Tyler
TX
75701
(903)579-3229
4/28/
233633
Erin
Yoon
3500 Carillon Pt
Kirkland
WA
98033-7354
(425)897-7221
3/25/2002
233634
Madeline
Shefferly
4100 E Dry Creek Rd
Littleton
CO
80122-3729
(303)486-3949
3/33/2002
233635
Steven
Conduit
1332 Enterprise Dr
West Chester
PA
19380-5970
(610)692-5900
4/27/2002
233636
Joseph
Kovach
1332 Enterprise Dr
West Chester
PA
19380-5970
(610)692-5900
4/28/2002
233637
Richard
Jordan
1700 N
Philadelphia
PA
19131-4728
(215)581-6770
3/19/2002
233638
Scott
Mikolajczyk
1655 Crofton Blvd
Crofton
MD
21114-1387
(410)729-8155
4/28/2002
233639
Susan
Shragg
1875 Century Park E
Los Angeles
CA
90067-2501
(310)785-0511
4/29/2002
233640
Rob
Ponto
29777 Telegraph Rd
Southfield
MI
48034-1303
(810)204-4724
5/5/2002
 
 
 
1211 Avenue Of The
 
 
 
 
 
233642
Lauren
Butler
Americas
New York
NY
10036-8701
(212)852-7494
4/22/2002
233643
Christopher
Lee
12421 W Olympic Blvd
Los Angeles
CA
90064-1022
(310)689-2577
3/25/2002
233644
Michelle
Decker
6922 Hollywood Blvd
Hollywood
CA
90028-6117
(323)817-4655
5/8/2002
 
 
 
1211 Avenue Of The
 
 
 
 
 
233647
Natalia
Galeano
Americas
New York
NY
10036-8701
(646)728-6911
4/23/2002
233648
Bobbie
Orchard
4201 Congress St
Charlotte
NC
28209-4617
(704)557-2444
5/11/2002
233650
Ben
Konfino
1111 Stewart Ave
Bethpage
NY
11714-3533
(516)803-1406
3/19/2002
233651
Lenee
Santana
1050 Techwood Dr NW
Atlanta
GA
30318-KKRR
(404)885-2000
3/22/2002
233652
Lauren
Monks
7700 Wisconsin Ave
Bethesda
MD
20814-3578
(301)771-4772
3/19/2005
 
 
 
10950 Washington
 
 
 
 
 
233653
Mark
Woolley
Blvd
Culver City
CA
90232-4026
(310)202-2900
4/20/2002
233654
Stan
Matthews
1235 W St NE
Washington
DC
20018-1107
(202)608-2000
3/25/2002
FIGURE AYK.1
Data Cleansing.

	
Chapter 8  Understanding Big Data and Its Impact on Business   *  157
5. Predicting Movie
The Netflix Prize is a $1,000,000 prize for any person that can help Netflix improve the data 
in its recommendation engine. The Netflix Prize sought to substantially improve the accuracy 
of predictions about how much someone is going to enjoy a movie based on their movie 
­preferences. On September 21, 2009 Netflix awarded the $1M Grand Prize to team BellKor’s 
Pragmatic Chaos.
Project Focus
The ability to search, analyze, and comprehend information is vital for any organization’s success. 
It certainly was for Netflix, as it was happy to pay anyone $1 million to improve the quality of its 
­information. In a group explain how Netflix might use databases, data warehouses, and data marts 
to predict customer movie recommendations. Here are a few characteristics you might want to 
­analyze to get you started:
■	
Customer demographics.
■	
Movie genre, rating, year, producer, type.
■	
Actor information.
■	
Internet access.
■	
Location for mail pickup.
Dimension
Value (1–5)
Dimension
Value (1–5)
Product number
 
Season
 
Store location
 
Promotion
 
Customer net worth
 
Payment method
 
Number of sales personnel
 
Commission policy
 
Customer eating habits
 
Manufacturer
 
Store hours
 
Traffic report
 
Salesperson ID
 
Customer language
 
Product style
 
Weather
 
Order date
 
Customer gender
 
Product quantity
 
Local tax information
 
Ship date
 
Local cultural demographics
 
Current interest rate
 
Stock market closing
 
Product cost
 
Customer religious affiliation
 
Customer’s political affiliation
 
Reason for purchase
 
Local market analysis
 
Employee dress code policy
 
Order time
 
Customer age
 
Customer spending habits
 
Employee vacation policy
 
Product price
 
Employee benefits
 
Exchange rates
 
Current tariff information
 
Product gross margin
 
 
 
FIGURE AYK.2
Data Warehouse Data.

158  *  Unit 2  Exploring Business Intelligence
6. The Crunch Factory
The Crunch Factory is one of the fourth-largest gyms operating in Australia, and each gym oper­
ates its own system with its own database. Unfortunately, the company failed to develop any 
data-capturing standards and now faces the challenges associated with low-quality enterprisewide 
information. For example, one system has a field to capture email addresses, while another system 
does not. Duplicate customer information among the different systems is another major issue, and 
the company continually finds itself sending conflicting or competing messages to customers from 
different gyms. A customer could also have multiple accounts within the company, one ­representing 
a membership, another representing additional classes, and yet another for a personal trainer. 
The Crunch Factory has no way to identify that the different customer accounts are actually for 
the same customer.
Project Focus
To remain competitive and be able to generate business intelligence The Crunch Factory has 
to resolve these challenges. The Crunch Factory has just hired you as its data quality expert. 
Your first task is to determine how the company can turn its low-quality information into high-
quality business intelligence. Create a plan that The Crunch Factory can implement that details 
the following:
■	
Challenges associated with low-quality information.
■	
Benefits associated with high-quality information.
■	
Recommendations on how the company can clean up its data.
7. Too Much of a Good Thing
The Castle, a premium retailer of clothes and accessories, created an enterprisewide data 
warehouse so all its employees could access information for decision making. The Castle soon 
discovered that it is possible to have too much of a good thing. The Castle employees found 
themselves inundated with data and unable to make any decisions, a common occurrence 
called analysis paralysis. When sales representatives queried the data warehouse to determine 
if a certain product in the size, color, and category was available, they would get hundreds of 
results showing everything from production orders to supplier contracts. It became easier for the 
sales ­representatives to look in the warehouse themselves than to check the system. Employees 
found the data warehouse was simply too big and too complicated, and it contained too much 
irrelevant information.
Project Focus
The Castle is committed to making its data warehouse system a success and has come to you for 
help. Create a plan that details the value of the data warehouse to the business, how it can be easier 
for all employees to use, along with the potential business benefits the company can derive from 
its data warehouse.
8. Twitter Buzz
Technology tools that can predict sales for the coming week, decide when to increase inven­
tory, and determine when additional staff is required are extremely valuable. Twitter is not just 
for ­tweeting your whereabouts anymore. Twitter and other social-media sites have become great 
tools for gathering business intelligence on customers, including what they like, dislike, need, 
and want. Twitter is easy to use, and businesses can track every single time a customer makes a 
­statement about a particular product or service. Good businesses turn this valuable information 
into ­intelligence spotting trends and patterns in customer opinion.

	
Chapter 8  Understanding Big Data and Its Impact on Business   *  159
If you are looking for Access projects to incorporate into your class, try any of the following to test 
your knowledge.
A Y K  A P P L I C A T I O N  P R O J E C T S
Project Focus
Do you agree that a business can use Twitter to gain business intelligence? How many companies 
do you think are aware of Twitter and exactly how they can use it to gain BI? How do you think 
­Twitter uses a data warehouse? How do you think companies store Twitter information? How would 
a company use Twitter in a data mart? How would a company use cubes to analyze Twitter data?
Project 
Number
Project Name
Project 
Type
Plug-In
Focus Area
Project Level
Skill Set
Page 
Number
28
Daily Invoice
Access
T5, T6, T7, T8
Business 
Analysis
Introductory
Entities, Relationships, 
and Databases
AYK.17
29
Billing Data
Access
T5, T6, T7, T8
Business 
Intelligence
Introductory
Entities, Relationships, 
and Databases
AYK.19
30
Inventory Data
Access
T5, T6, T7, T8
SCM
Intermediate
Entities, Relationships, 
and Databases
AYK.20
31
Call Center
Access
T5, T6, T7, T8
CRM 
Intermediate
Entities, Relationships, 
and Databases
AYK.21
32
Sales Pipeline
Access
T5, T6, T7, T8
Business 
Intelligence
Advanced
Entities, Relationships, 
and Databases
AYK.23
33
Online 
Classified Ads
Access
T5, T6, T7, T8
Ecommerce
Advanced
Entities, Relationships, 
and Databases
AYK.23

Information is a powerful asset. It is a key organizational asset that enables companies to carry out business 
initiatives and strategic plans. Companies that manage information are primed for competitive advantage and 
success. Information systems provide the key tools allowing access to and flow of information across enter­
prises. This unit emphasizes the important role strategic decision-making information systems play in increasing 
efficiency and effectiveness across global enterprises and providing the infrastructure required for supply chain 
management, customer relationship management, and enterprise resource planning. These systems facilitate 
interactions among customers, suppliers, partners, and employees providing new communication channels 
beyond those traditionally used by organizations such as face-to-face or paper-based methods.
A supply chain consists of all direct and indirect parties involved in the procurement of products and raw 
material. These parties can be internal groups or departments within an organization or external partner compa­
nies and end customers. You, as a business student, need to know the significance of a supply chain to organiza­
tional success and the critical role information technology plays in ensuring smooth operations of a supply chain.
You, as a business student, must understand the critical relationship your business will have with its cus­
tomers. You must understand how to analyze your organizational data to ensure you are not just meeting, but 
exceeding, your customers’ expectations. Business intelligence is the best way to understand your customers’ 
current and—more importantly—future needs. Like never before, enterprises are technologically empowered 
to reach their goals of integrating, analyzing, and making intelligent business decisions based on their data.
You, as a business student, must understand how to give employees, customers, and business partners 
access to information by means of newer technologies such as enterprise resource planning systems and enter­
prise portals. Creating access to information with the help of information systems facilitates completion of 
current tasks while encouraging the sharing and generation of new ideas that lead to the development of inno­
vations, improved work habits, and best practices.
W h a t ’ s  i n  I T  f o r  M e ?
Streamlining Business 
Operations
3
U
N
I
T

U N I T  T H R E E  O P E N I N G  C A S E
The Connected Car Revolution
We are currently in the middle of the connected car revolution, a vehicle equipped with smart 
sensors, Internet access, and a number of information systems that make driving easy, intel­
ligent, and safe. Connected cars share information with individuals inside and outside the car via 
smart networks in a seamless and safe manner. Connected cars have the power of 20 modern 
PCs and contain more than 100 million lines of code that can process up to 25 gigabytes of data 
in an hour. From automobile manufacturers to software vendors to telecommunication compa­
nies, everyone is excited about the connected car phenomenon. Connected cars are not some 
futuristic auto technology; in fact, the connected car is already on the market and generating 
significant revenue for car makers and technology companies. A few benefits of the connected 
car include:
	■	
Driver and passenger safety are the key benefits of a Connected Car, which warn the driver 
of external hazards and internal responses of the vehicle to hazards. The central monitoring 
system tracks multiple sensors for warning signs and indications related to the health of the 
car. It can even check external weather conditions and hazardous road conditions to alert the 
drivers in time.
	■	
Car crashes are the leading cause of death for U.S. teens, and speeding is a contributing fac­
tor in about a third of those crashes. Mom and Dad cannot always be there to influence their 
teen driver’s judgment, but a new application developed for Hyundai’s in-car infotainment 
system allows parents to monitor and set restrictions on the car’s speed, hours of operation 
and where it travels. If the driver exceeds a preset speed limit, for example, the parent will 
receive an alert via text, email and soon, a mobile app. The teenage driver also will see a 
notification on the vehicle’s multimedia screen.
	■	
Connected Cars take the infotainment to the next level by delivering popular content to the 
passengers. Today, car entertainment is mostly confined to FM radio and Bluetooth connectiv­
ity. With the availability of high-speed networks, popular streaming services such as Pandora, 
Spotify, and Hulu become available. Consumers will have a huge choice of digital content.
© JGI/Blend Images/Getty Images RF
© Steve Cole/Getty Images RF
© Steve Cole/Getty Images RF

162
	■	
Apple and Google are competing to becoming the brain behind in-car infotainment. 
Apple’s Car Play embeds familiar iOS experience in the dashboard which gives access 
to a variety of third-party apps available in the App Store. Android Auto can stream music 
from Google Play Music straight into your car. It also makes it easy to access your favorite 
apps and content in the car. Passengers can purchase or rent media on the go. Consum­
ers can use familiar voice-activated technologies such as Siri and Google Now to interact 
with the infotainment system. Amazon is partnering with Ford to bring its popular Alexa 
engine to the car.
	■	
Connected Cars allow the driver to reach a destination quickly, safely, and in a cost-­
efficient manner. By communicating with the traffic signals and the road infrastructure, a 
smart car can slow down before reaching a signal. It can even automatically stop and start 
the car just before the lights turn green. This feature translates to a greater fuel efficiency.
	■	
By tracking the driving patterns, Connected Cars can assess the wear and tear of a vehi­
cle. This information can be leveraged by insurance agencies in calculating the premium 
that’s based on usage and the maintenance of the car.
	■	
Service stations can periodically gather the diagnostic information over the air to perform 
predictive analysis. They can proactively reach out to the vehicle owners to schedule a 
service appointment.
Over the next five to 10 years, the connected car market is expected to explode creating 
a new platform for consumers to access content and revolutionize the auto industry. Industry 
experts equate the connected car market is similar to where the smartphone was in 2010— 
it’s just taken off and is ready to explode with an estimate of over 380 million connected cars 
will be on the road by 2021. Technology companies will play a major role in the future of the 
automotive market. The big question now is whether technology companies will eventually 
manufacture cars?
Next up, a world where cars drive themselves? Although fully autonomous vehicles are 
not yet mainstream, they are only a few years away. Technological, regulatory, and consumer 
adoption hurdles still remain, but there have been many strides towards a car that can drive 
itself from point A to point B with little to no human interaction. In the UK, KPMG estimates 
autonomous vehicles will lead to 2,500 fewer deaths between 2014 and 2030.1

	
 ﻿ ﻿  *  163
Introduction
Decision making and problem solving in today’s electronic world encompass large-scale, 
opportunity-oriented, strategically focused solutions. The traditional “cookbook” approach to 
decisions simply will not work in the ebusiness world. Decision-making and problem-solving 
abilities are now the most sought-after traits in up-and-coming executives. To put it mildly, 
decision makers and problem solvers have limitless career potential.
Ebusiness is the conducting of business on the Internet, not only buying and selling, but 
also serving customers and collaborating with business partners. (Unit Four discusses ebusi­
ness in detail.) With the fast growth of information technology and the accelerated use of the 
Internet, ebusiness is quickly becoming standard. This unit focuses on technology to help 
make decisions, solve problems, and find new innovative opportunities. The unit highlights 
how to bring people together with the best IT processes and tools in complete, flexible solu­
tions that can seize business opportunities (see Figure Unit 3.1). The chapters in Unit 3 are:
	■	 Chapter Nine—Enabling the Organization—Decision Making.
	■	 Chapter Ten—Extending the Organization—Supply Chain Management.
	■	 Chapter Eleven—Building a Customer-centric Organization—Customer Relationship 
Management.
	■	 Chapter Twelve—Integrating the Organization from End to End—Enterprise Resource 
Planning.
Customers
Partners
Suppliers
Employees
Supply Chain
Management (SCM)
Customer Relationship
Management (CRM)
Decision Support
Systems (DSS)
Executive Information
Systems (EIS) 
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI)
Enterprise Resource
Planning (ERP)
Data Mining
FIGURE UNIT 3.1
Decision-Enabling, Problem-
Solving, and Opportunity-
Seizing Systems.

164  *  Unit 3  Streamlining Business Operations
Making Business Decisions
Porter’s strategies suggest entering markets with a competitive advantage in either overall 
cost leadership, differentiation, or focus. To achieve these results, managers must be able 
to make decisions and forecast future business needs and requirements. The most important 
and most challenging question confronting managers today is how to lay the foundation for 
tomorrow’s success while competing to win in today’s business environment. A company will 
not have a future if it is not cultivating strategies for tomorrow. The goal of this section is to 
expand on Porter’s Five Forces Model, three generic strategies, and value chain analysis to 
demonstrate how managers can learn the concepts and practices of business decision making 
to add value. It will also highlight how companies heading into the 21st century are taking 
advantage of advanced MIS capable of generating significant competitive advantages across 
the value chain.
As we discussed in Unit 1, decision making is one of the most important and chal­
lenging aspects of management. Decisions range from routine choices, such as how many 
items to order or how many people to hire, to unexpected ones such as what to do if a key 
employee suddenly quits or needed materials do not arrive. Today, with massive volumes of 
information available, managers are challenged to make highly complex decisions—some 
involving far more information than the human brain can comprehend—in increasingly 
shorter time frames. Figure 9.1 displays the three primary challenges managers face when 
making decisions.
THE DECISION-MAKING ESSENTIALS
The process of making decisions plays a crucial role in communication and leadership for 
operational, managerial, and strategic projects. There are numerous academic decision-­
making models; Figure 9.2 presents just one example.2
A few key concepts about organizational structure will help our discussion of MIS deci­
sion-making tools. The structure of a typical organization is similar to a pyramid, and the 
different levels require different types of information to assist in decision making, problem 
solving, and opportunity capturing (see Figure 9.3).
LO 9.1 Explain the ­importance  
of decision making for ­managers 
at each of the three primary 
­organization levels along 
with the associated decision 
characteristics.
systems, and explain how managers can use these 
systems to make decisions and gain competitive 
advantages.
  9.3.	Describe artificial intelligence, and identify its five 
main types.
LEARNING OUTCOMES
  9.1.	 Explain the importance of decision making for 
managers at each of the three primary organization 
levels along with the associated decision 
characteristics.
  9.2.	Classify the different operational support systems, 
managerial support systems, and strategic support 
Enabling the 
Organization—Decision 
Making
C H A P T E R  9

	
Chapter 9  Enabling the Organization—Decision Making   *  165
Operational
At the operational level, employees develop, control, and maintain core business activities 
required to run the day-to-day operations. Operational decisions are considered structured 
decisions, which arise in situations where established processes offer potential solutions. 
Structured decisions are made frequently and are almost repetitive in nature; they affect short-
term business strategies. Reordering inventory and creating the employee staffing and weekly 
production schedules are examples of routine structured decisions. Figure 9.4 highlights the 
essential elements required for operational decision making.
FIGURE 9.1
Managerial Decision-Making 
Challenges.
1. Managers need to analyze large amounts of information:  
Innovations in communication and globalization have resulted in a
dramatic increase in the variables and dimensions people need to consider
when making a decision, solving a problem, or appraising an opportunity.
2. Managers must make decisions quickly:
Time is of the essence and people simply do not have time to sift through
all the information manually.
3. Managers must apply sophisticated analysis techniques, such as 
Porter’s strategies or forecasting, to make strategic decisions:
Due to the intensely competitive global business environment, companies
must oﬀer far more than just a great product to succeed. 
MANAGERIAL
DECISION-MAKING
CHALLENGES
FIGURE 9.2
The Six-Step Decision-
Making Process.
DECISION-MAKING 
PROCESS
Problem Identiﬁcation: Deﬁne the problem as clearly and precisely
as possible.  
Data Collection: Gather problem-related data, including who, what,
where, when, why, and how.  Be sure to gather facts, not rumors or
opinions about the problem. 
Solution Generation: Detail every solution possible, including ideas
that seem farfetched.
Solution Test: Evaluate solutions in terms of feasibility (can it be
completed?), suitability (is it a permanent or a temporary ﬁx?), and
acceptability (can all participants form a consensus?).
Solution Selection: Select the solution that best solves the problem
and meets the needs of the business.
Solution Implementation: If the solution solves the problem, then
the decisions made were correct.  If not, then the decisions were
incorrect and the process begins again.
1
2
3
4
5
6

166  *  Unit 3  Streamlining Business Operations
FIGURE 9.3
Common Company 
Structure.
STRATEGIC
MANAGERIAL
OPERATIONAL
STRATEGIC LEVEL
(Unstructured Decisions)
Managers develop overall business strategies, goals, and 
objectives as part of the company’s strategic plan
MANAGERIAL LEVEL
(Semistructured Decisions)
Employees are continuously evaluating company 
operations to hone the ﬁrm’s abilities to identify, adapt 
to, and leverage change
OPERATIONAL LEVEL
(Structured Decisions)
 Employees develop, control, and maintain core 
business activities required to run the day-to-day 
operations
FIGURE 9.4
Overview of Decision 
Making.
Employee 
Types
Types
Senior management, 
presidents, leaders, 
executives
Middle management, 
managers, directors
Lower management, 
department managers, 
analysts, staﬀ
Focus
External, industry, cross 
company
Internal, crossfunctional 
(sometimes external)
Internal, functional
Time Frame
Long term—yearly, 
multiyear
Short term, daily, 
monthly, yearly
Short term, day-to-day 
operations
Decision 
Types
Unstructured, 
 nonrecurring, one time
Semistructured, ad hoc 
(unplanned) reporting
Structured, recurring, 
repetitive
MIS Types
Knowledge
Business intelligence
Information
Metrics
 Critical success fac-
tors focusing on 
eﬀectiveness
Key performance 
 indicators focusing on 
eﬃciency, and critical 
success factors focusing 
on eﬀectiveness
Key performance 
 indicators focusing on 
eﬃciency
Examples
How will changes in 
employment levels over
the next 3 years aﬀect
the company?
What industry trends are 
worth analyzing?
What new products and 
new markets does the 
company need to create 
competitive advantages?
How will a recession 
over the next year aﬀect 
business?
What measures will the 
company need to pre-
pare for due to new tax 
laws?
Who are our best 
 customers by region, by
sales representative, by
product?
What are the sales 
forecasts for next month?
How do they compare to
actual sales for last year?
What was the diﬀerence 
between expected sales
and actual sales for
each month?
What was the impact of 
last month’s marketing 
campaign on sales?
What types of ad hoc or 
unplanned reports might 
the company require 
next month?
How many employees 
are out sick?
What are next 
week’s production 
requirements?
How much inventory is 
in the warehouse?
How many problems 
occurred when running 
payroll?
Which employees are on 
vacation next week?
How many products 
need to be made today?
STRATEGIC LEVEL
MANAGERIAL LEVEL
OPERATIONAL LEVEL

	
Chapter 9  Enabling the Organization—Decision Making   *  167
Managerial
At the managerial level, employees are continuously evaluating company operations to hone 
the firm’s abilities to identify, adapt to, and leverage change. A company that has a competitive 
advantage needs to constantly adjust and revise its strategy to remain ahead of fast-following 
competitors. Managerial decisions cover short- and medium-range plans, schedules, and bud­
gets along with policies, procedures, and business objectives for the firm. They also allocate 
resources and monitor the performance of organizational subunits, including departments, 
divisions, process teams, project teams, and other work groups. These types of decisions are 
considered semistructured decisions they occur in situations in which a few established pro­
cesses help to evaluate potential solutions, but not enough to lead to a definite recommended 
decision. For example, decisions about producing new products or changing employee ben­
efits range from unstructured to semistructured. Figure 9.4 highlights the essential elements 
required for managerial decision making.
Strategic
At the strategic level, managers develop overall business strategies, goals, and objectives as 
part of the company’s strategic plan. They also monitor the strategic performance of the orga­
nization and its overall direction in the political, economic, and competitive business environ­
ment. Strategic decisions are highly unstructured decisions, occurring in situations in which 
no procedures or rules exist to guide decision makers toward the correct choice. They are 
infrequent, extremely important, and typically related to long-term business strategy. Exam­
ples include the decision to enter a new market or even a new industry over, say, the next three 
years. In these types of decisions, managers rely on many sources of information, along with 
personal knowledge, to find solutions. Figure 9.4 highlights the essential elements required 
for strategic decision making.
Support: Enhancing Decision Making with MIS
Now that we’ve reviewed the essentials of decision making, we are ready to understand the 
powerful benefits associated with using MIS to support managers making decisions.
A model is a simplified representation or abstraction of reality. Models help managers 
calculate risks, understand uncertainty, change variables, and manipulate time to make deci­
sions. MIS support systems rely on models for computational and analytical routines that 
mathematically express relationships among variables. For example, a spreadsheet program, 
such as Microsoft Office Excel, might contain models that calculate market share or ROI. 
MIS have the capability and functionality to express far more complex modeling relation­
ships that provide information, business intelligence, and knowledge. Figure 9.5 highlights 
the three primary types of management information systems available to support decision 
making across the company levels.
OPERATIONAL SUPPORT SYSTEMS
Transactional information encompasses all the information contained within a single busi­
ness process or unit of work, and its primary purpose is to support the performance of daily 
operational or structured decisions. Transactional information is created, for example, when 
customers are purchasing stocks, making an airline reservation, or withdrawing cash from 
an ATM. Managers use transactional information when making structured decisions at the 
operational level, such as when analyzing daily sales reports to determine how much inven­
tory to carry.
Online transaction processing (OLTP) is the capture of transaction and event infor­
mation using technology to (1) process the information according to defined business 
rules, (2) store the information, and (3) update existing information to reflect the new 
information. During OLTP, the organization must capture every detail of transactions and 
events. A ­transaction processing system (TPS) is the basic business system that serves the 
operational level (analysts) and assists in making structured decisions. The most common 
LO 9.2 Classify the different 
­operational support systems, 
managerial support systems,  
and strategic support systems, 
and explain how managers 
can use these systems to make 
decisions and gain competitive 
advantages.

168  *  Unit 3  Streamlining Business Operations
example of a TPS is an operational accounting system such as a payroll system or an order-
entry system.
Using systems thinking, we can see that the inputs for a TPS are source documents, 
which describes the original transaction record along with details such as its date, purpose, 
and amount spent and includes cash receipts, canceled checks, invoices, customer refunds, 
employee time sheet, etc.. Source documents for a payroll system can include time sheets, 
wage rates, and employee benefit reports. Transformation includes common procedures such 
as creating, reading, updating, and deleting (commonly referred to as CRUD) employee 
records, along with calculating the payroll and summarizing benefits. The output includes 
cutting the paychecks and generating payroll reports. Figure 9.6 demonstrates the systems 
thinking view of a TPS.3
FIGURE 9.5
Primary Types of MIS 
Systems for Decision 
Making.
Operational                        Managerial                         Strategic 
Unstructured
Semistructured
Structured 
Transaction
Processing
System
Decision
Support
Systems 
Executive
Information
Systems
FIGURE 9.6
Systems Thinking Example 
of a TPS.
Input
Process
Output
 CRUD
 Calculate
 Summarize
 Reports
 Source Documents
Feedback

	
Chapter 9  Enabling the Organization—Decision Making   *  169
MANAGERIAL SUPPORT SYSTEMS
Analytical information encompasses all organizational information, and its primary purpose 
is to support the performance of managerial analysis or semistructured decisions. Analyti­
cal information includes transactional information along with other information such as mar­
ket and industry information. Examples of analytical information are trends, sales, product 
statistics, and future growth projections. Managers use analytical information when making 
important semistructured decisions, such as whether the organization should build a new 
manufacturing plant or hire additional sales reps.
Online analytical processing (OLAP) is the manipulation of information to create busi­
ness intelligence in support of strategic decision making. Decision support systems (DSSs) 
model information using OLAP, which provides assistance in evaluating and choosing among 
different courses of action. DSSs enable high-level managers to examine and manipulate large 
amounts of detailed data from different internal and external sources. Analyzing complex 
relationships among thousands or even millions of data items to discover patterns, trends, 
and exception conditions is one of the key uses associated with a DSS. For example, doctors 
may enter symptoms into a decision support system so it can help diagnose and treat patients. 
Insurance companies also use a DSS to gauge the risk of providing insurance to drivers who 
have imperfect driving records. One company found that married women who are homeown­
ers with one speeding ticket are rarely cited for speeding again. Armed with this business 
intelligence, the company achieved a cost advantage by lowering insurance rates to this spe­
cific group of customers. The following are common DSS analysis techniques.
What-If Analysis
What-if analysis checks the impact of a change in a variable or assumption on the model. 
For example, “What will happen to the supply chain if a hurricane in South Carolina reduces 
holding inventory from 30 percent to 10 percent?” A user would be able to observe and evalu­
ate any changes that occurred to the values in the model, especially to a variable such as 
profits. Users repeat this analysis with different variables until they understand all the effects 
of various situations.
Sensitivity Analysis
Sensitivity analysis, a special case of what-if analysis, is the study of the impact on other vari­
ables when one variable is changed repeatedly. Sensitivity analysis is useful when users are 
uncertain about the assumptions made in estimating the value of certain key variables. For exam­
ple, repeatedly changing revenue in small increments to determine its effects on other variables 
would help a manager understand the impact of various revenue levels on other decision factors.
Goal-Seeking Analysis
Goal-seeking analysis finds the inputs necessary to achieve a goal such as a desired level of 
output. It is the reverse of what-if and sensitivity analysis. Instead of observing how changes 
in a variable affect other variables, goal-seeking analysis sets a target value (a goal) for a 
variable and then repeatedly changes other variables until the target value is achieved. For 
example, goal-seeking analysis could determine how many customers must purchase a new 
product to increase gross profits to $5 million.
Optimization Analysis
Optimization analysis, an extension of goal-seeking analysis, finds the optimum value for 
a target variable by repeatedly changing other variables, subject to specified constraints. By 
changing revenue and cost variables in an optimization analysis, managers can calculate the 
highest potential profits. Constraints on revenue and cost variables can be taken into consider­
ation, such as limits on the amount of raw materials the company can afford to purchase and 
limits on employees available to meet production needs.
Figure 9.7 shows the common systems view of a DSS. Figure 9.8 shows how TPSs supply 
transactional data to a DSS. The DSS then summarizes and aggregates the information from 
the different TPSs, which assist managers in making semistructured decisions.

170  *  Unit 3  Streamlining Business Operations
STRATEGIC SUPPORT SYSTEMS
Decision making at the strategic level requires both business intelligence and knowledge to 
support the uncertainty and complexity associated with business strategies. An executive 
information system (EIS) is a specialized DSS that supports senior-level executives and 
unstructured, long-term, nonroutine decisions requiring judgment, evaluation, and insight. 
These decisions do not have a right or wrong answer, only efficient and effective answers. 
Moving up through the organizational pyramid, managers deal less with the details (“finer” 
information) and more with meaningful aggregations of information (“coarser” information). 
Granularity refers to the level of detail in the model or the decision-making process. The 
greater the granularity, the deeper the level of detail or fineness of data (see Figure 9.9).
A DSS differs from an EIS in that an EIS requires data from external sources to support 
unstructured decisions (see Figure 9.10). This is not to say that DSSs never use data from 
external sources, but typically DSS semistructured decisions rely on internal data only.
Visualization produces graphical displays of patterns and complex relationships in large 
amounts of data. Executive information systems use visualization to deliver specific key 
information to top managers at a glance, with little or no interaction with the system. A com­
mon tool that supports visualization is a digital dashboard, which tracks key performance 
FIGURE 9.7
Systems Thinking Example 
of a DSS.
Input
Process
Output
Feedback
 What-if
 Sensitivity
 Goal seeking
 Optimization
 Forecasts
 Simulations
 Ad hoc reports
 TPS
FIGURE 9.8
Interaction Between 
TPS and DSS to Support 
Semistructured Decisions.
Transaction Processing
Systems
Decision Support Systems
Order
Entry
Order Processing System
Inventory Tracking System
Distribution System
Decision Support System
Inventory
Data
Shipping
Data
Sales
Data
Manufacturing
Data
Transportation
Data
Managerial
Reports

	
Chapter 9  Enabling the Organization—Decision Making   *  171
FIGURE 9.9
Information Levels 
throughout an Organization.
STRATEGIC
MANAGERIAL
OPERATIONAL
Fine
Coarse
Granularity
OLTP
OLAP
Processing
Transactional
Analytical
Processes
FIGURE 9.10
Interaction between 
a TPS and EIS.
Transaction Processing
Systems
Executive
Reports
EIS
Order
Entry
Order Processing
System
Inventory Data
Inventory Tracking
System
Shipping Data
Distribution System
Sales
Data
Manufacturing
Data
Transportation
Data
Industry
Outlook
Market
Outlook
Executive Information
Systems
Industry
Information
Stock Market
Information
External Sources of
Information

172  *  Unit 3  Streamlining Business Operations
FIGURE 9.11
Digital Dashboard Analytical 
Capabilities.
CONSOLIDATION
Consolidation is the aggregation of data from simple 
roll-ups to complex groupings of interrelated
information. For example, data for diﬀerent sales
representatives can then be rolled up to an oﬃce level,
then a state level, then a regional sales level.
DRILL-DOWN 
Drill-down enables users to view details, and details of
details, of information. This is the reverse of
consolidation; a user can view regional sales data and
then drill down all the way to each sales
representative’s data at each oﬃce. Drill-down
capability lets managers view monthly, weekly, daily, or
even hourly information.
Slice-and-Dice
Slice-and-dice is the ability to look at information
from diﬀerent perspectives. One slice of information
could display all product sales during a given
promotion. Another slice could display a single
product’s sales for all promotions. Slicing and dicing is
often performed along a time axis to analyze trends
and ﬁnd time-based patterns in the information.
Pivot
Pivot (also known as rotation) rotates data to display
alternative presentations of the data. For example, a
Pivot can swap the rows and columns of a report to
show the data in a diﬀerent format.
indicators (KPIs) and critical success factors (CSFs) by compiling information from multiple 
sources and tailoring it to meet user needs. Following is a list of potential features included in 
a dashboard designed for a manufacturing team:
	■	 A hot list of key performance indicators, refreshed every 15 minutes.
	■	 A running line graph of planned versus actual production for the past 24 hours.
	■	 A table showing actual versus forecasted product prices and inventories.
	■	 A list of outstanding alerts and their resolution status.
	■	 A graph of stock market prices.
Digital dashboards, whether basic or comprehensive, deliver results quickly. As they 
become easier to use, more employees can perform their own analyses without inundating 
MIS staff with questions and requests for reports. Digital dashboards enable employees to 
move beyond reporting to using information to directly increase business performance. With 
them, employees can react to information as soon as it becomes available and make decisions, 
solve problems, and change strategies daily instead of monthly. Digital dashboards offer the 
capabilities detailed in Figure 9.11.
One thing to remember when making decisions is the old saying “Garbage in, garbage 
out.” If the transactional data used in the support system are wrong, then the managerial 
analysis will be wrong and the DSS will simply assist in making a wrong decision faster. 
Managers should also ask, “What is the DSS not telling me before I make my final decision?”
The Future: Artificial Intelligence
Executive information systems are starting to take advantage of artificial intelligence to facili­
tate unstructured strategic decision making. Artificial intelligence (AI) simulates human 
thinking and behavior, such as the ability to reason and learn. Its ultimate goal is to build a 
system that can mimic human intelligence.
Intelligent systems are various commercial applications of artificial intelligence. They 
include sensors, software, and devices that emulate and enhance human capabilities, learn 
or understand from experience, make sense of ambiguous or contradictory information, and 
LO 9.3 Describe artificial 
­intelligence, and identify its  
five main types.

	
Chapter 9  Enabling the Organization—Decision Making   *  173
even use reasoning to solve problems and make decisions effectively. Intelligent systems per­
form such tasks as boosting productivity in factories by monitoring equipment and signaling 
when preventive maintenance is required. They are beginning to show up everywhere:
	■	 At Manchester Airport in England, the Hefner AI Robot Cleaner alerts passengers to secu­
rity and nonsmoking rules while it scrubs up to 65,600 square feet of floor per day. Laser 
scanners and ultrasonic detectors keep it from colliding with passengers.
	■	 Shell Oil’s SmartPump keeps drivers in their cars on cold, wet winter days. It can service 
any automobile built after 1987 that has been fitted with a special gas cap and a wind­
shield-mounted transponder that tells the robot where to insert the pump.
	■	 Matsushita’s courier robot navigates hospital hallways, delivering patient files, X-ray 
films, and medical supplies.
	■	 The FireFighter AI Robot can extinguish flames at chemical plants and nuclear reactors 
with water, foam, powder, or inert gas. The robot puts distance between human operators 
and the fire.4
AI systems increase the speed and consistency of decision making, solve problems with 
incomplete information, and resolve complicated issues that cannot be solved by conventional 
computing. There are many categories of AI systems; five of the most familiar are (1) expert 
systems, (2) neural networks, (3) genetic algorithms, (4) intelligent agents, and (5) virtual 
reality (see Figure 9.12).
EXPERT SYSTEMS
Expert systems are computerized advisory programs that imitate the reasoning processes of 
experts in solving difficult problems. Typically, they include a knowledge base containing 
various accumulated experience and a set of rules for applying the knowledge base to each 
particular situation. Expert systems are the most common form of AI in the business arena 
because they fill the gap when human experts are difficult to find or retain or are too expen­
sive. The best-known systems play chess and assist in medical diagnosis.
NEURAL NETWORKS
A neural network, also called an artificial neural network, is a category of AI that attempts 
to emulate the way the human brain works. Neural networks analyze large quantities of infor­
mation to establish patterns and characteristics in situations where the logic or rules are 
unknown. Neural networks’ many features include:
	■	 Learning and adjusting to new circumstances on their own.
	■	 Lending themselves to massive parallel processing.
FIGURE 9.12
Examples of Artificial 
Intelligence.
Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Expert Systems
Example:
Playing chess.
Neural Networks 
Example: Credit
card companies
checking for
fraud.
Genetic Algorithms
Example:
Investment
companies in
trading decisions.
Intelligent Agents 
Example:
Environmental
scanning and
competitive
intelligence.
Virtual Reality
Example:
Working virtually
around the globe.

174  *  Unit 3  Streamlining Business Operations
	■	 Functioning without complete or well-structured information.
	■	 Coping with huge volumes of information with many dependent variables.
	■	 Analyzing nonlinear relationships in information (they have been called fancy regression 
analysis systems).
The finance industry is a veteran in the use of neural network technology and has been 
relying on various forms for over two decades. It uses neural networks to review loan applica­
tions and create patterns or profiles of applications that fall into two categories—approved or 
denied. Here are some examples of neural networks in finance:
	■	 Citibank uses neural networks to find opportunities in financial markets. By carefully 
examining historical stock market data with neural network software, Citibank financial 
managers learn of interesting coincidences or small anomalies (called market inefficien­
cies). For example, it could be that whenever IBM stock goes up, so does Unisys stock, or 
that a U.S. Treasury note is selling for 1 cent less in Japan than in the United States. These 
snippets of information can make a big difference to Citibank’s bottom line in a very com­
petitive financial market.
	■	 Visa, MasterCard, and many other credit card companies use a neural network to spot 
peculiarities in individual accounts and follow up by checking for fraud. MasterCard esti­
mates neural networks save it $50 million annually.
	■	 Insurance companies along with state compensation funds and other carriers use neural 
network software to identify fraud. The system searches for patterns in billing charges, 
laboratory tests, and frequency of office visits. A claim for which the diagnosis was a 
sprained ankle but treatment included an electrocardiogram would be flagged for the 
account manager.5
Fuzzy logic is a mathematical method of handling imprecise or subjective information. 
The basic approach is to assign values between 0 and 1 to vague or ambiguous information. 
Zero represents information not included, while 1 represents inclusion or membership. For 
example, fuzzy logic is used in washing machines that determine by themselves how much 
water to use or how long to wash (they continue washing until the water is clean). In account­
ing and finance, fuzzy logic allows people to analyze information with subjective financial 
values (intangibles such as goodwill) that are very important considerations in economic anal­
ysis. Fuzzy logic and neural networks are often combined to express complicated and subjec­
tive concepts in a form that makes it possible to simplify the problem and apply rules that are 
executed with a level of certainty.
GENETIC ALGORITHMS
A genetic algorithm is an artificial intelligence system that mimics the evolutionary, survival-
of-the-fittest process to generate increasingly better solutions to a problem. A genetic algo­
rithm is essentially an optimizing system: It finds the combination of inputs that gives the best 
outputs. Mutation is the process within a genetic algorithm of randomly trying combinations 
and evaluating the success (or failure) of the outcome.
Genetic algorithms are best suited to decision-making environments in which thousands, 
or perhaps millions, of solutions are possible. Genetic algorithms can find and evaluate solu­
tions with many more possibilities, faster and more thoroughly than a human. Organizations 
face decision-making environments for all types of problems that require optimization tech­
niques, such as the following:
	■	 Business executives use genetic algorithms to help them decide which combination of 
projects a firm should invest in, taking complicated tax considerations into account.
	■	 Investment companies use genetic algorithms to help in trading decisions.
	■	 Telecommunication companies use genetic algorithms to determine the optimal configu­
ration of fiber-optic cable in a network that may include as many as 100,000 connection 
points. The genetic algorithm evaluates millions of cable configurations and selects the 
one that uses the least amount of cable.

	
Chapter 9  Enabling the Organization—Decision Making   *  175
INTELLIGENT AGENTS
An intelligent agent is a special-purpose knowledge-based information system that accom­
plishes specific tasks on behalf of its users. Intelligent agents usually have a graphical repre­
sentation, such as “Sherlock Holmes” for an information search agent.
One of the simplest examples of an intelligent agent is a shopping bot. A shopping bot is 
software that will search several retailer websites and provide a comparison of each retailer’s 
offerings including price and availability. Increasingly, intelligent agents handle the majority 
of a company’s Internet buying and selling and complete such processes as finding products, 
bargaining over prices, and executing transactions. Intelligent agents also have the capability 
to handle all supply chain buying and selling.
Another application for intelligent agents is in environmental scanning and competitive intel­
ligence. For instance, an intelligent agent can learn the types of competitor information users 
want to track, continuously scan the web for it, and alert users when a significant event occurs.
Multiagent Systems and Agent-Based Modeling
What do cargo transport systems, book distribution centers, the video game market, and a 
flu epidemic have in common with an ant colony? They are all complex adaptive systems. 
By observing parts of Earth’s ecosystem, like ant colonies, artificial intelligence scientists 
can use hardware and software models that incorporate insect characteristics and behavior to 
(1) learn how people-based systems behave, (2) predict how they will behave under a given 
set of circumstances, and (3) improve human systems to make them more efficient and effec­
tive. This process of learning from ecosystems and adapting their characteristics to human 
and organizational situations is called biomimicry.
In the past few years, AI research has made much progress in modeling complex orga­
nizations as a whole with the help of multiagent systems. In a multiagent system, groups 
of intelligent agents have the ability to work independently and to interact with each other. 
Agent-based modeling is a way of simulating human organizations using multiple intelligent 
agents, each of which follows a set of simple rules and can adapt to changing conditions.
Agent-based modeling systems are being used to model stock market fluctuations, predict 
the escape routes people seek in a burning building, estimate the effects of interest rates on 
consumers with different types of debt, and anticipate how changes in conditions will affect 
the supply chain, to name just a few.
VIRTUAL REALITY
Virtual reality is a computer-simulated environment that can be a simulation of the real world 
or an imaginary world. Virtual reality is a fast-growing area of artificial intelligence that had 
its origins in efforts to build more natural, realistic, multisensory human-computer interfaces. 
Virtual reality enables telepresence where users can be anywhere in the world and use virtual 
reality systems to work alone or together at a remote site. Typically, this involves using a 
virtual reality system to enhance the sight and touch of a human who is remotely manipulat­
ing equipment to accomplish a task. Examples range from virtual surgery, where surgeon and 
patient may be on opposite sides of the globe, to the remote use of equipment in hazardous 
environments such as chemical plants and nuclear reactors. Augmented reality is the viewing 
of the physical world with computer-generated layers of information added to it.
Virtual Workforce
At Microsoft’s headquarters in Redmond, Washington, traffic congestion occurs daily for the 
35,000 commuters. To alleviate the congestion Microsoft is offering its employees the ability 
to work virtually from home. Over 42 percent of IBM’s 330,000 employees work virtually, 
saving over $100 million per year in real estate–elated expenses. Working virtually offers sev­
eral advantages such as fewer cars on the road, increases in worker productive, and decreased 
real estate expenses. Drawbacks include the fear among workers that they will jeopardize 
their careers by working from home, and some workers need a busy environment to stay 
productive. Virtual workers also tend to feel alone, secluded, and deprived of vital training 
and mentoring.

176  *  Unit 3  Streamlining Business Operations
	1.	 Explain the three different types of MIS systems for decision making and identify one form of each 
for a connected car.
	2.	 Describe the difference between transactional and analytical information, and determine which 
types are used to create a connected car’s intelligent dashboard.
	3.	 Identify how a connected car consolidates, drills-down, and slices-and-dices data to help drivers 
make better decisions.
	4.	 Identify the five different types of artificial intelligence systems, and create an example of each for 
a connected car.
O P E N I N G  C A S E  ST U DY  Q U E ST I O N S
The goal of the DARPA Grand Challenge is to save lives by making one-third of ground military forces 
autonomous or driverless vehicles. Created in response to a congressional and U.S. Department of 
Defense (DoD) mandate, the DARPA Grand Challenge brings together individuals and organizations 
from industry, the research and development (R&D) community, government, the armed services, and 
academia and includes students, backyard inventors, and automotive enthusiasts.
The DARPA Grand Challenge 2004
The DARPA Grand Challenge 2004 field test of autonomous ground vehicles ran from Barstow, 
­California, to Primm, Nevada, and offered a $1 million prize. From the qualifying round at the California 
Speedway, 15 finalists emerged to attempt the Grand Challenge. However, the prize went unclaimed 
when no vehicles were able to complete the difficult desert route.
The DARPA Grand Challenge 2005
The DARPA Grand Challenge 2005 was held in the Mojave Desert and offered a $2 million prize to the 
team that completed the 132-mile course in the shortest time under 10 hours. The race, over desert 
terrain, included narrow tunnels, sharp turns, and a winding mountain pass with a sheer drop-off on 
one side and a rock face on the other. Five teams completed the course, and “Stanley,” the Stanford 
Racing Team’s car, won the $2 million prize with a time of 6 hours, 53 minutes.
DARPA Robotic Challenge 2015
Machines with human-like abilities have been portrayed in movies and books for a long time. Now they 
are coming to life at the DARPA Robotics Challenge, a program created to accelerate progress in AI 
development that would allow them to move in to areas too dangerous for humans along with mitigat­
ing natural or man-made disasters. The $2 million first prize was awarded to the Korean team that built 
robot DRC-Hubo. The $1 million second prize was awarded to the Florida team that built Running Man. 
The Challenge was a huge success and advances in robotics are being seen in areas around the globe.6
Questions
	1.	 How is the DoD using AI to improve its operations and save lives?
	2.	 Why would the DoD use an event like the DARPA Grand Challenge or DARPA Robotic Challenge to 
further technological innovation?
	3.	 Describe how autonomous vehicles and robots could be used by organizations around the world 
to improve business efficiency and effectiveness.
Chapter Nine Case:  Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency 
(DARPA) Grand Challenge

	
Chapter 9  Enabling the Organization—Decision Making   *  177
9.1.	 Explain the importance of decision making for managers at each of the three primary 
organization levels along with the associated decision characteristics.
Decision-making skills are essential for all business professionals, at every company level, who 
make decisions that run the business. At the operational level, employees develop, control, and 
maintain core business activities required to run the day-to-day operations. Operational decisions 
are considered structured decisions, which arise in situations in which established processes offer 
potential solutions. Structured decisions are made frequently and are almost repetitive in nature; 
they affect short-term business strategies.
At the managerial level, employees are continuously evaluating company operations to hone 
the firm’s abilities to identify, adapt to, and leverage change. Managerial decisions cover short- and 
medium-range plans, schedules, and budgets along with policies, procedures, and business objec­
tives for the firm. These types of decisions are considered semistructured decisions; they occur in 
situations in which a few established processes help to evaluate potential solutions, but not enough 
to lead to a definite recommended decision.
At the strategic level, managers develop overall business strategies, goals, and objectives as part 
of the company’s strategic plan. They also monitor the strategic performance of the organization and 
its overall direction in the political, economic, and competitive business environment. Strategic deci­
sions are highly unstructured decisions, occurring in situations in which no procedures or rules exist 
to guide decision makers toward the correct choice. They are infrequent, extremely important, and 
typically related to long-term business strategy.
9.2.	Classify the different operational support systems, managerial support systems, and 
strategic support systems and explain how managers can use these systems to make 
decisions and gain competitive advantages.
Being able to sort, calculate, analyze, and slice-and-dice information is critical to an organization’s 
success. Without knowing what is occurring throughout the organization, there is no way that man­
agers and executives can make solid decisions to support the business. The different operational, 
managerial, and strategic support systems include:
■	
Operational: A transaction processing system (TPS) is the basic business system that serves 
the operational level (analysts) in an organization. The most common example of a TPS is an 
operational accounting system such as a payroll system or an order-entry system.
■	
Managerial: A decision support system (DSS) models information to support managers and 
business professionals during the decision-making process.
■	
Strategic: An executive information system (EIS) is a specialized DSS that supports senior-level 
executives within the organization.
9.3.	Describe artificial intelligence, and identify its five main types.
Artificial intelligence (AI) simulates human thinking and behavior, such as the ability to reason and 
learn. The five most common categories of AI are:
	1.	 Expert systems—computerized advisory programs that imitate the reasoning processes of 
experts in solving difficult problems.
	2.	 Neural networks—attempts to emulate the way the human brain works.
	3.	 Genetic algorithm—a system that mimics the evolutionary, survival-of-the-fittest process to gener­
ate increasingly better solutions to a problem.
	4.	 Intelligent agents—a special-purpose knowledge-based information system that accomplishes 
specific tasks on behalf of its users.
	5.	 Virtual reality—a computer-simulated environment that can be a simulation of the real world or an 
imaginary world.
L E A R N I N G  O U T C O M E  R E V I E W

178  *  Unit 3  Streamlining Business Operations
	1.	 What are the three levels of management found in a company? What types of decisions are made 
at each level?
	2.	 Define transaction processing systems and describe the role they play in a business.
	3.	 Define decision support systems and describe the role they play in a business.
	4.	 Define expert systems and describe the role they play in a business.
	5.	 What are the capabilities associated with digital dashboards?
	6.	 What are the common DSS analysis techniques?
	7.	 How does an electronic spreadsheet program, such as Excel, provide decision support 
capabilities?
	8.	 What is artificial intelligence?
	9.	 What are the five types of AI systems?
R E V I E W  Q U E S T I O N S
M A K I N G  B U S I N E S S  D E C I S I O N S
1. Long-Distance Hugs
Haptic technology digitizes touch. CuteCircuit created the Hug shirt that you can hug and send the 
exact hug, including strength, pressure, distribution, and even heartbeat, to a long-distance friend 
who is wearing the partner to your Hug shirt. Ben Hui at Cambridge University is creating hand-
squeezes that can be sent by mobile phones. You simply squeeze the phone and your friend feels it, 
in some form, at the other end. The value of these haptic devices is based on the idea that physical 
touch is an important element to all human interactions, and if you can transfer the physical touch, 
you can replicate the emotion. In a group, create a new business product that uses a haptic inter­
face. Share your product idea with your peers.
2. IBM Watson
In 2011, the IBM Watson computer defeated the two best contestants in the game show Jeopardy. What 
made the achievement so remarkable was that the computer had to read the question, understand 
what was being asked, search through 200 million pages of text, figure out what the best answer 
would be, and then hit a buzzer before the other contestants. It accomplished all these steps in about 
3 seconds. IBM predicts that Watson could be the ultimate researcher, helping professionals in various 
industries find the information they are looking for in a matter of seconds. What do you think about 
Watson’s powerful services? Do you think you could one day have access to htis powerful technology 
on your favorite serach engine. How would having an IBM Watson help you in your college career?
3. DSS and EIS
Dr. Rosen runs a large dental conglomerate—Teeth Doctors—that staffs more than 700 dentists in six 
states. Dr. Rosen is interested in purchasing a competitor called Dentix that has 150 dentists in three 
additional states. Before deciding whether to purchase Dentix, Dr. Rosen must consider several issues:
■	
The cost of purchasing Dentix.
■	
The locations of the Dentix offices.
■	
The current number of customers per dentist, per office, and per state.
■	
The merger between the two companies.

	
Chapter 9  Enabling the Organization—Decision Making   *  179
■	
The professional reputation of Dentix.
■	
Other competitors.
Explain how Dr. Rosen and Teeth Doctors can benefit from the use of information systems to make 
an accurate business decision in regard to the potential purchase of Dentix.
4. Finding Information on Decision Support Systems
You are working on the sales team for a small catering company that maintains 75 employees and 
generates $1 million in revenues per year. The owner, Pam Hetz, wants to understand how she can 
use decision support systems to help grow her business. Pam has an initial understanding of DSS 
systems and is interested in learning more about what types are available, how they can be used in 
a small business, and the cost associated with different DSS systems. In a group, create a presenta­
tion that discusses DSS systems in detail. Be sure to answer all Pam’s questions on DSS systems in 
the presentation.
5. Searching Telephone Calls
Imagine being able to search a database of customer phone calls to find specific requests or to be 
able to sort through digital customer complaints to detect the exact moment when the interaction 
between the customer service representative and the customer went wrong. A new tool called Find 
It allows the sorting of digital voice records as easily as using Google to sift through documents. Find 
It is opening limitless business opportunities as organizations begin to understand how they can use 
this technology to help employees search voice mails or recorded calls for keywords and phrases.
You have recently started your own marketing firm and you want to use the power of Find It to 
help your customers query all of their unique data records, including digital voice recordings. Now 
all you need is to prepare your marketing materials to send to potential customers. Create a market­
ing pitch that you will deliver to customers detailing the business opportunities they could uncover if 
they purchased Find It. Your marketing pitch can be a one-page document, a catchy tune, a video, or 
a PowerPoint presentation.

180  *  Unit 3  Streamlining Business Operations
C H A P T E R  10
LEARNING OUTCOMES
10.1.	 Describe supply chain management along with its 
impact on business.
10.2.	Identify the three components of supply chain 
management along with the technologies reinventing 
the supply chain.
Information Technology’s Role 
in the Supply Chain
Supply chain management systems can increase profitability across an organization. For 
example, a manufacturing plant manager might focus on keeping the inventory of Product 
A as low as possible, which will directly reduce the manufacturing costs and make the plant 
manager look great. However, the plant manager and the business might not realize that these 
savings are causing increased costs in other areas, such as having to pay more to procure 
raw materials for immediate production needs or increasing costs due to expedited shipping 
services. Only an end-to-end view or an integrated supply chain would uncover these issues, 
allowing a firm to adjust business strategies to increase profitability across the enterprise. 
Supply chain management performs three main business processes (see Figure 10.1):
	1.	 Materials flow from suppliers and their upstream suppliers at all levels.
	2.	 Materials are transformed into semifinished and finished products—the organization’s 
own production processes.
	3.	 Products are distributed to customers and their downstream customers at all levels.
Extending the Organization—
Supply Chain Management
LO 10.1 Describe supply chain 
management along with its 
impact on business.
FIGURE 10.1
Typical Supply Chain.
Suppliers’
Supplier
Supplier
Upstream
Manufacturer
Distributor
Retailer
Customer
Customers’
Customer
Suppliers’
Supplier
Customers’
Customer
Suppliers’
Supplier
Customers’
Customer
Downstream

	
Chapter 10  Extending the Organization—Supply Chain Management  *  181
The supply chain is only as strong as its weakest link. Companies use supply chain man­
agement metrics to measure the performance of supply chains to identify weak links quickly. 
A few of the common supply chain management metrics include:
	■	 Back order: An unfilled customer order for a product that is out of stock.
	■	 Inventory cycle time: The time it takes to manufacture a product and deliver it to the 
retailer.
	■	 Customer order cycle time: The agreed-upon time between the purchase of a product and 
the delivery of the product.
	■	 Inventory turnover: The frequency of inventory replacement.
As companies evolve into extended organizations, the roles of supply chain participants are 
changing. It is now common for suppliers to be involved in product development and for distribu­
tors to act as consultants in brand marketing. The notion of virtually seamless information 
links within and between organizations is an essential element of integrated supply chains.
Information technology’s primary role in SCM is creating the integrations or tight process 
and information linkages between functions within a firm—such as marketing, sales, finance, 
manufacturing, and distribution—and between firms, which allow the smooth, synchronized 
flow of both information and product between customers, suppliers, and transportation provid­
ers across the supply chain. Information technology integrates planning, decision-making 
processes, business operating processes, and information sharing for business performance 
management (see Figure 10.2).
Supply chain design determines how to structure a supply chain including the product, 
selection of partners, the location and capacity of warehouses, transportation methods, and 
supporting management information systems. Considerable evidence shows that this type of 
supply chain design results in superior supply chain capabilities and profits.
Supply chain visibility is the ability to view all areas up and down the supply chain in 
real time. To react to demand, an organization needs to know all customer events triggered 
upstream and downstream and so must their suppliers and their suppliers’ suppliers. Without 
this information, supply chain participants are blind to the supply and demand needs occurring 
in the marketplace, a factor required to implement successful business strategies. To improve 
FIGURE 10.2
The Integrated Supply 
Chain .
Source
Plan
Make
Deliver
Return
Strategic
Impact
Operational
Impact
Planning and Control Supply Chain Integration
Examples: supply chain planning, 
collaborative product development, 
integrated demand and supply management
Information Integration
Examples: inventory visibility, performance metrics,
event monitoring, business intelligence,
scorecards, dashboards
Business Process Integration
Examples: collaborative logistics, commerce websites,
vendor-managed inventory, private exchanges

182  *  Unit 3  Streamlining Business Operations
visibility across the supply chain, firms can use supply chain planning systems and supply 
chain execution systems.
Supply chain planning systems use advanced mathematical algorithms to improve the 
flow and efficiency of the supply chain while reducing inventory. To yield accurate results, 
however, supply chain planning systems require information inputs that are correct and up to 
date regarding customers, orders, sales, manufacturing, and distribution capabilities.
Ideally, the supply chain consists of multiple firms that function as efficiently and effec-
tively as a single firm, with full information visibility. Supply chain execution systems  
ensure supply chain cohesion by automating the different activities of the supply chain. For 
example, a supply chain execution system might electronically route orders from a manufac-
turer to a supplier using electronic data interchange (EDI), a standard format for the elec-
tronic exchange of information between supply chain participants. Figure 10.3 details how 
SCP and SCE software correlate to the supply chain.
A good example of inventory issues that occur when a company does not have a clear 
vision of its entire supply chain is the bullwhip effect. The bullwhip effect occurs when dis-
torted product-demand information ripples from one partner to the next throughout the supply 
chain. The misinformation regarding a slight rise in demand for a product could cause dif-
ferent members in the supply chain to stockpile inventory. These changes ripple throughout 
the supply chain, magnifying the issue and creating excess inventory and costs for all. For 
example, if a car dealership is having a hard time moving a particular brand of car, it might 
offer significant discounts to try to move the inventory. Without this critical information, 
the car manufacturer might see a rise in demand for this particular brand of car and increase 
production orders, not realizing that the dealerships are actually challenged with selling the 
inventory. Today, integrated supply chains provide managers with the visibility to see their 
suppliers’ and customers’ supply chains, ensuring that supply always meets demand.
Technologies Reinventing the Supply Chain
Optimizing the supply chain is a critical business process for any successful organization. 
Just think of the complexity of Walmart’s supply chain and the billions of products being sent 
around the world guaranteeing every shelf is fully stocked. The three components of supply 
chain management on which companies focus to find efficiencies include procurement, logis-
tics, and materials management (see Figure 10.4).
Procurement is the purchasing of goods and services to meet the needs of the supply chain. 
The procurement process is a key supply chain strategy because the capability to purchase 
input materials at the right price is directly correlated to the company’s ability to operate. 
Without the right inputs, the company simply can’t create cost-effective outputs. For example, 
LO 10.2 Identify the three com-
ponents of supply chain manage-
ment along with the technologies 
reinventing the supply chain.
FIGURE 10.3
Supply Chain Planning and 
Supply Chain Execution: 
Software’s Correlation to the 
Supply Chain.
Supply Chain Planning
Information Flows
Payment Flows
Supply Chain Execution
Supplier
Manufacturer
Distributor
Retailer
Customer

	
Chapter 10  Extending the Organization—Supply Chain Management  *  183
if McDonald’s could not procure potatoes or had to purchase potatoes at an outrageous price, 
it would be unable to create and sell its famous french fries. In fact, procuring the right size 
potatoes that can produce the famous long french fries is challenging in some countries where 
locally grown potatoes are too small. Procurement can help a company answer the following 
questions:
	■	 What quantity of raw materials should we purchase to minimize spoilage?
	■	 How can we guarantee that our raw materials meet production needs?
	■	 At what price can we purchase materials to guarantee profitability?
	■	 Can purchasing all products from a single vendor provide additional discounts?
Logistics includes the processes that control the distribution, maintenance, and replacement 
of materials and personnel to support the supply chain. Recall from the value chain analysis in 
Chapter 1 that the primary value activities for an organization include inbound and outbound 
logistics. Inbound logistics acquires raw materials and resources and distributes them to manu­
facturing as required. Outbound logistics distributes goods and services to customers. Logistics 
controls processes inside a company (warehouse logistics) and outside a company (transport 
logistics) and focuses on the physical execution part of the supply chain. Logistics includes 
the increasingly complex management of processes, information, and communication to take a 
product from cradle to grave. Cradle-to-grave provides logistics support throughout the entire 
system or life of the product. Logistics can help a company answer the following questions:
	■	 What is the quickest way to deliver products to our customers?
	■	 What is the optimal way to place items in the warehouse for picking and packing?
	■	 What is the optimal path to an item in the warehouse?
	■	 What path should the vehicles follow when delivering the goods? What areas or regions 
are the trucks covering?
Materials management includes activities that govern the flow of tangible, physical materi­
als through the supply chain such as shipping, transport, distribution, and warehousing. In mate­
rials management, you focus on quality and quantity of materials as well as on how you will plan, 
acquire, use, and dispose of such materials. It can include the handling of liquids, fuel, produce, 
FIGURE 10.4
The Three Components of 
Supply Chain Management.
LOGISTICS
Processes that control the
distribution, maintenance, and
replacement of materials and
personnel to support the supply
chain.
PROCUREMENT
Purchasing of goods and
services to meet the needs of
the supply chain.
MATERIALS
MANAGEMENT
Activities that govern the ﬂow of
tangible, physical materials
through the supply chain such as
shipping, transport, distribution
and warehousing.
SUPPLY CHAIN
MANAGEMENT

184  *  Unit 3  Streamlining Business Operations
and plants and a number of other potentially hazardous items. Materials management focuses on 
handling all materials safely, efficiently, and in compliance with regulatory requirements and dis­
posal requirements. Materials management can help a company answer the following concerns:
	■	 What are our current inventory levels?
	■	 What items are running low in the warehouse?
	■	 What items are at risk of spoiling in the warehouse?
	■	 How do we dispose of spoiled items?
	■	 What laws need to be followed for storing hazardous materials?
	■	 Which items must be refrigerated when being stored and transported?
	■	 What are the requirements to store or transport fragile items?
As with all other areas of business, disruptive technologies are continuously being deployed 
to help businesses find competitive advantages in each component of the supply chain, as out­
lined in Figure 10.5.
3D PRINTING SUPPORTS PROCUREMENT
The process of 3D printing (additive manufacturing) builds—layer by layer in an additive process—
a three-dimensional solid object from a digital model. The additive manufacturing process of 3D 
printing is profoundly different from traditional manufacturing processes. The Financial Times 
and other sources are stating that 3D printing has the potential to be vastly more disruptive to 
business than the Internet. That is a bold statement! The reason people are betting on 3D print­
ing to disrupt business is that it brings production closer to users, thus eliminating steps in the 
supply chain similar to disintermediation by the Internet. Three-dimensional printing also pro­
motes mass customization, small production batches, and reduction in inventory. Traditionally, 
the costs associated with 3D printing made it accessible only to large corporations. Now with 
FIGURE 10.5
Disruptive Business 
Technologies.
3D
Printing
RFID
Drones
Robotics
 A process that builds—
 layer by layer in an additive
 process- a three-
 dimensional solid object
 from a digital model
 Supports procurement
 Uses electronic tages and
 labels to identify objects
 wirelessly over short
 distances
 Supports logistics
 An unmanned aircraft that
 can ﬂy autonomously, or
 without a human
 Supports logistics
 Focus on creating artﬁcial intelligence
 devices that can move and react to sensory
 input
 Supports materials management
© Shannon Faulk/DreamPictures/Getty Images

	
Chapter 10  Extending the Organization—Supply Chain Management  *  185
inexpensive printers, scanners, and applications, the technology is accessible to small and mid-
sized businesses and home users. With the advances in 3D printing, the need to procure materials 
will become far easier because businesses can simply print the parts and components required 
for the production process. There is no doubt about it—3D printing will affect production pro­
cess and supply chains and cause business disruption. These printers are creating auto parts, cell 
phone covers, jewelry, toys, bicycles, and manufacturing prototypes for testing purposes.
To print a 3D product, users create a digital model that is sliced into thin cross-sections 
called layers. During the printing process, the 3D printer starts at the bottom of the design and 
adds successive layers of material to complete the project. Computer-aided design/computer-
aided manufacturing (CAD/CAM) systems are used to create the digital designs and then 
manufacture the products. For example, a user creates a design with a CAD application and 
then manufactures the product by using CAM systems. Before 3D printers existed, creat­
ing a prototype was time-consuming and expensive, requiring skilled craftsmen and specific 
machinery. Instead of sending modeling instructions to a production company, advances in 
3D printing allow users to create prototypes and products on demand from their desks. Ship­
ping required parts from around the world could become obsolete because the spare parts can 
now be 3D printed on demand. This could have a major impact on how businesses large and 
small operate and interact on a global scale in the future.
The maker movement is a cultural trend that places value on an individual’s ability to be 
a creator of things as well as a consumer of things. In this culture, individuals who create 
things are called "makers." The movement is growing rapidly and is expected to be economi­
cally disruptive; as ordinary people become more self-sufficient, they will be able to make 
their own products instead of procuring brand-name products from retail stores. Makers come 
from all walks of life, with diverse skill sets and interests. The thing they have in common is 
creativity, an interest in design, and access to tools and raw materials that make production 
possible. The growth of the maker movement is often attributed to the rise of community 
makerspaces, a community center that provides technology, manufacturing equipment, and 
educational opportunities to the public that would otherwise be inaccessible or unaffordable. 
Although the majority of makers are hobbyists, entrepreneurs and small manufacturers are 
also taking advantage of the classes and tools available in makerspaces.
RFID SUPPORTS LOGISTICS
A television commercial shows a man in a uniform quietly moving through a family home. 
The man replaces the empty cereal box with a full one just before a hungry child opens the 
cabinet; he then opens a new sack of dog food as the hungry bulldog eyes him warily; and, 
finally, he hands a full bottle of shampoo to the man in the shower whose bottle had just run 
out. The next wave in supply chain management will be home-based supply chain fulfillment. 
Walgreens is differentiating itself from other national chains by marketing itself as the fam­
ily’s just-in-time supplier. Consumers today are becoming incredibly comfortable with the 
idea of going online to purchase products when they want, how they want, and at the price 
they want. Walgreens is developing custom websites for each household, which allow families 
to order electronically and then at their convenience go to the store to pick up their goods at a 
special self-service counter or the drive-through window. Walgreens is making a promise that 
goes beyond low prices and customer service and extends right into the home.
Radio-frequency identification (RFID) uses electronic tags and labels to identify objects 
wirelessly over short distances. It holds the promise of replacing existing identification technologies 
such as the bar code. RFID tags are evolving, too, and the advances will provide more granular 
information to enterprise software. Today’s tags can store an electronic product code. In time, tags 
could hold more information, making them portable mini-databases. RFID’s electronic product 
code (RFID EPC) promotes serialization or the ability to track individual items by using the 
unique serial number associated with each RFID tag. Although a bar code might identify a prod­
uct such as a bottle of salad dressing, an RFID EPC tag can identify each specific bottle and allow 
item-level tracking to determine whether the product has passed its expiration date. Businesses 
can tell automatically where all its items are in the supply chain just by gathering the data from the 
RFID chips. The possibilities of RFID are endless, and one area it is affecting is logistics. RFID 

186  *  Unit 3  Streamlining Business Operations
tags for applications such as highway toll collection and container tracking remain in continuous 
use for several years. Like regular electronic components, the tags are adhered to rigid substrates 
and packaged in plastic enclosures. In contrast, tags on shipping cartons are used for a much 
shorter time and are then destroyed. Disposable tags are adhered to printed, flexible labels pasted 
onto the carton, and these smart labels contain an RFID chip and antenna on the back. A thermal 
printer/encoder prints alphanumeric and bar code data on the labels while encoding the chip at the 
same time.  Figures 10.6. and 10.7 display how an RFID system works in the supply chain.
FIGURE 10.6
Three RFID Components.
The Three Components to an RFID System
Tag - A microchip holds data, in this case an EPC (electronic
product code), a set of numbers unique to an item. The rest of
the tag is an antenna that transmits data to a reader.
EPC example: 01-0000A77-000136BR5
Reader - A reader uses radio waves to read the tag and
sends the EPC to computers in the supply chain.
Computer Network - Each computer in the supply chain
recognizes the EPC and pulls up information related to the item,
such as dates made and shipped, price, and directions for use,
from a server maintained by the manufacturer. The computers
track the item’s location throughout the supply chain.
FIGURE 10.7
RFID in the Supply Chain.
RFID in the Retail Supply Chain
RFID tags are added to every product and shipping box.  At every step of an item’s journey, a
reader scans one of the tags and updates the information on the server.
The Home
The consumer can have the tag disabled at the store for privacy
or place readers in closets to keep track of clothes.  With
customers’ approval, stores can follow purchasing patterns and
notify them of sales.
The Store
Tags are scanned upon arrival to update inventory.  At the racks,
readers scan tags as shirts are stocked.  At the checkout counter, a
cashier can scan individual items with a handheld reader.  As items
leave the store, inventory is updated.  Manufacturers and retailers
can observe sales patterns in real time and make swift decisions
about production, ordering, and pricing.
The Distribution Center
Readers in the unloading area scan the
tags on arriving boxes and update
inventory, avoiding the need to open packages.
The Manufacturer
A reader scans the tags
as items leave the factory.

	
Chapter 10  Extending the Organization—Supply Chain Management  *  187
DRONES SUPPORT LOGISTICS
A drone is an unmanned aircraft that can fly autonomously, or without a human. Amazon.com 
is piloting drone aircraft that could someday deliver customers’ packages in half an hour or less 
(see Figure 10.8). UPS and FedEx have also been experimenting with their own versions of 
flying parcel carriers. Drones are already here and use GPS to help coordinate the logistics of 
package delivery. The problems with drones include FAA approval and the advanced ability to 
detect and avoid objects. GPS coordinates can easily enable the drone to find the appropriate 
package delivery location, but objects not included in the GPS, such as cars, dogs, and children, 
will need to be detected and avoided.
FedEx founder Fred Smith stated that his drones are up and running in the lab; all he requires 
to move his fleet of drones from the lab to production is approval from regulators. “We have 
all this stuff working in the lab right now, we don’t need to reinvent the wheel,” remarks Smith. 
“We need a set of rules from the FAA. It’s just a matter of getting the laws in place so companies 
can begin building to those specifications and doing some real field testing.”
ROBOTICS SUPPORTS MATERIALS MANAGEMENT
Robotics focuses on creating artificial intelligence devices that can move and react to sensory 
input. The term robot was coined by Czech playwright Karl Capek in his play R.U.R. (Ros­
sum’s Universal Robots), which opened in Prague in 1921. Robota is the Czech word for “forced 
labor.” The term robotics was introduced by writer Isaac Asimov; in his science fiction book I, 
Robot, published in 1950, he presented three laws of robotics:
	1.	 A robot may not injure a human being, or, through inaction, allow a human being to come 
to harm.
	2.	 A robot must obey the orders given it by human beings except where such orders would 
conflict with the First Law.
	3.	 A robot must protect its own existence as long as such protection does not conflict with the 
First or Second Law.
FIGURE 10.8
Amazon Drones Delivering 
Packages.
© Mopic/Shutterstock

188  *  Unit 3  Streamlining Business Operations
You can find robots in factories performing high-precision tasks, in homes vacuuming 
the floor and the pool, and in dangerous situations such as cleaning toxic wastes or defusing 
bombs. Amazon alone has more than 10,000 robots in its warehouses, picking, packing, and 
managing materials to fulfill customer orders (see Figure 10.9). The robots are made by Kiva 
Systems, a company Amazon bought for $775 million in 2012. Kiva pitches its robots—which 
can cost between a few million dollars and as much as roughly $20 million—as simplifying 
and reducing costs via materials management. The robots are tied into a complex grid that 
optimizes item placement in the warehouse and allows the robots to pick the inventory items 
and bring them to the workers for packing. Watching an order fulfillment center equipped 
with Kiva robots is amazing; the operators stand still while the products come to them. Inven­
tory pods store the products that are carried and transferred by a small army of little orange 
robots, eliminating the need for traditional systems such as conveyors and sorters. Though 
assessing the costs and benefits of robots versus human labor can be difficult, Kiva boasts 
that a packer working with its robots can fulfill three to four times as many orders per hour. 
Zappos, Staples, and Amazon are just a few of the companies taking advantage of the latest 
innovation in warehouse management by replacing traditional order fulfillment technologies 
such as conveyor belts with Kiva’s little orange robots.
THE EXTENDED SUPPLY CHAIN
As the supply chain management market matures, it is becoming even more sophisticated and 
incorporating additional functionality such as marketing, customer service, and even product 
development to its extended supply chain. Advanced communications tools, easy-to-use deci­
sion support systems, and building trust among participants when sharing information are all 
making the home-based supply chain possible. A few of the fastest-growing extensions for sup­
ply chain management are included in Figure 10.11.
FIGURE 10.9
Kiva Robots.
© Beth Hall/Bloomberg via Getty Images

	
Chapter 10  Extending the Organization—Supply Chain Management  *  189
FIGURE 10.11
Extending the Supply Chain.
Supply chain event management (SCEM) 
Enables an organization to react more quickly to resolve supply chain issues.
SCEM software increases real-time information sharing among supply chain
partners and decreases their response time to unplanned events. SCEM
demand will skyrocket as more and more organizations begin to discover the
beneﬁts of real-time supply chain monitoring.
Selling chain management  
Applies technology to the activities in the order life cycle from inquiry
to sale. 
Collaborative engineering 
Allows an organization to reduce the cost and time required during the
design process of a product. 
Collaborative demand planning 
Helps organizations reduce their investment in inventory, while improving
customer satisfaction through product availability. 
ORDER
MANUFACTURING
What does orthopedic surgery and governing a country have in common with knitting socks, scarves, 
and headbands? Nothing except the salary. Hobbyist Alicia Shaffer is earning $80,000 a month sell­
ing her handmade goods on Etsy, which adds up to an annual revenue of $960,000. That is the same 
amount as an orthopedic surgeon makes, and more than twice as much as the United States presi­
dent makes.
Etsy is an online craft makerspace for handmade goods. ETSY is building a human, authentic, and 
community-centric makerspace that uses the power of business to create a better world. In an Etsy 
Chapter Ten Case:  ETSY
	1.	 Identify how connected cars can impact the supply chain.
	2.	 Explain how connected cars can use RFID to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of drivers in 
the supply chain.
	3.	 Explain how connected cars can use robotics to improve the supply chain?
O P E N I N G  C A S E  ST U DY  Q U E ST I O N S

190  *  Unit 3  Streamlining Business Operations
Economy, creative entrepreneurs can find meaningful work selling their goods in both global and 
local markets, where thoughtful consumers can discover those goods and build relationships with the 
people who make and sell them. It’s an ecosystem that connects buyers around the world to the com­
munities where Etsy shop owners live, work, and create. As Etsy grows it is committed to its mission 
ensuring its core values are woven into all decisions it makes for the long-term health of its business, 
from the sourcing of office supplies to employee benefits to the items sold in its marketspace.
Shaffer’s company ThreeBirdNest is named after her bird tattoo that honors her three children. 
Shaffer attributes her success to deep-seated motivation and access to a global supply chain through 
Etsy. ThreeBirdNest launched in 2011, when she made a few headbands for the small women’s cloth­
ing boutique she ran in Livermore, California. Her headbands were so popular she decided to start 
selling them online. “I opened an Etsy shop, figuring I‘d help pay for my kids’ soccer and dance 
lessons to supplement the boutique’s sales,” states Shaffer. “I was recovering from the failure of a 
business I’d run selling baby products—handmade slings, carriers, and blankets. After that business 
tanked in the recession, I’d lost a little bit of confidence in my ability to be an entrepreneur.”
In the first few weeks after its launch, ThreeBirdNest made 90 sales. Shaffer credits much of the 
traffic to Pinterest—she pinned her items. Still, “It was absolutely mindboggling. I thought it was a 
complete fluke.” But a few months later Shaffer found herself hiring a friend to help with shipping 
as orders began flowing like water. Through its independent website and Etsy shop, ThreeBirdNest 
receives an average of 150 orders per day, with most orders consisting of three items. Around the 
holidays, that number goes up to 700 to 1,200 orders per day. Last January, the business raked in a 
total of $128,000 in sales. Since its launch, it has made 100,000 sales on Etsy alone. ThreeBirdNest is 
unusually successful on Etsy, as most Etsy shop owners feel lucky to sell 10 pieces a month, and 65% 
of Etsy sellers make less than $100 from their shops in a year. Etsy makerspace crafters usually need 
day jobs to support their hobbies. 1
Questions
	1.	 Without makerspace’s like Etsy how would crafters market and sell their products?
	2.	 Explain how the bullwhip effect could impact a crafter on Etsy.
	3.	 Explain procurement, logistics, and materials management for ThreeBirdNest.
	4.	 What are some advantages and disadvantages of using Etsy to sell good and access its global 
supply chain?

	
Chapter 10  Extending the Organization—Supply Chain Management  *  191
10.1.	 Describe supply chain management along with its impact on business.
A supply chain consists of all parties involved, directly or indirectly, in obtaining raw materials or a 
product. To automate and enable sophisticated decision making in these critical areas, companies are 
turning to systems that provide demand forecasting, inventory control, and information flows between 
suppliers and customers. Supply chain management (SCM) is the management of information flows 
between and among activities in a supply chain to maximize total supply chain effectiveness and cor­
porate profitability. In the past, manufacturing efforts focused primarily on quality improvement efforts 
within the company; today these efforts reach across the entire supply chain, including customers, 
customers’ customers, suppliers, and suppliers’ suppliers. Today’s supply chain is an intricate network 
of business partners linked through communication channels and relationships.
Improved visibility across the supply chain and increased profitability for the firm are the primary 
business benefits received when implementing supply chain management systems. Supply chain 
visibility is the ability to view all areas up and down the supply chain in real time. The primary chal­
lenges associated with supply chain management include costs and complexity. The next wave in 
supply chain management will be home-based supply chain fulfillment. No more running to the store 
to replace your products because your store will come to you as soon as you need a new product.
10.2.	 Identify the three components of supply chain management along with the 
technologies reinventing the supply chain.
The three components of supply chain management on which companies focus to find efficiencies 
include procurement, logistics, and materials management. Procurement is the purchasing of goods 
and services to meet the needs of the supply chain. Materials management includes activities that 
govern the flow of tangible, physical materials through the supply chain such as shipping, transport, 
distribution, and warehousing. The technologies reinventing the supply chain include 3D printing, 
RFID, drones, and robotics.
L E A R N I N G  O U T C O M E  R E V I E W
	1.	 What are the five primary activities in a supply chain?
	2.	 What is the bullwhip effect and how can it affect a supply chain and a firm’s profitability?
	3.	 Where are the customer’s customers in a typical supply chain?
	4.	 Where are the supplier’s suppliers in a typical supply chain?
	5.	 What is procurement and how does it impact the supply chain?
	6.	 What is logistics and how does it impact the supply chain?
	7.	 What is materials management and how does it impact the supply chain?
	8.	 What is RFID’s primary purpose in the supply chain?
R E V I E W  Q U E S T I O N S

192  *  Unit 3  Streamlining Business Operations
1. 3D Printing for Poverty
Thirty-three-year-old Kodjo Afate Grikou wanted to help his community in West Africa to print 
necessities that they can’t source locally, such as kitchen utensils for cooking. The structure of the 
3D printer he had in mind uses very little in terms of new parts because it is mostly made up of 
ewaste and scrap metal. Before building this printer, he set up his project on the European social 
funding website, ulule. The project received more than $10,000, despite the printer costing only 
$1,000, mostly through purchasing new parts that he couldn’t find locally. Grikou hopes that his 
innovation will inspire teenagers and young people in his community to attend school and gain an 
education so they can make further life-changing developments that will benefit not only their lives 
but also others around them. In a group, brainstorm ways 3D printing can help rural communities 
fight poverty.
■	
What is the quickest way to deliver products to our customers?
■	
What is the optimal way to place items in the warehouse for picking and packing?
■	
What is the optimal path to an item in the warehouse?
■	
What path should the vehicles follow when delivering the goods?
■	
What areas or regions are the trucks covering?
2. 3D Printing Weapons
In 1976, the big movie studios sued Sony for releasing the first VCR because it advertised it as “a 
way of recording feature-length movies from TV to VHS tape for watching and taking over to friends’ 
houses.” Over the next eight years Universal Studios, along with other powerful media groups, 
fought Sony over creating the device because it could allow users to violate copyright laws. The 
courts went back and forth for years attempting to determine whether Sony would be held liable for 
creating a device that enabled users to break copyright laws. In 1984, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled 
in favor of Sony: “If a device is capable of sustaining a substantial noninfringing use, then it is lawful 
to make and sell that device. That is, if the device is merely capable of doing something legit, it is 
legal to make no matter how it is used in practice.”
Just think of cars, knives, guns, and computers as they are all used to break the law, and nobody 
would be allowed to produce them if they were held responsible for how people used them. Do you 
agree that if you make a tool and sell it to someone who goes on to break the law, you should be 
held responsible? Do you agree that 3D printers will be used to infringe copyright, trademark, and 
patent protections? If so, should 3D printers be illegal?
3. Analyzing Dell’s Supply Chain Management System
Dell’s supply chain strategy is legendary. Essentially, if you want to build a successful SCM system 
your best bet is to model your SCM system after Dell’s. In a team, research Dell’s supply chain man­
agement strategy on the web and create a report discussing any new SCM updates and strategies 
the company is using that were not discussed in this text. Be sure to include a graphical presentation 
of Dell’s current supply chain model.
4. Robots Took My Job
Kiva’s little orange robots are becoming the latest craze and a truly fascinating innovation in ware­
house management. Kiva’s robots are replacing conveyor belts and carousels at the order fulfillment 
warehouses of retailers such as Zappos, Staples, and Amazon. Kiva Mobile Fulfillment System uses a 
M A K I N G  B U S I N E S S  D E C I S I O N S

	
Chapter 10  Extending the Organization—Supply Chain Management  *  193
breakthrough parallel processing approach to order fulfillment with a unique material handling sys­
tem that simultaneously improves productivity, speed, accuracy, and flexibility.
■	
How can Kiva robots help distribution centers attain flexible, efficient order fulfillment?
■	
What other types of businesses could use Kiva robots to improve distribution productivity?
■	
How would warehouse employees react if they were told the company was implementing Kiva 
robots?
5. Fixing the Post Office
Is there anything more frustrating than waiting in line at the Post Office? Well, not only are those 
lines frustrating, they are also becoming unprofitable. The United States Postal Service is looking 
at a $13 billion loss in 2011, one of the greatest catastrophes in its history. What is killing the Post 
Office? Perhaps it is Stamps.com, a website that allows you to customize and print your own stamps 
24 hours a day. Getting married? You can place a photo of the happy couple right on the stamp for 
the invitations. Starting a business? You can place your business logo on your stamps. Stamps.com 
even keeps track of all of a customer’s postal spending using client codes, and it can recommend 
optimal delivery methods. Plus, Stamps.com gives you postage discounts you can’t even get at the 
Post Office or with a postage meter.
■	
What new products are stealing business from the Post Office?
■	
How could the Post Office create new products and services to help grow its business?
■	
How could the Post Office use cost, quality, delivery, flexibility, and service to revamp its oper­
ations management processes?

194  *  Unit 3  Streamlining Business Operations
C H A P T E R  11
LEARNING OUTCOMES
11.1.	 Describe customer relationship management along 
with its importance to a business.
11.2.	 Differentiate between operational and analytical 
customer relationship management.
11.3.	 Identify the three current trends extending customer 
relationship management.
Customer Relationship Management
Today, most competitors are simply a mouse-click away, and this intense competition is forc­
ing firms to switch from sales-focused business strategies to customer-focused business strat­
egies. Customers are one of a firm’s most valuable assets, and building strong, loyal customer 
relationships is a key competitive advantage. Harley-Davidson offers an excellent example of 
a company that knows the value of customer loyalty, and it finds itself in the coveted position 
of demand outweighing its supply. No other motorcycle in the world has the look, feel, and 
sound of a Harley-Davidson. Demand for Harley-Davidson motorcycles outweighs supply 
and some models have up to a two-year waiting list. Knowing the value of its customers, 
Harley-Davidson started the Harley’s Owners Group (HOG), which is the largest motorcycle 
club in the world with more than 600,000 members. HOG offers a wide array of events, rides, 
and benefits to its members and is a key competitive advantage as it helps to build a strong 
sense of community among Harley-Davidson owners. Harley-Davidson has built a customer 
following that is extremely loyal, a difficult task to accomplish in any industry.
Customer relationship management (CRM) is a means of managing all aspects of a cus­
tomer’s relationship with an organization to increase customer loyalty and retention and an orga­
nization’s profitability. CRM allows an organization to gain insights into customers’ shopping 
and buying behaviors. Every time a customer communicates with a company, the firm has the 
chance to build a trusting relationship with that particular customer. Harley-Davidson realizes 
that it takes more than just building and selling motorcycles to fulfill the dreams of its loyal 
customers. For this reason, the company strives to deliver unforgettable experiences along with 
its top-quality products. When the company began selling products online it found itself facing a 
dilemma—its online strategy for selling accessories directly to consumers would bypass Harley-
Davidson’s dealers, who depend on the high-margin accessories for store revenues. The solution 
was to deploy Harley-Davidson.com, which prompts customers to select a participating Harley-
Davidson dealership before placing any online orders. The selected dealership is then responsi­
ble for fulfilling the order. This strategy ensured that the dealers remained the focus point of each 
customer’s buying experiences. To guarantee that every customer has a highly satisfying online 
buying experience, the company asks the dealers to agree to a number of standards including:
	■	 Checking online orders twice daily.
	■	 Shipping online orders within 24 hours.
	■	 Responding to customer inquiries within 24 hours.
LO 11.1 Describe customer 
­relationship management along 
with its importance to a business.
Building a Customer-centric 
Organization—Customer 
Relationship Management

	
Chapter 11  Building a Customer-centric Organization—Customer Relationship Management  *  195
Harley-Davidson still monitors online customer metrics such as time taken to process 
orders, number of returned orders, and number of incorrect orders, guaranteeing that the com­
pany delivers on its critical success factor of providing prompt, excellent customer service 
consistently to all its loyal customers.
A primary component of managing a customer relationship is knowing when and why the 
customer is communicating with the company. Imagine an irate customer who has just spent 
an hour on the phone with your call center complaining about a defective product. While the 
customer is on the phone, your sales representative decides to drop by the customer’s office 
in an attempt to sell additional products. Obviously, this is not the ideal time to try to up-sell 
or cross-sell products to this particular customer. A customer relationship management sys­
tem would inform the sales representative that the customer was on the phone with customer 
service and even provide details of the call. Then your sales representative could stop by and 
offer assistance in resolving the product issue, which might help restore the relationship with 
the customer and provide opportunities for future sales.
THE POWER OF THE CUSTOMER
A standard rule of business states that the customer is always right. Although most busi­
nesses use this as their motto, they do not actually mean it. Ebusiness firms, however, must 
adhere to this rule as the power of the customer grows exponentially in the information age. 
Various websites and videos on YouTube reveal the power of the individual consumer (see 
­Figure 11.1). A decade ago if you had a complaint against a company, you could make a 
phone call or write a letter. Now you can contact hundreds or thousands of people around the 
globe and voice your complaint or anger with a company or product. You—the customer—
can now take your power directly to millions of people, and companies have to listen.
Using CRM metrics to track and monitor performance is a best practice for many compa­
nies. Figure 11.2 displays a few common CRM metrics a manager can use to track the success 
of the system. Just remember that you only want to track between five and seven of the hun­
dreds of CRM metrics available.
Operational and Analytical CRM
The two primary components of a CRM strategy are operational CRM and analytical CRM. 
Operational CRM supports traditional transactional processing for day-to-day front-office oper­
ations or systems that deal directly with the customers. Analytical CRM supports back-office 
operations and strategic analysis and includes all systems that do not deal directly with the cus­
tomers. Figure 11.3 provides an overview of the two. Figure 11.4 shows the different technolo­
gies marketing, sales, and customer service departments can use to perform operational CRM.
MARKETING AND OPERATIONAL CRM
Companies are no longer trying to sell one product to as many customers as possible; instead, 
they are trying to sell one customer as many products as possible. Marketing departments 
switch to this new way of doing business by using CRM technologies that allow them to 
gather and analyze customer information to tailor successful marketing campaigns. In fact, a 
marketing campaign’s success is directly proportional to the organization’s ability to gather 
and analyze the right customer information. The three primary operational CRM technologies 
a marketing department can implement to increase customer satisfaction are:
	1.	 List generator
	2.	 Campaign management
	3.	 Cross-selling and up-selling
List Generator
List generators compile customer information from a variety of sources and segment it for 
different marketing campaigns. These sources include website visits, questionnaires, surveys, 
LO 11.2 Differentiate between 
operational and analytical cus-
tomer relationship management.

196  *  Unit 3  Streamlining Business Operations
FIGURE 11.1
The Power of You–Websites 
Demonstrating the Power of 
the People.
www.
dontbuydodgechryslervehicles.
com
www.jetbluehostage.com

	
Chapter 11  Building a Customer-centric Organization—Customer Relationship Management  *  197
FIGURE 11.3
Operational CRM and 
Analytical CRM.
Sales
Systems
Marketing
Systems
Customer
Service
Systems
Front Oﬃce–Operational CRM
Collaborative
CRM
System
Data
Warehouse
Data
Mining
Back Oﬃce–Analytical CRM
FIGURE 11.2
Common CRM Metrics.
Sales Metrics
Customer Service Metrics
Marketing Metrics
Number of prospective customers
Cases closed same day
Number of marketing campaigns
Number of new customers
Number of cases handled by agent
New customer retention rates
Number of retained customers
Number of service calls
Number of responses by marketing campaign
Number of open leads
Average number of service requests by type
Number of purchases by marketing campaign
Number of sales calls
Average time to resolution
Revenue generated by marketing campaign
Number of sales calls per lead
Average number of service calls per day
Cost per interaction by marketing campaign
Amount of new revenue
Percentage compliance with service-level 
agreement
Number of new customers acquired by 
marketing campaign
Amount of recurring revenue
Percentage of service renewals
Customer retention rate
Number of proposals given
Customer satisfaction level
Number of new leads by product
marketing mailers, and so on. After compiling the customer list, it can be filtered based on 
criteria such as household income, gender, education level, political facilitation, age, or other 
factors. List generators provide the marketing department with valuable information on the 
type of customer it must target to find success for a marketing campaign.
Campaign Management
Campaign management systems guide users through marketing campaigns by performing 
such tasks as campaign definition, planning, scheduling, segmentation, and success analysis. 
These advanced systems can even calculate the profitability and track the results for each 
marketing campaign.

198  *  Unit 3  Streamlining Business Operations
Cross-Selling and Up-Selling
Two key sales strategies a marketing campaign can deploy are cross-selling and up-selling. 
Cross-selling is selling additional products or services to an existing customer. For example, 
if you were to purchase Tim Burton’s movie Alice in Wonderland on Amazon, you would also 
be asked whether you want to purchase the movie’s soundtrack or the original book. Amazon 
is taking advantage of cross-selling by offering customers goods across its book, movie, and 
music product lines. Up-selling is increasing the value of the sale. McDonald’s performs 
up-selling by asking customers whether they would like to super-size their meals for an extra 
cost. CRM systems offer marketing departments all kinds of information about customers 
and products, which can help identify up-selling and cross-selling opportunities to increase 
revenues.
SALES AND OPERATIONAL CRM
Sales departments were the first to begin developing CRM systems. They had two primary moti­
vations to track customer sales information electronically. First, sales representatives were strug­
gling with the overwhelming amount of customer account information they were required to 
maintain and track. Second, managers found themselves hindered because much of their vital 
customer and sales information remained in the heads of their sales representatives, even if the 
sales representative left the company. Finding a way to track customer information became a 
critical success factor for many sales departments. Customer service and support (CSS) is a part 
of operational CRM that automates service requests, complaints, product returns, and informa­
tion requests.
Figure 11.5 depicts the typical sales process, which begins with an opportunity and ends 
with billing the customer for the sale. Leads and potential customers are the lifeblood of all 
sales organizations, whether they sell computers, clothing, consulting, or cars. How leads are 
handled can make the difference between revenue growth and decline.
FIGURE 11.4
Operational CRM 
Technologies.
Marketing
Operational CRM Technology
Sales
Operational CRM Technology
Customer Service
Operational CRM Technology
List Generator
Campaign Management
Cross-Selling and Up-Selling
Sales Management
Contact Management
Opportunity Management
Contact Center
Web-Based Self-Service
Call Scripting

	
Chapter 11  Building a Customer-centric Organization—Customer Relationship Management  *  199
Sales force automation (SFA) automatically tracks all the steps in the sales process. SFA 
products focus on increasing customer satisfaction, building customer relationships, and 
improving product sales. The three primary operational CRM technologies a sales department 
can adopt are:
	1.	 Sales management CRM systems.
	2.	 Contact management CRM systems.
	3.	 Opportunity management CRM systems.
Sales Management CRM Systems
Sales management CRM systems automate each phase of the sales process, helping indi­
vidual sales representatives coordinate and organize all their accounts. Features include cal­
endars, reminders for important tasks, multimedia presentations, and document generation. 
These systems can even provide an analysis of the sales cycle and calculate how each sales 
representative is performing during the sales process.
Contact Management CRM Systems
A contact management CRM system maintains customer contact information and identifies 
prospective customers for future sales, using tools such as organizational charts, detailed cus­
tomer notes, and supplemental sales information. For example, a contact management system 
can take an incoming telephone number and automatically display the person’s name along 
with a comprehensive history, including all communications with the company. This allows 
the sales representative to personalize the phone conversation and ask such things as, “How 
is your new laptop working, Sue?” or “How was your family vacation to Colorado?” The 
customer feels valued, since the sales associate knows her name and even remembers details 
of their last conversation.
Opportunity Management CRM Systems
Opportunity management CRM systems target sales opportunities by finding new customers 
or companies for future sales. They determine potential customers and competitors and define 
selling efforts, including budgets and schedules. Advanced systems can even calculate the 
probability of a sale, which can save sales representatives significant time and money when 
FIGURE 11.5
A Typical Sales Process.
Lead sent
to salesperson
Potential
customer
contacted
Sales Process
Potential
customer
meeting
Problems and
solutions
identiﬁed
Order
fulﬁlled
Customer
billed
Sales order
placed
Customer
sales quote
generated
Opportunity
generated

200  *  Unit 3  Streamlining Business Operations
qualifying new customers. The primary difference between contact management and oppor­
tunity management is that contact management deals with existing customers and opportunity 
management with new or potential customers.
CUSTOMER SERVICE AND OPERATIONAL CRM
Most companies recognize the importance of building strong customer relationships during 
the marketing and sales efforts, but they must continue this effort by building strong post-
sale relationships also. A primary reason firms lose customers is due to negative customer 
service experiences. Providing outstanding customer service is challenging, and many 
CRM technologies can assist organizations with this important activity. The three primary 
ones are:
	1.	 Contact center.
	2.	 Web-based self-service.
	3.	 Call scripting.
Contact Center
A contact center (or call center) is where customer service representatives answer customer 
inquiries and solve problems, usually by email, chat, or phone. It is one of the best assets a 
customer-driven organization can have because maintaining a high level of customer support 
is critical to obtaining and retaining customers. Figure 11.6 highlights a few of the services 
contact center systems offer.
Contact centers also track customer communication histories along with problem 
­resolutions—information critical for providing a comprehensive customer view to the service 
representative. Representatives who can quickly comprehend the customer’s concerns provide 
tremendous value to the customer and to the company. Nothing makes frustrated customers hap­
pier than not having to explain their problems all over again to yet another customer service 
representative.
Web-Based Self-Service
Web-based self-service systems allow customers to use the web to find answers to their ques­
tions or solutions to their problems. FedEx uses web-based self-service systems to let custom­
ers electronically track packages without having to talk to a customer service representative. 
Another feature of web-based self-service is click-to-talk functions, which allow customers 
to click a button and talk with a representative via the Internet. Powerful customer-driven 
features such as these add value to any organization by providing customers with real-time 
information that helps resolve their concerns.
Call Scripting
Companies that market and sell highly technical products have a difficult time finding compe­
tent customer service representatives. Call scripting systems gather product details and issue 
resolution information that can be automatically generated into a script for the representative to 
FIGURE 11.6
Contact Center Services.
Routes inbound 
calls to available 
agents
Automatic 
Call 
Distribution
Directs
customers to use 
touch-tone phones
or keywords to
navigate or provide
information
Interactive 
Voice 
Response 
(IVR): 
Automatically 
dials outbound 
calls and forwards 
answered calls to 
an available 
agent
Predictive 
Dialing

	
Chapter 11  Building a Customer-centric Organization—Customer Relationship Management  *  201
read to the customer. These systems even provide questions the representative can ask the cus­
tomer to troubleshoot the problem and find a resolution. This feature not only helps reps answer 
difficult questions quickly but also presents a uniform response so customers don’t receive dif­
ferent answers.
ANALYTICAL CRM
Analytical CRM provides information about customers and products that was once impos­
sible to locate, such as which type of marketing and sales campaign to launch and which cus­
tomers to target and when. Unlike operational CRM, which automates call centers and sales 
forces with the aim of enhancing customer service, analytical CRM works by using business 
intelligence to identify patterns in product sales and customer behaviors. Uplift modeling is a 
form of predictive analytics for marketing campaigns that attempts to identify target markets 
or people who could be convinced to buy products. The “uplift” refers to the increased sales 
that can follow after this form of analytical CRM analysis. Analytical CRM provides priceless 
customer information, supports important business decisions, and plays a vital role in your 
­organization’s success.
Analytical CRM tools can slice and dice vast amounts of information to create custom views 
of customers, products, and market segments, highlighting opportunities for ­cross-selling and 
up-selling. Analytical CRM provides customer segmentation, which divides a market into 
categories that share similar attributes such as age, location, gender, habits, and so on. By 
segmenting customers into groups, it becomes easier to create targeted marketing and sales 
campaigns, ensuring that you are not wasting resources marketing products to the wrong cus­
tomers. Website personalization occurs when a website has stored enough data about a per­
son’s likes and dislikes to fashion offers more likely to appeal to that person. Many marketers 
use CRM to personalize customer communications and decide which customers are worth 
pursuing. Here are a few examples of the information insights analytical CRM can help an 
organization gain.
	■	 Find new profitable customers: Analytical CRM could highlight that the most profitable 
market segment consists of women between 35 and 45 years old who drive SUVs and live 
within 30 miles of the city limits. The firm could then find a way to locate these customers 
for mailings and other opportunities.
	■	 Exceed customer expectations: Analytical CRM helps a firm move past the typical “Dear 
Mr. Smith” greeting by personalizing communications. For example, if the firm knows the 
customer’s favorite brand and size of shoe, it can notify the customer that a pair of size 12 
Nike cross trainers is available for him to try on the next time he visits the store.
	■	 Discover the activities the firm performs the best: Analytical CRM can determine what an 
organization does better than its competitors. If a restaurant caters more lunches to mid­
sized companies than its competition does, it can purchase a specialized mailing targeting 
these customers for future mailings.
	■	 Eliminate competition: Analytical CRM can determine sales trends, enabling the company 
to provide customers with special deals and outsmarting its competition. A sports store 
might identify its best customers for outdoor apparel and invite them to a private sale right 
before the competition runs its sale.
	■	 Care about customers: Analytical CRM can determine what customers want and need, so a 
firm can contact them with an invitation to a private sale, remind them that a product needs 
a tune-up, or send them a personalized letter along with a discount coupon to help spark a 
renewed relationship.
Extending Customer Relationship Management
Organizations are discovering a wave of other key business areas where it is beneficial to take 
advantage of building strong relationships. These emerging areas include supplier relation­
ship management (SRM), partner relationship management (PRM), and employee relation­
ship management (ERM) as outlined in Figure 11.7.
LO 11.3 Identify the three current 
trends extending customer rela-
tionship management.

202  *  Unit 3  Streamlining Business Operations
SUPPLIER RELATIONSHIP MANAGEMENT
Supplier relationship management (SRM) focuses on keeping suppliers satisfied by evaluat­
ing and categorizing suppliers for different projects, which optimizes supplier selection. SRM 
applications help companies analyze vendors based on a number of key variables including 
strategy, business goals, prices, and markets. The company can then determine the best sup­
plier to collaborate with and can work on developing strong relationships with that supplier. 
The partners can then work together to streamline processes, outsource services, and provide 
products that they could not provide individually.
With the merger of the Bank of Halifax and Bank of Scotland, the new company, HBOS, 
implemented an SRM system to supply consistent information to its suppliers. The system 
integrates procurement information from the separate Bank of Halifax and Bank of Scotland 
operational systems, generating a single repository of management information for consistent 
reporting and analysis. Other benefits HBOS derived from the SRM solution include:
	■	 A single consolidated view of all suppliers.
	■	 Consistent, detailed management information allowing multiple views for every executive.
	■	 Elimination of duplicate suppliers.
PARTNER RELATIONSHIP MANAGEMENT
Organizations have begun to realize the importance of building relationships with partners, 
dealers, and resellers. Partner relationship management (PRM) focuses on keeping vendors 
satisfied by managing alliance partner and reseller relationships that provide customers with 
the optimal sales channel. PRM’s business strategy is to select and manage partners to opti­
mize their long-term value to an organization. In effect, it means picking the right partners, 
working with them to help them be successful in dealing with mutual customers, and ensuring 
that partners and the ultimate end customers are satisfied and successful. Many of the features 
FIGURE 11.7
Extending Customer 
Relationship Management.
Supplier relationship management (SRM)
focuses on keeping suppliers satisﬁed by
evaluating and categorizing suppliers for
diﬀerent projects
Patner relationship management (PRM)
discovers optimal sales channels by
selecting the right partners and
identifying mutual customers
Employee relationship management (ERM)
provides web-based self-service tools
that streamline and automate the
human resource department

	
Chapter 11  Building a Customer-centric Organization—Customer Relationship Management  *  203
of a PRM application include real-time product information on availability, marketing materi­
als, contracts, order details, and pricing, inventory, and shipping information.
PRM is one of the smaller segments of CRM that has superb potential. PRM has grown to 
more than a $1 billion industry. This is a direct reflection of the growing interdependency of 
organizations in the new economy. The primary benefits of PRM include:
	■	 Expanded market coverage.
	■	 Offerings of specialized products and services.
	■	 Broadened range of offerings and a more complete solution.
CRM suites will also incorporate PRM and SRM modules as enterprises seek to take 
advantage of these initiatives. Automating interactions with distributors, resellers, and sup­
pliers will enhance the corporation’s ability to deliver a quality experience to its customers.
EMPLOYEE RELATIONSHIP MANAGEMENT
Employee relationship management (ERM) provides employees with a subset of CRM appli­
cations available through a web browser. Many of the ERM applications assist the employee 
in dealing with customers by providing detailed information on company products, services, 
and customer orders.
At Rackspace, a San Antonio–based web-hosting company, customer focus borders on the 
obsessive. Joey Parsons, 24, won the Straightjacket Award, the most coveted employee distinction 
at Rackspace. The award recognizes the employee who best lives up to the Rackspace motto of 
delivering “fanatical support,” a dedication to customers that is so intense it borders on the loony. 
Rackspace motivates its staff by treating each team as a separate business, which is responsible 
for its own profits and losses and has its own ERM website. Each month, employees can earn 
bonuses of up to 20 percent of their monthly base salaries depending on the performance of their 
units by both financial and customer-centric measurements such as customer turnover, customer 
expansion, and customer referrals. Daily reports are available through the team’s ERM website.
CRM revenue forecast for 2018 is $21.5 billion. In the future, CRM applications will con­
tinue to change from employee-only tools to tools used by suppliers, partners, and even cus­
tomers. Providing a consistent view of customers and delivering timely and accurate customer 
information to all departments across an organization will continue to be the major goal of 
CRM initiatives.
As technology advances (intranet, Internet, extranet, wireless), CRM will remain a major 
strategic focus for companies, particularly in industries whose product is difficult to differenti­
ate. Some companies approach this problem by moving to a low-cost producer strategy. CRM 
will be an alternative way to pursue a differentiation strategy with a nondifferentiable product.
CRM applications will continue to adapt wireless capabilities supporting mobile sales and 
mobile customers. Sales professionals will be able to access email, order details, corporate 
information, inventory status, and opportunity information all from a PDA in their car or on 
a plane. Real-time interaction with human CSRs over the Internet will continue to increase.
	1.	 Why is CRM important to the technology companies, automobile manufactures and telecommunica­
tion companies all competing for the connected car market?  How can they use CRM to improve sales?
	2.	 Identify a few different metrics a connected car will use to monitor driver activity.
	3.	 How will automobile manufactures measure the success of customer satisfaction?
	4.	 Argue for or against the following statement: Technology companies will invade driver privacy by 
collecting data from connected cars without the consent of the driver.
O P E N I N G  C A S E  ST U DY  Q U E ST I O N S

204  *  Unit 3  Streamlining Business Operations
Tony Hsieh’s first entrepreneurial effort began at the age of 12 when he started his own custom but­
ton business. Realizing the importance of advertising, Hsieh began marketing his business to other 
kids through directories, and soon his profits soared to a few hundred dollars a month. Throughout 
his adolescence, Hsieh started several businesses, and by the time he was in college he was mak­
ing money selling pizzas out of his Harvard dorm room. Another entrepreneurial student, Alfred Lin, 
bought pizzas from Hsieh and resold them by the slice, making a nice profit. Hsieh and Lin quickly 
became friends.
After Harvard, Hsieh founded LinkExchange in 1996, a company that helped small businesses 
exchange banner ads. A mere two years later, Hsieh sold LinkExchange to Microsoft for $265 million. 
Using the profits from the sale, Hsieh and Lin formed a venture capital company that invested in start-
up businesses. One investment that caught their attention was Zappos, an online etailer of shoes. 
Both entrepreneurs viewed the $40 billion shoe market as an opportunity they could not miss, and in 
2000 Hsieh took over as Zappos’s CEO with Lin as his chief financial officer.
Today, Zappos is leading its market and offering an enormous selection of more than 90,000 styles 
of handbags, clothing, and accessories for more than 500 brands. One reason for Zappos’s incredible 
success was Hsieh’s decision to use the advertising and marketing budget for customer service, a 
tactic that would not have worked before the Internet. Zappos’s passionate customer service strategy 
encourages customers to order as many sizes and styles of products as they want, ships them for 
free, and offers free return shipping. Zappos encourages customer communication, and its call center 
receives more than 5,000 calls a day with the longest call to date lasting more than four hours.
Zappos’s extensive inventory is stored in a warehouse in Kentucky right next to a UPS shipping 
center. Only available stock is listed on the website, and orders as late as 11 P.M. are still guaranteed 
next-day delivery. To facilitate supplier and partner relationships, Zappos built an extranet that pro­
vides its vendors with all kinds of product information, such as items sold, times sold, price, customer, 
and so on. Armed with these kinds of details, suppliers can quickly change manufacturing schedules 
to meet demand.
Zappos Culture
Along with valuing its partners and suppliers, Zappos also places a great deal of value on its employee 
relationships. Zappos employees have fun, and walking through the offices you will see all kinds of 
things not normally seen in business environments—bottle-cap pyramids, cotton-candy machines, 
and bouncing balls. Building loyal employee relationships is a critical success factor at Zappos, and 
to facilitate this relationship the corporate headquarters are located in the same building as the call 
center (where most employees work) in Las Vegas. All employees receive 100 percent company-paid 
health insurance along with a daily free lunch.
Of course, the Zappos culture does not work for everyone, and the company pays to find the right 
employees through “The Offer,” which extends to new employees the option of quitting and receiving 
payment for time worked plus an additional $1,000 bonus. Why the $1,000 bonus for quitting? Zappos 
management believes that is a small price to pay to find those employees who do not have the sense 
of commitment Zappos requires. Less than 10 percent of new hires take The Offer. Zappos’s unique 
culture stresses the following:
	
■	
Delivering WOW through service.
	
■	
Embracing and driving change.
	
■	
Creating fun and a little weirdness.
	
■	
Being adventurous, creative, and open-minded.
	
■	
Pursuing growth and learning.
	
■	
Building open and honest relationships with communication.
Chapter Eleven Case:  Zappos Is Passionate for Customers

	
Chapter 11  Building a Customer-centric Organization—Customer Relationship Management  *  205
	
■	
Building a positive team and family spirit.
	
■	
Doing more with less.
	
■	
Being passionate and determined.
	
■	
Being humble.
Zappos’s Sale to Amazon
Amazon.com purchased Zappos for $880 million. Zappos employees shared $40 million in cash and 
stock, and the Zappos management team remained in place. Having access to Amazon’s world-class 
warehouses and supply chain is sure to catapult Zappos’s revenues, though many wonder whether 
the Zappos culture will remain. It’ll be interesting to watch!1
Questions
	1.	 Why would Zappos benefit from the implementation of a CRM system?
	2.	 Why are customers at the heart of Zappos’s business strategy?
	3.	 Analyze the merger between Zappos and Amazon and assess potential issues for Zappos 
customers.
	4.	 Propose a plan for how Zappos can use Amazon’s supply chain to increase sales and customer 
satisfaction.
	5.	 Argue for or against the following statement: “In the electronic age, customer relationships are 
more important than ever, and Zappos provides the new benchmark that all corporations should 
follow.”

206  *  Unit 3  Streamlining Business Operations
11.1.	Describe customer relationship management along with its importance to a business.
Customer relationship management (CRM) is a means of managing all aspects of a customer’s rela­
tionship with an organization to increase customer loyalty and retention and an organization’s profit­
ability. CRM allows an organization to gain insights into customers’ shopping and buying behaviors. 
Every time a customer communicates with a company, the firm has the chance to build a trusting 
relationship with that particular customer.
11.2.	 Differentiate operational and analytical customer relationship management.
The two primary components of a CRM strategy are operational CRM and analytical CRM. Opera­
tional CRM supports traditional transactional processing for day-to-day front-office operations or 
systems that deal directly with the customers. Analytical CRM supports back-office operations and 
strategic analysis and includes all systems that do not deal directly with the customers.
11.3.	 Identify the three current trends extending customer relationship management. 
Supplier relationship management (SRM) focuses on keeping suppliers satisfied by evaluating and 
categorizing suppliers for different projects, which optimizes supplier selection. Partner relationship 
management (PRM) focuses on keeping vendors satisfied by managing alliance partner and reseller 
relationships that provide customers with the optimal sales channel. Employee relationship manage­
ment (ERM) provides employees with a subset of CRM applications available through a web browser. 
Many of the ERM applications assist the employee in dealing with customers by providing detailed 
information on company products, services, and customer orders.
L E A R N I N G  O U T C O M E  R E V I E W
	1.	 Why are customer relationships important to an organization?
	2.	 Do you agree that every business needs to focus on customers to survive?
	3.	 What is the difference between operational and analytical CRM?
	4.	 How can a sales department use CRM to improve operations?
	5.	 How can a marketing department use CRM to improve operations?
	6.	 How can a company use partner relationship management to create a successful business?
	7.	 Why would a company want to implement an employee relationship management system?
R E V I E W  Q U E S T I O N S
1. Straightjacket Customer Service
You might not want to put the fact that you won the Straightjacket Award on your résumé unless 
you worked for Rackspace, a Texas company that specializes in hosting websites. At Rackspace, 
the coveted Straightjacket Award is won by the employee who best delivers “fanatical customer 
support,” one of the firm’s critical success factors. The company motivates its customer service 
M A K I N G  B U S I N E S S  D E C I S I O N S

	
Chapter 11  Building a Customer-centric Organization—Customer Relationship Management  *  207
representatives by dividing them into teams, each responsible for its own profitability. The company 
then measures such things as customer turnover, up-selling, cross-selling, and referrals. The team 
with the highest scores wins the Straightjacket Award and each member receives a 20 percent 
bonus.
Assume your professor has hired you as the employee relationship manager for your class. What 
type of award would you create to help increase class participation? What type of award would you 
create to help increase the overall average on exams? What type of award would you create to help 
increase student collaboration? Be sure to name your awards and describe their details. Also, what 
type of metrics would you create to measure your awards? How could a CRM system help you imple­
ment your awards?
2. Nice Emotions
New emotion-detection software called Perform, created by Nice Systems, helps firms improve 
customer service by identifying callers who are displeased or upset. Perform determines a baseline 
of emotion and can detect emotional issues during the first few seconds of a call; any variation from 
the baseline activates an alert. When an elderly person who was highly distressed over medical 
costs hung up during a phone call to the insurance company, Perform identified the customer’s frus­
tration and automatically emailed a supervisor. The supervisor was able to review a recording of the 
conversation and immediately called the customer back suggesting ways to lower the costs.
How do you think emotion-detection software will affect customer relationships? What other 
departments or business processes could benefit from its use? Create a new product that uses 
emotion-detection software. What business problem would your product solve and who would be 
your primary customers?
3. Ruby Receptionists
Great businesses are driven by exceptional customer experiences and interactions. Ruby is a com­
pany operating from Portland, Oregon, that has a team of smart and cheerful virtual receptionists 
that you can hire to carry out all your customer interactions—remotely. Ruby aims to deliver the per­
fect mix of friendliness, charm, can-do attitude, and professionalism to all its clients’ customer calls. 
Best of all, customers believe the Ruby receptionists are working right in your office, not in Portland, 
Oregon. Ruby promises to bring back the lost art of human interaction by delighting each and every 
customer who calls.
Explain the importance of customer service for customer relationship management. Do you agree 
that a company can improve customer service by hiring Ruby receptionists? If you owned a small 
business, would you be comfortable hiring Ruby receptionists?
4. I’m Stuck in London and I’ve Been Robbed—Help Me!
There are so many people using Facebook that people can quickly become overwhelmed with 
friend requests. Without knowing who your friends are, it is easy to find yourself a victim of a scam. 
Internet impostors are perfecting the technique of impersonating friends on social networking sites 
like Facebook with lucrative results and suckering individuals out of thousands of dollars. Emotional 
email pleas sent by imposters, such as “I’m stuck in London and I’ve been robbed, help me,” have 
become so effective that the FBI has issued warnings to consumers about social networking sites. 
“Fraudsters continue to hijack accounts on social networking sites and spread malicious software by 
using various techniques,” the FBI stated after logging 3,200 complaints about such incidents within 
a week.
When Barry Schwartz logged on to Twitter, he had 20 messages waiting for him, all with the 
unwelcome news: someone was impersonating his company on Twitter. Schwartz runs RustyBrick, 
a 15-employee, $2 million website development company. The impostor had set up a profile using 
a slight variation of the company’s name and started following Schwartz’s 4,000 customer contacts 
with a message similar to spam: “Hey guys, you have to get this new Twitter Success Guide—it’s 

208  *  Unit 3  Streamlining Business Operations
priceless.” A devastated Schwartz stated, “The last thing I want is to have people thinking that I’m 
following them and I’m selling a Twitter Success Guide.”
Internet impostors impersonate organizations as well as individuals. What could happen to an 
organization whose customers are contacted by an impostor asking for money or selling a product? 
What happens when the relationship with a customer turns sour? What type of power does a dis­
gruntled customer or employee have against a company? Why is it more important than ever to build 
strong relationships with your customers, employees, partners, and suppliers?
5. Customer Relationship Management Strategies
On average, it costs an organization six times more to sell to a new customer than to sell to an 
existing customer. As the co-owner of a medium-sized luggage distributor, you have recently been 
notified by your EIS systems that sales for the past three months have decreased by an average of 
17 percent. The reasons for the decline in sales are numerous, including a poor economy, people’s 
aversion to travel because of the terrorist attacks, and some negative publicity your company 
received regarding a defective product line. In a group, explain how implementing a CRM system 
can help you understand and combat the decline in sales. Be sure to justify why a CRM system is 
important to your business and its future growth.
6. My Customers Hate Me
The web contains numerous examples of customer power. Customers are using YouTube, Myspace, 
blogs, and a number of other web tools to slam or praise companies. Do you believe that the most 
influential person in your business is the customer? How could customers hurt or help your busi­
ness? Will your employees agree that customers are the most important part of the business?
7. Times They Are A Changing!
Change.org, a social activist website, is a resource for researching and organizing groups around 
social and political causes, called “Changes.” Changes allow members with similar beliefs to post 
images, videos, blogs, and even donations to their nonprofit cause. Politicians need to find donors 
to help them raise campaign funds so they can compete in elections. In fact, politicians in the last 
election raised upwards of $3 billion, with about $50 million spent on finding the donors. Change.
org wants to lower those fund-raising costs, neutralize large donors’ “special interest” money, 
and provide a place where the “average Joe” who can’t afford a $2,500 fund-raising dinner can 
be heard. Change.org’s strategy is to create a database of politician profiles that align with each 
Change group. The Change groups are now empowered to pool together a pot of money to donate 
to relevant charities or political candidates, as well as the power to lobby representatives.
Describe the differences between operational CRM and analytical CRM. What types of 
­operational CRM would Change.org need to function? What types of analytical CRM would Change.
org need to function? How could Change.org use marketing, sales, and customer service CRM 
technologies to help raise awareness and donations for nonprofit causes? Why is creating a social 
activist website a risky decision? Would you want to have your personal information stored on this 
website?

	
Chapter 12  Integrating the Organization from End to End—Enterprise Resource Planning  *  209
C H A P T E R  12
LEARNING OUTCOMES
12.1.	 Describe the role information plays in enterprise 
resource planning systems.
12.2.	Identify the core and extended areas of enterprise 
resource planning.
12.3.	 Discuss the current technologies organizations are 
integrating in enterprise resource planning systems.
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP)
Enterprise resource planning systems serve as the organization’s backbone in providing fun­
damental decision-making support. In the past, departments made decisions independent 
of each other. ERP systems provide a foundation for collaboration between departments, 
enabling people in different business areas to communicate. ERP systems have been widely 
adopted in large organizations to store critical knowledge used to make the decisions that 
drive performance.
To be competitive, organizations must always strive for excellence in every business pro­
cess enterprisewide, a daunting challenge if the organization has multisite operations world­
wide. To obtain operational efficiencies, lower costs, improve supplier and customer relations, 
and increase revenues and market share, all units of the organization must work together har­
moniously toward congruent goals. An ERP system will help an organization achieve this.
The heart of an ERP system is a central database that collects information from and feeds 
information into all the ERP system’s individual application components (called modules), 
supporting diverse business functions such as accounting, manufacturing, marketing, and 
human resources. When a user enters or updates information in one module, it is immediately 
and automatically updated throughout the entire system, as illustrated in Figure 12.1.
ERP automates business processes such as order fulfillment—taking an order from a cus­
tomer, shipping the purchase, and then billing for it. With an ERP system, when a customer 
service representative takes an order from a customer, he or she has all the information nec­
essary to complete the order (the customer’s credit rating and order history, the company’s 
inventory levels, and the delivery schedule). Everyone else in the company sees the same 
information and has access to the database that holds the customer’s new order. When one 
department finishes with the order, it is automatically routed via the ERP system to the next 
department. To find out where the order is at any point, a user need only log in to the ERP 
system and track it down, as illustrated in Figure 12.2. The order process moves like a bolt of 
lightning through the organization, and customers get their orders faster and with fewer errors 
than ever before. ERP can apply that same magic to the other major business processes, such 
as employee benefits or financial reporting.
LO 12.1 Describe the role informa-
tion plays in enterprise resource 
planning systems.
Integrating the Organization 
from End to End—Enterprise 
Resource Planning

210  *  Unit 3  Streamlining Business Operations
BRINGING THE ORGANIZATION TOGETHER
In most organizations, information has traditionally been isolated within specific departments, 
whether on an individual database, in a file cabinet, or on an employee’s PC. ERP enables 
employees across the organization to share information across a single, centralized database. 
With extended portal capabilities, an organization can also involve its suppliers and customers 
to participate in the workflow process, allowing ERP to penetrate the entire value chain, and 
help the organization achieve greater operational efficiency (see Figures 12.3 and 12.4).
FIGURE 12.1
ERP Integration Data Flow.
Information
Purchasing
Inventory
Accounting
and Finance
Human
Resources
Marketing
and Sales
Manufacturing
FIGURE 12.2
ERP Process Flow.
SALES
Information
Sales
quote
Sales
order
WAREHOUSE
Pack and
ship
RECEIVING
Returns
ACCOUNTING
1
2
3
Payment
Billing

	
Chapter 12  Integrating the Organization from End to End—Enterprise Resource Planning  *  211
THE EVOLUTION OF ERP
Originally, ERP solutions were developed to deliver automation across multiple units of an 
organization, to help facilitate the manufacturing process and address issues such as raw mate­
rials, inventory, order entry, and distribution. However, ERP was unable to extend to other 
functional areas of the company such as sales, marketing, and shipping. It could not tie in any 
CRM capabilities that would allow organizations to capture customer-specific information, 
nor did it work with websites or portals used for customer service or order fulfillment. Call 
center or quality assurance staff could not tap into the ERP solution, nor could ERP handle 
document management, such as cataloging contracts and purchase orders.
FIGURE 12.3
The Organization before ERP.
Document Management
Workﬂow
ERP
Logistics
Sales
Financials
HR
Portal and
Website
Project Management
FIGURE 12.4
ERP—Bringing the 
Organization Together.
ERP
Financials
Project Management
Portal and Website
Workﬂow
Document Management
Sales
HR
Logistics

212  *  Unit 3  Streamlining Business Operations
ERP has grown over the years to become part of the extended enterprise. From its begin­
ning as a tool for materials planning, it has extended to warehousing, distribution, and order 
entry. With its next evolution, ERP expands to the front office including CRM. Now admin­
istrative, sales, marketing, and human resources staff can share a tool that is truly enter­
prisewide. To compete on a functional level today, companies must adopt an enterprisewide 
approach to ERP that utilizes the Internet and connects to every facet of the value chain. Fig­
ure 12.5 shows how ERP has grown since the 1990s to accommodate the needs of the entire 
organization.
Applications such as SCM, CRM, and ERP are the backbone of ebusiness. Integration of 
these applications is the key to success for many companies. Integration allows the unlocking 
of information to make it available to any user, anywhere, anytime.
Most organizations today have no choice but to piece their SCM, CRM, and ERP applica­
tions together since no one vendor can respond to every organizational need; hence, custom­
ers purchase applications from multiple vendors. As a result, organizations face the challenge 
of integrating their systems. For example, a single organization might choose its CRM com­
ponents from Siebel, SCM components from i2, and financial components and HR manage­
ment components from Oracle. Figure 12.6 displays the general audience and purpose for 
each of these applications that have to be integrated.
INTEGRATION TOOLS
Effectively managing the transformation to an integrated enterprise will be critical to the suc­
cess of the 21st-century organization. The key is the integration of the disparate IT applica­
tions. An integrated enterprise infuses support areas, such as finance and human resources, 
with a strong customer orientation. Integrations are achieved using middleware—several dif­
ferent types of software that sit in the middle of and provide connectivity between two or 
more software applications. Middleware translates information between disparate systems. 
Enterprise application integration (EAI) middleware represents a new approach to middle­
ware by packaging together commonly used functionality, such as providing prebuilt links 
to popular enterprise applications, which reduces the time necessary to develop solutions 
that integrate applications from multiple vendors. A few leading vendors of EAI middleware 
FIGURE 12.5
The Evolution of ERP.
• Materials Planning
• Order Entry
• Distribution
• General Ledger
• Accounting
• Shop Floor Control
• Project Management
• Knowledge Management
• Workﬂow Management
• Customer Relationship Management
• Human Resource Management
• Portal Capability
• Integrated Financials
ERP
• Scheduling
• Forecasting
• Capacity Planning
• Ecommerce
• Warehousing
• Logistics
Extended ERP
ERP-II
1990
2000
Present

	
Chapter 12  Integrating the Organization from End to End—Enterprise Resource Planning  *  213
include Active Software, Vitria Technology, and Extricity. Figure 12.7 displays the data 
points where these applications integrate and illustrates the underlying premise of architecture 
infrastructure design.
Companies run on interdependent applications, such as SCM, CRM, and ERP. If one appli­
cation performs poorly, the entire customer value delivery system is affected. For example, no 
matter how great a company is at CRM, if its SCM system does not work and the customer 
never receives the finished product, the company will lose that customer. The world-class 
enterprises of tomorrow must be built on the foundation of world-class applications imple­
mented today.
FIGURE 12.6
Primary Users and Business 
Benefits of Strategic 
Initiatives.
Sales, Marketing,
Customer Service
Sales forecasts,
Sales strategies,
Marketing campaigns
CRM
Customers, Resellers,
Partners, Suppliers,
Distributors
Market demand,
Resource and
capacity constraints,
Real-time scheduling
SCM
Accounting, Finance,
Logistics, Production
Forecasting, Planning,
Purchasing,
Material management,
Warehousing,
Inventory, Distribution
ERP
Primary Users
Primary Business Beneﬁt
Enterprise Application
FIGURE 12.7
Integrations between SCM, 
CRM, and ERP Applications.
Accounting, Finance, Human Resources,
Purchasing, Management, Auditing
Employees
Customers
SCM
Business
Partners,
Suppliers,
Distributors,
Resellers
ERP
Logistics,
Production,
Distribution
CRM
Marketing,
Sales,
Customer
Service
SCM

214  *  Unit 3  Streamlining Business Operations
Core and Extended ERP Components
Turner Industries grew from $300 million in sales to $800 million in sales in less than 10 years 
thanks to the implementation of an ERP system. Ranked number 369 on the Forbes 500 list of 
privately held companies, Turner Industries is a leading industrial services firm. Turner Indus­
tries develops and deploys advanced software applications designed to maximize the produc­
tivity of its 25,000 employees and construction equipment valued at more than $100 million.
The company considers the biggest challenges in the industrial services industry to be 
completing projects on time, within budget, while fulfilling customers’ expectations. To meet 
these challenges the company invested in an ERP system and named the project Interplan. 
Interplan won Constructech’s Vision award for software innovation in the heavy construc­
tion industry. Interplan runs all of Turner’s construction, turnaround, shutdown, and mainte­
nance projects and is so adept at estimating and planning jobs that Turner Industries typically 
achieves higher profit margins on projects that use Interplan. As the ERP solution makes the 
company more profitable, the company can pass on the cost savings to its customers, giving 
the company an incredible competitive advantage.
Figure 12.8 provides an example of an ERP system with its core and extended components. 
Core ERP components are the traditional components included in most ERP systems and 
they primarily focus on internal operations. Extended ERP components are the extra compo­
nents that meet the organizational needs not covered by the core components and primarily 
focus on external operations.
CORE ERP COMPONENTS
The three most common core ERP components focusing on internal operations are:
	1.	 Accounting and finance.
	2.	 Production and materials management.
	3.	 Human resources.
LO 12.2 Identify the core and 
extended areas of enterprise 
resource planning.
FIGURE 12.8
Core ERP Components and 
Extended ERP Components.
Accounting
and
ﬁnance
Production
and materials
management
Human
resource
Core ERP components
Customer
relationship
management
Supply chain
management
Business
intelligence
Ebusiness
Extended ERP components
Enterprise
resource planning
software

	
Chapter 12  Integrating the Organization from End to End—Enterprise Resource Planning  *  215
Accounting and Finance ERP Components
Deeley Harley-Davidson Canada (DHDC), the exclusive Canadian distributor of Harley-
Davidson motorcycles, has improved inventory, turnaround time, margins, and customer 
satisfaction—all with the implementation of a financial ERP system. The system has opened 
up the power of information to the company and is helping it make strategic decisions when it 
still has the time to change things. The ERP system provides the company with ways to man­
age inventory, turnaround time, and warehouse space more effectively.
Accounting and finance ERP components manage accounting data and financial pro­
cesses within the enterprise with functions such as general ledger, accounts payable, accounts 
receivable, budgeting, and asset management. One of the most useful features included in 
an ERP accounting/finance component is its credit-management feature. Most organizations 
manage their relationships with customers by setting credit limits, or a limit on how much 
a customer can owe at any one time. The company then monitors the credit limit whenever 
the customer places a new order or sends in a payment. ERP financial systems help to corre­
late customer orders with customer account balances determining credit availability. Another 
great feature is the ability to perform product profitability analysis. ERP financial compo­
nents are the backbone behind product profitability analysis and allow companies to perform 
all types of advanced profitability modeling techniques.
Production and Materials Management ERP Components
One of the main functions of an ERP system is streamlining the production planning 
process. Production and materials management ERP components handle the various 
aspects of production planning and execution such as demand forecasting, production 
scheduling, job cost accounting, and quality control. Companies typically produce mul­
tiple products, each of which has many different parts. Production lines, consisting of 
machines and employees, build the different types of products. The company must then 
define sales forecasting for each product to determine production schedules and materi­
als purchasing. Figure 12.9 displays the typical ERP production planning process. The 
process begins with forecasting sales in order to plan operations. A detailed production 
schedule is developed if the product is produced and a materials requirement plan is com­
pleted if the product is purchased.
Grupo Farmanova Intermed, located in Costa Rica, is a pharmaceutical marketing and 
distribution company that markets nearly 2,500 products to approximately 500 customers in 
Central and South America. The company identified a need for software that could unify 
product logistics management in a single country. It decided to deploy PeopleSoft financial 
and distribution ERP components allowing the company to improve customer data manage­
ment, increase confidence among internal and external users, 
and coordinate the logistics of inventory. With the software the 
company enhanced its capabilities for handling, distributing, 
and marketing its pharmaceuticals.
Human Resources ERP Components
Human resources ERP components track employee informa­
tion including payroll, benefits, compensation, and performance 
assessment, and assure compliance with the legal requirements 
of multiple jurisdictions and tax authorities. Human resources 
components even offer features that allow the organization to 
perform detailed analysis on its employees to determine such 
things as the identification of individuals who are likely to leave 
the company unless additional compensation or benefits are 
provided. These components can also identify which employ­
ees are using which resources, such as online training and long-
distance telephone services. They can also help determine 
whether the most talented people are working for those business 
units with the highest priority—or where they would have the 
greatest impact on profit.
FIGURE 12.9
The Production Planning 
Process.
Sales forecasting
Operations
planning
Materials requirement
planning
Purchasing
Detailed
scheduling
Production

216  *  Unit 3  Streamlining Business Operations
EXTENDED ERP COMPONENTS
Extended ERP components are the extra components that meet the organizational needs not 
covered by the core components and primarily focus on external operations. Many of the 
numerous extended ERP components are Internet enabled and require interaction with cus­
tomers, suppliers, and business partners outside the organization. The four most common 
extended ERP components are:
	1.	 Business intelligence
	2.	 Customer relationship management
	3.	 Supply chain management
	4.	 Ebusiness
Business Intelligence Components
ERP systems offer powerful tools that measure and control organizational operations. Many 
organizations have found that these valuable tools can be enhanced to provide even greater 
value through the addition of powerful business intelligence systems. The business intelligence 
components of ERP systems typically collect information used throughout the organization 
(including data used in many other ERP components), organize it, and apply analytical tools 
to assist managers with decisions. Data warehouses are one of the most popular extensions to 
ERP systems, with over two-thirds of U.S. manufacturers adopting or planning such systems.
Customer Relationship Management Components
ERP vendors are expanding their functionality to provide services formerly supplied by cus­
tomer relationship management (CRM) vendors such as Siebel. CRM components provide 
an integrated view of customer data and interactions allowing organizations to work more 
effectively with customers and be more responsive to their needs. CRM components typically 
include contact centers, sales force automation, and marketing functions. These improve the 
customer experience while identifying a company’s most (and least) valuable customers for 
better allocation of resources.
Supply Chain Management Components
ERP vendors are expanding their systems to include SCM functions that manage the informa­
tion flows between and among supply chain stages, maximizing total supply chain effectiveness 
and profitability. SCM components allow a firm to monitor and control all stages in the supply 
chain from the acquisition of raw materials to the receipt of finished goods by customers.
Ebusiness Components
The original focus of ERP systems was the internal organization. In other words, ERP systems 
are not fundamentally ready for the external world of ebusiness. The newest and most excit­
ing extended ERP components are the ebusiness components. Two of the primary features of 
ebusiness components are elogistics and eprocurement. Elogistics manages the transportation 
and storage of goods. Eprocurement is the business-to-business (B2B) purchase and sale of 
supplies and services over the Internet.
Ebusiness and ERP complement each other by allowing companies to establish a web pres­
ence and fulfill orders expeditiously. A common mistake made by many businesses is deploying 
a web presence before the integration of back-office systems or an ERP system. For example, 
one large toy manufacturer announced less than a week before Christmas that it would be unable 
to fulfill any of its web orders. The company had all the toys in the warehouse, but it could not 
organize the basic order processing function to get the toys delivered to the consumers on time.
Customers and suppliers are now demanding access to ERP information including order 
status, inventory levels, and invoice reconciliation. Plus, the customers and partners want all 
this information in a simplified format available through a website. This is a difficult task to 
accomplish because most ERP systems are full of technical jargon, which is why employee 
training is one of the hidden costs associated with ERP implementations. Removing the jar­
gon to accommodate untrained customers and partners is one of the more difficult tasks when 

	
Chapter 12  Integrating the Organization from End to End—Enterprise Resource Planning  *  217
web-enabling an ERP system. To accommodate the growing needs of the ebusiness world, 
ERP vendors need to build two new channels of access into the ERP system information—one 
channel for customers (B2C) and one channel for businesses, suppliers, and partners (B2B).
MEASURING ERP SUCCESS
There is no guarantee of success for an ERP system. It is difficult to measure the success of 
an ERP system because one system can span an entire organization, including thousands of 
employees across the globe. ERPs focus on how a corporation operates internally, and opti­
mizing these operations takes significant time and energy.
Two of the primary forces driving ERP failure include software customization and ERP costs. 
Software customization modifies existing software according to the business’s or user’s require­
ments. Since ERP systems must fit business processes, many enterprises choose to customize 
their ERP systems to ensure that they meet business and user needs. Figure 12.10 displays the 
different forms of software customization a business will undertake to ensure the success of an 
ERP implementation. Heavy customization leads to complex code that must be continuously 
maintained and upgraded. It should be noted that customizing an ERP system is costly and com­
plex and should only be done when there is a specific business advantage. According to Meta 
Group, it takes the average company 8 to 18 months to see any benefits from an ERP system. The 
primary risk for an ERP implementation includes the associated costs displayed in Figure 12.11.
FIGURE 12.10
Software Customization 
Examples.
SOFTWARE CUSTOMIZATION  
Business Processes or 
Workﬂows
Software can be customized to support the needs of business process work-
ﬂows unique to each business or department.
Code Modiﬁcations
The most expensive customization occurs when application code is changed 
and should only be done if the code changes provide speciﬁc competitive 
advantages. 
Integrations
Data integration is key for business process support that spans functional 
areas and legacy systems. 
Reports, Documents, 
Forms
Customization to reports, documents, and forms can consist of simple layout 
or design changes or complex logic programming rules for speciﬁc business 
requirements. 
User-Interface Changes
An ERP system can be customized to ensure that each user has the most efﬁ-
cient and eﬀective view of the application. 
FIGURE 12.11
ERP Costs.
Software Costs
Consulting Fees
Process rework
Customization
Integration
Testing
Training
Data warehouse 
integration and data 
conversions
ERP COSTS
Purchasing the software can cost millions of dollars for a large enterprise. 
Hiring external experts to help implement the system correctly can cost millions 
of dollars. 
Redeﬁne processes to ensure that the company is using the most efﬁcient and 
eﬀective processes. 
If the software package does not meet all of the company’s needs, customizing 
the software may be required. 
Ensuring that all software products, including disparate systems not part of the 
ERP system, are working together or are integrated. 
Testing that all functionality works correctly along with testing all integrations. 
Training all new users and creating the training user manuals. 
Moving data from an old system into the new ERP system. 

218  *  Unit 3  Streamlining Business Operations
The Future of ERP
The goal of ERP is to integrate all of the organizational systems into one fully functioning, 
high-performance system that is capable of meeting all business needs and user requirements. 
Traditional ERP systems were typically accessed from a computer on the customers’ premises 
or office. Tomorrow’s ERP systems will enhance the ability of organizations to apply context 
to decision making and adapt more easily to changing events. ERP systems in the future will 
focus on usability, ubiquity, accessibility, and mobility drawing many advantages including:
	■	 Drive cost efficiencies.
	■	 Faster time to market.
	■	 Better enable mobile workforce.
	■	 Better leverage data to provide insights.
	■	 New product development.
Of course, ERP of the future will have many challenges including data management, source 
record management, and coordinating integrations and support activities. Figure 12.12 displays 
the three primary ERP implementation choices driving the next generation of business operations.
ON-PREMISE ERP
Until a decade ago, virtually all ERP systems were installed on-premise. On-premise systems 
include a server at a physical location using an internal network for internal access and fire­
walls for remote users’ access. Remote users had to access the ERP system through a firewall, 
which protected the system against unauthorized access. These systems are known as on-
premise systems, and they are still in wide use today. The ERP, SCM, and CRM systems that 
run on-premise are referred to as legacy systems. Legacy system is an old system that is fast 
approaching or beyond the end of its useful life with in an organization.
CLOUD ERP
The cloud has changed the legacy model of ERP implementation. According to the National 
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) cloud computing is a model for enabling 
LO 12.3 Discuss the current 
technologies organizations are 
integrating in enterprise resource 
planning systems.
FIGURE 12.12
ERP Implementation 
Choices.
ON-PREMISE ERP
-Own all Hardware and Software
-Signiﬁcant Capital Investment
-Complete Ownership
CLOUD ERP
-All Hardware and Software Owned and Remotely Hosted by
Cloud Vendor
Hybrid ERP
-Own Components of Hardware and Software
-Host Components of Hardware and Software with Cloud
Vendor

	
Chapter 12  Integrating the Organization from End to End—Enterprise Resource Planning  *  219
ubiquitous, convenient, on-demand network access to a shared pool of configurable computing 
resources (e.g., networks, servers, storage, applications, and services) that can be rapidly pro­
visioned and released with minimal management effort or service provider interaction. cloud 
computing stores, manages, and processes data and applications over the Internet rather than 
on a personal computer or server. Cloud computing offers new ways to store, access, process, 
and analyze information and connect people and resources from any location in the world an 
Internet connection is available. As shown in Figure 12.13, users connect to the cloud from 
their personal computers or portable devices by using a client, such as a web browser. To these 
individual users, the cloud appears as their personal application, device, or document. It is like 
storing all of your software and documents in the cloud, and all you need is a device to access 
the cloud. No more hard drives, software, or processing power—that is all located in the cloud, 
transparent to the users. Users are not physically bound to a single computer or network; they 
can access their programs and documents from wherever they are, whenever they need to. Just 
think of having your hard drive located in the sky and you can access your information and 
programs using any device from wherever you are. The best part is that even if your machine 
crashes, is lost, or is stolen, the information hosted in the cloud is safe and always available.
Software as a Service (SaaS) delivers applications over the cloud using a pay-per-use 
revenue model. Before its introduction, companies often spent huge amounts of money imple­
menting and customizing specialized applications to satisfy their business requirements. 
Many of these applications were difficult to implement, expensive to maintain, and challeng­
ing to use. Usability was one of the biggest drivers for creating interest in and success for 
cloud computing service providers. SaaS ERP uses the cloud platform to enable organizations 
not only to unite around business processes, but also to gather cloud data across supplier 
networks and supply chains to drive greater efficiency in manufacturing projects. The move 
to SaaS ERP is attracting many small and midsized businesses that simply cannot afford the 
costs associated with a traditional large ERP implementation.
SaaS offers a number of advantages; the most obvious is tremendous cost savings. The software 
is priced on a per-use basis with no up-front costs, so companies get the immediate benefit of reduc­
ing capital expenditures. They also get the added benefits of scalability and flexibility to test new 
software on a rental basis. Figure 12.14 displays the many advantages of SaaS implementations.
Cloud ERP has been slow to take off across business because many people were initially 
uncomfortable with placing sensitive data in the cloud. As the tremendous cost-saving advan­
tages associated with cloud applications and SaaS become more apparent, the reservations 
against cloud ERP are dissipating.
Large organizations tend to have difficulty adjusting to cloud solutions simply because they want 
greater levels of control over their enterprise applications. Smaller, less complex organizations that 
FIGURE 12.13
Cloud Computing Example.
Amazon EC2
Windows Live
Mozy
Facebook
Gmail

220  *  Unit 3  Streamlining Business Operations
lack sophisticated MIS departments are more likely to gravitate toward the cloud because it is easy 
for them to change business processes to fit the software. SaaS ERP can provide a company with 
the flexibility of on-premise software and the added benefits of a vendor maintaining and housing 
the applications off the premises. The biggest concerns for organizations interested in cloud ERP 
solutions is data security and potential vendor outages causing business downtime. Without an on-
premises MIS department, the organization is truly at the mercy of the vendor during any system 
outage, and for critical organizational systems like ERP, this could be an unacceptable risk.
HYBRID ERP
It is conventional wisdom that a diversified stock portfolio is a very effective hedge against invest­
ment risk. For the same reason, companies that are not comfortable with the risk and/or loss of 
control associated with moving wholesale into ERP cloud computing, but still want to explore this 
evolving infrastructure, might find a hybrid ERP approach to be the perfect answer. By “hybrid 
ERP approach,” we mean mostly on site, but with some carefully selected hosted applications.
Building an all-encompassing ERP system traditionally ended in expensive failures. Nike, 
K-Mart, and Hershey all lost over $100 million in failed ERP implementations. Based on the 
need to avoid expensive failures along with the emergence of cloud computing, enterprises can 
now adopt hybrid ERP architectures. The idea behind hybrid ERP is to split the ERP functions 
between an on-premises ERP system and one or more functions handled as Software as a Ser­
vice (SaaS) in the cloud. Typically the on-premise legacy application operates at the corporate 
headquarters, whereas cloud-based specific applications support business needs such as mobil­
ity and web-based functionality. It is also becoming increasingly popular. In fact many analysts 
are predicting that hybrid ERP will become a mainstay in the ERP market in the next few years.
Often a hybrid ERP system is implemented when the legacy system becomes very large 
and costly to customize, maintain, and upgrade or when mergers and acquisitions leave an 
organization with multiple ERP solutions that it is unable to consolidate to a single ERP sys­
tem. Hybrid ERP architectures also support organizations with multiple operations based in 
multiple geographic locations. The following scenarios are common in organizations that use 
hybrid architectures of ERP:
	■	 A business with a very specific local focus—single-site or multisite within a single country 
or region.
	■	 A business with operations geared strongly toward a specific industry that doesn’t feature 
strongly at corporate headquarters.
FIGURE 12.14
Cloud Computing 
Advantages.
Cost Saving
Flexibility
Reliability
Portability
Capacity on
Demand
Backup/Recovery
Scalability
Availability
Accessibility

	
Chapter 12  Integrating the Organization from End to End—Enterprise Resource Planning  *  221
	■	 A newly acquired operation with a mismatch of multiple outdated, unsupported ERPs.
	■	 A small subsidiary with no formal ERP in place.
Managing the data across the enterprise is one of the biggest concerns for organizations 
deploying hybrid ERP architectures. It is critical for the business to have absolutely no dupli­
cation of effort between the two ERP systems. Consistency is required for any hybrid applica­
tion to ensure that there is always a single source of information for accounting, financials, 
customer service, production, and other business areas. Hundreds of ERP vendors offer best-
of-breed ERP applications or vertical market solutions to meet the unique requirements of 
specific industries such as manufacturing, distribution, retail, and others. Figure 12.15 dis­
plays an overview of ERP vendors by business size. Figure 12.16 displays the important fac­
tors driving the future of ERP.
FIGURE 12.15
ERP Vendors by Tier.
  ERP VENDORS BY TIER  
  
  Enterprise Size  
  ERP Vendor  
 Tier I 
 Large Enterprise 
SAP  
Oracle  
Microsoft    
 Tier II 
 Midsize Business 
Infor  
Lawson  
Epicor  
Sage    
 Tier III 
 Small Business 
Exact Globe  
Syspro  
 etiu
Ste
N
Consona    
Ebusiness
Supply chain
management
Materials
requirement
planning
Human
resource
management
Finance
accounting
resource
management
Business
intelligence
Customer
relationship
management
ENTERPRISE
RESOURCE
PLANNING
CLOUD ERP
MOBILITY
SaaS ERP
TIERED
ARCHITECTURE
FIGURE 12.16
Organizational Integration 
of ERP.

222  *  Unit 3  Streamlining Business Operations
The world of ERP may seem boring to those caught up in the hysteria over Twitter and iPhone appli­
cations, but there’s plenty of drama to be found: Troubled multimillion-dollar software deals that 
produce spectacular failures and huge spending nightmares; vendor marketing bravado that breeds 
cut-throat competition and contempt; and embarrassing and costly lawsuits over botched implemen­
tations and intellectual property breaches. Consider CIO.com’s brief and semi-chronological history of 
five ERP scandals as a warning if you’re contemplating an upgrade or implementation.
	1.	 Definitely Not a Sweet Experience for Hershey- Could a failed technology implementation take 
down a Fortune 500 company (in this case Hershey Foods)? Well, it certainly didn’t help Her­
shey’s operations during the Halloween season in 1999 or make Wall Street investors thrilled. In 
the end, Hershey’s ghastly problems with its SAP ERP, Siebel CRM and Manugistics supply chain 
applications prevented it from delivering $100 million worth of Kisses for Halloween that year and 
caused the stock to dip 8 percent. So I guess a failed technology project can’t actually take down 
a Fortune 500 company for good, but it can certainly knock it around a bit.
	2.	 Just Do It: Fix Our Supply Chain System- What did a $400 million upgrade to Nike’s supply chain and 
ERP systems get the world-renowned shoe- and athletic gear-maker? Well, for starters, $100 million
in lost sales, a 20 percent stock dip and a collection of class-action lawsuits. This was all back in 
2000, and the horrendous results were due to a bold ERP, supply chain and CRM project that aimed 
to upgrade the systems into one superstar system. Nike’s tale is both of woe and warning.
	3.	 HP’s “Perfect Storm” of ERP Problems- The epic tale of HP’s centralization of its disparate North 
American ERP systems onto one SAP system proves that one can never be too pessimistic when 
it comes to ERP project management. You see, in 2004, HP’s project managers knew all of the 
things that could go wrong with their ERP rollout. But they just didn’t plan for so many of them to 
happen at once. The project eventually cost HP $160 million in order backlogs and lost revenue—
more than five times the project’s estimated cost. Said Gilles Bouchard, then-CIO of HP’s global 
operations: “We had a series of small problems, none of which individually would have been too 
much to handle. But together they created the perfect storm.”
	4.	 A New Type of Freshman Hazing- Pity the college freshman at the University of Massachusetts 
in fall 2004: The last thing they needed was some computer program to haunt their lives and 
make their new collegiate experience even more uncertain. But more than 27,000 students at the 
University of Massachusetts as well as Stanford and Indiana University were forced to do battle 
with buggy portals and ERP applications that left them at best unable to find their classes and at 
worst unable to collect their financial aid checks. Said one UMass senior at the time: “The fresh­
men were going crazy because they didn’t know where to go.” After a couple of tense days and 
weeks, however, everyone eventually got their checks and class schedules.
Chapter Twelve Case:  Five Famous ERP Failures
	1.	 Measuring the success of an ERP system is difficult. How is measuring the success of a connected 
car similar to measuring the success of an ERP system?
	2.	 How are connected cars using software as a service?
	3.	 How are connected cars using cloud computing?
O P E N I N G  C A S E  ST U DY  Q U E ST I O N S

	
Chapter 12  Integrating the Organization from End to End—Enterprise Resource Planning  *  223
	5.	 Waste Management Trashes Its “Fake” ERP Software- Garbage-disposal giant Waste Manage­
ment is still embroiled in an acrimonious $100 million legal battle with SAP over an 18-month 
installation of its ERP software. The initial deal began in 2005, but the legal saga commenced 
in March 2008, when Waste Management filed suit and claimed SAP executives participated in 
a fraudulent sales scheme that resulted in the massive failure. Several months later, SAP fired 
back, claiming that Waste Management allegedly violated its contractual agreement with SAP in 
several ways, including by “failing to timely and accurately define its business requirements,” and 
not providing “sufficient, knowledgeable, decision-empowered users and managers” to work on 
the project. In the fall 2008, accusations were still flying about documentation, depositions and 
delays in bringing the case before a judge. And that proposed 18-month implementation now 
sounds like a dream scenario.1
Questions
	1.	 Why do you think it is so difficult to find successful ERP implementation?
	2.	 How do you think cloud computing will help ERP implementations find success?
	3.	 What advice would you give a company deciding to implement an ERP system?
	4.	 How can integrating SCM, CRM, and ERP help improve business operations at your school?

224  *  Unit 3  Streamlining Business Operations
12.1.	 Describe the role information plays in enterprise resource planning systems.
Enterprise resource planning systems serve as the organization’s backbone in providing fundamen­
tal decision-making support. In the past, departments made decisions independent of each other. 
ERP systems provide a foundation for collaboration between departments, enabling people in differ­
ent business areas to communicate. ERP systems have been widely adopted in large organizations 
to store critical knowledge used to make the decisions that drive performance.
12.2.	 Identify the core and extended areas of enterprise resource planning.
Enterprise resource planning (ERP) integrates all departments and functions throughout an organiza­
tion into a single IT system (or integrated set of IT systems) so employees can make decisions by 
viewing enterprisewide information about all business operations. The current generation of ERP, 
ERP-II, is composed of two primary components—core and extended. Core ERP components are the 
traditional components included in most ERP systems and primarily focus on internal operations. 
Extended ERP components are the extra components that meet organizational needs not covered by 
the core components and primarily focus on external operations.
12.3.	 Discuss the current technologies organizations are integrating in enterprise 
resource planning systems.
The goal of ERP is to integrate all of the organizational systems into one fully functioning, high-
performance system that is capable of meeting all business needs and user requirements. Of course, 
this goal is incredibly difficult to achieve because businesses and technologies experience rapid 
change, and ERP must support mobility, cloud, SaaS, and tiered architectures.
L E A R N I N G  O U T C O M E  R E V I E W
	1.	 What is an enterprise resource planning system?
	2.	 What is the difference between core and extended ERP?
	3.	 What are the components in a core ERP system?
	4.	 What are the components in an extended ERP system?
	5.	 What is at the heart of an ERP system?
	6.	 How does a company measure the success of an ERP system?
	7.	 What are the three different ERP implementation choices?
R E V I E W  Q U E S T I O N S

	
Chapter 12  Integrating the Organization from End to End—Enterprise Resource Planning  *  225
1. Implementing an ERP System
Blue Dog Inc. is a leading manufacturer in the high-end sunglasses industry. Blue Dog Inc. reached 
record revenue levels of over $250 million last year. The company is currently deciding on the pos­
sibility of implementing an ERP system to help decrease production costs and increase inventory 
control. Many of the executives are nervous about making such a large investment in an ERP system 
due to its low success rates. As a senior manager at Blue Dog Inc. you have been asked to compile 
a list of the potential benefits and risks associated with implementing an ERP system along with your 
recommendations for the steps the company can take to ensure a successful implementation.
2. SCM, CRM, and ERP
Jamie Ash is interested in applying for a job at a large software vendor. One of the criteria for the 
job is a detailed understanding of strategic initiatives such as SCM, CRM, and ERP. Jamie has no 
knowledge of any of these initiatives and cannot even explain what the acronyms mean. Jamie has 
come to you for help. She would like you to compile a summary of the three initiatives including an 
analysis of how the three are similar and how they are different. Jamie would also like to perform 
some self-training via the web so be sure to provide her with several additional links to key websites 
that offer detailed overviews on SCM, CRM, and ERP.
3. Software as a Service
It is not uncommon to open a magazine and find a number of X as a Service acronyms. Platform as 
a Service, Data as a Service, and Infrastructure as a Service to name a few. Research the Internet to 
find examples of businesses using different application and data service to help grown and trans­
form their operations. What is SaaS and why are businesses excited about SaaS ERP systems? Why 
is SaaS such a hot trend in the business world? What other kinds of services did you find and how 
would a business benefit from using them?
4. Gaining Business Intelligence from Strategic Initiatives
You are a new employee in the customer service department at Premier One, a large office supply 
distributor. The company has been in business for three years and focuses on providing top of the line 
office supplies at a low cost. The company currently has 90 employees and operates in seven states.
Sales over the past three years have tripled, and the manual systems currently in place are no 
longer sufficient to run the business. Your first task is to meet with your new team and create a 
presentation for the president and chief executive officer describing supply chain management, 
customer relationship management, and enterprise resource planning. The presentation should 
highlight the main benefits Premier One can receive from these enterprise systems along with any 
additional added business value that can be gained from the systems.
5. Sharptooth Incorporated
Stephen Kern is the founder and CEO of Sharptooth, a small business that buys and sells comic 
strips to magazines and newspapers around the country. Some of Sharptooth’s artists have made it 
big and are syndicated in hundreds of magazines and newspapers, whereas others are new to the 
industry. Kern started in the business as an artist and began contracting other artists when he real­
ized he had a knack for promoting and marketing comic materials. His artistic background is great 
for spotting talented young artists but not so great for running the business.
Kern recently began selling comics to new forms of media such as blogs, websites, and other 
online tools. He has hired you to build him a new system to track all online comic sales. You quickly 
notice that Kern has a separate system for each of his lines of business, including newspaper 
M A K I N G  B U S I N E S S  D E C I S I O N S

226  *  Unit 3  Streamlining Business Operations
sources, magazine sources, billboard sources, and now online sources. You notice that each system 
works independently to perform its job of creating, updating, and maintaining sales information, 
but you are wondering how he operates his business as a whole. Create a list of issues Kern will 
encounter if he continues to run his business with four systems performing the same operations. 
What could happen to the business if he cannot correlate the details of each? Be sure to highlight at 
least 10 issues by which separate systems could cause problems.
U N I T  S U M M A R Y
T
oday, organizations of various sizes are proving that systems that support decision making 
and opportunity seizing are essential to thriving in the highly competitive electronic world. We 
are living in an era when information technology is a primary tool, knowledge is a strategic 
asset, and decision making and problem solving are paramount skills. The tougher, larger, and more 
demanding a problem or opportunity is, and the faster and more competitive the environment is, the 
more important decision-making and problem-solving skills become. This unit discussed numerous 
tools and strategic initiatives that an organization can take advantage of to assist in decision making:
	■	
Supply chain management (SCM)—managing information flows within the supply chain to maxi-
mize total supply chain effectiveness and profitability.
	■	
Customer relationship management (CRM)—managing all aspects of customers’ relationships 
with an organization to increase customer loyalty and retention and an organization’s profitability.
	■	
Enterprise resource planning (ERP)—integrating all departments and functions throughout an 
organization into a single IT system (or integrated set of IT systems) so that managers and lead-
ers can make enterprisewide decisions by viewing enterprisewide information on all business 
operations.
K E Y  T E R M S
3D printing,  184
Accounting and finance ERP 
component,  215
Analytical CRM,  195
Artificial intelligence (AI),  172
Augmented reality,  175
Bullwhip effect,  182
Call scripting system,  200
Campaign management system, 
197
Click-to-talk,  200
Cloud computing,  218
Computer-aided design/ 
computer-aided  
manufacturing (CAD/CAM,  
185
Consolidation,  172
Contact center,  200
Contact management CRM 
system,  199
Core ERP component,  214
Cradle to grave,  183
Cross-selling,  198
Customer relationship 
management (CRM),  194
Customer segmentation,  201
Customer service and support 
(CSS),  198
Decision support system (DSS),  
177
Digital dashboard,  170
Drill-down,  172
Drone,  187
Ebusiness,  163
Electronic data interchange 
(EDI),  182
Elogistics,  216
Employee relationship 
management (ERM),  203
Enterprise application  
integration (EAI) 
middleware,   212
Eprocurement,  216
Extended ERP component,  214
Executive information system 
(EIS),  170
Expert system,  173
Extended ERP component,  214
Fuzzy logic,  174
Genetic algorithm,  174
Goal-seeking analysis,  169
Granularity,  170
Human resources ERP 
component,  215
Hybrid ERP,  220
Intelligent agent,  175
Intelligent system,  172
Legacy system,  218
List generator,  195
Logistics,  183
Maker movement,  185
Makerspace,  185
Managerial level,  167
Materials management,  183
Middleware,  212
Model,  167

	
Chapter 12  Integrating the Organization from End to End—Enterprise Resource Planning  *  227
U N I T  C L O S I N G  C A S E  O N E
Mutation,  174
Neural network or artificial neural 
network,  173
Online analytical processing 
(OLAP),  169
Online transaction processing 
(OLTP),  167
On-premise system,  218
Operational CRM,  195
Operational level,  165
Opportunity management CRM 
systems,  199
Optimization analysis,  169
Partner relationship  
management (PRM),  202
Procurement,  184
Production and materials 
management ERP 
component,  215
Radio frequency identification 
(RFID),  185
RFID’s Electronic Product Code 
(RFID EPC),  185
Robotics,  187
Sales force automation (SFA,   199
Sales management CRM 
systems,  199
Selling chain management,  189
Semistructured decisions,  167
Sensitivity analysis,  169
Shopping bot,  175
Slice-and-dice,  172
Software as a Service 
(SaaS),  219
Software customization,  217
Source document,  168
Strategic level,  167
Structured decisions,  165
Supply chain design,  181
Supply chain execution 
system,   182
Supply chain planning 
system,   182
Supply chain visibility,  181
Supplier relationship  
management (SRM),  202
Transaction processing  
system (TPS),  167
Unstructured decisions,  167
Uplift modeling,  201
Up-selling,  198
Virtual reality,  175
Web-based self-service 
system,   200
Website personalization,  201
What-if analysis,  169
Action Finally
Data are all over the Internet! Tons and tons and tons of data! For example, over 152 million blogs are 
created each year, along with 100 million Twitter accounts resulting in 25 billion Tweets, 107 trillion 
emails are sent, and 730 billion hours of YouTube videos are watched. Known as the social media sec-
tor, this arena is by far one of the fastest growing and most influential sectors in business. Companies 
are struggling to understand how the social media sector impacts it both financially and strategically.
Data are valuable to any company and the data on the Internet are unique because the informa-
tion comes directly from customers, suppliers, competitors, and even employees. As the social media 
sector takes off, companies are finding themselves at a disadvantage when attempting to keep up 
with all of the “online chatter” about their goods and services on the many different social media 
websites, including Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, Yelp, Google, blogs, etc.
Anytime there is a problem there is a potential business solution, and Actionly.com chooses to 
capitalize on the data glut problem. Actionly monitors multiple social media channels through one 
tracking service looking for specific keywords for industries, brands, companies, and trends. Actionly 
customers choose a keyword to monitor—such as a brand, product names, industry terms, or com-
petitors—and then Actionly constantly collects the data from these social channels and pulls that 
© C. Sherburne/PhotoLink/Getty Images
© Ryan McVay/Getty Images
© Digital Vision/Getty Images

228  *  Unit 3  Streamlining Business Operations
data into a cohesive digital dashboard. The digital dashboard tracks the desired information, such 
as marketplace trends, specific companies, competitive brands, entire industries (for example, clean 
technology), by simultaneously searching Twitter, Facebook, Google, YouTube, Flickr, and blogs. 
After completing a search, Actionly.com uses Google Analytics to create graphs and charts indicating 
how frequently each keyword was found throughout the various channels. Additionally, it links each 
respective channel to the dashboard and filters them with “positive” and “negative” connections, 
allowing users to respond to any comments.
Actionly.com’s business model sets it up for success in this emerging industry. Actionly has a first-
mover advantage because it was the first online brand management company offering this service to 
customers. And the company benefits by using its own services to ensure its brand stays number one 
on all social media websites. Actionly uses Google Analytics to help transform the data it collects from 
the various social media websites into valuable business intelligence. Its digital dashboard monitors 
several key metrics, including:
	■	
Reputation Management: Actionly’s easy to use digital dashboard allows customers to observe 
and analyze trends and track mentions about brands based on historical data as well as continu­
ously updated data. For example, a customer can view graphs that highlight key trends across 30 
days for specific brands, products, or companies.
	■	
Social ROI: By connecting to Google Analytics from Actionly, a customer can analyze its campaign 
performance for individual tweets or Facebook posts to determine which are successful and 
which are failing. Actionly analyzes every post and click to track page views, visitor information, 
goal completions, and so on, through its digital dashboard, allowing users to customize reports 
tracking the performance of daily posts.
	■	
Twitter Analytics: After adding Twitter accounts to the dashboard, a user can drill down into the 
data to view graphs of followers, mentions, and retweets. This eliminates the need to manually 
track a number of Twitter accounts, and a user can view the data in graphs or export the data in 
Excel for further analysis.
	■	
Marketing Campaign Tracking: If a company is launching a big promotion or contest, it can post 
messages across multiple Facebook or Twitter accounts; all the user has to do is select which 
Twitter or Facebook accounts it wants to use and when. Actionly’s Campaign Tracking helps a 
user view which posts are resonating well with customers and measure metrics such as page 
views, signups, conversions, and revenue by post. Actionly even segments the data by post, 
account, campaign, or channel, allowing users to measure performance over time.
	■	
Click Performance: Actionly tracks performance by hour and day of week, allowing customers 
to view which clicks are getting the most attention. Actionly’s algorithm automatically assigns a 
sentiment to tweets, allowing the customer to immediately filter positive or negative or neutral 
posts to react to information quickly.
	■	
Sentiment Analysis: Reviewing positive and negative feedback helps gauge how a brand is doing 
over time, allowing the client to try to increase the positive sentiment. However, no sentiment 
scoring is 100 percent accurate due to the complexities of interpretation, culture, sarcasm, and 
other language nuances. For example, if Actionly is incorrectly tracking a metric, it can change it, 
allowing users to assign their unique sentiments directly to their tweets. A user can also select to 
have positive or negative alerts for keywords emailed as soon as the keyword is posted to help 
manage online brand and company reputations.
	■	
Competitive Analysis: Actionly tracks competitor intelligence by watching new-product releases, 
acquisitions, or customer feedback, allowing a company to stay on top of market entrants, mar­
ket-related blogs, news, or industry-related seminars/webinars.
	■	
Find Influencers: Actionly’s digital dashboard allows a user to engage directly with key influenc­
ers or people who are driving the online chatter about goods and services. Actionly identifies 
influencers and determines their relevance to the company, brand, or product. It then compiles a 

	
Chapter 12  Integrating the Organization from End to End—Enterprise Resource Planning  *  229
list of influencers based on users with the most followers and who have been most active for the 
specific searches in the past 30 days.2
Questions
1.	 Describe the difference between transnational and analytical information, and determine which 
types Actionly uses to create a customer’s digital dashboard.
2.	 Explain why virtual companies such as Actionaly would need to worry about supply chain 
management.
3.	 If you ran an apparel company, such as Nike or REI, how could you use RFID to improve the supply 
chain?
4.	 Identify the different metrics Actionly uses to measure the success of a customer marketing 
campaign.
5.	 Argue for or against the following statement: Actionly invades consumer privacy by taking data 
from different websites such as Twitter and Flickr without the consent of the customer who posted 
the information.
Dream It, Design It, 3D Print It
Have you ever lost a beloved pet? No worries, just draw a picture of your pet and print a plastic replica 
from your 3D desktop printer so your cat or dog can sit on your desk forever. Can you imagine printing 
your drawing in 3D? Well, there is no need to imagine this because you can do it today for as little as 
$300. Just think of all the problems you can solve by having your own 3D printer. Did you recently lose 
the key to your car’s roof rack? No worries, just download the specifications and print one. Did you 
forget your girlfriend’s birthday? No worries, just download and customize a silver bracelet with her 
initials and in less than 30 minutes, you’ll have the beautiful custom piece of jewelry on her wrist— 
without ever leaving your apartment.
Welcome to the wonderful world of 3D printing. For almost 30 years, 3D printing has been used by 
large manufacturing companies to create everything from custom parts to working prototypes. The 
medical industry uses 3D printing to create custom hearing aids, artificial limbs, and braces, and art 
designers and architects use 3D printers to create models and prototypes of statues and buildings. 
Traditionally, 3D printing was only available to large corporations and engineers who could code the 
intricate devices. Today, the first generation of consumer 3D printers is hitting the market at afford­
able prices with software easy enough for children to use.
The disruption occurring in the 3D printing world can, of course, be attributed to Moore’s law as the 
technology has increased in capacity and processing power while decreasing in size and costs. Now 
you can purchase your own 3D printer for as little as $300 to $5,000; simply connect it to your Wi-Fi 
U N I T  C L O S I N G  C A S E  T W O
© Izabela Habur/E+/Getty Images
© Cultura Creative (RF) / Alamy Stock Photo
© scanrail/Getty Images

230  *  Unit 3  Streamlining Business Operations
network and begin downloading files to create your own 3D objects. Current 3D printers offer a wide 
range of colors and materials, including plastics, metal, glass, and even chocolate. That’s right—you 
can custom print your own valentine chocolates! The only barrier to 3D printing is that the software 
used to control the printer is still rather difficult for the average person to use, but you can expect 
that to change because software makers, such as Autodesk, are quickly releasing new, user-friendly 
applications. Autodesk just released 123D, a suite of free applications that enables ordinary people 
to design and customize objects on their PCs or even their iPads and then send them to a 3D printer.
3D printers work by first creating a digital computer-aided design (CAD) file, produced with a 3D 
modeling program or scanned into a 3D modeling program with a 3D scanner. To get from this digital 
file to instructions that the 3D printer understands, software then slices the design into hundreds 
or thousands of horizontal layers. Typically, the 3D printer uses either a fused deposition modeling 
printer, which applies the tiny layers of material, or a laser sintering process by which a laser fuses 
the material together. Names like 3DSystems, Afinia, and MakerBot produce 3D printers for just a few 
thousand dollars for consumers and small businesses alike. Figure Unit 3.2 represents a few of the 
best 3D printed objects according to PC Magazine and Wired. 3
Questions
1.	 Define 3D printing and its impact on business.
2.	 Explain CRM and how 3D printing could affect customer relations.
3.	 Provide an example of how 3D printing might affect the global economy.
4.	 Analyze how 3D printing is affecting supply chains.
5.	 Propose a plan for how a company can use 3D printing to increase sales and customer satisfaction.
6.	 Argue for or against the following statement: “3D printing will be more disruptive to business than 
the Internet.”
1. Great Stories
With the advent of the Internet, when customers have an unpleasant customer experience, the com­
pany no longer has to worry about them telling a few friends and family; the company has to worry 
about them telling everyone. Internet service providers are giving consumers frustrated with how they 
were treated by a company another means of fighting back. Free or low-cost computer space for Inter­
net websites is empowering consumers to tell not only their friends, but also the world about the way 
they have been treated. A few examples of disgruntled customer stories from the Internet include:
■	
Bad Experience with Blue Marble Biking—Tourist on biking tour is bitten by dog, requires 
stitches. Company is barred from hotel because of incident, and in turn it bars the tourist from 
any further tours.
■	
Best Buy Receipt Check—Shopper declines to show register receipt for purchase to door 
guard at Lakewood Best Buy, which is voluntary. Employees attempt to seize cart, stand in 
shopper’s path, and park a truck behind shopper’s car to prevent departure.
■	
Enterprise Rent-A-Car Is a Failing Enterprise—Enterprise Rent-A-Car did not honor reserva­
tions, did not have cars ready as stated, rented cars with nearly empty tanks, and charged 
higher prices to corporate account holders.
The Internet is raising the stakes for customer service. With the ability to create a website dedicated 
to a particular issue, a disgruntled customer can have nearly the same reach as a manufacturer. 
The pervasive nature of the Internet is increasing customer power and changing business from 
product-focused to customer-focused. Explain the difference between product-focused business and 
A P P LY  Y O U R  K N O W L E D G E

	
Chapter 12  Integrating the Organization from End to End—Enterprise Resource Planning  *  231
FIGURE UNIT 3.2
3D-Printed Objects.
Acoustic guitar
 Why print a guitar? Well, a little-known fact is that the supplies of exotic woods are running considerably 
low, so manufacturers of instruments need to start researching for alternative materials. Scott Summit, 
cofounder of Bespoke Innovations, says that the good news is that there is no gold standard for guitars 
compared to other stringed instruments such as the violin, so they can be made of anything. In addition, 
guitarists prefer to have their own unique sound in addition to a customized guitar face, something that will 
be available with a truly original, 3D-printed guitar. 
Bikinis
 The N12 is named after Nylon 12, the material in which the bikini was 3D printed by Continuum Fashion. 
Nylon 12 makes an ideal swimsuit material because it is innately waterproof. As well as being the ﬁrst 3D 
printed bikini, it is also the ﬁrst bikini that actually becomes more comfortable when it gets wet. 
Bionic ear
 To construct the ear, Princeton University researchers print the polymer gel onto an approximate ear shape 
and implant calf cells onto the matrix. The silver nanoparticles fuse to create an antenna, which picks up 
radio signals before being transferred to the cochlea, which translates the sound into brain signals. Despite 
all of this, researchers have yet to draw up plans to attach the ear to the human head. 
Cars
 In 2010, Stratasys and Kor Ecologic teamed up to develop Urbee, the ﬁrst car ever to have its entire body 
3D printed by printing layers of material on top of each other until a ﬁnished product appeared. 
Car parts for Jay Leno
 Comedian and car nut Jay Leno had a 1907 White Steamer with a badly damaged feedwater heater, a part 
that bolts onto the cylinders. Using a NextEngine 3D scanner and Dimension 3D printer, he was able to whip 
up a new one in 33 hours. “It’s an amazingly versatile technology,” Leno said on his website. “My EcoJet 
supercar needed air-conditioning ducts. We used plastic parts we designed, right out of the 3D copier. We 
didn’t have to make these scoops out of aluminum—plastic is what they use in a real car. And the ﬁnished 
ones look like factory production pieces.” 
Chocolate heads
 Some people give roses, some people give 3D-printed jewelry, some people give their undying love. But in 
Japan, you can give your lover your chocolate head so they can bite into your brain as the ultimate expres-
sion of love. 
Clothes
 Dutch designer Iris van Herpen was at Fashion Week in Paris, accompanied by MIT Media Lab’s Neri 
Oxman, to showcase a dress that was fabricated using 3D printing technology. It was printed on an Objet 
Connex500 multimaterial 3D printer. Most 3D printers require creations to be printed using only one type of 
fabric or material, but the Connex500 allows mixing of diﬀerent types of material. 
Google Glasses
 Chinese entrepreneur Sunny Gao printed a fully functioning pair of Google Glasses at a hackathon event 
in Shanghai. Unfortunately, the 3D printed version of the glasses doesn’t boast Wi-Fi or Bluetooth support, 
unlike the real thing—but they are identical in every other way. 
Meat (yes, meat)
 U.S. start-up Modern Meadow believes it can make artiﬁcial raw meat using a 3D bioprinter, the BBC 
reported. Peter Thiel, one of Silicon Valley’s most prominent venture capitalists, PayPal cofounder, and early 
Facebook investor, has just backed the company with $350,000. The team reportedly has a prototype, but 
it’s “not ready for consumption.” 
Robotic prosthetic
 Easton LaChappelle, a 17-year-old high school student from Colorado, used free online resources for 3D 
printers to construct a fully functional prosthetic arm and hand. The high school student found inspiration 
from one of his past projects, which involved building a robotic hand made entirely of LEGOs when he was 
14. His creation was able to open and close its ﬁngers using two things: ﬁshing line and servomotors. 2

232  *  Unit 3  Streamlining Business Operations
customer-focused business and why CRM is more important than ever before. In a group, search the 
web for the most outrageous story of a disgruntled customer. A few places to start include:
■	
Complain Complain—provides professionally written, custom complaint letters to businesses.
■	
The Complaint Department—a for-fee consumer complaint resolution and letter writing service.
■	
The Complaint Station—provides a central location to complain about issues related to com­
panies’ products, services, employment, and get rich quick scams.
■	
Complaints.com Consumer Complaints—database of consumer complaints and consumer 
advocacy.
■	
Baddealings.com—forum and database on consumer complaints and scams on products and 
services.
2. Classic Car Problems
Classic Cars Inc. operates high-end automotive dealerships that offer luxury cars along with luxury 
service. The company is proud of its extensive inventory, top-of-the-line mechanics, and especially 
its exceptional service, which even includes a cappuccino bar at each dealership.
The company currently has 40 sales representatives at four locations. Each location maintains its 
own computer systems, and all sales representatives have their own contact management systems. 
This splintered approach to operations causes numerous problems including customer communica­
tion issues, pricing strategy issues, and inventory control issues. A few examples include:
■	
A customer shopping at one dealership can go to another dealership and receive a quote for a 
different price for the same car.
■	
Sales representatives are frequently stealing each other’s customers and commissions.
■	
Sales representatives frequently send their customers to other dealerships to see specific cars 
and when the customer arrives, the car is not on the lot.
■	
Marketing campaigns are not designed to target specific customers; they are typically generic, 
such as 10 percent off a new car.
■	
If a sales representative quits, all of his or her customer information is lost.
You are working for Customer One, a small consulting company that specializes in CRM strategies. 
The owner of Classic Cars Inc., Tom Jones, has hired you to help him formulate a strategy to put his 
company back on track. Develop a proposal for Tom detailing how a CRM system can alleviate the 
company’s issues and create new opportunities.
3. Building Visibility
Visionary companies are building extended enterprises to best compete in the new Internet 
economy. An extended enterprise combines the Internet’s power with new business structures and 
processes to eliminate old corporate boundaries and geographic restrictions. Networked supply 
chains create seamless paths of communication among partners, suppliers, manufacturers, retailers, 
and customers. Because of advances in manufacturing and distribution, the cost of developing new 
products and services is dropping, and time to market is speeding up. This has resulted in increasing 
customer demands, local and global competition, and increased pressure on the supply chain.
To stay competitive, companies must reinvent themselves so that the supply chain—sourcing and 
procurement, production scheduling, order fulfillment, inventory management, and customer care—
is no longer a cost-based back-office exercise, but rather a flexible operation designed to effectively 
address today’s challenges.
The Internet is proving an effective tool in transforming supply chains across all industries. Sup­
pliers, distributors, manufacturers, and resellers now work together more closely and effectively 
than ever. Today’s technology-driven supply chain enables customers to manage their own buying 

	
Chapter 12  Integrating the Organization from End to End—Enterprise Resource Planning  *  233
experiences, increases coordination and connectivity among supply partners, and helps reduce 
operating costs for every company in the chain.
In the past, assets were a crucial component of success in supply chain management. In today’s 
market, however, a customer-centric orientation is key to retaining competitive advantage. Using the 
Internet and any other resources available, develop a strategic plan for implementing a networked, 
flexible supply chain management system for a start-up company of your choice. Research Netflix 
if you are unfamiliar with how start-up companies are changing the supply chain. Be sure that your 
supply chain integrates all partners—manufacturers, retailers, suppliers, carriers, and vendors—into 
a seamless unit and views customer relationship management as a key competitive advantage. 
There are several points to consider when creating your customer-centric supply chain strategy:
■	
Taking orders is only one part of serving customer needs.
■	
Businesses must fulfill the promise they make to customers by delivering products and infor­
mation upon request—not when it is convenient for the company.
■	
Time to market is a key competitive advantage. Companies must ensure uninterrupted supply, 
and information about customer demands and activities is essential to this requirement.
■	
Cost is an important factor. Companies need to squeeze the costs from internal processes to 
make the final products less expensive.
■	
Reducing design-cycle times is critical, as this allows companies to get their products out more 
quickly to meet customer demand.
4. Finding Shelf Space at Walmart
Walmart’s business strategy of being a low-cost provider by managing its supply chain down to the 
minutiae has paid off greatly. Each week, approximately 100 million customers, or one-third of the 
U.S. population, visit Walmart’s U.S. stores. Walmart is currently the world’s largest retailer and the 
second largest corporation behind ExxonMobil. It was founded by Sam Walton in 1962 and is the 
largest private employer in the United States and Mexico. Walmart is also the largest grocery retailer 
in the United States, with an estimated 20 percent of the retail grocery and consumables business, 
and the largest toy seller in the United States, with an estimated 45 percent of the retail toy busi­
ness, having surpassed Toys “R” Us in the late 1990s.
Walmart’s business model is based on selling a wide variety of general merchandise at “always 
low prices.” The reason Walmart can offer such low prices is due to its innovative use of information 
technology tools to create its highly sophisticated supply chain. Over the past decade, Walmart has 
famously invited its major suppliers to jointly develop powerful supply chain partnerships. These are 
designed to increase product flow efficiency and, consequently, Walmart’s profitability.
Many companies have stepped up to the challenge, starting with the well-known Walmart/
Procter & Gamble alliance, which incorporated vendor-managed inventory, category management, 
and other intercompany innovations. Walmart’s CFO became a key customer as P&G’s objective 
became maximizing Walmart’s internal profitability. Unlike many other retailers, Walmart does not 
charge a slotting fee to suppliers for their products to appear in the store. Alternatively, Walmart 
focuses on selling more popular products and often pressures store managers to drop unpopular 
products in favor of more popular ones, as well as pressuring manufacturers to supply more popu­
lar products.
You are the owner of a high-end collectible toy company. You create everything from authentic 
sports figure replicas to famous musicians and movie characters including Babe Ruth, Hulk Hogan, 
Mick Jagger, Ozzy Osbourne, Alien, and the Terminator. It would be a huge win for your company if 
you could get your collectibles into Walmart. Compile a strategic plan highlighting the steps required 
to approach Walmart as your supply chain partner. Be sure to address the pros and cons of partner­
ing with Walmart, including the cost to revamp your current supply chain to meet Walmart’s tough 
supply chain requirements.

234  *  Unit 3  Streamlining Business Operations
5. Shipping Problems
Entrepreneurship is in Alyssa Stuart’s blood. Alyssa has been starting businesses since she was 10 
years old, and she finally has the perfect business of custom-made furniture. Customers who visit 
Alyssa’s shop can choose from a number of different fabrics and 50 different styles of couch and 
chair designs to create their custom-made furniture. Once the customer decides on a fabric pattern 
and furniture design, the information is sent to China where the furniture is built and shipped to the 
customer via the West Coast. Alyssa is excited about her business; all of her hard work has finally 
paid off as she has more than 17,000 customers and 875 orders currently in the pipe.
Alyssa’s business is booming. Her high-quality products and outstanding customer service have 
created an excellent reputation for her business. But Alyssa’s business is at risk of losing everything 
and she has come to you for help solving her supply chain issues.
Yesterday, a dockworkers’ union strike began and shut down all of the West Coast shipping docks 
from San Francisco to Canada. Work will resume only when the union agrees to new labor contracts, 
which could take months. Alyssa has asked you to summarize the impact of the dock shutdown 
on her business and create a strategy to keep her business running, which is especially difficult 
because Alyssa guarantees 30-day delivery on all products or the product is free. What strategies do 
you recommend for Alyssa’s business to continue working while her supply chain is disrupted by the 
dockworkers’ strike?
6. Political Supply Chains
The U.S. government has crafted a deal with the United Arab Emirates (UAE) that would let a UAE-
based firm, Dubai Ports World (DPW), run six major U.S. ports. If the approval is unchallenged, Dubai 
Ports World would run the ports of New York, New Jersey, Baltimore, New Orleans, Miami, and Phila­
delphia. Currently, London-based Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Co. (P&O), the fourth 
largest port operator in the world, runs the six ports. But the $6.8 billion sale of P&O to DPW would 
effectively turn over North American operations to the government-owned company in Dubai.
Some citizens are worried that the federal government may be outsourcing U.S. port operations 
to a company prone to terrorist infiltration by allowing a firm from the United Arab Emirates to run 
port operations within the United States. You have been called in on an investigation to determine 
the potential effects on U.S. businesses’ supply chains if these ports were shut down due to ter­
rorist activities. The United Arab Emirates has had people involved in terrorism. In fact, some of its 
financial institutions laundered the money for the 9/11 terrorists. Create an argument for or against 
outsourcing these ports to the UAE. Be sure to detail the effect on U.S. businesses’ supply chains if 
these ports are subjected to terrorist acts.
7. JetBlue on YouTube
JetBlue took an unusual and interesting CRM approach by using YouTube to apologize to its cus­
tomers. JetBlue’s founder and CEO, David Neeleman, apologized to customers via YouTube after a 
very, very bad week for the airline: 1,100 flights canceled due to snow storms and thousands of irate 
passengers. Neeleman’s unpolished, earnest delivery makes this apology worth accepting. But then 
again, we were not stuck on a tarmac for eight hours. With all of the new advances in technology 
and the many ways to reach customers, do you think using YouTube is a smart approach? What else 
could JetBlue do to help gain back its customers’ trust?
You are the founder and CEO of GoodDog, a large pet food manufacturing company. Recently, 
at least 16 pet deaths have been tied to tainted pet food, fortunately not manufactured by your 
company. A recall of potentially deadly pet food has dog and cat owners studying their animals for 
even the slightest hint of illness and swamping veterinarians nationwide with calls about symptoms 

	
Chapter 12  Integrating the Organization from End to End—Enterprise Resource Planning  *  235
both real and imagined. Create a strategy for using YouTube as a vehicle to communicate with your 
customers as they fear for their pets’ lives. Be sure to highlight the pros and cons of using YouTube 
as a customer communication vehicle. Are there any other new technologies you could use as a cus­
tomer communication vehicle that would be more effective than YouTube?
8. Lively’s Home Cooking Catering
Having been employed by the same company for more than 20 years, Mary Lou Lively was shocked 
when she was suddenly terminated along with about 900 of her co-workers. It took Lively a few 
weeks to recover from the shock, and then she finally began focusing her efforts on searching for a 
new job. Lively was sure her loyal employment history and strong skill set would land her a new job 
in no time; however, after several months of searching, she wasn’t having any luck. With her emer­
gency funds quickly being depleted, Lively knew she had to find a new job soon or she’d need to 
start selling her assets or cashing in her retirement.
The one positive aspect of having so much free time was that she could focus on her true pas­
sion, cooking. Mary Lou began making a little money by catering lunches and dinners for local busi­
nesses and neighbors. One day she overheard a neighbor remark that she was hosting a large party 
and didn’t have enough time to prepare the meal. Almost jokingly, Lively asked her how much she’d 
be willing to pay for a catered event. Soon Lively was catering for numerous neighbors and small 
businesses and she knew she had to make a decision about whether she would go into business for 
herself or continue searching for other employment.
After a year in the catering business, Lively was earning a good living and building a stellar repu­
tation. She began catering for all types of events, including weddings, and business was so good 
that she hired several employees to help grow her business. As Lively begins to plan her expansion, 
she has asked for your help in answering the following questions:
1.	 How important is customer loyalty for Lively’s business? What can she do to ensure that her 
customers remain loyal? How could one disgruntled customer hurt business? What can she do 
to combat this challenge?
2.	 Research the business Yelp.com. What service does Yelp.com perform? Would a small business 
see Yelp.com as an opportunity or a threat? What are the pros and cons a customer should be 
aware of when using Yelp.com?
3.	 Lively’s responsibilities include forecasting, inventory control, scheduling, and ensuring high-
quality products. What types of forecasts would she require to run her business? What types of 
inventory would she want to track? What might happen if her inventory tracking tool was off by 
50 percent? What types of schedules does Lively need to generate? What things might occur to 
disrupt schedules and cause her to reschedule? How can a supply chain management system 
help run the business?
4.	 Lively wants to create a business based on loyal customers and loyal employees. She offers her 
employees bonuses for new ideas, recipes, or business referrals. What risks is Lively encoun­
tering by offering these bonuses? One employee idea that she has implemented is turning out 
to be a competitive advantage for her business; however, the employee has quit and is now 
working for a competitor. Should Lively still pay the employee the bonus? What should she do 
to ensure that she is building strong employee relationships?
5.	 Lively overheard one of her customers talking about enterprise systems such as CRM, SCM, 
and ERP. However, she is sure they are available only to big companies that have lots of capital. 
Research the Internet and find examples of enterprise systems for small business. Do you think 
she should invest in these types of systems to run her business? Why or why not?

236  *  Unit 3  Streamlining Business Operations
If you are looking for Excel projects to incorporate into your class, try any of the following to test 
your knowledge.
A Y K  A P P L I C A T I O N  P R O J E C T S
Project 
Number
Project Name
Project 
Type
Plug-In
Focus Area
Project Level
Skill Set
Page 
Number
9
Security Analysis
Excel
T3
Filtering Data
Intermediate
Conditional 
Formatting, 
Autofilter, Subtotal
AYK.7
10
Gathering Data
Excel
T3
Data Analysis
Intermediate
Conditional 
Formatting
AYK.8
11
Scanner System
Excel
T2
Strategic 
Analysis
Intermediate
Formulas
AYK.8
12
Competitive 
Pricing
Excel
T2
Profit 
Maximization
Intermediate
Formulas
AYK.9
13
Adequate 
Acquisitions
Excel
T2
Break Even 
Analysis
Intermediate
Formulas
AYK.9
15
Assessing the Value 
of Information
Excel
T3
Data Analysis
Intermediate
PivotTable
AYK.10
16
Growth, Trends, 
and Forecasts
Excel
T2, T3
Data 
Forecasting
Advanced
Average, Trend, 
Growth
AYK.11
18
Formatting Grades
Excel
T3
Data Analysis
Advanced
If, LookUp
AYK.12
22
Turnover Rates
Excel
T3
Data Mining
Advanced
PivotTable
AYK.15
23
Vital Information
Excel
T3
Data Mining
Advanced
PivotTable
AYK.15
24
Breaking Even
Excel
T4
Business 
Analysis
Advanced
Goal Seek
AYK.16
25
Profit Scenario
Excel
T4
Sales Analysis
Advanced
Scenario Manager
AYK.16


U
N
I
T
The pace of technological change never ceases to amaze. What only a few years ago would have been con­
sidered Star Trek technology is becoming normal. What used to take hours to download over a dial-up modem 
connection can now transfer in a matter of seconds through an invisible, wireless network connection from a 
computer thousands of miles away. We are living in an increasingly wireless present and hurtling ever faster 
toward a wireless future. The tipping point of ubiquitous, wireless, handheld, mobile computing is not far away.
Managers must understand the importance of ebusiness and how it has revolutionized fundamental busi­
ness processes. Ebusiness offers new opportunities for growth and new ways of performing business activities 
that were simply not possible before the Internet. As a business student, you should understand the funda­
mental impact of the Internet and the innovations in mobile technologies on business. As a future manager 
and organizational knowledge worker, you need to understand what benefits ebusiness and wireless business 
practices can offer an organization and your career. Furthermore, you need to understand the challenges that 
come along with the adoption of web technologies, how Web 2.0 is impacting communication and the limita­
tions on the mobile worker. This unit will give you this knowledge and help prepare you for success in today’s 
electronic wireless global marketplace.
4
Building Innovation
W h a t ’ s  i n  I T  f o r  M e ?

Slack–Be Less Busy
Slack’s business model is simple: Be Less Busy. It’s hard to imagine any busy professional not 
coveting those simple words. Slack’s promise is to make business professionals more productive 
by eliminating meetings and emails. Can you imagine a life without meetings? That is Slack’s 
promise and it is taking the business world by storm.
Slack, a SaaS application, is one of the fast-growing collaboration companies ever started 
used by millions of people every day to collaborate at work. In two short years since its incep­
tion Slack has become a $3 Billion Dollar company. Slack is like Twitter for businesses. Slack is 
a centralized group chat platform for the enterprise. With its advanced search and file-sharing 
functionalities, it can also be linked to third-party apps, like Google Drive, Dropbox, and Twit­
ter. Slack has long advertised itself as a “freemium” product, where an unlimited number of 
users can use it for free before deciding to upgrade and pay money for more robust package 
with better features.
In time — and it won’t be long — Slack will morph into the spinal cord of the office nervous 
system, connecting numerous third-party business apps, eventually becoming the gateway to a 
workplace artificial intelligence system that will answer routine questions and proactively seek 
out information you might otherwise miss.
Slack’s founder Stewart Butterfield, also the founder of Flickr, was actually building a gaming 
company when the team created Slack to help developers and employees communicate. When 
the gaming company went bankrupt Butterfield used the opportunity to launch the company’s 
home-grown collaboration tool Slack and the rest is history. And like a game Slack is fun and 
engaging and beating-up its boring traditional enterprise application competition. Slack only 
charges customers after Butterfield attributes his company’s success to its focus on education, 
feedback, customer happiness, and metric analysis. Butterfield’s vision is for Slack to become 
the single source of company information.
U N I T  F O U R  O P E N I N G  C A S E
© John Lund/Marc
Romanelli/Blend Images LLC RF
© Marcel De Grijs/123RF
© AFP/Getty Images

240
Slack’s AI Vision
The future of Slack is being sketched out by Noah Weiss, Slack’s head of search, learning, 
and intelligence. Weiss envisions Slack communicating with its customers using advanced AI 
software bots allowing the application to understand your role inside a company, anticipate 
your day-to-day needs and act like a well-trained office assistant.
The information employees share with their colleagues within their many Slack channels 
creates a valuable trove of a company’s collective memory, one that can be mined for training 
an AI system about how things get done inside that company and even who does what.
“Workers spend about 20 percent of their time looking for information, or looking for a 
person who has the information they need,” Weiss said. “And we’ve found that a lot of the 
questions people have are asked over and over again.”
Those questions can be basic — “What‘s the password to the office Wi-Fi network?” — or 
weightier — “Who’s in charge of sales in Berlin?” In time, Slack itself will be smart enough to 
answer. Combine this with the more than 430 third-party apps that connect to it and Slack 
becomes the place where you get information and then act on it. Approving expenses and 
tracking projects are already routine tasks that appear in Slack.
As Slack becomes smarter, it will seek out and present you with information that it thinks 
you might want to know. This will become especially useful as Slack scales up to work with 
ever-larger companies. Weiss likens the AI layer to your personal chief of staff. “Slack will 
know the people you trust and the topics you tend to care about, and over time it will fig­
ure out how to better route information to you,” he said. “It becomes a robot that’s working 
behind the scenes on your behalf to find things you should know about but might otherwise 
never see.” 1 

	
  Introduction  *  241
Introduction
One of the biggest forces changing business is the Internet. Technology companies like Intel 
and Cisco were among the first to seize the Internet to overhaul their operations. Intel deployed 
web-based automation to liberate its 200 salesclerks from tedious order-entry positions. 
Instead, salesclerks concentrate on customer relationship management functions such as ana­
lyzing sales trends and pampering customers. Cisco handles 75 percent of its sales online, and 
45 percent of online orders never touch employees’ hands. This type of Internet-based ordering
has helped Cisco hike productivity by 20 percent over the past few years.
Ebusiness is the conducting of business on the Internet, not only buying and selling, but also 
serving customers and collaborating with business partners. Organizations realize that putting
up simple websites for customers, employees, and partners does not create an ebusiness.
Ebusiness websites must create a buzz, much as Amazon has done in the book-selling industry.
Ebusiness websites must be innovative, add value, and provide useful information. In short, the 
site must build a sense of community and collaboration, eventually becoming the port of entry 
for business. This unit focuses on the opportunities and advantages found with developing
collaborative partnerships in ebusiness and includes:
	■	 Chapter Thirteen—Creating Innovative Organizations.
	■	 Chapter Fourteen—Ebusiness.
	■	 Chapter Fifteen—Creating Collaborative Partnerships.
	■	 Chapter Sixteen—Integrating Wireless Technology in Business.
© Digital Vision/PunchStock

242  *  Unit 4  Building Innovation
C H A P T E R  13
LEARNING OUTCOMES
  13.1.	 Compare disruptive and sustaining technologies, and 
explain how the Internet and WWW caused business 
disruption.
  13.2.	 Describe ebusiness and its associated advantages.
Disruptive Technologies and Web 1.0
Polaroid, founded in 1937, produced the first instant camera in the late 1940s. The Pola-
roid camera, whose pictures developed themselves, was one of the most exciting technologi-
cal advances the photography industry had ever seen. The company eventually went public, 
becoming one of Wall Street’s most prominent enterprises, with its stock trading above $60 per 
share in 1997. In 2002, the stock dropped to 8 cents and the company declared bankruptcy.2
How could a company such as Polaroid, which had innovative technology and a captive 
customer base, go bankrupt? Perhaps company executives failed to use Porter’s Five Forces 
Model to analyze the threat of substitute products or services. If they had, would they have 
noticed the two threats—one-hour film processing and digital cameras—which eventually 
stole Polaroid’s market share? Would they have understood that their customers, people who 
want instant access to their pictures, would be the first to try these alternatives? Could the 
company have found a way to compete with one-hour film processing and the digital camera 
to save Polaroid?
Many organizations face the same dilemma as Polaroid—what’s best for the current busi-
ness might not be what’s best for it in the long term. Some observers of our business environ-
ment have an ominous vision of the future—digital Darwinism. Digital Darwinism implies 
that organizations that cannot adapt to the new demands placed on them for surviving in the 
information age are doomed to extinction.
DISRUPTIVE VERSUS SUSTAINING TECHNOLOGY
A disruptive technology is a new way of doing things that initially does not meet the needs of 
existing customers. Disruptive technologies tend to open new markets and destroy old ones.  
A sustaining technology, on the other hand, produces an improved product customers are 
eager to buy, such as a faster car or larger hard drive. Sustaining technologies tend to provide 
us with better, faster, and cheaper products in established markets. Incumbent companies most 
often lead sustaining technology to market, but they virtually never lead in markets opened by 
disruptive technologies. Figure 13.1 positions companies expecting future growth from new 
investments (disruptive technology) and companies expecting future growth from existing 
investments (sustaining technology).
Disruptive technologies typically enter the low end of the marketplace and eventually evolve 
to displace high-end competitors and their reigning technologies. Sony is a perfect example. 
Sony started as a tiny company that built portable, battery-powered transistor radios. The sound 
Creating Innovative 
Organizations
LO 13.1 Compare disruptive and 
sustaining technologies, and 
explain how the Internet and 
WWW caused business disruption.

	
Chapter 13  Creating Innovative Organizations  *  243
quality was poor, but customers were willing to overlook that for the convenience of portability.
With the experience and revenue stream from the portables, Sony improved its technology to 
produce cheap, low-end transistor amplifiers that were suitable for home use and invested those 
revenues in improving the technology further, which produced still-better radios.
The Innovator’s Dilemma, a book by Clayton M. Christensen, discusses how established 
companies can take advantage of disruptive technologies without hindering existing relation­
ships with customers, partners, and stakeholders. Xerox, IBM, Sears, and DEC all listened to 
existing customers, invested aggressively in technology, had their competitive antennae up, 
and still lost their market-dominant positions. They may have placed too much emphasis on 
satisfying customers’ current needs, while neglecting new disruptive technology to meet cus­
tomers’ future needs and thus losing market share. Figure 13.2 highlights several companies 
that launched new businesses by capitalizing on disruptive technologies.3
FIGURE 13.1
Disruptive and Sustaining 
Technologies.
Expected Returns on  New Investments
Expected Returns on Existing Investments
100
80
60
40
20
100
80
60
40
20
Dell
Johnson & Johnson
Procter & Gamble
Walmart
Phillips Petroleum
General Motors
Sears
Home Depot
Cisco
Company
Disruptive Technology
Apple
iPod, iPhone, iPad
Charles Schwab
Online brokerage
Hewlett-Packard
Microprocessor-based computers; ink-jet printers
IBM
Minicomputers; personal computers
Intel
Low-end microprocessors
Intuit
QuickBooks software; TurboTax software; Quicken software
Microsoft
Internet-based computing; operating system software; SQL and Access database 
software
Oracle
Database software
Quantum
3.5-inch disks
Sony
Transistor-based consumer electronics
FIGURE 13.2
Companies That Capitalized 
on Disruptive Technologies.

244  *  Unit 4  Building Innovation
THE INTERNET AND WORLD WIDE WEB—THE ULTIMATE BUSINESS DISRUPTORS
The Internet is a massive network that connects computers all over the world and allows them 
to communicate with one another. Computers connected via the Internet can send and receive 
information including text, graphics, voice, video, and software. Originally the Internet was 
essentially an emergency military communications system operated by the U.S. Depart­
ment of Defense Advanced Research Project Agency (DARPA), which called the network 
ARPANET. No one foresaw the dramatic impact it would have on both business and per­
sonal communications. In time, all U.S. universities that had defense-related funding installed 
ARPANET computers, forming the first official Internet network. As users began to notice 
the value of electronic communications, the purpose of the network started shifting from a 
military pipeline to a communications tool for scientists.
The Internet and the World Wide Web are not synonymous. The WWW is just one part 
of the Internet, and its primary use is to correlate and disseminate information. The Internet 
includes the WWW and also other forms of communication systems such as email.   Figure 13.3 
lists the key terms associated with the WWW and Figure 13.4 lists the reasons for the massive 
growth of the WWW.
WEB 1.0: THE CATALYST FOR EBUSINESS
As people began learning about the WWW and the Internet, they understood that it enabled a 
company to communicate with anyone, anywhere, at anytime, creating a new way to participate 
FIGURE 13.3
Overview of the WWW.
  Term  
  Deﬁnition  
  Example  
    World Wide Web  
Provides access to Internet information through documents, 
including text, graphics, and audio and video ﬁles that use 
a special formatting language called Hypertext Markup 
Language. 
Tim Berners-Lee, a British computer scientist, is 
considered the inventor of the WWW on March 12, 1989. 
Hypertext Markup 
Language (HTML)    
Publishes hypertext on the WWW, which allows users to 
move from one document to another simply by clicking a 
hot spot or link. 
HTML uses tags such as <h1> and </h1> to structure text 
into headings, paragraphs, lists, hypertext links, and so on. 
  HTML 5  
The current version of HTML delivers everything from 
animation to graphics and music to movies; it can also 
be used to build complicated web applications and works 
across platforms, including a PC, tablet, smartphone, or 
smart TV. 
Includes new tags such as doctype, a simple way to tell 
the browser what type of document is being looked at. 
 <!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC> 
Hypertext Transport 
Protocol (HTTP)    
The Internet protocol web browsers use to request and dis-
play web pages using universal resource locators (URLs). 
To retrieve the ﬁle at the URL  http://www.somehost.com/
path/ﬁle.html  
World Wide Web 
Consortium (W3C)  
An international community that develops open standards 
to ensure the long-term growth of the Web ( www.w3.org ). 
Tim Berners-Lee founded the W3C to act as a steward of 
web standards, which the organization has done for more 
than 15 years. 
Web browser    
Allows users to access the WWW. 
 Internet Explorer, Mozilla’s Firefox, Google Chrome 
Universal resource 
locator (URL)    
The address of a ﬁle or resource on the web. 
  www.apple.com  
  www.microsoft.com  
  www.amazon.com  
Domain name hosting 
(web hosting)    
A service that allows the owner of a domain name to main-
tain a simple website and provide email capacity. 
  GoDaddy.com,  1&1.com,  Web.com  
Applet  
A program that runs within another application such as a 
website. 
The common “Hello World” applet types Hello World across 
the screen 
Internet Corporation for 
Assigned Names and 
Numbers (ICANN)    
A nonproﬁt organization that has assumed the responsi-
bility for Internet Protocol (IP) address space allocation, 
protocol parameter assignment, domain name system 
management, and root server system management 
functions previously performed under U.S. government 
contract. 
https://www.icann.org/  
Individuals, industry, noncommercial, and government 
representatives discuss, debate, and develop policies 
about the technical coordination of the Internet’s Domain 
Name System. 

	
Chapter 13  Creating Innovative Organizations  *  245
in business. The competitive advantages for first movers would be enormous, thus spurring the 
beginning of the Web 1.0 Internet boom. Web 1.0 is a term to refer to the World Wide Web dur­
ing its first few years of operation between 1991 and 2003. Ecommerce is the buying and selling 
of goods and services over the Internet. Ecommerce refers only to online transactions. Ebusiness 
includes ecommerce along with all activities related to internal and external business operations 
such as servicing customer accounts, collaborating with partners, and exchanging real-time 
information. During Web 1.0, entrepreneurs began creating the first forms of ebusiness.
Ebusiness opened up a new marketplace for any company willing to move its business 
operations online. A paradigm shift occurs when a new radical form of business enters the 
market that reshapes the way companies and organizations behave. Ebusiness created a para­
digm shift, transforming entire industries and changing enterprisewide business processes 
that fundamentally rewrote traditional business rules. Deciding not to make the shift to ebusi­
ness proved fatal for many companies (see Figure 13.5 for an overview of industries revamped 
by the disruption of ebusiness).
The microcomputer revolution made it possible for an average person to own a computer.
Advancements in networking hardware, software, and media made it possible for business computers to 
be connected to larger networks at a minimal cost.
Browser software such as Microsoft’s Internet Explorer and Netscape Navigator gave computer users an 
easy-to-use graphical interface to find, download, and display web pages.
The speed, convenience, and low cost of email have made it an incredibly popular tool for business and 
personal communications.
Basic web pages are easy to create and extremely flexible.
FIGURE 13.4
Reasons for Growth of the 
World Wide Web.
Industry
Business Changes Due to Technology
Auto
AutoTrader.com is the world’s largest used-car marketplace, listing millions of cars from both private 
owners and dealers. AutoTrader.com actually helps to increase used-car dealers’ business as it drives 
millions of qualified leads (potential used-car buyers) to participating automotive dealers and private 
sellers.
Publishing
With the Internet, anyone can publish online content. Traditionally, publishers screened many authors and 
manuscripts and selected those that had the best chances of succeeding. Lulu.com turned this model 
around by providing self-publishing along with print-on-demand capabilities.
Education and Training
Continuing medical education is costly, and just keeping up-to-date with advances often requires taking 
training courses and traveling to conferences. Now continuing education in many fields is moving 
online, and by 2016 more than 50 percent of doctors will be building their skills through online learning. 
Companies such as Cisco save millions by moving training to the Internet.
Entertainment
The music industry was hit hard by ebusiness, and online music traders such as iTunes average billions of 
annual downloads. Unable to compete with online music, the majority of record stores closed. The next 
big entertainment industry to feel the effects of ebusiness will be the multibillion-dollar movie business. 
Video rental stores are closing their doors as they fail to compete with online streaming and home rental 
delivery companies such as Netflix.
Financial Services
Nearly every public efinance company makes money, with online mortgage service Lending Tree leading 
the pack. Processing online mortgage applications is more than 50 percent cheaper for customers.
Retail
Forrester Research predicts ebusiness retail sales will grow at a 10 percent annual growth rate through 
2020. It forecasts U.S. online retail sales will be nearly $250 billion, up from $155 billion in 2009. Online 
retail sales were recently up 11 percent, compared to 2.5 percent for all retail sales.
Travel
Travel site Expedia.com is now the biggest leisure-travel agency, with higher profit margins than even 
American Express. The majority of travel agencies closed as a direct result of ebusiness.
FIGURE 13.5
Ebusiness Disruption of 
Traditional Industries.

246  *  Unit 4  Building Innovation
Advantages of Ebusiness
Both individuals and organizations have embraced ebusiness to enhance productivity, maxi­
mize convenience, and improve communications. Companies today need to deploy a compre­
hensive ebusiness strategy, and business students need to understand its advantages, outlined 
in Figure 13.6. Let’s look at each.
EXPANDING GLOBAL REACH
Easy access to real-time information is a primary benefit of ebusiness. Information richness 
refers to the depth and breadth of details contained in a piece of textual, graphic, audio, or video 
information. Information reach measures the number of people a firm can communicate with 
all over the world. Buyers need information richness to make informed purchases, and sellers 
need information reach to properly market and differentiate themselves from the competition.
Ebusinesses operate 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. This availability directly reduces trans­
action costs, since consumers no longer have to spend a lot of time researching purchases 
or traveling great distances to make them. The faster delivery cycle for online sales helps 
strengthen customer relationships, improving customer satisfaction and ultimately sales.
A firm’s website can be the focal point of a cost-effective communications and market­
ing strategy. Promoting products online allows the company to precisely target its customers 
whether they are local or around the globe. A physical location is restricted by size and lim­
ited to those customers who can get there, while an online store has a global marketplace with 
customers and information seekers already waiting in line.
OPENING NEW MARKETS
Ebusiness is perfect for increasing niche-product sales. Mass customization is the ability of 
an organization to tailor its products or services to the customers’ specifications. For example, 
customers can order M&M’s in special colors or with customized sayings such as “Marry 
Me.” Personalization occurs when a company knows enough about a customer’s likes and 
dislikes that it can fashion offers more likely to appeal to that person, say by tailoring its 
website to individuals or groups based on profile information, demographics, or prior transac­
tions. Amazon uses personalization to create a unique portal for each of its customers.
REDUCING COSTS
Chris Anderson, editor-in-chief of Wired magazine, describes niche-market ebusiness strat­
egies as capturing the long tail, referring to the tail of a typical sales curve. This strategy 
demonstrates how niche products can have viable and profitable business models when sell­
ing via ebusiness. In traditional sales models, a store is limited by shelf space when selecting 
products to sell. For this reason, store owners typically purchase products that will be wanted 
or needed by masses, and the store is stocked with broad products as there is not room on the 
shelf for niche products that only a few customers might purchase. Ebusinesses such as Ama­
zon and eBay eliminated the shelf-space dilemma and were able to offer infinite products.
LO 13.2 Describe ebusiness and 
its associated advantages.
FIGURE 13.6
Ebusiness Advantages.
 Expanding global reach
 Opening new markets
 Reducing costs
 Improving eﬀectiveness
Ebusiness
Advantages

	
Chapter 13  Creating Innovative Organizations  *  247
Netflix offers an excellent example of the long tail. Let’s assume that an average Block­
buster store maintains 3,000 movies in its inventory, whereas Netflix, without physical shelf 
limitations, can maintain 100,000 movies in its inventory. Looking at sales data, the majority of 
Blockbuster’s revenue comes from new releases that are rented daily, whereas older selections 
are rented only a few times a month and don’t repay the cost of keeping them in stock. Thus 
Blockbuster’s sales tail ends at title 3,000 (see Figure 13.7) However, Netflix, with no physical 
limitations, can extend its tail beyond 100,000 (and with streaming video perhaps 200,000). By 
extending its tail, Netflix increases sales, even if a title is rented only a few times.4
Intermediaries are agents, software, or businesses that provide a trading infrastructure to 
bring buyers and sellers together. The introduction of ebusiness brought about disintermedia­
tion, which occurs when a business sells directly to the customer online and cuts out the inter­
mediary (see Figure 13.8). This business strategy lets the company shorten the order process 
and add value with reduced costs or a more responsive and efficient service. The disinterme­
diation of the travel agent occurred as people began to book their own vacations online, often 
at a cheaper rate. At Amazon anyone can publish and sell print-on-demand books, online 
music, and custom calendars, making the publisher obsolete.5
In reintermediation, steps are added to the value chain as new players find ways to add 
value to the business process. Levi Strauss originally thought it was a good business strategy 
to limit all online sales to its own website. A few years later, the company realized it could 
FIGURE 13.7
The Long Tail.
Products
Long tail
Head
Popularity
FIGURE 13.8
Business Value of 
Disintermediation.
The more intermediaries that 
are cut from the distribution 
chain, the lower the product 
price. When Dell decided to 
sell its PCs through Walmart 
many were surprised, because 
Dell’s direct-to-customer sales 
model was the competitive 
advantage that had kept Dell 
the market leader for years.
Manufacturer
IBM
Distributor
Retailer
Customer
Dell
Direct
Dell
Walmart
$1,200
$1,000
$800

248  *  Unit 4  Building Innovation
gain a far larger market share by allowing all retailers to sell its products directly to custom­
ers. As ebusiness matures it has become evident that to serve certain markets in volume, some 
reintermediation may be desirable. Cybermediation refers to the creation of new kinds of 
intermediaries that simply could not have existed before the advent of ebusiness, including 
comparison-shopping sites such as Kelkoo and bank account aggregation services such as 
Citibank.
Operational benefits of ebusiness include business processes that require less time and 
human effort or can be eliminated. Compare the cost of sending out 100 direct mailings 
(paper, postage, labor) to the cost of a bulk email campaign. Think about the cost of renting 
a physical location and operating phone lines versus the cost of maintaining an online site. 
Switching to an ebusiness model can eliminate many traditional costs associated with com­
municating by substituting systems, such as Live Help, that let customers chat live with sup­
port or sales staff.
Online air travel reservations cost less than those booked over the telephone. Online order­
ing also offers the possibility of merging a sales order system with order fulfillment and 
delivery so customers can check the progress of their orders at all times. Ebusinesses can also 
inexpensively attract new customers with innovative marketing and retain present customers 
with improved service and support.
One of the most exciting benefits of ebusiness is its low start-up costs. Today, anyone can 
start an ebusiness with just a website and a great product or service. Even a dog-walking 
operation can benefit from being an ebusiness.
IMPROVING EFFECTIVENESS
Just putting up a simple website does not create an ebusiness. Ebusiness websites must create 
buzz, be innovative, add value, and provide useful information. In short, they must build a 
sense of community and collaboration.
MIS measures of efficiency, such as the amount of traffic on a site, don’t tell the whole story. 
They do not necessarily indicate large sales volumes, for instance. Many websites with lots of 
traffic have minimal sales. The best way to measure ebusiness success is to use effectiveness 
MIS metrics, such as the revenue generated by web traffic, number of new customers acquired 
by web traffic, and reductions in customer service calls resulting from web traffic.
Interactivity measures advertising effectiveness by counting visitor interactions with the 
target ad, including time spent viewing the ad, number of pages viewed, and number of repeat 
visits to the advertisement. Interactivity measures are a giant step forward for advertisers, since 
traditional advertising methods—newspapers, magazines, radio, and television—provide
few ways to track effectiveness. Figure 13.9  displays the ebusiness marketing initiatives 
allowing companies to expand their reach while measuring effectiveness.
The ultimate outcome of any advertisement is a purchase. Organizations use metrics to tie 
revenue amounts and number of new customers created directly back to the websites or ban­
ner ads. Through clickstream data they can observe the exact pattern of a consumer’s naviga­
tion through a site. Figure 13.10 displays different types of clickstream metrics.  Clickstream 
metrics can include the length of stay on a website, number of abandoned registrations, and 
number of abandoned shopping carts. When a visitor reaches a website, a hit is generated, and 
his or her computer sends a request to the site’s computer server to begin displaying pages. 
Each element of a request page is recorded by the website’s server log file as a hit. Stickiness 
is the length of time a visitor spends on a website. 
Figure 3.11 provides definitions of common metrics based on clickstream data. Businesses 
want their websites to be sticky and keep their customer’s attention. To interpret such data 
properly, managers try to benchmark against other companies. For instance, consumers seem 
to visit their preferred websites regularly, even checking back multiple times during a given 
session. To interpret such data properly, managers try to benchmark against other companies. 
For instance, consumers seem to visit their preferred websites regularly, even checking back 
multiple times during a given session.

	
Chapter 13  Creating Innovative Organizations  *  249
  TERM  
  DEFINITION  
  EXAMPLE  
  Associate (aﬃliate) 
program  
 Allows a business to generate commissions or referral 
fees when a customer visiting its website clicks a link to
another merchant’s website 
 If a customer to a company website clicks a banner ad 
to another vendor’s website, the company will receive a
referral fee or commission when the customer performs
the desired action, typically making a purchase or com-
pleting a form. 
  Banner ad  
 A box running across a website that advertises the prod-
ucts and services of another business, usually another
ebusiness. 
 The banner generally contains a link to the advertiser’s 
website. Advertisers can track how often customers click
a banner ad resulting in a click-through to their website.
Often the cost of the banner ad depends on the number
of customers who click the banner ad. Web-based adverti-
sing services can track the number of times users click the
banner, generating statistics that enable advertisers to
judge whether the advertising fees are worth paying. 
  Click-through
A count of the number of people who visit one site and 
click an advertisement that takes them to the site of the
advertiser. 
T racking eﬀectiveness based on click-throughs guarantees 
exposure to target ads; however, it does not  guarantee that
the visitor liked the ad, spent any substantial time viewing
the ad, or was satisﬁed with the information  contained
in the ad. 
  Cookie  
 A small ﬁle deposited on a hard drive by a website, con-
taining information about customers and their browsing
activities. 
 Cookies allow websites to record the comings and goings 
of customers, usually without their knowledge or consent. 
  Pop-up ad  
 A small web page containing an advertisement that 
appears outside of the current website loaded in the
browser. 
 A form of a pop-up ad that users do not see until they 
close the current web browser screen. 
  Viral marketing
A technique that induces websites or users to pass on a 
marketing message to other websites or users, creating
exponential growth in the message’s visibility and eﬀect. 
 One example of successful viral marketing is Hotmail, 
which promotes its service and its own advertisers’
messages in every user’s email notes. Viral marketing
encourages users of a product or service supplied by
an ebusiness to encourage friends to join. Viral marketing
is a word-of-mouth type of advertising program. 
FIGURE 13.9
Marketing Benefits from 
Ebusiness.
FIGURE 13.10
Clickstream Data Metrics.
Types of Clickstream Data Metrics
The number of page views (i.e., the number of times a particular page has been presented to a visitor).
The pattern of websites visited, including most frequent exit page and most frequent prior website.
Length of stay on the website.
Dates and times of visits.
Number of registrations filled out per 100 visitors.
Number of abandoned registrations.
Demographics of registered visitors.
Number of customers with shopping carts.
Number of abandoned shopping carts.

250  *  Unit 4  Building Innovation
	1.	 Do you consider Slack a form of disruptive or sustaining technology? Why or why not?
	2.	 What types of security and ethical dilemmas are facing Slack?
O P E N I N G  C A S E  ST U DY  Q U E ST I O N S
Chapter Thirteen Case:  Disruptive Innovation
Every so often a management idea escapes from the pages of the Harvard Business Review and 
becomes part of the zeitgeist. In the 1990s it was “re-engineering”. Today it is “disruptive innovation”. 
TechCrunch, a technology-news website, holds an annual “festival of disruption”. CNBC, a cable-news 
channel, produces an annual “disruptor list” of the most disruptive companies. Mentioning “disrup­
tive innovation” adds a veneer of sophistication to bread-and-butter speeches about education or 
health care. But just what is disruptive innovation?
The theory of disruptive innovation was invented by Clayton Christensen, of Harvard Business 
School, in his book “The Innovator’s Dilemma”. Mr Christensen used the term to describe innovations 
that create new markets by discovering new categories of customers. They do this partly by harness­
ing new technologies but also by developing new business models and exploiting old technologies 
FIGURE 13.11
Website Metrics.
METRICS MEASURING WEBSITE SUCCESS
Website Visit Metrics
Stickiness (visit duration time)
The length of time a visitor spends on a website.
Raw visit depth (total web pages 
exposure per session)
The total number of pages a visitor is exposed to during a single visit to a website.
Visit depth (total unique web pages 
exposure per session)
The total number of unique pages a visitor is exposed to during a single visit to a website.
Website Visitor Metrics
Unidentified visitor
A visitor is an individual who visits a website. An “unidentified visitor” means that no information 
about that visitor is available.
Unique visitor
A unique visitor is one who can be recognized and counted only once within a given period of 
time.
Identified visitor
An ID is available that allows a user to be tracked across multiple visits to a website.
Website Hit Metrics
Hits
When visitors reach a website, their computer sends a request to the site’s computer server to 
begin displaying pages. Each element of a requested page is recorded by the website’s server log 
file as a “hit.”

	
Chapter 13  Creating Innovative Organizations  *  251
in new ways. He contrasted disruptive innovation with sustaining innovation, which simply improves 
existing products. Personal computers, for example, were disruptive innovations because they cre­
ated a new mass market for computers; previously, expensive mainframe computers had been sold 
only to big companies and research universities.
The “innovator’s dilemma” is the difficult choice an established company faces when it has to 
choose between holding onto an existing market by doing the same thing a bit better, or capturing 
new markets by embracing new technologies and adopting new business models. IBM dealt with 
this dilemma by launching a new business unit to make PCs, while continuing to make mainframe 
computers. Netflix took a more radical move, switching away from its old business model (sending out 
rental DVDs by post) to a new one (streaming on-demand video to its customers). Disruptive innova­
tions usually find their first customers at the bottom of the market: as unproved, often unpolished, 
products, they cannot command a high price. Incumbents are often complacent, slow to recognize 
the threat that their inferior competitors pose. But as successive refinements improve them to the 
point that they start to steal customers, they may end up reshaping entire industries: classified ads 
(Craigslist), long distance calls (Skype), record stores (iTunes), research libraries (Google), local stores 
(eBay), taxis (Uber) and newspapers (Twitter).
Partly because of disruptive innovation, the average job tenure for the CEO of a Fortune 500 com­
pany has halved from ten years in 2000 to less than five years today. There is good reason to think 
that the pace of change will increase, as computer power increases and more things are attached to 
the internet, expanding its disruptive influence into new realms. Google promises to reinvent cars as 
autonomous vehicles; Amazon promises to reinvent shopping (again) using drones; 3D printing could 
disrupt manufacturing. But perhaps the most surprising disruptive innovations will come from bottom-
of-the-pyramid entrepreneurs who are inventing new ways of delivering education and health-care 
for a fraction of the cost of current market leaders. 6
Questions
	1.	 If every new product has a first-mover advantage, then why do products fail?
	2.	 Do you view 3D printing as sustaining or disruptive technology?
	3.	 Do you view drones as sustaining or disruptive technology?
	4.	 Choose one of the products listed and determine what the company could have done to prevent 
the product from failing.
	5.	 Can you name another technology product that failed? Why did it fail? What could the company 
have done differently for it to succeed?

252  *  Unit 4  Building Innovation
13.1.	 Compare disruptive and sustaining technologies, and explain how the Internet and 
WWW caused business disruption.
Disruptive technologies offer a new way of doing things that initially does not meet the needs of 
existing customers. Disruptive technologies redefine the competitive playing fields of their respective 
markets, open new markets and destroy old ones, and cut into the low end of the marketplace and 
eventually evolve to displace high-end competitors and their reigning technologies.
Sustaining technologies produce improved products customers are eager to buy, such as a faster 
car or larger hard drive. Sustaining technologies tend to provide us with better, faster, and cheaper 
products in established markets and virtually never lead in markets opened by new and disruptive 
technologies.
The Internet and WWW caused business disruption by allowing people to communicate and 
collaborate in ways that were not possible before the information age. The Internet and WWW 
completely disrupted the way businesses operate, employees communicate, and products are 
developed and sold.
13.2.	 Describe ebusiness and its associated advantages.
Web 1.0 is a term that refers to the World Wide Web during its first few years of operation, between 
1991 and 2003. Ebusiness includes ecommerce along with all activities related to internal and 
external business operations such as servicing customer accounts, collaborating with partners, and 
exchanging real-time information. During Web 1.0, entrepreneurs began creating the first forms of 
ebusiness. Ebusiness advantages include expanding global reach, opening new markets, reducing 
costs, and improving effectiveness.
L E A R N I N G  O U T C O M E  R E V I E W
	 1.	What is the difference between sustaining and disruptive technology? 
	 2.	What is a paradigm shift and what is its relation to ebusiness?
	 3.	What is the difference between information richness and information reach?
	 4.	Do you consider the Internet and WWW forms of sustaining or disruptive technology? 
	 5.	How have the Internet and WWW created a global platform for business? 
	 6.	How do disintermediation, reintermediation, and cybermediation differ?
	 7.	What are the four ebusiness advantages?
	 8.	How can a business use clickstream data to help improve website efficiency?
	 9.	How can a company use disintermediation to achieve a competitive advantage?
	10.	What is the difference between ebusiness and ecommerce? 
R E V I E W  Q U E S T I O N S

	
Chapter 13  Creating Innovative Organizations  *  253
1.	 Searching for Disruption
Scheduler.com is a large corporation that develops software that automates scheduling and record 
keeping for medical and dental practices. Scheduler.com currently holds 48 percent of its market 
share, has more than 8,700 employees, and operates in six countries. You are the vice president of 
product development at Scheduler.com. You have just finished reading The Innovator’s Dilemma by 
Clayton Christensen and you are interested in determining what types of disruptive technologies you 
can take advantage of, or should watch out for, in your industry. Use the Internet to develop a pre­
sentation highlighting the types of disruptive technologies you have found that have the potential to 
give the company a competitive advantage or could cause the company to fail.
2.	 Assessing Internet Capabilities
Hoover’s Rentals is a small, privately owned business that rents sports equipment in Denver, Colo­
rado. The company specializes in winter rentals including ski equipment, snowboarding equipment, 
and snowmobile equipment. Hoover’s has been in business for 20 years and, for the first time, it 
is experiencing a decline in rentals. Brian Hoover, the company’s owner, is puzzled by the recent 
decreases. The snowfall for the last two years has been outstanding, and the ski resorts have 
opened earlier and closed later than most previous years. Reports say tourism in the Colorado area 
is up, and the invention of loyalty programs has significantly increased the number of local ski­
ers. Overall, business should be booming. The only reason for the decrease in sales might be the 
fact that big retailers such as Walmart and Gart Sports are now renting winter sports equipment. 
Brian would like your team’s help in determining how he can use the Internet to help his company 
increase sales and decrease costs to compete with these big retailers.
3.	 Finding Innovation
Along with disruptive technologies, there are also disruptive strategies. The following are a few 
examples of companies that use disruptive strategies to gain competitive advantages:
■	
Best Buy—This company disrupted the consumer electronics departments of full-service and 
discount department stores, which has sent it up-market into higher margin goods.
■	
Ford—Henry Ford’s Model T was so inexpensive that he enabled a much larger population of 
people, who historically could not afford cars, to own one.
■	
JetBlue—Whereas Southwest Airlines initially followed a strategy of new-market disruption, 
JetBlue’s approach is low-end disruption. Its long-range viability depends on the major air­
lines’ motivation to run away from the attack, as integrated steel mills and full-service depart­
ment stores did.
■	
McDonald’s—The fast-food industry has been a hybrid disrupter, making it so inexpensive and 
convenient to eat out that it created a massive wave of growth in the “eating out” industry. 
McDonald’s earliest victims were mom-and-pop diners.
There are numerous other examples of corporations that have used disruptive strategies to create 
competitive advantages. In a team, prepare a presentation highlighting three additional companies 
that used disruptive strategies to gain a competitive advantage.
4.	 Book’em
You are the CIO of Book’em, a company that creates and sells custom book bags. Book’em currently 
holds 28 percent of market share with more than 3,000 employees operating in six countries. You 
have just finished reading The Long Tail by Chris Anderson and The Innovator’s Dilemma by Clayton 
Christensen, and you are interested in determining how you can grow your business while reducing 
M A K I N G  B U S I N E S S  D E C I S I O N S

254  *  Unit 4  Building Innovation
costs. Summarize each book, and explain how Book’em could implement the strategies explained in 
each book to create competitive advantages and increase sales.
5.	 Unethical Disruption 
Did you know you can make a living naming things? Eli Altman has been naming things since he was 
six years old and has named more than 400 companies and brands while working for A Hundred 
Monkeys, a branding consulting company. Altman recently noticed an unfamiliar trend in the indus­
try: nonsensical names such as Flickr, Socializr, Zoomr, Rowdii, Yuuguu, and Oooooc. Why are names 
like this becoming popular? 
The reason is “domain squatting” or “cyber squatting,” the practice of buying a domain to profit 
from a trademarked name. For example, if you wanted to start a business called Drink, chances are 
a domain squatter has already purchased drink.com and is just waiting for you to pay big bucks for 
the right to buy it. Domain squatting is illegal and outlawed under the 1999 Anticybersquatting Con­
sumer Protection Act.
Do you agree that domain squatting should be illegal? Why or why not? If you were starting a 
business and someone were squatting on your domain, what would you do?
6.	 14th Annual Webby Awards Nominees
Who needs the Academy Awards when you can witness the Webby Awards? The Webby Awards 
are the leading international awards honoring excellence in interactive design, creativity, usability, 
and functionality on the Internet. With nearly 70 categories, website entries make up the majority 
of Webby winners, nominees, and honorees. Some are beautiful to look at and interact with. Others 
are a testament to usability and functionality. And a handful excel across the board. To be selected 
among the best is an incredible achievement worthy of praise and perhaps a little bragging.
Visit the latest edition of the Webby Awards at www.webbyawards.com and answer the following 
questions:
■	
Which nominations were the most surprising?
■	
Which nominations were you unfamiliar with but will now use?
■	
Were there any examples of Web 1.0 winners?
■	
Were there any examples of Web 3.0 winners?
■	
List the top five websites you think deserve to win a Webby.

	
Chapter 14  Ebusiness  *  255
C H A P T E R  14
LEARNING OUTCOMES
  14.1.	 Compare the four categories of ebusiness models.
  14.2.	 Describe the six ebusiness tools for connecting and 
communicating.
  14.3.	 Identify the four challenges associated with 
ebusiness.
Ebusiness Models
A business model is a plan that details how a company creates, delivers, and generates rev­
enues. Some models are quite simple: A company produces a good or service and sells it 
to customers. If the company is successful, sales exceed costs and the company generates a 
profit. Other models are less straightforward, and sometimes it’s not immediately clear who 
makes money and how much. Radio and network television are broadcast free to anyone with 
a receiver, for instance; advertisers pay the costs of programming.
The majority of online business activities consist of the exchange of products and services 
either between businesses or between businesses and consumers. An ebusiness model is a 
plan that details how a company creates, delivers, and generates revenues on the Internet. 
Ebusiness models fall into one of the four categories (1) business-to-business, (2) business-to-
consumer, (3) consumer-to-business, and (4) consumer-to-consumer (see Figure 14.1).
BUSINESS-TO-BUSINESS (B2B)
Business-to-business (B2B) applies to businesses buying from and selling to each other over 
the Internet. Examples include medical billing service, software sales and licensing, and vir­
tual assistant businesses. B2B relationships represent 80 percent of all online business and are 
more complex with greater security needs than the other types.
LO 14.1 Compare the four catego-
ries of ebusiness models.
Ebusiness
FIGURE 14.1
Ebusiness Models.
Ebusiness Term
Deﬁnition
Business-to-
business (B2B)
Business-to-
consumer (B2C)
Consumer -to-
business (C2B)
Consumer -to-
consumer (C2C)
Applies to businesses buying from and selling
to each other over the Internet.
Applies to any business that sells its products
or services to consumers over the Internet.
Applies to any consumer that sells a product or
service to a business over the Internet.
Applies to sites primarily oﬀering goods and
services to assist consumers interacting with
each other over the Internet.
Business
Business
Consumer
Consumer
B2B
C2B
B2C
C2C

256  *  Unit 4  Building Innovation
Electronic marketplaces, or emarketplaces, are interactive business communities providing 
a central market where multiple buyers and sellers can engage in ebusiness activities. By tight­
ening and automating the relationship between the two parties, they create structures for con­
ducting commercial exchange, consolidating supply chains, and creating new sales channels.
BUSINESS-TO-CONSUMER (B2C)
Business-to-consumer (B2C) applies to any business that sells its products or services 
directly to consumers online. Carfax offers car buyers detailed histories of used vehicles for 
a fee. An eshop, sometimes referred to as an estore or etailer, is an online version of a retail 
store where customers can shop at any hour. It can be an extension of an existing store such 
as The Gap or operate only online such as Amazon.com. There are three ways to operate as a 
B2C: brick-and-mortar, click-and-mortar, and pure play (see Figure 14.2).
CONSUMER-TO-BUSINESS (C2B)
Consumer-to-business (C2B) applies to any consumer who sells a product or service to a 
business on the Internet. One example is customers of Priceline.com, who set their own prices 
for items such as airline tickets or hotel rooms and wait for a seller to decide whether to supply 
them. The demand for C2B ebusiness will increase over the next few years due to customers’ 
desire for greater convenience and lower prices.
CONSUMER-TO-CONSUMER (C2C)
Consumer-to-consumer (C2C) applies to customers offering goods and services to each 
other on the Internet. A good example of C2C is an auction where buyers and sellers solicit 
consecutive bids from each other and prices are determined dynamically. EBay, the Internet’s 
most successful C2C online auction website, links like-minded buyers and sellers for a small 
commission. Other types of online auctions include forward auctions, where sellers market to 
many buyers and the highest bid wins, and reverse auctions, where buyers select goods and 
services from the seller with the lowest bid.
EBUSINESS FORMS AND REVENUE-GENERATING STRATEGIES
As more and more companies began jumping on the ebusiness bandwagon, new forms of 
ebusiness began to emerge (see Figure 14.3). Many of the new forms of ebusiness went to 
market without clear strategies on how they were going to generate revenue.
FIGURE 14.2
Forms of Business-to-
Consumer Operations.
Brick-and-Mortar Business
A business that operates in
a physical store without an
Internet presence.
Example: T.J. Maxx
Pure-Play (Virtual) Business
A business that operates on
the Internet only without a
physical store.
Example: Google
Click-and-Mortar Business
A business that operates
in a physical store and on
the Internet.
Example: Barnes & Noble

	
Chapter 14  Ebusiness  *  257
Google is an excellent example of an ebusiness that did not figure out a way to gener­
ate profits until many years after its launch. Google’s primary line of business is its search 
engine; however, the company does not generate revenue from people using its site to search 
the Internet. It generates revenue from the marketers and advertisers that pay to place their ads 
on the site. Adwords are keywords that advertisers choose to pay for and appear as sponsored 
links on the Google results pages.  
About 200 million times each day, people from all over the world access Google to perform 
searches. Adwords, a part of the Google site, allows advertisers to bid on common 
search terms. The advertisers simply enter in the keywords they want to bid on and 
the maximum amounts they want to pay per click per day. Google then determines a 
price and a search ranking for those keywords based on how much other advertisers 
are willing to pay for the same terms. Pricing for keywords can range from 5 cents 
to $10 a click. Paid search is the ultimate in targeted advertising because consumers 
type in exactly what they want. A general search term such as tropical vacation costs 
less than a more specific term such as Hawaiian vacation. Whoever bids the most for 
a term appears in a sponsored advertisement link either at the top or along the side of 
the search-results page.
A search engine is website software that finds other pages based on keyword 
matching similar to Google. Search engine ranking evaluates variables that search 
engines use to determine where a URL appears on the list of search results. Search 
engine optimization (SEO) combines art along with science to determine how to 
make URLs more attractive to search engines resulting in higher search engine 
ranking (see Figure 14.4). The better the SEO, the higher the ranking for a website 
in the list of search engine results. SEO is critical because most people view only 
the first few pages of a search result. After that a person is more inclined to begin 
a new search than review pages and pages of search results. Websites can generate 
revenue through:
	■	 Pay-per-click: generates revenue each time a user clicks on a link to a retailer’s 
website.
	■	 Pay-per-call: generates revenue each time a user clicks on a link that takes the 
user directly to an online agent waiting for a call.
	■	 Pay-per-conversion: generates revenue each time a website visitor is converted 
to a customer.
FIGURE 14.3
Ebusiness Forms.
Form
Description
Examples
Content providers
Generate revenues by providing digital 
content such as news, music, photos, 
or videos.
Netflix.com, iTunes.com, CNN.com
Infomediaries
Provide specialized information on 
behalf of producers of goods and 
services and their potential customers.
Edmunds.com, BizRate.com, 
Bloomberg.com, 
Zillow.com
Online marketplaces
Bring together buyers and sellers of 
products and services.
Amazon.com, eBay.com, Priceline.
com
Portals
Operate central website for users to 
access specialized content and other 
services.
Google.com, Yahoo.com, MSN.com
Service providers
Provide services such as photo sharing, 
video sharing, online backup and 
storage.
Flickr.com, Mapquest.com, 
YouTube.com
Transaction brokers
Process online sales transactions.
Etrade.com, Charlesschwab.com, 
Fidelity.com
FIGURE 14.4
Different Forms of Searching.
Top to bottom: © Image 
Source RF, all rights reserved., 
© Design Pics/Darren 
Greenwood, © Bull’s Eye/Getty 
Images, © Fancy/Superstock, 
© Ingram Publishing, © Sergiy 
Serdyuk/Alamy Stock Photo
Search Engine
Search Engine 
Ranking
Search 
Optimization
Pay-per-Click
Pay-per-Call
Pay-per-
Conversion

258  *  Unit 4  Building Innovation
Ebusinesses must have a revenue model, or a model for making money. Some compa­
nies charge a flat fee for access to the material or services and some business charge fees 
for use. For instance, will the ebusiness accept advertising or sell subscriptions or licens­
ing rights? Figure 14.5 lists the different benefits and challenges of various ebusiness 
revenue models.1
Ebusiness Tools for Connecting and 
Communicating
As firms began to move online, more MIS tools were created to support ebusiness processes 
and requirements. The tools supporting and driving ebusiness are highlighted in Figure 14.6 
and covered below in detail.
EMAIL
Email, short for electronic mail, is the exchange of digital messages over the Internet. No 
longer do business professionals have to wait for the mail to receive important documents as 
email single-handedly increased the speed of business by allowing the transfer of documents 
with the same speed as the telephone. Its chief business advantage is the ability to inform and 
communicate with many people simultaneously, immediately, and with ease. There are no 
time or place constraints, and users can check, send, and view emails whenever they require.
LO 14.2 Describe the six ebusi-
ness tools for connecting and 
communicating.
FIGURE 14.5
Ebusiness Revenue Models.
Ebusiness Revenue 
Model
Benefits
Challenges
Advertising fees
■	 Well-targeted advertisements 
can be perceived as value-added 
content by trading participants.
■	 Easy to implement
■	 Limited revenue potential
■	 Overdone or poorly targeted 
advertisements can be disturbing 
elements on the website.
License fees
■	 Creates incentives to do many 
transactions
■	 Customization and back-end 
integration lead to lock-in of 
participants.
■	 Up-front fee is a barrier to entry for 
participants.
■	 Price differentiation is complicated.
Subscription fees
■	 Creates incentives to do 
transactions
■	 Price can be differentiated.
■	 Possibility to build additional 
revenue from new user groups
■	 Fixed fee is a barrier to entry for 
participants.
Transaction fees
■	 Can be directly tied to savings 
(both process and price savings)
■	 Important revenue source when 
high level of liquidity (transaction 
volume) is reached
■	 If process savings are not 
completely visible, use of the 
system is discouraged (incentive to 
move transactions offline).
■	 Transaction fees likely to decrease 
with time
Value-added services 
fees
■	 Service offering can be 
differentiated.
■	 Price can be differentiated.
■	 Possibility to build additional 
revenue from established and 
new user groups (third parties)
■	 Cumbersome process for customers 
to continually evaluate new 
services

	
Chapter 14  Ebusiness  *  259
An Internet service provider (ISP) is a company that provides access to the Internet for a 
monthly fee. Major ISPs in the United States include AOL, AT&T, Comcast, Earthlink, and 
Netzero, as well as thousands of local ISPs including regional telephone companies.
INSTANT MESSAGING
Real-time communication occurs when a system updates information at the same rate it 
receives it. Email was a great advancement over traditional communication methods such 
as the U.S. mail, but it did not operate in real time. Instant messaging (IMing) is a service 
that enables instant or real-time communication between people. Businesses immediately saw 
what they could do:
	■	 Answer simple questions quickly and easily.
	■	 Resolve questions or problems immediately.
	■	 Transmit messages as fast as naturally flowing conversation.
	■	 Easily hold simultaneous IM sessions with multiple people.
	■	 Eliminate long-distance phone charges.
	■	 Quickly identify which employees are at their computers.
PODCASTING
Podcasting converts an audio broadcast to a digital music player. Podcasts can increase mar­
keting reach and build customer loyalty. Companies use podcasts as marketing communica­
tion channels discussing everything from corporate strategies to detailed product overviews. 
The senior executive team can share weekly or monthly podcasts featuring important issues or 
expert briefings on new technical or marketing developments.
VIDEOCONFERENCING
A videoconference allows people at two or more locations to interact via two-way video 
and audio transmissions simultaneously as well as share documents, data, computer displays, 
FIGURE 14.6
Ebusiness Tools.
Content
Management
System
Email
Podcasting
Videoconferencing
Instant
Messaging
Web
Conferencing

260  *  Unit 4  Building Innovation
and whiteboards. Point-to-point videoconferences connect two people, and multipoint confer­
ences connect more than two people at multiple locations.
Videoconferences can increase productivity because users participate without leaving their 
offices. They can improve communication and relationships, because participants see each 
other’s facial expressions and body language, both important aspects of communication that 
are lost with a basic telephone call or email. They also reduce travel expenses, a big win for 
firms facing economic challenges. Of course, nothing can replace meeting someone face-to-
face and shaking hands, but videoconferencing offers a viable and cost-effective alternative.
WEB CONFERENCING
Web conferencing, or a webinar, blends videoconferencing with document sharing and 
allows the user to deliver a presentation over the web to a group of geographically dispersed 
participants. Regardless of the type of hardware or software the attendees are running, every 
participant can see what is on anyone else’s screen. Schools use web conferencing tools such 
as Illuminate Live to deliver lectures to students, and businesses use tools such as WebEx to 
demonstrate products. Web conferencing is not quite like being there, but professionals can 
accomplish more sitting at their desks than in an airport waiting to make travel connections.
CONTENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS
In the fourth century BC Aristotle cataloged the natural world according to a systematic orga­
nization, and the ancient library at Alexandria was reportedly organized by subject, connecting 
like information with like. Today content management systems help companies manage the 
creation, storage, editing, and publication of their website content. Content management systems 
are user-friendly; most include web-based publishing, search, navigation, and indexing to orga­
nize information; and they let users with little or no technical expertise make website changes.
A search is typically carried out by entering a keyword or phrase (query) into a text field and 
clicking a button or a hyperlink. Navigation facilitates movement from one web page to another. 
Content management systems play a crucial role in getting site visitors to view more than just 
the home page. If navigation choices are unclear, visitors may hit the “Back” button on their first 
(and final) visit to a website. One rule of thumb to remember is that each time a user has to click 
to find search information, there is a 50 percent chance the user will leave the website instead. A 
key principle of good website design, therefore, is to keep the number of clicks to a minimum.
Taxonomy is the scientific classification of organisms into groups based on similarities 
of structure or origin. Taxonomies are also used for indexing the content on the website into 
categories and subcategories of topics. For example, car is a subtype of vehicle. Every car 
is a vehicle, but not every vehicle is a car; some vehicles are vans, buses, and trucks. Tax­
onomy terms are arranged so that narrower/more specific/“child” terms fall under broader/
more generic/“parent” terms. Information architecture is the set of ideas about how all infor­
mation in a given context should be organized. Many companies hire information architects to 
create their website taxonomies. A well-planned taxonomy ensures search and navigation are 
easy and user-friendly. If the taxonomy is confusing, the site will soon fail.
The Challenges of Ebusiness
Although the benefits of ebusiness are enticing, developing, deploying, and managing ebusi­
ness systems is not always easy. Figure 14.7 lists the challenges facing ebusiness.
IDENTIFYING LIMITED MARKET SEGMENTS
The main challenge of ebusiness is the lack of growth in some sectors due to product or ser­
vice limitations. The online food sector has not grown in sales, in part because food products 
are perishable and consumers prefer to buy them at the supermarket as needed. Other sectors 
with limited ebusiness appeal include fragile or consumable goods and highly sensitive or 
confidential businesses such as government agencies.
LO 14.3 Identify the four chal-
lenges associated with ebusiness.

	
Chapter 14  Ebusiness  *  261
MANAGING CONSUMER TRUST
Trust in the ebusiness exchange deserves special attention. The physical sepa­
ration of buyer and seller, the physical separation of buyer and merchandise, 
and customer perceptions about the risk of doing business online provide 
unique challenges. Internet marketers must develop a trustworthy relationship 
to make that initial sale and generate customer loyalty. A few ways to build 
trust when working online include being accessible and available to commu­
nicate in person with your customers; using customers’ testimonials that link 
to your client website or to provide their contact information; and accepting 
legitimate forms of payment such as credit cards.
ENSURING CONSUMER PROTECTION
An organization that wants to dominate with superior customer service as a competitive advan­
tage must not only serve but also protect its customers, guarding them against unsolicited 
goods and communication, illegal or harmful goods, insufficient information about goods and 
suppliers, invasion of privacy and misuse of personal information, and online fraud. System
security, however, must not make ebusiness websites inflexible or difficult to use.
ADHERING TO TAXATION RULES
Many believe that U.S. tax policy should provide a level playing field for traditional retail 
businesses, mail-order companies, and online merchants. Yet the Internet marketplace remains 
mostly free of traditional forms of sales tax, partly because ecommerce law is vaguely defined 
and differs from state to state. For now, companies that operate online must obey a patchwork 
of rules about which customers are subject to sales tax on their purchases and which are not.
FIGURE 14.7
Challenges Facing 
Ebusiness.
Identifying
Limited Market
Segments
Managing
Consumer Trust
Ensuring
Consumer
Protection
Adhering to
Taxation Rules
	1.	 What is the ebusiness model implemented by Slack?
	2.	 What is the revenue model implemented by Slack?
O P E N I N G  C A S E  ST U DY  Q U E ST I O N S
HelloFresh is at the forefront of disrupting a multi trillion-dollar industry at the very beginning of its 
online transition. HelloFresh is a truly local food product, uniquely suited to individual tastes and 
meal-time preferences offering delivery of a giant box of delicious food with recipes to enable easy 
and enjoyable meal preparation for a weekly fee. 
HelloFresh aims to provide each and every household in its 7 markets with the opportunity to 
enjoy wholesome home-cooked meals with no planning, no shopping, and no hassle required. Every­
thing required for weeknight meals, carefully planned, locally sourced and delivered to your door at 
the most convenient time for each subscriber. Behind the scenes, a huge data driven technology plat­
form puts us in the prime position for disrupting the food supply chain and for fundamentally changing 
the way consumers shop for food. HelloFresh has local founders across the globe who are able to 
leverage the global platform, and at the same time ensure that the HelloFresh product in each market 
truly reflects the local community.
Chapter Fourteen Case:  HelloFresh Hello Delicious

262  *  Unit 4  Building Innovation
The soft subscription model business enables us to leverage our weekly subscriber touch points to 
consistently manage supply chains and demand, and to optimize the customer experience as well as 
our business economics.  Customers sign-up for a box containing between 2 and 5 meals per week 
for a flat fee.  If the customer is out of town or unavailable he can easily cancel any week without a 
penalty provided they notify HelloFresh in advance.
Dominik Richter has been CEO since starting HelloFresh in 2011. He has responsibility for keeping 
a general oversight of the business and strategy. Prior to HelloFresh, Dominik worked with Goldman 
Sachs in London. Dominik graduated with a degree in International Business in 2009, and from the 
London School of Economics in 2010 with a Masters in Finance.
Thomas Griesel has been responsible for the logistics and operations behind HelloFresh since 
founding with Dominik in 2011. Previously, Thomas had spent time at OC&C Strategy Consultants and 
worked on a range of his own businesses and ideas. He graduated from with a degree in International 
Business Administration in 2009, and from the London Business School in 2010 with a Masters in 
Management.
2011
All the way back in 2011, Dominik and Thomas arrived in Berlin, intent on starting a new and disruptive 
business. With a love of healthy food, nutrition, cooking, and a desire to make access to healthy food 
as easy as possible for as many people as possible - starting a Food at Home business seemed the 
natural choice.
2012
After examining business models from Sweden to Japan to very local ideas, they and a group of 
like-minded individuals formulated the recipe for HelloFresh. The team started early in 2012 packing 
shopping bags in Berlin, Amsterdam and London with a view to target the highest density population 
areas in Europe. Quite quickly, they started getting requests from people outside those areas who all 
wanted to become a part of the HelloFresh family. Wanting to serve as many people as possible, the 
team developed a logistics model that enabled them to deliver to every single household across a 
given country.
2013
The HelloFresh product started to rapidly gain in popularity, as subscribers shared the excitement 
about their weekly boxes, with friends and colleagues. Subscriber referrals accelerated, as it became 
clear that HelloFresh had finally solved the “What’s for dinner tonight” problem for its subscribers.
2014
Having launched on the East Coast of the U.S in December 2012, HelloFresh moved to cover the 
entire country in September 2014. Over the short time since then, HelloFresh has grown rapidly to 
become one of the largest players in this market.
Questions
	1.	 Do you consider HelloFresh a form of disruptive or sustaining technology?
	2.	 Is HelloFresh an example of Web 1.0 (ebusiness) or Web 2.0 (Business 2.0)?
	3.	 Describe the ebusiness model associated with HelloFresh.
	4.	 Describe the revenue model associated with HelloFresh.

	
Chapter 14  Ebusiness  *  263
R E V I E W  Q U E S T I O N S
	 1.	What is a business model?
	 2.	How did ebusiness change traditional business models?
	 3.	What are the benefits and challenges associated with ebusiness? 
	 4.	What is the difference between a B2B and C2C?
	 5.	What is the difference between a C2B and B2C?
	 6.	What is a pure-play? Provide an example.
	 7.	What is a brick-and-mortar? Provide an example.
	 8.	What is click-and-mortar? Provide an example.
	 9.	Why is search engine ranking important to a company?
	10.	What is the difference between search engine ranking and search engine optimization?
14.1.	 Compare the four categories of ebusiness models.
■	
Business-to-business (B2B) applies to businesses buying from and selling to each other over 
the Internet.
■	
Business-to-consumer (B2C) applies to any business that sells its products or services to con­
sumers over the Internet.
■	
Consumer-to-business (C2B) applies to any consumer who sells a product or service to a busi­
ness over the Internet.
■	
Consumer-to-consumer (C2C) applies to sites primarily offering goods and services to assist 
consumers interacting with each other over the Internet.
The primary difference between B2B and B2C are the customers; B2B customers are other businesses, 
whereas B2C markets to consumers. Overall, B2B relations are more complex and have higher security 
needs and is the dominant ebusiness force, representing 80 percent of all online business.
14.2.	 Describe the six ebusiness tools for connecting and communicating.
As firms began to move online, more MIS tools were created to support ebusiness processes and 
requirements. The ebusiness tools used to connect and communicate include email, instant messag­
ing, podcasting, content management systems, videoconferencing, and web conferencing.
14.3.	 Identify the four challenges associated with ebusiness.
Although the benefits of ebusiness are enticing, developing, deploying, and managing ebusiness sys­
tems is not always easy. The challenges associated with ebusiness include identifying limited market 
segments, managing consumer trust, ensuring consumer protection, and adhering to taxation rules.
L E A R N I N G  O U T C O M E  R E V I E W

264  *  Unit 4  Building Innovation
1.	 Nasty Gal–Eight Years Old and Worth $100 Million
Sophia Amoruso is the founder and CEO of Nasty Gal, an eight-year-old online fashion retail com­
pany worth over $100 million. Nasty Gal sells new and vintage clothing, accessories, and shoes 
online. Founder Sophia Amoruso started the company on eBay, selling one-of-a-kind vintage pieces 
that she sourced, styled, photographed, and shipped herself. The following is excerpted from her 
new book, #GIRLBOSS.
“I never started a business. I started an eBay store, and ended up with a business. I never would 
have done it had I known it was going to become this big. I was 22 and, like most 22-year-olds, I 
was looking for a way to pay my rent and buy my Starbucks chai. Had someone shown me the future 
of where Nasty Gal would be in 2014, I would have gasped in revulsion, thinking, ‘Oh, no, that is way 
too much work.’
There are different kinds of entrepreneurs. There are the ones who start a business because 
they’re educated and choose to, and the ones who do it because it is really the only option. I defi­
nitely fall into the latter category.”
The Internet is a great place to start a business! If Sophia Amoruso had started her business in 
a traditional store, would she have found success? List the advantages Sophia Amoruso gained by 
selling her items on eBay. If you could start a business on eBay, what would it be and how would you 
use ebusiness to your advantage?
2.	 Using Hashtags
If you have ever seen a word with a # before it in Facebook or Twitter, you have seen a hashtag. 
A hashtag is a keyword or phrase used to identify a topic and is preceded by a hash or pound sign 
(#). Hashtags provide an online audience to expand business exposure and directly engage with 
customers. Customers can type any search keyword in a social media site with a hashtag before the 
word and the search results will show all related posts. Hashtags can be used to reference promo­
tions, observe market trends, and even provide links to helpful tips.
When you understand hashtags, you can use them to find business ideas and research potential 
employers. Pick a company you would like to work for and see whether you can find any related 
hashtags including what they are tweeting and posting. See whether you can find any information 
on partners and competitors. Which hashtags generate discussion or offer business insights? Check 
Twitter’s and Facebook’s trending topics and see whether there are any issues or insights on your 
career area.
3.	 Virtual Abandonment
Approximately 35 percent of online shopping carts are abandoned prior to checkout. Abandoned 
shopping carts relate directly to lost revenues for a business. It is like a customer walking out of the 
store, leaving his or her cart full of chosen items. Businesses need to focus on why the customers 
are virtually walking out of their stores. The problem typically lies in the checkout process and can 
be fixed by the following:
■	
Make sure the checkout button is easy to find.
■	
Make sure personal information is safe and the website’s security is visible.
■	
Streamline the checkout process so the customer has as few clicks as possible.
■	
Do not ask shoppers to create an account prior to checkout, but you can ask them to create an 
account after checkout.
■	
Ensure your return policy is visible.
M A K I N G  B U S I N E S S  D E C I S I O N S

	
Chapter 14  Ebusiness  *  265
Have you ever abandoned a virtual shopping cart? In a group, visit a website that you or your peers 
have recently abandoned and review the checkout process. Was it difficult, cumbersome, or lacking 
security? Then visit Amazon.com and review its checkout process and determine whether Amazon is 
meeting the preceding recommendations.
4.	 Viral Foxes and Devil Babies
Viral marketing can be a company’s greatest success or its worst nightmare. Here are a few popular 
examples:
■	
“What Does the Fox Say?” The video created by a pair of Norwegian variety show brothers 
displays people, dressed up as animals, dancing around in the woods and singing a catchy 
song. The video received over 400 million views on YouTube and skyrocketed the band Ylvis 
to virtual stardom.
■	
The video of a robotic devil baby left in an unattended stroller in the middle of the street in 
Manhattan attracted over 50 million views in a month. The creators of the devil baby video, 
Thinkmodo, was creating buzz for the 20th Century Fox movie it was promoting, Devil’s Due.
■	
Domino’s Pizza employees posted a video showing them making sandwiches with unsanitary 
ingredients. The video went viral and ended with the arrest of the employees and an apology 
from the CEO.
Research the web and find an example of a viral video that helped a business achieve success and 
one that caused a business to fail. Do you think it is important for a business to try to manage its 
online reputation actively? What can a company do if a negative video goes viral, such as the one 
concerning Domino’s Pizza?

266  *  Unit 4  Building Innovation
C H A P T E R  15
LEARNING OUTCOMES
  15.1.	
Explain Web 2.0, and identify its four characteristics.
  15.2.	 Explain how Business 2.0 is helping communities 
network and collaborate.
  15.3.	 Describe the three Business 2.0 tools for collaborating.
  15.4.	 Explain the three challenges associated with 
Business 2.0.
  15.5.	 Describe Web 3.0 and the next generation of online 
business.
Web 2.0: Advantages of Business 2.0
In the mid-1990s the stock market reached an all-time high as companies took advantage of 
ebusiness and Web 1.0, and many believed the Internet was the wave of the future. When 
new online businesses began failing to meet earning expectations, however, the bubble burst. 
Some then believed the ebusiness boom was over, but they could not have been more wrong.
Web 2.0 (or Business 2.0) is the next generation of Internet use—a more mature, distinc­
tive communications platform characterized by new qualities such as collaboration, sharing, 
and free. Business 2.0 encourages user participation and the formation of communities that 
contribute to the content. In Business 2.0, technical skills are no longer required to use and 
publish information to the World Wide Web, eliminating entry barriers for online business.
Traditional companies tended to view technology as a tool required to perform a process 
or activity, and employees picked up information by walking through the office or hanging 
out around the water cooler. Business 2.0 technologies provide a virtual environment that, for 
many new employees, is just as vibrant and important as the physical environment. Figure 15.1
highlights the common characteristics of Business 2.0.1
CONTENT SHARING THROUGH OPEN SOURCING
An open system consists of nonproprietary hardware and software based on publicly 
known standards that allow third parties to create add-on products to plug into or interoper­
ate with the system. Thousands of hardware devices and software applications created and 
sold by third-party vendors interoperate with computers, such as iPods, drawing software, 
and mice.
Source code contains instructions written by a programmer specifying the actions to be 
performed by computer software. Closed source is any proprietary software licensed under 
exclusive legal right of the copyright holder. Open source refers to any software whose source 
code is made available free (not on a fee or licensing basis as in ebusiness) for any third 
party to review and modify. Business 2.0 is capitalizing on open source software. Mozilla, 
for example, offers its Firefox web browser and Thunderbird email software free. Mozilla 
believes the Internet is a public resource that must remain open and accessible to all; it con­
tinuously develops free products by bringing together thousands of dedicated volunteers from 
LO 15.1 Explain Web 2.0, and 
identify its four characteristics.
Creating Collaborative 
Partnerships

	
Chapter 15  Creating Collaborative Partnerships  *  267
around the world. Mozilla’s Firefox now holds more than 20 percent of the browser market 
and is quickly becoming a threat to Microsoft’s Internet Explorer. How do open source soft­
ware companies generate revenues? Many people are still awaiting an answer to this very 
important question.2
USER-CONTRIBUTED CONTENT
Ebusiness was characterized by a few companies or users posting content for the masses. 
Business 2.0 is characterized by the masses posting content for the masses. User-contributed 
content (or user-generated content) is created and updated by many users for many users. 
Websites such as Flickr, Wikipedia, and YouTube, for example, move control of online media 
from the hands of leaders to the hands of users. Netflix and Amazon both use user-generated 
content to drive their recommendation tools, and websites such as Yelp use customer reviews 
to express opinions on products and services. Companies are embracing user-generated con­
tent to help with everything from marketing to product development and quality assurance.
Native advertising is an online marketing concept in which the advertiser attempts to gain 
attention by providing content in the context of the user’s experience in terms of its content, 
format, style, or placement. One of the most popular forms of user-generated content is a 
reputation system, where buyers post feedback on sellers. eBay buyers voluntarily comment 
on the quality of service, their satisfaction with the item traded, and promptness of ship­
ping. Sellers comment about prompt payment from buyers or respond to comments left by 
the buyer. Companies ranging from Amazon to restaurants are using reputation systems to 
improve quality and enhance customer satisfaction.
COLLABORATION INSIDE THE ORGANIZATION
A collaboration system is a set of tools that supports the work of teams or groups by facilitat­
ing the sharing and flow of information. Business 2.0’s collaborative mind-set generates more 
information faster from a wider audience. Collective intelligence is collaborating and tapping 
into the core knowledge of all employees, partners, and customers. Knowledge can be a real 
competitive advantage for an organization. The most common form of collective intelligence 
found inside the organization is knowledge management (KM), which involves capturing, 
classifying, evaluating, retrieving, and sharing information assets in a way that provides con­
text for effective decisions and actions. The primary objective of knowledge management is to 
be sure that a company’s knowledge of facts, sources of information, and solutions are readily 
available to all employees whenever it is needed. A knowledge management system (KMS) 
supports the capturing, organization, and dissemination of knowledge (i.e., know-how) 
FIGURE 15.1
Characteristics of 
Business 2.0.
Business 2.0 Characteristics
Content
Sharing
Through Open
Sourcing
Collaboration
Inside the
Organization
User-
Contributed
Content
Collaboration
Outside the
Organization

268  *  Unit 4  Building Innovation
throughout an organization. KMS can distribute an organization’s knowledge base by inter­
connecting people and digitally gathering their expertise.
A great example of a knowledge worker is a golf caddie. Golf caddies give advice such as 
“The rain makes the third hole play 10 yards shorter.” If a golf caddie is good and gives accu­
rate advice it can lead to big tips. Collaborating with other golf caddies can provide bigger 
tips for all. How can knowledge management make this happen? Caddies could be rewarded 
for sharing course knowledge by receiving prizes for sharing knowledge. The course manager 
could compile all of the tips and publish a course notebook for distribution to all caddies. The 
goal of a knowledge management system is that everyone wins. Here the caddies make big­
ger tips and golfers improve their play by benefiting from the collaborative experiences of the 
caddies, and the course owners win as business increases.
KM has assumed greater urgency in American business over the past few years as millions 
of baby boomers prepare to retire. When they punch out for the last time, the knowledge they 
gleaned about their jobs, companies, and industries during their long careers will walk out 
with them—unless companies take measures to retain their insights.
Explicit and Tacit Knowledge
Not all information is valuable. Individuals must determine what information qualifies as 
intellectual and knowledge-based assets. In general, intellectual and knowledge-based assets 
fall into one of two categories: explicit or tacit. As a rule, explicit knowledge consists of any­
thing that can be documented, archived, and codified, often with the help of IT. Examples of 
explicit knowledge are assets such as patents, trademarks, business plans, marketing research, 
and customer lists. Tacit knowledge is the knowledge contained in people’s heads. The chal­
lenge inherent in tacit knowledge is figuring out how to recognize, generate, share, and man­
age knowledge that resides in people’s heads. While information technology in the form of 
email, instant messaging, and related technologies can help facilitate the dissemination of 
tacit knowledge, identifying it in the first place can be a major obstacle.
COLLABORATION OUTSIDE THE ORGANIZATION
The most common form of collective intelligence found outside the organization is crowdsourcing, 
which refers to the wisdom of the crowd. The idea that collective intelligence is greater than 
the sum of its individual parts has been around for a long time (see Figure 15.2). With Busi­
ness 2.0 the ability to efficiently tap into its power is emerging. For many years organizations 
believed that good ideas came from the top. CEOs collaborated only with the heads of sales 
and marketing, the quality assurance expert, or the road warrior salesman. The organization 
chart governed who should work with whom and how far up the chain of command a sugges­
tion or idea would travel. With Business 2.0 this belief is being challenged, as firms capitalize 
FIGURE 15.2
Crowdsourcing: The 
Crowd Is Smarter Than the 
Individual.
© Punchstock/Digital Vision

	
Chapter 15  Creating Collaborative Partnerships  *  269
on crowdsourcing by opening up a task or problem to a wider group to find better or cheaper 
results from outside the box. Crowdfunding sources capital for a project by raising many small 
amounts from a large number of individuals, typically via the Internet. 
With Business 2.0, people can be continuously connected, a driving force behind collabo­
ration. Traditional ebusiness communications were limited to face-to-face conversations and 
one-way technologies that used asynchronous communications, or communication such as 
email in which the message and the response do not occur at the same time. Business 2.0 
brought synchronous communication, or communications that occur at the same time such 
as IM or chat. Ask a group of college students when they last spoke to their parents. For most 
the answer is less than hour ago, as opposed to the traditional response of a few days ago. In 
business, too, continuous connections are now expected in today’s collaborative world.
Networking Communities with Business 2.0
Social media refers to websites that rely on user participation and user-contributed content, 
such as Facebook, YouTube, and Digg. A social network is an application that connects people 
by matching profile information. Providing individuals with the ability to network is by far 
one of the greatest advantages of Business 2.0. Social networking is the practice of expand­
ing your business and/or social contacts by constructing a personal network (see Figure 15.3). 
Social networking sites provide two basic functions. The first is the ability to create and main­
tain a profile that serves as an online identity within the environment. The second is the 
ability to create connections between other people within the network. Social networking 
analysis (SNA) maps group contacts (personal and professional), identifying who knows each 
other and who works together. In a company it can provide a vision of how employees work 
together. It can also identify key experts with specific knowledge such as how to solve a com­
plicated programming problem or launch a new product.
Business 2.0 simplifies access to information and improves the ability to share it. Instead 
of spending $1,000 and two days at a conference to meet professional peers, business people 
can now use social networks such as LinkedIn to meet new contacts for recruiting, prospect­
ing, and identifying experts on a topic. With executive members from all the Fortune 500 
companies, LinkedIn has become one of the more useful recruiting tools on the web.
Social graph represents the interconnection of relationships in a social network. Social 
networking sites can be especially useful to employers trying to find job candidates with 
unique or highly specialized skill sets that may be harder to locate in larger communities. 
Many employers also search social networking sites to find “dirt” and character references for 
potential employees. Keep in mind that what you post on the Internet stays on the Internet.4
LO 15.2 Explain how Business 2.0 
is helping communities network 
and collaborate.
FIGURE 15.3
Social Network Example.3

270  *  Unit 4  Building Innovation
SOCIAL TAGGING
Tags are specific keywords or phrases incorporated into website 
content for means of classification or taxonomy. An item can have 
one or more tags associated with it, to allow for multiple browseable 
paths through the items, and tags can be changed with minimal effort 
(see Figure 15.4). Social tagging describes the collaborative activity 
of marking shared online content with keywords or tags as a way to 
organize it for future navigation, filtering, or search. The entire user 
community is invited to tag, and thus essentially defines, the content. 
Flickr allows users to upload images and tag them with appropriate 
keywords. After enough people have done so, the resulting tag collec­
tion will identify images correctly and without bias. A hashtag is a 
keyword or phrase used to identify a topic and is preceded by a hash 
or pound sign (#). For example, the hashtag #sandiegofire helped 
coordinate emergency responses to a fire.
Folksonomy is similar to taxonomy except that crowdsourcing 
determines the tags or keyword-based classification system. Using 
the collective power of a community to identify and classify con­
tent significantly lowers content categorization costs, because there 
is no complicated nomenclature to learn. Users simply create and 
apply tags as they wish. For example, while cell phone manufacturers 
often refer to their products as mobile devices, the folksonomy could 
include mobile phone, wireless phone, smartphone, iPhone, Black­
Berry, and so on. All these keywords, if searched, should take a user 
to the same site. Folksonomies reveal what people truly call things 
(see Figure 15.5). They have been a point of discussion on the web 
because the whole point of having a website is for your customers to find it. The majority of 
websites are found through search terms that match the content.5
A website bookmark is a locally stored URL or the address of a file or Internet page saved 
as a shortcut. Social bookmarking allows users to share, organize, search, and manage book­
marks. Del.icio.us, a website dedicated to social bookmarking, provides users with a place 
to store, categorize, annotate, and share favorites. StumbleUpon is another popular social 
bookmarking website that allows users to locate interesting websites based on their favorite 
subjects. The more you use the service, the more the system “learns” about your interests and 
the better it can show you websites that interest you. StumbleUpon represents a new social 
networking model in which content finds the users instead of the other way around. Stumble­
Upon is all about the users and the content they enjoy.6
FIGURE 15.4
Social Tagging Occurs When 
Many Individuals Categorize 
Content.
© Radius Images/Corbis
FIGURE 15.5
Folksonomy Example: The 
User-Generated Names for 
Cellular Phones.
Cellular
Phone
Mobile
Phone
BlackBerry
iPhone
Cell

	
Chapter 15  Creating Collaborative Partnerships  *  271
Business 2.0 Tools for Collaborating
Social networking and collaborating are leading businesses in new directions, and Figure 15.6 
provides an overview of the tools that harness the “power of the people,” allowing users to 
share ideas, discuss business problems, and collaborate on solutions.
BLOGS
A blog, or web log, is an online journal that allows users to post their own comments, graph­
ics, and video. Unlike traditional HTML web pages, blog websites let writers communicate—
and readers respond—on a regular basis through a simple yet customizable interface that does 
not require any programming. A selfie is a self-photograph placed on a social media website.
From a business perspective, blogs are no different from marketing channels such as video, 
print, audio, or presentations. They all deliver results of varying kinds. Consider Sun Micro­
system’s Jonathan Schwartz and GM’s Bob Lutz, who use their blogs for marketing, sharing 
ideas, gathering feedback, press response, and image shaping. Starbucks has developed a blog 
called My Starbucks Idea, allowing customers to share ideas, tell Starbucks what they think of 
other people’s ideas, and join discussions. Blogs are an ideal mechanism for many businesses 
because they can focus on topic areas more easily than traditional media, with no limits on 
page size, word count, or publication deadline.7
Microblogs
Microblogging is the practice of sending brief posts (140 to 200 characters) to a personal 
blog, either publicly or to a private group of subscribers who can read the posts as IMs or 
as text messages. The main advantage of microblogging is that posts can be submitted by 
a variety of means, such as instant messaging, email, or the web. By far the most popular 
microblogging tool is Twitter, which allows users to send microblog entries called tweets to 
anyone who has registered to “follow” them. Senders can restrict delivery to people they want 
to follow them or, by default, allow open access.
Real Simple Syndication (RSS)
Real Simple Syndication (RSS) is a web format used to publish frequently updated works, 
such as blogs, news headlines, audio, and video, in a standardized format. An RSS document 
or feed includes full or summarized text, plus other information such as publication date and 
authorship. News websites, blogs, and podcasts use RSS, constantly feeding news to consum­
ers instead of having them search for it. In addition to facilitating syndication, RSS allows a 
website’s frequent readers to track updates on the site.
LO 15.3 Describe the three Busi-
ness 2.0 tools for collaborating.
FIGURE 15.6
Business 2.0 Communication 
and Collaboration Tools.
 
An online journal
that allows users to
post their own
comments, graphics,
and videos 
 
Popular business
examples include
Sweet Leaf Tea,
Stoneyﬁeld Farm,
Nuts about
Southwest, Disney
Parks 
Collaborative
website that allows
users to add,
remove, and change
content 
 
Popular business
examples include
Wikipedia, National
Institute of Health,
Intelopedia,
LexisNexis, Wiki for
Higher Education  
Content from
more than one
source to create a
new product or 
service
 
Examples include
Zillow, Infopedia,
Trendsmap,
SongDNA,
ThisWeKnow 
BLOG
WIKI
MASHUP

272  *  Unit 4  Building Innovation
WIKIS
A wiki (the word is Hawaiian for quick) is a type of collaborative web page that allows users to 
add, remove, and change content, which can be easily organized and reorganized as required. 
While blogs have largely drawn on the creative and personal goals of individual authors, wikis 
are based on open collaboration with any- and everybody. Wikipedia, the open encyclopedia 
that launched in 2001, has become one of the 10 most popular web destinations, reaching an 
estimated 217 million unique visitors a month.8
A wiki user can generally alter the original content of any article, while the blog user 
can only add information in the form of comments. Large wikis, such as Wikipedia, protect 
the quality and accuracy of their information by assigning users roles such as reader, edi­
tor, administrator, patroller, policy maker, subject matter expert, content maintainer, software 
developer, and system operator. Access to some important or sensitive Wikipedia material is 
limited to users in these authorized roles.9
The network effect describes how products in a network increase in value to users as the 
number of users increases. The more users and content managers on a wiki, the greater the 
network effect because more users attract more contributors, whose work attracts more users, 
and so on. For example, Wikipedia becomes more valuable to users as the number of its con­
tributors increases.
Wikis internal to firms can be vital tools for collecting and disseminating knowledge 
throughout an organization, across geographic distances, and between functional business 
areas. For example, what U.S. employees call a “sale” may be called “an order booked” in the 
United Kingdom, an “order scheduled” in Germany, and an “order produced” in France. The 
corporate wiki can answer any questions about a business process or definition. Companies 
are also using wikis for documentation, reporting, project management, online dictionaries, 
and discussion groups. Of course, the more employees who use the corporate wiki, the greater 
the network effect and valued added for the company.
MASHUPS
A mashup is a website or web application that uses content from more than one source 
to create a completely new product or service. The term is typically used in the context 
of music; putting Jay-Z lyrics over a Radiohead song makes something old new. The web 
version of a mashup allows users to mix map data, photos, video, news feeds, blog entries, 
and so on to create content with a new purpose. Content used in mashups is typically 
sourced from an application programming interface (API), which is a set of routines, 
protocols, and tools for building software applications. A programmer then puts these 
building blocks together.
Most operating environments, such as Microsoft Windows, provide an API so that pro­
grammers can write applications consistent with them. Many people experimenting with 
mashups are using Microsoft, Google, eBay, Amazon, Flickr, and Yahoo! APIs, leading 
to the creation of mashup editors. Mashup editors are WYSIWYG, or What You See Is 
What You Get, tools. They provide a visual interface to build a mashup, often allowing the 
user to drag and drop data points into a web application. An ezine is a magazine published 
only in electronic form on a computer network. Flipboard is a social-network aggregation, 
magazine-format application software for multiple devices that collects content from social 
media and other websites, presents it in magazine format, and allows users to flip through 
the content.
Whoever thought technology could help sell bananas? Dole Organic now places three-digit 
farm codes on each banana and creates a mashup using Google Earth and its banana database. 
Socially and environmentally conscious buyers can plug the numbers into Dole’s website and 
look at a bio of the farm where the bananas were raised. The site tells the story of the farm and 
its surrounding community, lists its organic certifications, posts some photos, and offers a link 
to satellite images of the farm in Google Earth. Customers can personally monitor the produc­
tion and treatment of their fruit from the tree to the grocer. The process assures customers that 
their bananas have been raised to proper organic standards on an environmentally friendly, 
holistically minded plantation.10

	
Chapter 15  Creating Collaborative Partnerships  *  273
The Challenges of Business 2.0
As much as Business 2.0 has positively changed the global landscape of business, a few chal­
lenges remain in open source software, user-contributed content systems, and collaboration 
systems, all highlighted in Figure 15.7. We’ll briefly describe each one.
TECHNOLOGY DEPENDENCE
Many people today expect to be continuously connected, and their depen­
dence on technology glues them to their web connections for everything 
from web conferencing for a university class or work project to making plans 
with friends for dinner. If a connection is down, how will they function? 
How long can people go without checking email, text messaging, or listen­
ing to free music on Pandora or watching on-demand television? As society 
becomes more technology-dependent, outages hold the potential to cause 
ever-greater havoc for people, businesses, and educational institutions.
INFORMATION VANDALISM
Open source and sharing are both major advantages of Business 2.0, and ironically they are 
major challenges as well. Allowing anyone to edit anything opens the door for individuals to 
purposely damage, destroy, or vandalize website content. One of the most famous examples 
of wiki vandalism occurred when a false biography entry read that John Seigenthaler Sr. was 
assistant to Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy in the early 1960s and was thought to have been 
directly involved in the assassinations of both Kennedy and his brother, President John F. Kennedy.
Seigenthaler did work as an assistant to Robert Kennedy, but he was never involved in the 
assassinations. Wiki vandalism is a hot issue and for this reason wiki software can now store 
all versions of a web page, tracking updates and changes and ensuring the site can be restored 
to its original form if the site is vandalized. It can also color-code the background ensuring the 
user understands which areas have been validated and which areas have not. The real trick to 
wiki software is to determine which statements are true and which are false, a huge issue when 
considering how easily and frequently wiki software is updated and changed.11
VIOLATIONS OF COPYRIGHT AND PLAGIARISM
Online collaboration makes plagiarism as easy as clicking a mouse. Unfortunately a great deal 
of copyrighted material tends to find its ways to blogs and wikis where many times blame 
cannot be traced to a single person. Clearly stated copyright and plagiarism policies are a 
must for all corporate blogs and wikis.
Web 3.0: Defining the Next Generation of 
Online Business Opportunities
While Web 1.0 refers to static text-based information websites and Web 2.0 is about user-
contributed content, Web 3.0 is based on “intelligent” web applications using natural lan­
guage processing, machine-based learning and reasoning, and intelligent applications. Web 
3.0 is the next step in the evolution of the Internet and web applications. Business leaders who 
explore its opportunities will be the first to market with competitive advantages.
Web 3.0 offers a way for people to describe information such that computers can start to 
understand the relationships among concepts and topics. To demonstrate the power of Web 
3.0, let’s look at a few sample relationships, such as Adam Sandler is a comedian, Lady Gaga 
is a singer, and Hannah is friends with Sophie. These are all examples of descriptions that 
can be added to web pages allowing computers to learn about relationships while displaying 
the information to humans. With this kind of information in place, there will be a far richer 
interaction between people and machines with Web 3.0.
LO 15.4 Explain the three chal-
lenges associated with Business 
2.0.
LO 15.5 Describe Web 3.0 and 
the next generation of online 
business.
FIGURE 15.7
Challenges of Business 2.0.
Technology Dependence
Information Vandalism
Violations of Copyright
and Plagiarism

274  *  Unit 4  Building Innovation
Applying this type of advanced relationship knowledge to a company can create new 
opportunities. After all, businesses run on information. Whereas Web 2.0 brings people closer 
together with information using machines, Web 3.0 brings machines closer together using 
information. These new relationships unite people, machines, and information so a business 
can be smarter, quicker, more agile, and more successful.
One goal of Web 3.0 is to tailor online searches and requests specifically to users’ prefer­
ences and needs. For example, instead of making multiple searches, the user might type a 
complex sentence or two in a Web 3.0 browser, such as “I want to see a funny movie and 
then eat at a good Mexican restaurant. What are my options?” The Web 3.0 browser will 
analyze the request, search the web for all possible answers, organize the results, and present 
them to the user.
Tim Berners-Lee, one of the founders of the WWW, has described the semantic web as 
a component of Web 3.0 that describes things in a way that computers can understand. The 
semantic web is not about links between web pages; rather it describes the relationships 
between things (such as A is a part of B and Y is a member of Z) and the properties of things 
(size, weight, age, price). If information about music, cars, concert tickets, and so on is stored 
in a way that describes the information and associated resource files, semantic web applica­
tions can collect information from many different sources, combine it, and present it to users 
in a meaningful way. Although Web 3.0 is still a bit speculative, some topics and features are 
certain to be included in it, such as:12
	■	 Integration of legacy devices: the ability to use current devices such as iPhones, laptops, 
and so on, as credit cards, tickets, and reservations tools.
	■	 Intelligent applications: the use of agents, machine learning, and semantic web concepts to 
complete intelligent tasks for users.
	■	 Open ID: the provision of an online identity that can be easily carried to a variety of 
devices (cell phones, PCs) allowing for easy authentication across different websites.
	■	 Open technologies: the design of websites and other software so they can be easily inte­
grated and work together.
	■	 A worldwide database: the ability for databases to be distributed and accessed from 
anywhere.
EGOVERNMENT: THE GOVERNMENT MOVES ONLINE
Recent business models that have arisen to enable organizations to take advantage of the Internet 
and create value are within egovernment. Egovernment involves the use of strategies and 
technologies to transform government(s) by improving the delivery of services and enhancing 
the quality of interaction between the citizen-consumer and all branches of government.
One example of an egovernment portal, FirstGov.gov, the official U.S. gateway to all gov­
ernment information, is the catalyst for a growing electronic government. Its powerful search 
engine and ever-growing collection of topical and customer-focused links connect users to 
millions of web pages, from the federal government, to local and tribal governments, to for­
eign nations around the world. Figure 15.8 highlights and adds to our discussion specific 
egovernment models.
MBUSINESS: SUPPORTING ANYWHERE BUSINESS
Internet-enabled mobile devices are quickly outnumbering personal computers. Mobile business
(or mbusiness, mcommerce) is the ability to purchase goods and services through a wire­
less Internet-enabled device. The emerging technology behind mbusiness is a mobile device 
equipped with a web-ready micro-browser that can perform the following services:
	■	 Mobile entertainment—downloads for music, videos, games, voting, ring tones, as well as 
text-based messaging services.
	■	 Mobile sales/marketing—advertising, campaigns, discounts, promotions, and coupons.
	■	 Mobile banking—manage accounts, pay bills, receive alerts, and transfer funds.

	
Chapter 15  Creating Collaborative Partnerships  *  275
	■	 Mobile ticketing—purchase tickets for entertainment, transportation, and parking includ­
ing the ability to automatically feed parking meters.
	■	 Mobile payments—pay for goods and services including in-store purchases, home deliv­
ery, vending machines, taxis, gas, and so on.
Organizations face changes more extensive and far reaching in their implications than any­
thing since the modern industrial revolution occurred in the early 1900s. Technology is a 
primary force driving these changes. Organizations that want to survive must recognize the 
immense power of technology, carry out required organizational changes in the face of it, and 
learn to operate in an entirely different way.
FIGURE 15.8
Extended Ebusiness Models.
Business
Business
Consumer
Consumer
B2B
conisint.com
C2B
priceline.com
B2C
dell.com
C2C
ebay.com
Government
G2B
export.gov
G2C
medicare.gov
Government
B2G
lockheedmartin.com
C2G
egov.com
G2G
disasterhelp.gov
	1.	 Categorize Slack as an example of Web 1.0 (ebusiness) or Web 2.0 (Business 2.0).
	2.	 Explain the four characteristics of Business 2.0 and how each applies to Slack.
	3.	 How could Slack use social networking analysis to help organizations function more efficiently?
O P E N I N G  C A S E  ST U DY  Q U E ST I O N S
Pinterest has been called the latest addiction for millions of people around the world. Pinterest, a 
visual social media network, allows users to create “interest boards” where they “pin” items of inter­
ests found on the web. Terms you need to understand to use Pinterest include:
■	
Pin: A link to an image from a computer or a website. Pins can include captions for other users. 
Users upload, or “pin,” photos or videos to boards.
■	
Board: Pins live on boards and users can maintain separate boards, which can be categorized by 
activity or interests, such as cooking, do-it-yourself activities, fitness, music, movies, etc.
■	
Repin: After pinning an item, it can be repinned by other Pinterest users, spreading the content 
virally. Repinning allows users to share items they like with friends and family.
Chapter Fifteen Case:  Pinterest - Billboards for the Internet

276  *  Unit 4  Building Innovation
“Pinning” is simply done by clicking on a photo or video that captures the attention of a user, 
whether it be by uploading personal photos or repinning a photo or video from a fellow user. Started 
in 2010, Pinterest has already attracted over 10 million users with the majority being women between 
the ages of 25 and 54. Millions of people visit the website each day to find what new items will spark 
their interest as there are always more and more things to see.
Pinterest is considered a social network, but unlike other social networks, such as Twitter and 
Facebook, Pinterest is open to invited users only, meaning it is an invitation-only website and users 
must “ask” for an invitation before gaining access. Upon accepting the invitation, users can gain 
access to the website and begin inviting their own “friends” with whom they have connections on 
Facebook or Twitter. Pinterest’s primary mission is to:
connect everyone in the world through the ‘things’ they find interesting. We think that a favorite 
book, toy, or recipe can reveal a common link between two people. With millions of new pins added 
every week, Pinterest is connecting people all over the world based on shared tastes and interests.
Just like on other social networks, Pinterest users can compile a list of people they want to follow. 
A user can link a Pinterest board to a Facebook account, allowing instant access to quickly see which 
of his or her Facebook friends are on the social network. Adding bookmarks allows the user to pin 
images to other websites such as a book at Barnes & Noble or a set of mugs at Pier 1 Imports. The 
image is automatically linked to the retailer’s website, and if another user clicks on the image, that 
user receives additional information on the product or service. If users pin a specific image of a plate 
or sweater, they can add the item’s price in the description, which will automatically place a banner 
ad on the image and show the listed price. If users are unsure of what they are looking for, they can 
search for a specific event or theme such as “twenty-first birthday party” for a whole array of ideas.
Essentially, Pinterest allows users to paint a visual picture. Just imagine a wedding planner talking 
to a bride about her upcoming event, and the bride mentions she would like a “classic modernism” 
wedding. If the wedding planner was confused on what exactly the bride meant by classic modern­
ism, she could quickly visit Pinterest to find an entire suite of photos and videos to spark ideas of how 
to coordinate the event.
The Business Value of Pinterest
Visual Communication
Pinterest is by far one of the hottest social media spaces available today. Offering all kinds of valuable 
information from useful cleaning tips to fantastic recipes to beautiful photos and videos, the website 
is extremely valuable for sharing anything visual. Pinterest is in no way simply a passing fad as com­
panies begin to use the website for social marketing.
One of the best business uses of Pinterest is allowing employees to visually communicate and 
brainstorm. Visual communication is a new experience for many employees and the phrase “A picture 
is worth a thousand words” can help a company perform many tasks from generating new products 
to transforming business processes. In fact, many companies are using Pinterest to solicit feedback 
directly from employees, customers, and suppliers to ensure the company is operating efficiently and 
effectively. Soliciting feedback directly from customers allows companies to have a customer service 
support team handle problems before they become mainstream issues. Providing customers with a 
new channel to post their thoughts and concerns about products or services can provide valuable 
feedback for any company. Companies typically state that they may not respond to every question 
or comment, but that they take each and every concern into account, demonstrating that they are 
devoted to creating a bond between themselves and their customers.
Driving Traffic
Pinterest drives traffic—it is that simple! Even though the website operates under an invitation-only 
model, it has attracted more than 10 million users in less than two years. That number might seem 
small compared to powerhouses such as Facebook, Twitter, or Google, but it demonstrates there is 
enough of an audience to send a decent amount of traffic to any business. The images a business pins 
up should be linked to the relevant page of its website. If users are attracted by it, they may click on 
it to find out more.

	
Chapter 15  Creating Collaborative Partnerships  *  277
Pinterest also drives traffic by providing higher rankings on search engine optimization as com­
panies appear higher and higher on search lists the more users are pinning to their boards. Linking 
is one of the key factors search engines consider, and with Pinterest gaining in popularity, it is also 
growing as a trustworthy domain. The number of Pinterest users combined with its ability to increase 
search rankings will play an important role when a company is looking to increase visibility and drive 
traffic to its website. Data from Shareholic found that Pinterest sent more referral traffic to bloggers 
than Google+, YouTube, and LinkedIn combined, falling just behind Twitter.
Product Branding
Pinterest is an extraordinary branding tool, offering a place where companies can create a pres­
ence and community around a product, idea, event, or company. Just like other social networking 
websites, Pinterest allows a company to reach out and engage its customers, vendors, suppliers, 
and even employees to communicate about its products and services. Recently the National Football 
League’s Minnesota Vikings began using Pinterest to create a following of favorite photos, statistics, 
and even game-day recipes!
Pinterest recently deployed an iPhone application that allows users to pin photos and video from 
their cameras instantly on their boards. Pinterest’s unique competitive advantage is its ability to host 
billions of images and redirect users to the appropriate sources in a user-friendly interface.
Pinterest’s Dilemma
Since its inception, Pinterest has been under fire from sites such as Flikr, Photobucket, and Instagram 
over attributing credit to those who own the images that are pinned. Many users are concerned that 
they may one day be sued for the improper use of an image they pinned.
The Pinterest Terms of Use state, “If you are a copyright owner, or are authorized to act on behalf 
of one, or authorized to act under any exclusive right under copyright, please report alleged copy­
right infringements taking place on or through the Site by completing the following DMCA Notice of 
Alleged Infringement and delivering it to Pinterest’s Designated Copyright Agent.”
To protect Pinterest from third-party litigation claims (such as those from authors claiming copy­
right infringement), Pinterest has incorporated the following statement into its indemnity clause: “You 
agree to indemnify and hold harmless Pinterest and its officers, directors, employees and agents, 
from and against any claims, suits, proceedings, disputes, demands, liabilities, damages, losses, 
costs and expenses, including, without limitation, reasonable legal and accounting fees (including 
costs of defense of claims, suits or proceedings brought by third parties), arising out of or in any way 
related to (i) your access to or use of the Services or Pinterest Content, (ii) your User Content, or (iii) 
your breach of any of these Terms.”
Pinterest is well aware of the probability that many of the pinned images might be violating copy­
right infringement and is attempting to protect itself against any litigation claims resulting from users 
intentionally or unintentionally breaking the law through its site. 13
Questions
	1.	 Do you consider Pinterest a form of disruptive or sustaining technology? Why or why not?
	2.	 What types of security and ethical dilemmas are facing Pinterest?
	3.	 Do you consider Pinterest an example of Web 1.0 or Web 2.0?
	4.	 What are the mobility benefits and challenges facing Pinterest?

278  *  Unit 4  Building Innovation
15.1.	 Explain Web 2.0, and identify its four characteristics.
Web 2.0, or Business 2.0, is the next generation of Internet use—a more mature, distinctive com­
munications platform characterized by new qualities such as collaboration, sharing, and being free. 
Web 2.0 encourages user participation and the formation of communities that contribute to the con­
tent. In Web 2.0, technical skills are no longer required to use and publish information to the World 
Wide Web, eliminating entry barriers for online business. The four characteristics of Web 2.0 include:
■	
Content sharing through open sourcing.
■	
User-contributed content.
■	
Collaboration inside the organization.
■	
Collaboration outside the organization.
15.2.	Explain how Business 2.0 is helping communities network and collaborate.
A social network is an application that connects people by matching profile information. Providing 
individuals with the ability to network is by far one of the greatest advantages of Business 2.0. Social 
networking is the practice of expanding your business and/or social contacts by constructing a per­
sonal network. Business 2.0 simplifies the way individuals communicate, network, find employment, 
and search for information.
15.3.	 Describe the three Business 2.0 tools for collaborating.
The three tools that harness the “power of the people” for Business 2.0 include blogs, wikis, and 
mashups. A blog, or web log, is an online journal that allows users to post their own comments, 
graphics, and video. Blog websites let writers communicate—and readers respond—on a regular 
basis through a simple yet customizable interface that does not require any programming. A wiki is 
a type of collaborative web page that allows users to add, remove, and change content, which can 
be easily organized and reorganized as required. Whereas blogs have largely drawn on the creative 
and personal goals of individual authors, wikis are based on open collaboration with any- and every­
body. A mashup is a website or web application that uses content from more than one source to 
create a completely new product or service. A mashup allows users to mix map data, photos, video, 
news feeds, blog entries, and so on to create content with a new purpose.
15.4.	 Explain the three challenges associated with Business 2.0.
As much as Business 2.0 has positively changed the global landscape of business, a few challenges 
remain in open source software, user-contributed content systems, and collaboration systems. 
These challenges include individuals forming unrealistic dependencies on technology, vandalism of 
information on blogs and wikis, and the violation of copyrights and plagiarism.
15.5.	Describe Web 3.0 and the next generation of online business.
Web 3.0 is based on intelligent web applications using natural language processing, machine-based 
learning and reasoning, and intelligent applications. Web 3.0 is the next step in the evolution of the 
Internet and web applications. Business leaders who explore its opportunities will be the first to mar­
ket with competitive advantages.
Web 3.0 offers a way for people to describe information in ways that enable computers to under­
stand the relationships among concepts and topics.
L E A R N I N G  O U T C O M E  R E V I E W

	
Chapter 15  Creating Collaborative Partnerships  *  279
M A K I N G  B U S I N E S S  D E C I S I O N S
1.	 The Toughest College Test You’ll Ever Take
If your professor asked you today to kick your social networking habits, do you think you could do 
it? Can you go without Facebook, cell phones, or the Internet for a week? For a day? Recently, a Uni­
versity of Minnesota professor challenged her public relations class to go five days without media or 
gadgets that didn’t exist before 1984. Out of the 43 students in the class, just a handful made it even 
three days without new technology. Among those who didn’t, one student said, “My mother thought 
I died.” How long could you go without any social media? What types of issues might you encoun­
ter without constant connections to your friends? How has social media affected society? How has 
social media impacted businesses?
2.	 The Future of Wikipedia
Wikipedia is a multilingual, web-based, free-content encyclopedia project written collaboratively by 
volunteers around the world. Since its creation in 2001, it has grown rapidly into one of the largest 
reference websites. Some people believe Wikipedia will eventually fail under an assault by market­
ers and self-promoting users. Eric Goldman, a professor at the Santa Clara University School of Law, 
argues that Wikipedia will see increasingly vigorous efforts to subvert its editorial process, including 
the use of automated marketing tools to alter Wikipedia entries to generate online traffic. The site’s 
editors will burn out trying to maintain it, he projects, or Wikipedia will change its open-access archi­
tecture and its mission. Do you agree or disagree with Professor Goldman’s argument? What can 
Wikipedia do to combat the challenges of information vandalism and copyright/plagiarism issues?
3.	 Is Facebook Becoming the Whole World’s Social Network?
Facebook’s growth, which we already know is massive, is truly a global phenomenon. Nations 
with the fastest membership growth rate are in South America and Asia. Is Facebook becoming 
the global phone book? If you review InsideFacebook.com, you’ll find a detailed analysis of the 
numerical growth rate of members per nation and the penetration Facebook is achieving among 
each nation’s population. Particularly interesting was the monthly growth rate for Indonesia, the 
	 1.	What are the benefits and challenges associated with Web 2.0?
	 2.	What are the four primary characteristics of Web 2.0?
	 3.	What is the difference between closed source and open source?
	 4.	How can a business use a reputation system?
	 5.	Why are explicit knowledge and tacit knowledge important to a business?
	 6.	Would a small business want to use crowdsourcing or crowdfunding?
	 7.	How could a business use a blog, a wiki, and a mashup to improve communications?
	 8.	What are the three challenges associated with Business 2.0?
	 9.	What is the semantic web? 
	10.	How does mbusiness differ from ebusiness?
R E V I E W  Q U E S T I O N S

280  *  Unit 4  Building Innovation
Philippines, Mexico, Argentina, and Malaysia—each of which showed about a 10 percent jump in 
Facebook membership in a single month. In a group answer the following:
■	
What potential business opportunities could be created by a worldwide social media network 
or phone book?
■	
Facebook, which contains personal data on each member, is becoming the world’s phone 
book. What are the implications of a world phone book for social change?
■	
What do you think would be the benefits and challenges of global social networking?
4.	 Five Ways Google Docs Speeds Up Collaboration 
Google Docs wants you to skip Microsoft Office and collaborate with your group in your browser 
for free, especially when you’re not in the same physical space. Visit Google Docs and answer the 
following questions. What are five ways the new Google Docs can help your team accomplish work 
more efficiently, even when you’re not in the same room together? Is Google Docs open source soft­
ware? What revenue model is Google Docs following? Why would putting Google Docs and Microsoft 
Office on your résumé help differentiate your skills? What other applications does Google create that 
you are interested in learning to help collaborate and communicate with peers and co-workers? 
5. Anti-Social Networking
Before the Internet, angry customers could write letters or make phone calls, but their individual 
power to find satisfaction or bring about change was relatively weak. Now, disgruntled consum­
ers can create a website or upload a video bashing a product or service, and their efforts can 
be instantly seen by millions of people. Though many companies monitor the Internet and try to 
respond to such postings quickly, power has clearly shifted to the consumer. Create an argument for 
or against the following statement: “Social networking has given power to the consumer that ben­
efits society and creates socially responsible corporations.”
6. Collaborating for Nonprofits—Kiva
Kiva’s mission is to connect people through lending for the sake of alleviating poverty. Kiva is a 
micro-lending online nonprofit organization that enables individuals to lend directly to entrepreneurs 
throughout the world. If you want to participate in Kiva you simply browse the website (www.kiva.
org) and choose an entrepreneur that interests you, make a loan, then track your entrepreneur for 
the next 6 to 12 months while he or she builds the business and makes the funds to repay the loan. 
When the loan is up you can relend the money to someone else who is in need.14
Kiva is an excellent example of blending ethics and information technology. How is Kiva operating 
differently than traditional nonprofits? What are the risks associated with investing in Kiva? When you 
invest in Kiva you run three primary risks: entrepreneur risk, local field partner risk, and country risk. 
Analyze each of these risks for potential unethical issues that might arise when donating to Kiva.
7. Connectivity Breakdown
When you are considering connectivity services for your business, you need to take continuous 
access and connectivity seriously. What if one of your employees is about to close a multimillion-
dollar deal and loses the Internet connection, jeopardizing the deal? What if a disgruntled employee 
decides to post your business’s collective intelligence on an open source blog or wiki?
What if your patient-scheduling software crashes and you have no idea which patients are sched­
uled to which operating rooms with which doctors? These are far worse scenarios than a teenage 
boy not gaining access to his email or Facebook page. What management and technical challenges 
do you foresee as people and businesses become increasingly dependent on connectivity? What 
can managers do to meet these challenges and prevent problems?

	
Chapter 15  Creating Collaborative Partnerships  *  281
8. Blogging for Dollars
You have purchased a financial investment company, The Financial Level, that caters to individuals 
and families. You would like to develop a few blogs for your customers, employees, and partners. 
The goals for your customer blog are to gather honest feedback, provide a place for customers to 
interact, and help find new opportunities for your businesses. The goals for the employee blog are 
to gather knowledge, collect employment feedback, and offer a place where employees can post 
anonymous feedback for issues and concerns so you can manage your staff better.
	a.	 Research the Internet and find several customer blogs and employee blogs.
	b.	 Determine the top three blogs for customers and for employees and critique the blogs for con­
tent, ease of use, and overall value.
	c.	 Design a prototype customer blog and a prototype employee blog for The Financial Level, 
using Word, PowerPoint, or a tool of your choice.

282  *  Unit 4  Building Innovation
C H A P T E R  16
LEARNING OUTCOMES
16.1.	 Describe the different wireless network categories.
16.2.	Explain the different wireless network business 
applications.
Wireless Network Categories
As far back as 1896, Italian inventor Guglielmo Marconi demonstrated a wireless telegraph, 
and in 1927, the first radiotelephone system began operating between the United States and 
Great Britain. Automobile-based mobile telephones were offered in 1947. In 1964, the first 
communications satellite, Telstar, was launched, and soon after, satellite-relayed telephone 
service and television broadcasts became available. Wireless networks have exploded since 
then, and newer technologies are now maturing that allow companies and home users alike to 
take advantage of both wired and wireless networks.1
Before delving into a discussion of wireless networks, we should distinguish between 
mobile and wireless, terms that are often used synonymously but actually have different mean­
ings. Mobile means the technology can travel with the user, for instance, users can download 
software, email messages, and web pages onto a laptop or other mobile device for portable 
reading or reference. Information collected while on the road can be synchronized with a PC 
or company server. Wireless, on the other hand, refers to any type of operation accomplished 
without the use of a hard-wired connection. There are many environments in which the net­
work devices are wireless but not mobile, such as wireless home or office networks with 
stationary PCs and printers. Some forms of mobility do not require a wireless connection; for 
instance, a worker can use a wired laptop at home, shut down the laptop, drive to work, and 
attach the laptop to the company’s wired network.
In many networked environments today, users are both wireless and mobile; for example, a 
mobile user commuting to work on a train can maintain a VoIP call and multiple TCP/IP con­
nections at the same time. Figure 16.1 categorizes wireless networks by type.
PERSONAL AREA NETWORKS
A personal area network (PAN) provides communication for devices owned by a single user 
that work over a short distance. PANs are used to transfer files, including email, calendar 
appointments, digital photos, and music. A PAN can provide communication between a wire­
less headset and a cell phone or between a computer and a wireless mouse or keyboard. Per­
sonal area networks generally cover a range of less than 10 meters (about 30 feet). Bluetooth 
is a wireless PAN technology that transmits signals over short distances among cell phones, 
computers, and other devices. The name is borrowed from Harald Bluetooth, a king in Den­
mark more than 1,000 years ago. Bluetooth eliminates the need for wires, docking stations, or 
cradles, as well as all the special attachments that typically accompany personal computing 
devices. Bluetooth operates at speeds up to 1 Mbps within a range of 33 feet or less. Devices 
that are Bluetooth-enabled communicate directly with each other in pairs, like a handshake. 
LO 16.1 Describe the different 
wireless network categories.
Integrating Wireless 
Technology in Business

	
Chapter 16  Integrating Wireless Technology in Business   *  283
Up to eight can be paired simultaneously. And Bluetooth is not just for technology devices. 
An array of Bluetooth-equipped appliances, such as a television set, a stove, and a thermostat, 
can be controlled from a cell phone—all from a remote location.2
WIRELESS LANS
A wireless LAN (WLAN) is a local area network that uses radio signals to transmit and 
receive data over distances of a few hundred feet. An access point (AP) is the computer or 
network device that serves as an interface between devices and the network. Each computer 
initially connects to the access point and then to other computers on the network. A wireless 
access point (WAP) enables devices to connect to a wireless network to communicate with 
each other. WAPs with multiple-in/multiple-out (MIMO) technology have multiple transmit­
ters and receivers, allowing them to send and receive greater amounts of data than traditional 
networking devices. Wireless fidelity (Wi-Fi) is a means by which portable devices can con­
nect wirelessly to a local area network, using access points that send and receive data via 
radio waves. Wi-Fi has a maximum range of about 1,000 feet in open areas such as a city park 
and 250 to 400 feet in closed areas such as an office building. Wi-Fi infrastructure includes 
the inner workings of a Wi-Fi service or utility, including the signal transmitters, towers, or 
poles, along with additional equipment required to send out a Wi-Fi signal. Most WLANs use 
a Wi-Fi infrastructure in which a wireless device, often a laptop, communicates through an 
access point or base station by means of, for instance, wireless fidelity.
Areas around access points where users can connect to the Internet are often called 
hotspots. Hotspots are designated locations where Wi-Fi access points are publically avail­
able. Hotspots are found in places such as restaurants, airports, and hotels—places where 
business professionals tend to gather. Hotspots are extremely valuable for those business pro­
fessionals who travel extensively and need access to business applications. By positioning 
hotspots at strategic locations throughout a building, campus, or city, network administrators 
can keep Wi-Fi users continuously connected to a network or the Internet, no matter where 
they roam.3
In a Wi-Fi network, the user’s laptop or other Wi-Fi-enabled device has a wireless adapter 
that translates data into a radio signal and transmits it to the wireless access point. The wire­
less access point, which consists of a transmitter with an antenna that is often built into the 
hardware, receives the signal and decodes it. The access point then sends the information to 
the Internet over a wired broadband connection, as illustrated in Figure 16.2. When receiving 
data, the wireless access point takes the information from the Internet, translates it into a radio 
signal, and sends it to the computer’s wireless adapter. If too many people try to use the Wi-Fi 
network at one time, they can experience interference or dropped connections. Most laptop 
computers come with built-in wireless transmitters and software to enable computers to auto­
matically discover the existence of a Wi-Fi network.
Wi-Fi operates at considerably higher frequencies than cell phones use, which allows 
greater bandwidth. The bandwidths associated with Wi-Fi are separated according to sev­
eral wireless networking standards, known as 802.11, for carrying out wireless local area 
network communication. The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) 
researches and institutes electrical standards for communication and other technologies. IEEE 
802.11n (orWireless-N) is the standard for wireless networking. Compared with earlier stan­
dards such as 802.11b, Wireless-N offers faster speeds, more flexibility, and greater range. 
FIGURE 16.1
Wireless Communication 
Network Categories.
Wireless Wide Area
Networks (WWANs)
Wireless
Metropolitan Area
Networks (WMANs)
Wireless Local Area
Networks (WLANs)
Wireless Networks
Personal Area
Networks (PANs)

284  *  Unit 4  Building Innovation
The organization denotes different versions of the standard—for example, Wireless-G and 
Wireless-N—by a lowercase letter at the end of this number. Figure 16.3 outlines the band­
widths associated with a few of these standards.4
An increasing number of digital devices, including most laptops, netbooks, tablets such as 
the iPad, and even printers are incorporating Wi-Fi technology into their design. Cell phones 
are incorporating Wi-Fi so they can automatically switch from the cell network to a faster 
Wi-Fi network where available for data communications. BlackBerrys and iPhones can con­
nect to an access point for data communications such as email and web browsing, but not for 
voice unless they use the services of Skype or another VoIP.
WIRELESS MANs
A wireless MAN (WMAN) is a metropolitan area network that uses radio signals to trans­
mit and receive data. WMAN technologies have not been highly successful to date, mainly 
because they are not widely available, at least in the United States. One with the potential for 
success is Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access (WiMAX), a communications 
technology aimed at providing high-speed wireless data over metropolitan area networks. 
In many respects, WiMAX operates like Wi-Fi, only over greater distances and with higher 
bandwidths. A WiMAX tower serves as an access point and can connect to the Internet or 
another tower. A single tower can provide up to 3,000 square miles of coverage, so only a 
few are needed to cover an entire city. WiMAX can support data communications at a rate of 
70 Mbps. In New York City, for example, one or two WiMAX access points around the city 
might meet the heavy demand more cheaply than hundreds of Wi-Fi access points. WiMAX 
can also cover remote or rural areas where cabling is limited or nonexistent, and where it is 
too expensive or physically difficult to install wires for the relatively few users.5
WiMAX can provide both line-of-sight and non-line-of-sight service. A non-line-of-
sight service uses a small antenna on a mobile device that connects to a WiMAX tower less 
than six miles away where transmissions are disrupted by physical obstructions. This form 
of service is similar to Wi-Fi but has much broader coverage area and higher bandwidths.
FIGURE 16.2
Wi-Fi Networks.
Access
Point
INTERNET
Wireless Network
Broadband
Modem
FIGURE 16.3
Wi-Fi Standards and 
Bandwidths.
Wi-Fi Standard
Bandwidth
802.11a
54 Mbps
802.11b
11 Mbps
802.11g
54 Mbps
802.11n
140 Mbps

	
Chapter 16  Integrating Wireless Technology in Business   *  285
A line-of-sight option offers a fixed antenna that points at the WiMAX tower from a rooftop 
or pole. This option is much faster than non-line-of-sight service, and the distance between the 
WiMAX tower and antenna can be as great as 30 miles. Figure 16.4 illustrates the WiMAX 
infrastructure.6
Some cellular companies are evaluating WiMAX as a means of increasing bandwidth for 
a variety of data-intensive applications such as those used by smartphones. Sprint Nextel and 
Clearwire are building a nationwide WiMAX network in the United States. WiMAX-capable 
gaming devices, laptops, cameras, and even cell phones are being manufactured by companies 
including Intel, Motorola, Nokia, and Samsung.7
WIRELESS WAN—CELLULAR COMMUNICATION SYSTEM
A wireless WAN (WWAN) is a wide area network that uses radio signals to transmit and 
receive data. WWAN technologies can be divided into two categories: cellular communica­
tion systems and satellite communication systems.
Although mobile communications have been around for generations, including the walkie-
talkies of the 1940s and mobile radiophones of the 1950s, it was not until 1983 that cellular 
telephony became available commercially. A cell phone is a device for voice and data, com­
municating wirelessly through a collection of stationary ground-based sites called base sta­
tions, each of which is linked to its nearest neighbor stations. Base station coverage areas are 
about 10 square miles and are called cells, as Figure 16.5 illustrates.
The first cell phone was demonstrated in 1973 by Motorola (it weighed almost 2 pounds), 
but it took 10 years for the technology to become commercially available. The Motorola 
DynaTAC, marketed in 1983, weighed 1 pound and cost about $4,000. Cellular technology 
has come a long way since then.8
FIGURE 16.4
WiMAX Infrastructure.
Line-of-Sight
Transmission
ISP
WiMAX
Tower
Non-Line-of-Sight
Transmission
INTERNET

286  *  Unit 4  Building Innovation
Cellular systems were originally designed to provide voice services to mobile customers 
and thus were designed to interconnect cells to the public telephone network. Increasingly, 
they provide data services and Internet connectivity. There are more cell phones than landline 
phones in many countries today, and it is no longer uncommon for cell phones to be the only 
phones people have.
Cell phones have morphed into smartphones that offer more advanced computing ability 
and connectivity than basic cell phones. They allow for web browsing, emailing, listening to 
music, watching video, computing, keeping track of contacts, sending text messages, and tak­
ing and sending photos. The Apple iPhone and RIM BlackBerry are examples of smartphones.
Streaming is a method of sending audio and video files over the Internet in such a way 
that the user can view the file while it is being transferred. Streaming is not limited to cellular 
usage; all wireless and even wired networks can take advantage of this method. The most 
obvious advantage is speed, a direct benefit for mobile and wireless devices since they are still 
not as fast as their wired counterparts. Voice over LTE (VoLTE) allows mobile voice calls 
to be made over broadband networks, creating—under the right network conditions—clearer 
audio and fewer dropped calls. One easy way to think of VoLTE is as, essentially, a VoIP call 
on your mobile phone. The functionality is still the same, but the data transfers in a faster and 
more efficient manner.
FIGURE 16.5
Cell Phone Communication 
System Overview.
Each cell is typically sized
at about 10 square miles 
Each cell has a base
station that 
consists of an 
antenna or tower
to relay signals  
Cell
FIGURE 16.6
Cell Phone Generations.
Speed
Wireless Communications  
14.4 Kbps 
– The original analog cell phone network 
 G
1 
10 Kbps - 144 Kbps 
 – Digital cell phone service 
 
 G
2 
– Broadband Internet services over cellular networks 
– Added MMS (multimedia message services) or picture message services 
144 Kbps - 4 Mbps 
– High-speed access, anywhere, anytime, to anything digital—audio, 
 video, text 
– Improved video transmissions 
100 Mbps 
– Superior data communication rate 
– Expected to provide artiﬁcial intelligence capabilities on wearable 
 devices 
1.5 Gbps over a distance 
of 90 meters 
3G
4G
5G

	
Chapter 16  Integrating Wireless Technology in Business   *  287
WIRELESS WAN—SATELLITE COMMUNICATION SYSTEM
The other wireless WAN technology is a satellite communication system. A satellite is a space 
station that orbits the Earth receiving and transmitting signals from Earth-based stations over 
a wide area. When satellite systems first came into consideration in the 1990s, the goal was 
to provide wireless voice and data coverage for the entire planet, without the need for mobile 
phones to roam between many different provider networks. But by the time satellite networks 
were ready for commercial use, they had already been overtaken by cellular systems.
The devices used for satellite communication range from handheld units to mobile 
base stations to fixed satellite dish receivers. The peak data transmission speeds range 
from 2.4 Kbps to 2 Mbps. For the everyday mobile professional, satellite communication 
may not provide a compelling benefit, but for people requiring voice and data access from 
remote locations or guaranteed coverage in nonremote locations, satellite technology is a 
viable solution.
Conventional communication satellites move in stationary orbits approximately 22,000 
miles above Earth. A newer satellite medium, the low-orbit satellite, travels much closer to 
Earth and is able to pick up signals from weak transmitters. Low-orbit satellites also consume 
less power and cost less to launch than conventional satellites. With satellite networks, busi­
ness people almost anywhere in the world have access to full communication capabilities, 
including voice, videoconferencing, and Internet access. Figure 16.7 briefly illustrates the 
satellite communication system.9
PROTECTING WIRELESS CONNECTIONS
Network intrusions can occur if access codes or passwords are stored on a device that is lost 
or stolen. However, anytime a wireless network connects to a wired one, the wireless network 
can serve as a conduit for a hacker to gain entry into an otherwise secure wired network. This 
risk is especially high if the wireless network is not sufficiently secured in its own right.
Before the emergence of the Internet, hackers generally had to be physically present within 
the corporate complex to gain access to a wired network. The thousands, if not millions, of 
access points enabled by the Internet now allow hackers to work from a distance. This threat 
has spawned a variety of security techniques, from firewalls to VPNs to SSL and HTTPS.
Several techniques can secure wireless networks from unauthorized access whether used 
separately or in combination. One method is authenticating Wi-Fi access points. Because 
Wi-Fi communications are broadcast, anyone within listening distance can intercept commu­
nications. Every time someone uses an unsecured website via a public Wi-Fi access point, his 
or her logon name and password are sent over the open airwaves with a high risk that someone 
might eavesdrop or capture logon names, passwords, credit card numbers, and other vital infor­
mation. Wired equivalent privacy (WEP) is an encryption algorithm designed to protect wire­
less transmission data. If you are using a Wi-Fi connection, WEP encrypts the data by using a 
key that converts the data to a nonhuman readable form. The purpose of WEP was to provide 
wireless networks with the equivalent level of security as wired networks. Unfortunately, the 
FIGURE 16.7
Satellite Communication 
System.
22,000 miles above
Earth 
Fixed Locations
Portable Communications
Vehicles

288  *  Unit 4  Building Innovation
technology behind WEP has been demonstrated to be relatively insecure compared to newer 
protocols such as WPA. WLANs that use Wi-Fi have a built-in security mechanism called 
Wi-Fi protected access (WPA), a wireless security protocol to protect Wi-Fi networks. It is an 
improvement on the original Wi-Fi security standard, wired equivalent privacy (WEP), and 
provides more sophisticated data encryption and user authentication. Anyone who wants to use 
an access point must know the WPA encryption key to access the Wi-Fi connection.
War chalking is the practice of tagging pavement with codes displaying where Wi-Fi 
access is available. The codes for war chalking tell other users the kind of access available, 
the speed of the network, and if the network is secured. War driving is deliberately search­
ing for Wi-Fi signals while driving by in a vehicle. Many individuals who participate in war 
driving simply map where Wi-Fi networks are available. Other individuals have a more mali­
cious intent and use war driving to hack or break into these networks. War driving has been 
a controversial practice since its inception and has raised the awareness of the importance of 
wireless network security.
MANAGING MOBILE DEVICES
IT consumerization is the blending of personal and business use of technology devices and 
applications. Today’s workforce grew up with the Internet and its members do not differenti­
ate between corporate and personal technology. Employees want to use the same technology 
they have at home in the office. This blending of personal and business technology is hav­
ing a significant impact on corporate MIS departments, which traditionally choose all of the 
technology for the organization. Today, MIS departments must determine how to protect their 
networks and manage technology that they did not authorize or recommend. Two ways an 
MIS department can manage IT consumerization is through mobile device management and 
mobile application management.
Mobile device management(MDM) remotely controls smartphones and tablets, ensuring 
data security. MIS departments implement MDM by requiring passcodes on organizational 
smartphones to ensure data encryption and, in the event of a lost smartphone, that all data on 
the device can be deleted remotely. MDM tools can also enforce policies, track inventory, and 
perform real-time monitoring and reporting. One problem with MDM is that the full-device 
approach can be too heavy-handed in an era when employees, not their employers, own their 
smartphones and tablets. Users may wonder, “If I only use my phone to check email at night, 
why do I have to enter my work password every time I want to use the phone?” or “If I lose my 
phone, why does my IT department want to wipe pictures of my dog remotely?”
Mobile application management administers and delivers applications to corporate and 
personal smartphones and tablets. MAM software assists with software delivery, licensing, 
and maintenance and can limit how sensitive data can be shared among apps. An important 
feature of MAM is that it provides corporate network administrators with the ability to wipe 
corporate mobile apps from an end user’s device remotely.
Business Applications of Wireless Networks
Companies of all types and sizes have relied on wireless technology for years. Shipping and 
trucking companies developed some of the earliest wireless applications to help track vehicles 
and valuable cargo, optimize the logistics of their global operations, perfect their delivery 
capabilities, and reduce theft and damage. Government agencies such as the National Aero­
nautics and Space Administration and the Department of Defense have relied on satellite 
technologies for decades to track the movement of troops, weaponry, and military assets; to 
receive and broadcast data; and to communicate over great distances.
Wireless technologies have also aided the creation of new applications. Some build upon 
and improve existing capabilities. UPS, for example, is combining several types of wireless 
network technologies from Bluetooth to WWANs and deploying scanners and wearable data-
collection terminals to automate and standardize package management and tracking across all 
its delivery centers. Figure 16.8 displays the three business applications taking advantage of 
wireless technologies.
LO 16.2 Explain the differ-
ent wireless network business 
applications.

	
Chapter 16  Integrating Wireless Technology in Business   *  289
RADIO-FREQUENCY IDENTIFICATION (RFID)
Radio-frequency identification (RFID) uses electronic tags and labels to identify objects wire­
lessly over short distances. It holds the promise of replacing existing identification technolo­
gies such as the bar code. RFID wirelessly exchanges information between a tagged object 
and a reader/writer. An RFID tag is an electronic identification device that is made up of a 
chip and antenna. An RFID reader (RFID interrogator) is a transmitter/receiver that reads 
the contents of RFID tags in the area. A RFID system is comprised of one or more RFID tags, 
one or more RFID readers, two or more antennas (one on the tag and one on each reader), 
RFID application software, and a computer system or server, as Figure 16.9 illustrates. Tags, 
often smaller than a grain of rice, can be applied to books or clothing items as part of an 
adhesive bar-code label, or included in items such as ID cards or packing labels. Readers can 
be stand-alone devices, such as for self-checkout in a grocery store, integrated with a mobile 
device for portable use, or built in as in printers. The reader sends a wireless request that is 
received by all tags in the area that have been programmed to listen to wireless signals. Tags 
receive the signal via their antennas and respond by transmitting their stored data. The tag 
can hold many types of data, including a product number, installation instructions, and his­
tory of activity (such as the date the item was shipped). The reader receives a signal from the 
tag using its antenna, interprets the information sent, and transfers the data to the associated 
computer system or server.
Passive RFID tags do not have a power source, whereas active RFID tags have their own 
transmitter and a power source (typically a battery). The power source runs the microchip’s 
circuitry and broadcasts a signal to the reader (similar to the way a cell phone transmits sig­
nals to a base station). Passive RFID tags draw power from the RFID reader, which sends 
out electromagnetic waves that induce a current in the tag’s antenna. Semi-passive RFID 
tags use a battery to run the microchip’s circuitry, but communicate by drawing power from 
the RFID reader. Asset tracking occurs when a company places active or semi-passive RFID 
tags on expensive products or assets to gather data on the items’ location with little or no 
FIGURE 16.8
Wireless Business 
Applications.
Global
Positioning
Systems (GPS)
Geographic
Information
Systems (GIS)
Radio-Frequency
Identiﬁcation
(RFID)
FIGURE 16.9
Elements of an RFID system.
Tagged
Products 
RFID
Reader/
Writer
Computer 
System or
Server 
Network

290  *  Unit 4  Building Innovation
manual intervention. Asset tracking allows a company to focus on its supply chain, reduce 
theft, identify the last known user of assets, and automate maintenance routines. Active and 
semi-passive tags are useful for tracking high-value goods that need to be scanned over long 
ranges, such as railway cars on a track. The cost of active and semi-passive RFID tags is sig­
nificant; hence, low-cost items typically use passive RFID tags.
The RFID accelerometer is a device that measures the acceleration (the rate of change of 
velocity) of an item and is used to track truck speeds or taxi cab speeds. Chipless RFID tags 
use plastic or conductive polymers instead of silicon-based microchips, allowing them to be 
washed or exposed to water without damaging the chip. Examples of the innovative uses of 
RFID include:
	■	 RFID chips injected under the skin of animals using a syringe can help ranchers meet regu­
lations, track wild animals for ecological studies, and return lost pets to their owners.
	■	 Retail stores use RFID to track and monitor inventory. Hospitals and pharmaceutical com­
panies meet government regulations and standards with RFID. Even local libraries are 
using RFID to control theft and speed up the checkout process.
	■	 Car manufacturers install RFID antitheft systems. Toll roads use RFID to collect payments 
from passing cars.
	■	 Hospitals track patients’, doctors’, and nurses’ locations to facilitate emergency situations 
and ensure safety. RFID also tracks equipment location to ensure quick response times dur­
ing an emergency.
	■	 American Express and MasterCard use RFID for automatic payments.
	■	 Walmart and other large retailers use RFID to maintain inventory, stop shoplifting, and 
speed customer checkout processes.10
GLOBAL POSITIONING SYSTEM (GPS)
A global positioning system (GPS) is a satellite-based navigation system providing extremely 
accurate position, time, and speed information. The U.S. Department of Defense developed 
the technology in the early 1970s and later made it available to the public. GPS uses 24 global 
satellites that orbit Earth, sending signals to a receiver that can communicate with three or 
four satellites at a time. A GPS receiver can be a separate unit connected to a mobile device 
using cable or wireless technology such as Bluetooth, or it can be included in devices such as 
mobile phones or vehicle navigation systems. Automatic vehicle location (AVL) uses GPS 
tracking to track vehicles. AVL systems use a GPS receiver in the vehicle that links to a 
control center. Garmin is one of the more popular manufacturers of GPS tracking systems, 
offering vehicle tracking, phone and laptop integration, and hiker navigation for water and air.
The satellites broadcast signals constantly, while the receiver measures the time it takes 
for the signals to reach it. This measurement, which uses the speed of the signal to determine 
the distance, is taken from three distinct satellites to provide precise location information. 
The time measurements depend on high-powered clocks on each satellite and must be pre­
cise, because an error of one-thousandth of a second can result in a location variation of more 
than 200 miles. GPS can produce very accurate results, typically within 5 to 50 feet of the 
actual location (military versions have higher accuracy). GPS also provides latitude, longi­
tude, and elevation information. Latitude represents a north/south measurement of position. 
Longitude represents an east/west measurement of position. Geocache is a GPS technology 
adventure game that posts the longitude and latitude location for an item on the Internet for 
users to find. GPS users find the geocache and typically sign a guest book or take an item and 
leave an item for the next adventure players to find. Caches are often placed in locations that 
are interesting or challenging for people to discover. A geocoin, a round, coin-sized object, is 
uniquely numbered and hidden in geocache. Geocoins can also be shaped to match a theme 
such as the state of Colorado or a birthday party hat. Geocoins are often decorative or com­
memorative, making them collectible and highly valuable for technology adventures.

	
Chapter 16  Integrating Wireless Technology in Business   *  291
GPS applications are in every kind of company vehicle these days—from police cars to 
bulldozers, from dump trucks to mayoral limousines. Emergency response systems use GPS 
to track each of their vehicles and so dispatch those closest to the scene of an accident. If a 
vehicle is missing, its GPS locator can help locate it. Estimated time of arrival (ETA) is the 
time of day of an expected arrival at a certain destination and is typically used for navigation 
applications. Estimated time enroute (ETE) is the time remaining before reaching a destina­
tion using the present speed and is typically used for navigation applications.
GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEMS (GIS)
GPS provides the foundation for geographic information systems. A geographic information
system (GIS) stores, views, and analyzes geographic data creating multidimensional charts 
or maps. For example, GIS are monitoring global warming by measuring the speed of gla­
ciers melting in Canada, Greenland, and Antarctica. Cartography is the science and art of 
making an illustrated map or chart. GIS allows users to interpret, analyze, and visualize data 
in different ways that reveal patterns and trends in the form of reports, charts, and maps. 
Edge matching (warping, rubber sheeting) occurs when paper maps are laid edge to edge 
and items that run across maps but do not match are reconfigured to match. Edge matching is 
a critical component of creating a GIS database because map misalignments occur frequently 
for many reasons, including survey error and cartographic errors. GIS map automation links 
business assets to a centralized system where they can be tracked and monitored over time.
Spatial data (geospatial data or geographic information) identifies the geographic 
location of features and boundaries on Earth, such as natural or constructed features, 
oceans, and more. Spatial data can be mapped and is stored as coordinates and topology. A 
GIS accesses, manipulates, and analyzes spatial data. Geocoding in spatial databases is a 
coding process that assigns a digital map feature to an attribute that serves as a unique ID 
(tract number, node number) or classification (soil type, zoning category). GIS profession­
als are certified in geocoding practices to ensure industry standards are met when classify­
ing spatial data.
Companies that deal in transportation combine GISs with database and GPS technology. 
Airlines and shipping companies can plot routes with up-to-the-second information about the 
location of all their transport vehicles. Hospitals can locate their medical staff with GIS and 
sensors that pick up transmissions from ID badges. Automobiles have GPSs linked to GIS 
maps that display the car’s location and driving directions on a dashboard screen. GM offers 
the OnStar system, which sends a continuous stream of information to the OnStar center 
about the car’s exact location.
Some mobile phone providers combine GPS and GIS capabilities so they can locate users 
within a geographical area about the size of a tennis court to assist emergency services such 
as 911. Farmers can use GIS to map and analyze fields, telling them where to apply the proper 
amounts of seed, fertilizer, and herbicides.
A GIS can find the closest gas station or bank or determine the best way to get to a particu­
lar location. But it is also good at finding patterns, such as finding the most feasible location 
to hold a conference according to where the majority of a company’s customers live and work. 
GIS can present this information in a visually effective way (see Figure 16.10).
A GIS can provide information and insight to both mobile users and people at fixed loca­
tions. Google Earth combines satellite imagery, geographic data, and Google’s search capa­
bilities to create a virtual globe that users can download to a computer or mobile device. 
Not only does this provide useful business benefits, but it also allows for many educational 
opportunities. Instead of just talking about the Grand Canyon, an instructor can use Google 
Earth to view that region.
GPS and GIS both utilize location-based services (LBS), applications that use location 
information to provide a service. LBS is designed to give mobile users instant access to per­
sonalized local content and range from 911 applications to buddy finders (“Let me know 
when my friend is within 1,000 feet”) to games (treasure hunts) to location-based advertising 

292  *  Unit 4  Building Innovation
(“Visit the Starbucks on the corner and get $1.00 off a latte”). Many LBS applications com­
plement GPS and GIS, such as:
	■	 Emergency services
	■	 Field service management
	■	 Find-it services
	■	 Mapping
	■	 Navigation
	■	 Tracking assets
	■	 Traffic information
	■	 Vehicle location
	■	 Weather information
	■	 Wireless advertising11
Just as Facebook and Twitter helped fuel the Web 2.0 revolution, applications such as 
Foursquare, Gowalla, and Loopt are bringing attention to LBS. Each application is a mobile 
phone service that helps social media users find their friends’ locations. Facebook and Twitter 
have added location-based services to complement their applications.
	1.	 What are the three different wireless business applications? How can Slack use each to provide 
value to its customers?
	2.	 What are the mobility benefits and challenges facing Slack?
O P E N I N G  C A S E  ST U DY  Q U E ST I O N S
  GRAPHICAL INFORMATION SYSTEMS USES  
  Finding what is nearby  
 Given a speciﬁc location, the GIS ﬁnds sources within a deﬁned radius. These 
might be entertainment venues, medical facilities, restaurants, or gas stations. 
Users can also use GIS to locate vendors that sell a speciﬁc item they want 
and get the results as a map of the surrounding area or an address. 
  Routing information  
 Once users have an idea where they want to go, GIS can provide directions to 
get there using either a map or step-by-step instructions. Routing information 
can be especially helpful when combined with search services. 
  Sending information alerts   Users may want to be notiﬁed when information relevant to them becomes 
available near their location. A commuter might want to know that a section 
of the highway has traﬃc congestion, or a shopper might want to be notiﬁed 
when a favorite store is having a sale on a certain item. 
  Mapping densities  
 GIS can map population and event densities based on a standard area unit, 
such as square miles, making it easy to see distributions and concentrations. 
Police can map crime incidents to determine where additional patrolling is 
required, and stores can map customer orders to identify ideal delivery routes. 
  Mapping quantities  
 Users can map quantities to ﬁnd out where the most or least of a feature may 
be. For example, someone interested in opening a specialty coﬀee shop can 
determine how many others are already in the area, and city planners can 
determine where to build more parks. 
FIGURE 16.10
GIS Uses.

	
Chapter 16  Integrating Wireless Technology in Business   *  293
Square is a little device that magically transforms a smartphone into a credit/debit card machine. It’s 
changing the game for electronic payments and the way we traditionally send and receive money. 
Square allows you to buy, sell, and send money by using any Apple or Android mobile device. With 
three free mobile apps—Square Register, Square Wallet, and Square Cash—Square is designed to 
help small businesses and sole proprietorship’s accept credit card payments and help consumers 
transition to a cashless lifestyle. Here is how Square works:
■	
Request your free reader: Sign up and Square will send you a free Square Reader to take pay­
ments on an iPhone, iPad, or Android. Activate your account and process payments in minutes.
■	
Download Square Register: Square Register is a free app that works with Square Reader to turn 
a smartphone or an iPad into a mobile point of sale. Payments, sales reports, and hardware—
Register does all this and more.
■	
Go places. Sell things: Plug in Square Reader, sign in to Square Register, and start swiping. Send 
receipts via email or text message. Request more free Square Readers so staff can sell for your 
business, too.
Square is amazing technology, but the question you have to ask is whether Square is really chang­
ing how we process payments. If you own a small business and could traditionally only accept cash, 
then the answer is yes! Just think of the farmer’s markets, street fair vendors, or flea market. Unfor­
tunately, small business does not always equate to large profits. These types of customers are low 
volume and minimal transactions, which equate to low profits for a payment processor like Square, 
which makes its money by taking 2.75 percent of the total purchase. If you purchase $100 worth of 
t-shirts at the local street fair with your Visa card, Square collects $2.75 and has to pay Visa $2.20, 
making a mere $0.55. Square has to run its business on these profits, including expenses for market­
ing, sales, customer service, employees, accounting, and so on. For a viable business, Square needs 
to scale its way to massive payment volumes, and with PayPal and Intuit quickly building card readers 
of their own, the competition is growing.12
Questions
	1.	 Would you categorize Square as a disruptive technology?
	2.	 How is Square using wireless networks to gain a competitive advantage?
	3.	 What type of network is Square using?  What happens to Square’s business if the network is 
hacked?
	4.	 What can Square do to maintain its competitive advantage and become more profitable?
	5.	 If you were given $1 million to invest in Square, would you do it? Why or why not?
Chapter Sixteen Case:  Square

294  *  Unit 4  Building Innovation
16.1.	 Describe the different wireless network categories.
There are four types of wireless networks—PAN, WLAN, WMAN, and WWAN. A PAN provides com­
munication over a short distance that is intended for use with devices that are owned and operated 
by a single user. A WLAN is a local area network that uses radio signals to transmit and receive 
data over distances of a few hundred feet. A WMAN is a metropolitan area network that uses radio 
signals to transmit and receive data, and a WWAN is a wide area network that uses radio signals to 
transmit and receive data.
16.2.	Explain the different wireless network business applications.
Mobile and wireless business applications and services are using satellite technologies. These tech­
nologies are GPS, GIS, and LBS. GPS is a satellite-based navigation system providing extremely accu­
rate position, time, and speed information. GIS is location information that can be shown on a map. 
LBSs are applications that use location information to provide a service that both GPS and GIS use.
L E A R N I N G  O U T C O M E  R E V I E W
	 1.	What is a personal area network? 
	 2.	How does Wi-Fi work? 
	 3.	What are GIS, GPS, and LBS? How are businesses using these applications to compete? 
	 4.	What is RFID and how could it help a large retailer track inventory? 
	 5.	What are the advantages of mobile business? 
	 6.	Why would a company want to implement mobile device management?
	 7.	What is IT consumerization and how does it impact an organization?
	 8.	Why would a company want to use VoLTE?
	 9.	What is the difference between WEP and WPA?
	10.	How could hackers use war chalking and war driving?
R E V I E W  Q U E S T I O N S
1. Sports Sensors
A sensor is a device that detects or measures a physical property such as heat, light, sound, or 
motion and records, indicates, or otherwise reacts to it in a particular way. With wireless apps and 
sensors, a number of new, high-tech tools for amateurs provide coach-quality feedback to athletes 
of all levels, including:
■	
Tennis (Sony): Sony recently created a tennis-tracking device and app that will let users col­
lect the kind of game-play data that used to be available only to professionals.
■	
Golf (Swingbyte): The ultralight sensor clips to the club and monitors speed, acceleration, 
arc, and other statistics.
M A K I N G  B U S I N E S S  D E C I S I O N S

	
Chapter 16  Integrating Wireless Technology in Business   *  295
■	
Hockey (Fwd Powershot): The ultralight sensor fits into the handle end of the stick and mea­
sures swing speed, angle, and acceleration.
■	
Basketball (94Fifty Smart Sensor): Embedded in a standard ball, the sensor tracks shot 
speed, arc, and backspin plus dribble speed and force.
■	
Baseball (Zepp): Stuck to the knob of the bat, the sensor tracks the speed and plane of a 
swing and the angle of impact.
In a group, create a product that takes advantage of sensors, including what the sensor would mea­
sure and how it would deliver the feedback to the user.
2.	 Wi-Fi for Fishes
Not too long ago, the Seattle Aquarium decided it needed to take a deep dive into its network infra­
structure and deploy wireless across its facilities. Now, a year and half in, the aquarium has found 
Wi-Fi to be a tool that not only lets it serve visitors in unique ways but enriches the exchanges pos­
sible between staff members and the community, says Pam Lamon, the aquarium’s web and social 
media coordinator. For instance, there are long stretches when Umi, the aquarium’s 40-pound giant 
Pacific octopus, doesn’t move at all. Now, staff members armed with tablets can roam around the 
exhibit showing visitors videos of Umi feeding while they field questions.
Wireless even lets the aquarium interact with people who can’t visit in person. For instance, dur­
ing a recent Google + Hangout on Air, a young boy from an East Coast school asked an aquarium 
diver how many fish were swimming in the tank with her. The diver, wearing a wetsuit and a face­
mask with a microphone and speaker, began pointing out fish. “One, two, three, four, five, six, 
seven,” she counted off, before giving up and telling him there were 500, give or take a few. “It’s a 
little bit hard to know for sure because they just don’t hold still while we count them,” she joked.
The Seattle Aquarium is far from alone among businesses and organizations that are tapping into 
wireless to expand or improve services. As wireless has morphed from a pleasant perk to a neces­
sity for employees and clients across industries, many businesses are finding they can no longer 
make do without wireless or with limited Wi-Fi services. Today, not only is there incentive to find 
better solutions, but companies have access to more sophisticated equipment to help them pinpoint 
network problems. From next-generation access points to cloud-based management systems, wire­
less tools can provide expanded capabilities, are easy to manage, and are available in a range of 
prices.
In a group, choose a business in your area that could benefit from wireless technology, such as 
the Seattle Aquarium, and create a plan detailing the additional services it could offer its customers.
3.	 Snapping a Theftie
Has your smartphone ever been stolen? If so, you are not alone; millions of cell phones are stolen 
every year and the numbers are increasing. Of course, every good entrepreneur can spot an oppor­
tunity, and a new antitheft app is one step ahead of criminals who are targeting smartphones.
Lookout is among the latest additions to the growing antitheft industry, and the app features 
some smart ways of helping you get one step ahead of thieves. A smartphone’s front-facing camera 
is often regarded as merely a portal to endless selfie photographs. But Lookout puts the camera 
to good use by capturing a photo of you—or of any would-be thief—when someone inputs your 
phone’s password incorrectly three times. That photo, or theftie, is instantly emailed to the phone’s 
owner, along with the device’s approximate location. The antitheft app is free to download, but this 
handy photo feature is not available on iPhones due to Apple restrictions and comes with an annual 
charge of $30.
Lookout’s team has been adding new features to the app’s alerts, based on the methods thieves 
use to steal phones undetected. The app also will send emails to its owner if anyone attempts to 
remove the phone’s SIM card, enables Airplane mode, or turns off the device. From that point, the 
owner can choose to lock or wipe the phone remotely.

296  *  Unit 4  Building Innovation
Do you agree that antitheft apps are smart business? Are any ethical issues involved in taking 
thefties? How would you feel if company security policy required you to install Lookout on your cell 
phone? If you could add a new feature to Lookout, how would it work and what would it do to deter 
smartphone theft?
4.	 Pandora Makes Users’ Music Public
Pandora, the online music company, lets users create personalized music stations that they can 
stream online, but it also makes those stations viewable to anyone on the Internet who knows 
someone’s email address. For example, someone with the email address sergey@google.com likes 
a band called Rise Against. Using the email address of Steve Jobs implies he likes country music 
legend Willie Nelson and jazz trumpeter Chris Botti.Do you view your music selection as private or 
public information? How could someone use this information unethically? Do you see this as a threat 
for Pandora? Do you think customers will stop using the service? What can Pandora do to ensure 
customer privacy?
Do you view your music selection as private or public information? How could someone use this 
information unethically? Do you see this as a threat for Pandora? Do you think customers will stop 
using the service? What can Pandora do to ensure customer privacy?
5.	 Cars Hacked
Who would have thought that a car could be hacked? But that is exactly what happened in Austin, 
Texas. About a hundred cars were broken into, not by the usual method of either picking the lock or 
smashing a window but instead through a Wi-Fi connection. A local dealership, where all the cars 
were purchased, had installed a Wi-Fi-enabled black box under the dashboard that could disable 
the car and set off the horn if the owner did not make payments. However, in this case, the owners 
were not in arrears but, rather, the victims of a recently laid-off employee at the dealership who was 
seeking revenge by using the web-based system to disable the cars one by one. After someone at 
the dealership figured out the cars had been hacked, the password that allowed authorization to the 
black boxes was quickly changed.
Is the black box a good idea? Do you consider this an ethical business practice? If you had bought 
a car with a black box, would you have had it removed? How many customers do you think will con­
sider buying another car from that dealership?
6.	 Google TV
As more Internet-related services move beyond delivering content just to the computer, Google 
wants to bring that content into the living room. In a joint venture, Google is teaming with Sony and 
Intel to introduce IPTV services either through new Internet-accessible TVs or a new set-top box 
allowing consumers to search for content, browse the web, view photo albums, and more. Google 
would provide the needed software along with advertisement opportunities, Sony would manufac­
ture the new TVs, and Intel would supply the processors that make it all happen. Although consum­
ers can already watch TV shows on their computers as well as on a TV, porting Internet content to 
an HDTV screen seems like the next logical step, which is the magic of IPTV. However, this is a very 
crowded playing field with many firms competing for the living room space. Google is competing 
with the likes of VUDU, TiVo, Yahoo! Connected TV, Netflix, Roku, Rovi, DivX, Apple TV, Xbox 360, 
Boxee, CinemaNow, Popbox, and many others, with no clear winner, at least not at the moment. 
Brainstorm the advantages and disadvantages associated with IPTV. Do you think Google TV will be 
successful? Why or why not?
7.	 Shipment Routes
Mary Conzachi works in the logistics department for Loadstar, a large trucking company and barge 
operator in the Midwest. She has looked into a variety of systems to keep track of the location of 
trucks and barges so that the company can route shipments better and answer customer inquiries 

	
Chapter 16  Integrating Wireless Technology in Business   *  297
faster. Conzachi’s major concern is with the trucks; the barges have commodities and take weeks to 
move something. She states that it is much harder to keep up with trucking. She needs to know the 
exact location of the truck at any given time. You have been hired to assist her in recommending a 
solution. What solution would you recommend? Why?
8.	 Google Collected Public Wi-Fi Data . . . By Mistake
Google has admitted to collecting data sent over unsecured Wi-Fi networks mistakenly, using its 
Street View cars. Google photographs homes from public streets, using a fleet of company cars. 
Google said it was trying to gather information about the location, strength, and configuration of 
Wi-Fi networks so it could improve the accuracy of location-based services such as Google Maps 
and driving directions. However, in the process, the cars were also collecting snippets of emails and 
other Internet activity from unprotected wireless networks in the homes. Google blamed this on a 
programming error, temporarily halted the Street View data collection, and announced it would stop 
collecting all Wi-Fi data. Do you believe this was a mistake by Google? If home users do not protect 
their wireless networks, what is to stop a neighbor from collecting the same information? Who is 
really at fault here?
U N I T  S U M M A R Y
I
n a remarkably short time, the Internet has grown from a virtual playground into a vital, sophis­
ticated medium for business, more specifically, ebusiness. Online consumers are flooding to the 
Internet, and they come with very high expectations and a degree of control that they did not 
have with traditional bricks-and-mortar companies. The enticement of doing business online must be 
strengthened by the understanding that, to succeed online, businesses will have to be able to deliver 
a satisfying and consistent customer experience, building brand loyalty and guaranteeing high rates 
of customer retention.
Strategic alliances enable businesses to gain competitive advantage(s) through access to a part­
ner’s resources, including markets, technologies, and people. Teaming up with another business adds 
complementary resources and capabilities, enabling participants to grow and expand more quickly 
and efficiently.
K E Y  T E R M S
Access point (AP)  283
Active RFID tags  289
Adwords  257 
Applet  244
Application programming 
interface (API)  272
Asset tracking  289
Asynchronous 
communication  269
Automatic vehicle location 
(AVL)  290
Bluetooth  282
Blog  271 
Business model  255
Business-to-business (B2B)  255
Business-to-consumer (B2C)  256
Cartography  291
Chipless RFID tags  290
Clickstream data  248
Closed source  266
Collaboration system  267
Collective intelligence  267
Consumer-to-business (C2B)  256
Consumer-to-consumer (C2C)  256
Content management system 
(CMS)  260
Crowdfunding  269
Crowdsourcing  268
Cybermediation  248
Digital Darwinism  242
Disintermediation  247
Disruptive technology  242
Domain name hosting  244
Ebusiness  245
Ebusiness model  255
Ecommerce  245
Edge matching (warping, rubber 
sheeting)  291
Egovernment  274
Eshop (estore or etailer)  256
Estimated time enroute (ETE)  291
Estimated time of arrival (ETA)  291

298  *  Unit 4  Building Innovation
Explicit knowledge  268
Ezine  272
Folksonomy  270
Geocache  290
Geocoding  291
Geocoin  290
Geographic information system 
(GIS)  291
GIS map automation  291
Global positioning system 
(GPS)  290
Hashtag  264
Hotspots  283
HTML 5  244
Hypertext markup language 
(HTML)  244
Hypertext transport protocol 
(HTTP)  244
IEEE 802.11n (or Wireless-N)
  283
Information architecture  260
Information reach  246
Information richness  246
Instant messaging (sometimes 
called IM or IMing)  271
Institute of Electrical and 
Electronics Engineers 
(IEEE)  283
Interactivity  248
Intermediaries  247
Internet  244
Internet Corporation for 
Assigned Names and Number 
(ICANN)  244
Internet service provider (ISP)  259
IT consumerization  288
Knowledge management (KM)  267
Knowledge management system 
(KMS)  267
Latitude  290
Location-based services (LBS)  291
Longitude  290
Long tail  246
Mashup  272
Mashup editor  272
Mass customization  246
Microblogging  271
Mobile application management 
(MAM)  288
Mobile business (mcommerce, 
mbusiness)  274
Mobile device management 
(MDM)   288
Multiple-in/multiple-out (MIMO) 
technology  283
Native advertising  267
Network effect  272
Open source  266
Open system  266
Paradigm shift  245
Passive RFID tags  289
Pay-per-call  257
Pay-per-click  257
Pay-per-conversion  257
Personal area network (PAN)  282
Personalization  246
Podcasting  259
Real Simple Syndication (RSS)  271
Real-time communication  259
Reintermediation  247
Reputation system  267
RFID accelerometer  290
RFID reader (RFID 
interrogator)  289
RFID tag  289
Satellite  287
Search engine  257
Search engine optimization 
(SEO)  257
Search engine ranking  257
Selfie  271
Semantic web  274
Semi-passive RFID tags  289
Smartphone  286
Social bookmarking  270
Social graph  269
Social media  269
Social network  267
Social networking  267
Social networking analysis 
(SNA)  267
Social tagging  270
Source code  266
Spatial data (geospatial data or 
geographic information)  291
Streaming  286
Sustaining technology  242
Synchronous 
communication  269
Tacit knowledge  268
Tags  270
Taxonomy  260
Universal resource locator 
(URL)  244
User-contributed content (also 
referred to as user-generated 
content)  267
Videoconference  259
Voice over LTE (VoLTE)  286
War chalking  288
War driving  288
Web 1.0 (or Business 1.0)  266
Web 2.0 (or Business 2.0)  266
Web browser  244
Web conferencing (webinar)  260
Website bookmark  270
Wi-Fi infrastructure  283
Wi-Fi protected access 
(WAP)  288
Wiki  272
Wired equivalent privacy 
(WEP)  287
Wireless access point (WAP)  283
Wireless fidelity (Wi-Fi)  283
Wireless LAN (WLAN)  283
Wireless MAN (WMAN)  284
Wireless WAN (WWAN)  285
Worldwide Interoperability 
for Microwave Access 
(WiMAX)  284
World Wide Web (WWW)  244
World Wide Web Consortium 
(W3C)  244

	
Chapter 16  Integrating Wireless Technology in Business   *  299
U N I T  C L O S I N G  C A S E  O N E
© Sean Gallup/Getty Images
BitCoin
Bitcoin is a new currency that was created in 2009 by an unknown person using the alias Satoshi 
Nakamoto. Bitcoin isn’t just a currency, like dollars or euros or yen. It’s a way of making payments, 
like PayPal or the Visa credit card network. Bitcoins can be used to buy merchandise anonymously. 
Transactions are made with no middle men—meaning no banks, and bitcoins are not tied to any coun­
try or subject to regulation! There are no transaction fees and no need to give your real name. More 
merchants are beginning to accept them: You can buy webhosting services, pizza, or even manicures. 
There’s now a Bitcoin ATM in Vancouver and one planned for Hong Kong.
It’s not clear whether Bitcoin’s inventor, who disappeared from the Internet in mid-2010, was pro­
phetic enough to imagine what happened last year. The idea was to create a currency whose value 
couldn’t be watered down by some central authority such as the Federal Reserve. The value of Bitcoin 
exploded, with the price of an individual coin jumping from $100 in July to $200 in October to more 
than $1,000 as of May 2014.
About five years ago, using the pseudonym Satoshi Nakamoto, an anonymous computer program­
mer or group of programmers built the Bitcoin software system and released it on the Internet. This 
was a system that was designed to run across a large network of machines—called Bitcoin miners—
and anyone on Earth could operate one of these machines. This distributed software seeded the 
new currency, creating a small number of Bitcoins. Basically, Bitcoins are just long digital addresses 
and balances, stored in an online ledger called the blockchain. But the system was also designed so 
that the currency would slowly expand and encourage people to operate Bitcoin miners to keep the 
system itself growing.
When the system creates new Bitcoins, it gives them to the miners. Miners keep track of all the 
Bitcoin transactions and add them to the blockchain ledger; in exchange, they get the privilege of, 
every so often, awarding themselves a few extra Bitcoins. Right now, 25 Bitcoins are paid out to the 
world’s miners about six times per hour, but that rate changes over time.
Why do these Bitcoins have value? It’s pretty simple. They’ve evolved into something that a lot of 
people want—like a dollar or a yen or the cowry shells swapped for goods on the coast of Africa over 
3,000 years ago—and they’re in limited supply. Although the system continues to crank out Bitcoins, 
this will stop when it reaches 21 million, which was designed to happen in about the year 2140.
Bitcoins are stored in a digital wallet, a kind of virtual bank account that allows users to send or 
receive bitcoins, pay for goods, or save their money. Although each Bitcoin transaction is recorded 
in a public log, names of buyers and sellers are never revealed—only their wallet IDs. Although 
that keeps Bitcoin users’ transactions private, it also lets them buy or sell anything without easily 
tracing it back to them. That’s why it has become the currency of choice for people online buying 
drugs or other illicit activities. No one knows what will become of Bitcoin. It is mostly unregulated, 
but that could change. Governments are concerned about taxation and their lack of control over the 
currency.13
Source: BTC Keychain/Flickr/
CC-BY-2.0
Source: TaxCredits.net/Flickr/
CC-BY-2.0

300  *  Unit 4  Building Innovation
Questions
1.	 Do you consider Bitcoin a form of disruptive or sustaining technology? 
2.	 How can web-based businesses benefit from Bitcoin? 
3.	 Describe the revenue model for how miners receive Bitcoin currency. 
4.	 Why are governments wary of Bitcoin? 
5.	 What are the security issues surrounding Bitcoin?
Disrupting the Taxi: Uber
Ray Markovich started driving a taxi in Chicago three years ago after shutting his struggling wireless 
phone store. Driving a cab wasn’t particularly gratifying or lucrative—he had to pay $400 a week just 
to lease his white 2011 Ford Escape. It was predictable if monotonous work. Well, there’s nothing 
monotonous about it now. In June, Markovich, a thin, well-dressed man with short brown hair and 
spots of gray in his mustache and goatee, walked into the local office of Uber, the San Francisco–
based taxi technology start-up. Uber put him through an hour of orientation, gave him a free iPhone 
that carries its car dispatch app and some gear to mount it on the windshield, and sent him on his way.
Since then, Markovich has had to dodge flak from traditional cabbies who complain that they can 
no longer pick up riders in the city’s tonier neighborhoods, and he’s receiving a constant flood of 
emails from Uber itself, offering steep discounts on new cars and other perks to secure his loyalty. 
At the same time, he has increased his earnings by about 20 percent and says he’s simply evolving 
along with his customers. “No one under the age of 40 with a smart phone is going out and getting a 
cab anymore,” says Markovich. “I say if you can’t beat ’em, join ’em.”
A battle for the future of transportation is being waged outside our offices and homes. Uber and a 
growing collection of well-funded start-ups, such as the ride-sharing service Lyft, are trying to make 
getting a taxi as easy as booking a reservation on OpenTable or checking a price on Amazon—just 
another thing you do with your smartphone. Flush with Silicon Valley venture capital, these com­
panies have an even grander ambition: They want to make owning a car completely unnecessary. 
They’re battling each other, city regulators, entrenched taxi interests, and critics who claim they are 
succeeding only because they run roughshod over laws meant to protect public safety. “Being out in 
front of the taxi industry, putting a bull’s-eye on our back, has not been easy,” says Travis Kalanick, the 
37-year-old chief executive of Uber. “The taxi industry has been ripe for disruption for decades. But 
only technology has allowed it to really kick in.”
Nearly four years ago, Uber introduced the idea of allowing passengers to book the nearest town 
car by smartphone and then track the vehicle on a map as it approaches their location. After the 
U N I T  C L O S I N G  C A S E  T W O
© FocusTechnology/Alamy
© fotog/Getty Images RF
© Ronnie Kaufman/Blend Images LLC RF

	
Chapter 16  Integrating Wireless Technology in Business   *  301
ride, the service automatically compensates the driver from the customer’s preloaded credit card—no 
awkward tipping required. It’s a simple experience and a much more pleasant way to get a ride than 
stepping onto a busy street and waving at oncoming traffic.
Uber has raised $307 million from a group of backers that include Google Ventures, Google’s 
investment arm, and Jeff Bezos, the founder of Amazon. It operates in 270 ­cities around the world 
and was on track to book more than $1 billion annually in rides in 2013, according to financial informa­
tion that leaked to the gossip website Valleywag last November. In February alone, Uber expanded 
to Dubai; Honolulu; Lyon; Manila; Milwaukee; Pittsburgh; Tucson, Arizona; and Durban, South Africa.
In the process, Uber has managed to become one of the most loved and hated start-ups of the 
smartphone age. Its customers rave about the reliability and speed of the service even as they bit­
terly complain about so-called surge pricing, the elevated rates Uber charges during hours of high 
demand. Uber has also been blocked from operating in several markets by regulators out to protect 
the interests of consumers or entrenched incumbents, depending on whom you ask. After customers 
complained about the ban in Austin, Texas, the Austin City Council adopted a regulatory structure for 
ride sharing, enabling Uber to operate in the city. In Boston and Chicago, taxi operators have sued 
their cities for allowing unregulated companies to devalue million-dollar operating permits. Things 
grew especially heated recently in Paris when incensed taxi drivers shut down highway exits to the 
main airports and gridlocked city traffic.
Kalanick calls the cab industry a “protectionist scheme.” He says these protests are not about the 
drivers but cab companies “that would prefer not to compete at all and like things the way they are.”
His opponents are equally critical. They accuse Uber of risking passengers’ lives by putting 
untested drivers on the road, offering questionable insurance, and lowering prices as part of a long-
term conspiracy to kill the competition, among other alleged transgressions. Fueling the anti-Uber 
cause is the tragic case of a 6-year-old girl in San Francisco who was struck and killed by an Uber 
driver. “Would you feel comfortable if you had a 21-year-old daughter living alone in the city, using a 
smart phone app to get in a vehicle for hire, and that vehicle ends up being a 2001 Chevy Astro van 
with 300,000 miles on it?” says Trevor Johnson, one of the directors of the San Francisco Cab Driv­
ers Association. “I’ve made it my personal mission to make it as difficult as possible for these guys to 
operate.”
Kalanick calls himself the perfect man for the job of liberating drivers and riders. His previous com­
pany, video-streaming start-up Red Swoosh, was well ahead of its time, and Kalanick limped along for 
years, taking no salary before selling it to Akamai Technologies in 2007 for a modest sum. “Imagine 
hearing ‘no’ a hundred times a day for six years straight,” he says. “When you go through an experi­
ence like that, you are sort of a hardened veteran. You only persevere if you are really hard-core and 
fight for what you believe in.”14
Questions
1.	 Identify Uber’s ebusiness model and explain how it is disruptive.
2.	 Explain why some market segments are not included in Uber’s business model.
3.	 List the ways Uber is using collaboration and wireless technologies to improve its competitive 
advantage in the taxi market. 
4.	 Describe the different types of networks Uber is using to run its business. 
5.	 Develop a use for LBS that Uber customers can benefit from using when looking for a taxi. 
6.	 Evaluate the security dilemmas that Uber faces in using the various forms of wireless technology.

302  *  Unit 4  Building Innovation
1. Analyzing Website
Stars Inc. is a large clothing corporation that specializes in reselling clothes worn by celebrities. 
The company’s four websites generate 75 percent of its sales. The remaining 25 percent of sales 
occur directly through the company’s warehouse. You have recently been hired as the director of 
sales. The only information you can find about the success of the four websites is displayed in the 
table below.
You decide that maintaining four websites is expensive and adds little business value. You pro­
pose consolidating to one site. Create a report detailing the business value gained by consolidat­
ing to a single website, along with your recommendation for consolidation. Be sure to include your 
website profitability analysis. Assume that, at a minimum, 10 percent of hits result in a sale; at an 
average, 30 percent of hits result in a sale; and at a maximum, 60 percent of hits result in a sale.
A P P LY  Y O U R  K N O W L E D G E
Website
Classic
Contemporary
New Age
Traditional
Traffic analysis
5,000 hits/day
200 hits/day
10,000 hits/day
1,000 hits/
day
Stickiness (average)
20 minutes
1 hour
20 minutes
50 minutes
Number of abandoned 
shopping carts
400/day
0/day
5,000/day
200/day
Number of unique visitors
2,000/day
100/day
8,000/day
200/day
Number of identified 
visitors
3,000/day
100/day
2,000/day
800/day
Average revenue per sale
$1,000
$1,000
$50
$1,300
2. Wiki Your Way
Wikis are web-based tools that make it easy for users to add, remove, and change online content. 
Employees at companies such as Intel, Motorola, IBM, and Sony use them for a host of tasks, from 
setting internal meeting agendas to posting documents related to new products.
Many companies rely on wikis to engage customers in ongoing discussions about products. 
Wikis for Motorola and T-Mobile handsets serve as continually updated user guides. TV networks, 
including ABC and CBS, created fan wikis that let viewers interact with each other as they unrav­
eled mysteries from such shows as Lost and CSI: Crime Scene Investigation. You would like to 
implement wikis at your new company, The Consulting Edge, a small computer consulting com­
pany catering to mid- and large-sized businesses. Answer the following questions:
■	
How can a wiki help you attract customers and grow your business?
■	
How can a wiki help your partners and employees?
■	
What ethical and security concerns would you have with the wiki?
■	
What could you do to minimize these concerns?
3. Sticky Wiki
Wiki (Hawaiian for “quick”) is software that allows users to create and edit web page content 
freely, using any web browser. The most common wiki is Wikipedia. Wikis offer a powerful yet 
flexible collaborative communication tool for developing websites. The best part of a wiki is that 
it grows and evolves by the collaborative community adding content—the owner of the wiki does 
not have to add all of the content as is typical in a standard web page.

	
Chapter 16  Integrating Wireless Technology in Business   *  303
Many sites offer free wiki software such as Socialtext, a group-editable website. As one of the 
first wiki companies, Socialtext wikis are designed for anyone who wants to accelerate team com­
munications, enable knowledge sharing better, foster collaboration, and build online communities. 
Socialtext also offers WikiWidgets, which make it easy for nontechnical business users to create 
rich, dynamic wiki content. Today, more than 3,000 organizations use Socialtext, including Syman­
tec, Nokia, IKEA, Conde Nast, Ziff-Davis, Kodak, University of Southern California, Boston College, 
and numerous others.
Create your own wiki. Wikis can address a variety of needs: student involvement, fraternities 
and sororities, group activities, sport team updates, local band highlights, and so on. Choose a 
free wiki software vendor from the Internet and create a wiki for something you are involved in 
or excited about and want to share with others. This could include a student organization; frater­
nity or sorority; academic organization; or favorite author, book, movie, band, musician, or sports 
team. If you have different wiki software you prefer, feel free to use it to create your wiki.
 4. Securing Your Home Wireless Network
These days wireless networking products are so ubiquitous and inexpensive that anyone can eas­
ily build a wireless network with less than $100 worth of equipment. However, wireless networks 
are exactly that—wireless—they do not stop at walls. In fact, wireless networks often carry signals 
more than 300 feet from the wireless router. Living in an apartment, dorm, condominium, or house 
means that you might have dozens of neighbors who can access your wireless network.
It is one thing to let a neighbor borrow a lawn mower, but it is another thing to allow a neighbor 
to access a home wireless network. There are several good reasons for not sharing a home wire­
less network including:
■	
It may slow Internet performance.
■	
It allows others to view files on your computers and spread dangerous software such as 
viruses.
■	
It allows others to monitor the websites you visit, read your email and instant messages as 
they travel across the network, and copy your user names and passwords.
■	
It allows others to send spam or perform illegal activities with your Internet connection.
Securing a home wireless network is invaluable and allows you to enable security features that 
can make it difficult for uninvited guests to connect through your wireless network. Create a docu­
ment detailing all of the features you can use to secure a home wireless network.
5. Weather Bots
Warren Jackson, an engineering graduate student at the University of Pennsylvania, was not inter­
ested in the weather until he started investigating how the National Weather Service collected 
weather data. The weather service has collected most of its information using weather balloons 
that carry a device to measure items such as pressure, wind speed, and humidity. When the bal­
loon reaches about 100,000 feet and pressure causes it to pop, the device falls and lands a sub­
stantial distance from its launch point. The National Weather Service and researchers sometimes 
look for the $200 device, but of the 80,000 sent up annually, they write off many as lost.
Convinced there had to be a better way, Warren began designing a GPS-equipped robot that 
launches a parachute after the balloon pops and brings the device back down to Earth, landing it 
at a predetermined location set by the researchers. The idea is so inventive that the Penn’s Weiss 
Tech House, a university organization that encourages students to innovate and bring their ideas 
to market, awarded Warren and some fellow graduate engineering students first prize in its third 
annual PennVention Contest. Warren won $5,000 and access to expert advice on prototyping, 
legal matters, and branding.

304  *  Unit 4  Building Innovation
GPS and GIS can be used in all sorts of devices, in many different industries, for multiple pur­
poses. You want to compete, and win first prize, in the PennVention next year. Create a product, 
using a GPS or GIS, that is not currently in the market today that you will present at the fourth 
annual PennVention.
6. Wireless Networks and Streetlamps
Researchers at Harvard University and BBN Technologies have designed CitySense, a wireless 
network capable of reporting real-time sensor data across the entire city of Cambridge, Massachu­
setts. CitySense is unique because it solves a constraint on previous wireless networks—battery 
life. The network mounts each node on a municipal streetlamp, where it draws power from city 
electricity. Researchers plan to install 100 sensors on streetlamps throughout Cambridge by 2011, 
using a grant from the National Science Foundation. Each node will include an embedded PC run­
ning the Linux operating system, an 802.11 Wi-Fi interface, and weather sensors.
One of the challenges in the design was how the network would allow remote nodes to com­
municate with the central server at Harvard and BBN. CitySense will do that by letting each node 
form a mesh with its neighbors, exchanging data through multiple-hop links. This strategy allows a 
node to download software or upload sensor data to a distant server hub using a small radio with 
only a 1-kilometer range.
You are responsible for deploying a CitySense network around your city. What goals would you 
have for the system besides monitoring urban weather and pollution? What other benefits could 
a CitySense network provide? How could local businesses and citizens benefit from the network? 
What legal and ethical concerns should you understand before deploying the network? What can 
you do to protect your network and your city from these issues?
7. Free Wi-Fi in Africa
Covering Africa with free and low-cost Wi-Fi may not seem like a smart thing, but that is exactly 
what Paul English, the cofounder of travel search engine Kayak.com, plans to do. English has cre­
ated a hybrid nonprofit/for-profit company, JoinAfrica, to explore the creation of two tiers of Wi-Fi 
access in Africa. The first tier will be free and offer basic email service (from Gmail, Yahoo!, etc.) 
and web browsing (Wikipedia, BBC, etc.). The second tier will be fee-based and offer additional 
capabilities, including audio, video, and high-quality images.
Although many countries in Africa struggle to have proper drinking water or even efficient 
electrical power, English and the JoinAfrica initiative believe having access to the Internet is just 
as important. JoinAfrica will work with for-profit telecommunication companies in Africa to first 
branch out with existing connections in villages, providing residents with the first-tier services, and 
residents can pay money to upgrade to the second tier. More bandwidth-intensive services such 
as streaming video and pornography will be throttled to ensure a basic level of service for all as 
the networks grow.
■	
List 10 ways wireless access could hurt remote villages in Africa.
■	
What other infrastructure requirements will JoinAfrica need to implement to ensure the proj­
ect’s success?
■	
How will changes in technology over the next decade affect the JoinAfrica project?
■	
What types of security and ethical issues will JoinAfrica face?
■	
If you were given $1 million, would you invest it in JoinAfrica?
8. Never Run with Your iPod
Jennifer Goebel was disqualified from her first-place spot in the Lakefront Marathon in Milwaukee 
after race officials spotted her using an iPod. A controversial 2007 rule banned portable music 
devices by all U.S. Track and Field participants because music could give a runner a competitive

	
Chapter 16  Integrating Wireless Technology in Business   *  305
 advantage and cause safety issues if the runner can’t hear announcements. The officials for the 
Lakefront Marathon took action after viewing online photos of Goebel using her iPod; ironically, 
the photos were posted by Goeble herself on her own website.
Do you agree with the USTAF’s decision to disqualify Jennifer Goebel? How could an iPod 
give a runner a competitive advantage? With so many wireless devices entering the market, it is 
almost impossible to keep up with the surrounding laws. Do you think Goebel was aware of the 
headphone ban? In your state, what are the rules for using wireless devices while driving? Do you 
agree with these rules? How does a business keep up with the numerous, ever-changing rules 
surrounding wireless devices? What could happen to a company that fails to understand the laws 
surrounding wireless devices?
         9. Ding-a-Ling Took My $400!
A satellite television customer requested her service to be disconnected due to poor reception. 
Soon after disconnecting the service, the customer noticed a direct bank withdrawal for a $430 
early-termination fee from the satellite provider. To make matters worse, the unplanned charge 
caused hundreds of dollars in overdraft charges. To top it all off, a customer service representa­
tive apparently named Ding-a-Ling called the customer to see if she would consider reconnecting 
the service.
Never give any company your checking account number or direct access to your bank account. 
If you want to establish a good relationship with a company, give it your credit card number. When 
a relationship with a supplier turns sour, the last thing you want is for that company to have direct 
access to your checking account.
Do you think what the satellite provider did was ethical? What could the customer do when 
disconnecting her service to avoid this type of issue? Can credit card companies enter your bank 
account and take out as much money as you owe at any time they want? Why is it important to 
never give a supplier direct access to your business checking account?
10. 911 McNuggets
Cellular technologies have changed the way we do business, and it is hard to imagine life without 
them. There are many wonderful advantages of using wireless technologies in business, but there 
are also some serious disadvantages, like the ability to make a bad decision faster.
A woman in Florida called 911 three times after McDonald’s employees told her they were out 
of Chicken McNuggets. The woman stated that this is an emergency and if she had known they 
didn’t have any McNuggets, then she would not have given them any money. The woman said 
McDonald’s offered her a McDouble, but that she didn’t want one. The woman was cited on a 
misuse of 911 charge.
It is so easy to pick up the phone, from anywhere, at any time, and make a bad call. How many 
times do you see people making calls on their cell phones from inappropriate locations? If this 
woman had to wait in line to use a pay phone, do you think it would have given her time to calm 
down and rethink her decision? With technology and the ability to communicate at our fingertips, 
do you agree that it is easier than ever to make a bad decision? What can you do to ensure that 
you think before you communicate?

306  *  Unit 4  Building Innovation
If you are looking for Excel projects to incorporate into your class, try any of the following to test 
your knowledge.
A Y K  A P P L I C A T I O N  P R O J E C T S
Project 
Number
Project Name
Project Type
Plug-In Focus 
Area
Project Focus
Project Skill Set
Page 
Number
  1
Financial Destiny
Excel
T2
Personal Budget
Introductory 
Formulas
AYK.4
  2
Cash Flow
Excel
T2
Cash Flow
Introductory 
Formulas
AYK.4
  3
Technology Budget
Excel
T1, T2
Hardware and 
Software
Introductory 
Formulas
AYK.4
  4
Tracking Donations
Excel
T2
Employee 
Relationships
Introductory 
Formulas
AYK.4
  5
Convert Currency
Excel
T2
Global Commerce
Introductory 
Formulas
AYK.5
  6
Cost Comparison
Excel
T2
Total Cost of 
Ownership
Introductory 
Formulas
AYK.5
  7
Time Management
Excel or 
Project
T2 or T12
Project Management
Introductory Gantt 
Charts
AYK.6
  8
Maximize Profit
Excel
T2, T4
Strategic Analysis
Intermediate 
Formulas or 
Solver
AYK.6
  9
Security Analysis
Excel
T3
Filtering Data
Intermediate 
Conditional 
Formatting, 
Autofilter, Subtotal
AYK.7
10
Gathering Data
Excel
T3
Data Analysis
Intermediate 
Conditional 
Formatting, 
PivotTable
AYK.8
11
Scanner System
Excel
T2
Strategic Analysis
Intermediate
AYK.8
12
Competitive Pricing
Excel
T2
Profit Maximization
Intermediate
AYK.9
13
Adequate Acquisitions
Excel
T2
Break-Even Analysis
Intermediate
AYK.9
24
Electronic Resumes
HTML
T9, T10, T11
Electronic Personal 
Marketing
Introductory 
Structural Tags
AYK.16
25
Gathering Feedback
Dreamweaver
T9, T10, T11
Data Collection
Intermediate 
Organization of 
Information
AYK.16


U
N
I
T
This unit provides an overview of how organizations build information systems to prepare for competing in the 
21st century. You as a business student need to know about this because information systems are the under­
lying foundation of how companies operate. A basic understanding of the principles of building information 
systems will make you a more valuable employee. You will be able to identify trouble spots early during the 
design process and make suggestions that will result in a better delivered information systems project—one 
that satisfies both you and your business.
Building an information system is analogous to constructing a house. You could sit back and let the develop­
ers do all the design work, construction, and testing with hopes that the house will satisfy your needs. However, 
participating in the house building process helps to guarantee that your needs are not only being heard, but 
also being met. It is good business practice to have direct user input steering the development of the finished 
product. The same is true for building information systems. Your knowledge of the systems development pro­
cess will allow you to participate and ensure you are building flexible enterprise architectures that support not 
only current business needs, but also your future business needs.
Have you ever dreamed of traveling to exotic cities like Paris, Tokyo, Rio de Janeiro, or Cairo? In the past, 
the closest many people ever got to working in such cities was in their dreams. Today, the situation has 
changed. Most major companies cite global expansion as a link to future growth and a recent study noted 
that 91 percent of the companies doing business globally believe it is important to send employees on assign­
ments in other countries.
If a career in global business has crossed your mind, this unit will help you understand the nature of competi­
tion in the global business world. The United States is a market of about 300 million people, but there are more 
than 6 billion potential customers in the 193 countries that make up the global market. Perhaps more interest­
ing is that approximately 75 percent of the world’s population lives in developing areas where technology, 
education, and per capita income still lag considerably behind developed (or industrialized) nations such as the 
United States. Developing countries are still a largely untapped market.
You, the business student, should be familiar with the potential of global business, including its many ben­
efits and challenges. The demand for students with training in global business is almost certain to grow as the 
number of businesses competing in global markets increases.
W h a t ’ s  i n  I T  f o r  M e ?
5
Transforming 
Organizations

U N I T  F I V E  O P E N I N G  C A S E
Gamer Delight
It is a dream come true when you can make an incredible salary doing what you love and that is 
exactly what is happening in the gaming industry.  To the gamer’s delight profitable careers can 
be found for people with design, development, and programming skills.  Video programmers 
are finding success in technology companies, marketing corporations, advertising agencies, and 
video game development companies. In fact, video games are a $30 billion industry in the U.S., 
especially as more people play games on their mobile phones, according to Reuters. Companies 
around the globe are paying application programmers, developers, and designers incredible 
salaries for their skills and capabilities.
Video Game Programmer
Video game programmers are software engineers who work on games for console or hand-held 
video gaming systems. In addition to understanding computer languages and structures, they 
must also be familiar with the specific target systems on which their games will be played, as 
well as the development platforms used to create games
Video game programming experts specializing in networking or graphic engines are seeing 
starting salaries as high as $100,000. One of the great benefits of the video game industry is 
that it is hardly affected by depression or bad economies.  New college graduates are offered 
$60,000 annually without any industry experience. 
Technical Directors
Technical directors for a game development company get high salaries even at the entry level. 
Those having the least experience are said to get an average of $60,000 every year and increase 
to more than $70, 000 for individuals who have more than three years of know-how. The highest 
compensation for this particular job description was $195,500 annually.
© Bernhard Lang/Getty Images
© Comstock/Jupiterimages RF
© altrendo images/Getty Images RF

310
Video Games Designer
Video game designers work with a team developing and designing video games. Game 
designers are an important part of a comprehensive team of designers and developers that 
coordinate the complex task of creating a new video game. Game designers have duties like 
designing characters, levels, puzzles, art and animation. They may also write code, using vari­
ous computer programming languages. Depending on their career duties, they may also be 
responsible for project management tasks and testing early versions of video games.
Video game designers also receives comparatively high compensation whether the knowl­
edge comes from experience or formal education. The designer with fewer than three years 
of experience normally starts with $50,000 each year which increases to $75,000 after the 
third year. Once the video game design expert earns more than six years of on-the-job experi­
ence, this can go up to $100,000 annually. The creative director or lead designer earns up to 
$180,000 every year after getting substantial experience in the industry.
Video Game Producer
Video game producers supervise all aspects of creating a video game and are held liable for 
decisions from start to finish. These individuals coordinate the work of different departments 
involved, ensure that deadlines are met and the project remains within the budget. The mini­
mum salary of producers is $62,000 while those with over six years of experience can earn 
up to $180,000 every year.
Video Game Artists and Animators
The artists and animators for video game development companies earn an average salary 
of $50,000 annually.  Senior lead artists earn anywhere from $80,000 to $215,000 annu­
ally.  Earning high income is quite easy in the video game industry if you have a good educa­
tion, experience, determination, and creativity.1

	
  Introduction  *  311
Introduction
In a competitive business climate, an organization’s ability to efficiently align resources and 
business activities with strategic objectives can mean the difference between succeeding 
and just surviving. To achieve strategic alignment, organizations increasingly manage their 
systems development efforts and project planning activities to monitor performance and 
make better business decisions. Fast-growing companies outsource many areas of their 
business to extend their technical and operational resources. By outsourcing, they save time 
and boost productivity by not having to develop their own systems from scratch. They are 
then free to concentrate on innovation and their core business. The chapters in Unit 5 are:
	■	 Chapter Seventeen—Developing Software to Streamline Operations.
	■	 Chapter Eighteen—Methodologies for Supporting Agile Organizations.
	■	 Chapter Nineteen—Managing Organizational Projects.
© PhotoDisc Imaging/Getty Images

312  *  Unit 5  Transforming Organizations
C H A P T E R  17
LEARNING OUTCOMES
17.1.	 Describe the seven phases of the systems development 
life cycle.
The Systems Development Life Cycle (SDLC)
The multimillion-dollar Nike SCM system failure is legendary as Nike CEO Philip Knight 
famously stated, “This is what we get for our $400 million?” Nike partnered with i2 to imple­
ment an SCM system that never came to fruition. i2 blamed the failed implementation on the 
fact that Nike failed to use the vendor’s implementation methodology and templates. Nike 
blamed the failure on faulty software.
It is difficult to get an organization to work if its systems do not work. In the information 
age, software success, or failure, can lead directly to business success, or failure. Companies 
rely on software to drive business operations and ensure work flows throughout the company. 
As more and more companies rely on software to operate, so do the business-related conse­
quences of software successes and failures.
The potential advantages of successful software implementations provide firms with signifi­
cant incentives to manage software development risks. However, an alarmingly high number of 
software development projects come in late or over budget, and successful projects tend to main­
tain fewer features and functions than originally specified. Understanding the basics of software 
development, or the systems development life cycle, will help organizations avoid potential soft­
ware development pitfalls and ensure that software development efforts are successful.
Before jumping into software development, it is important to understand a few key terms. 
A legacy system is an old system that is fast approaching or beyond the end of its useful life 
within an organization. Conversion is the process of transferring information from a legacy 
system to a new system. Software customization modifies software to meet specific user or 
business requirements. Off-the-shelf application software supports general business processes 
and does not require any specific software customization to meet the organization’s needs.
The systems development life cycle (SDLC) is the overall process for developing informa­
tion systems, from planning and analysis through implementation and maintenance. The SDLC 
is the foundation for all systems development methods, and hundreds of different activities are 
associated with each phase. These activities typically include determining budgets, gathering 
system requirements, and writing detailed user documentation.
The SDLC begins with a business need, proceeds to an assessment of the functions a system 
must have to satisfy the need, and ends when the benefits of the system no longer outweigh 
its maintenance costs. This is why it is referred to as a life cycle. The SDLC is comprised of 
seven distinct phases: planning, analysis, design, development, testing, implementation, and 
maintenance (see Figure 17.1).
LO 17.1 Describe the seven 
phases of the systems develop-
ment life cycle.
Developing Software to 
Streamline Operations

	
Chapter 17  Developing Software to  Streamline Operations  *  313
FIGURE 17.1
The SDLC and Its Associated 
Activities.
Planning
Analysis
Maintenance
Implementation
Testing
Development
Design
Phase
Associated Activity
Planning
■  Brainstorm issues and identify opportunities for the organization
■  Prioritize and choose projects for development
■  Set the project scope
■  Develop the project plan
Analysis
■  Gather the business requirement for the system
■  Define any constraints associated with the system
Design
■  Design the technical architecture required to support the system
■  Design the system models
Development
■  Build the technical architecture
■  Build the database
■  Build the applications
Testing
■  Write the test conditions
■  Perform system testing
Implementation
■  Write detailed user documentation
■  Provide training for the system users
Maintenance
■  Build a help desk to support the system users
■  Provide an environment to support system changes

314  *  Unit 5  Transforming Organizations
PHASE 1: PLANNING
The planning phase establishes a high-level plan of the intended project and determines proj­
ect goals. Planning is the first and most critical phase of any systems development effort, 
regardless of whether the effort is to develop a system that allows customers to order products 
online, determine the best logistical structure for warehouses around the world, or develop a 
strategic information alliance with another organization. Organizations must carefully plan 
the activities (and determine why they are necessary) to be successful. A change agent is a 
person or event that is the catalyst for implementing major changes for a system to meet busi­
ness changes. Brainstorming is a technique for generating ideas by encouraging participants 
to offer as many ideas as possible in a short period without any analysis until all the ideas 
have been exhausted. Many times, new business opportunities are found as the result of a 
brainstorming session.
The Project Management Institute (PMI) develops procedures and concepts necessary 
to support the profession of project management (www.pmi.org). PMI defines a project as 
a temporary activity a company undertakes to create a unique product, service, or result. 
Project management is the application of knowledge, skills, tools, and techniques to project 
activities to meet project requirements. A project manager is an individual who is an expert 
in project planning and management, defines and develops the project plan, and tracks the 
plan to ensure the project is completed on time and on budget. The project manager is the 
person responsible for executing the entire project and defining the project scope that links 
the project to the organization’s overall business goals. The project scope describes the busi­
ness need (the problem the project will solve) and the justification, requirements, and current 
boundaries for the project. The project plan is a formal, approved document that manages and 
controls the entire project.
PHASE 2: ANALYSIS
In the analysis phase the firm analyzes its end-user business requirements and refines project 
goals into defined functions and operations of the intended system. Business requirements 
are the specific business requests the system must meet to be successful, so the analysis phase 
is critical because business requirements drive the entire systems development effort. A sam­
ple business requirement might state, “The CRM system must track all customer inquiries 
by product, region, and sales representative.” The business requirement will state what the 
system must accomplish to be considered successful.
Gathering business requirements is basically conducting an investigation in which users iden­
tify all the organization’s business needs and take measurements of these needs. Figure 17.2 
displays a number of ways to gather business requirements. Requirements management is the 
process of managing changes to the business requirements throughout the project. Projects 
are typically dynamic in nature, and change should be expected and anticipated for success­
ful project completion. A requirements definition document prioritizes all of the business 
requirements by order of importance to the company. Sign-off consists of the users’ actual 
signatures indicating they approve all of the business requirements. If a system does not meet 
FIGURE 17.2
Methods for Gathering 
Business Requirements.
Methods for Gathering Business Requirements
Perform a joint application development (JAD) session where employees meet, sometimes for several 
days, to define or review the business requirements for the system.
Interview individuals to determine current operations and current issues.
Compile questionnaires to survey employees to discover issues.
Make observations to determine how current operations are performed.
Review business documents to discover reports, policies, and how information is used throughout the 
organization.

	
Chapter 17  Developing Software to Streamline Operations   *  315
the business requirements, it will be deemed a failed project. For this reason, the organization 
must spend as much time, energy, and resources as necessary to gather accurate and detailed 
business requirements.
Once a business analyst takes a detailed look at how an organization performs its work and 
its processes, the analyst can recommend ways to improve these processes to make them more 
efficient and effective. Process modeling involves graphically representing the processes that 
capture, manipulate, store, and distribute information between a system and its environment. 
One of the most common diagrams used in process modeling is the data flow diagram. A 
data flow diagram (DFD) illustrates the movement of information between external enti­
ties and the processes and data stores within the system (see Figure 17.3). Process models 
and data flow diagrams establish the specifications of the system. Computer-aided software 
engineering (CASE) tools are software suites that automate systems analysis, design, and 
development. Process models and data flow diagrams can provide the basis for the automatic 
generation of the system if they are developed using a CASE tool.
PHASE 3: DESIGN
The design phase establishes descriptions of the desired features and operations of the system, 
including screen layouts, business rules, process diagrams, pseudo code, and other documen­
tation. During the analysis phase, end users and MIS specialists work together to gather the 
detailed business requirements for the proposed project from a logical point of view. That is, 
during analysis, business requirements are documented without respect to technology or the 
technical infrastructure that will support the system. Moving into the design phase turns the 
project focus to the physical or technical point of view, defining the technical architecture that 
will support the system, including data models, screen designs, report layouts, and database 
models (see Figure 17.4). The graphical user interface (GUI) is the interface to an information 
system. GUI screen design is the ability to model the information system screens for an entire 
system using icons, buttons, menus, and submenus. Data models represent a formal way to 
express data relationships to a database management system (DBMS). Entity relationship dia­
grams document the relationships between entities in a database environment (see Figure 17.5).
FIGURE 17.3
Sample Data Flow Diagram.
Automated Course Registration
External
entity
Check
course
availability
Inquiry
Application
Reply
Courses
1
Check
applicant
qualiﬁcation
Inquiry
Reply
Applications
2
Accept/decline
enrollment

316  *  Unit 5  Transforming Organizations
PHASE 4: DEVELOPMENT
The development phase takes all the detailed design documents from the design phase and 
transforms them into the actual system. In this phase, the project transitions from prelimi­
nary designs to actual physical implementation. During development, the company purchases 
and implements the equipment necessary to support the architecture. Software engineering 
is a disciplined approach for constructing information systems through the use of common 
methods, techniques, or tools. Software engineers use computer-aided software engineering 
(CASE) tools, which provide automated support for the development of the system. Control 
objects for information and related technology (COBIT) is a set of best practices that helps 
an organization to maximize the benefits of an information system, while at the same time 
establishing appropriate controls to ensure minimum errors.
During development, the team defines the programming language it will use to build the 
system. A scripting language is a programming method that provides for interactive mod­
ules to a website. Object-oriented languages group data and corresponding processes into 
objects. Fourth-generation languages (4GL) are programming languages that look similar to 
human languages. For example, a typical 4GL command might state, “FIND ALL RECORDS 
WHERE NAME IS “SMITH”.” Programming languages are displayed in Figure 17.6.
PHASE 5: TESTING
The testing phase brings all the project pieces together into a special testing environment 
to eliminate errors and bugs and verify that the system meets all the business requirements 
defined in the analysis phase. Bugs are defects in the code of an information system. Test 
conditions detail the steps the system must perform along with the expected result of each 
step. Figure 17.7 displays several test conditions for testing user log-on functionality in a 
system. The tester will execute each test condition and compare the expected results with 
the actual results in order to verify that the system functions correctly. Notice in Figure 17.7 
FIGURE 17.4
Sample Technical 
Architecture.
Ethernet Network
Ethernet Network
Ethernet Network

	
Chapter 17  Developing Software to Streamline Operations   *  317
FIGURE 17.5
Sample Entity Relationship 
Diagram.
Shipping
Order
Number
Ships
Item
Customer
Orders
Has
Item
Price
Name
Name
ECommerce
Processes
Order
Creates
Shopping
Cart
Company
Produces
Contains
Contains
Credit Card
Veriﬁes
= One
= Zero or more, Optional
= Many
Attribute
Entity
Relationship
Forwards
Order
Address
Name
Email
how each test condition is extremely detailed and states the expected results that should 
occur when executing each test condition. Each time the actual result is different from the 
expected result, a “bug” is generated and the system goes back to development for a bug 
fix. Test condition 6 in Figure 17.7 displays a different actual result than the expected result 
because the system failed to allow the user to log on. After this test condition fails, it is obvi­
ous that the system is not functioning correctly, and it must be sent back to development for 
a bug fix.
A typical system development effort has hundreds or thousands of test conditions. 
Every single test condition must be executed to verify that the system performs as expected. 

318  *  Unit 5  Transforming Organizations
Writing all the test conditions and performing the actual testing of the software takes a tre­
mendous amount of time and energy. After reviewing the massive level of effort required to 
test a system, it becomes obvious why this is a critical step in successful development. Figure 
17.8 displays the different types of tests typically included in a systems development effort.
PHASE 6: IMPLEMENTATION
In the implementation phase, the organization places the system into production so users can 
begin to perform actual business operations with it. In this phase, the detailed user documentation 
is created that highlights how to use the system and how to troubleshoot issues or problems. 
Training is also provided for the system users and can take place online or in a classroom. 
Online training runs over the Internet or on a CD or DVD, and employees complete the 
training on their own time at their own pace. Workshop training is held in a classroom envi­
ronment and led by an instructor. One of the best ways to support users is to create a help 
desk , or a group of people who respond to users’ questions. Figure 17.9 displays the different 
implementation methods an organization can choose to ensure success.
FIGURE 17.6
Overview of Programming 
Languages.
FIRST GENERATION
Machine language
diﬃcult for people
to understand.
SECOND GENERATION
Assembly language
diﬃcult for people
to understand.
THIRD GENERATION
High-level
programming
languages, such as
C+ and Java.
FOURTH GENERATION
Programming
languages that look
similar to human
languages.
FIFTH GENERATION
Programming
languages for
artiﬁcial
intelligence and
neural networks.
Test 
Condition 
Number
Date 
Tested
Tested
Test Condition
Expected Result
Actual Result
Pass/
Fail
1
1/1/20
Audry Sapp
Click on System Start 
Button
Main Menu appears
Same as expected result
Pass
2
1/1/20
Audry Sapp
Click on Log-on Button 
in Main Menu
Log-on screen appears 
asking for username and 
password
Same as expected result
Pass
3
1/1/20
Audry Sapp
Type Audry Sapp in the 
Username Field
Audry Sapp appears in 
the username field
Same as expected result
Pass
4
1/1/20
Audry Sapp
Type Password Miranda
XXXXXXXXX appears in 
the password field
Same as expected result
Pass
5
1/1/20
Audry Sapp
Click on OK 
User log-on request is 
sent to database and 
username and password 
are verified
Same as expected result
Pass
6
1/1/20
Audry Sapp
Click on Start
Username and password 
are accepted and the 
system main menu 
appears
Screen appeared 
stating log-on failed and 
username and password 
were incorrect
Fail
FIGURE 17.7
Sample Test Conditions.

	
Chapter 17  Developing Software to Streamline Operations   *  319
FIGURE 17.8
Different Forms of System 
Testing.
Alpha Testing
Assess if the entire
system meets the design
requirements
of the users
Development Testing
Test the system to ensure
it is bug-free
Integration Testing
Verify that separate
systems can work together,
passing data back and
forth correctly
System Testing
Verify that the units
or pieces of code function
correctly when
integrated
User Acceptance
Testing (UAT)
Determine if the system
satisﬁes the user and
business requirements
Unit Testing
Test individual units or
pieces of code for a
system
PHASE 7: MAINTENANCE
Maintaining the system is the final sequential phase of any systems development effort. In the 
maintenance phase, the organization performs changes, corrections, additions, and upgrades 
to ensure the system continues to meet business goals. This phase continues for the life of the 
system because the system must change as the business evolves and its needs change, which 
means conducting constant monitoring, supporting the new system with frequent minor 
changes (for example, new reports or information capturing), and reviewing the system to be 
sure it is moving the organization toward its strategic goals. Corrective maintenance makes 
system changes to repair design flaws, coding errors, or implementation issues. Preventive 
maintenance makes system changes to reduce the chance of future system failure. During the 
maintenance phase, the system will generate reports to help users and MIS specialists ensure 
it is functioning correctly (see Figure 17.10).
FIGURE 17.9
System Implementation 
Methods.
Parallel Implementation
Uses both the legacy system
and new system until all
users verify that the new
system functions correctly
Plunge Implementation
Discards the legacy system
and immediately migrates
all users to the new system
Pilot Implementation
Assigns a small group of people
to use the new system until it is
veriﬁed that it works correctly;
then the remaining users
migrate to the new system
Phased Implementation
Installs the new system in
phases (for example, by
department) until it is veriﬁed
that it works correctly

320  *  Unit 5  Transforming Organizations
	1.	 Which phase in the systems development life cycle is the most critical when building a video 
game?
	2.	 Which phase in the systems development life cycle is the least critical when building a video 
game?
O P E N I N G  C A S E  ST U DY  Q U E ST I O N S
Report
Examples
Internal report
Presents data that are distributed inside the organization and intended for employees within an 
organization. Internal reports typically support day-to-day operations monitoring that supports 
managerial decision making.
Detailed internal report
Presents information with little or no filtering or restrictions of the data.
Summary internal report
Organizes and categorizes data for managerial perusal. A report that summarizes total sales by 
product for each month is an example of a summary internal report. The data for a summary report 
are typically categorized and summarized to indicate trends and potential problems.
Exception reporting
Highlights situations occurring outside of the normal operating range for a condition or standard. 
These internal reports include only exceptions and might highlight accounts that are unpaid or 
delinquent or identify items that are low in stock.
Information system control report
Ensures the reliability of information, consisting of policies and their physical implementation, 
access restrictions, or record keeping of actions and transactions.
Information systems audit report
Assesses a company’s information system to determine necessary changes and to help ensure the 
information system’s availability, confidentiality, and integrity.
Post-implementation report
Presents a formal report or audit of a project after it is up and running.
FIGURE 17.10
Examples of System Reports.
The number one reason projects fail is bad business requirements. Business requirements are consid­
ered “bad” because of ambiguity or insufficient involvement of end users during analysis and design.
A requirement is unambiguous if it has the same interpretation for all parties. Different interpre­
tations by different participants will usually result in unmet expectations. Here is an example of an 
ambiguous requirement and an example of an unambiguous requirement:
■	
Ambiguous requirement: The financial report must show profits in local and U.S. currencies.
■	
Unambiguous requirement: The financial report must show profits in local and U.S. currencies 
using the exchange rate printed in The Wall Street Journal for the last business day of the period 
being reported.
Chapter Seventeen Case:  Reducing Ambiguity in Business 
Requirements

	
Chapter 17  Developing Software to Streamline Operations   *  321
Ambiguity is impossible to prevent completely because it is introduced into requirements in natu­
ral ways. For example:
■	
Requirements can contain technical implications that are obvious to the IT developers but not to 
the customers.
■	
Requirements can contain business implications that are obvious to the customer but not to the IT 
developers.
■	
Requirements may contain everyday words whose meanings are “obvious” to everyone, yet dif­
ferent for everyone.
■	
Requirements are reflections of detailed explanations that may have included multiple events, 
multiple perspectives, verbal rephrasing, emotion, iterative refinement, selective emphasis, and 
body language—none of which are captured in the written statements.
Tips for Reviewing Business Requirements
When reviewing business requirements always look for the following words to help dramatically 
reduce ambiguity:
■	
“And” and “or” have well-defined meanings and ought to be completely unambiguous, yet they 
are often understood only informally and interpreted inconsistently. For example, consider the 
statement “The alarm must ring if button T is pressed and if button F is pressed.” This statement 
may be intended to mean that to ring the alarm, both buttons must be pressed or it may be 
intended to mean that either one can be pressed. A statement like this should never appear in a 
requirement because the potential for misinterpretation is too great. A preferable approach is to 
be very explicit, for example, “The alarm must ring if both buttons T and F are pressed simultane­
ously. The alarm should not ring in any other circumstance.”
■	
“Always” might really mean “most of the time,” in which case it should be made more explicit. 
For example, the statement “We always run reports A and B together” could be challenged with 
“In other words, there is never any circumstance where you would run A without B and B without 
A?” If you build a system with an “always” requirement, then you are actually building the system 
to never run report A without report B. If a user suddenly wants report B without report A, you will 
need to make significant system changes.
■	
“Never” might mean “rarely,” in which case it should be made more explicit. For example, the 
statement “We never run reports A and B in the same month” could be challenged with “So that 
means that if I see that A has been run, I can be absolutely certain that no one will want to run B.” 
Again, if you build a system that supports a “never” requirement then the system users can never 
perform that requirement. For example, the system would never allow a user to run reports A and 
B in the same month, no matter what the circumstances.
■	
Boundary conditions are statements about the line between true and false and do and do not. 
These statements may or may not be meant to include end points, for example, “We want to use 
method X when there are up to 10 pages, but method Y otherwise.” If you were building this sys­
tem, would you include page 10 in method X or in method Y? The answer to this question will vary 
causing an ambiguous business requirement.
Questions
	1.	 Why are ambiguous business requirements the leading cause of system development failures?
	2.	 Why do the words “and” and “or” tend to lead to ambiguous requirements?
	3.	 Research the web and determine other reasons for “bad” business requirements.
	4.	 What is wrong with the following business requirement? “The system must support employee 
birthdays since every employee always has a birthday every year.”

322  *  Unit 5  Transforming Organizations
17.1.	Describe the seven phases of the systems development life cycle.
The seven phases in the SDLC are:
	■	 Planning—involves establishing a high-level plan of the intended project and determining project 
goals.
	■	 Analysis—involves analyzing end-user business requirements and refining project goals into 
defined functions and operations of the intended system.
	■	 Design—involves describing the desired features and operations of the system, including screen 
layouts, business rules, process diagrams, pseudocode, and other documentation.
	■	 Development—involves transforming all the detailed design documents from the design phase 
into the actual system.
	■	 Testing—involves bringing all the project pieces together into a special testing environment to 
test for errors, bugs, and interoperability and verifying that the system meets all the business 
requirements defined in the analysis phase.
	■	 Implementation—involves placing the system into production so users can begin to perform 
actual business operations with the system.
	■	 Maintenance—involves performing changes, corrections, additions, and upgrades to ensure that 
the system continues to meet the business goals.
L E A R N I N G  O U T C O M E  R E V I E W
	 1.	What is the systems development life cycle?
	 2.	What are the phases in the systems development life cycle?
	 3.	Which phase in the systems development life cycle is the most important?
	 4.	If you had to skip a phase during the development of a system, which phase would it be and why?
	 5.	Which phase in the systems development life cycle contains the most risk? Be sure to explain 
your answer.
	 6.	What are the different types of system testing?
	 7.	What are the different types of system implementation methods?
	 8.	Why should end users be involved in the systems development effort?
R E V I E W  Q U E S T I O N S

	
Chapter 17  Developing Software to Streamline Operations   *  323
1.	 Missing Phases in the Systems Development Life Cycle
Hello Inc. is a large concierge service for executives operating in Chicago, San Francisco, and New 
York. The company performs all kinds of services from dog walking to airport transportation. Your 
manager, Dan Martello, wants to skip the testing phase during the company’s financial ERP imple­
mentation. He feels that because the system came from a vendor, it should work correctly. Draft a 
memo explaining the importance of following the SDLC and the ramifications to the business if the 
financial system is not tested.
2.	 Refusing to Sign Off
You are the primary client on a large extranet development project. After carefully reviewing the 
requirements definition document, you are positive that there are missing, ambiguous, inaccurate, and 
unclear requirements. The project manager is pressuring you for your sign-off because he has already 
received sign-off from five of your co-workers. If you fail to sign off on the requirements, you are going 
to put the entire project at risk because the time frame is nonnegotiable. What would you do? Why?
3.	 Just Ask TED
You’ll remember this day because it is the day you were introduced to TED (www.ted.com). TED is a 
nonprofit devoted to “ideas worth spreading.” The company hosts a yearly conference focusing on 
technology, entertainment, and design (TED). It gathers the world’s innovative minds and challenges 
them to give the talk of their lives in just 18 minutes. Each talk is posted to the TED website and 
includes such famous speakers as:
■	
Chris Anderson, editor of Wired and author of The Long Tail: Why the Future of Business Is 
Selling Less of More.
■	
Tim Berners-Lee, inventor of the World Wide Web.
■	
Jeff Bezos, founder of Amazon.com.
■	
Richard Branson, founder of Virgin.
■	
Bill Clinton, former president of the United States.
■	
Peter Diamandis, chairman of the X Prize Foundation.
■	
Sergey Brin and Larry Page, cofounders of Google.
■	
Malcolm Gladwell, author of Blink and The Tipping Point.
■	
Bill Gates, founder of Microsoft.
■	
Seth Godin, a marketing guru.
■	
Steven Levitt, author of Freakonomics.
As you brainstorm your future start-up, hoping to become the next Bill Gates or Steve Jobs, how 
can you use TED to generate ideas? Review the TED website and choose three talks that could help 
lead to the next great business idea.
4.	 Flawed Development
Data must be secure! A computer programming course would teach you that security is a critical 
component that must be included in every system. Apparently, the employees that developed the 
new system for the state of Oklahoma were out sick during this important class. The new system 
mistakenly posted confidential data, including Social Security numbers, for thousands of Oklahoma 
residents on the state’s website. The really unfortunate part of this systems blunder is that the error 
went unnoticed for more than three years. A programmer found the error when he realized that by 
M A K I N G  B U S I N E S S  D E C I S I O N S

324  *  Unit 5  Transforming Organizations
changing his web browser he could redirect his page to the entire database for the state of Oklahoma. 
To make matters even worse, due to development issues, a hacker could have easily changed all the 
data in the database or added false data to elements such as the state’s Sexual and Violent Offender 
Registry.
Why is it important to secure data? What can happen if someone accesses your customer data­
base? What could happen if someone changes the information in your customer database and adds 
fictitious data? What phases in the systems development life cycle should have found these errors? 
How could these errors go unnoticed for over three years? Who should be held responsible for the 
system issues?

	
Chapter 18  Methodologies for Supporting  Agile Organizations  *  325
C H A P T E R  18
LEARNING OUTCOMES
18.1.	 Summarize the different software development 
methodologies.
18.2.	Explain why a company would implement a service-
oriented architecture.
Software Development Methodologies
Today, systems are so large and complex that teams of architects, analysts, developers, testers, 
and users must work together to create the millions of lines of custom-written code that drive 
enterprises. For this reason, developers have created a number of different systems develop­
ment life cycle methodologies. A methodology is a set of policies, procedures, standards, 
processes, practices, tools, techniques, and tasks that people apply to technical and manage­
ment challenges. Firms use a methodology to manage the deployment of technology with 
work plans, requirements documents, and test plans, for instance. A formal methodology can 
include coding standards, code libraries, development practices, and much more.
The oldest and the best known is the waterfall methodology, a sequence of phases in which 
the output of each phase becomes the input for the next (see Figure 18.1). In the SDLC, this 
means the steps are performed one at a time, in order, from planning through implementation and 
maintenance. The traditional waterfall method no longer serves most of today’s development 
LO 18.1 Summarize the dif-
ferent software development 
methodologies.
Methodologies for Supporting 
Agile Organizations
FIGURE 18.1
The Traditional Waterfall 
Methodology.
Phase
Planning
Analysis
Design
Development
Testing
Implementation
Maintenance
Time

326  *  Unit 5  Transforming Organizations
efforts, however; it is inflexible and expensive, and it requires rigid adherence to the sequence 
of steps. Its success rate is only about 1 in 10. Figure 18.2 explains some issues related to the 
waterfall methodology.
Today’s business environment is fierce. The desire and need to outsmart and outplay com­
petitors remain intense. Given this drive for success, leaders push internal development teams 
and external vendors to deliver agreed-upon systems faster and cheaper so they can realize ben­
efits as early as possible. Even so, systems remain large and complex. The traditional waterfall 
methodology no longer serves as an adequate systems development methodology in most cases. 
Because this development environment is the norm and not the exception anymore, development 
teams use a new breed of alternative development methods to achieve their business objectives.
Prototyping is a modern design approach where the designers and system users use an 
iterative approach to building the system. Discovery prototyping builds a small-scale repre­
sentation or working model of the system to ensure it meets the user and business require­
ments. The advantages of prototyping include:
	■	 Prototyping encourages user participation.
	■	 Prototypes evolve through iteration, which better supports change.
	■	 Prototypes have a physical quality allowing users to see, touch, and experience the system 
as it is developed.
	■	 Prototypes tend to detect errors earlier.
	■	 Prototyping accelerates the phases of the SDLC, helping to ensure success.
It is common knowledge that the smaller the project, the greater the success rate. The 
iterative development style is the ultimate in small projects. Basically, iterative development 
consists of a series of tiny projects. It has become the foundation of multiple agile methodolo­
gies. Figure 18.3 displays an iterative approach.
An agile methodology aims for customer satisfaction through early and continuous deliv­
ery of useful software components developed by an iterative process using the bare minimum 
requirements. Agile methodology is what it sounds like: fast and efficient, with lower costs 
and fewer features. Using agile methods helps refine feasibility and supports the process for 
getting rapid feedback as functionality is introduced. Developers can adjust as they move 
along and better clarify unclear requirements.
One key to delivering a successful product or system is to deliver value to users as soon as 
possible—give them something they want and like early to create buy-in, generate enthusi­
asm, and, ultimately, reduce scope. Using agile methodologies helps maintain accountability 
and helps to establish a barometer for the satisfaction of end users. It does no good to accom­
plish something on time and on budget if it does not satisfy the end user. The primary forms 
of agile methodologies include:
	■	 Rapid prototyping or rapid application development methodology.
	■	 Extreme programming methodology.
FIGURE 18.2
Disadvantages of the 
Waterfall Methodology.
Issues Related to the Waterfall Methodology
The business 
problem
Any flaws in accurately defining and articulating the business problem in terms of what 
the business users actually require flow onward to the next phase.
The plan
Managing costs, resources, and time constraints is difficult in the waterfall sequence. 
What happens to the schedule if a programmer quits? How will a schedule delay in 
a specific phase impact the total cost of the project? Unexpected contingencies may 
sabotage the plan.
The solution
The waterfall methodology is problematic in that it assumes users can specify all 
business requirements in advance. Defining the appropriate IT infrastructure that is 
flexible, scalable, and reliable is a challenge. The final IT infrastructure solution must 
meet not only current but also future needs in terms of time, cost, feasibility, and 
flexibility. Vision is inevitably limited at the head of the waterfall.

	
Chapter 18  Methodologies for Supporting Agile Organizations   *  327
	■	 Rational unified process (RUP) methodology.
	■	 Scrum methodology.
It is important not to get hung up on the names of the methodologies—some are propri­
etary brand names; others are generally accepted names. It is more important to know how 
these alternative methodologies are used in today’s business environment and the benefits 
they can deliver.
RAPID APPLICATION DEVELOPMENT (RAD) METHODOLOGY
In response to the faster pace of business, rapid application development has become a 
popular route for accelerating systems development. Rapid application development (RAD) 
methodology (also called rapid prototyping) emphasizes extensive user involvement in the 
rapid and evolutionary construction of working prototypes of a system, to accelerate the sys­
tems development process. Figure 18.4 displays the fundamentals of RAD.
EXTREME PROGRAMMING METHODOLOGY
Extreme programming (XP) methodology, like other agile methods, breaks a project into 
four phases, and developers cannot continue to the next phase until the previous phase is 
complete. The delivery strategy supporting XP is that the quicker the feedback the more 
improved the results. XP has four basic phases: planning, designing, coding, and testing. 
Planning can include user interviews, meetings, and small releases. During design, func­
tionality is not added until it is required or needed. During coding, the developers work 
together soliciting continuous feedback from users, eliminating the communication gap that 
Phase
Planning
Analysis
Design
Development
Testing
Implementation
Maintenance
ITERATION 2
ITERATION 1
Time
Planning
Analysis
Design
Development
Testing
Implementation
Maintenance
FIGURE 18.3
The Iterative Approach.
FIGURE 18.4
Fundamentals of RAD.
Fundamentals of RAD
Focus initially on creating a prototype that looks and acts like the desired system.
Actively involve system users in the analysis, design, and development phases.
Accelerate collecting the business requirements through an interactive and iterative construction approach.

328  *  Unit 5  Transforming Organizations
generally exists between developers and customers. During testing, the test requirements 
are generated before any code is developed. Extreme programming saves time and pro­
duces successful projects by continuously reviewing and revamping needed and unneeded 
requirements.
Customer satisfaction is the primary reason XP finds success as developers quickly respond 
to changing business requirements, even late in the life cycle. XP encourages managers, cus­
tomers, and developers to work together as a team to ensure the delivery of high-quality sys­
tems. XP is similar to a puzzle; there are many small pieces and individually the pieces make 
no sense, but when they are pieced together they can create a new system.
RATIONAL UNIFIED PROCESS (RUP) METHODOLOGY
The rational unified process (RUP) methodology, owned by IBM, provides a framework for 
breaking down the development of software into four “gates.” Each gate consists of execut­
able iterations of the software in development. A project stays in a gate waiting for the stake­
holder’s analysis, and then it either moves to the next gate or is cancelled. The gates include:
	■	 Gate one: inception. This phase ensures all stakeholders have a shared understanding of 
the proposed system and what it will do.
	■	 Gate two: elaboration. This phase expands on the agreed-upon details of the system, 
including the ability to provide an architecture to support and build it.
	■	 Gate three: construction. This phase includes building and developing the product.
	■	 Gate four: transition. Primary questions answered in this phase address ownership of the 
system and training of key personnel.
Because RUP is an iterative methodology, the user can reject the product and force the 
developers to go back to gate one. RUP helps developers avoid reinventing the wheel and 
focuses on rapidly adding or removing reusable chunks of processes addressing common 
problems.
SCRUM METHODOLOGY
Another agile methodology, scrum methodology, uses small teams to produce small pieces 
of software using a series of “sprints,” or 30-day intervals, to achieve an appointed goal. In 
rugby, a scrum is a team pack and everyone in the pack works together to move the ball down 
the field. In scrum methodology, each day ends or begins with a stand-up meeting to monitor 
and control the development effort.
Developing a Service-Oriented Architecture
One of the latest trends in systems development is creating a service-oriented architecture. 
Service-oriented architecture (SOA) is a business-driven enterprise architecture that supports 
integrating a business as linked, repeatable activities, tasks, or services. SOA ensures that 
MIS systems can adapt quickly, easily, and economically to support rapidly changing business 
needs. SOA promotes a scalable and flexible enterprise architecture that can implement new 
or reuse existing MIS components, creating connections among disparate applications and 
systems. It is important to understand that SOA is not a concrete architecture; it is thought that 
leads to a concrete architecture. It might be described as a style, paradigm, concept, perspec­
tive, philosophy, or representation. That is, SOA is an approach, a way of thinking, a value 
system that leads to decisions that design a concrete architecture allowing enterprises to plug 
in new services or upgrade existing services in a granular approach. Figure 18.5  discusses 
the problems that can be addressed by implementing SOA. Figure 18.6 displays the three key 
technical concepts of SOA.
LO 18.2 Explain why a company 
would implement a service-
oriented architecture.

	
Chapter 18  Methodologies for Supporting Agile Organizations   *  329
FIGURE 18.5
Business Issues and SOA 
Solutions.
  Service-Oriented Architecture Solutions  
Agents unable to see policy coverage information 
remotely  
Calls/faxes used to get information from other 
divisions  
Clinical patient information stored on paper  
Complex access to supplier design drawings    
Integrate information to make it more accessible to 
employees. 
High cost of handling customer calls  
Reconciliation of invoice deductions and rebates  
Hours on hold to determine patient insurance 
eligibility 
High turnover leading to excessive hiring and 
training costs    
Understand how business processes interact to man-
age administrative costs better. 
Decreasing customer loyalty due to incorrect 
invoices  
Customers placed on hold to check order status  
Inability to update policy endorsements quickly  
Poor service levels    
Improve customer retention and deliver new products 
and services through reuse of current investments. 
Time wasted reconciling separate databases  
Manual processes such as handling trade 
allocations  
Inability to detect quality ﬂaws early in cycle  
High percentage of scrap and rework    
Improve people productivity with better business 
integration and connectivity. 
FIGURE 18.6
SOA Concepts.
Service
A business task
Loose Coupling 
The capability of services
to be joined together on
demand to create
composite services,
or disassembled just as
easily into their
functional component
Interoperability 
The capability of two or
more computer systems
to share data and
resources, even though
they are made by
diﬀerent manufacturers     

330  *  Unit 5  Transforming Organizations
INTEROPERABILITY
As defined earlier, interoperability is the capability of two or more computer systems to share 
data and resources, even though they are made by different manufacturers. Businesses today 
use a variety of systems that have resulted in diverse operating environments. This diversity 
has inundated businesses with the lack of interoperability. With SOA, a business can create 
solutions that draw on functionality from these existing, previously isolated systems that are 
portable, interoperable, or both, regardless of the environment in which they exist.
A web service is an open-standards way of supporting interoperability. Web services are 
application programming interfaces (API) that can be accessed over a network, such as the 
Internet, and executed on a remote system hosting the requested services. SOA is a style 
of architecture that enables the creation of applications that are built by combining loosely 
coupled and interoperable services. In SOA, since the basic unit of communication is a mes­
sage rather than an operation, web services are usually loosely coupled. Although SOA can 
exist without web services, the best-practice implementation of SOA for flexibility always 
involves web services.
Technically, web services are based on Extensible Markup Language (XML), a markup 
language for documents, containing structured information. The technical specifics of XML’s 
capabilities go beyond the scope of this book, but for our purposes, they support things such 
as ebusiness transactions, mathematical equations, and a thousand other kinds of structured 
data. XML is a common data representation that can be used as the medium of exchange 
between programs that are written in different programming languages and execute different 
kinds of machine instructions. In simple terms, think about XML as the official translator for 
structured information. Structured information is both the content (word, picture, and so on) 
and the role it plays. XML is the basis for all web service technologies and the key to interop­
erability; every web service specification is based on XML.
LOOSE COUPLING
Part of the value of SOA is that it is built on the premise of loose coupling of services. Loose 
coupling is the capability of services to be joined on demand to create composite services 
or disassembled just as easily into their functional components. Loose coupling is a way of 
ensuring that the technical details such as language, platform, and so on are decoupled from 
the service. For example, look at currency conversion. Today all banks have multiple currency 
converters, all with different rate refreshes at different times. By creating a common service, 
conversion of currency, that is loosely coupled to all banking functions that require conver­
sion, the rates, times, and samplings can be averaged to ensure floating the treasury in the 
most effective manner possible. Another example is common customer identification. Most 
businesses lack a common customer ID and, therefore, have no way to determine who the cus­
tomers are and what they buy for what reason. Creating a common customer ID that is inde­
pendent of applications and databases allows loosely coupling the service, customer ID, to 
data and applications without the application or database ever knowing who it is or where it is.
The difference between traditional, tightly bound interactions and loosely coupled ser­
vices is that, before the transaction occurs, the functional pieces (services) operating within 
the SOA are dormant and disconnected. When the business process initiates, these services 
momentarily interact with each other. They do so for just long enough to execute their piece of 
the overall process, and then they go back to their dormant state, with no long-standing con­
nection to the other services with which they just interacted.
The next time the same service is called, it could be as part of a different business process 
with different calling and destination services. A great way to understand this is through the 
analogy of the telephone system. At the dawn of widespread phone usage, operators had to 
plug in a wire physically to create a semi-permanent connection between two parties. Callers 
were “tightly bound” to each other. Today you pick up your cell phone and put it to your ear, 
and there’s no dial tone—it’s disconnected. You enter a number, you push “Talk,” and only 
then does the process initiate, establishing a loosely coupled connection just long enough for 
your conversation. Then when the conversation is over, your cell phone goes back to dormant 
mode until a new connection is made with another party. As a result, supporting a million 

	
Chapter 18  Methodologies for Supporting Agile Organizations   *  331
cell phone subscribers does not require the cell phone service provider to support a million 
live connections; it requires supporting only the number of simultaneous conversations at any 
given time. It allows for a much more flexible and dynamic exchange.
SOA SERVICE
Service-oriented architecture begins with a service—an SOA service being simply a business 
task, such as checking a potential customer’s credit rating when opening a new account. It is 
important to stress that this is part of a business process. Services are “like” software prod­
ucts; however, when describing SOA, do not think about software or MIS. Think about what 
a company does on a day-to-day basis, and break up those business processes into repeatable 
business tasks or components. SOA works with services that are not just software or hardware 
but, rather, business tasks. It is a pattern for developing a more flexible kind of software appli­
cations (see Figure 18.7).
SOA is a pattern for developing a more flexible kind of software application that can pro­
mote loose coupling among software components while reusing existing investments in tech­
nology in new, more valuable ways across the organization. SOA is based on standards that 
enable interoperability, business agility, and innovation to generate more business value for 
those who use these principles.
FIGURE 18.7
SOA Integration.
Customer Order
Analysis & Tracking
Customers, Sales, and
Business Partners
Manufacturing
Plant
Distribution
System
Distribution
System
Customer
Manufacturing
Plant
Client Applications
Order Processing Systems
Interface Service
Validation Service
Manufacturing
Plant Service
Legacy
Applications
SOA
Business
Rules

332  *  Unit 5  Transforming Organizations
	1.	 If you were consulting to a business that wanted to build a video game for the iPhone, which 
development methodology would you recommend and why?
	2.	 What is a prototype and why would a new game benefit from building one?
O P E N I N G  C A S E  ST U DY  Q U E ST I O N S
SOA helps companies become more agile by aligning business needs and the MIS capa­
bilities that support these needs. Business drives requirements for MIS; SOA enables the 
MIS environment to respond to these requirements effectively and efficiently. SOA is about 
helping companies apply reusability and flexibility that can lower cost (of development, inte­
gration, and maintenance), increase revenue, and obtain sustainable competitive advantage 
through technology.
It is very important to note that SOA is an evolution. Although its results are revolutionary, 
it builds on many technologies used in the marketplace, such as web services, transactional 
technologies, information-driven principles, loose coupling, components, and object-oriented 
design. The beauty of SOA is that these technologies exist together in SOA through standards, 
well-defined interfaces, and organizational commitments to reuse key services instead of rein­
venting the wheel. SOA is not just about technology, but about how technology and business 
link themselves for a common goal of business flexibility.
June is the perfect time of year to reflect on the current state of all the key projects that were approved 
in January. At this stage, you and your management team should have enough data to know if each 
initiative will successfully meet its objectives. You may already know there are projects in your organi­
zation that are not positioned to succeed, yet they still receive funding and staff. When you assess the 
current state of your projects, do you see any of the following signs?
■	
Critical issues keep opening up, but they’re not getting resolved.
■	
Project scope is constantly changing.
■	
The project is consistently behind its plan, despite efforts to get it back on schedule.
■	
Competing deliverables are distracting your attention.
If all of these signs appear, it may be time to cut your losses and cut the project—or at least radi­
cally restructure it. You know better than anyone that throwing good money after the bad will not save 
the project because it doesn’t address the root cause of the project’s woes. To determine a course of 
action, ask yourself the following questions about the project:
■	
What can be salvaged?
■	
What can be delivered with the time and budget that are left?
■	
Do you have the right leadership in place to complete the project successfully?
■	
Is the plan for the initiative sound and realistic?
■	
Am I and my management team doing everything we can to support the initiative?
Chapter Eighteen Case:  Getting Your Project on Track

	
Chapter 18  Methodologies for Supporting Agile Organizations   *  333
If part of or the entire project can be salvaged and delivered on time and with the remaining bud­
get, if the right leaders are present to steer the project, if the new plan is solid, and if management 
will continue to support the project, the following four steps will help you regain control and deliver 
the revised project successfully. These steps are basic blocking and tackling, but the detail behind 
the plan—and more importantly, the execution and focus the project team brings to the effort—will 
determine whether the project recovery effort will succeed.
Step One: Assess the Situation
Get as much information about the current state of the project as possible. Use that data to make 
informed decisions about what needs to happen next. Don’t be afraid if, at this stage, there are more 
questions than answers; that is normal. The key is to ask the right question to obtain as accurate a picture 
of the project’s status as possible. The following questions address key data points you need to collect:
■	
How critical is the delivery date?
■	
What functionality is exactly required by the delivery date?
■	
What has been completed and what is still outstanding?
■	
How willing will people be to change scope, dates, and budget?
The last question about change is critical because it touches on the people and political issues 
that are present in any project and any organization. Even when faced with sure failure, people find it 
hard to change unless there is a direct benefit to them and their team. For recovery to have a chance, 
expectations need to change, especially those of the key stakeholders.
When gathering data about the current state of the project, remember to ask the current team for 
their opinions on what went wrong. It can be easy to ignore their input since they’re associated with 
the current failure. In fact, each individual can provide great insight into why the project arrived in its 
current state. Reach out to key team members and get their suggestions for correcting the situation.
Step Two: Prepare the Team for Recovery
Everyone involved in the project—from executive management to stakeholders to project team 
members—needs to accept that the current project is broken and needs to be fixed. They also need 
to accept that the existing project plan and approach to delivering the project is flawed and needs to 
be restructured. If they don’t accept these facts, they will likely resist the steps needed for recovery.
Once everyone has accepted the need to change course, define realistic expectations for what 
can be delivered given the current state and time frame. Also establish metrics for success and con­
trol of the recovery. If you had metrics at the outset of the project, you may need to establish new 
ones, or you may simply need to hold yourself and others accountable to them.
Both management and the project manager in charge of the recovery need to develop a support­
ive environment for team members. Giving them realistic goals and providing them with the needed 
space, equipment, and training will position them for success.
Finally, take advantage of the new momentum associated with the recovery and involve all the 
key parties in the status of the project. This involvement will keep everyone focused and engaged. 
It will assure project team members and stakeholders that they’re needed for more than just exe­
cuting tasks.
Step Three: Develop a Game Plan for Recovery
Think of the recovery as a new project, separate from the old one. This new project requires its own 
scope of work to make the expectations around what is being delivered and the new criteria for judg­
ing success crystal clear. The new scope may require you to determine if you have the right resources 
on the project team or if you need to re-staff some team members.
Based on the new project scope, the project manager and project team should lay out a clear and 
realistic road map to achieve the objectives. The main difference in the plan this time is that it must 
not fail. It will also be under much greater scrutiny by management. Consequently, it will be critical 

334  *  Unit 5  Transforming Organizations
to make sure the milestones are shorter in duration to demonstrate success and to allow for course 
correction if needed. The shorter milestones will provide valuable data points to determine the health 
of the project early.
Step Four: Execute the Game Plan
With the new plan in hand, it’s time to get down to business. Remember that during execution, it is 
not just the project team members who are accountable. Everyone from management on down is on 
the hook. All facets of the project, from environment to support, need to be in sync at all times, and 
everyone needs to know he or she is accountable for the project recovery to succeed.
To make sure everyone is on the same page during the recovery, the project communication needs 
to be clear, informative, and frequent. Clearly define in your communication plan how information will 
be disseminated, how urgent items will be addressed, and how key decisions will be made.
Given the added level of scrutiny on the plan and the project, being able to provide the latest on 
the metrics to show the improved control over the project will be key. The data will also allow you to 
quickly make corrections when any sign of trouble surfaces.
Getting a flailing project back on track is not easy. It requires sustained effort, focus, commitment, 
and objectivity. During the project recovery there is no time for personal agendas. The ability to see 
and do what is best for the project is required from every team member.
It is also important to not lose sight of the pressure that everyone is under. Make sure there is a 
positive focus on people. The team needs to have the ability to bond, release a little steam, and be 
focused on the task at hand.
When the project has been successfully delivered, celebrate and recognize the effort of each and 
every team member. Finally, learn from this successful project recovery so that you and your organiza­
tion can avoid having to recover a project again. Pay attention to the warning signs and act swiftly and 
decisively to make corrections early in the project’s life cycle so that successful delivery is ensured 
the first time.1
Questions
	1.	 What signs identify if a current project is experiencing issues?
	2.	 Which software development methodology would you choose to build a new accounting system? 
Explain why.
	3.	 Which software development methodology would you choose to build a personal website? 
Explain why.

	
Chapter 18  Methodologies for Supporting Agile Organizations   *  335
L E A R N I N G  O U T C O M E  R E V I E W
	1.	Which project management methodology would you choose to run your systems development 
project?
	2.	If you started on a new software development project and the project plan was using the water­
fall methodology, would you remain on the project? Why or why not? What could you do to pre­
pare your project better for success?
	3.	What do rapid application development, extreme programming, and the rational unified process 
all have in common?
	4.	How many gates are included in the RUP methodology?
	5.	What is the scrum methodology?
	6.	What is a service-oriented architecture?
	7.	What is a service?
	8.	Why is loose coupling and interoperability important to SOA?
R E V I E W  Q U E S T I O N S
18.1.	 Summarize the different software development methodologies.
The oldest and the best known project management methodology is the waterfall methodology, a sequence 
of phases in which the output of each phase becomes the input for the next. In the SDLC, this means the 
steps are performed one at a time, in order, from planning through implementation and maintenance. The 
traditional waterfall method no longer serves most of today’s development efforts, however; it is inflexible 
and expensive, and it requires rigid adherence to the sequence of steps. Its success rate is only about 1 in 10.
There are a number of software development methodologies:
	■	
Agile methodology aims for customer satisfaction through early and continuous delivery of useful 
software components developed by an iterative process with a design point that uses the bare 
minimum requirements.
	■	
Waterfall methodology follows an activity-based process in which each phase in the SDLC is per­
formed sequentially from planning through implementation and maintenance.
	■	
Rapid application development (RAD) methodology emphasizes extensive user involvement in 
the rapid and evolutionary construction of working prototypes of a system to accelerate the sys­
tems development process.
	■	
Extreme programming (XP) methodology breaks a project into tiny phases, and developers can­
not continue on to the next phase until the first phase is complete.
	■	
Rational unified process (RUP) provides a framework for breaking down the development of soft­
ware into four gates.
	■	
Scrum uses small teams to produce small pieces of deliverable software by using sprints, or 
30-day intervals, to achieve an appointed goal.
18.2.	 Explain why a company would implement a service-oriented architecture.
Service oriented architecture (SOA) is a business-driven enterprise architecture that supports integrat­
ing a business as linked, repeatable activities, tasks, or services. SOA ensures that MIS systems can 
adapt quickly, easily, and economically to support rapidly changing business needs. SOA promotes 
a scalable and flexible enterprise architecture that can implement new or reuse existing MIS compo­
nents, creating connections among disparate applications and systems. It is important to understand 
that SOA is not a concrete architecture; it is a way of thinking that leads to a concrete architecture.

336  *  Unit 5  Transforming Organizations
M A K I N G  B U S I N E S S  D E C I S I O N S
1.	 Selecting a Systems Development Methodology
Exus Incorporated is an international billing outsourcing company. Exus currently has revenues of 
$5 billion, more than 3,500 employees, and operations on every continent. You have recently been 
hired as the CIO. Your first task is to increase the software development project success rate, which 
is currently at 20 percent. To ensure that future software development projects are successful, you 
want to standardize the systems development methodology across the entire enterprise. Currently, 
each project determines which methodology it uses to develop software.
Create a report detailing three systems development methodologies that were covered in this 
text. Compare each of these methodologies to the traditional waterfall approach. Finally, recommend 
which methodology you want to implement as your organizational standard. Be sure to highlight any 
potential roadblocks you might encounter when implementing the new standard methodology.
2.	 Planning for the Unexpected
Unexpected situations happen all the time, and the more you plan for them the better prepared 
you’ll be when developing software. Your employees will get into accidents, contract viruses and 
diseases, and experience other life issues. All of these scenarios lead to unplanned absenteeism,
which can throw your project plan into a tailspin. What can happen to a project when a key 
employee suddenly quits or is forced to go on short-term disability? When reviewing all the different 
SDLC methodologies, which one offers the greatest flexibility for unplanned employee downtime? If 
you could choose when your employee was absent, which phase in the SDLC would be the safest for 
your project to still continue and achieve success? What can you do to ensure that you are preparing 
for unplanned absenteeism on your project plan?
3.	 Scratch
Scratch is a visual programming language that is perfect for anyone learning to code. Scratch creates 
programs by connecting blocks of code by using a drag-and-drop GUI so users do not have to type 
programming languages. Users can simply select colored blocks of code that, when joined, create a 
script or a set of computer instructions that can make objects such as people and animals move and 
speak. Users can create interactive stories, games, and animations with the click of a button.
Scratch is a free project created by the Lifelong Kindergarten Group at the MIT Media Lab and 
currently has more than 8 million users. The goal of Scratch is to help young people learn to think 
creatively, reason systematically, and work collaboratively—essential skills for life in the 21st century.
In a group, visit the Scratch website at http://scratch.mit.edu/. What type of system development 
methodology is Scratch using? What skills can young people learn from creating Scratch programs?
4.	 DUI in a Golf Cart
Swedish police stopped Bill Murray and charged him with drunk driving when he attempted to drive 
his golf cart around the city. A golf cart hits top speed at three miles per hour and although it might 
seem odd that you can be issued a DUI for driving one, many countries have laws against such prac­
tices. A few other culture blunders you want to avoid include the following:
■	
One American company learned that the name of the cooking oil they were marketing trans­
lated as “jackass oil” in Spanish.
■	
A deodorant marketing campaign displayed images of a strong, courageous man washing his 
dog. The campaign failed in Islamic countries, where dogs are considered unclean.
■	
A sports equipment company packaged golf balls in groups of four for sales throughout Japan. 
Sales plummeted because the word four pronounced in Japanese sounds the same as the 
word death and items packaged in fours are considered unlucky.

	
Chapter 18  Methodologies for Supporting Agile Organizations   *  337
Companies that are expanding globally are looking for opportunities, not problems. Yet local laws 
and procedures that come into play when setting up shop abroad—everything from hiring and firing 
to tax filings—can be a minefield. What types of culture, language, and legal issues should a company 
expect to encounter when dealing with outsourcing to another country? What can a company do to 
mitigate these risks?
5.	 Living the Dream
CharityFocus.org
Don’t ask what the world needs. Ask what makes you come alive, and go do it. Because what the 
world needs is people who have come alive.—Howard Thurman
This is the quote found at the bottom of the website for CharityFocus.org. CharityFocus, created in 
1999, partners volunteers with small nonprofit organizations to build custom web solutions. CharityFocus 
is completely run by volunteers, and the services of its volunteers are absolutely free. The nonprofit 
believes that it is impossible to create a better world without inner change resulting from selfless 
service. In the spirit of selfless service, volunteers created the following on the website to inspire 
and cultivate change:
■	
DailyGood: Email service that delivers a little bit of good news to thousands of people all over 
the world.
■	
KarmaTube: Site that uses the power of video to document multiple acts of compassion, gen­
erosity, and selflessness.
■	
Conversations: Site (Conversations.org) that hosts in-depth interviews of everyday heroes 
and a broad spectrum of artists.
■	
HelpOthers: A kindness portal based on the smile, a universally recognized symbol. People 
smile because they are happy and people smile because they want to become happy. The 
purpose of HelpOthers.org is to bring more of those smiles in the world through small acts of 
kindness.
Why is it important to give back to communities around the globe and share systems development 
methodologies? Would you volunteer for CharityFocus? What are the risks associated with volunteering 
for CharityFocus?

338  *  Unit 5  Transforming Organizations
C H A P T E R  19
LEARNING OUTCOMES
19.1.	 Explain project management and identify the primary 
reasons projects fail.
19.2.	Identify the primary project planning diagrams.
19.3.	 Identify the three different types of outsourcing along 
with their benefits and challenges.
Using Project Management to Deliver 
Successful Projects
No one would think of building an office complex by turning loose 100 different construction 
teams to build 100 different rooms with no single blueprint or agreed-upon vision of the com­
pleted structure. Yet this is precisely the situation in which many large organizations find them­
selves when managing information technology projects. Organizations routinely overschedule their 
resources (human and otherwise), develop redundant projects, and damage profitability by invest­
ing in nonstrategic efforts that do not contribute to the organization’s bottom line. Business leaders 
face a rapidly moving and unforgiving global marketplace that will force them to use every possible 
tool to sustain competitiveness; project management is one of those tools. For this reason, business 
personnel must anticipate being involved in some form of project management during their career. 
Figure 19.1 displays a few examples of the different types of projects organizations encounter.
LO 19.1 Explain project manage-
ment and identify the primary 
reasons projects fail.
Managing Organizational 
Projects
FIGURE 19.1
Types of Organizational 
Projects.
Sales
Deploying a
new service to
help up-sell a
current
product
Marketing
Creating a
new TV or
radio show
Finance
Requesting a
new report
summarizing
revenue
across
departments
Accounting
Adding
system
functionality
to adhere to
new rules or
regulations
MIS
Upgrading a
payroll system
or adding a
new sales
force
management
system
a. © Ingram Publishing; b. © ColorBlind Images/Blend Images LLC; c-d. © Royalty-Free/Corbis; e.© webphotographeer/Getty Images

	
Chapter 19  Managing Organizational Projects  *  339
Tangible benefits are easy to quantify and typically measured to determine the success or 
failure of a project. Intangible benefits are difficult to quantify or measure (see Figure 19.2 
for examples). One of the most difficult decisions managers make is identifying the projects 
in which to invest time, energy, and resources. An organization must choose what it wants to 
do—justifying it, defining it, and listing expected results—and how to do it, including project 
budget, schedule, and analysis of project risks. Feasibility is the measure of the tangible and 
intangible benefits of an information system. Figure 19.3 displays several types of feasibility 
studies business analysts can use to determine the projects that best fit business goals.
With today’s volatile economic environment, many businesses are being forced to do more 
with less. Businesses today must respond quickly to a rapidly changing business environment 
by continually innovating goods and services. Effective project management provides a con­
trolled way to respond to changing market conditions, to foster global communications, and to 
provide key metrics to enable managerial decision making. Developing projects within budget 
and on time is challenging, and with the help of solid project management skills, managers 
can avoid the primary reasons projects fail, including:
	■	 Unclear or missing business requirements.
	■	 Skipped SDLC phases.
	■	 Changing technology.
	■	 The cost of finding errors.
	■	 Balance of the triple constraints.
UNCLEAR OR MISSING BUSINESS REQUIREMENTS
The most common reason systems fail is because the business requirements are either missing 
or incorrectly gathered during the analysis phase. The business requirements drive the entire 
system. If they are not accurate or complete, the system will not be successful.
SKIPPED PHASES
The first thing individuals tend to do when a project falls behind schedule is to start skipping 
phases in the SDLC. For example, if a project is three weeks behind in the development phase, 
the project manager might decide to cut testing from six weeks to three weeks. Obviously, it 
is impossible to perform all the testing in half the time. Failing to test the system will lead to 
unfound errors, and chances are high that the system will fail. It is critical for an organization 
FIGURE 19.2
Examples of Tangible and 
Intangible Benefits.
Decreased expenses
Decreased processing
errors
Decreased response
time
Increased quantity or
sales
Increased quality
Tangible
Beneﬁts
Improved decision
making
Improved community
service
Improved goodwill
Improved morale
Intangible
Beneﬁts

340  *  Unit 5  Transforming Organizations
FIGURE 19.3
Types of Feasibility Studies.
Measures how well a solution meets
the identiﬁed system requirements to
solve the problems and take advantage
of opportunities
Operational Feasibility
Measures the cost-eﬀectiveness of
a project
Economic Feasibility
Measures the project time frame to
ensure it can be completed on time
Schedule Feasibility
Measures the practicality of a technical 
solution and the availability of
technical resources and expertise
Technical Feasibility
Measures how well the solution will
be accepted in a given organization
Political Feasibility
Measures how well a solution can be 
implemented within existing legal and 
contractual obligations
Legal Feasibility
to perform all phases in the SDLC during every project. Skipping any of the phases is sure to 
lead to system failure.
CHANGING TECHNOLOGY
Many real-world projects have hundreds of business requirements, take years to complete, 
and cost millions of dollars. As Moore’s Law states, technology changes at an incredibly fast 
pace; therefore, it is possible that an entire project plan will need to be revised in the middle 
of a project as a result of a change in technology. Technology changes so fast that it is almost 
impossible to deliver an information system without feeling the pain of updates.
THE COST OF FINDING ERRORS IN THE SDLC
It is important to discuss the relationship between the SDLC and the cost for the organization 
to fix errors. An error found during the analysis and design phase is relatively inexpensive 
to fix. All that is typically required is a change to a Word document. However, exactly the 
same error found during the testing or implementation phase will cost the organization an 

	
Chapter 19  Managing Organizational Projects  *  341
enormous amount to fix because it has to change the actual system. Figure 19.4 displays how 
the cost to fix an error grows exponentially the later the error is found in the SDLC.
BALANCE OF THE TRIPLE CONSTRAINTS
Figure 19.5 displays the relationships among the three primary and interdependent variables 
in any project—time, cost, and scope. All projects are limited in some way by these three 
constraints. The Project Management Institute calls the framework for evaluating these com­
peting demands the triple constraints.
The relationship among these variables is such that if any one changes, at least one other 
is likely to be affected. For example, moving up a project’s finish date could mean either 
increasing costs to hire more staff or decreasing the scope to eliminate features or func­
tions. Increasing a project’s scope to include additional customer requests could extend the 
project’s time to completion or increase the project’s cost—or both—to accommodate the 
FIGURE 19.4
The Cost of Finding Errors.
Cost $
Planning
Analysis
Design
Development
Testing
Implementation
Maintenance
Systems Development Life Cycle Phases
FIGURE 19.5
The Triple Constraints: 
Changing One Changes All.
MANAGING
EXPECTATIONS
Resources
Time
Scope

342  *  Unit 5  Transforming Organizations
FIGURE 19.6
PMBOK Elements of Project 
Management.
Tool
Description
Communication plan
Defines the how, what, when, and who regarding the flow of project information to stakeholders and 
is key for managing expectations.
Executive sponsor
The person or group who provides the financial resources for the project.
Project assumption
Factors considered to be true, real, or certain without proof or demonstration. Examples include 
hours in a workweek or time of year the work will be performed.
Project constraint
Specific factors that can limit options, including budget, delivery dates, available skilled resources, 
and organizational policies.
Project deliverable
Any measurable, tangible, verifiable outcome, result, or item that is produced to complete a project 
or part of a project. Examples of project deliverables include design documents, testing scripts, and 
requirements documents.
Project management office (PMO)
An internal department that oversees all organizational projects. This group must formalize and 
professionalize project management expertise and leadership. One of the primary initiatives of 
the PMO is to educate the organization on techniques and procedures necessary to run successful 
projects.
Project milestone
Represents key dates when a certain group of activities must be performed. For example, 
completing the planning phase might be a project milestone. If a project milestone is missed, then 
chances are the project is experiencing problems.
Project objectives
Quantifiable criteria that must be met for the project to be considered a success.
Project requirements document
Defines the specifications for product/output of the project and is key for managing expectations, 
controlling scope, and completing other planning efforts.
Project scope statement
Links the project to the organization’s overall business goals. It describes the business need (the 
problem the project will solve) and the justification, requirements, and current boundaries for 
the project. It defines the work that must be completed to deliver the product with the specified 
features and functions, and it includes constraints, assumptions, and requirements—all components 
necessary for developing accurate cost estimates.
Project stakeholder
Individuals and organizations actively involved in the project or whose interests might be affected as 
a result of project execution or project completion.
Responsibility matrix
Defines all project roles and indicates what responsibilities are associated with each role.
Status report
Periodic reviews of actual performance versus expected performance.
changes. Project quality is affected by the project manager’s ability to balance these compet­
ing demands. High-quality projects deliver the agreed-upon product or service on time and 
on budget. Project management is the science of making intelligent trade-offs between time, 
cost, and scope. Benjamin Franklin’s timeless advice—by failing to prepare, you prepare to 
fail—applies to many of today’s software development projects.
The Project Management Institute created the Project Management Body of Knowledge 
(PMBOK) for the education and certification of project managers. Figure 19.6 summarizes 
the key elements of project planning according to PMBOK.
Primary Project Planning Diagrams
Project planning is the process of detailed planning that generates answers to common opera­
tional questions such as why are we doing this project or what is the project going to accom­
plish for the business? Some of the key questions project planning can help answer include:
	■	 How are deliverables being produced?
	■	 What activities or tasks need to be accomplished to produce the deliverables?
LO 19.2 Identify the primary proj-
ect planning diagrams.

	
Chapter 19  Managing Organizational Projects  *  343
FIGURE 19.7
SMART Criteria for 
Successful Objective 
Creation.
S
 Speciﬁc
M
 Measurable
 Agreed Upon
 Realistic
R
 Time Frame
T
A
	■	 Who is responsible for performing the tasks?
	■	 What resources are required to perform the tasks?
	■	 When will the tasks be performed?
	■	 How long will it take to perform each task?
	■	 Are any tasks dependent upon other tasks being completed before they can begin?
	■	 How much does each task cost?
	■	 What skills and experience are required to perform each task?
	■	 How is the performance of the task being measured including quality?
	■	 How are issues being tracked?
	■	 How is change being addressed?
	■	 How is communication occurring and when?
	■	 What risks are associated with each task?
The project objectives are among the most important areas to define because they are 
essentially the major elements of the project. When an organization achieves the project 
objectives, it has accomplished the major goals of the project and the project scope is 
satisfied. Project objectives must include metrics so that the project’s success can be 
measured. The metrics can include cost, schedule, and quality metrics. Figure 19.7 lists 
the SMART criteria—useful reminders about how to ensure the project has created 
understandable and measurable objectives.
The project plan is a formal, approved document that manages and controls project 
execution. The project plan should include a description of the project scope, a list of 
activities, a schedule, time estimates, cost estimates, risk factors, resources, assign­
ments, and responsibilities. In addition to these basic components, most project professionals 
also include contingency plans, review and communications strategies, and a kill switch—a 
trigger that enables a project manager to close the project before completion.
A good project plan should include estimates for revenue and strategic necessities. It also should 
include measurement and reporting methods and details as to how top leadership will engage in 
the project. It also informs stakeholders of the benefits of the project and justifies the investment, 
commitment, and risk of the project as it relates to the overall mission of the organization.
Managers need to continuously monitor projects to measure their success. If a project 
is failing, the manager must cancel the project and save the company any further project 
costs. Canceling a project is not necessarily a failure as much as it is successful resource 
management as it frees resources that can be used on other projects that are more valuable 
to the firm.
The most important part of the plan is communication. The project manager must com­
municate the plan to every member of the project team and to any key stakeholders and 
executives. The project plan must also include any project assumptions and be detailed 
enough to guide the execution of the project. A key to achieving project success is earning 
consensus and buy-in from all key stakeholders. By including key stakeholders in project 
plan development, the project manager allows them to have ownership of the plan. This 
often translates to greater commitment, which in turn results in enhanced motivation and 
productivity. The two primary diagrams most frequently used in project planning are PERT 
and Gantt charts.
A PERT (Program Evaluation and Review Technique) chart is a graphical network 
model that depicts a project’s tasks and the relationships between them. A dependency is a 
logical relationship that exists between the project tasks, or between a project task and a mile­
stone. PERT charts define dependency between project tasks before those tasks are scheduled 
(see Figure 19.8). The boxes in Figure 19.8 represent project tasks, and the project manager 
can adjust the contents of the boxes to display various project attributes such as schedule 
and actual start and finish times. The arrows indicate that a task depends on the start or the 
completion of a different task. The critical path estimates the shortest path through the proj­
ect ensuring all critical tasks are completed from start to finish. The red line in Figure 19.8 
displays the critical path for the project.

344  *  Unit 5  Transforming Organizations
A Gantt chart is a simple bar chart that lists project tasks vertically against the project’s 
time frame, listed horizontally. A Gantt chart works well for representing the project schedule. 
It also shows actual progress of tasks against the planned duration. Figure 19.9 displays a 
software development project using a Gantt chart.
FIGURE 19.8
PERT Chart Expert, a PERT 
Chart Example.
Source: Microsoft Office 2016
2022
Project
Approval
9/24/2021
Prototype
Development
12/20/2022
Project
Development
4/1/2022
Project
Implementation
5/21/2022
Kick-Oﬀ
7/31/2022
Completion
6/25–7/21
Deﬁne Scope
7/5–8/8
Requirements
7/25–9/1
Analysis
8/11–9/13
Infrastructure
8/25–10/5
Design
9/7–10/14
Database
9/25–10/20
Data Analysis
10/15–12/16
Project Coding
12/12–12/31
Testing
1/2–2/6
Test Scripts
1/15–4/9
Project Coding
3/25–4/18
System Testing 
4/1–5/2
Integration Testing 
4/18–5/23
Scalability Testing
5/30–6/30
Application Integration
6/14–7/3
User Acceptance Testing 
7/2–7/25
Project Documentation
7/10–7/30
Phase 1 Completion
2021
Jun
Aug
Oct
Dec
Feb
Apr
Jun
20 days
24 days
21 days
27 days
35 days
39 days
34 days
42 days
38 days
63 days
26 days
20 days
36 days
85 days
25 days
32 days
36 days
32 days
FIGURE 19.9
Microsoft Project, a Gantt 
Chart Example.
Source: Microsoft Office 2016

	
Chapter 19  Managing Organizational Projects  *  345
Outsourcing Projects
In the high-speed global business environment, an organization needs to increase profits, 
grow market share, and reduce costs. Two basic options are available to organizations wishing 
to develop and maintain their information systems—in-sourcing or outsourcing.
In-sourcing (in-house development) uses the professional expertise within an organi­
zation to develop and maintain its information technology systems. In-sourcing has been 
instrumental in creating a viable supply of IT professionals and in creating a better quality 
workforce combining both technical and business skills.
Outsourcing is an arrangement by which one organization provides a service or services 
for another organization that chooses not to perform them in-house. In some cases, the entire 
MIS department is outsourced, including planning and business analysis as well as the design, 
development, and maintenance of equipment and projects. Outsourcing can range from a 
large contract under which an organization such as IBM manages all MIS services for another 
company, to hiring contractors and temporary staff on an individual basis. Common reasons 
companies outsource include:
	■	 Core competencies. Many companies have recently begun to consider outsourcing as a 
way to acquire best-practices and the business process expertise of highly skilled technol­
ogy resources for a low cost. Technology is advancing at such an accelerated rate that 
companies often lack the technical resources required to keep current.
	■	 Financial savings. It is far cheaper to hire people in China and India than pay the required 
salaries for similar labor in the United States.
	■	 Rapid growth. Firms must get their products to market quickly and still be able to react 
to market changes. By taking advantage of outsourcing, an organization can acquire the 
resources required to speed up operations or scale to new demand levels.
	■	 The Internet and globalization. The pervasive nature of the Internet has made more peo­
ple comfortable with outsourcing abroad as India, China, and the United States become 
virtual neighbors.
Outsourcing MIS enables organizations to keep up with market and technology advances—
with less strain on human and financial resources and more assurance that the IT infrastruc­
ture will keep pace with evolving business priorities (see Figure 19.10). The three forms of 
outsourcing options available for a project are:
	1.	 Onshore outsourcing—engaging another company within the same country for services.
	2.	 Nearshore outsourcing—contracting an outsourcing arrangement with a company in a 
nearby country. Often this country will share a border with the native country.
	3.	 Offshore outsourcing—using organizations from developing countries 
to write code and develop systems. In offshore outsourcing the country is 
geographically far away.
Since the mid-1990s, major U.S. companies have been sending signifi­
cant portions of their software development work offshore—primarily to 
vendors in India, but also to vendors in China, eastern Europe (including 
Russia), Ireland, Israel, and the Philippines. The big selling point for off­
shore outsourcing is inexpensive but good work. The overseas counterpart 
to an American programmer who earns as much as $63,000 per year is paid 
as little as $5,000 per year (see Figure 19.11). Developing countries in Asia 
and South Africa offer some outsourcing services but are challenged by 
language difference, inadequate telecommunication equipment, and regula­
tory obstacles. India is the largest offshore marketplace because it promotes 
English along with a technologically advanced population. Infosys, NIIT, 
Mahindra Satyam, Tata Consultancy Services, and Wipro are among the 
biggest Indian outsourcing service providers, each of which has a large pres­
ence in the United States.
LO 19.3 Identify the three differ-
ent types of outsourcing along 
with their benefits and challenges.
FIGURE 19.10
Outsourcing Models.
Indirect
Customer Control
Direct
Close
Remote
Locations of Outsourcing
Onshore
Nearshore
Oﬀshore

346  *  Unit 5  Transforming Organizations
OUTSOURCING BENEFITS
The many benefits associated with outsourcing include:
	■	 Increased quality and efficiency of business processes.
	■	 Reduced operating expenses for head count and exposure to risk for large capital investments.
	■	 Access to outsourcing service provider’s expertise, economies of scale, best practices, and 
advanced technologies.
	■	 Increased flexibility for faster response to market changes and less time to market for new 
products or services.
OUTSOURCING CHALLENGES
Outsourcing comes with several challenges. These arguments are valid and should be consid­
ered when a company is thinking about outsourcing. Many challenges can be avoided with 
proper research. The challenges include:
	■	 Length of contract. Most companies look at outsourcing as a long-term solution with a 
time period of several years. Training and transferring resources around the globe is dif­
ficult and expensive; hence, most companies pursuing offshore outsourcing contract for 
multiple years of service. A few of the challenges facing the length of the contract include:
	
1.	 It can be difficult to break the contract.
	
2.	 Forecasting business needs for the next several years is challenging and the contract 
might not meet future business needs.
	
3.	 Re-creating an internal MIS department if the outsource provider fails is costly and 
challenging.
	■	 Threat to competitive advantage. Many businesses view MIS as a competitive advantage and 
view outsourcing as a threat because the outsourcer could share the company’s trade secrets.
	■	 Loss of confidentiality. Information on pricing, products, sales, and customers can be a com­
petitive asset and often critical for business success. Outsourcing could place confidential 
information in the wrong hands. Although confidentiality clauses contained in the contracts 
are supposed to protect the company, the potential risk and costs of a breach must be analyzed.
Every type of organization in business today relies on software to operate and solve complex 
problems or create exciting opportunities. Software built correctly can support nimble organi­
zations and transform with them as they and their businesses transform. Software that effec­
tively meets employee needs will help an organization become more productive and enhance 
decision making. Software that does not meet employee needs might have a damaging effect 
on productivity and can even cause a business to fail. Employee involvement in software 
development, along with the right implementation, is critical to the success of an organization.
FIGURE 19.11
Typical Salary Ranges for 
Computer Programmers.
Country
Salary Range per Year
China
$5,000–$9,000
India
6,000–10,000
Philippines
6,500–11,000
Russia
7,000–13,000
Ireland
21,000–28,000
Canada
25,000–50,000
United States
60,000–90,000

	
Chapter 19  Managing Organizational Projects  *  347
	1.	 What are the three interdependent variables shaping project management? Why are these vari­
ables important to a video game software development project?
	2.	 Why is the cost of finding errors important to a business when developing and designing video games?
	3.	 What are the ethical and security issues associated with outsourcing the development of a video 
game to India or China?
O P E N I N G  C A S E  ST U DY  Q U E ST I O N S
One good way to learn how to develop successful systems is to review past failures. One of the most 
infamous system failures is Denver International Airport’s (DIA) baggage system. When the automated 
baggage system design for DIA was introduced, it was hailed as the savior of modern airport design. 
The design relied on a network of 300 computers to route bags and 4,000 cars to carry luggage 
across 21 miles of track. Laser scanners were to read bar-coded luggage tags, while advanced scan­
ners tracked the movement of toboggan-like baggage carts.
When DIA finally opened its doors for reporters to witness its revolutionary baggage handling system, the 
scene was rather unpleasant. Bags were chewed up, lost, and misrouted in what has since become a 
legendary systems nightmare.
One of the biggest mistakes made in the baggage handling system fiasco was that not enough 
time was allowed to properly develop the system. In the beginning of the project, DIA assumed it was 
the responsibility of individual airlines to find their own way of moving the baggage from the plane 
to the baggage claim area. The automated baggage system was not involved in the initial planning 
of the DIA project. By the time the DIA developers decided to create an integrated baggage system, 
the time frame for designing and implementing such a complex and huge system was not possible.
Another common mistake that occurred during the project was that the airlines kept changing 
their business requirements. This caused numerous issues, including the implementation of power 
supplies that were not properly updated for the revised system design, which caused overloaded 
motors and mechanical failures. Besides the power supply design problem, the optical sensors did 
not read the bar codes correctly, causing issues with baggage routing.
Finally, BAE, the company that designed and implemented the automated baggage system for 
DIA, had never created a baggage system of this size before. BAE had created a similar system in an 
airport in Munich, Germany, where the scope was much smaller. Essentially, the baggage system had 
an inadequate IT infrastructure because it was designed for a much smaller system.
DIA simply could not open without a functional baggage system so the city had no choice but to 
delay the opening date for more than 16 months, costing taxpayers roughly $1 million per day, which 
totaled around $500 million.1
Questions
	1.	 One problem with DIA’s baggage system was inadequate testing. Why is testing important to a 
project’s success? Why do so many projects decide to skip testing?
	2.	 Evaluate the different systems development methodologies. Which one would have most signifi­
cantly increased the chances of the project’s success?
	3.	 How could more time spent in the analysis and design phase have saved Colorado taxpayers 
hundreds of millions of dollars?
	4.	 Why could BAE not take an existing IT infrastructure and simply increase its scale and expect it to work?
Chapter Nineteen Case:  Disaster at Denver International Airport

348  *  Unit 5  Transforming Organizations
19.1.	 Explain project management and identify the primary reasons projects fail.
A project is a temporary or short-term endeavor undertaken to create a unique product, service, or result, 
such as developing a custom ecommerce site or merging databases. Project management is the applica­
tion of knowledge, skills, tools, and techniques to project activities to meet project requirements. A proj­
ect manager is an individual who is an expert in project planning and management, defines and develops 
the project plan, and tracks the plan to ensure that the project is completed on time and on budget. The 
primary reasons projects fail include unclear or missing business requirements, skipped phases, changing 
technology, the cost of finding errors in the SDLC, and imbalance of the triple constraints.
19.2.	 Identify the primary project planning diagrams.
A PERT (Program Evaluation and Review Technique) chart is a graphical network model that depicts a 
project’s tasks and the relationships between those tasks. A dependency is a logical relationship that 
exists between the project tasks or between a project task and a milestone. A Gantt chart is a simple 
bar chart that depicts project tasks against a calendar. In a Gantt chart, tasks are listed vertically and 
the project’s time frame is listed horizontally. A Gantt chart works well for representing the project 
schedule. It also shows actual progress of tasks against the planned duration.
19.3.	 Identify the three different types of outsourcing along with their benefits 
and challenges.
	■	
Onshore outsourcing—engaging another company within the same country for services.
	■	
Nearshore outsourcing—contracting an outsourcing arrangement with a company in a nearby 
country.
	■	
Offshore outsourcing—using organizations from developing countries to write code and develop 
systems.
The many benefits associated with outsourcing include increased quality and efficiency of a process, 
service, or function; reduction of operating expenses and exposure to risks involved with large capi­
tal investments; and access to the outsourcing service provider’s expertise, economies of scale, best 
practices, and advanced technologies. Outsourcing comes with several challenges, including length 
of contracts, losing competitive advantages, and risking a breach of confidential information.
L E A R N I N G  O U T C O M E  R E V I E W
	1.	What role does project management play in the systems development effort? 
	2.	What role does the project manager play in determining a project’s success? 
	3.	Why would a project require an executive sponsor?
	4.	Why would a project manager use Gantt and PERT charts? 
	5.	Why is gathering business requirements a challenge for most projects? 
	6.	What are the different types of outsourcing available for a project? 
	7.	What are the risks associated with outsourcing? 
	8.	Explain the goals of the Project Management Institute and identify three key terms associated 
with PMBOK.
	9.	Explain the different types of feasibility studies a project manager can use to prioritize project 
importance. 
R E V I E W  Q U E S T I O N S

	
Chapter 19  Managing Organizational Projects  *  349
1.	 Understanding Project Failure
You are the director of project management for Stello, a global manufacturer of high-end writing 
instruments. The company sells to primarily high-end customers, and the average price for one of its 
fine writing instruments is about $350. You are currently implementing a new customer relationship 
management system, and you want to do everything you can to ensure a successful systems devel­
opment effort. Create a document summarizing the primary reasons this project could fail, along 
with your strategy to eliminate the possibility of system development failure on your project.
2.	 Saving Failing Systems
Crik Candle Company manufactures low-end candles for restaurants. The company generates more 
than $40 million in annual revenues and has more than 300 employees. You are in the middle of a 
large multimillion-dollar supply chain management implementation. Your project manager has just 
come to you with the information that the project might fail for the following reasons:
■	
Several business requirements were incorrect and the scope has to be doubled.
■	
Three developers recently quit.
■	
The deadline has been moved up a month.
Develop a list of options that your company can follow to ensure that the project remains on schedule 
and within budget.
3.	 Explaining Project Management
Prime Time Inc. is a large consulting company that specializes in outsourcing people with project 
management capabilities and skills. You are in the middle of an interview for a job with Prime Time. 
The manager performing the interview asks you to explain why managing a project plan is critical to 
a project’s success. The manager also wants you to explain scope creep and feature creep and your 
tactics for managing them on a project. Finally, the manager wants you to elaborate on your strate­
gies for delivering successful projects and reducing risks.
4.	 Applying Project Management Techniques
You have been hired by a medium-sized airline company, Sun Best. Sun Best currently flies more than 
300 routes in the East. The company is experiencing tremendous issues coordinating its 3,500 pilots, 
7,000 flight attendants, and 2,000 daily flights. Determine how Sun Best could use a Gantt chart to 
help it coordinate pilots, flight attendants, and daily flights. Using Excel, create a sample Gantt chart 
highlighting the different types of activities and resources Sun Best could track with the tool.
5.	 SharePoint
Life is good when you can complete all your projects by the due date and under budget. Life is not 
good when you miss your deadlines, exceed your budget, and fail to meet the business requirements. 
One tool that can help ensure that your life always stays good is Microsoft SharePoint. With SharePoint, 
you can connect with employees enterprisewide to collaborate, share ideas, and reinvent the way work 
flows. Whether working as a team or an individual, SharePoint helps you organize information, people, 
and projects. SharePoint can make any manager’s life easier by organizing teamwork around common 
milestones. You can make sure that work is completed by assigning people tasks that can be tracked 
and prioritized. You can keep an eye on important details with real-time summaries of your projects that 
warn you about delays and keep next steps and milestones on your radar. Explain why using a project 
management/collaboration tool such as SharePoint can help ensure that you never fail as a manager. 
Be sure to explain any project management terms such as deliverables, dependencies, and milestones.
M A K I N G  B U S I N E S S  D E C I S I O N S

350  *  Unit 5  Transforming Organizations
6.	 Edward Yourdon’s book Death March describes the complete software developer’s guide to 
surviving “mission impossible” projects. MIS projects are challenging, and project managers are 
expected to achieve the impossible by pulling off a successful project even when pitted against 
impossible challenges. In Death March, infamous software developer Edward Yourdon presents 
his project classification displayed here. Yourdon measures projects based on the level of pain 
and chances for success.2
■	
Mission Impossible Project: This project has a great chance of success and your hard work 
will pay off as you find happiness and joy in the work. For example, this is the type of project 
where you work all day and night for a year and become the project hero as you complete the 
mission impossible and reap a giant promotion as your reward.
■	
Ugly Project: This project has a high chance of success but is very painful and offers little hap­
piness. For example, you work day and night to install a new accounting system and although 
successful, you hate accounting and dislike the company and its products.
■	
Kamikaze Project: This is a project that has little chance of success but you are so passion­
ate about the content that you find great happiness working on the project. For example, you 
are asked to build a website to support a cancer foundation, a cause near to your heart, but 
the company is nonprofit and doesn’t have any funds to help buy the software you need to 
get everything working. You patch the system together and implement many manual work-
arounds just to keep the system functioning.
■	
Suicide Project: This project has no chance of success and offers you nothing but pain. This is 
the equivalent of your worst nightmare project. Word of caution, avoid suicide projects!2
1.	 Analyze your school and work projects and find a project that would fit in each box in the 
accompanying figure.
2.	 What could you have done differently on your suicide project to ensure its success?
3.	 What can you do to avoid being placed on a suicide project? Given the choice, which type 
of project would you choose to work on and why?
Kamikaze
Suicide
Ugly
Chance of Success
Mission
Impossible
Level of Happiness

	
Chapter 19  Managing Organizational Projects  *  351
Agile methodology  326
Alpha testing  319
Analysis phase  314
Brainstorming  314
Bug  316
Business requirement  314
Change agent  314
Communication plan  342
Computer-aided software 
engineering (CASE)  315
Control objects for information 
and related technology 
(COBIT)  316
Conversion  312
Corrective maintenance  319
Critical path  343
Data flow diagram (DFD)  315
Dependency  343
Design phase  315
Development phase  316
Development testing  312
Discovery prototyping  326
Executive sponsor  342
Extensible Markup Language 
(XML)  330
Extreme programming (XP) 
methodology  327
Feasibility  339
Fourth-generation language 
(4GL)  316
Gantt chart  344
Graphical user interface (GUI)  315
Help desk  318
Implementation phase  318
In-sourcing (in-house 
development)  345
Intangible benefits  339
Integration testing  319
Interoperability  330
Iterative development  326
Joint application development 
(JAD)  314
Kill switch  343
Loose coupling  330
Maintenance phase  319
Methodology  325
Nearshore outsourcing  345
Object-oriented languages
  316
Offshore outsourcing  345
Off-the-shelf application  312
Online training  318
Onshore outsourcing  345
Outsourcing  345
Parallel implementation  319
PERT (Program Evaluation and 
Review Technique) chart  343
Phased implementation  319
Pilot implementation  319
Planning phase  314
Plunge implementation  319
Preventive maintenance  319
Project  312
Project assumption  342
Project constraint  342
Project deliverable  342
Project management  000
Project management office 
(PMO)  342
Project manager  343
Project milestone  342
Project objective  342
Project plan  342
Project requirements 
document  342
Project scope  342
Project scope statement  342
Project stakeholder  342
Prototyping  326
Rapid application development 
(RAD) methodology (rapid 
prototyping)  327
Rational unified process (RUP) 
methodology  328
Requirements definition 
document  314
Requirements management  314
Responsibility matrix  342
Scripting language  316
Scrum methodology  328
Service-oriented architecture 
(SOA)  328
Sign-off  314
SOA service  331
Software customization  312
Software engineering  315
U N I T  S U M M A R Y
A
n organization must remain competitive in this quick-paced, constantly changing, global 
business environment. It must implement technology that is adaptive, disruptive, and trans­
formable to meet new and unexpected customer needs. Focusing on the unexpected and 
understanding disruptive technologies can give an organization a competitive advantage.
Organizations need software that users can transform quickly to meet the requirements of the rap­
idly changing business environment. Software that effectively meets employee needs will help an orga­
nization become more productive and make better decisions. Software that does not meet employee 
needs may have a damaging effect on productivity. Employee involvement along with using the right 
implementation methodology in developing software is critical to the success of an organization.
Information technology has rapidly expanded from a backroom resource providing competitive 
advantage (e.g., cost, time, quality) to a front-office resource (e.g., marketing, sales) that is a competi­
tive necessity. The dynamic business and technical environment of the 21st century is driving the need 
for technology infrastructures and applications architecture that are increasingly flexible, integrated, 
and maintainable (while always providing functionality, cost effectiveness, timeliness, and security).
K E Y  T E R M S

352  *  Unit 5  Transforming Organizations
Status report  342
Systems development life cycle 
(SDLC)  312
System testing  319
Tangible benefits  339
Test conditions  316
Testing phase  316
Unit testing  319
User acceptance testing 
(UAT)  344
User documentation  318
Waterfall methodology  325
Web service  330
Workshop training  318
To Share—Or Not To Share
People love social networks! Social networks are everywhere and a perfect way to share vacation 
photos, family events, and birthday parties with family, friends, and co-workers. About 40 percent of 
adults use at least one social media website, and 51 percent of those use more than one website. The 
majority of users are between the ages of 18 and 24. The Pew Research Center found that 89 percent 
of social network users primarily use the websites to update friends and family, while 57 percent use 
the websites to make plans with friends, and 49 percent use the websites to make new friends.
Facebook, Myspace, LinkedIn, Friendster, Urban Chat, and Black Planet are just a few of more 
than 100 websites connecting people around the world who are eager to share everything from pho­
tos to thoughts and feelings. But we need to remember that sometimes you can share too much; 
there can be too much information. Choosing whom you share with and what you share is something 
you want to think about for your personal social networks and corporate social networks. According 
to Pew Research, more than 40 percent of users allow open access to their social networking profiles, 
which allows anyone from anywhere to view all of their personal information. The remaining 60 per­
cent restrict access to friends, family, and co-workers. The following are the top 10 things you should 
consider before posting information to your social networks.
1: If You Don’t Want to Share It—Don’t Post It
You can select all the privacy settings you want on social networking sites, but the fact is, if you post it, 
it has the potential to be seen by someone you don’t want seeing it. You know all those fun Facebook 
U N I T  C L O S I N G  C A S E  O N E
© Tetra Images/Getty Images
© The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc./Lars A. 
Niki, photographer
© The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc./
Christopher Kerrigan, photographer

	
Chapter 19  Managing Organizational Projects  *  353
applications, quizzes, and polls you can’t help but fill out? A study performed by the University of Vir­
ginia found that of the top 150 applications on Facebook, 90 percent were given access to information 
they didn’t need in order for the application to function. So when you sign up to find out what sitcom 
star you most identify with, the makers of that poll now have access to your personal information. It’s 
anybody’s guess where it goes from there. Social networking is all about sharing, so something you 
think is in confidence can easily be shared and then shared again, and before you know it, someone 
you don’t even know has access to something private. “When in doubt, leave it out” is a good motto 
to follow. And always remember that anything you share has the potential to be leaked in some way.
2: Never Give Out Your Password Hints
Most websites that contain secure personal information require a password and have at least one 
password hint in case you forget. It typically goes like this: You sign up for something such as online 
banking and you get a log-in and password and then choose a security question for when you forget 
your password. What’s the name of your first pet? What’s your mother’s maiden name? What was your 
high school mascot? What’s the name of the first street you lived on? Including any of these details 
on a Facebook wall or status update may not seem like a big deal, but it could provide an identity 
thief with the last piece of the puzzle needed to hack into your bank account. Think before you post 
anything that could compromise this information.
3: Never Give Out Your Password
This one really seems like a no-brainer, but if it didn’t happen, then Facebook probably wouldn’t feel 
the need to list it in the No. 1 slot on its list of things you shouldn’t share. Even sharing the password 
with a friend so he or she can log on and check something for you can be a risk. This is especially true 
with couples who feel like there’s enough trust to share these kinds of things. Here’s another scenario 
for you: You give your boyfriend your Facebook password because he wants to help you upload some 
vacation photos. A couple of months later, the relationship sours, he turns into a not-so-nice guy, and 
then there’s a person out there who doesn’t like you and has your log-in information. Time to cancel 
your account and get a new one. If you’d kept that information private, you could simply move on 
with your life. Now you have a compromised profile, and if you link to other sites or profiles, all that 
information is at risk as well. Keep your password to yourself, no matter what, and you never have to 
worry about it.
4: Never Provide Personal Financial Information
You would think that nobody would share things like where they do their banking or what their stock 
portfolio looks like, but it happens. It’s easy for an innocent Facebook comment to reveal too much 
about your personal finances. Consider this scenario: You’re posting to a long thread on a friend’s 
wall about the bank crisis. You say something along the lines of, “We don’t need to worry because 
we bank with a teacher’s credit union,” or even, “We put all our money into blue chip stocks and plan 
to ride it out.” Again, if you’re one of the 40 percent who allow open access to your profile, then sud­
denly identity thieves know where you bank and where you have the bulk of your investments. It’s 
easy to forget that what may seem like a harmless comment on a Facebook wall could reveal a great 
deal about your personal finances. It’s best to avoid that kind of talk.
5: Never Give Out Your Address or Phone Numbers
File this one under security risk. If you share your address and phone number on a social networking 
site, you open yourself up to threats of identity theft and other personal dangers such as burglaries. If 
you post that you’re going on vacation and you have your address posted, then everyone knows you 
have an empty house. Identity thieves could pay a visit to your mailbox and open up a credit card in 
your name. Burglars could rid your home of anything of value. Even just posting your phone number 
gives people with Internet savvy easy access to your address. Reverse lookup services can supply 
anyone with your home address in possession of your phone number.

354  *  Unit 5  Transforming Organizations
6: Never Share Photos of Your Children
Social networking sites are a common place for people to share pictures of their families, but if you’re 
one of the 40 percent of users who don’t restrict access to your profile, then those pictures are there 
for everyone to see. It’s a sad fact, but a lot of predators use the Internet to stalk their prey. If you post 
pictures of your family and combine that with information like, “My husband is out of town this week­
end” or “Little Johnny is old enough to stay at home by himself now,” then your children’s safety could 
be at risk. Nobody ever thinks it will happen to them until it does, so safety first is a good default mode 
when using social networking sites. Just like with other private matters, send family photos only to a 
select group of trusted friends and colleagues who you know won’t share them.
7: Never Provide Company Information
You may be dying to tell the world about your new work promotion, but if it’s news that could be 
advantageous to one of your company’s competitors, then it’s not something you should share. News 
of a planned expansion or a big project role and anything else about your workplace should be kept 
private. Sophos, a security software company, found that 63 percent of companies were afraid of 
what their employees were choosing to share on social networking sites. If you want to message it 
out, be selective and send private emails. Many companies are so serious about not being included 
in social networking sites that they forbid employees from using sites like Facebook at work. Some 
IT departments even filter the URLs and block access to these sites so employees aren’t tempted to 
log on.
8: Never Give Links to Websites
With 51 percent of social network users taking advantage of more than one site, there’s bound to be 
some crossover, especially if you have the sites linked. You may post something you find innocuous 
on Facebook, but then it’s linked to your LinkedIn work profile and you’ve put your job at risk. If you 
link your various profiles, be aware that what you post in one world is available to the others. In 2009, 
a case of an employee caught lying on Facebook hit the news. The employee asked off for a weekend 
shift because he was ill and then posted pictures on his Facebook profile of himself at a party that 
same weekend. The news got back to his employer easily enough and he was fired. So if you choose 
to link your profiles, it’s no longer a “personal life” and “work life” scenario.
9: Keep Your Social Plans to Yourself
Sharing your social plans for everybody to see isn’t a good idea. Unless you’re planning a big party 
and inviting all the users you’re connected to, it will only make your other friends feel left out. There 
are also some security issues at stake here. Imagine a scenario where a jealous ex-boyfriend knows 
that you’re meeting a new date out that night. What’s to keep the ex from showing up and causing 
a scene or even potentially getting upset or violent? Nothing. If you’re planning a party or an outing 
with a group of friends, send a personal “e-vite” for their eyes only and nobody is the wiser. If you’re 
trying to cast a wide net by throwing out an idea for a social outing, just remember that anyone who 
has access to your profile sees it.
10: Do Not Share Personal Conversations
On Facebook, users can send personal messages or post notes, images, or videos to another user’s 
wall. The wall is there for all to see, while messages are between the sender and the receiver, just like 
an email. Personal and private matters should never be shared on your wall. You wouldn’t go around 
with a bullhorn announcing a private issue to the world, and the same thing goes on the Internet. 
This falls under the nebulous world of social networking etiquette. There is no official handbook for 
this sort of thing, but use your best judgment. If it’s not something you’d feel comfortable sharing in 
person with extended family, acquaintances, work colleagues, or strangers, then you shouldn’t share 
it on your Facebook wall.3

	
Chapter 19  Managing Organizational Projects  *  355
Questions
1.	 Which phase in the systems development life cycle is the most critical when building a social 
media website?
2.	 Which phase in the systems development life cycle is the least critical when building a social 
media website?
3.	 If you were consulting to a business that wanted to build a social networking website, which 
development methodology would you recommend and why?
4.	 What are the three interdependent variables shaping project management?  Why are these vari­
ables important to a social media software development project?
5.	 What are the ethical and security issues associated with outsourcing the development of a social 
media website?
Box Up Your Data
What happens when you need a file for a class that you have on your desktop back at home? What 
happens when you want to share your wedding video with your friends and family around the world? 
What happens when you want to safeguard the 4,000 selfies you have taken over the past year? Your 
best bet is to store your data in a Box! Box offers data storage services that: Help you securely store, 
share, and manage your files.
	■	
Store unlimited data at the start.
	■	
Securely send large files online.
	■	
Take advantage of comprehensive security for mobile devices.
	■	
Easily collaborate online with anyone, anywhere.
	■	
Control who can access content.
	■	
Edit documents and files online.
Box is a cloud data-sharing service that can increase your productivity by making it easy to create 
and collaborate with co-workers by using computers, iPhones, iPads, Androids, or other devices. With 
a Box site, you can access up to 50GB of files from anywhere. Through a web link, you can invite oth­
ers to share your files or collaborate on your documents, and you can synchronize files from Box to 
your desktop and vice versa.
U N I T  C L O S I N G  C A S E  T W O
© Ingram Publishing/AGE Fotostock
© Stockbyte/Getty Images
© Shutterstock / Zurijeta

356  *  Unit 5  Transforming Organizations
Another College Start-Up Box
Rachel King from InfoWorld interviewed Box founder Aaron Levie on how he and his childhood friends 
started the company. Box as a platform and company was born in 2005, but even that was well after the 
establishment of the friendship between Levie and his cofounder and Box’s chief financial officer, Dylan 
Smith. Smith and Levie met as classmates at Islander Middle School on Mercer Island, Washington, a sub­
urb southeast of Seattle, and then went to Mercer Island High School together. “Even back then he started 
getting me interested in entrepreneurship,” Smith recalled. “He was much more interested in technology 
[than business] back then.” Two other key members of the Box team were also childhood friends.
Jeff Queisser, currently vice president of Box’s technical operations, met Levie when they were in 
the fourth and fifth grades, respectively, as neighbors. By high school, Queisser recalled that the two 
were starting “kinda crazy businesses.” “[Levie] was a magician, and I was very much a hard core 
nerd and doing programming,” Queisser laughed.
Sam Ghods, now vice president of technology at Box, joined the group in the tenth grade when his 
family relocated from Illinois to Mercer Island. The same year in school, Ghods recalled that he and 
Queisser became friends on the bus to school, eventually hanging out more frequently with Smith and 
Levie as well and getting involved in various business schemes.
In high school, Levie’s parents’ hot tub served as the discussion forum. “We would get a call at 
about 12:30, and it would be Aaron, ‘What do you think about this? I think this could be absolutely 
insane. Like, come over right now. I got towels, just bring shorts, come over,’” Queisser remembers. 
“This would be at 12:30 and by like 12:40, we were in his hot tub just iterating ideas.”
And although he built a lot of websites in high school, Levie doesn’t brag about having a strong tech­
nical background, admitting, “They weren’t very good websites.” One example was a search engine 
dubbed Zizap, which Levie facetiously peddled as “the world’s fastest search engine if you have never 
been to Google.” Another project was Fastest.com, a website that let people buy and sell their homes 
online. Levie notes sarcastically that it “made sense as a high school senior to launch that company.”
These early rumblings of entrepreneurship would soon pay dividends. Levie enrolled at the Uni­
versity of Southern California in 2003 to study business, which is where the idea that was to become 
Box began to develop. “It’s not like a lightning bolt that hits you in the head, and all of a sudden you 
just get so obsessed with storing files online. It was a series of factors,” he explained.
The first piece of the puzzle came from the basic difficulty of getting work done. He and his fellow 
students were working from lots of computers, collaborating on projects, and accessing files from dif­
ferent places, including libraries, classrooms, and dorm rooms.
“It felt unbelievably kind of painful and taxing to share data across those different systems and 
with other people. It seemed like there should be a simpler solution,” Levie remarked.
A business school project in which students were asked to evaluate a particular industry added 
another piece to the puzzle. Levie chose the nascent online storage industry and wrote a paper on 
flaws with existing businesses in the market and what one could do to build a better business effec­
tively. It didn’t take long before he realized the massive potential. “It was very obvious that there 
should be a technology category that solved this problem,” he said.
“When we were talking about just the things that we were doing and the stuff we were working 
on, Box came up,” Levie described. “It’s very, very early in the process, and Dylan Smith decided to 
join on board as the other half of the business and product side. He handled the finance and some of 
the early marketing stuff. That was how we started.”4
Questions
1.	 List the different systems development methodologies and explain which one would be best sup­
ported by a service like Box. 
2.	 Evaluate the following for Box.
	
a.	 List and describe the seven phases in the systems development life cycle and determine 
which phase is most important for Box.

	
Chapter 19  Managing Organizational Projects  *  357
	
b.	 Review the primary principles of successful software development and prioritize them in order 
of importance to Box.
	
c.	 Explain how the company can use project management to ensure success.
	
d.	 Explain the pros and cons of outsourcing your data storage to a company like Box. 
3.	 Why is building agile software important for all of the companies?
4.	 What types of information security issues should companies be aware as they use cloud services 
such as Box?
5.	 What types of ethical dilemmas should the companies be aware of as they use cloud services 
such as Box?
1. Confusing Coffee
Business requirements are the detailed set of business requests that any new system must meet in 
order to be successful. A sample business requirement might state, “The system must track all cus­
tomer sales by product, region, and sales representative.” This requirement states what the system 
must do from the business perspective, giving no details or information on how the system is going 
to meet this requirement.
You have been hired to build an employee payroll system for a new coffee shop. Review the fol­
lowing business requirements and highlight any potential issues.
■	
All employees must have a unique employee ID.
■	
The system must track employee hours worked based on employee’s last name.
■	
Employees must be scheduled to work a minimum of eight hours per day.
■	
Employee payroll is calculated by multiplying the employee’s hours worked by $7.25.
■	
Managers must be scheduled to work morning shifts.
■	
Employees cannot be scheduled to work more than eight hours per day.
■	
Servers cannot be scheduled to work morning, afternoon, or evening shifts.
■	
The system must allow managers to change and delete employees from the system.
2. Picking Projects
You are a project management contractor attempting to contract work at a large telecommunica­
tions company, Hex Incorporated. Your interview with Debbie Fernandez, the senior vice president 
of IT, went smoothly. The last thing Debbie wants to see from you before she makes her final hiring 
decision is a prioritized list of the projects here. You are sure to land the job if Debbie is satisfied 
with your prioritization.
Create a report for Debbie prioritizing the following projects and be sure to include the business 
justifications for your prioritization.
■	
Upgrade accounting system.
■	
Develop employee vacation tracking system.
■	
Enhance employee intranet.
■	
Cleanse and scrub data warehouse information.
■	
Performance test all hardware to ensure 20 percent growth scalability.
A P P LY  Y O U R  K N O W L E D G E

358  *  Unit 5  Transforming Organizations
■	
Implement changes to employee benefits system.
■	
Develop backup and recovery strategy.
■	
Implement supply chain management system.
■	
Upgrade customer relationship management system.
■	
Build executive information system for CEO.
3. Keeping Time
Time Keepers Inc. is a small firm that specializes in project management consulting. You are a senior 
project manager, and you have recently been assigned to the Tahiti Tanning Lotion account. The 
Tahiti Tanning Lotion company is currently experiencing a 10 percent success rate (90 percent failure 
rate) on all internal IT projects. Your first assignment is to analyze one of the current project plans 
being used to develop a new CRM system (see Figure AYK.1).
Review the project plan and create a document listing the numerous errors in the plan. Be sure to 
also provide suggestions on how to fix the errors.
4.	 Facing insurmountable troubles, some people turn to faking their own death to escape legal 
issues and even the Marines. Here are a few examples:
■	
Marcus Schrenker, a Wall Street investor whose company was under investigation for fraud, 
disappeared while flying his plane over Alabama. Schrenker’s plane was found in a swamp, 
and the last anyone heard from Schrenker was a distressed radio call—until he was discov­
ered in a campground a few weeks later.
■	
A Colorado man returning from a hike reported that his friend, Lance Hering, had been injured 
on the hike, and rescue teams were dispatched to find the hiker. All the rescuers found were 
blood, a water bottle, and Hering’s shoes. Two years later, Hering was arrested with his father 
FIGURE AYK.1
Sample Project Plan. 
Source: 2010 Microsoft

	
Chapter 19  Managing Organizational Projects  *  359
at an airport in Washington State. Hering, a Marine, claimed he faked his death to avoid return­
ing to Iraq, where he feared other soldiers would kill him because of something incriminating 
he had witnessed.
■	
One Florida woman, Alison Matera, informed her friends, family, and church choir that she 
was entering hospice because she was dying of cancer. Matera’s plan unraveled when she 
appeared at her own funeral service, claiming to be her own long-lost identical twin sister. 
Police were called, and Matera admitted faking both her cancer and death.
Unexpected situations happen all the time, and the more you plan for them the better prepared you’ll 
be when developing software. Hopefully, your employees are not faking their own deaths, but they will 
get into accidents, have babies, contract viruses and diseases, and face other life issues. All of these 
scenarios lead to unplanned absenteeism, which can throw your project plan into a tailspin. What can 
happen to a project when a key employee suddenly quits or is forced to go on short-term disability? 
When reviewing all of the different SDLC methodologies, which one offers the greatest flexibility for 
unplanned employee downtime? If you could choose when your employee was absent, during which 
phase in the SDLC would it be the safest if your project were to still continue and achieve success? 
What can you do to ensure you are preparing for unplanned absenteeism on your project plan?
5. Methods Behind Methodologies
Signatures Inc. specializes in producing personalized products such as coffee mugs and pens with 
company logos. The company generates more than $40 million in annual revenues and has more 
than 300 employees. The company is in the middle of a large multimillion-dollar SCM implementa­
tion, and it has just hired your project management outsourcing firm to take over the project man­
agement efforts.
On your first day, your team is told that the project is failing for the following reasons:
■	
The project is using the traditional waterfall methodology.
■	
The SDLC was not followed and the developers decided to skip the testing phase.
■	
A project plan was developed during the analysis phase, but the old project manager never 
updated or followed the plan.
Determine what your first steps would be to get this project back on track.
6. The Travel Store
The Travel Store is facing a dilemma because it tripled in size over the past three years and finds 
its online sales escalating beyond a billion dollars. The company is having a hard time continuing 
with operations because its business processes can’t scale to meet the new demand. In the past six 
months, sales and profits have dropped and the stock price is plummeting.
The Travel Store is determined to take quick and decisive action to restore profitability and 
improve its credibility in the marketplace. One of its top priorities is to overhaul its inventory man­
agement system in an effort to create optimal levels of inventory to support sales demand. This 
would prevent higher-volume stores from running out of key sale items while also ensuring that 
lower-sales stores would not be burdened with excess inventory that could be moved only at close­
out prices. The company would like to outsource this function but is worried about the challenges of 
transferring the responsibility of this important business function as well as the issues surrounding 
confidentiality and scope definition. List the competitive advantages outsourcing could give The 
Travel Store and recommendations for addressing the company’s outsourcing concerns.
7. GEM Athletic Center
First Information Corporation is a large consulting company that specializes in systems analysis 
and design. The company has more than 2,000 employees, and first-quarter revenues reached 
$15 million. The company prides itself on maintaining an 85 percent success rate for all project 

360  *  Unit 5  Transforming Organizations
implementations. The primary reason attributed to the unusually high project success rate is the 
company’s ability to define accurate, complete, and high-quality business requirements.
The GEM Athletic Center located in Cleveland, Ohio, is interested in implementing a new payroll 
system. The current payroll process is manual and takes three employees two days each month 
to complete. The GEM Athletic Center does not have an IT department and is outsourcing the 
entire procurement, customization, and installation of the new payroll system to First Information 
Corporation.
You have been working for First Information for a little over one month. Your team has just been 
assigned the GEM Athletic Center project, and your first task is to define the initial business require­
ments for the development of the new payroll system.
a.	 Review the testimony of three current GEM Athletic Center accounting employees who detail 
the current payroll process along with their wish list for the new system. Figure AYK.2 displays 
the testimonies of Maggie Cleaver, Anne Logan, and Jim Poulos.
b.	 Review Chapter 17 Case, “Reducing Ambiguity in Business Requirements,” and highlight sev­
eral techniques you can use to develop solid business requirements.
c.	 After careful analysis, create a report detailing the business requirements for the new system. 
Be sure to list any assumptions, issues, or questions in your document.

	
Chapter 19  Managing Organizational Projects  *  361
Jim Poulos, Director of Sales
Each week I have to review all of the new memberships sold in our club. Each of my seven sales representa-
tives receives $50 from a new sale for the initiation fee. They also receive 10 percent of the type of member-
ship sold. Membership types include:
Adult, $450/month
Youth, $300/month
Family, $750/month
Senior, $300/month
Each sales representative is also paid $4.50/hour and receives a 25 percent bonus for working overtime 
and holidays. If the sales representative sells over 200 percent of expected sales they receive an additional 
25 percent bonus on their commissions. If the membership is sold during a promotion, the commission rate 
decreases. The payroll department uses time sheets to track my sales representatives’ hourly pay. I have to 
sign all time sheets once they are completed by the payroll department. I check my sales representatives’ 
schedule to validate the times on the employee time sheets. I then have to submit a separate listing of each 
employee and their corresponding commissions for initiation fees and memberships sold. I track all of my 
sales representatives’ vacation and sick time. If they are over their vacation or sick time, I have them sign a 
form stating that if they quit they will pay back all negative vacation or sick time.
I would like a system that can automatically calculate commissions and be able to handle sales forecast-
ing and “what if” analysis on my sales representatives’ commission rates. I would like to be able to walk up 
to my sales representatives and tell them that if they sell four more family memberships and one adult, they 
will receive their bonus. I would also like to be able to design promotions for our best customers. These types 
of things would really help boost sales at our club.
Maggie Cleaver, Payroll Manager
The ﬁrst thing I do each week is collect the time sheets. I review each time sheet to ensure that the employee 
punched in and out correctly. If the employee forgot to clock out, I contact that person’s director to ﬁnd the 
time that the employee should have clocked out. I then calculate all regular hours, overtime hours, and holi-
day hours and total these on the time sheet. I also track sick time and vacation time and total these on the 
time sheet. Once completed, I send the time sheet to the directors of each department for approval.
When I receive the signed time sheets back, I begin to calculate payments. First, I calculate regular pay, 
then overtime pay, and ﬁnally holiday pay. I then add in the sales representatives’ commissions, which I 
receive from the director of sales. I then calculate payment amounts for aerobics instructors because they 
are paid by class, not by hour. I receive the aerobics class schedule from the ﬁtness coordinator. I then total 
the entire pay and send a sheet with payment amounts to my co-worker Anne, who calculates taxes. I then 
calculate all sick time and vacation time and track this in a separate document. I then print labels that state 
each employee’s name, department, and the pay period. I place the labels on a new time sheet, which is 
returned to the employee punch clock.
I would like a system that automatically tracks employee sick time and vacation time. I would also like a 
system that can automatically calculate regular pay, overtime pay, and holiday pay. I don’t know if there is a 
system that can validate employee time sheets, but if there is, that would be great.
Anne Logan, Tax Manager
I receive the payment amounts from Maggie. I then calculate all city, state, and federal taxes. I also deduct 
health beneﬁts and retirement plan beneﬁts. I then cut the check to the employee and the corresponding 
checks for the taxes to the government. I manually calculate W2s and all quarterly taxes. I’m also responsible 
for correcting personal information such as a change of address. I’m also responsible for cutting checks if an 
incorrect amount was issued. I also track amounts owed by employees that have gone over their sick time or 
vacation time. I also generate checks for all salaried employees.
The part of my job that takes the longest is correlating the total cash debit for all checks and the total 
amount calculated for all checks. It’s amazing how many times these two ﬁgures do not match, which indi-
that a check was written for the wrong amount.
I would like a system that determines taxes automatically, along with quarterly tax ﬁling statements. I 
would also like a system that can perform audits.
FIGURE AYK.2
Employee Testimonies.

362  *  Unit 5  Transforming Organizations
A Y K  A P P L I C A T I O N  P R O J E C T S
If you are looking for Excel projects to incorporate into your class, try any of the following to test 
your knowledge.
Project 
Number
Project Name
Project 
Type
Plug-In
Focus Area
Project Level
Skill Set
Page 
Number
9
Security Analysis
Excel
T3
Filtering Data
Intermediate
Conditional 
Formatting, 
Autofilter, 
Subtotal
AYK.7
10
Gathering Data
Excel
T3
Data Analysis
Intermediate
Conditional 
Formatting
AYK.8
11
Scanner System
Excel
T2
Strategic 
Analysis
Intermediate
Formulas
AYK.8
12
Competitive 
Pricing
Excel
T2
Profit 
Maximization
Intermediate
Formulas
AYK.9
13
Adequate 
Acquisitions
Excel
T2
Break Even 
Analysis
Intermediate
Formulas
AYK.9
15
Assessing 
the Value of 
Information
Excel
T3
Data Analysis
Intermediate
PivotTable
AYK.10
16
Growth, Trends, 
and Forecasts
Excel
T2, T3
Data 
Forecasting
Advanced
Average, 
Trend, Growth
AYK.11
18
Formatting Grades
Excel
T3
Data Analysis
Advanced
If, LookUp
AYK.12
22
Turnover Rates
Excel
T3
Data Mining
Advanced
PivotTable
AYK.15
23
Vital Information
Excel
T3
Data Mining
Advanced
PivotTable
AYK.15
24
Breaking Even
Excel
T4
Business 
Analysis
Advanced
Goal Seek
AYK.16
25
Profit Scenario
Excel
T4
Sales Analysis
Advanced
Scenario 
Manager
AYK.16


364  *  Plug-In B1   Business Basics
P L U G - I N
Introduction
A sign posted beside a road in Colorado states, “Failing to plan is planning to fail.” Playnix 
Toys posted the sign after successfully completing its 20th year in the toy business in Colo­
rado. The company’s mission is to provide a superior selection of high-end toys for children 
of all ages. When the company began, it generated interest by using unique marketing strate­
gies and promotions. The toy business has a lot of tough competition. Large chain stores such 
as Walmart and Target offer toys at deep discount prices. Finding the right strategy to remain 
competitive is difficult in this industry, as FAO Schwarz discovered when it filed for bank­
ruptcy after 143 years in the toy business.
This plug-in introduces basic business fundamentals beginning with the three most com­
mon business structures—sole proprietorship, partnership, and corporation. It then focuses 
on the internal operations of a corporation including accounting, finance, human resources, 
sales, marketing, operations/production, and management information systems.
Types of Business
Businesses come in all shapes and sizes and exist to sell products or perform services. 
Businesses make profits or incur losses. A profit occurs when businesses sell products or 
services for more than they cost to produce. A loss occurs when businesses sell products 
or services for less then they cost to produce. Businesses typically organize in one of the 
following types:
	1.	 Sole proprietorship
	2.	 Partnership
	3.	 Corporation
B1 
Business Basics
LEARNING OUTCOMES
	1.	 Define the three common business forms.
	2.	 List and describe the seven departments commonly found in most organizations.
LO 1 Define the three common 
business forms.

	
Plug-In B1   Business Basics  *  365
SOLE PROPRIETORSHIP
The sole proprietorship is a business form in which a single person is the sole owner and is 
personally responsible for all the profits and losses of the business. The sole proprietorship is 
the quickest and easiest way to set up a business operation. No prerequisites or specific costs 
are associated with starting a sole proprietorship. A simple business license costing around 
$25 from the local county clerk is all that is required to start a sole proprietorship. The person 
who starts the sole proprietorship is the sole owner.
PARTNERSHIP
Partnerships are similar to sole proprietorships, except that this legal structure allows for more 
than one owner. Each partner is personally responsible for all the profits and losses of the busi­
ness. Similar to the sole proprietorship, starting a partnership is a relatively easy process since 
there are no prerequisites or specific costs required. When starting a partnership, it is wise to 
have a lawyer draft a partnership agreement. A partnership agreement is a legal agreement 
between two or more business partners that outlines core business issues. Partnership agree­
ments typically include:
	■	
Amount of capital each partner expects to contribute. Capital represents money whose 
purpose is to make more money, for example, the money used to buy a rental property or 
a business.
	■	
Duties and responsibilities expected from each partner.
	■	
Expectations for sharing profits and losses.
	■	
Partners’ salary requirements.
	■	
Methods for conflict resolution.
	■	
Methods for dissolving the partnership.
Limited Partnership
A limited partnership is much like a general partnership except for one important fundamen­
tal difference; the law protects the limited partner from being responsible for all of the part­
nership’s losses. The limited partner’s legal liability in the business is limited to the amount 
of his or her investment. The limited partnership enables this special type of investor to share 
in the partnership profits without being exposed to its losses in the event the company goes 
out of business. However, this protection exists only as long as the limited partner does not 
play an active role in the operation of the business.
CORPORATION
The corporation is the most sophisticated form of business entity and the most common 
among large companies. The corporation (also called organization, enterprise, or busi­
ness) is an artificially created legal entity that exists separate and apart from those indi­
viduals who created it and carry on its operations. In a corporation, the business entity is 
separate from the business owners. Shareholder is another term for business owners. An 
important advantage of using a corporation as a business form is that it offers the sharehold­
ers limited liability. Limited liability means that the shareholders are not personally liable 
for the losses incurred by the corporation. In most instances, financial losses incurred by 
a corporation are limited to the assets owned by the corporation. Shareholders’ personal 
assets, such as their homes or investments, cannot be claimed to pay off debt or losses 
incurred by the corporation.
There are two general types of corporations—for profit and not for profit. For profit 
corporations primarily focus on making money and all profits and losses are shared by the 
business owners. Not for profit (or nonprofit) corporations usually exist to accomplish some 
charitable, humanitarian, or educational purpose, and the profits and losses are not shared by 
the business owners. Donations to nonprofit businesses may be tax deductible for the donor. 
Typical examples include hospitals, colleges, universities, and foundations.

366  *  Plug-In B1   Business Basics
Eleanor Josaitis is a tiny 72-year-old woman who cofounded the Detroit civil-rights group 
Focus: HOPE. Focus: HOPE, founded in 1968, began as a food program serving pregnant 
women, new mothers, and their children. Josaitis has built the nonprofit organization from 
a basement operation run by a handful of friends into a sprawling 40-acre campus in Detroit 
that now employs over 500 people, boasts more than 50,000 volunteers and donors, and has 
helped over 30,000 people become gainfully employed.
Josaitis and her team developed a technical school to help job seekers gain certifications in 
IT support. They operate a machinists’ training program that funnels people into the employ­
ment pipeline at local automotive companies. The organization also teams up with local uni­
versities to help disadvantaged students receive college educations, and it runs a child care 
center to make sure all these opportunities are available to working and single parents. Josaitis 
states that the most courageous act she has performed in her life occurred 36 years ago when 
she turned off her television, got up off the couch, and decided to do something. “You have to 
have the guts to try something, because you won’t change a thing by sitting in front of the TV 
with the clicker in your hand,” Josaitis said.
Forming a corporation typically costs several hundred dollars in fees, and the owners must 
file a charter within the respective state. The charter typically includes:
	■	
Purpose of the intended corporation.
	■	
Names and addresses of the incorporators.
	■	
Amount and types of stock the corporation will be authorized to issue.
	■	
Rights and privileges of the shareholders.
The most common reason for incurring the cost of setting up a corporation is the recogni­
tion that the shareholder is not legally liable for the actions of the corporation. Figure B1.1 
displays the primary reasons businesses choose to incorporate.
The Limited Liability Corporation (LLC)
The limited liability corporation (LLC) is a hybrid entity that has the legal protections of a 
corporation and the ability to be taxed (one time) as a partnership. A company can form an 
LLC for any lawful business as long as the nature of the business is not banking, insurance, 
and certain professional service operations. By simply filing articles of organization with 
the respective state agency, an LLC takes on a separate identity similar to a corporation, but 
without the tax problems of the corporation. Figure B1.2 summarizes the primary differences 
between the three most common business structures.
 
Reasons Businesses Choose to Incorporate
Limited liability
In most instances, financial losses or judgments against the corporation are limited to the assets 
owned by the corporation.
Unlimited life
Unlike sole proprietorships and partnerships, the life of the corporation is not dependent on the 
life of a particular individual or individuals. It can continue indefinitely until it accomplishes its 
objective, merges with another business, or goes bankrupt. Unless stated otherwise, it could go 
on indefinitely.
Transferability of shares
It is easy to sell, transfer, or give the ownership interest in a corporation to another person. The 
process of divesting sole proprietorships or partnerships can be cumbersome and costly. Property 
has to be re-titled, new deeds drawn, and other administrative steps taken any time the slightest 
change of ownership occurs. With a corporation, all of the individual owners’ rights and privileges are 
represented by the shares of stock they own. Corporations can quickly transfer ownership by simply 
having the shareholders endorse the back of each stock certificate to another party.
Ability to raise investment capital
It is easy to attract new investors into a corporate entity because of limited liability and the easy 
transferability of ownership.
FIGURE B1.1
Reasons Businesses Choose 
to Incorporate.

	
Plug-In B1   Business Basics  *  367
LO 2 List and describe the seven 
departments commonly found in 
most organizations.
FIGURE B1.2
Comparison of Business 
Structures.
 
Sole Proprietorship
Partnership
Corporation
Licensing
Local license, $25–$100
Partnership agreement, legal fees
Articles of incorporation through the 
Secretary of State
Income
Business flows directly into 
personal income
Distributions taken by partners, as 
agreed by partners
Business and personal earnings separate, 
depending on corporate structure
Liability
Owner is liable
Owners are liable
Only business is liable
Internal Operations of a Corporation
The majority of corporations use different specialized departments to perform the unique 
operations required to run the business. These departments commonly include accounting, 
finance, human resources, sales, marketing, operations/production, and management infor­
mation systems (see Figure B1.3).
Accounting
The accounting department provides quantitative information about the finances of the busi­
ness including recording, measuring, and describing financial information. People tend to 
use the terms accounting and bookkeeping synonymously; however, the two are different. 
­Bookkeeping is the actual recording of the business’s transactions, without any analysis of 
the information. Accounting analyzes the transactional information of the business so the 
owners and investors can make sound economic decisions.
The two primary types of accounting are financial and managerial. Financial accounting 
involves preparing financial reports that provide information about the business’s perfor­
mance to external parties such as investors, creditors, and tax authorities. Financial accounting 
must follow strict guidelines known as Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP). 
Managerial accounting involves analyzing business operations for internal decision making 
and does not have to follow any rules issued by standard-setting bodies such as GAAP.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
All businesses operate using the same basic element, the transaction. A transaction is an 
exchange or transfer of goods, services, or funds involving two or more people. Each time a 
transaction occurs a source document captures all of the key data involved with the transac­
tion. The source document describes the basic transaction data such as its date, purpose, and 
amount and includes cash receipts, canceled checks, invoices, customer refunds, employee 
FIGURE B1.3
Departmental Structure of a 
Typical Organization.
COMMON DEPARTMENTS FOUND IN A CORPORATION
MARKETING
PRODUCTION
OPERATIONS
SALES
ACCOUNTING
HUMAN
RESOURCES
FINANCE
MANAGEMENT
INFORMATION
SYSTEMS

368  *  Plug-In B1   Business Basics
time sheet, etc. The source document is the beginning step in the accounting process and 
serves as evidence that the transaction occurred. Financial statements are the written records 
of the financial status of the business that allow interested parties to evaluate the profitabil­
ity and solvency of the business. Solvency represents the ability of the business to pay its 
bills and service its debt. The financial statements are the final product of the accountant’s 
analysis of the business transactions. Preparing the financial statements is a major undertak­
ing and requires a significant amount of effort. Financial statements must be understandable, 
timely, relevant, fair, and objective in order to be useful. The four primary financial state­
ments include:
	■	
Balance sheet.
	■	
Income statement.
	■	
Statement of owner’s equity.
	■	
Statement of cash flows.
Balance Sheet
The balance sheet gives an accounting picture of property owned by a company and of 
claims against the property on a specific date. The balance sheet is based on the fundamental 
accounting principle that assets = liabilities + owner’s equity. An asset is anything owned 
that has value or earning power. A liability is an obligation to make financial payments. 
Owner’s equity is the portion of a company belonging to the owners. The left (debit) side of 
a balance sheet states assets. The right (credit) side shows liabilities and owners’ equity. The 
two sides must be equal (balance). The balance sheet is like a snapshot of the position of an 
individual or business at one point in time (see Figure B1.4).
Income Statement
The income statement (also referred to as earnings report, operating statement, and profit-
and-loss (P&L) statement) reports operating results (revenues minus expenses) for a given 
time period ending at a specified date. Revenue refers to the amount earned resulting from 
the delivery or manufacture of a product or from the rendering of a service. Revenue can 
include sales from a product or an amount received for performing a service. Expenses 
refer to the costs incurred in operating and maintaining a business. The income statement 
reports a company’s net income, or the amount of money remaining after paying taxes (see 
Figure B1.5).
Statement of Owner’s Equity
The statement of owner’s equity (also called the statement of retained earnings or equity 
statement) tracks and communicates changes in the shareholder’s earnings. Profitable organi­
zations typically pay the shareholders dividends. Dividends are a distribution of earnings to 
shareholders.
FIGURE B1.4
Balance Sheet Example.
ASSETS
LIABILITIES
Current Assets 
Current Liabilities
Cash
$
Accounts Payable 
$
Securities
$ 
Loans (due < 1 year) 
$
Accounts Receivable
$
Taxes
$
Inventory
$
Long-term Liabilities 
Fixed Assets
$
Loans (due > 1 year) 
$
Total Liabilities
$
Owner’s Equity 
$
Total Assets
$
Total Liabilities +
Owner’s Equity 
$
ASSETS = LIABILITIES + OWNER’S EQUITY
250,000
30,000
1,500,000
2,920,000
7,500,000
12,200,000
150,000
750,000
200,000
2,500,000
3,600,000
8,600,000
12,200,000

	
Plug-In B1   Business Basics  *  369
Statement of Cash Flows
Cash flow represents the money an investment produces after sub­
tracting cash expenses from income. The statement of cash flows 
summarizes sources and uses of cash, indicates whether enough cash 
is available to carry on routine operations, and offers an analysis 
of all business transactions, reporting where the firm obtained its 
cash and how it chose to allocate the cash. The cash flow statement 
shows where money comes from, how the company is going to 
spend it, and when the company will require additional cash. Com­
panies typically project cash flow statements on a monthly basis for 
the current year and a quarterly basis for the next two to five years. 
A financial quarter indicates a three-month period (four quarters 
per year). Cash flow statements become less valid over time since 
numerous assumptions are required to project into the future.
When it comes to decreasing expenses and managing a compa­
ny’s cash flow, managers need to look at all costs. Ben Worthen, executive vice president and 
CIO of Manufacturers Bank in Los Angeles, states that everyone notices the million-dollar 
negotiation; however, a couple of thousand dollars here and there are just as important. When 
attempting to cut costs, Worthen listed every contract the bank had. He saved $5,000 by 
renegotiating a contract with the vendor who watered the plants, a vendor that most employ­
ees did not even know existed. He also saved $50,000 by renegotiating the contract with the 
bank’s cleaning agency. “You need to think of everything when cutting costs,” Worthen said. 
“$5,000 buys three or four laptops for salespersons.”
Finance
Finance deals with the strategic financial issues associated with increasing the value of the 
business while observing applicable laws and social responsibilities. Financial decisions 
include such things as:
	■	
How the company should raise and spend its capital.
	■	
Where the company should invest its money.
	■	
What portion of profits will be paid to shareholders in the form of dividends.
	■	
Whether the company should merge with or acquire another business.
Financial decisions are short term (usually up to one year), medium term (one to seven years), 
or long term (more than seven years). The typical forms of financing include loans (debt or 
equity) or grants. Financing may be required for immediate use in business operations or for 
an investment.
FINANCIAL ANALYSIS
Different financial ratios are used to evaluate a company’s performance. Companies can gain 
additional insight into their performance by comparing financial ratios against other compa­
nies in their industry. A few of the more common financial ratios include:
	■	
Internal rate of return (IRR)—the rate at which the net present value of an investment 
equals zero.
	■	
Return on investment (ROI)—indicates the earning power of a project and is measured 
by dividing the benefits of a project by the investment.
	■	
Cash flow analysis—a means to conduct a periodic check on the company’s financial 
health. A projected cash flow statement estimates what the stream of money will be in 
coming months or years, based on a history of sales and expenses. A monthly cash flow 
statement reveals the current state of affairs. The ability to perform a cash flow analysis 
is an essential skill for every business owner; it can be the difference between being able 
to open a business and being able to stay in business.
Income Statement
Revenue (Sales)
$60,000,000
Cost of Goods Sold
$30,000,000
Gross Profit (Sales – Cost of Goods Sold)
$30,000,000
Operating Expenses
$7,000,000
Profit Before Taxes 
(Gross Profit – Operating Expenses)
$23,000,000
Taxes
$18,000,000
Net Profit (or Loss)
$5,000,000
FIGURE B1.5
Income Statement Example.

370  *  Plug-In B1   Business Basics
	■	
Break-even analysis—a way to determine the volume 
of business required to make a profit at the current prices 
charged for the products or services. For example, if a 
promotional mailing costs $1,000 and each item generates 
$50 in revenue, the company must generate 20 sales to 
break even and cover the cost of the mailing. The break-
even point is the point at which revenues equal costs. The 
point is located by performing a break-even analysis. All 
sales over the break-even point produce profits; any drop in 
sales below that point will produce losses (see Figure B1.6).
Human Resources
Human resources (HR) includes the policies, plans, and pro­
cedures for the effective management of employees (human 
resources). HR typically focuses on the following:
FIGURE B1.6
Break-Even Analysis.
Dollars
Quantity
Sales
Costs
Break-Even
Point
Proﬁt
BREAK-EVEN POINT
	■	
Employee recruitment.
	■	
Employee selection.
	■	
Employee training and development.
	■	
Employee appraisals, evaluations, and rewards.
	■	
Employee communications.
The primary goal of HR is to instill employee commitment by creating an environment of 
shared values, innovation, flexibility, and empowerment. Most organizations recognize that 
focusing on strong HR practices that foster employee growth and satisfaction can signifi­
cantly contribute to achieving business success. The most obvious way HR practices create 
business success is through quality employee selection. Hiring the right employee who suits 
the company’s culture is difficult. Organizations create employee value by implementing 
employment practices such as training, skill development, and rewards. An organization that 
focuses on HR creates valuable employees with strategic business competencies.
MANAGEMENT TECHNIQUES
There may be no such thing as a best practice for managing people. Numerous management 
techniques are used by all different types of managers in a variety of industries. For exam­
ple, Sears and Nordstrom are legends in the retailing industry; however, their approaches 
to HR are completely different. Sears is one of the pioneering companies in the science of 
employee selection, relying on some of the most sophisticated selection tests in American 
industry. Sears employees receive extensive training in company practices; management 
tracks employee attitudes and morale through frequent and rigorous employee surveys. The 
company provides its sales representatives, who work on salary rather than commission, with 
intensive training in Sears products, the company’s operating systems, and sales techniques.
Nordstrom operates with virtually no formal personnel practices. Its hiring is decentralized, 
using no formal selection tests. Managers look for applicants with experience in customer 
contact, but the main desirable quality appears to be pleasant personalities and motivation. 
The company has only one rule in its personnel handbook: “Use your best judgment at all 
times.” Individual salesclerks virtually run their areas as private stores. Nordstrom maintains 
a continuous stream of programs to motivate employees to provide intensive service, but it 
offers very little training. Its commission-based payroll system makes it possible for sales­
clerks to earn sizable incomes. Nordstrom sales personnel are ranked within each department 
according to their monthly sales; the most successful are promoted (almost all managers are 
promoted from within the company) and the least successful are terminated.
Sears and Nordstrom are both highly successful retailers, yet they operate using widely 
different recruitment policies. One of the biggest success factors for any business is the 
company’s management and personnel. Employees must possess certain critical skills for 

	
Plug-In B1   Business Basics  *  371
the company to succeed. The HR department takes on the important task of hiring, training, 
evaluating, rewarding, and terminating employees. Effective HR goes far beyond executing 
a standard set of policies and procedures; it requires questioning and understanding the rela­
tionships between choices in managing people, the strategies and goals of the organization, 
and the possibilities presented by the external environment. Today’s competitive environ­
ment features rapid technological change, increasingly global markets, and a diverse work­
force comprising not just men and women with different sorts of career objectives, but also 
potential workers from diverse cultural and ethnic backgrounds. HR must ensure that the 
choices made in managing people are made sensibly and with clear purposes in mind.
Sales
Sales is the function of selling a good or service and focuses on increasing customer sales, 
which increases company revenues. A salesperson has the main activity of selling a product 
or service. Many industries require a license before a salesperson can sell the products, such 
as real estate, insurance, and securities.
A common view of the sales department is to see the salespersons only concerned with 
making the sale now, without any regard to the cost of the sale to the business. This is called 
the hard sell, where the salesperson heavily pushes a product (even when the customer does 
not want the product) and where price cuts are given even if they cause financial losses for 
the company. A broader view of the sales department sees it as taking on the task of building 
strong customer relationships where the primary emphasis is on securing new customers and 
keeping current customers satisfied. Many sales departments are currently focusing on build­
ing strong customer relationships.
THE SALES PROCESS
Figure B1.7 depicts the typical sales process, which begins with an opportunity and ends with 
billing the customer for the sale. An opportunity is a name of a potential customer who might 
be interested in making a purchase (opportunities are also called leads). The company finds 
opportunities from a variety of sources such as mailing lists and customer inquiries. The name 
is sent to a salesperson who contacts the potential customer and sets up a meeting to discuss 
the products. During the meeting, all problems and issues are identified and resolved, and the 
salesperson generates a quote for the customer. If the customer decides to accept the quote, a 
sales order is placed. The company fulfills the order and delivers the product, and the process 
ends when the customer is billed.
MARKET SHARE
Sales figures offer a good indication of how well a company is performing. For example, 
high sales volumes typically indicate that a company is performing well. However, they 
do not always indicate how a firm is performing relative to its competitors. For example, 
changes in sales might simply reflect shifts in market size or in economic conditions. A 
sales increase might occur because the market increased in size, not because the company 
is performing better.
Measuring the proportion of the market that a firm captures is one way to measure a firm’s 
performance relative to its competitors. This proportion is the firm’s market share and is 
calculated by dividing the firm’s sales by the total market sales for the entire industry. For 
example, if a firm’s total sales (revenues) were $2 million and the sales for the entire indus­
try were $10 million, the firm would have captured 20 percent of the total market, or have a 
20 percent market share.
Many video game products launch with great enthusiasm and die a quick death such as 
Sega’s GameGear and DreamCast, Atari’s Lynx, and Nintendo’s Virtual Boy. Video game 
consoles die quickly when only a limited number of game publishers sign up to supply games 
for the particular product. Producing video game products is a tough competitive business in 
a finicky market.

372  *  Plug-In B1   Business Basics
Reasons to Increase Market Share
Many organizations seek to increase their market share because many individuals associate 
market share with profitability. Figure B1.8 indicates the primary reasons organizations seek 
to increase their market share.
Ways to Increase Market Share
A primary way to increase market share is by changing one of the following variables: prod­
uct, price, place, or promotion (see Figure B1.9). It is common to refer to these four variables 
as the marketing mix, discussed in detail below.
FIGURE B1.7
The Sales Process.
Lead sent
to salesperson
Potential
customer
contacted
Sales Process
Potential
customer
meeting
Problems and
solutions
identiﬁed
Order
fulﬁlled
Customer
billed
Sales order
placed
Customer
sales quote
generated
Opportunity
generated
FIGURE B1.8
Reasons to Increase Market 
Share.
Reasons to Increase Market Share
Economies of scale—An organization can develop a cost advantage by selling additional products or 
higher volumes.
Sales growth in a stagnant industry—If an industry stops growing, an organization can increase its sales 
by increasing its market share.
Reputation—A successful organization with a solid reputation can use its clout to its advantage.
Increased bargaining power—Larger organizations have an advantage in negotiating with suppliers and 
distributors.
Ways to Increase Market Share
Product—An organization can change product attributes to provide more value to the customer. Improving 
product quality is one example.
Price—An organization can decrease a product’s price to increase sales. This strategy will not work if 
competitors are willing to match discounts.
Place (Distribution)—An organization can add new distribution channels. This allows the organization to 
increase the size of its market, which should increase sales.
Promotion—An organization can increase spending on product advertising, which should increase sales. 
This strategy will not work if competitors also increase advertising.
FIGURE B1.9
Ways to Increase Market 
Share.

	
Plug-In B1   Business Basics  *  373
Reasons Not to Increase Market Share
Surprisingly, it is not always a good idea to increase an organization’s market share. 
Figure B1.10 offers a few reasons increasing an organization’s market share can actually 
decrease an organization’s revenues.
Marketing
Marketing is the process associated with promoting the sale of goods or services. The mar­
keting department supports the sales department by creating promotions that help sell the 
company’s products. Marketing communications seek to build product or service awareness 
and to educate potential consumers on the product or service.
Jenny Ming, president of Old Navy, a division of Gap Inc., believes that unique market­
ing ideas for Old Navy’s original designs heavily contributed to the success of the $6.5 
billion brand. Ideas come from anywhere, and Ming found one of the company’s most 
successful products when she was dropping her daughter off at school. It was pajama day 
at school, and all of the girls were wearing pajama bottoms with a tank top. Ming began 
wondering why they even created and sold pajama tops; nobody seemed to wear them. The 
company, having problems selling pajama sets, quickly introduced “just bottoms,” a line 
of pajama bottoms selling at $15. A full pajama set cost $25. Along with the bottoms, the 
company offered tank tops in different colors so the customer could mix and match the 
items. The company built a huge business from the “just bottoms” line. Ming encourages 
her staff to look for marketing and product opportunities everywhere, even in the most 
unlikely of places.
MARKETING MIX
The classic components of marketing include the four Ps in the marketing mix: product, price, 
place, and promotion. The marketing mix includes the variables that marketing managers can 
control in order to best satisfy customers in the target market (see Figure B1.11). The orga­
nization attempts to generate a positive response in the target market by blending these four 
marketing mix variables in an optimal manner.
Figure B1.12 summarizes the primary attributes involved with each decision made in the 
marketing mix.
CUSTOMER SEGMENTATION
Market segmentation is the division of a market into similar groups of customers. It is 
not always optimal for an organization to offer the same marketing mix to vastly different 
customers. Market segmentation makes it possible for organizations to tailor the marketing 
mix for specific target markets, hence better satisfying its customer needs. Not all attri­
butes of the marketing mix need to be changed for each market segment. For example, one 
market segment might require a discounted price, while another market segment might 
require better customer service. An organization uses marketing research, market trends, 
FIGURE B1.10
Reasons Not to Increase 
Market Share.
Reasons Not to Increase Market Share
If an organization is near its production capacity and it experiences an increase in market share, it could 
cause the organization’s supply to fall below its demand. Not being able to deliver products to meet 
demand could damage the organization’s reputation.
Profits could decrease if an organization gains market share by offering deep discounts or by increasing the 
amount of money it spends on advertising.
If the organization is not prepared to handle the new growth, it could begin to offer shoddy products or 
less attentive customer service. This could result in the loss of its professional reputation and valuable 
customers.

374  *  Plug-In B1   Business Basics
and managerial judgment when deciding the optimal way to segment a market. Market 
segmentation typically includes:
	■	
Geographic segmentation—based on regional variables such as region, climate, 
population density, and population growth rate.
	■	
Demographic segmentation—based on variables such as age, gender, ethnicity, 
education, occupation, income, and family status.
	■	
Psychographic segmentation—based on variables such as values, attitudes, and lifestyles.
	■	
Behavioral segmentation—based on variables such as usage rate, usage patterns, price 
sensitivity, and brand loyalty.
FIGURE B1.11
The Marketing Mix.
Target
Market
Promotion
Product
Place
Price
4. Promotion—related to communication to and selling to potential consumers.
 
An organization can perform a break-even analysis when making promotion
 
decisions. If an organization knows the value of each customer, it can determine
 
whether additional customers are worth the cost of acquisition. Attributes
 
involved in promotion decisions involve advertising, public relations, media types, etc.
1. Product—the physical product or service oﬀered to the consumer. Product
 
decisions include function, appearance, packaging, service, warranty, etc.
2. Price—takes into account proﬁt margins and competitor pricing. Pricing includes
 
list price, discounts, ﬁnancing, and other options such as leasing.
3. Place (distribution)—associated with channels of distribution that serve as the
 
means for getting the product to the target customers. Attributes involved in place
 
decisions include market coverage, channel member selection, logistics, and
 
levels of service.
Product
Price
Place (Distribution)
Promotion
Quality
Discount
Channel
Advertising
Brand
Financing
Market
Sales
Appearance
Lease
Location
Public relations
Package
 
Logistics
Marketing Message
Function
 
Service Level
Media Type
Warranty
 
 
Budget
Service/Support
 
 
 
FIGURE B1.12
Common Attributes Involved 
with Each P in the Marketing 
Mix.

	
Plug-In B1   Business Basics  *  375
THE PRODUCT LIFE CYCLE
The product life cycle includes the four phases a product progresses through during its life 
cycle including introduction, growth, maturity, and decline. An organization’s marketing of a 
product will change depending on its stage in the product life cycle. An organization can plot 
a product’s profits as a function of the product life cycle (see Figure B1.13).
Operations/Production
Operations management (also called production management) is the management of sys­
tems or processes that convert or transform resources (including human resources) into goods 
and services. The operations department oversees the transformation of input resources (i.e., 
labor, materials, and machines) into output resources (i.e., products and services). The opera­
tions department is critical because it manages the physical processes by which companies 
take in raw materials, convert them into products, and distribute them to customers. The oper­
ations department generally ranks high in the responsibilities of general management.
TRANSFORMING CORPORATIONS
Complete transformation of an organization, or an entire industry, is the ultimate goal of suc­
cessful business process reengineering. Figure B1.14 displays a matrix that has project scope 
on one axis and project speed on the other. For a project with a relatively narrow scope where 
FIGURE B1.13
The Product Life Cycle.
Product
Sales
Introduction
Growth
Maturity
Decline
• Decline Stage—Sales begin to decline. At this point, the organization has several
 
options. It can maintain the product, possibly rejuvenating it by adding new features
 
and ﬁnding new uses. It can reduce costs and continue to oﬀer it, possibly to a loyal
 
niche segment. It can discontinue the product, liquidating remaining inventory or
 
selling it to another ﬁrm that is willing to continue the product. 
• Introduction Stage—The organization seeks to build product awareness and develop
 
the product’s market. The organization will use the marketing mix to help impact the
 
target market. Product branding and quality level are established.
• Growth Stage—The organization seeks to build brand preference and increase market
 
share. The organization maintains or increases the quality of the product and might
 
add additional features or better customer service. The organization typically enjoys
 
increases in demand with little competition allowing the price to remain constant.
• Maturity Stage—The strong growth in sales diminishes. Competition begins to
 
appear with similar products. The primary objective at this point is to defend market
 
share while maximizing proﬁts. Some companies enhance product features to
 
diﬀerentiate the product in the market.

376  *  Plug-In B1   Business Basics
the speed is fast, reengineering occurs. Fast speed with broad scope may be a turnaround 
situation requiring downsizing and tough decision making. A project with a relatively slow 
speed and narrow scope results in continuous improvement. In the upper right-hand corner of 
Figure B1.14, where the project scope is broad and the time frame for achieving that change 
is longer, the term transformation is appropriate.
Progressive Insurance offers a great example of a corporation that transformed its entire 
industry by reengineering the insurance claims process. Progressive Insurance has seen 
phenomenal growth in an otherwise staid auto insurance market. Progressive’s growth 
came not through acquisitions or mergers—the stuff that puts CEOs on the front page of 
The Wall Street Journal—but through substantial innovations in everyday operations. Pro­
gressive reengineered the insurance claim process. When a customer has an auto accident, 
Progressive representatives are on hand 24 hours a day to take the call and schedule a 
claims adjustor. The claims adjustor works out of a mobile van, enabling a nine-hour turn­
around rather than the industry standard of 10 to 17 days. The Progressive adjustor prepares 
an estimate on the spot and will, in most cases, write the customer a check immediately and 
even offer a ride home.
What provoked this innovation? Progressive says it was the strong connection it has to its 
customers, its willingness to listen to customers’ frustrations, and the common sense to act 
on those frustrations by changing the core of its business operations. As a result of customer 
feedback, the company did not merely tweak the details of the claims adjustment process. It 
dramatically rewrote the process, resulting in significant cost savings for the company. More 
important, however, the hassle-free claims process keeps customers happy and loyal, reduc­
ing the significant burden of constantly replacing lapsed customers with new ones.
Management Information Systems
Management information systems is a business function just as marketing, finance, opera­
tions, and human resources management are business functions. Formally defined, manage­
ment information systems (MIS) is a general name for the business function and academic 
discipline covering the application of people, technologies, and procedures—collectively 
called information systems—to solve business problems. Other names for MIS include infor­
mation services (IS), management information services (MIS), or managed service provider 
(MSP). In business, MIS supports business processes and operations, decision making, and 
competitive strategies. MIS involves collecting, recording, storing, and basic processing of 
information including:
	■	
Accounting records such as sales, purchase, investment, and payroll information, 
processed into financial statements such as income statements, balance sheets, ledgers, 
management reports, and so on.
FIGURE B1.14
Organizational 
Transformation through BPR.
Reengineering
Continuous
Improvement
Turnaround
Transformation
Fast
Broad
(Finding new
ways to perform
the process)
Slow
Narrow
(Finding better
ways to perform
the process)
Project Speed
Project
Scope

	
Plug-In B1   Business Basics  *  377
	■	
Operations records such as inventory, work-in-process, equipment repair and 
maintenance, supply chain, and other production/operations information, processed 
into production schedules, production controllers, inventory systems, and production 
monitoring systems.
	■	
Human resources records such as personnel, salary, and employment history information, 
processed into employee expense reports and performance-based reports.
	■	
Marketing records such as customer profiles, customer purchase histories, marketing 
research, advertising, and other marketing information, processed into advertising 
reports, marketing plans, and sales activity reports.
	■	
Strategic records such as business intelligence, competitor analysis, industry analysis, 
corporate objectives, and other strategic information, processed into industry trends 
reports, market share reports, mission statements, and portfolio models.
The bottom line is that management information systems must incorporate all aspects of 
the business to implement, control, and monitor plans, strategies, tactics, new products, new 
business models, or new business ventures.

378  *  Plug-In B1   Business Basics
T
he study of business begins with understanding the different types of businesses including a 
sole proprietorship, partnership, or a corporation. Figure B1.15 highlights seven departments 
found in a typical business.
All of these departments must be able to execute activities specific to their business function and 
also be able to work with the other departments to create synergies throughout the entire business.
P L U G - I N  S U M M A R Y
■  Accounting provides quantitative information about the finances of the business including recording, 
measuring, and describing financial information.
■  Finance deals with the strategic financial issues associated with increasing the value of the business, 
while observing applicable laws and social responsibilities.
■  Human resources (HR) includes the policies, plans, and procedures for the effective management of 
employees (human resources).
■  Sales is the function of selling a good or service and focuses on increasing customer sales, which 
increases company revenues.
■  Marketing is the process associated with promoting the sale of goods or services. The marketing 
department supports the sales department by creating promotions that help sell the company’s 
products.
■  Operations management (also called production management) is the management of systems or 
processes that convert or transform resources (including human resources) into goods and services.
■  Management information systems (MIS) is a general name for the business function and academic 
discipline covering the application of people, technologies, and procedures—collectively called 
information systems—to solve business problems.
FIGURE B1.15
Common Departments in a Business.
K E Y  T E R M S
Accounting  367
Accounting department  367
Asset  368
Balance sheet  368
Bookkeeping  367
Break-even point  370
Capital  365
Corporation 
(also called, organization, 
enterprise, or business)  365
Dividend  368
Expense  368
Finance  369
Financial accounting  367
Financial quarter  369
Financial statements  368
For profit corporation  365
Human resources (HR)  370
Income statement   368
Liability  368
Limited liability  365
Limited liability corporation (LLC)  366
Limited partnership  365
Loss  364
Managerial accounting  367
Marketing  373
Marketing communications  373
Marketing mix  373
Market segmentation  373
Net income  368
Not for profit (or nonprofit) 
corporation  365
Operations management  375
Owner’s equity  368
Partnership  365
Partnership agreement  365
Product life cycle  375
Profit  364
Revenue  368
Sales  371
Shareholder  365
Sole proprietorship  365
Solvency  368
Statement of cash flows  369
Statement of owner’s equity  368
Transaction  367

	
Plug-In B1   Business Basics  *  379
	1.	 Setting Up a Business
Your friend, Olivia Graves, is going to start her own chocolate shop, called Chocolate-By-Design. 
Olivia is an expert candy maker and one of the city’s top pastry chefs. Olivia has come to you for 
advice on what type of business Chocolate-By-Design should be—a sole proprietorship, partner­
ship, or corporation. Create a report comparing the three different types of businesses, along with 
your recommendation for Chocolate-By-Design’s business structure.
	2.	 Guest Lecturing on Business
As a recent college graduate, your favorite professor, Dr. Henning, has asked you to come back 
and guest lecture at his introduction to business course. Create a presentation defining the differ­
ent departments in a typical business, what roles each play, and why it is important that they all 
work together.
	3.	 Expanding Markets
J. R. Cash created a small business selling handmade cowboy boots, and within a year his busi­
ness is booming. J. R. currently builds all of the boots in his store and takes orders over the 
phone and from walk-in customers. There is currently a three-month waiting list for boots. J. R. 
is not sure how to grow his business and has come to you for advice. Describe the reasons and 
ways some businesses increase market share and why J. R. might choose not to increase his 
market share.
	4.	 Segmenting Customers
Due to your vast marketing experience, you have been hired by a new company, Sugar, to 
perform a strategic analysis on chewing gum. The company wants to understand the many mar­
ket segments for the different brands, flavors, sizes, and colors of gum. Create an analysis of 
the different market segments for chewing gum. What market segment would you recommend 
Sugar pursue?
	5.	 Product Life Cycle
An associate, Carl Deadmarsh, has developed a new brand of laundry detergent called Clean. Carl 
wants your opinion on his potential to enter and dominate the laundry detergent market. Using the 
product life cycle create a recommendation for Carl’s new product.
	6.	 Redesigning a Business
Tom Walton is the new CEO for Lakeside, a large cereal manufacturing company. Tom’s predeces­
sor had run the company for 50 years and did little in terms of process improvement; in fact, his 
motto was “if it isn’t broke, why fix it?” Tom wants to take advantage of technology to create new 
processes for the entire company. He believes that improving operations will increase efficiency 
and lower costs.
Tom has a major hurdle to overcome before he can begin revamping the company—its 
­employees. Many of the employees have worked at the company for decades and are comfortable 
with the motto “if it isn’t broke, why fix it?” Develop a plan Tom can use to communicate to his 
­employees the potential value gained from business process reengineering.
M A K I N G  B U S I N E S S  D E C I S I O N S

380  *  Plug-In B2  Business Process
P L U G - I N
Introduction
The benefits of business process improvement vary, but a rough rule of thumb is that it will, at 
a minimum, double the gains of a project by streamlining outdated practices, enhancing effi­
ciency, promoting compliance and standardization, and making an organization more agile. 
Business process improvement involves three key steps:
	1.	 Measure what matters to most customers.
	2.	 Monitor the performance of key business processes.
	3.	 Assign accountability for process improvement.
Comprehensive business process management systems help organizations model and 
define complete business processes, implement those processes integrated with existing sys­
tems, and provide business leaders with the ability to analyze, manage, and improve the exe­
cution of processes in real time.
Examining Business Processes
Waiting in line at a grocery store is a great example of the need for process improvement. In this 
case, the “process” is called checkout, and the purpose is to pay for and bag groceries. The process 
begins when a customer steps into line and ends when the customer receives the receipt and leaves 
the store. The process steps are the activities the customer and store personnel do to complete the 
transaction. A business process is a standardized set of activities that accomplish a specific task, 
LO 1 Describe business processes 
and their importance to an 
organization.
B2
Business Process
LEARNING OUTCOMES
	1.	 Describe business processes and their importance to an organization.
	2.	 Compare the continuous process improvement model and business process 
reengineering.
	3.	 Describe the importance of business process modeling (or mapping) and business 
process models.
	4.	 Explain business process management along with the reason for its importance to 
an organization.

	
Plug-In B2  Business Process  *  381
such as processing a customer’s order. Business processes transform a set of inputs into a set of 
outputs (goods or services) for another person or process by using people and tools. This simple 
example describes a customer checkout process. Imagine other business processes: developing 
new products, building a new home, ordering clothes from mail-order companies, requesting new 
telephone service from a telephone company, administering Social Security payments, and so on.
Examining business processes helps an organization determine bottlenecks and identify 
outdated, duplicate, and smoothly running processes. To stay competitive, organizations must 
optimize and automate their business processes. To identify which business processes need to 
be optimized, the organization must clearly understand its business processes, which typically 
have the following important characteristics:
	■	
The processes have internal and external users.
	■	
A process is cross-departmental. Departments are functional towers of expertise, but 
processes cut across departments.
	■	
The processes occur across organizations.
	■	
The processes are based on how work is done in the organization.
	■	
Every process should be documented and fully understood by everyone participating in 
the process.
	■	
Processes should be modeled to promote complete understanding.
A business process can be viewed as a “value chain.” By contributing to the creation or 
delivery of a product or service, each step in a process should add value to the preceding step. 
For example, one step in the product development process consists of conducting market accep­
tance tests. This step adds value by ensuring that the product meets the needs of the market 
before the product or service is finalized. A tremendous amount of learning and improvement 
can result from the documentation and examination of the input-output linkages. However, 
between every input and every output is a process. Knowledge and improvement can only 
be completed by peeling the layers of the onion and examining the processes through which 
inputs are converted into outputs. Figure B2.1 displays several sample business processes.
Organizations are only as effective as their business processes. Developing logical busi­
ness processes can help an organization achieve its goals. For example, an automobile manu­
facturer might have a goal to reduce the time it takes to deliver a car to a customer. The 
automobile manufacturer cannot hope to meet this goal with an inefficient ordering process or 
a convoluted distribution process. Sales representatives might be making mistakes when com­
pleting order forms, data-entry clerks might not accurately code order information, and dock 
crews might be inefficiently loading cars onto trucks. All of these errors increase the time it 
will take to get the car to the customer. Improving any one of these business processes can 
have a significant effect on the total distribution process, made up of the order entry, produc­
tion scheduling, and transportation processes.
Sample Business Processes
ACCOUNTING BUSINESS PROCESSES
■  Accounts payable
■  Accounts receivable
■  Bad/NSF checks
■  Bank account reconciliation
■  Cash receipts
■  Check requests
■  Check signing authority
■  Depreciation
■  Invoice billings
■  Petty cash
■  Month-end closing procedures
CUSTOMER SERVICE BUSINESS PROCESSES
■  Customer satisfaction survey
■  Customer service contact/complaint handling
■  Guarantee customer service satisfaction
■  Postsale customer follow-up
■  Warranty and service policies
FIGURE B2.1
Sample Business 
Processes.

382  *  Plug-In B2  Business Process
ENVIRONMENTAL BUSINESS PROCESSES
■  Environmental protection
■  Hazardous waste management
■  Air/water/soil resource management
FINANCE BUSINESS PROCESSES
■  Account collection
■  Bank loan applications
■  Banking policy and relations
■  Business plans and forecasts
■  Customer credit approval and credit terms
■  Exercise of incentive stock options
■  Property tax assessments
■  Release of financial or confidential information
■  Stock transactions
■  Weekly financial and six-week cash flow reports
HUMAN RESOURCES BUSINESS PROCESSES
■  Board of directors and shareholders meetings, minutes, and protocol
■  Disabilities employment policies
■  Drug-free workplace employment policies
■  Employee hiring policies
■  Employee orientation
■  Family and Medical Leave Act
■  Files and records management
■  Health care benefits
■  Paid and unpaid time off
■  Pay and payroll matters
■  Performance appraisals and salary adjustments
■  Resignations and terminations
■  Sexual harassment policies
■  Training/tuition reimbursement
■  Travel and entertainment
■  Workplace rules and guidelines
■  Workplace safety
MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS BUSINESS PROCESSES
■  Disaster recovery procedures
■  Backup/recovery procedures
■  Service agreements, emergency services, and community resources
■  Emergency notification procedures
■  Office and department recovery
■  User workstation standards
■  Use of personal software
■  Computer security incident reporting
■  Control of computer virus programs
■  Computer user/staff training plan
■  Internet use policy
■  Email policy
■  Computer support center
MANUFACTURING BUSINESS PROCESSES
■  Assembly manuals
■  Bill of materials
■  Calibration for testing and measuring equipment
■  FDA inspections
■  Manufacturing change orders
■  Master parts list and files
■  Serial number designation
■  Quality control for finished goods
■  Quality assurance audit procedure
SALES AND MARKETING BUSINESS PROCESSES
■  Collection of sales tax
■  Copyrights and trademarks
■  Marketing plans model number
■  Designation public relations
■  Return of goods from customers
■  Sales leads
■  Sales order entry
■  Sales training
■  Trade shows
SHIPPING, PURCHASING, AND INVENTORY CONTROL BUSINESS PROCESSES
■  Packing, storage, and distribution
■  Physical inventory procedures
■  Purchasing procedures
■  Receiving, inspection, and stocking of parts and materials
■  Shipping and freight claims
■  Vendor selection, files, and inspections

	
Plug-In B2  Business Process  *  383
Business Process Improvement
Improving business processes is paramount for businesses to stay competitive in today’s mar­
ketplace. Over the past 10 to 15 years, companies have been forced to improve their business 
processes because customers are demanding better products and services; if 
they do not receive what they want from one supplier, they have many others to 
choose from (hence the competitive issue for businesses). Figure B2.2 displays 
several opportunities for business process improvement.
Many organizations began business process improvement with a continuous 
improvement model. A continuous process improvement model attempts to 
understand and measure the current process, and make performance improve­
ments accordingly. Figure B2.3 illustrates the basic steps for continuous process 
improvement. Organizations begin by documenting what they do today, estab­
lish some way to measure the process based on what customers want, perform the 
process, measure the results, and then identify improvement opportunities based 
on the collected information. The next step is to implement process improve­
ments, and then measure the performance of the new process. This loop repeats 
over and over again and is called continuous process improvement. It might also 
be called business process improvement or functional process improvement.
This method for improving business processes is effective to obtain gradual, 
incremental improvement. However, several factors have accelerated the need to 
improve business processes. The most obvious is technology. New technologies 
(like the Internet and wireless) rapidly bring new capabilities to businesses, thereby 
raising the competitive bar and the need to improve business processes dramatically.
Another apparent trend is the opening of world markets and increased free 
trade. Such changes bring more companies into the marketplace, adding to the 
competition. In today’s marketplace, major changes are required just to stay in the game. As 
a result, companies have requested methods for faster business process improvement. Also, 
companies want breakthrough performance changes, not just incremental changes, and they 
want this now. Because the rate of change has increased for everyone, few businesses can 
afford a slow change process. One approach for rapid change and dramatic improvement is 
business process reengineering (BPR).
BUSINESS PROCESS REENGINEERING (BPR)
An organization must continuously revise and reexamine its decisions, goals, and targets to 
improve its performance. A bank may have many activities, such as investing, credit cards, 
loans, and so on, and it may be involved in cross-selling (e.g., insurance) with other preferred 
vendors in the market. If the credit card department is not functioning in an efficient manner, 
the bank might reengineer the credit card business process. This activity, business process 
reengineering (BPR), is the analysis and redesign of workflow within and between enter­
prises. BPR relies on a different school of thought than continuous process improvement. 
In the extreme, BPR assumes the current process is irrelevant, does not work, or is broken 
and must be overhauled from scratch. Such a clean slate enables business process designers 
to disassociate themselves from today’s process and focus on a new process. It is like the 
designers projecting themselves into the future and asking: What should the process look 
like? What do customers want it to look like? What do other employees want it to look like? 
How do best-in-class companies do it? How can new technology facilitate the process?
Figure B2.4 displays the basic steps in a business process reengineering effort. It begins 
with defining the scope and objectives of the reengineering project, then goes through a learn­
ing process (with customers, employees, competitors, noncompetitors, and new technology). 
LO 2 Compare the continuous 
process improvement model and 
business process reengineering.
FIGURE B2.2
Opportunities for Business 
Process Improvement.
Business Process Improvement Examples
Eliminate duplicate activities
Combine related activities
Eliminate multiple reviews and approvals
Eliminate inspections
Simplify processes
Reduce batch sizes
Process in parallel
Implement demand pull
Outsource inefficient activities
Eliminate movement of work
Organize multifunctional teams
Design cellular workplaces
Centralize/decentralize
FIGURE B2.3
Continuous Process 
Improvement Model.
Document
As-Is
Process
Establish
Measures
Follow
Process
Measure
Performance
Identify and
Implement
Improvements

384  *  Plug-In B2  Business Process
Given this knowledge base, the designers can create a vision for the future and design new 
business processes by creating a plan of action based on the gap between current processes, 
technologies, and structures, and process vision. It is then a matter of implementing the 
chosen solution. The Department of Defense (DoD) is an expert at reengineering business 
processes. Figure B2.5 highlights the Department of Defense’s best-in-class suggestions 
for a managerial approach to a reengineering effort.
Business Process Design
After choosing the method of business process improvement that is appropriate for the orga­
nization, the process designers must determine the most efficient way to begin revamping 
the processes. To determine whether each process is appropriately structured, organizations 
should create a cross-functional team to build process models that display input-output rela­
tionships among process-dependent operations and departments. They should create busi­
ness process models documenting a step-by-step process sequence for the activities that are 
required to convert inputs to outputs for the specific process.
Business process modeling (or mapping) is the activity of creating a detailed flowchart 
or process map of a work process, showing its inputs, tasks, and activities in a structured 
sequence. A business process model is a graphic description of a process, showing the 
sequence of process tasks, which is developed for a specific purpose and from a selected 
viewpoint. A set of one or more process models details the many functions of a system or 
subject area with graphics and text and its purpose is to:
	■	
Expose process detail gradually and in a controlled manner.
	■	
Encourage conciseness and accuracy in describing the process model.
	■	
Focus attention on the process model interfaces.
	■	
Provide a powerful process analysis and consistent design vocabulary.
A process model typically displays activities as boxes and uses arrows to represent data 
and interfaces. Process modeling usually begins with a functional process representation of 
LO 3 Describe the importance 
of business process modeling  
(or mapping) and business pro-
cess models.
FIGURE B2.4
Business Process 
Reengineering Model.
Set Project
Scope
Study
Competition
Create
New
Processes
Implement
Solution
Managerial Approach to Reengineering Projects
1.
Define the scope. Define functional objectives; determine the management strategy to be followed 
in streamlining and standardizing processes; and establish the process, data, and information 
systems baselines from which to begin process improvement.
2.
Analyze. Analyze business processes to eliminate non-value-added processes; simplify and 
streamline processes of little value; and identify more effective and efficient alternatives to the 
process, data, and system baselines.
3.
Evaluate. Conduct a preliminary, functional, economic analysis to evaluate alternatives to baseline 
processes and select a preferred course of action.
4.
Plan. Develop detailed statements of requirements, baseline impacts, costs, benefits, and schedules 
to implement the planned course of action.
5.
Approve. Finalize the functional economic analysis using information from the planning data, and 
present to senior management for approval to proceed with the proposed process improvements and 
any associated data or system changes.
6.
Execute. Execute the approved process and data changes, and provide functional management 
oversight of any associated information system changes.
FIGURE B2.5
Managerial Approach to 
Reengineering Projects.

	
Plug-In B2  Business Process  *  385
what the process problem is or an As-Is process model. As-Is process models represent the 
current state of the operation that has been mapped, without any specific improvements or 
changes to existing processes. The next step is to build a To-Be process model that displays 
how the process problem will be solved or implemented. To-Be process models show the 
results of applying change improvement opportunities to the current (As-Is) process model. 
This approach ensures that the process is fully and clearly understood before the details of a 
process solution are decided. The To-Be process model shows how the what is to be realized. 
Figure B2.6 displays the As-Is and To-Be process models for ordering a hamburger.
Analyzing As-Is business process models leads to success in business process reengineer­
ing since these diagrams are very powerful in visualizing the activities, processes, and data 
flow of an organization. As-Is and To-Be process models are integral in process reengineer­
ing projects. Figure B2.7 illustrates an As-Is process model of an order-filling process devel­
oped by a process modeling team representing all departments that contribute to the process. 
The process modeling team traces the process of converting the input (orders) through all the 
intervening steps until the final required output (payment) is produced. The map shows how 
all departments are involved as the order is processed.
It is easy to become bogged down in excessive detail when creating an As-Is process 
model. The objective is to aggressively eliminate, simplify, or improve the To-Be processes. 
Successful process improvement efforts result in positive answers to the key process design 
or improvement question: Is this the most efficient and effective process for accomplishing 
the process goals? This process modeling structure allows the team to identify all the critical 
interfaces, overlay the time to complete various processes, start to define the opportunities for 
process simulation, and identify disconnects (illogical, missing, or extraneous steps) in the 
processes. Figure B2.8 displays sample disconnects in the order-filling process in Figure B2.7.
The team then creates a To-Be process model, which reflects a disconnect-free order ful­
fillment process (see Figure B2.9). Disconnects fixed by the new process include
	■	
Direct order entry by sales, eliminating sales administration.
	■	
Parallel order processing and credit checking.
	■	
Elimination of multiple order-entry and order-logging steps.
The consulting firm KPMG Peat Marwick uses process modeling as part of its business 
reengineering practice. Recently the firm helped a large financial services company slash 
FIGURE B2.6
As-Is and To-Be Process 
Models for Ordering a 
Hamburger.
Order
combo
meal
Customer
approaches
cashier
Customer
pays
cashier
To-Be Burger Order Process
As-Is Burger Order Process
Order
fries
Want fries?
Customer
pays
cashier
Order
drink
No
Yes
Yes
No
Order
burger
Customer
approaches
cashier
Want drink?

386  *  Plug-In B2  Business Process
costs and improve productivity in its Manufactured Housing Finance Division. Turnaround 
time for loan approval was reduced by half, using 40 percent fewer staff members.
Modeling helped the team analyze the complex aspects of the project. “In parts of the 
loan origination process, a lot of things happen in a short period of time,” according to 
team leader Bob Karrick of KPMG. “During data capture, information is pulled from a 
number of different sources, and the person doing the risk assessment has to make judg­
ment calls at different points throughout the process. There is often a need to stop, raise 
questions, make follow-up calls, and so on and then continue with the process modeling 
effort. Modeling allows us to do a thorough analysis that takes into account all these deci­
sion points and variables.”
Business Process Management (BPM)
A key advantage of technology is its ability to improve business processes. Working faster 
and smarter has become a necessity for companies. Initial emphasis was given to areas such 
as production, accounting, procurement, and logistics. The next big areas to discover technol­
ogy’s value in business process were sales and marketing automation, customer relationship 
management, and supplier relationship management. Some of these processes involve several 
departments of the company and some are the result of real-time interaction of the com­
pany with its suppliers, customers, and other business partners. The latest area to discover the 
LO 4 Explain business process 
management along with the 
reason for its importance to an 
organization.
FIGURE B2.7
As-Is Process Model for 
Order Entry.
As-Is Order Fulﬁllment Process
Customer
Order
Submitted
Order
Generated
Order
Received
Credit
Checked
Credit
OK?
Credit
OK?
Invoice
Prepared
Credit
Issues
Assessed
Order
Canceled
Credit
Approved
Order
Entered
Inventory
Available?
Inventory
Ordered
Order
Shipped
Order
Picked and
Packaged
Process
Payment
Shipped
Order?
Invoice
Sent
Billing
Inventory
Shipping
Sales
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
Issues in the As-Is Order Process Model
■  Sales representatives take too long to submit orders.
■  There are too many process steps.
■  Sales administration slows down the process by batch-processing orders.
■  Credit checking is performed for both old and new customers.
■  Credit checking holds up the process because it is done before (rather than concurrently with) order picking.
FIGURE B2.8
Issues in the As-Is Process 
Model for Order Entry.

	
Plug-In B2  Business Process  *  387
power of technology in automating and reengineering business process is business process 
management. Business process management (BPM) integrates all of an organization’s busi­
ness process to make individual processes more efficient. BPM can be used to solve a single 
glitch or to create one unifying system to consolidate a myriad of processes.
Many organizations are unhappy with their current mix of software applications and dealing 
with business processes that are subject to constant change. These organizations are turning to 
BPM systems that can flexibly automate their processes and glue their enterprise applications 
together. Figure B2.10 displays the key reasons organizations are embracing BPM technologies.
BPM technologies effectively track and orchestrate the business process. BPM can auto­
mate tasks involving information from multiple systems, with rules to define the sequence in 
which the tasks are performed as well as responsibilities, conditions, and other aspects of the 
process (see Figure B2.11 for BPM benefits). BPM not only allows a business process to be 
executed more efficiently, but also provides the tools to measure performance and identify 
opportunities for improvement—as well as to easily make changes in processes to act upon 
those opportunities such as:
	■	
Bringing processes, people, and information together.
	■	
Identifying the business processes is relatively easy. Breaking down the barriers between 
business areas and finding owners for the 
processes are difficult.
	■	
Managing business processes within 
the enterprise and outside the enterprise 
with suppliers, business partners, and 
customers.
	■	
Looking at automation horizontally instead 
of vertically.
IS BPM FOR BUSINESS OR IT?
A good BPM solution requires two great parts 
to work together as one. Since BPM solutions 
cross application and system boundaries, they 
FIGURE B2.9
To-Be Process Model for 
Order Entry.
To-Be Order Fulﬁllment Process
Customer
Credit
Checked
Invoice
Prepared
Order
Entered
Inventory
Available?
Inventory
Ordered
Order
Shipped
Order
Picked and
Packaged
Process
Payment
Shipped
Order?
Invoice
Sent
Billing
Inventory
Shipping
Sales
Yes
No
Order
Generated
Order
Submitted
FIGURE B2.10
Key Reasons for BPM.
Scale 1 to 5 where 1 = not important and 5 = very important
1
2
4
To introduce greater eﬃciencies/ improved
productivity
To improve service
To deal with integration issues
To reduce operational costs
To improve organizational agility
To improve process visibility
To meet regulatory compliance
5
3

388  *  Plug-In B2  Business Process
often need to be sanctioned and implemented by the IT organization, while at 
the same time BPM products are business tools that business managers need to 
own. Therefore, confusion often arises in companies as to whether business or IT 
managers should be responsible for driving the selection of a new BPM solution.
The key requirement for BPM’s success in an organization is the understand­
ing that it is a collaboration of business and IT, and thus both parties need to be 
involved in evaluating, selecting, and implementing a BPM solution. IT manag­
ers need to understand the business drivers behind the processes, and business 
managers need to understand the impact the BPM solution may have on the infra­
structure. Generally, companies that have successfully deployed BPM solutions 
are those whose business and IT groups have worked together as a cohesive team.
All companies can benefit from a better understanding of their key business pro­
cesses, analyzing them for areas of improvement and implementing improvements. 
BPM applications have been successfully developed to improve complex business 
issues of some medium- to large-sized companies. Like many large-scale imple­
mentation projects, BPM solutions are most successful in companies with a good 
understanding of their technology landscape and management willing to approach business in 
a new way. BPM solutions are truly driven by the business process and the company’s owners.
Effective BPM solutions allow business owners to manage many aspects of the technology 
through business rules they develop and maintain. Companies that cannot support or manage 
cultural and organizational changes may lack positive BPM results.
BPM TOOLS
Business process management tools are used to create an application that is helpful in design­
ing business process models and helpful in simulating, optimizing, monitoring, and maintain­
ing various processes that occur within an organization. Many tasks are involved in achieving 
a goal, and these tasks are done either manually or with the help of software systems. For 
example, if an organization needs to buy a software application that costs $6 million, then a 
request has to be approved by several authorities and managers. The request approval may be 
done manually. However, when a person applies for a loan of $300,000, several internal and 
external business processes are triggered to find out details about that person before approv­
ing the loan. For these activities the BPM tool creates an application that coordinates the 
manual and automated tasks. Figure B2.12 displays several popular BPM tools.
BPM RISKS AND REWARDS
If an organization is considering BPM, it must be aware of the risks involved in implement­
ing these systems. One factor that commonly derails a BPM project has nothing to do with 
technology and everything to do with people. BPM projects involve 
cultural and organizational changes that companies must make to 
support the new management approach required for success. Where 
10 area leaders once controlled 10 pieces of an end-to-end process, 
now a new group is involved in implementing a BPM solution across 
all these areas. Suddenly the span of control is consolidated and all 
are accountable to the whole process, not just one piece of the puzzle.
The added benefit of BPM is not only a technology solution, 
but also a business solution. BPM is a new business architecture 
and approach to managing the process and enabling proactive, con­
tinuous improvement. The new organizational structure and roles 
created to support BPM help maximize the continuous benefits to 
ensure success.
An IT director from a large financial services company gave this 
feedback when asked about his experience in using a BPM solution to 
improve the company’s application help desk process. “Before BPM, 
the company’s application help desk was a manual process, filled 
with inefficiencies, human error, and no personal accountability. In 
BPM Benefits
■  Update processes in real time
■  Reduce overhead expenses
■  Automate key decisions
■  Reduce process maintenance cost
■  Reduce operating cost
■  Improve productivity
■  Improve process cycle time
■  Improve forecasting
■  Improve customer service
FIGURE B2.11
Benefits of BPM.
Tool Name
Company Name
BPM Suite
Ultimus
Process Suite
Stalfware
Business Manager
Savvion
Pega Rules Process Commander
PegaSystem
E Work Vision
MetaStorm
Team Works
Lombardi Software
Intalio
Intalio
Bizflow
Handysoft
FugeoBPM
Fugeo
Business Process Manager
Filenet
FIGURE B2.12
Popular BPM Tools.

	
Plug-In B2  Business Process  *  389
addition, the old process provided no visibility into the process. There was absolutely no way to 
track requests, since it was all manual. Business user satisfaction with the process was extremely 
low. A BPM solution provided a way for the company to automate, execute, manage, and moni­
tor the process in real time. The biggest technical challenge in implementation was ensuring 
that the user group was self-sufficient. While the company recognized that the IT organization 
is needed, it wanted to be able to maintain and implement any necessary process changes with 
little reliance on IT. It views process management as empowering the business users to main­
tain, control, and monitor the process. BPM goes a long way to enable this process.”
CRITICAL SUCCESS FACTORS
In a publication for the National Academy of Public Administration, Dr. Sharon L. Caudle 
identified six critical success factors that ensure government BPM initiatives achieve the 
desired results (see Figure B2.13).
FIGURE B2.13
Critical Success Factors for 
BPM Projects.
Critical Success Factors for BPM Projects
1. Understand reengineering.
■  Understand business process fundamentals.
■  Know what reengineering is.
■  Differentiate and integrate process improvement approaches.
2. Build a business and political case.
■  Have necessary and sufficient business (mission delivery) reasons for reengineering.
■  Have the organizational commitment and capacity to initiate and sustain reengineering.
■  Secure and sustain political support for reengineering projects.
3. Adopt a process management approach.
■  Understand the organizational mandate and set mission strategic directions and goals cascading to 
process-specific goals and decision making across and down the organization.
■  Define, model, and prioritize business processes important for mission performance.
■  Practice hands-on senior management ownership of process improvement through personal 
involvement, responsibility, and decision making.
■  Adjust organizational structure to better support process management initiatives.
■  Create an assessment program to evaluate process management.
4. Measure and track performance continuously.
■  Create organizational understanding of the value of measurement and how it will be used.
■  Tie performance management to customer and stakeholder current and future expectations.
5. Practice change management and provide central support.
■  Develop human resource management strategies to support reengineering.
■  Build information resources management strategies and a technology framework to support process 
change.
■  Create a central support group to assist and integrate reengineering efforts and other improvement 
efforts across the organization.
■  Create an overarching and project-specific internal and external communication and education 
program.
6. Manage reengineering projects for results.
■  Have a clear criterion to select what should be reengineered.
■  Place the project at the right level with a defined reengineering team purpose and goals.
■  Use a well-trained, diversified, expert team to ensure optimum project performance.
■  Follow a structured, disciplined approach for reengineering.

390  *  Plug-In B2  Business Process
Business Process Modeling Examples
A picture is worth a thousand words. Just ask Wayne Kendrick, a system analyst for Mobil Oil 
Corporation in Dallas, Texas. Kendrick, whose work involves planning and designing complex 
processes, was scheduled to make a presentation to familiarize top management with a number 
of projects his group was working on. “I was given 10 minutes for my presentation, and I had 
20 to 30 pages of detailed documentation to present. Obviously, I could not get through it all 
in the time allocated.” Kendrick turned to business process models to help communicate his 
projects. “I think people can relate to pictures better than words,” Kendrick said. He applied 
his thinking to his presentation by using Microsoft’s Visio to create business process models 
and graphs to represent the original 30 pages of text. “It was an effective way to get people 
interested in my projects and to quickly see the importance of each project,” he stated. The 
process models worked and Kendrick received immediate approval to proceed with all of his 
projects. Figures B2.14 through B2. 20 offer examples of business process models.
FIGURE B2.14
Ebusiness Process Model.
Quality
Assurance
Customer
Website
Credit card
transaction
Customer information
in database
Shipped product
Customer Service
Quality
Assurance
Warehouse
Ebusiness Process Model
FIGURE B2.15
Online Banking Business 
Process Model.
Automatic Deposit
Process Deposit
Withdraw from Account
Electronic Payment
Paper Check
Online Banking Business Process

	
Plug-In B2  Business Process  *  391
FIGURE B2.17
eBay Buyer Business Process 
Model.
Purchase an Item on eBay Business Process
Decides to Purchase Item
Reviews
Auction
Listing
Places Bid
Wins Bid
Receives
Invoice
Pays Invoice
Receives
Item
Rates Seller
Ends Sale
FIGURE B2.16
Customer Order Business 
Process Model.
$
$
$
$
$
Order Business Process
Call Center
Customer
Online Order
Warehouse Server
Item Shipped
Inventory Check
Yes
Customer Notiﬁed
of Backorder
No
Item in
stock
Item Packed
Process Payment
$
$
$
$
$
FIGURE B2.18
eBay Seller Business Process 
Model.
Sell an Item on eBay Business Process
Decides to Sell Item
Lists Item
on eBay
Sets Initial
Price
Sets Auction
Length
Invoices
Winning Bid
Receives
Payment
Ships Item
Rates Buyer
Ends Sale

392  *  Plug-In B2  Business Process
Customer Call
Is
representative
available?
Hold
What is
customer
need?
Transfer to
Customer
Service
Transfer to
Sales 
Transfer to
Shipping
Problem with Order
Track Order
Place Order
Determine
tracking
number
Provide
tracking
details
End Call
Sales
Process
Determine
customer
issues
Can problem
be resolved?
Resolve
customer
problems
Return
product
Yes
No
Customer Service Business Process
FIGURE B2.19
Customer Service Business 
Process Model.
Identify one
of the steps
in the process
Is the step
necessary?
Can the step be
improved?
Are resources
available to
implement the
change?
Identify
a process
Remove the
step
Is there an
additional
step?
Keep the
step
Document
improved
step
Model
improved
process
Yes
No
Yes
No
Implement new
process
Process Improvement Model
No
No
Yes
Yes
FIGURE B2.20
Business Process 
Improvement Model.

	
Plug-In B2  Business Process  *  393
I
nvestment in continuous process improvement, business process reengineering, or business pro­
cess management is the same as any other technology-related investment. Planning the project 
properly, setting clear goals, educating those people who have to change their mind-set once the 
system is implemented, and retaining strong management support will help with a successful imple­
mentation generating a solid return on investment.
Organizations must go beyond the basics when implementing business process improvement 
and realize that it is not a one-time project. Management and improvement of end-to-end business 
processes is difficult and requires more than a simple, one-time effort. Continuously monitoring and 
improving core business processes will guarantee performance improvements across an organization.
P L U G - I N  S U M M A R Y
As-Is process model  385
Business process  385
Business process 
management (BPM)  387
Business process 
management tool  389
K E Y  T E R M S
Business process model  385
Business process modeling 
(or mapping)  385
Business process reengineering 
(BPR)  384
	1.	 Discovering Reengineering Opportunities
In an effort to increase efficiency, your college has hired you to analyze its current business pro­
cesses for registering for classes. Analyze the current business processes from paying tuition to 
registering for classes and determine which steps in the process are:
	■	
Broken
	■	
Redundant
	■	
Antiquated
Be sure to define how you would reengineer the processes for efficiency.
	2.	 Modeling a Business Process
Do you hate waiting in line at the grocery store? Do you find it frustrating when you go to the movie 
store and cannot find the movie you wanted to rent? Do you get annoyed when the pizza delivery 
person brings you the wrong order? This is your chance to reengineer the annoying process that 
drives you crazy. Choose a problem you are currently experiencing and reengineer the process to 
make it more efficient. Be sure to provide an As-Is and To-Be process model.
	3.	 Revamping Business Processes
The following is the sales order business process for MusicMan. Draw the As-Is process model 
based on the following narrative:
	1.	 A customer submits an order for goods to MusicMan, a music retailer, through an online mech­
anism such as a browser-based order form. The customer supplies his or her name, the appro­
priate email address, the state to which the order will be shipped, the desired items (IDs and 
names), and the requested quantities.
M A K I N G  B U S I N E S S  D E C I S I O N S
Continuous process improvement 
model  384
To-Be process model  385

394  *  Plug-In B2  Business Process
	 2.	 The order is received by a processing system, which reads the data and appends an ID number 
to the order.
	 3.	 The order is forwarded to a customer service representative, who checks the customer’s credit 
information.
	 4.	 If the credit check fails, the customer service representative is assigned the task of notifying 
the customer to obtain correct credit information, and the process becomes manual from this 
point on.
	 5.	 If the credit check passes, the system checks a database for the current inventory of the 
ordered item, according to the item ID, and it compares the quantity of items available with the 
quantity requested.
	 6.	 If the amount of stock is not sufficient to accommodate the order, the order is placed on hold 
until new inventory arrives. When the system receives notice of new incoming inventory, it 
repeats step 5 until it can verify that the inventory is sufficient to process the order.
	 7.	 If the inventory is sufficient, the order is forwarded simultaneously to a shipping agent who 
arranges shipment and an accounting agent who instructs the system to generate an invoice 
for the order.
	 8.	 If the system encounters an error in processing the input necessary to calculate the total price 
for the invoice, including state sales tax, the accounting agent who initiated the billing process 
is notified and prompted to provide the correct information.
	 9.	 The system calculates the total price of the order.
	10.	 The system confirms that the order has been shipped and notifies the customer via email.
	 11.	At any point in the transaction before shipping, the order can be canceled by notification from 
the customer.
	4.	 Revamping Accounts
The accounting department at your company deals with the processing of critical documents. 
These documents must arrive at their intended destination in a secure and efficient manner. Such 
documents include invoices, purchase orders, statements, purchase requisitions, financial state­
ments, sales orders, and quotes.
The current processing of documents is done manually, which causes a negative ripple effect. 
Documents tend to be misplaced or delayed through the mailing process. Unsecured documents 
are vulnerable to people making changes or seeing confidential documents. In addition, the 
accounting department incurs costs such as preprinted forms, inefficient distribution, and storage. 
Explain BPM and how it can be used to revamp the accounting department.

	
Plug-In B2  Business Process  *  395
A
B
C
D
Counter A — Food is ordered
Broadway
Café
Process Flow:
Counter B — Beverages are ordered and food is picked up
Counter C — Beverages are picked up
Counter D — Pay for food and beverages
Counter E — Cream, sugar, lids
A
B
C
D
E
E
	5.	 Revamp The Broadway Cafe
Your friends have asked you to review the customer ordering process for their restaurant, The 
Broadway Café. To make the café as efficient and effective as possible, you want to redesign pro­
cesses to remove bottlenecks, reduce redundancies, and streamline workflow.
Review The Broadway Café’s customer ordering process highlighted in the accompanying 
image and reengineer it for improvements in efficiency and effectiveness. If you are looking for a 
real challenge, create your As-Is and To-Be process diagrams by using PowerPoint or Visio.

396  *  Plug-In B3  Hardware and Software Basics
P L U G - I N
Introduction
Managers need to determine what types of hardware and software will satisfy their current 
and future business needs, the right time to buy the equipment, and how to protect their 
investments. This does not imply that managers need to be experts in all areas of technology; 
however, building a basic understanding of hardware and software can help them make the 
right investment choices.
Information technology can be an important enabler of business success and innovation. 
Information technology can be composed of the Internet, a personal computer, a cell phone 
that can access the web, a personal digital assistant, or presentation software. All of these 
technologies help to perform specific information processing tasks. There are two basic 
categories of information technology: hardware and software. Hardware consists of the 
physical devices associated with a computer system. Software is the set of instructions the 
hardware executes to carry out specific tasks. Software, such as Microsoft Excel, and vari­
ous hardware devices, such as a keyboard and a monitor, interact to create a spreadsheet or 
a graph. This plug-in coversthe basics of computer hardware and software including termi­
nology, characteristics, and the associated managerial responsibilities for building a solid 
enterprise architecture.
Hardware Basics
In many industries, exploiting computer hardware is key to gaining a competitive advan­
tage. Frito-Lay gained a competitive advantage by using mobile devices to track the strategic 
placement and sale of items in convenience stores. Sales representatives track prices, com­
petitor information, the number of items sold, and item location in the store all from their 
mobile device.1
LO 1 Describe the six major  
categories of hardware, and provide 
an example of each.
B3
Hardware and Software Basics
LEARNING OUTCOMES
	1.	 Describe the six major categories of hardware, and provide an example of each.
	2.	 Identify the different computer categories, and explain their potential business uses.
	3.	 Identify the two main types of software.

	
Plug-In B3  Hardware and Software Basics  *  397
A computer is an electronic device operating under the control of instructions stored in its 
own memory that can accept, manipulate, and store data. Figure B3.1 displays the two pri­
mary components of a computer—hardware and software. A computer system consists of six 
hardware components (see Figure B3.2). Figure B3.3 displays how these components work 
together to form a computer system.
CENTRAL PROCESSING UNIT
The central processing unit (CPU) (or microprocessor) is the actual hardware that interprets 
and executes the program (software) instructions and coordinates how all the other hard­
ware devices work together. The CPU is built on a small flake of silicon and can contain the 
equivalent of several million transistors. CPUs are unquestionably one of the 20th century’s 
greatest technological advances.
A CPU contains two primary parts: control unit and arithmetic/logic unit. The control 
unit interprets software instructions and literally tells the other hardware devices what to 
do, based on the software instructions. The arithmetic-logic unit (ALU) performs all arith­
metic operations (for example, addition and subtraction) and all logic operations (such as 
sorting and comparing numbers). The control unit and ALU perform different functions. 
The control unit obtains instructions from the software. It then interprets the instructions, 
decides which tasks other devices perform, and finally tells each device to perform the 
task. The ALU responds to the control unit and does whatever it dictates, performing either 
arithmetic or logic operations.
The number of CPU cycles per second determines how fast a CPU carries out the software 
instructions; more cycles per second means faster processing, and faster CPUs cost more than 
their slower counterparts. CPU speed is usually quoted in megahertz and gigahertz. Megahertz 
(MHz) is the number of millions of CPU cycles per second. Gigahertz (GHz) is the number of 
billions of CPU cycles per second. Figure B3.4 displays the factors that determine CPU speed.
FIGURE B3.1
Hardware and Software 
Overview.
CENTRAL PROCESSING UNIT
HARDWARE
OUTPUT DEVICE
STORAGE DEVICE
COMMUNICATION DEVICE
CONNECTING DEVICE
INPUT DEVICE
 Keyboard; mouse; scanner
The physical
devices
associated
with a
computer
system
 Monitor; printer; headphones
 DVD; memory stick; hard drive
 Modem; wireless card
 Cables; USB port
CPU: The computer´s “brains”
RAM: Integrated circuits; works with the CPU
SYSTEM SOFTWARE
SOFTWARE
UTILITY SOFTWARE
APPLICATION SOFTWARE
WORD PROCESSING SOFTWARE
SPREADSHEET SOFTWARE
OPERATING SYSTEM SOFTWARE
 Windows; Mac OS; Linux
 Antivirus; screen savers; data
  recovery
Performs speciﬁc information processing
needs
 Microsoft Word
 Microsoft Excel
Controls how the various tools work
together along with application software
The set of
instructions
the hardware
executes to
carry out
speciﬁc
tasks

398  *  Plug-In B3  Hardware and Software Basics
 The actual hardware that interprets and executes the
 program (software) instructions and coordinates how
 all the other hardware devices work together
 The computer’s main memory, which consists of the
 random access memory (RAM), the cache memory,
 and the read-only memory (ROM) that is directly
 accessible to the central processing unit (CPU)
 Equipment designed to store large volumes of data for
 long-term storage (diskette, CD, DVD, memory stick)
 Equipment used to capture information and commands
 (mouse, keyboard, scanner)
 Equipment used to see, hear, or otherwise accept the
 results of information processing requests (monitor,
 printer, microphone)
 Equipment used to send information and receive it
 from one location to another (modem, wireless card)
CPU
Primary Storage
Secondary Storage
Input Devices
Output Devices
Communication Device
FIGURE B3.2
Hardware Components of a 
Computer System.
Advances in CPU Design
Chip makers are pressing more functionality into CPU technology. Most CPUs are complex
instruction set computer (CISC) chips, which is a type of CPU that can recognize as many 
as 100 or more instructions, enough to carry out most computations directly. Reduced 
­instruction set computer (RISC) chips limit the number of instructions the CPU can execute 
to increase processing speed. The idea of RISC is to reduce the instruction set to the bare 
minimum, emphasizing the instructions used most of the time and optimizing them for the 
fastest possible execution. An RISC processor runs faster than a CISC processor.
PRIMARY STORAGE
Primary storage is the computer’s main memory, which consists of the random access ­memory 
(RAM), cache memory, and read-only memory (ROM) that is directly accessible to the CPU.
Random Access Memory
Random access memory (RAM) is the computer’s primary working memory, in which pro­
gram instructions and data are stored so that they can be accessed directly by the CPU via the 
processor’s high-speed external data bus.
RAM is often called read/write memory. In RAM, the CPU can write and read data. Most 
programs set aside a portion of RAM as a temporary work­
space for data so that one can modify (rewrite) as needed until 
the data are ready for printing or storage on secondary storage 
media, such as a hard drive or memory key. RAM does not 
retain its contents when the power to the computer is switched 
off; hence individuals should save their work frequently. When 
the computer is turned off, everything in RAM is wiped clean. 
­Volatility refers to a device’s ability to function with or without 
power. RAM is volatile, meaning it must have constant power 
to function; its contents are lost when the computer’s electric 
supply fails.
© Royalty-Free/Corbis
© Stockbyte/Punchstock Images

	
Plug-In B3  Hardware and Software Basics  *  399
Cache Memory
Cache memory is a small unit of ultra-fast memory that is used to store recently accessed or 
frequently accessed data so that the CPU does not have to retrieve this data from slower mem­
ory circuits such as RAM. Cache memory that is built directly into the CPU’s circuits is called 
primary cache. Cache memory contained on an external circuit is called secondary cache.
FIGURE B3.3
How the Hardware 
Components Work Together.
Central Processing Unit (CPU)
Control Unit
Arithmetic-Logic Unit
Input Device
Output Device
Secondary Storage Device
Communication Device
Primary Storage Device
(clockwise, starting left to right):© Royalty-Free/Corbis,© Stockbyte/PunchStock Images,© Nick Rowe/Getty Images,© Digital 
Vision/Getty Images,© Image Club,© Royalty-Free/Corbis,© Getty Images/Photodisc,© Daisuke Morita/Getty Images,© Don 
Bishop/Photodisc/Getty Images/RF,© Stockbyte/PunchStock Images,© Stockbyte/PunchStock Images
FIGURE B3.4
Factors That Determine 
CPU Speed.
CPU Speed Factors
Clock speed—the speed of the internal clock of a CPU that sets the pace at which operations proceed 
within the computer’s internal processing circuitry.
Word length—number of bits (0s and 1s) that can be processed by the CPU at any one time. Computers 
work in terms of bits and bytes using electrical pulses that have two states: on and off.
Bus width—the size of the internal electrical pathway along which signals are sent from one part of the 
computer to another. A wider bus can move more data, hence faster processing.
Chip line width—the distance between transistors on a chip. The shorter the chip line width the faster the 
chip since more transistors can be placed on a chip and the data and instructions travel short distances 
during processing.

400  *  Plug-In B3  Hardware and Software Basics
Read-Only Memory (ROM)
Read-only memory (ROM) is the portion of a computer’s primary storage that does 
not lose its contents when one switches off the power. ROM is nonvolatile, meaning it 
does not require constant power to function. ROM contains essential system programs 
that neither the user nor the computer can erase. Since the computer’s internal memory 
is blank during start-up, the computer cannot perform any functions unless given start-
up instructions. These instructions are stored in ROM.
Flash memory is a special type of rewritable read-only memory (ROM) that is 
compact and portable. Memory cards contain high-capacity storage that holds data 
such as captured images, music, or text files. Memory cards are removable; when 
one is full the user can insert an additional card. Subsequently, the data can be down­
loaded from the card to a computer. The card can then be erased and used again. 
Memory cards are typically used in digital devices such as cameras, cellular phones, 
and personal digital assistants (PDAs). Memory sticks provide nonvolatile memory 
for a range of portable devices including computers, digital cameras, cell phones, 
and PDAs.
SECONDARY STORAGE
Storage is a hot area in the business arena as organizations struggle to make sense of explod­
ing volumes of data. Secondary storage consists of equipment designed to store large vol­
umes of data for long-term storage. Secondary storage devices are nonvolatile and do not lose 
their contents when the computer is turned off. Some storage devices, such as a hard disk, 
offer easy update capabilities and a large storage capacity. Others, such as CD-ROMs, offer 
limited update capabilities but possess large storage capacities.
Storage capacity is expressed in bytes, with megabytes being the most common. A megabyte
(MB or M or Meg) is roughly 1 million bytes. Therefore, a computer with 256 MB of 
RAM translates into the RAM being able to hold roughly 256 million characters of data and 
software instructions. A gigabyte (GB) is roughly 1 billion bytes. A terabyte (TB) is roughly 
1 trillion bytes (refer to Figure B3.5).2
A typical double-spaced page of pure text is roughly 2,000 characters. Therefore, a 40 GB 
(40 gigabyte or 40 billion characters) hard drive can hold approximately 20 million pages of text.
Common storage devices include:
	■	
Magnetic medium
	■	
Optical medium
Magnetic Medium
Magnetic medium is a secondary storage medium that uses magnetic techniques to store and 
retrieve data on disks or tapes coated with magnetically sensitive materials. Like iron filings 
on a sheet of waxed paper, these materials are reoriented when a magnetic field passes over 
them. During write operations, the read/write heads emit a magnetic field that orients the 
magnetic materials on the disk or tape to represent encoded data. During read operations, the 
read/write heads sense the encoded data on the medium.
One of the first forms of magnetic medium developed was magnetic tape. Magnetic tape 
is an older secondary storage medium that uses a strip of thin plastic coated with a magneti­
cally sensitive recording medium. The most popular type of magnetic medium is a hard drive. 
A hard drive is a secondary storage medium that uses several rigid disks coated with a mag­
netically sensitive material and housed together with the recording heads in a hermetically 
sealed mechanism. Hard drive performance is measured in terms of access time, seek time, 
rotational speed, and data transfer rate.
A solid state drive is an all-electronic storage device that is an alternative to a hard disk 
and are faster than hard disks because there is zero latency (no read/write head to move). 
Instead of storing data magnetically like traditional hard drives, solid state drives store data 
using flash memory and have no moving parts so they do not need to “spin up” while in a 
© Nick Rowe/Getty Images
© Don Bishop/Photodisc/Getty 
Images/RF

	
Plug-In B3  Hardware and Software Basics  *  401
sleep state and they don’t need to move a drive head to different parts of the drive to access 
data. Therefore, solid state drives can access data faster than traditional hard drives and are far 
more rugged and reliable offering greater protection in hostile environments.
Optical Medium
Optical medium is a secondary storage medium for computers on which information is stored 
at extremely high density in the form of tiny pits. The presence or absence of pits is read by a 
tightly focused laser beam. Optical medium types include:
	■	
Compact disk-read-only memory (CD-ROM) drive—an optical drive designed to 
read the data encoded on CD-ROMs and to transfer this data to a computer.
	■	
Compact disk-read-write (CD-RW) drive—an optical drive that enables users to erase 
existing data and to write new data repeatedly to a CD-RW.
	■	
Digital video disk (DVD)—a CD-ROM format capable of storing up to a maximum of 
17 GB of data; enough for a full-length feature movie.
	■	
DVD-ROM drive—a read-only drive designed to read the data encoded on a DVD and 
transfer the data to a computer.
	■	
Digital video disk-read/write (DVD-RW)—a standard for DVD disks and player/
recorder mechanisms that enables users to record in the DVD format.
CD-ROMs and DVDs offer an increasingly economical medium for storing data and 
­programs. The overall trend in secondary storage is toward more direct-access methods, 
higher capacity with lower costs, and increased portability.
INPUT DEVICES
An input device is equipment used to capture information and 
commands. A keyboard is used to type in information, and a 
mouse is used to point and click on buttons and icons. ­Adaptive 
computer devices are input devices designed for special appli­
cations for use by people with different types of special needs. 
An example is a keyboard with tactile surfaces, which can be 
used by the visually impaired. A ­stylus is used as a pen-like 
device that taps the screen to enter commands. Numerous input 
devices are available in many different environments, some of 
FIGURE B3.5
Binary Terms.
Term
Size
Kilobyte (KB)
1,024 Bytes
Megabyte (MB)
1,024 KB
1,048,576 Bytes
Gigabyte (GB)
1,024 MB (109 bytes)
Terabyte (TB)
1,024 GB (1012 bytes)
1 TB = Printing of 1 TB would require 50,000 trees to be made into paper 
and printer
Petabyte (PB)
1,024 TB (1015 bytes)
200 PB = All production of digital magnetic tape in 1995
Exabyte (EB)
1,024 PB (1018 bytes)
2 EB = Total volume of information generated worldwide annually
5 EB = All words ever spoken by human beings
© Daisuke Morita/Getty Images
© Stockbyte/PunchStock Images
© Stockbyte/PunchStock Images

402  *  Plug-In B3  Hardware and Software Basics
which have applications that are more ­suitable in a personal setting than a business setting. A 
keyboard, mouse, and scanner are the most common forms of input devices (see Figure B3.6).
An output device is equipment used to see, hear, or otherwise accept the results of infor­
mation processing requests. Among output devices, printers and monitors are the most common; 
however, speakers and plotters (special printers that draw output on a page) are widely used 
(see Figure B3.7). In addition, output devices are responsible for converting computer-stored 
information into a form that can be understood.
A new output device based on sensor technology aims to translate American Sign Language 
(ASL) into speech, enabling the millions of people who use ASL to better communicate with 
FIGURE B3.6
Input Devices.
 Provides a set of alphabetic, numeric,
 punctuation, symbol, and control keys
 One or more control buttons housed in a palm-
 sized case and designed so that one can move
 it about on the table next to the keyboard
 Form of a stationary mouse on which the
 movement of a ﬁnger causes the pointer on
 the screen to move; typically found below the
 space bar on laptops
KEYBOARD
MANUAL INPUT DEVICES
MOUSE
TOUCH PAD
 Allows the use of a ﬁnger to point at and touch 
 a monitor to execute commands
 Devices used to navigate and select objects
 on a display screen
 Devices used for games to obtain better
 control screen action
TOUCH SCREEN
POINTING DEVICE
GAME
CONTROLLER
 Captures images, photos, graphics, and text 
  that already exist on paper
 Captures information that exists in the form of
 vertical bars whose width and distance apart
 determine a number
 Captures human physical attributes such as a
 ﬁngerprint or iris for security purposes
 Detects the presence or absence of a mark in 
 a predetermined place (popular for multiple-
 choice exams)
 Converts text into digital format for computer 
 input
IMAGE SCANNER
AUTOMATED INPUT DEVICES
BAR CODE
SCANNER
BIOMETRIC
SCANNER
OPTICAL
CHARACTER
READER
OPTICAL MARK
READER
 Digitally captures still images in varying 
 resolutions
 Digitally captures video
 Digitally captures video and uploads it directly 
 to the Internet
 Captures sounds such as a voice for voice-
 recognition software
 Captures information at the point of a 
 transaction, typically in a retail environment
DIGITAL STILL
CAMERA
DIGITAL VIDEO
CAMERA
WEBCAM
POINT-OF-SALE
(POS)
MICROPHONE
© Digital Vision/Getty Images
© Image Club

	
Plug-In B3  Hardware and Software Basics  *  403
those who do not know the rapid gesturing system. The AcceleGlove is a glove lined on the 
inside with sensors embedded in rings. The sensors, called accelerometers, ­measure accelera­
tion and can categorize and translate finger and hand movements. Additional, ­interconnected 
attachments for the elbow and shoulder capture ASL signs that are made with full arm motion. 
When users wear the glove while signing ASL, algorithms in the glove’s software translate 
the hand gestures into words. The translations can be relayed through speech synthesizers 
or read on a PDA-size computer screen. Inventor Jose L. Hernandez-Rebollar started with a 
single glove that could translate only the ASL alphabet. Now, the device employs two gloves 
that contain a 1,000-word vocabulary.3
COMMUNICATION DEVICES
A communication device is equipment used to send information and receive it from one 
location to another. One of the first forms of communication devices was a telephone modem 
that connected a computer to a phone line in order to access another computer. The computer 
works in terms of digital signals, while a standard telephone line works with analog signals. 
Each digital signal represents a bit (either 0 or 1). The modem must convert the digital signals 
of a computer into analog signals so they can be sent across the telephone line. At the other 
end, another modem translates the analog signals into digital signals, which can then be used 
by the other computer. Figure B3.8 displays the different types of modems.
Computer Categories
Supercomputers today can hit processing capabilities of well over 200 teraflops—the equiva­
lent of everyone on Earth performing 35,000 calculations per second (see Figure B3.9). For 
the past 20 years, federally funded supercomputing research has given birth to some of the 
computer industry’s most significant technology breakthroughs including:
	■	
Clustering, which allows companies to chain together thousands of PCs to build mass-
market systems.
	■	
Parallel processing, which provides the ability to run two or more tasks simultaneously 
and is viewed as the chip industry’s future.
	■	
Mosaic browser, which morphed into Netscape and made the web a household name.
Federally funded supercomputers have also advanced some of the country’s most dynamic 
industries, including advanced manufacturing, gene research in the life sciences, and real-
time financial-market modeling.4
LO 2 Identify the different com-
puter categories, and explain their 
potential business uses.
FIGURE B3.7
Output Devices.
 A vacuum tube that uses an electron gun 
 (cathode) to emit a beam of electrons that 
 illuminates phosphors on a screen as the 
 beam sweeps across the display repeatedly
CATHODE-RAY TUBE
(CRT)
MONITORS
 Low-powered displays used in laptop 
 computers where rod-shaped crystal 
 molecules change their orientation when an 
 electrical current ﬂows through them
LIQUID CRYSTAL
DISPLAY (LCD)
 Tiny bulb used for backlight to improve the 
 image on the screen
 Displays use many layers of organic material 
 emitting a visible light and therefore 
 eliminating the need for backlighting
LIGHT-EMITTING
DIODE (LED)
ORGANIC LIGHT-
EMITTING DIODE
(OLED)
 Printer that makes images by forcing ink 
 droplets through nozzles
 Printer that forms images using an 
 electrostatic process, the same way a 
 photocopier works
 Printer that can scan, copy, fax, and print all
 in one device
 Printer that uses computer-directed pens for
 creating high-quality images, blueprints, 
 schematics, etc.
 Printer that can produce solid, three-
 dimensional objects
INK-JET PRINTER
PRINTERS
LASER PRINTER
MULTIFUNCTION
PRINTER
3-D PRINTER
PLOTTER
© Royalty-Free/Corbis

404  *  Plug-In B3  Hardware and Software Basics
Computers come in different shapes, sizes, and colors. And they meet a variety of needs. 
An appliance is a computer dedicated to a single function, such as a calculator or computer 
game. An ebook is an electronic book that can be read on a computer or special reading 
device. Some are small enough to carry around, while others are the size of a telephone booth. 
Size does not always correlate to power, speed, and price (see Figure B3.10).
MIT’s Media Lab is developing a laptop that it will sell for $100 each to government agen­
cies around the world for distribution to millions of underprivileged schoolchildren. Using a 
simplified sales model and reengineering the device helped MIT reach the $100 price point. 
Almost half the price of a current laptop comprises marketing, sales, distribution, and profit. 
Of the remaining costs, the display panel and backlight account for roughly half while the 
rest covers the operating system. The low-cost laptop will use a display system that costs less 
than $25, a 500 MHz processor from AMD, a wireless LAN connection, 1 GB of storage, and 
the Linux operating system. The machine will automatically connect with others. China and 
Brazil have already ordered 3 million and 1 million laptops, respectively. MIT’s goal is to 
produce around 150 million laptops per year.5
Carrier Technology
Description
Speed
Comments
Dial-up access
On demand access using a modem and 
regular telephone line (POT).
2,400 bps to 56 Kbps
■  Cheap but slow.
Cable
Special cable modem and cable line 
required.
512 Kbps to 20 Mbps
■  Must have existing cable access in 
area.
■  Bandwidth is shared.
DSL
Digital Subscriber 
Line
This technology uses the unused digital 
portion of a regular copper telephone 
line to transmit and receive information. 
A special modem and adapter card are 
required.
128 Kbps to 8 Mbps
■  Doesn’t interfere with normal 
telephone use.
■  Bandwidth is dedicated.
■  Must be within 5 km (3.1 miles) of 
telephone company switch.
Wireless (LMCS)
Access is gained by connection to a 
high-speed cellular like local multipoint 
communications system (LMCS) network 
via wireless transmitter/receiver.
30 Mbps or more
■  Can be used for high-speed data, 
broadcast TV, and wireless telephone 
service.
Satellite
Newer versions have two-way satellite 
access, removing need for phone line.
6 Mbps or more
■  Bandwidth is not shared.
■  Some connections require an existing 
Internet service account.
■  Setup fees can range from $500 to 
$1,000.
FIGURE B3.8
Comparing Modems.
FIGURE B3.9
Supercomputer. 
© Digital Vision/Getty Images

	
Plug-In B3  Hardware and Software Basics  *  405
FIGURE B3.10
Computer Categories.
Smartphone/Personal Digital Assistant (PDA)
Handheld/Ultra Portable/Pocket Computer
Laptop/Notebook/Portable Computer/Netbook
Tablet Computer
Personal/Desktop Computer
Workstation/Minicomputer
Mainframe Computer
Supercomputer
Computer Category
Description
Smartphone
A cellular telephone with a keypad that runs programs, music, photos, and email and includes many features of a PDA.
Personal digital 
assistant (PDA)
A small handheld computer that performs simple tasks such as taking notes, scheduling appointments, and 
maintaining an address book and a calendar. The PDA screen is touch-sensitive, allowing a user to write directly on 
the screen, capturing what is written.
Handheld (ultra 
portable, pocket) 
computer
Computer portable enough to fit in a purse or pocket and has its own power source or battery.
Laptop (portable, 
notebook) computer
Computer portable enough to fit on a lap or in a bag and has its own power source or battery. Laptops come 
equipped with all of the technology that a personal desktop computer has, yet weigh as little as two pounds.
Tablet computer
Computer with a flat screen that uses a mouse or fingertip for input instead of a keyboard. Similar to PDAs, tablet 
PCs use a writing pen or stylus to write notes on the screen and touch the screen to perform functions such as 
clicking on a link while visiting a website.
Personal computer 
(microcomputer)
Computer that is operated by a single user who can customize the functions to match personal preferences.
Desktop computer
Computer that sits on, next to, or under a user’s desk and is too large to carry around. The computer box is where 
the CPU, RAM, and storage devices are held with a monitor on top, or a vertical system box (called a tower) usually 
placed on the floor within a work area.
Workstation computer
Similar to a desktop but has more powerful mathematical and graphics processing capabilities and can perform 
more complicated tasks in less time. Typically used for software development, web development, engineering, and 
ebusiness tools.
Minicomputer (server)
Designed to meet the computing needs of several people simultaneously in a small to medium-size business 
environment. A common type of minicomputer is a server and is used for managing internal company applications, 
networks, and websites.
Mainframe computer
Designed to meet the computing needs of hundreds of people in a large business environment. Mainframe 
computers are a step up in size, power, capability, and cost from minicomputers.
Supercomputer
The fastest, most powerful, and most expensive type of computer. Organizations such as NASA that are heavily 
involved in research and number crunching employ supercomputers because of the speed with which they 
can process information. Other large, customer-oriented businesses such as General Motors and AT&T employ 
supercomputers just to handle customer information and transaction processing.

406  *  Plug-In B3  Hardware and Software Basics
Software Basics
Hardware is only as good as the software that runs it. Over the years, the cost of hardware 
has decreased while the complexity and cost of software have increased. Some large soft­
ware applications, such as customer relationship management systems, contain millions of 
lines of code, take years to develop, and cost millions of dollars. The two main types of 
software are system software and application software.
SYSTEM SOFTWARE
System software controls how the various technology tools work together along with the appli­
cation software. System software includes both operating system software and utility software.
Operating System Software
Linus Torvalds, a Finnish programmer, may seem an unlikely choice to be one of the world’s 
top managers. However, Linux, the software project he created while a university student, is 
now one of the most powerful influences on the computer world. Linux is an operating system 
built by volunteers and distributed for free and has become one of the primary competitors 
to Microsoft. Torvalds coordinates Linux development with a few dozen volunteer assistants 
and more than 1,000 programmers scattered around the globe. They contribute code for the 
kernel—or core piece—of Linux. He also sets the rules for dozens of technology companies 
that have lined up behind Linux, including IBM, Dell, Hewlett-Packard, and Intel.
Operating system software controls the application software and manages how the hard­
ware devices work together. When using Excel to create and print a graph, the operating sys­
tem software controls the process, ensures that a printer is attached and has paper, and sends 
the graph to the printer along with instructions on how to print it. Some computers are con­
figured with two operating systems so they can dual boot—provide the user with the option 
of choosing the operating system when the computer is turned on. An embedded operating 
system is used in computer appliances and special-purpose applications, such as an automo­
bile or ATM and are used for a single purpose. A cell phone has a single-purpose embedded 
operating system.
Operating system software also supports a variety of useful features, one of which is multi­
tasking. Multitasking allows more than one piece of software to be used at a time. Multitask­
ing is used when creating a graph in Excel and simultaneously printing a word processing 
document. With multitasking, both pieces of application software are operating at the same 
time. There are different types of operating system software for personal environments and 
for organizational environments (see Figure B3.11).
LO 3 Identify the two main types 
of software.
FIGURE B3.11
Operating System Software.
Operating System Software
Linux
An open source operating system that provides a rich environment for high-
end workstations and network servers. Open source refers to any program 
whose source code is made available for use or modification as users or other 
developers see fit.
Mac OS X
The operating system of Macintosh computers.
Android Operating 
System
A Linux-based OS developed by the Open Handset Alliance (OHA) and Google 
used to run cell phones.
Microsoft Windows
Generic name for the various operating systems in the Microsoft Windows family.
MS-DOS
The standard, single-user operating system of IBM and IBM-compatible 
computers, introduced in 1981. MS-DOS is a command-line operating system 
that requires the user to enter commands, arguments, and syntax.
UNIX
A 32-bit multitasking and multiuser operating system that originated at AT&T’s 
Bell Laboratories and is now used on a wide variety of computers, from 
mainframes to PDAs.

	
Plug-In B3  Hardware and Software Basics  *  407
Utility Software
Utility software provides additional functionality to the operating system. Utility software 
includes antivirus software, screen savers, and anti-spam software. Operating systems are 
customized by using the control panel, which is a Windows feature that provides options that 
set default values for the Windows operating system. For example, the system clock works 
like a wristwatch and uses a battery mounted on the motherboard to provide power when 
the computer is turned off. If the user moves to a different time zone, the system clock can 
be adjusted in the control panel. Safe mode occurs if the system is failing and will load only 
the most essential parts of the operating system and will not run many of the background 
operating utilities. System restore enables a user to return to the previous operating system. 
Figure B3.12 displays a few types of available utility software.
APPLICATION SOFTWARE
Application software is used for specific information processing needs, including payroll, 
customer relationship management, project management, training, and many others. Appli­
cation software is used to solve specific problems or perform specific tasks. From an orga­
nizational perspective, payroll software, collaborative software such as videoconferencing 
(within groupware), and inventory management software are all examples of application soft­
ware (see Figure B3.13). Personal information management (PIM) software handles con­
tact information, appointments, task lists, and email. Course management software contains 
course information such as a syllabus and assignments and offers drop boxes for quizzes and 
homework along with a grade book.
DISTRIBUTING APPLICATION SOFTWARE
After software has been deployed to its users, it is not uncommon to find bugs or additional 
errors that require fixing. Software updates (software patch) occur when the software ven­
dor releases updates to software to fix problems or enhance features. Software upgrade 
occurs when the software vendor releases a new version of the software, making significant 
changes to the program. Application software can be distributed using one of the following 
methods:
	■	
Single user license—restricts the use of the software to one user at a time.
	■	
Network user license—enables anyone on the network to install and use the 
software.
	■	
Site license—enables any qualified users within the organization to install the software, 
regardless of whether the computer is on a network. Some employees might install the 
software on a home computer for working remotely.
	■	
Application service provider license—specialty software paid for on a license basis or 
per-use basis or usage-based licensing.
FIGURE B3.12
Utility Software.
Types of Utility Software
Crash-proof
Helps save information if a computer crashes.
Disk image for data 
recovery
Relieves the burden of reinstalling applications if a hard drive crashes or 
becomes irretrievably corrupted.
Disk optimization
Organizes information on a hard disk in the most efficient way.
Encrypt data
Protects confidential information from unauthorized eyes.
File and data recovery
Retrieves accidental deletion of photos or documents.
Uninstaller
Can remove software that is no longer needed.

408  *  Plug-In B3  Hardware and Software Basics
Types of Application Software
Browser
Enables the user to navigate the World Wide Web. Common browsers include Internet Explorer, Microsoft Edge, 
Mozilla Firefox, Google Chrome, Safari.
Data management
Provides the tools for data retrieval, modification, deletion, and insertion; for example, Microsoft Access, MySQL, 
and Oracle.
Desktop publishing
Transforms a computer into a desktop publishing workstation. Leading packages include Microsoft Publisher, 
Serif, and QuarkXpress.
Email
Provides email services for computer users, including receiving mail, sending mail, and storing messages. 
Microsoft Outlook is a common email application.
Groupware
Increases the cooperation and joint productivity of small groups of co-workers.
Presentation graphics
Creates and enhances charts and graphs so that they are visually appealing and easily understood by an 
audience. A full-features presentation graphics package such as Microsoft PowerPoint or Visio includes facilities 
for making a wide variety of charts and graphs and for adding titles, legends, and explanatory text anywhere in 
the chart or graph.
Programming
Possesses an artificial language consisting of a fixed vocabulary and a set of rules (called syntax) that 
programmers use to write computer programs. Leading programming languages include SQL, Java, C#, Python, 
and PHP.
Spreadsheet
Simulates an accountant’s worksheet onscreen and lets users embed hidden formulas that perform calculations 
on the visible data. Many spreadsheet programs also include powerful graphics and presentation capabilities to 
create attractive products. The leading spreadsheet application is Microsoft Excel.
Word processing
Transforms a computer into a tool for creating, editing, proofreading, formatting, and printing documents. 
Microsoft Word is the leading word processing application.
FIGURE B3.13
Application Software.

	
Plug-In B3  Hardware and Software Basics  *  409
I
nformation technology (IT) is a field concerned with the use of technology in managing and pro­
cessing information. IT includes cell phones, PDAs, software such as spreadsheet software, and 
printers. There are two categories of IT: hardware and software. The six hardware components 
include CPU, primary storage, secondary storage, input devices, output devices, and communication 
devices. Computer categories include PDAs, laptops, tablets, desktops, workstations, minicomputers, 
mainframe computers, and supercomputers.
Software includes system software and application software. Operating system software and util­
ity software are the two primary types of system software. There are many forms of application soft­
ware from word processing to databases.
P L U G - I N  S U M M A R Y
Adaptive computer device  401
Appliance  404
Application service provider 
license  407
Application software  407
Arithmetic-logic unit (ALU)  397
Cache memory  399
Central processing unit (CPU) 
(or microprocessor)  397
Communication device  403
Complex instruction set computer 
(CISC) chip  398
Computer  396
Control panel  407
Control unit  397
Course management 
software  407
Dual boot  406
Ebook  404
Embedded operating system  406
Flash memory  400
Gigabyte (GB)  400
K E Y  T E R M S
Gigahertz (GHz)  397
Hard drive  400
Hardware  396
Input device  401
Magnetic medium  400
Magnetic tape  400
Megabyte (MB, M, or 
Meg)  400
Megahertz (MHz)  397
Memory card  400
Memory stick  400
Multitasking  406
Network user license  407
Nonvolatile  400
Operating system 
software  406
Output device  402
Personal information management 
(PIM) software  407
Primary storage  398
Random access memory 
(RAM)  398
Read-only memory (ROM)  400
Reduced instruction set computer 
(RISC) chip  398
Safe mode  407
Secondary storage  400
Single user license  407
Site license  407
Software  407
Software updates (software 
patch)  407
Software upgrade  407
Solid state drive  400
Stylus  401
System clock  407
System restore  407
System software  396
Terabyte (TB)  400
Utility software  407
Volatile  398
Volatility  398
1.	 Purchasing a Computer
Dell specializes in computer customization. Connect to Dell’s website at www.dell.com. Go to the 
portion of Dell’s site that allows you to customize either a laptop or a desktop computer. First, 
choose an already prepared system and note its price and capability in terms of CPU speed, RAM 
size, monitor quality, and storage capacity. Now, customize that system to increase CPU speed, 
add more RAM, increase monitor size and quality, and add more storage capacity. What is the dif­
ference in price between the two? Which system is more in your price range? Which system has 
the speed and capacity you need?
M A K I N G  B U S I N E S S  D E C I S I O N S

410  *  Plug-In B3  Hardware and Software Basics
2.	 Small Business Computers
Many different types of computers are available for small businesses. Use the Internet to find 
three different vendors of laptops or notebooks that are good for small businesses. Find the most 
expensive and the least expensive that the vendor offers and create a table comparing the differ­
ent computers based on the following:
	■	
CPU
	■	
Memory
	■	
Hard drive
	■	
Optical drive
	■	
Operating system
	■	
Utility software
	■	
Application software
	■	
Support plan
Determine which computer you would recommend for a small business looking for an inexpen­
sive laptop. Determine which computer you would recommend for a small business looking for an 
expensive laptop.


412  *  Plug-In B4  MIS Infrastructures
P L U G - I N
The Business Benefits of a Solid MIS Infrastructure
Management information systems have played a significant role in business strategies, 
affected business decisions and processes, and even changed the way companies operate. 
What is the foundation supporting all of these systems that enable business growth, opera­
tions, and profits? What supports the volume and complexity of today’s user and application 
requirements? What protects systems from failures and crashes? It is the MIS infrastructure, 
which includes the plans for how a firm will build, deploy, use, and share its data, processes, 
and MIS assets. A solid MIS infrastructure can reduce costs, improve productivity, optimize 
business operations, generate growth, and increase profitability.
Briefly defined, hardware consists of the physical devices associated with a computer 
system, and software is the set of instructions the hardware executes to carry out specific 
tasks. In today’s business environment, most hardware and software are run via a network. 
A network is a communications system created by linking two or more devices and estab­
lishing a standard methodology in which they can communicate. As more companies need 
to share more information, the network takes on greater importance in the infrastructure. 
Most companies use a specific form of network infrastructure called a client and server 
network. A client is a computer designed to request information from a server. A server is a 
computer dedicated to providing information in response to requests. A good way to under­
stand this is when someone uses a web browser (this would be the client) to access a website 
(this would be a server that would respond with the web page being requested by the client).
In the physical world, a detailed blueprint would show how public utilities, such as water, 
electricity, and gas, support the foundation of a building. MIS infrastructure is similar, as it 
shows in detail how the hardware, software, and network connectivity support the firm’s pro­
cesses. Every company, regardless of size, relies on some form of MIS infrastructure, whether 
it is a few personal computers networked together sharing an Excel file or a large, multina­
tional company with thousands of employees interconnected around the world.
LO 1 Explain MIS infrastructure 
and its three primary types.
B4
MIS Infrastructures
LEARNING OUTCOMES
	1.	 Explain MIS infrastructure and its three primary types.
	2.	 Identify the three primary areas associated with an information MIS infrastructure.
	3.	 Describe the characteristics of an agile MIS infrastructure.

	
Plug-In B4  MIS Infrastructures  *  413
An MIS infrastructure is dynamic; it continually changes as the business needs change. 
Each time a new form of Internet-enabled device, such as an iPhone or BlackBerry, is created 
and made available to the public, a firm’s MIS infrastructure must be revised to support the 
device. This moves beyond just innovations in hardware to include new types of software 
and network connectivity. An enterprise architect (EA) is a person grounded in technology, 
fluent in business, and able to provide the important bridge between MIS and the business. 
Firms employ enterprise architects to help manage change and dynamically update MIS infra­
structure. Figure B4.1 displays the three primary areas where enterprise architects focus when 
maintaining a firm’s MIS infrastructure.
	■	
Supporting operations: Information MIS infrastructure identifies where and how 
important information, such as customer records, is maintained and secured.
	■	
Supporting change: Agile MIS infrastructure includes the hardware, software, and 
telecommunications equipment that, when combined, provides the underlying foundation 
to support the organization’s goals.
	■	
Supporting the environment: Sustainable MIS infrastructure identifies ways that a 
company can grow in terms of computing resources while simultaneously becoming less 
dependent on hardware and energy consumption.
Supporting Operations: 
Information MIS Infrastructure
Imagine taking a quick trip to the printer on the other side of the room, and when you turn 
around you find that your laptop has been stolen. How painful would you find this experience? 
What types of information would you lose? How much time would it take you to recover all 
of that information? A few things you might lose include music, movies, emails, assignments, 
LO 2 Identify the three primary 
areas associated with an informa-
tion MIS infrastructure.
FIGURE B4.1
MIS Infrastructures.
MIS Infrastructure
Information MIS
Infrastructure
Supports
Operations
Agile MIS
Infrastructure
Supports
Change
Sustainable MIS
Infrastructure
Supports
Sustainability
Backup
Recovery
Disaster Recovery
Business Continuity
Planning
Accessibility
Availability
Maintainability
Portability
Reliability
Scalability
Usability
Grid Computing
Cloud Computing
Virtualization

414  *  Plug-In B4  MIS Infrastructures
saved passwords, not to mention that all-important 40-page paper that took you more than a 
month to complete. If this sounds painful, then you want to pay particular attention to this sec­
tion and learn how to eliminate this pain.
An information MIS infrastructure identifies where and how important information is 
maintained and secured. An information infrastructure supports day-to-day business opera­
tions and plans for emergencies such as power outages, floods, earthquakes, malicious attacks 
via the Internet, theft, and security breaches to name just a few. Managers must take every 
precaution to make sure their systems are operational and protected around the clock every 
day of the year. Losing a laptop or experiencing bad weather in one part of the country simply 
cannot take down systems required to operate core business processes. In the past, someone 
stealing company information would have to carry out boxes upon boxes of paper. Today, as 
data storage technologies grow in capabilities while shrinking in size, a person can simply 
walk out the front door of the building with the company’s data files stored on a thumb drive 
or external hard drive. Today’s managers must act responsibly to protect one of their most 
valued assets, information. To support continuous business operations, an information infra­
structure provides three primary elements:
	■	
Backup and recovery plan.
	■	
Disaster recovery plan.
	■	
Business continuity plan (see Figure B4.2).
BACKUP AND RECOVERY PLAN
Each year businesses lose time and money because of system crashes and failures. One way 
to minimize the damage of a system crash is to have a backup and recovery strategy in place. 
A backup is an exact copy of a system’s information. Recovery is the ability to get a system 
up and running in the event of a system crash or failure that includes restoring the information 
backup. Many different types of backup and recovery media are available, including main­
taining an identical replica or redundant of the storage server, external hard drives, thumb 
drives, and even DVDs. The primary differences between them are speed and cost.
Fault tolerance is the ability for a system to respond to unexpected failures or system 
crashes as the backup system immediately and automatically takes over with no loss of service.
For example, fault tolerance enables a business to support continuous business operations if 
there is a power failure or flood. Fault tolerance is an expensive form of backup, and only 
FIGURE B4.2
Areas of Support Provided by 
Information Infrastructure.
Able to recover information
or systems in the event of a
catastrophic disaster such
as a ﬁre or ﬂood
• 
Creates a way for a company
to recover and restore
partially or completely
interrupted critical functions
within a predetermined time
after a disaster or extended
disruption
• 
Business Continuity
Planning
Backup: Provides an exact
copy of a system’s
information
• 
Recovery: Able to get a
system up and running after
a crash
• 
Backup and
Recovery
Disaster Recovery

	
Plug-In B4  MIS Infrastructures  *  415
mission-critical applications and operations use it. Failover, a specific type of fault tolerance, 
occurs when a redundant storage server offers an exact replica of the real-time data, and if the 
primary server crashes, the users are automatically directed to the secondary server or backup 
server. This is a high-speed and high-cost method of backup and recovery. Failback occurs 
when the primary machine recovers and resumes operations, taking over from the secondary 
server.
Using DVDs or thumb drives to store your data offers a low-speed and low-cost backup 
method. It is a good business practice to back up data at least once a week using a low-cost 
method. This will alleviate the pain of having your laptop stolen or your system crash as you 
will still have access to your data, and it will only be a few days old.
Deciding how often to back up information and what media to use is a critical decision. 
Companies should choose a backup and recovery strategy in line with their goals and opera­
tional needs. If the company deals with large volumes of critical information, it will require 
daily, perhaps hourly, backups to storage servers. If it relies on small amounts of noncriti­
cal information, then it might require only weekly backups to external hard drives or thumb 
drives. A company that backs up on a weekly basis is taking the risk that, if a system crash 
occurs, it could lose a week’s worth of work. If this risk is acceptable, a weekly backup strat­
egy will work. If it is unacceptable, the company needs more frequent backup.
DISASTER RECOVERY PLAN
Disasters such as power outages, fires, floods, hurricanes, and even malicious activities such 
as hackers and viruses strike companies every day. Disasters can have the following effects 
on companies and their business operations.
	■	
Disrupting communications: Most companies depend on voice and data 
communications for daily operational needs. Widespread communications outages, from 
either direct damage to the infrastructure or sudden spikes in usage related to an outside 
disaster, can be as devastating to some firms as shutting down the whole business.
	■	
Damaging physical infrastructures: Fire and flood can directly damage buildings, 
equipment, and systems, making structures unsafe and systems unusable. Law 
enforcement officers and firefighters may prohibit business professionals from entering a 
building, thereby restricting access to retrieve documents or equipment.
	■	
Halting transportation: Disasters such as floods and hurricanes can have a deep effect 
on transportation. Disruption to major highways, roads, bridges, railroads, and airports 
can prevent business professionals from reporting to work or going home, slow the 
delivery of supplies, and stop the shipment of products.
	■	
Blocking utilities: Public utilities, such as the supply of electric power, water, and 
natural gas, can be interrupted for hours or days even in incidents that cause no direct 
damage to the physical infrastructure. Buildings are often uninhabitable and systems 
unable to function without public utilities.
These effects can devastate companies by causing them to cease operations for hours, days, 
or longer and risk losing customers whom they cannot then supply. Therefore, to combat 
these disasters a company can create a disaster recovery plan, which is a detailed process for 
recovering information or a system in the event of a catastrophic disaster. This plan includes 
such factors as which files and systems need to have backups and their corresponding fre­
quency and methods along with the strategic location of the storage in a separate physical site 
that is geographically dispersed. A company might strategically maintain operations in New 
York and San Francisco, ensuring that a natural disaster would not impact both locations. 
A disaster recovery plan also foresees the possibility that not only the computer equipment 
but also the building where employees work may be destroyed. A hot site is a separate and 
fully equipped facility where the company can move immediately after a disaster and resume 
business. A cold site is a separate facility that does not have any computer equipment but is 
a place where employees can move after a disaster. A warm site is a separate facility with 
computer equipment that requires installation and configuration. Figure B4.3 outlines these 
resources that support disaster recovery.

416  *  Plug-In B4  MIS Infrastructures
A disaster recovery plan usually has a disaster recovery cost curve to support it. A disaster 
recovery cost curve charts (1) the cost to the company of the unavailability of information and 
technology and (2) the cost to the company of recovering from a disaster over time. Figure 
B4.4 displays a disaster recovery cost curve and shows that the best recovery plan in terms of 
cost and time is where the two lines intersect. Creating such a curve is no small task. Manag­
ers must consider the cost of losing information and technology within each department or 
functional area, and across the whole company. During the first few hours of a disaster, those 
costs may be low, but they rise over time. With those costs in hand, a company must then 
determine the costs of recovery.  Figure B4.5 displays TechTarget’s disaster recovery strate­
gies for business.
On April 18, 1906, San Francisco was rocked by an earthquake that destroyed large sec­
tions of the city and claimed the lives of more than 3,000 inhabitants. More than a century 
later, a rebuilt and more durable San Francisco serves as a central location for major MIS cor­
porations as well as a major world financial center. Managers of these corporations are well 
aware of the potential disasters that exist along the San Andreas Fault and actively update 
their business continuity plans anticipating such issues as earthquakes and floods. The Union 
Bank of California is located in the heart of downtown San Francisco and maintains a highly 
detailed and well-developed business continuity plan. The company employs hundreds of 
business professionals scattered around the world that coordinate plans for addressing the 
potential loss of a facility, business professionals, or critical systems so that the company can 
continue to operate if a disaster happens. Its disaster recovery plan includes hot sites where 
staff can walk in and start working exactly as if they were in their normal location. It would 
be a matter of minutes, not hours, for the Union Bank of California to be up and running again 
in the event of a disaster.
FIGURE B4.3
Sites to Support Disaster 
Recovery.
A separate and fully
equipped facility where
the company can move
immediately after a
disaster and resume
business.
Hot Site
A separate facility that
does not have any
computer equipment,
but is a place where
employees can move
after a disaster.
Cold Site
A separate facility
with computer
equipment that
requires installation and
conﬁguration.
Warm Site
FIGURE B4.4
Disaster Recovery Cost 
Curve.
Dollars
Time from Disaster to Recovery
The optimal disaster
recovery plan in terms
of cost and time
The cost to your organization of
the unavailability of information
and technology
The cost to your organization
to recover from a disaster

	
Plug-In B4  MIS Infrastructures  *  417
BUSINESS CONTINUITY PLAN
An emergency is a sudden, unexpected event requiring immediate action due to potential 
threat to health and safety, the environment, or property. Emergency preparedness ensures 
a company is ready to respond to an emergency in an organized, timely, and effective man­
ner. Natural disasters and terrorist attacks are on the minds of business professionals who take 
safeguarding their information assets seriously. Disaster recovery plans typically focus on sys­
tems and data, ignoring cross-functional and intraorganizational business processes that can be 
destroyed during an emergency. For this reason many companies are turning to a more com­
prehensive and all-encompassing emergency preparedness plan known as business continuity 
planning (BCP), which details how a company recovers and restores critical business opera­
tions and systems after a disaster or extended disruption. BCP includes such factors as identi­
fying critical systems, business processes, departments, and the maximum amount of time the 
business can continue to operate without functioning systems. BCP contains disaster recovery 
plans along with many additional plans, including prioritizing business impact analysis, emer­
gency notification plans, and technology recovery strategies (see Figures B4.6 and B4.7).
Business Impact Analysis
A business impact analysis identifies all critical business functions and the effect that a spe­
cific disaster may have upon them. A business impact analysis is primarily used to ensure a 
company has made the right decisions about the order of recovery priorities and strategies. For 
example, should the accounting department have its systems up and running before the sales 
and marketing departments? Will email be the first system for recovery to ensure employees 
can communicate with each other and outside stakeholders such as customers, suppliers, and 
partners? The business impact analysis is a key part of BCP as it details the order in which 
functional areas should be restored, ensuring the most critical are focused on first.
Emergency Notification Services
A business continuity plan typically includes an emergency notification service, that is, an 
infrastructure built for notifying people in the event of an emergency. Radio stations’ occa­
sional tests of the national Emergency Alert System are an example of a very large-scale 
emergency notification system. A firm will implement an emergency notification service 
FIGURE B4.5
TechTarget’s Disaster 
Recovery Strategies.
  DISASTER RECOVERY STRATEGIES  
1. Activate backup and recovery facilities in second-
 
ary company data center; transfer production to that
 
site 
 Assumes the secondary data center has suﬃcient 
resources, e.g., storage capacity, server hardware to 
accommodate additional processing requirements 
2. Activate recovery resources in a cloud-based 
 
service; failover critical systems to that site and
 
resume operations 
 Ensure that your contract for this service has the 
ability to ﬂex as your needs dictate; ensure that 
security of your data can be maintained 
3. Activate backup systems and data at a hot site; 
 
transfer operations to that site 
 Be sure you know what resources you have available 
at the hot site, what the declaration rules and fees 
are, and what your options are if multiple declara-
tions are occurring at the same time 
4. Replace damaged equipment with spare 
 
components 
 As much as possible, have available spare systems, 
circuit boards, and power supplies; backup disks 
with system software; and hard and soft copies of 
critical documentation 
5. Recover virtual machines at an alternate site; 
 
assumes VMs have been updated to be current 
 
with production VMs 
 Create VM clones at an alternate site, keep them 
updated, and if needed they can quickly become 
production VMs 
6. Activate alternate network routes and re-route 
 
data and voice traﬃc away from the failed net-
 
work service 
 Ensure that network infrastructures have diverse 
routing of local access channels as well as diverse 
routing of high-capacity circuits3

418  *  Plug-In B4  MIS Infrastructures
to warn employees of unexpected events and provide them with instructions about how to 
handle the situation. Emergency notification services can be deployed through the firm’s 
own infrastructure, supplied by an outside service provider on company premises, or hosted 
remotely by an outside service provider. All three methods provide notification using a vari­
ety of methods such as email, voice notification to a cell phone, and text messaging. The 
notifications can be sent to all the devices selected, providing multiple means in which to get 
critical information to those who need it.
FIGURE B4.6
Business Continuity Planning 
Focus Areas.
Disaster
Recovery
Plan
Technology
Recovery
Strategies
Emergency
Notiﬁcation
Services
Business
Impact
Analysis
Business
Continuity
Planning
FIGURE B4.7
Tech Target’s Business 
Continuity Strategies.
  BUSINESS CONTINUITY STRATEGIES  
 1. Evacuate existing building and relocate to a prear-
ranged alternate work area 
 Assumes the alternate site is ready for occupancy, or 
can be made ready quickly, based on recovery time 
objectives; ensure that transportation is available 
 2.
 Ensure that staﬀ have broadband and Internet access 
at home; ensure that there are suﬃcient network 
access points to accommodate the increase in usage 
 3. 
 Assumes a hot site program is in place and that 
space is available at the site for staﬀ 
 4. Move alternate staﬀ into leadership roles in the 
absence of key leaders; ensure that they have 
been cross-trained 
 Succession planning is a key strategy in business 
continuity; it ensures that loss of a senior manager or 
someone with special expertise can be replaced with 
minimal disruption to the business 
Move staﬀ into local or nearby hotels and set up 
temporary work space 
 Make sure this kind of arrangement is set up 
with hotels in advance, especially in case of an 
incident that disrupts many other businesses in 
the same area 
6. 
Organizations with multiple oﬃces that
to the company network as well as work space can 
be leveraged to temporarily house employees4 
5.  
Relocate staﬀ to another company oﬃce
have access 
Work from home 
Move selected staﬀ to a hot site. 

	
Plug-In B4  MIS Infrastructures  *  419
Technology Recovery Strategies
Companies create massive amounts of data vital to their survival and continued operations. 
A technology failure occurs when the ability of a company to operate is impaired because 
of a hardware, software, or data outage. Technology failures can destroy large amounts of 
vital data, often causing incidents, unplanned interruption of a service. An incident record 
contains all of the details of an incident. Incident management is the process responsible 
for managing how incidents are identified and corrected. Technology recovery strategies 
focus specifically on prioritizing the order for restoring hardware, software, and data across the 
organization that best meets business recovery requirements. A technology recovery strategy 
details the order of importance for recovering hardware, software, data centers, and networking 
(or connectivity). If one of these four vital components is not functioning, the entire system 
will be unavailable, shutting down cross-functional business processes such as order manage­
ment and payroll. Figure B4.8 displays the key areas a company should focus on when devel­
oping technology recovery strategies.
Supporting Change: Agile MIS Infrastructure
Agile MIS infrastructure includes the hardware, software, and telecommunications equip­
ment that, when combined, provides the underlying foundation to support the organization’s 
goals. If a company grows by 50 percent in a single year, its infrastructure and systems must 
be able to handle a 50 percent growth rate. If they cannot, they can severely hinder the com­
pany’s ability not only to grow but also to function.
The future of a company depends on its ability to meet its partners, suppliers, and custom­
ers anytime of the day in any geographic location. Imagine owning an ebusiness and everyone 
on the Internet is tweeting and collaborating about how great your business idea is and how 
successful your company is going to be. Suddenly, you have 5 million global customers inter­
ested in your website. Unfortunately, you did not anticipate this many customers so quickly, 
and the system crashes. Users typing in your URL find a blank message stating the website 
is unavailable and to try back soon. Or even worse, they can get to your website but it takes 
three minutes to reload each time they click on a button. The buzz soon dies about your busi­
ness idea as some innovative web-savvy fast follower quickly copies your idea and creates a 
website that can handle the massive number of customers. The characteristics of agile MIS 
infrastructures can help ensure your systems can meet and perform under any unexpected or 
unplanned changes. Figure B4.9 lists the seven abilities of an agile infrastructure.
ACCESSIBILITY
Accessibility refers to the varying levels that define what a user can access, view, or perform 
when operating a system. Imagine the people at your college accessing the main student infor­
LO 3 Describe the characteristics 
of an agile MIS infrastructure.
FIGURE B4.8
Key Areas of Technology 
Recovery Strategies.
Technology
Recovery
Strategies
NETWORKING
(Wireless, LAN,
Fiber, Cable)
SOFTWARE
(Applications
such as Email,
Payroll, Instant
Messaging) 
DATA CENTER
(Climate Control,
Power Supply,
Security) 
HARDWARE
(Servers,
Computers,
Wireless
Devices)

420  *  Plug-In B4  MIS Infrastructures
mation system. Each person that accesses the system will have different needs and requirements; 
for example, a payroll employee will need to access vacation information and salary informa­
tion, or a student will need to access course information and billing information. Each system 
user is provided with an access level that details which parts of the system the user can and 
cannot access and what the user can do when in the system. For example, you would not want 
your students to be able to view payroll information or professors’ personal information; also, 
some users can only view information and are not allowed to create or delete information. Top-
level MIS employees require administrator access, or unrestricted access to the entire system. 
Administrator access can perform functions such as resetting passwords, deleting accounts, and 
shutting down entire systems.
Tim Berners-Lee, W3C director and inventor of the World Wide Web, stated, “the power 
of the web is in its universality. Access by everyone regardless of disability is an essen­
tial aspect.” Web accessibility means that people with disabilities, including visual, auditory, 
physical, speech, cognitive, and neurological disabilities, can use the web. The web accessi­
bility initiative (WAI) brings together people from industry, disability organizations, govern­
ment, and research labs from around the world to develop guidelines and resources to help 
make the web accessible to people with disabilities, including auditory, cognitive, neurologi­
cal, physical, speech, and visual disabilities. The goal of WAI is to allow people to access the 
full potential of the web, enabling people with disabilities to participate equally. For example, 
Apple includes screen magnification and VoiceOver on its iPhone, iPad, and iPod, which 
allow the blind and visually impaired to use the devices.
AVAILABILITY
In a 24/7/365 ebusiness environment, business professionals need to use their systems when­
ever they want from wherever they want. Availability refers to the time frames when the 
FIGURE B4.9
Agile MIS Infrastructure 
Characteristics.
• The system is operational during diﬀerent time frames.
• The system functions correctly and provides accurate
   information.
• The system can “scale up” or adapt to the increased
   demands of growth.
• The system is easy to learn and eﬃcient and satisfying
   to use.
• Varying levels allow system users to access,
   view, or perform operational functions.
Accessibility
Accessibility
Accessibility
Availability
Reliability
Scalability
Usability
Maintainability
• The system is available to operate on diﬀerent devices
   or software platforms.
• The system quickly transforms to support environmental
   changes.
Portability

	
Plug-In B4  MIS Infrastructures  *  421
system is operational. A system is called unavailable when it is not operating and cannot 
be used. High availability occurs when a system is continuously operational at all times. 
Availability is typically measured relative to “100 percent operational” or “never failing.” 
A widely held but difficult-to-achieve standard of availability for a system is known as “five 
9s” (99.999 percent) availability. Some companies have systems available around the clock to 
support ebusiness operations, global customers, and online suppliers.
Sometimes systems must be taken down for maintenance, upgrades, and fixes, which 
are completed during downtime. One challenge with availability is determining when to 
schedule system downtime if the system is expected to operate continuously. Perform­
ing maintenance during the evening might seem like a great idea, but evening in one 
city is morning somewhere else in the world, and business professionals scattered around 
the globe may not be able to perform specific job functions if the systems they need are 
unavailable. This is where companies deploy failover systems so they can take the primary 
system down for maintenance and activate the secondary system to ensure continuous 
operations.
MAINTAINABILITY
Companies must watch today’s needs, as well as tomorrow’s, when designing and building 
systems that support agile infrastructures. Systems must be flexible enough to meet all types of 
company changes, environmental changes, and business changes. Maintainability (or flexibil­
ity) refers to how quickly a system can transform to support environmental changes. Maintain­
ability helps to measure how quickly and effectively a system can be changed or repaired after 
a failure. For example, when starting a small business you might not consider that you will have 
global customers, a common mistake. When building your systems, you might not design them 
to handle multiple currencies and different languages, which might make sense if the company 
is not currently performing international business. Unfortunately, when the first international 
order arrives, which happens easily with ebusiness, the system will be unable to handle the 
request because it does not have the flexibility to be easily reconfigured for a new language or 
currency. When the company does start growing and operating overseas, the system will need 
to be redeveloped, which is not an easy or cheap task, to handle multiple currencies and differ­
ent languages.
Building and deploying flexible systems allow easy updates, changes, and reconfigurations 
for unexpected business or environmental changes. Just think what might have happened if 
Facebook had had to overhaul its entire system to handle multiple languages. Another social 
networking business could easily have stepped in and become the provider of choice. That 
certainly would not be efficient or effective for business operations.
PORTABILITY
Portability refers to the ability of an application to operate on different devices or software 
platforms, such as different operating systems. Apple’s iTunes is readily available to users 
of Mac computers as well as users of PC computers, smartphones, iPods, iPhones, iPads, 
and so on. It is also a portable application. Because Apple insists on compatibility across its 
products, both software and hardware, Apple can easily add to its product, device, and service 
offerings without sacrificing portability. Many software developers are creating programs 
that are portable to all three devices—the iPhone, iPod, and iPad—which increases their tar­
get market and they hope their revenue.
RELIABILITY
Reliability (or accuracy) ensures a system is functioning correctly and providing accurate 
information. Inaccuracy can occur for many reasons, from the incorrect entry of informa­
tion to the corruption of information during transmissions. Many argue that the information 
contained in Wikipedia is unreliable. Because the Wikipedia entries can be edited by any 
user, there are examples of rogue users inaccurately updating information. Many users skip 
over Google search findings that correlate to Wikipedia for this reason. Housing unreliable 

422  *  Plug-In B4  MIS Infrastructures
information on a website can put a company at risk of losing customers, placing inaccurate 
supplier orders, or even making unreliable business decisions. A vulnerability is a system 
weakness, such as a password that is never changed or a system left on while an employee 
goes to lunch, that can be exploited by a threat. Reliable systems ensure that vulnerabilities 
are kept at a minimum to reduce risk.
SCALABILITY
Estimating company growth is a challenging task, in part because growth can occur in a num­
ber of different forms—the firm can acquire new customers, new product lines, or new mar­
kets. Scalability describes how well a system can scale up, or adapt to the increased demands 
of growth. If a company grows faster than anticipated, it might experience a variety of prob­
lems, from running out of storage space to taking more time to complete transactions. Antici­
pating expected, and unexpected, growth is key to building scalable systems that can support 
that development.
Performance measures how quickly a system performs a process or transaction. Perfor­
mance is a key component of scalability as systems that can’t scale suffer from performance 
issues. Just imagine your college’s content management system suddenly taking five minutes 
to return a page after a button is pushed. Now imagine if this occurs during your midterm 
exam and you miss the two-hour deadline because the system is so slow. Performance issues 
experienced by firms can have disastrous business impacts causing loss of customers, loss of 
suppliers, and even loss of help-desk employees. Most users will wait only a few seconds for 
a website to return a request before growing frustrated and either calling the support desk or 
giving up and moving on to another website.
Capacity represents the maximum throughput a system can deliver; for example, the 
capacity of a hard drive represents its size or volume. Capacity planning determines future 
environmental infrastructure requirements to ensure high-quality system performance. If a 
company purchases connectivity software that is outdated or too slow to meet demand, its 
employees will waste a great deal of time waiting for systems to respond to user requests. It 
is cheaper for a company to design and implement agile infrastructure that envisions growth 
requirements than to update all the equipment after the system is already operational. If 
a company with 100 workers merges with another company and suddenly there are 400 
people using the system, performance time could suffer. Planning for increases in capacity 
can ensure systems perform as expected. Waiting for a system to respond to requests is not 
productive.
Web 2.0 is a big driver for capacity planning to ensure agile infrastructures can meet the 
business’s operational needs. Delivering videos over the Internet requires enough band­
width to satisfy millions of users during peak periods such as Friday and Saturday eve­
nings. Video transmissions over the Internet cannot tolerate packet loss (blocks of data 
loss), and allowing one additional user to access the system could degrade the video quality 
for every user.
USABILITY
Usability is the degree to which a system is easy to learn and efficient and satisfying to use. 
Providing hints, tips, shortcuts, and instructions for any system, regardless of its ease of use, 
is recommended. Apple understood the importance of usability when it designed the first 
iPod. One of the iPod’s initial attractions was the usability of the click wheel. One simple and 
efficient button operates the iPod, making it usable for all ages. And to ensure ease of use, 
Apple also made the corresponding iTunes software intuitive and easy to use. Serviceability 
is how quickly a third party can change a system to ensure it meets user needs and the terms 
of any contracts, including agreed levels of reliability, maintainability, or availability. When 
using a system from a third party, it is important to ensure the right level of serviceability for 
all users, including remote employees.

	
Plug-In B4  MIS Infrastructures  *  423
P L U G - I N  S U M M A R Y
A
n MIS infrastructure is dynamic; it continually changes as the business needs change. Each 
time a new form of Internet-enabled device, such as an iPhone or BlackBerry, is created 
and made available to the public, a firm’s MIS infrastructure must be revised to support 
the device. This moves beyond just innovations in hardware to include new types of software and 
network connectivity. The three primary areas where enterprise architects focus when maintaining a 
firm’s MIS infrastructure are as follows:
	■	 Supporting operations: Information MIS infrastructure identifies where and how important infor­
mation, such as customer records, is maintained and secured.
	■	 Supporting change: Agile MIS infrastructure includes the hardware, software, and telecommunica­
tions equipment that, when combined, provide the underlying foundation to support the organiza­
tion’s goals.
	■	 Supporting the environment: Sustainable MIS infrastructure identifies ways that a company can 
grow in terms of computing resources while simultaneously becoming less dependent on hard­
ware and energy consumption.
Accessibility  419
Administrator access  420
Agile MIS infrastructure  413
Availability  420
Backup  414
Business continuity planning 
(BCP)  417
Business impact analysis  417
Capacity  422
Capacity planning  422
Client  412
Cold site  415
Disaster recovery cost curve  416
Disaster recovery plan  415
Emergency  417
Emergency notification 
service  417
Emergency preparedness  417
K E Y  T E R M S
Enterprise architect (EA)  413
Failback  415
Failover  415
Fault tolerance  414
Hardware  412
High availability  421
Hot site  415
Incident  419
Incident management  419
Incident record  419
Information MIS 
infrastructure  413
Maintainability (or flexibility)  421
MIS infrastructure  412
Network  412
Performance  422
Portability  421
Recovery  414
Reliability (or accuracy)  421
Scalability  422
Server  412
Serviceability  422
Software  412
Sustainable MIS 
infrastructure  413
Technology failure  419
Technology recovery 
strategy  419
Unavailable  421
Usability  422
Vulnerability  422
Warm site  415
Web accessibility  420
Web accessibility initiative 
(WAI)  420
M A K I N G  B U S I N E S S  D E C I S I O N S
1.	 Creating Your BCP Plan
Business disruption costs money. In the event of a disaster or emergency, you will not only lose 
revenue, you will also incur additional expenses. If you are expecting your insurance to cover your 
losses, be careful—there are many losses your insurance will not cover such as lost sales, lost 
business intelligence, and lost customers. To mitigate the risks of a catastrophe, you will want to 
create a detailed business continuity plan. A business continuity plan (BCP) is not only a good idea 
but also one of the least expensive plans a company can develop. A BCP will detail how employees 
will contact each other and continue to keep operations functioning in the event of a disaster or 

424  *  Plug-In B4  MIS Infrastructures
emergency such as a fire or flood. Regrettably, many companies never take the time to develop 
such a plan until it is too late.
Research the web for sample BCP plans for a small business or a start-up. In a group, create 
a BCP for a start-up of your choice. Be sure to think of such things as data storage, data access, 
transaction processing, employee safety, and customer communications.
	2.	 Disaster Recovery
Backup and recovery are essential for any computer system. How painful would it be if some­
one stole your laptop right now? How much critical information would you lose? How many hours 
would it take you to re-create your data? Perhaps that will motivate you to implement a backup 
procedure. How many of you have a disaster recovery plan? Disaster recovery is needed when 
your best friend dumps a grande latte on your computer or you accidently wash your thumb drive.
Disaster recovery plans are crucial for any business, and you should ensure that your company 
has everything it needs to continue operations if there is ever a disaster, such as 9/11. You need to 
decide which disasters are worth worrying about and which ones probably will never occur. For 
example, if you live in Colorado, chances are good you don’t have to worry about hurricanes, but 
avalanches are another story.
How often does a company need to back up its data? Where should the backup be stored? 
What types of disasters should companies in your state prepare for in case of an emergency? Why 
is it important to test the backup? What could happen to a company if it failed to create a disaster 
recovery plan?
	3.	 Ranking the Ab-“ilities”
Do you know how Google makes so much money? Unlike traditional businesses, Google does not 
make money from the users of its service. Google makes money by charging the companies that 
want to appear in the sponsored section of a search result. After performing a Google search, you 
will notice three sections on the resulting page. Along the top and side are the sponsored search 
results, and the middle lists the organic search results. Google’s innovative marketing program, 
called AdWords, allows companies to bid on common search terms, and the highest bidder is 
posted first in the sponsored search results. Every time a user clicks a sponsored link, the com­
pany that owns the link has to pay Google. This is also called pay-per-click and can cost anywhere 
from a few cents to a few dollars for each click. A general search term such as “tropical vacation” 
costs less than a more specific search term such as “Hawaiian vacation.” Whichever company bids 
the most for the search term appears at the top of the sponsored section. Clicking the links in the 
organic search results does not incur any charges for the company that owns the link.
Rank the agile infrastructure ab-“ilities” for Google from most important to least important in 
terms of supporting Google’s MIS infrastructure and business operations. Be sure to provide the 
justification behind your ranking.
	4.	 Laptop? Notebook? Netbook? Tablet?
Thanks to Moore’s Law, computing devices are getting smaller, cheaper, and faster every year, 
allowing innovative companies to create new devices that are smaller and more powerful than 
current devices. Just look at desktop, laptop, notebook, and tablet computers. These are all dif­
ferent devices allowing users to connect and compute around the globe. Moore’s Law has been 
accurate about computing power roughly doubling every 18 months. Do you agree or disagree 
that Moore’s Law will continue to apply for the next 20 years? Why or why not?
	5.	 Universities Are Switching to Gmail
Schools around the world are moving to cloud computing applications such as Google Docs & 
Spreadsheets and Google Calendar. Yale had planned to move from its own email system to 
Google Mail, but at the last minute decided to cancel the project because school administrators

	
Plug-In B4  MIS Infrastructures  *  425
and faculty members did not believe the move could support their business requirements. Do 
you agree or disagree that Google Gmail would be unable to replace a university’s private email 
system? What are the advantages and disadvantages of a private email system? What are the 
advantages and disadvantages of using a cloud application such as Google Gmail? What choice 
would you make if you were the primary decision maker for choosing your school’s email system?
	         6. I Don’t Have a Temperature, but I’m Positive I Have a Virus
Think how horrible it would be to finish your term paper at 4 a.m. and find out that your computer 
has a virus and you just lost your entire document. Or perhaps you submit your final paper, which 
is worth 50 percent of your grade, and then head off to Colorado for winter break. You return to 
find that you failed the course, and you frantically check email to find out what happened. A mes­
sage from your professor informs you that your document was corrupt and couldn’t be opened 
and that you had 24 hours to resend the file, which you missed because you were skiing down 
the slopes.
Have you ever experienced having a file corrupted? If so, what could you have done to recover 
from this situation? Do you think your instructor ever receives corrupted files? How did the file become 
corrupted? Do you think your instructor would be suspicious if you submitted a corrupted file?
	            7. Sustainable Departments
Energy prices and global warming are discussed daily in the news as the environmental impact of 
ewaste is just beginning to be recognized. Sustainability and corporate social responsibility need 
to be taken seriously by all managers because everyone should take an active role in helping to 
preserve the environment. List the different departments in a business and the types of environ­
mental issues they typically encounter. Which department do you think creates the most ewaste? 
Which department uses the greatest amount of electricity or has the largest carbon footprint? 
What can each department do to help combat its environmental issues? Why do all managers, and 
for that matter all employees, need to be aware of environmental issues and ways they can create 
sustainable MIS infrastructures?
	         8. Facebook’s Energy Use
Cheap electricity is great for keeping business costs down, but it often means relying on coal for 
power. Facebook recently commissioned a new computing facility in Oregon and is using power 
from PacifiCorp, a utility that gets the majority of its energy from coal-fired power stations, which 
are major contributors of greenhouse gas emissions. As more and more people subscribe to Face­
book, its energy needs are increasing almost exponentially.
Do you agree that Facebook made a wise business decision in selecting a utility provider that 
uses coal-fired power stations? What alternative sources of energy could Facebook have used to 
power its computing facility? Do you think Facebook’s core customers care about the environ­
ment? What types of business challenges might Facebook encounter if it continues using coal-
fired power stations?
	          9.    Planning for Disaster Recovery
You are the new senior analyst in the MIS department at Beltz, a large snack food manufacturing 
company. The company is located on the beautiful shoreline in Charleston, South Carolina. The com­
pany’s location is one of its best and worst features. The weather and surroundings are beautiful, but 
the threat of hurricanes and other natural disasters is high. What types of information should be con­
tained in Beltz’s disaster recovery plan that will minimize any risks involved with a natural disaster?
	10. Comparing Backup and Recovery Systems
Research the Internet to find three vendors of backup and recovery systems. Compare and con­
trast the three systems and determine which one you would recommend if you were installing a 

426  *  Plug-In B4  MIS Infrastructures
backup and recovery system for a medium-sized business, with 3,500 employees, that maintains 
information on the stock market. Compile your findings in a presentation that you can give to your 
class that details the three systems’ strengths and weaknesses, along with your recommendation.
	11. Cool Schools
Very large computers and data centers incur huge energy costs keeping electronic components 
cooled. Where is your school’s data center located? How big is it? What security measures does 
the facility enforce? Can you get a tour of it? If it is on campus, how is the facility cooled? How 
is the power supplied? Heating and cooling computer systems are certainly a big issue. Think of 
ways you could reuse the heat from a data center, such as sending it to a college dorm. Could 
alternative resources, such as a nearby river or a lake, provide added cooling? What unanticipated 
environmental issues could this create?


428  *  Plug-In B5  Networks and Telecommunications
P L U G - I N
Introduction
Change is everywhere in the information technology domain, but nowhere is change more 
evident and more dramatic than the realm of networks and telecommunications. Most man­
agement information systems today rely on digital networks to communicate information in 
the form of data, graphics, video, and voice. Companies large and small from all over the world 
are using networks and the Internet to locate suppliers and buyers, to negotiate contracts with 
them, and to provide bigger, better, and faster services than ever before. Telecommunication 
systems enable the transmission of data over public or private networks. A network is a com­
munications system created by linking two or more devices and establishing a standard meth­
odology by which they can communicate. The world’s largest and most widely used network 
is the Internet. The Internet is a global “network of networks” that uses universal standards 
to connect millions of different networks around the world. Telecommunication systems and 
networks are traditionally complicated and historically inefficient. However, businesses can 
benefit from today’s network infrastructures that provide reliable global reach to employees 
and customers.
Network Basics
Networks range from small two-computer networks to the biggest network of all, the Inter­
net. A network provides two principle benefits: the ability to communicate and the ability 
to share.
Today’s corporate digital networks include a combination of local area networks, wide 
area networks, and metropolitan area networks. A local area network (LAN) is designed 
LO 1 Compare LANs, WANs, and 
MANs.
B5
Networks and Telecommunications
LEARNING OUTCOMES
	1.	 Compare LANs, WANs, and MANs.
	2.	 Compare the two types of network architectures.
	3.	 Explain topology and the different types found in networks.
	4.	 Describe protocols and the importance of TCP/IP.
	5.	 Identify the different media types found in networks.

	
Plug-In B5  Networks and Telecommunications  *  429
to connect a group of computers in proximity to each other such as in an office building, a 
school, or a home. A LAN is useful for sharing resources such as files, printers, games, or 
other applications. A LAN in turn often connects to other LANs, and to the Internet or wide 
area networks. A wide area network (WAN) spans a large geographic area, such as a state, 
province, or country. WANs often connect multiple smaller networks, such as local area net­
works or metropolitan area networks. The world’s most popular WAN is the Internet. A metro­
politan area network (MAN) is a large computer network usually spanning a city. Figure B5.1
highlights the three different types of networks, and Figure B5.2 illustrates each network type.
Direct data communication links between a company and its suppliers or customers, or 
both, have been successfully used to give the company a strategic advantage. The SABRE 
airline reservation system is a classic example of a strategic management information system 
that depends upon communication provided through a network. SABRE Airline Solutions 
pioneered technological advances for the industry in areas such as revenue management, pric­
ing, flight scheduling, cargo, flight operations, and crew scheduling. In addition, not only 
did SABRE help invent ecommerce for the travel industry, the company holds claim to pro­
gressive solutions that defined—and continue to revolutionize—the travel and transportation 
marketplace.
A network typically includes four things (besides the computers themselves):
	1.	 Protocol—a set of communication rules to make sure that everyone speaks the same 
language.
	2.	 Network interface card (NIC)—a card that plugs into the back (or side) of your computers 
and lets them send and receive messages from other computers.
	3.	 Cable—the medium to connect all of the computers.
	4.	 Hub (switch or router)—hardware to perform traffic control.
We will continue to define many of these terms and concepts in the sections that follow. 
Networks are differentiated by the following:
	■	
Architecture—peer-to-peer, client/server.
	■	
Topology—bus, star, ring, hybrid, wireless.
	■	
Protocols—Ethernet, transmission control protocol/Internet protocol (TCP/IP).
	■	
Media—coaxial, twisted-pair, fiber-optic.
Architecture
The two primary types of network architectures are peer-to-peer networks and client/server 
networks.
LO 2 Compare the two types 
of network architectures.
FIGURE B5.1
Network Types.
Network Types
Local area network (LAN)
Designed to connect a group of computers in proximity to each other such 
as in an office building, a school, or a home. A LAN is useful for sharing 
resources such as files, printers, games, or other applications. A LAN in turn 
often connects to other LANs, and to the Internet or wide area networks.
Wide area network (WAN)
Spans a large geographic area, such as a state, province, or country. WANs 
often connect multiple smaller networks, such as local area networks 
(LANs) or metropolitan area networks (MANs).
Metropolitan area network 
(MAN)
A large computer network usually spanning a city. Most colleges, 
universities, and large companies that span a campus use an infrastructure 
supported by a MAN.

430  *  Plug-In B5  Networks and Telecommunications
PEER-TO-PEER NETWORKS
A peer-to-peer (P2P) network is a computer network that relies on the computing power and 
bandwidth of the participants in the network rather than a centralized server, as illustrated in 
Figure B5.3. Each networked computer can allow other computers to access its files and use 
connected printers while it is in use as a workstation without the aid of a server.
FIGURE B5.2
LAN, WAN, and MAN.
Network
Network
Local Area Network (LAN)
Example : City Library
Metropolitan Area Network (MAN)
Example: University Campus
West Campus
East Campus
MAN
Network
Wide Area Network (WAN)
Example: Internet
Sydney,  Australia
London,  England
Network
Denver,  Colorado
Boston,  Massachusetts
WAN
Network
Network
Network
FIGURE B5.3
Peer-to-Peer Networks.
Connection such
as Internet or Cables

	
Plug-In B5  Networks and Telecommunications  *  431
While Napster may be the most widely known example of a P2P implementation, it may 
also be one of the most narrowly focused since the Napster model takes advantage of only 
one of the many capabilities of P2P computing: file sharing. The technology has far broader 
capabilities, including the sharing of processing, memory, and storage, and the supporting of 
collaboration among vast numbers of distributed computers such as grid computing. Peer-to-
peer computing enables immediate interaction among people and computer systems.1
CLIENT/SERVER NETWORKS
A client is a computer designed to request information from a server. A server is a computer 
dedicated to providing information in response to requests. A client/server network is a model 
for applications in which the bulk of the back-end processing, such as performing a physical 
search of a database, takes place on a server, while the front-end processing, which involves 
communicating with the users, is handled by the clients (see Figure B5.4). A network operating 
system (NOS) is the operating system that runs a network, steering information between comput­
ers and managing security and users. The client/server model has become one of the central ideas 
of network computing. Most business applications written today use the client/server model.
A fundamental part of client/server architecture is packet-switching. Packet-switching 
occurs when the sending computer divides a message into a number of efficiently sized units 
of data called packets, each of which contains the address of the destination computer. Each 
packet is sent on the network and intercepted by routers. A router is an intelligent connecting 
device that examines each packet of data it receives and then decides which way to send it 
onward toward its destination. The packets arrive at their intended destination, although some 
may have actually traveled by different physical paths, and the receiving computer assembles 
the packets and delivers the message to the appropriate application.
Topology
Networks are assembled according to certain rules. Cables, for example, have to be a certain 
length; each cable strand can support only a certain amount of network traffic. A network topology 
refers to the geometric arrangement of the actual physical organization of the computers (and other 
network devices) in a network. Topologies vary depending on cost and functionality. Figure B5.5 
highlights the five common topologies used in networks, and Figure B5.6 displays each topology.
Protocols
A protocol is a standard that specifies the format of data as well as the rules to be followed 
during transmission. Simply put, for one computer (or computer program) to talk to another 
computer (or computer program) they must both be talking the same language, and this lan­
guage is called a protocol.
LO 3 Explain topology and the dif-
ferent types found in networks.
LO 4 Describe protocols and the 
importance of TCP/IP.
FIGURE B5.4
Client/Server Network.
LAN/MAN/WAN
Network
LAN
LAN
Network
Client
Client
Server
Client
Server
Client
Client
Client
Client
Client

432  *  Plug-In B5  Networks and Telecommunications
FIGURE B5.6
Network Topologies.
Ring Topology
Star Topology
Bus Topology
Hybrid Topology
Wireless Topology
Access
Point
Access
Point
Wireless
LAN/WAN/MAN
A protocol is based on an agreed-upon and established standard, and this way all manufactur­
ers of hardware and software that are using the protocol do so in a similar fashion to allow for 
interoperability. Interoperability is the capability of two or more computer systems to share data 
and resources, even though they are made by different manufacturers. The most popular net­
work protocols used are Ethernet and transmission control protocol/Internet protocol (TCP/IP).
ETHERNET
Ethernet is a physical and data layer technology for LAN networking (see Figure B5.7). 
Ethernet is the most widely installed LAN access method, originally developed by Xerox 
FIGURE B5.5
Five Network Topologies.
Network Topologies
Bus
All devices are connected to a central cable, called the bus or backbone. Bus networks are 
relatively inexpensive and easy to install for small networks.
Star
All devices are connected to a central device, called a hub. Star networks are relatively easy 
to install and manage, but bottlenecks can occur because all data must pass through the 
hub.
Ring
All devices are connected to one another in the shape of a closed loop, so that each device 
is connected directly to two other devices, one on either side of it. Ring topologies are 
relatively expensive and difficult to install, but they offer high bandwidth and can span large 
distances.
Hybrid
Groups of star-configured workstations are connected to a linear bus backbone cable, 
combining the characteristics of the bus and star topologies.
Wireless
Devices are connected by signals between access points and wireless transmitters within a 
limited range.

	
Plug-In B5  Networks and Telecommunications  *  433
and then developed further by Xerox, Digital Equipment Corporation, and Intel. When it first 
began to be widely deployed in the 1980s, Ethernet supported a maximum theoretical data 
transfer rate of 10 megabits per second (Mbps). More recently, Fast Ethernet has extended 
traditional Ethernet technology to 100 Mbps peak, and Gigabit Ethernet technology extends 
performance up to 1,000 Mbps.
Ethernet is one of the most popular LAN technologies for the following reasons:
	■	
Is easy to implement, manage, and maintain.
	■	
Allows low-cost network implementations.
	■	
Provides extensive flexibility for network installation.
	■	
Guarantees interoperability of standards-compliant products, regardless of 
manufacturer.2
TRANSMISSION CONTROL PROTOCOL/INTERNET PROTOCOL
The most common telecommunication protocol is transmission control protocol/Internet 
protocol (TCP/IP), which was originally developed by the Department of Defense to con­
nect a system of computer networks that became known as the Internet. Transmission 
control protocol/Internet protocol (TCP/IP) provides the technical foundation for the 
public Internet as well as for large numbers of private networks. The key achievement 
of TCP/IP is its flexibility with respect to lower-level protocols. TCP/IP uses a special 
transmission method that maximizes data transfer and automatically adjusts to slower 
devices and other delays encountered on a network. Although more than 100 protocols 
make up the entire TCP/IP protocol suite, the two most important of these are TCP and 
IP. TCP provides transport functions, ensuring, among other things, that the amount 
of data received is the same as the amount transmitted. IP provides the addressing and 
routing mechanism that acts as a postmaster. Figure B5.8 displays TCP/IP’s four-layer 
reference model:
	■	
Application layer—serves as the window for users and application processes to access 
network services.
	■	
Transport layer—handles end-to-end packet transportation.
FIGURE B5.7
Ethernet Protocols.
Ethernet
HR Department
Sales Department
Department Server
Finance Department
Ethernet LAN Diagram
Printers
Router-Firewall
Internet

434  *  Plug-In B5  Networks and Telecommunications
FIGURE B5.8
TCP/IP Four-Layer Reference 
Model.
Applications
Transport
TCP
FTP, SMTP, Telnet, HTTP, SNTP
IP
Ethernet, Token Ring, FDDI
Internet
Network Interface
TCP/IP Applications
File Transfer Protocol (FTP)
Allows files containing text, programs, graphics, 
numerical data, and so on to be downloaded off or 
uploaded onto a network.
Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP)
TCP/IP’s own messaging system for email.
Telnet Protocol
Provides terminal emulation that allows a personal 
computer or workstation to act as a terminal, or 
access device, for a server.
Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP)
Allows web browsers and servers to send and receive 
web pages.
Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP)
Allows the management of networked nodes to be 
managed from a single point.
FIGURE B5.9
TCP/IP Applications.
	■	
Internet layer—formats the data into packets, adds a header containing the packet 
sequence and the address of the receiving device, and specifies the services required 
from the network.
	■	
Network interface layer—places data packets on the network for transmission.3 
For a computer to communicate with other computers and web servers on the Internet, it 
must have a unique numeric IP address. IP provides the addressing and routing mechanism 
that acts as a postmaster. An IP address is a unique 32-bit number that identifies the location 
of a computer on a network. It works like a street address—as a way to find out exactly where 
to deliver information.
When IP addressing first came out, everyone thought that there were plenty of addresses 
to cover any need. Theoretically, you could have 4,294,967,296 unique addresses. The actual 
number of available addresses is smaller (somewhere between 3.2 and 3.3 billion) due to the 
way that the addresses are separated into classes, and some addresses are set aside for multi­
casting, testing, or other special uses.4
With the explosion of the Internet and the increase in home networks and business net­
works, the number of available IP addresses is simply not enough. The obvious solution is to 
redesign the address format to allow for more possible addresses. Internet protocol version 
6 (IPv6) is the “next generation” protocol designed to replace the current version Internet 
protocol, IP version 4 (IPv4). However, IPv6 will take several years to implement because 
it requires modification of the entire infrastructure of the Internet. The main change brought 
by IPv6 is a much larger address space that allows greater flexibility in assigning addresses. 
IPv6 uses a 128-bit addressing scheme that produces 3.4 × 1038 addresses.5
The TCP/IP suite of applications includes five protocols—file transfer, simple mail trans­
fer, telnet, hypertext transfer, and simple network management (see Figures B5.9 and B5.10).6
FIGURE B5.10
Open System 
Interconnection Model.
OSI Model
7. Application
6. Presentation
5. Session
4. Transport
3. Network
2. Data Link
1. Physical

	
Plug-In B5  Networks and Telecommunications  *  435
Media
Network transmission media refers to the various types of media used to carry the signal 
between computers. When information is sent across the network, it is converted into electri­
cal signals. These signals are generated as electromagnetic waves (analog signaling) or as a 
sequence of voltage pulses (digital signaling). To be sent from one location to another, a signal 
must travel along a physical path. The physical path that is used to carry a signal between a 
signal transmitter and a signal receiver is called the transmission media. The two types of 
transmission media are wire (guided) and wireless (unguided).
WIRE MEDIA
Wire media are transmission material manufactured so that signals will be confined to a narrow 
path and will behave predictably. The three most commonly used types of guided media are 
(see Figure B5.11):
	■	
Twisted-pair cable
	■	
Coaxial cable
	■	
Fiber-optic cable
Twisted-Pair Cable
Twisted-pair cable refers to a type of cable composed of four (or more) copper wires 
twisted around each other within a plastic sheath. The wires are twisted to reduce out­
side electrical interference. Twisted-pair cables come in shielded and unshielded varieties. 
Shielded cables have a metal shield encasing the wires that acts as a ground for electromag­
netic interference. Unshielded twisted-pair (UTP) is the most popular and is generally the 
best option for LAN networks. The quality of UTP may vary from telephone-grade wire to 
high-speed cable. The cable has four pairs of wires inside the jacket. Each pair is twisted 
with a different number of twists per inch to help eliminate interference from adjacent pairs 
and other electrical devices. The connectors (called RF-45) on twisted-pair cables resemble 
large telephone connectors.
Coaxial Cable
Coaxial cable is cable that can carry a wide range of frequencies with low signal loss. It 
consists of a metallic shield with a single wire placed along the center of a shield and isolated 
from the shield by an insulator. Coaxial cable is similar to that used for cable television. This 
type of cable is referred to as coaxial because it contains one copper wire (or physical data 
channel) that carries the signal and is surrounded by another concentric physical channel 
consisting of a wire mesh. The outer channel serves as a ground for electrical interference. 
LO 5 Identify the different media 
types found in networks.
FIGURE B5.11
Twisted-Pair, Coaxial Cable, 
and Fiber-Optic.
Twisted-Pair Cabling
(10Base-T)
Coaxial Cable
Fiber-Optic Cable
Protective outside cover
Jacket
Cladding
Glass ﬁber core
Protective outside cover
Copper/aluminum mesh
Insulator
Copper center conductor
Inner, single-wire cover
Copper wire

436  *  Plug-In B5  Networks and Telecommunications
Because of this grounding feature, several coaxial cables can be placed within a single con­
duit or sheath without significant loss of data integrity.
Fiber-Optic Cable
Fiber-optic (or optical fiber) refers to the technology associated with the transmission of 
information as light impulses along a glass wire or fiber. Fiber-optic cable is the same type 
used by most telephone companies for long-distance service. Fiber-optic cable can transmit 
data over long distances with little loss in data integrity. In addition, because data are trans­
ferred as a pulse of light, fiber-optic is not subject to interference. The light pulses travel 
through a glass wire or fiber encased in an insulating sheath.
Fiber-optic’s increased maximum effective distance comes at a price. Optical fiber is more 
fragile than wire, difficult to split, and labor intensive to install. For these reasons, fiber-optic 
is used primarily to transmit data over extended distances where the hardware required to 
relay the data signal on less expensive media would exceed the cost of fiber-optic installation. 
It is also used where large amounts of data need to be transmitted on a regular basis.
WIRELESS MEDIA
Wireless media are natural parts of the Earth’s environment that can be used as physical 
paths to carry electrical signals. The atmosphere and outer space are examples of wireless 
media that are commonly used to carry these signals. Today, technologies for wireless data 
transmission include microwave transmission, communication satellites (see Figure B5.12), 
mobile phones, personal digital assistants (PDAs), personal computers (e.g., laptops), and 
mobile data networks.
Network signals are transmitted through all media as a type of waveform. When transmit­
ted through wire and cable, the signal is an electrical waveform. When transmitted through 
fiber-optic cable, the signal is a light wave, either visible or infrared light. When transmitted 
through the Earth’s atmosphere, the signal can take the form of waves in the radio spectrum, 
including microwaves, infrared, or visible light.
FIGURE B5.12
Communication Satellite 
Example.
22,000 miles above
Earth 
Fixed Locations
Satellite
Satellite
Portable Communications
Vehicles

	
Plug-In B5  Networks and Telecommunications  *  437
Client  431
Client/server network  431
Coaxial cable  435
Ethernet  432
Fiber-optic (or optical fiber)  436
Internet protocol version 6 
(IPv6)  434
Interoperability  432
Local area network (LAN)  428
Metropolitan area network 
(MAN)  429
N
etworks come in all sizes, from two computers connected to share a printer to the Internet, 
which is the largest network of all, joining millions of computers of all types all over the 
world. In between are business networks, which vary in size from a dozen or fewer comput­
ers to many thousands. There are three primary types of networks: local area network (LAN), wide 
area network (WAN), and metropolitan area network (MAN). The following differentiate networks:
	■	 Architecture—peer-to-peer, client/server.
	■	 Topology—bus, star, ring, hybrid, wireless.
	■	 Protocols—Ethernet, transmission control protocol/Internet protocol (TCP/IP).
	■	 Media—coaxial, twisted-pair, fiber-optic.
P L U G - I N  S U M M A R Y
	1.	 Secure Access
Organizations that have traditionally maintained private, closed systems have begun to look at the 
potential of the Internet as a ready-made network resource. The Internet is inexpensive and glob­
ally pervasive: Every phone jack is a potential connection. However, the Internet lacks security. 
What obstacles must organizations overcome to allow secure network connections?
	2.	 Rolling Out with Networks
As organizations begin to realize the benefits of adding a wireless component to their network, 
they must understand how to leverage this emerging technology. Wireless solutions have come to 
the forefront for many organizations with the rollout of more standard, cost-effective, and secure 
wireless protocols. With wireless networks, increased business agility may be realized by con­
tinuous data access and synchronization. However, with the increased flexibility comes many 
challenges. Develop a report detailing the benefits an organization could obtain by implementing 
wireless technology. Also, include the challenges that a wireless network presents along with rec­
ommendations for any solutions.
K E Y  T E R M S
Network  435
Network operating system 
(NOS)  431
Network topology  431
Network transmission media  435
Packet-switching  431
Peer-to-peer (P2P) network  430
Protocol  431
Router  431
Server  431
Telecommunication system  428
Transmission control protocol/
Internet protocol (TCP/IP)  433
Twisted-pair cable  435
Wide area network (WAN)  429
Wire media  435
Wireless media  436
M A K I N G  B U S I N E S S  D E C I S I O N S

438  *  Plug-In B5  Networks and Telecommunications
3.	 Wireless Fitness
Sandifer’s Fitness Club is located in beautiful South Carolina. Rosie Sandifer has owned and oper­
ated the club for 20 years. The club has three outdoor pools, two indoor pools, 10 racquetball 
courts, 10 tennis courts, an indoor and outdoor track, along with a four-story exercise equipment 
and massage therapy building. Rosie has hired you as a summer intern specializing in information 
technology. The extent of Rosie’s current technology includes a few PCs in the accounting depart­
ment and two PCs with Internet access for the rest of the staff. Your first assignment is to create a 
report detailing networks and wireless technologies. The report should explain how the club could 
gain a business advantage by implementing a wireless network. If Rosie likes your report, she will 
hire you as the full-time employee in charge of information technology. Be sure to include all of the 
different uses for wireless devices the club could implement to improve its operations.
4.	 Network Analysis
Global Manufacturing is considering a new technology application. The company wants to process 
orders in a central location and then assign production to different plants. Each plant will oper­
ate its own production scheduling and control system. Data on work in process and completed 
assemblies will be transmitted back to the central location that processes orders. At each plant, 
Global uses personal computers that perform routine tasks such as payroll and accounting. The 
production scheduling and control systems will be a package program running on a new computer 
dedicated to this application.
The MIS personnel at Global have retained you as a consultant to help with further analysis. 
What kind of network configuration seems most appropriate? How much bandwidth is needed? 
What data should be collected? Prepare a plan showing the information Global must develop to 
establish this network system. Should Global use a private network or can it accomplish its objec­
tives through the Internet?
5.	 Frying Your Brains?
Radio waves, microwaves, and infrared all belong to the electromagnetic radiation spectrum used. 
These terms reference ranges of radiation frequencies we use every day in our wireless network­
ing environments. However, the very word radiation strikes fear in many people. Cell towers have 
sprouted from fields all along highways. Tall rooftops harbor many more cell stations in cities. 
Millions of cell phone users place microwave transmitters/receivers next to their heads each time 
they make a call. With all this radiation zapping around, should we be concerned? Research the 
Internet to find out what the World Health Organization (WHO) has had to say about this.
6.	 Home Network Experience
If you maintain a home computer network (or have set one up in the past), create a document that 
describes the benefits that the network provides along with the difficulties that you have experi­
enced. Include in your document a network topology, a detailed description of the type of network 
you have, and the equipment you use. If you have no experience with home networking, interview 
someone who does, and write up his or her comments. Compare this with several classmates, and 
discuss the benefits and challenges.


440  *  Plug-In B6  Information Security
P L U G - I N 
The First Line of Defense—People
Organizations today are able to mine valuable information such as the identity of the top 
20 percent of their customers, who usually produce 80 percent of revenues. Most organiza­
tions view this type of information as intellectual capital and implement security measures 
to prevent it from walking out the door or falling into the wrong hands. At the same time, 
they must enable employees, customers, and partners to access needed information electroni­
cally. Organizations address security risks through two lines of defense; the first is people, the 
­second technology.
Surprisingly, the biggest problem is people, as the majority of information security 
breaches result from people misusing organizational information. Insiders are legitimate 
users who purposely or accidentally misuse their access to the environment and cause some 
kind of business-affecting incident. For example, many individuals freely give up their 
passwords or write them on sticky notes next to their computers, leaving the door wide 
open for hackers. Through social engineering, hackers use their social skills to trick people 
into revealing access credentials or other valuable information. Dumpster diving, or look­
ing through people’s trash, is another way hackers obtain information. Pretexting is a form 
of social engineering in which one individual lies to obtain confidential data about another 
individual.
Information security policies identify the rules required to maintain information ­security, 
such as requiring users to log off before leaving for lunch or meetings, never sharing pass­
words with anyone, and changing passwords every 30 days. An information security plan 
details how an organization will implement the information security policies (see ­Figure B6.1). 
The best way a company can safeguard itself from people is by implementing and communi­
cating its information security plan. This becomes even more important with Web 2.0 and as 
B6
Information Security
LEARNING OUTCOMES
1.	 Describe the relationship between information security policies and an infor­
mation security plan.
2.	 Provide an example of each of the three primary information security areas: 
(1) authentication and authorization, (2) prevention and resistance, and 
(3) detection and response.
LO 1 Describe the relationship 
between information security 
­policies and an information secu­
rity plan.

	
Plug-In B6  Information Security  *  441
the use of mobile devices, remote workforce, and contractors are growing. A few details man­
agers should consider surrounding people and information security policies include defining 
the best practices for:
	■	
Applications allowed to be placed on the corporate network, especially various file 
sharing applications, IM software, and entertainment or freeware created by unknown 
sources (iPhone applications).
	■	
Corporate computer equipment used for personal reason on personal networks.
	■	
Password creation and maintenance including minimum password length, characters to 
be included while choosing passwords, and frequency for password changes.
	■	
Personal computer equipment allowed to connect to the corporate network.
	■	
Virus protection including how often the system should be scanned and how frequently 
the software should be updated. This could also include if downloading attachments is 
allowed and practices for safe downloading from trusted and untrustworthy sources.
The Second Line of Defense—Technology
Once an organization has protected its intellectual capital by arming its people with a detailed 
information security plan, it can begin to focus on deploying technology to help combat 
attackers. Destructive agents are malicious agents designed by spammers and other Inter­
net attackers to farm email addresses off websites or deposit spyware on machines. Figure 
B6.2 displays the three areas where technology can aid in the defense against attacks.
PEOPLE: AUTHENTICATION AND AUTHORIZATION
Identity theft is the forging of someone’s identity for the purpose of fraud. The fraud is often 
financial, because thieves apply for and use credit cards or loans in the victim’s name. Two 
means of stealing an identity are phishing and pharming. Information secrecy is the ­category 
Information Security Policies
Identifies the rules required to 
maintain information security
Information Security Plan
Details how an organization will implement the information security 
policies
Acceptable Encryption Policy
On-premise network servers must be encrypted and kept behind 
locked doors at a minimum. Limit employee access to servers.
Clean Desk Policy
Clear desk clear screen policy—all employees should be required 
to adhere to a clear desk, clear screen policy. When they leave their 
work computer, they should sign off to prevent an unauthorized user 
from accessing. You can set up a password-protected screensaver 
that will activate after 10 minutes in case the employee forgets to sign 
out. In addition ensure that employees do not leave sensitive printed 
information on their desks unattended.
Disaster Recovery Plan Policy
All networked computers must be accessed via a firewall.
Digital Signature 
Acceptance Policy
Keep filing cabinets locked at all times, and if feasible keep them behind 
locked doors. Keep keys locked in a single location with limited access.
Password Construction 
Guidelines
Require all employees to use password authentication to access their 
computers, the corporate network, and email.
Password Protection Policy
Set computer passwords to expire every 90 days.
Security Response Plan Policy
Client confidential information is defined as proprietary and 
confidential information received from customers. An example of this 
type of information is customer bank account info. This information 
type is restricted to management-approved internal access only.
FIGURE B6.1
Information Security Policies 
and Information Security Plan.
LO 2 Provide an example of each 
of the three primary information 
security areas: (1) authentication 
and authorization, (2) prevention 
and resistance, and (3) detection 
and response.

442  *  Plug-In B6  Information Security
of computer security that addresses the protection of data from unauthorized disclosure and 
confirmation of data source authenticity. Phishing is a technique to gain personal information 
for the purpose of identity theft, usually by means of fraudulent emails that look as though 
they came from legitimate businesses. The messages appear to be genuine, with official-­
looking formats and logos, and typically ask for verification of important information such 
as passwords and account numbers, ostensibly for accounting or auditing purposes. Since the 
emails look authentic, up to one in five recipients responds with the information and subse­
quently becomes a victim of identity theft and other fraud. Figure B6.3 displays a phishing 
scam attempting to gain information for Skyline Bank; you should never click on emails 
­asking you to verify your identity, as companies will never contact you directly asking for 
your username or password.1
Phishing expedition is a masquerading attack that combines spam with spoofing. The 
perpetrator sends millions of spam emails that appear to be from a respectable company. The 
emails contain a link to a website that is designed to look exactly like the company’s web­
site. The victim is encouraged to enter his or her username, password, and sometimes credit 
card information. Spear phishing is a phishing expedition in which the emails are carefully 
designed to target a particular person or organization. Vishing (or voice phishing) is a phone 
scam that attempts to defraud people by asking them to call a bogus telephone number to 
“confirm” their account information.
Pharming reroutes requests for legitimate websites to false websites. For example, if you 
were to type in the URL to your bank, pharming could redirect to a fake site that collects your 
information. A zombie is a program that secretly takes over another computer for the purpose 
of launching attacks on other computers. Zombie attacks are almost impossible to trace back 
to the attacker. A zombie farm is a group of computers on which a hacker has planted zombie 
programs. A pharming attack uses a zombie farm, often by an organized crime association, 
to launch a massive phishing attack.
Authentication and authorization technologies can prevent identity theft, phishing, and 
pharming scams. Authentication is a method for confirming users’ identities. Once a system 
determines the authentication of a user, it can then determine the access privileges (or authori­
zation) for that user. Authorization is the process of providing a user with permission includ­
ing access levels and abilities such as file access, hours of access, and amount of allocated 
storage space. Authentication and authorization techniques fall into three categories; the most 
secure procedures combine all three:
	1.	 Something the user knows, such as a user ID and password.
	2.	 Something the user has, such as a smart card or token.
	3.	 Something that is part of the user, such as a fingerprint or voice signature.
Attacks
Data
Authentication
and
Authorization
Prevention and
Resistance
Detection
and
Response
People
FIGURE B6.2
Three Areas of Information 
Security.

	
Plug-In B6  Information Security  *  443
Something the User Knows Such as a User ID and Password
A password is string of alphanumeric characters used to authenticate a user and provide 
access to a system. The first type of authentication, using something the user knows, is the 
most common way to identify individual users and typically consists of a unique user ID and 
password. However, this is actually one of the most ineffective ways for determining authen­
tication because passwords are not secure. All it typically takes to crack one is enough time. 
More than 50 percent of help-desk calls are password related, which can cost an organization 
significant money, and a social engineer can coax a password from almost anybody.
Something the User Has Such as a Smart Card or Token
The second type of authentication, using something the user has, offers a much more effec­
tive way to identify individuals than a user ID and password. Tokens and smart cards are two 
of the primary forms of this type of authentication. Tokens are small electronic devices that 
change user passwords automatically. The user enters his or her user ID and token-displayed 
password to gain access to the network. A smart card is a device about the size of a credit 
card, containing embedded technologies that can store information and small amounts of soft­
ware to perform some limited processing. Smart cards can act as identification instruments, a 
form of digital cash, or a data storage device with the ability to store an entire medical record.
FIGURE B6.3
SkyLine Bank Phishing Scam.
Dear Customer,
As your premier local banking choice, we take our commitment to your 
account security very seriously. To that end, we are communicating with you to 
inform you that due to an internal error, we are at this time, unable to conﬁrm 
your account data. It is of the utmost importance that you reply to this email in 
a timely fashion to avoid any interruption of service on your account.
To avoid suspension of your account, please click the link below to verify your 
account details.  We apologize for this inconvenience.
Click Here
Thank you, 
SkyLine Bank Corp.
Online Banking Division
FROM
SUBJECT
SkyLine Bank   customerservice@skylinebank.com
Your Account Veriﬁcation
SKYLINE BANK
“Your Local Banking Experts”

444  *  Plug-In B6  Information Security
Something That Is Part of the User Such as a Fingerprint or Voice Signature
The third kind of authentication, something that is part of the user, is by far the best and most 
effective way to manage authentication. Biometrics (narrowly defined) is the identification 
of a user based on a physical characteristic, such as a fingerprint, iris, face, voice, or hand­
writing. A voiceprint is a set of measurable characteristics of a human voice that uniquely 
identifies an individual. These characteristics, which are based on the physical configuration 
of a speaker’s mouth and throat, can be expressed as a mathematical formula. Unfortunately, 
biometric authentication such as voiceprints can be costly and intrusive.
Single-factor authentication is the traditional security process, which requires a username 
and password. Two-factor authentication requires the user to provide two means of authen­
tication, what the user knows (password) and what the user has (security token). Multifactor 
authentication requires more than two means of authentication such as what the user knows 
(password), what the user has (security token), and what the user is (biometric verification). 
The goal of multifactor authentication is to make it difficult for an unauthorized person to 
gain access to a system because, if one security level is broken, the attacker will still have to 
break through additional levels.
DATA: PREVENTION AND RESISTANCE
A privilege escalation is a network intrusion attack that takes advantage of programming 
errors or design flaws to grant the attacker elevated access to the network and its associated 
data and applications. There are two kinds of privilege escalation:
	■	
Vertical privilege escalation Attackers grant themselves a higher access level such 
as administrator, allowing the attacker to perform illegal actions such as running 
unauthorized code or deleting data.
	■	
Horizontal privilege escalation Attackers grant themselves the same access levels they 
already have but assume the identity of another user. For example, someone gaining 
access to another person’s online banking account would constitute horizontal privilege 
escalation.
Prevention and resistance technologies stop intruders from accessing and reading data by 
means of content filtering, encryption, and firewalls. Time bombs are computer viruses that 
wait for a specific date before executing their instructions. Content filtering occurs when 
organizations use software that filters content, such as emails, to prevent the accidental or 
malicious transmission of unauthorized information. Organizations can use content filtering 
technologies to filter email and prevent emails containing sensitive information from trans­
mitting, whether the transmission was malicious or accidental. It can also filter emails and 
prevent any suspicious files from transmitting such as potential virus-infected files. Email 
content filtering can also filter for spam, a form of unsolicited email.
Encryption scrambles information into an alternative form that requires a key or password 
to decrypt. If there were a security breach and the stolen information were encrypted, the thief 
would be unable to read it. Encryption can switch the order of characters, replace characters 
with other characters, insert or remove characters, or use a mathematical formula to convert 
the information into a code. Companies that transmit sensitive customer information over the 
Internet, such as credit card numbers, frequently use encryption. To decrypt information is 
to decode it and is the opposite of encrypt. Cryptography is the science that studies encryp­
tion, which is the hiding of messages so that only the sender and receiver can read them. The 
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) introduced an advanced encryption 
standard (AES) designed to keep government information secure.
Some encryption technologies use multiple keys. Public key encryption (PKE) uses two keys: 
a public key that everyone can have and a private key for only the recipient (see Figure B6.4). 
The organization provides the public key to all customers, whether end consumers or other 
businesses, who use that key to encrypt their information and send it via the Internet. When it 
arrives at its destination, the organization uses the private key to unscramble it.
Public keys are becoming popular to use for authentication techniques consisting of 
digital objects in which a trusted third party confirms correlation between the user and the 

	
Plug-In B6  Information Security  *  445
public key. A certificate authority is a trusted third party, such as VeriSign, that validates 
user identities by means of digital certificates. A digital certificate is a data file that identifies 
individuals or organizations online and is comparable to a digital signature.
A firewall is hardware and/or software that guards a private network by analyzing incoming 
and outgoing information for the correct markings. If they are missing, the firewall prevents 
the information from entering the network. Firewalls can even detect computers communicat­
ing with the Internet without approval. As Figure B6.5 illustrates, organizations typically place 
a firewall between a server and the Internet. Think of a firewall as a gatekeeper that protects 
computer networks from intrusion by providing a filter and safe transfer points for access to and 
from the Internet and other networks. It screens all network traffic for proper passwords or other 
security codes and allows only authorized transmissions in and out of the network.
Firewalls do not guarantee complete protection, and users should enlist additional security 
technologies such as antivirus software and antispyware software. Antivirus software scans 
and searches hard drives to prevent, detect, and remove known viruses, adware, and spyware. 
Antivirus software must be frequently updated to protect against newly created viruses.
ATTACK: DETECTION AND RESPONSE
Cyberwar is an organized attempt by a country’s military to disrupt or destroy information 
and communication systems for another country. Cyberterrorism is the use of computer and 
networking technologies against persons or property to intimidate or coerce governments, 
individuals, or any segment of society to attain political, religious, or ideological goals. 
FIGURE B6.4
Public Key Encryption (PKE).
Public Key
Encrypted Information
Public Key
Encrypted Information
Public Key
Encrypted Information
Originating Business
Sends the same
public key to all
customers
Uses a private key
to decrypt the
information received
FIGURE B6.5
Sample Firewall Architecture 
Connecting Systems Located 
in Chicago, New York, and 
Boston.
Server
Firewall
Chicago
Internet
Database
Firewall
Server
New York
Firewall
Server
Boston
Database
Database

446  *  Plug-In B6  Information Security
With so many intruders planning computer attacks, it is critical that all computer systems are 
protected. The presence of an intruder can be detected by watching for suspicious network 
events such as bad passwords, the removal of highly classified data files, or unauthorized 
user attempts. Intrusion detection software (IDS) features full-time monitoring tools that 
search for patterns in network traffic to identify intruders. IDS protects against suspicious 
network traffic and attempts to access files and data. If a suspicious event or unauthorized 
traffic is identified, the IDS will generate an alarm and can even be customized to shut down 
a particularly sensitive part of a network. After identifying an attack, an MIS department can 
implement response tactics to mitigate the damage. Response tactics outline procedures such 
as how long a system under attack will remain plugged in and connected to the corporate 
network, when to shut down a compromised system, and how quickly a backup system will 
be up and running.
Guaranteeing the safety of organization information is achieved by implementing the two 
lines of defense: people and technology. To protect information through people, firms should 
develop information security policies and plans that provide employees with specific precau­
tions they should take in creating, working with, and transmitting the organization’s informa­
tion assets. Technology-based lines of defense fall into three categories: authentication and 
authorization, prevention and resistance, and detection and response.

	
Plug-In B6  Information Security  *  447
I
mplementing information security lines of defense through people first and through technology 
second is the best way for an organization to protect its vital intellectual capital. The first line of 
defense is securing intellectual capital by creating an information security plan detailing the vari­
ous information security policies. The second line of defense is investing in technology to help secure 
information through authentication and authorization, prevention and resistance, and detection 
and response.
P L U G - I N  S U M M A R Y
Advanced encryption standard 
(AES)  444
Antivirus software  445
Authentication  442
Authorization  442
Biometrics  444
Certificate authority  445
Content filtering  444
Cryptography  444
Cyberterrorism  445
Cyberwar  445
Decrypt  444
Destructive agents  441
Digital certificate  445
Dumpster diving  440
Encryption  444
Firewall  445
K E Y  T E R M S
Horizontal privilege 
escalation  444
Identity theft  441
Information secrecy  441
Information security plan  440
Information security 
policies  440
Insiders  440
Intrusion detection software 
(IDS)  446
Multifactor authentication  444
Password  443
Pharming  442
Pharming attack  442
Phishing  442
Phishing expedition  442
Pretexting  440
Privilege escalation  444
Public key encryption 
(PKE)  444
Single-factor 
authentication  444
Smart card  443
Social engineering  440
Spear phishing  442
Time bombs  444
Tokens  443
Two-factor authentication  444
Vertical Privilege Escalation  444
Vishing (or voice phishing)  442
Voiceprint  442
Zombie  442
Zombie farm  442
1.	 Firewall Decisions
You are the CEO of Inverness Investments, a medium-size venture capital firm that specializes in 
investing in high-tech companies. The company receives more than 30,000 email messages per 
year. On average, there are two viruses and three successful hackings against the company each 
year, which result in losses to the company of about $250,000. Currently, the company has antivi­
rus software installed but does not have any firewalls.
Your CIO is suggesting implementing 10 firewalls for a total cost of $80,000. The estimated life 
of each firewall is about three years. The chances of hackers breaking into the system with the 
firewalls installed are about 3 percent. Annual maintenance costs on the firewalls are estimated 
around $15,000. Create an argument for or against supporting your CIO’s recommendation to 
purchase the firewalls. Are there any considerations in addition to finances?
2.	 Preventing Identity Theft
The FBI states that identity theft is one of the fastest-growing crimes. If you are a victim of iden­
tity theft, your financial reputation can be ruined, making it impossible for you to cash a check 
or receive a bank loan. Learning how to avoid identity theft can be a valuable activity. Using 
the Internet, research the most current ways the government recommends for you to prevent 
identity theft.
M A K I N G  B U S I N E S S  D E C I S I O N S

448  *  Plug-In B6  Information Security
3.	 Discussing the Three Areas of Information Security
Great Granola Inc. is a small business operating out of northern California. The company spe­
cializes in selling homemade granola, and its primary sales vehicle is through its website. The 
company is growing exponentially and expects its revenues to triple this year to $12 million. 
The company also expects to hire 60 additional employees to support its growth. Joan Martin, 
the CEO, is aware that if her competitors discover the recipe for her granola, or who her primary 
customers are, it could easily ruin her business. Martin has hired you to draft a document discuss­
ing the different areas of information security, along with your recommendations for providing a 
secure ebusiness environment.
4.	 Beyond the Password
The password, a combination of a username and personal code, has been the primary way to 
secure systems since computers first hit the market in the 1980s. Of course, in the 1980s, users 
had only one password to maintain and remember, and chances are they still probably had to 
write it down. Today, users have dozens of usernames and passwords they have to remember to 
multiple systems and ­websites—it is simply no longer sustainable! A few companies are creating 
new forms of identification, hoping to eliminate the password problem.
	■	
Bionym is developing the Nymi, a wristband with two electrodes that reads your heart’s unique 
electrocardiogram signal and can unlock all your devices.
	■	
Clef is developing the Clef Wave, a free app that generates a unique image on your smart­
phone that you can point at your webcam, which reads the image and unlocks your websites. 
The image cannot be stolen because it only stays on your screen for a few seconds. More than 
300 websites have enabled the Clef Wave service.
	■	
Illiri is developing an app that emits a unique sound on your smartphone that can be used to 
unlock other devices, process payments, and access websites. The sound lasts for 10 seconds 
and can be heard within 1 foot of your device.
In a group, evaluate the three preceding technologies and determine which one you would 
choose to implement at your school.
5.	 LifeLock: Keeping Your Identity Safe
Have you ever seen a LifeLock advertisement? If so, you know the Social Security number of Life­
Lock CEO Todd Davis because he posts it in all ads daring hackers to try to steal his identity. Davis 
has been a victim of identity theft at least 13 times. The first theft occurred when someone used 
his identity to secure a $500 loan from a check-cashing company. Davis discovered the crime only 
after the company called his wife’s cell phone to recover the unpaid debt.
If you were starting an identity theft prevention company, do you think it would be a good 
idea to post your Social Security number in advertisements? Why or why not? What do you think 
happened that caused Davis’s identity to be stolen? What types of information security measures 
should LifeLock implement to ensure that Davis’s Social Security number is not stolen again? If you 
were LifeLock’s CEO, what type of marketing campaign would you launch next?


450  *  Plug-In B7  Ethics
P L U G - I N 
Developing Information Management Policies
Treating sensitive corporate information as a valuable resource is good management. ­Building 
a corporate culture based on ethical principles that employees can understand and imple­
ment is responsible management. Organizations should develop written policies establishing 
employee guidelines, employee procedures, and organizational rules for information. These 
policies set employee expectations about the organization’s practices and standards and pro­
tect the organization from misuse of computer systems and IT resources. If an ­organization’s 
employees use computers at work, the organization should, at a minimum, implement epoli­
cies. Epolicies are policies and procedures that address information management along with 
the ethical use of computers and the Internet in the business environment. Figure B7.1 ­displays 
the epolicies a firm should implement to set employee expectations.
ETHICAL COMPUTER USE POLICY
In a case that illustrates the perils of online betting, a leading Internet poker site reported that 
a hacker exploited a security flaw to gain an insurmountable edge in high-stakes, no-limit 
Texas hold-’em tournaments—the ability to see his opponents’ hole cards. The cheater, whose 
B7
Ethics
LEARNING OUTCOMES
1.	 Identify the six epolicies organizations should implement to protect 
themselves.
LO 1 Identify the six epolicies 
organizations should implement 
to protect themselves.
Ethical
Computer Use
Policy
Email Privacy
Policy
Social Media
Policy
Workplace
Monitoring
Policy
Information
Privacy Policy
Acceptable
Use Policy
FIGURE B7.1
Overview of Epolicies.

	
Plug-In B7  Ethics  *  451
illegitimate winnings were estimated at between $400,000 and $700,000 by one victim, was 
an employee of AbsolutePoker.com and hacked the system to show that it could be done. 
Regardless of what business a company operates—even one that many view as unethical—
the company must protect itself from unethical employee behavior. Cyberbullying includes 
threats, negative remarks, or defamatory comments transmitted via the Internet or posted on 
the website. A threat is an act or object that poses a danger to assets. Click-fraud is the abuse 
of pay-per-click, pay-per-call, and pay-per-conversion revenue models by repeatedly clicking 
on a link to increase charges or costs for the advertiser. Competitive click-fraud is a computer 
crime where a competitor or disgruntled employee increases a company’s search advertising 
costs by repeatedly clicking on the advertiser’s link. Cyberbullying and click-fraud are just a 
couple of examples of the many types of unethical computer use found today.
One essential step in creating an ethical corporate culture is establishing an ethical com­
puter use policy. An ethical computer use policy contains general principles to guide com­
puter user behavior. For example, it might explicitly state that users should refrain from 
playing computer games during working hours. This policy ensures the users know how to 
behave at work and the organization has a published standard to deal with infractions. For 
example, after appropriate warnings, the company may terminate an employee who spends 
significant amounts of time playing computer games at work.
Organizations can legitimately vary in how they expect employees to use computers, but 
in any approach to controlling such use, the overriding principle should be informed consent. 
The users should be informed of the rules and, by agreeing to use the system on that basis, 
consent to abide by them.
Managers should make a conscientious effort to ensure all users are aware of the policy 
through formal training and other means. If an organization were to have only one epolicy, it 
should be an ethical computer use policy because that is the starting point and the umbrella 
for any other policies the organization might establish.
Part of an ethical computer use policy can include a BYOD policy. A bring your own 
device (BYOD) policy allows employees to use their personal mobile devices and computers 
to access enterprise data and applications. BYOD policies offer four basic options, including:
	■	
Unlimited access for personal devices.
	■	
Access only to nonsensitive systems and data.
	■	
Access, but with MIS control over personal devices, apps, and stored data.
	■	
Access, but preventing local storage of data on personal devices.
INFORMATION PRIVACY POLICY
An organization that wants to protect its information should develop an information privacy 
policy, which contains general principles regarding information privacy. Visa created Inov­
ant to handle all its information systems including its coveted customer information, which 
details how people are spending their money, in which stores, on which days, and even at 
what time of day. Just imagine what a sales and marketing department could do if it gained 
access to this information. For this reason, Inovant bans the use of Visa’s customer informa­
tion for anything outside its intended purpose—billing. Inovant’s privacy specialists devel­
oped a strict credit card information privacy policy, which it follows.
Now Inovant is being asked if it can guarantee that unethical use of credit card information 
will never occur. In a large majority of cases, the unethical use of information happens not 
through the malicious scheming of a rogue marketer, but rather unintentionally. For instance, 
information is collected and stored for some purpose, such as record keeping or billing. Then, a 
sales or marketing professional figures out another way to use it internally, share it with partners, 
or sell it to a trusted third party. The information is “unintentionally” used for new purposes. The 
classic example of this type of unintentional information reuse is the Social Security number, 
which started simply as a way to identify government retirement benefits and then was used as 
a sort of universal personal ID, found on everything from drivers’ licenses to savings accounts.
Fair information practices is a general term for a set of standards governing the col­
lection and use of personal data and addressing issues of privacy and accuracy. Different 

452  *  Plug-In B7  Ethics
­organizations and countries have their own terms for these concerns. The United ­Kingdom 
terms it “Data Protection,” and the European Union calls it “Personal Data Privacy”; the 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) has written Guidelines 
on the Protection of Privacy and Transborder Flows of Personal Data, which can be found at 
www.oecd.org/unitedstates.
ACCEPTABLE USE POLICY
An acceptable use policy (AUP) requires a user to agree to follow it to be provided access 
to corporate email, information systems, and the Internet. Nonrepudiation is a contractual 
stipulation to ensure that ebusiness participants do not deny (repudiate) their online actions. A 
nonrepudiation clause is typically contained in an acceptable use policy. Many businesses and 
educational facilities require employees or students to sign an acceptable use policy before 
gaining network access. When signing up with an email provider, each customer is typically 
presented with an AUP, which states the user agrees to adhere to certain stipulations. Users 
agree to the following in a typical acceptable use policy:
	■	
Not using the service as part of violating any law.
	■	
Not attempting to break the security of any computer network or user.
	■	
Not posting commercial messages to groups without prior permission.
	■	
Not performing any nonrepudiation.
Some organizations go so far as to create a unique information management policy focus­
ing solely on Internet use. An Internet use policy contains general principles to guide the 
proper use of the Internet. Because of the large amounts of computing resources that Internet 
users can expend, it is essential that such use be legitimate. In addition, the Internet contains 
numerous materials that some believe are offensive, making regulation in the workplace a 
requirement. Cybervandalism is the electronic defacing of an existing website. ­Typosquatting 
is a problem that occurs when someone registers purposely misspelled variations of well-
known domain names. These variants sometimes lure consumers who make typographical 
errors when entering a URL. Website name stealing is the theft of a website’s name that 
occurs when someone, posing as a site’s administrator, changes the ownership of the domain 
name assigned to the website to another website owner. These are all examples of unaccept­
able Internet use. Internet censorship is government attempts to control Internet traffic, thus 
preventing some material from being viewed by a country’s citizens. Generally, an Internet 
use policy:
	■	
Describes the Internet services available to users.
	■	
Defines the organization’s position on the purpose of Internet access and what 
restrictions, if any, are placed on that access.
	■	
Describes user responsibility for citing sources, properly handling offensive material, 
and protecting the organization’s good name.
	■	
States the ramifications if the policy is violated.
EMAIL PRIVACY POLICY
An email privacy policy details the extent to which email messages may be read by others. 
Email is so pervasive in organizations that it requires its own specific policy. Most working 
professionals use email as their preferred means of corporate communications. While email 
and instant messaging are common business communication tools, there are risks associated 
with using them. For instance, a sent email is stored on at least three or four computers (see 
Figure B7.2). Simply deleting an email from one computer does not delete it from the others. 
Companies can mitigate many of the risks of using electronic messaging systems by imple­
menting and adhering to an email privacy policy.
One major problem with email is the user’s expectations of privacy. To a large extent, this 
expectation is based on the false assumption that email privacy protection exists somehow 
analogous to that of U.S. first-class mail. Generally, the organization that owns the email 

	
Plug-In B7  Ethics  *  453
system can operate the system as openly or as privately as it wishes. Surveys indicate that the 
majority of large firms regularly read and analyze employees’ email looking for confidential 
data leaks such as unannounced financial results or the sharing of trade secrets that result 
in the violation of an email privacy policy and eventual termination of the employee. That 
means that if the organization wants to read everyone’s email, it can do so. Basically, using 
work email for anything other than work is not a good idea. A typical email privacy policy:
	■	
Defines legitimate email users and explains what happens to accounts after a person 
leaves the organization.
	■	
Explains backup procedure so users will know that at some point, even if a message is 
deleted from their computer, it is still stored by the company.
	■	
Describes the legitimate grounds for reading email and the process required before such 
action is performed.
	■	
Discourages sending junk email or spam to anyone who does not want to receive it.
	■	
Prohibits attempting to mail bomb a site. A mail bomb sends a massive amount of email 
to a specific person or system that can cause that user’s server to stop functioning.
	■	
Informs users that the organization has no control over email once it has been transmitted 
outside the organization.
Spam is unsolicited email. It plagues employees at all levels within an organization, from 
receptionist to CEO, and clogs email systems and siphons MIS resources away from legiti­
mate business projects. An anti-spam policy simply states that email users will not send unso­
licited emails (or spam). It is difficult to write anti-spam policies, laws, or software because 
there is no such thing as a universal litmus test for spam. One person’s spam is another per­
son’s newsletter. End users have to decide what spam is, because it can vary widely not just 
from one company to the next, but from one person to the next. A user can opt out of receiv­
ing emails by choosing to deny permission to incoming emails. A user can opt in to receive 
emails by choosing to allow permissions to incoming emails. Teergrubing is an anti-spam­
ming approach where the receiving computer launches a return attack against the spammer, 
sending email messages back to the computer that originated the suspected spam.
SOCIAL MEDIA POLICY
Did you see the YouTube video showing two Domino’s Pizza employees violating health 
codes while preparing food by passing gas on sandwiches? Millions of people did and the 
company took notice when disgusted customers began posting negative comments all over 
Twitter. Not having a Twitter account, corporate executives at Domino’s did not know about 
FIGURE B7.2
Email Is Stored on Multiple 
Computers.
Sender’s
Computer
Sender’s Email
Provider’s Server
Recipient’s
Computer
Recipient’s Email
Provider’s Server
Email Message
Email Message
Email Message
Email Message

454  *  Plug-In B7  Ethics
the damaging tweets until it was too late. The use of social media can contribute many ben­
efits to an organization, and implemented correctly it can become a huge opportunity for 
employees to build brands. But there are also tremendous risks as a few employees repre­
senting an entire company can cause tremendous brand damage. Defining a set of guidelines 
implemented in a social media policy can help mitigate that risk. Companies can protect 
themselves by implementing a social media policy outlining the corporate guidelines or 
principles governing employee online communications. Having a single social media policy 
might not be enough to ensure the company’s online reputation is protected. Additional, more 
specific social media policies a company might choose to implement include:
	■	
Employee online communication policy detailing brand communication.
	■	
Employee blog and personal blog policies.
	■	
Employee social network and personal social network policies.
	■	
Employee Twitter, corporate Twitter, and personal Twitter policies.
	■	
Employee LinkedIn policy.
	■	
Employee Facebook usage and brand usage policy.
	■	
Corporate YouTube policy.
Social media monitoring is the process of monitoring and responding to what is being said 
about a company, individual, product, or brand. Social media monitoring typically falls to the 
social media manager, a person within the organization who is trusted to monitor, contrib­
ute, filter, and guide the social media presence of a company, individual, product, or brand. 
Organizations must protect their online reputations and continuously monitor blogs, message 
boards, social networking sites, and media sharing sites. However, monitoring the hundreds 
of different social media sites can quickly become overwhelming. To combat these issues, a 
number of companies specialize in online social media monitoring; for example, Trackur.com 
creates digital dashboards allowing executives to view at a glance the date published, source, 
title, and summary of every item tracked. The dashboard highlights not only what’s being said 
but also the influence of the particular person, blog, or social media site.
WORKPLACE MONITORING POLICY
Increasingly, employee monitoring is not a choice; it is a risk-management obligation. 
Michael Soden, CEO of the Bank of Ireland, issued a mandate stating that company employ­
ees could not surf illicit websites with company equipment. Next, he hired Hewlett-Packard 
to run the MIS department and illicit websites were discovered on Soden’s own computer, 
forcing Soden to resign. Monitoring employees is one of the biggest challenges CIOs face 
when developing information management policies.
Physical security is tangible protection such as alarms, guards, fireproof doors, fences, 
and vaults. New technologies make it possible for employers to monitor many aspects of 
their employees’ jobs, especially on telephones, computer terminals, through electronic and 
voice mail, and when employees are using the Internet. Such monitoring is virtually unregu­
lated. Therefore, unless company policy specifically states otherwise (and even this is not 
assured), your employer may listen, watch, and read most of your workplace communica­
tions. ­Workplace MIS monitoring tracks people’s activities by such measures as number of 
keystrokes, error rate, and number of transactions processed (see Figure B7.3 for an over­
view). The best path for an organization planning to engage in employee monitoring is open 
communication including an employee monitoring policy stating explicitly how, when, and 
where the company monitors its employees. Several common stipulations an organization can 
follow when creating an employee monitoring policy include:
	■	
Be as specific as possible stating when and what (email, IM, Internet, network activity, 
etc.) will be monitored.
	■	
Expressly communicate that the company reserves the right to monitor all employees.
	■	
State the consequences of violating the policy.
	■	
Always enforce the policy the same for everyone.

	
Plug-In B7  Ethics  *  455
Many employees use their company’s high-speed Internet access to shop, browse, and surf 
the web. Most managers do not want their employees conducting personal business during 
working hours, and they implement a Big Brother approach to employee monitoring. Many 
management gurus advocate that organizations whose corporate cultures are based on trust 
are more successful than those whose corporate cultures are based on mistrust. Before an 
organization implements monitoring technology, it should ask itself, “What does this say 
about how we feel about our employees?” If the organization really does not trust its employ­
ees, then perhaps it should find new ones. If an organization does trust its employees, then it 
might want to treat them accordingly. An organization that follows its employees’ every key­
stroke might be unwittingly undermining the relationships with its employees, and it might 
find the effects of employee monitoring are often worse than lost productivity from employee 
web surfing.
FIGURE B7.3
Internet Monitoring 
Technologies.
Common Internet Monitoring Technologies
Key logger, or 
key trapper, software
A program that records every keystroke and mouse click.
Hardware key logger
A hardware device that captures keystrokes on their journey from the 
keyboard to the motherboard.
Cookie
A small file deposited on a hard drive by a website containing information 
about customers and their web activities. Cookies allow websites to 
record the comings and goings of customers, usually without their 
knowledge or consent.
Adware
Software that generates ads that install themselves on a computer when 
a person downloads some other program from the Internet.
Spyware (sneakware or 
stealthware)
Software that comes hidden in free downloadable software and tracks 
online movements, mines the information stored on a computer, or uses 
a computer’s CPU and storage for some task the user knows nothing 
about.
Web log
Consists of one line of information for every visitor to a website and is 
usually stored on a web server.
Clickstream
Records information about a customer during a web surfing session such 
as what websites were visited, how long the visit was, what ads were 
viewed, and what was purchased.

456  *  Plug-In B7  Ethics
P L U G - I N  S U M M A R Y
A
dvances in technology have made ethics a concern for many organizations. Consider how 
easy it is for an employee to email large amounts of confidential information, change elec­
tronic communications, or destroy massive amounts of important company information all 
within seconds. Electronic information about customers, partners, and employees has become one of 
corporate America’s most valuable assets. However, the line between the proper and improper use 
of this asset is at best blurry. Should an employer be able to search employee files without employee 
consent? Should a company be able to sell customer information without informing the customer of 
its intent? What is a responsible approach to document deletion?
The law provides guidelines in many of these areas, but how a company chooses to act within the 
confines of the law is up to the judgment of its officers. Since CIOs are responsible for the technol­
ogy that collects, maintains, and destroys corporate information, they sit smack in the middle of this 
potential ethical quagmire.
One way an organization can begin dealing with ethical issues is to create a corporate culture that 
encourages ethical considerations and discourages dubious information dealings. Not only is an ethical 
culture an excellent idea overall, but it also acts as a precaution, helping prevent customer problems 
from escalating into front-page news stories. The establishment of and adherence to well-defined rules 
and policies will help organizations create an ethical corporate culture. These policies include:
	■	 Ethical computer use policy.
	■	 Information privacy policy.
	■	 Acceptable use policy.
	■	 Email privacy policy.
	■	 Social media policy.
	■	 Workplace monitoring policy.
Acceptable use policy (AUP)  452
Anti-spam policy  453
Bring your own device 
(BYOD)  451
Click-fraud  451
Competitive click-fraud  451
Cyberbullying  451
Cybervandalism  452
Email privacy policy  452
Employee monitoring policy  454
Epolicies  450
K E Y  T E R M S
Ethical computer use 
policy  451
Fair information practices  451
Information privacy policy  451
Internet censorship  452
Internet use policy  452
Mail bomb  453
Nonrepudiation  452
Opt in  453
Opt out  453
Physical security  454
Social media manager  454
Social media monitoring  454
Social media policy  454
Spam  453
Teergrubing  453
Threat  451
Typosquatting  452
Website name stealing  452
Workplace MIS 
monitoring  454
M A K I N G  B U S I N E S S  D E C I S I O N S
1.	 Information—Does It Have Ethics?
A high school principal decided it was a good idea to hold a confidential conversation about teachers, 
salaries, and student test scores on his cellular phone in a local Starbucks. Not realizing that one of 
the students’ parents was sitting next to him, the principal accidentally divulged sensitive information 
about his employees and students. The irate parent soon notified the school board about the prin­
cipal’s inappropriate behavior and a committee was formed to decide how to handle the situation.

	
Plug-In B7  Ethics  *  457
With the new wave of collaboration tools, electronic business, and the Internet, employees are 
finding themselves working outside the office and beyond traditional office hours. Advantages 
associated with remote workers include increased productivity, decreased expenses, and boosts 
in morale as employees are given greater flexibility to choose their work location and hours. Unfor­
tunately, disadvantages associated with workers working remotely include new forms of ethical 
challenges and information security risks.
In a group, discuss the following statement: Information does not have any ethics. If you were 
elected to the committee to investigate the principal’s inappropriate Starbucks phone conversa­
tion, what types of questions would you want answered? What type of punishment, if any, would 
you enforce on the principal? What types of policies would you implement across the school district 
to ensure that this scenario is never repeated? Be sure to highlight how workers working remotely 
affect business along with any potential ethical challenges and information security issues.
2. Is IT Really Worth the Risk?
Ethics. It’s just one tiny word, but it has monumental impact on every area of business. From the 
magazines, blogs, and newspapers you read to the courses you take, you will encounter ethics 
because it is a hot topic in today’s electronic world. Technology has provided so many incredible 
opportunities, but it has also provided those same opportunities to unethical people. Discuss the 
ethical issues surrounding each of the following situations (yes, these are true stories):
	■	
A student raises her hand in class and states, “I can legally copy any DVD I get from Netflix 
because Netflix purchased the DVD and the copyright only applies to the company who pur­
chased the product.”
	■	
A student stands up the first day of class before the professor arrives and announces that his fra­
ternity scans textbooks and he has the textbook for this course on his thumb drive, which he will 
gladly sell for $20. Several students pay on the spot and upload the scanned textbook to their PCs. 
One student takes down the student information and contacts the publisher about the incident.
	■	
A senior marketing manager is asked to monitor his employee’s email because there is a 
rumor that the employee is looking for another job.
	■	
A vice president of sales asks her employee to burn all of the customer data onto an external 
hard drive because she made a deal to provide customer information to a strategic partner.
	■	
A senior manager is asked to monitor his employee’s email to discover whether she is sexually 
harassing another employee.
	■	
An employee is looking at the shared network drive and discovers that his boss’s entire hard 
drive, including his email backup, has been copied to the network and is visible to all.
	■	
An employee is accidently copied on an email listing the targets for the next round of layoffs.
3. 15 Million Identity Theft Victims
Identity theft has quickly become the most common, expensive, and pervasive crime in the United 
States. The identities of more than 15 million U.S. citizens are stolen each year, with financial losses 
exceeding $50 billion. This means that the identities of almost 10 percent of U.S. adults will be sto­
len this year, with losses of around $4,000 each, not to mention the 100 million U.S. citizens whose 
personal data will be compromised due to data breaches on corporate and government databases.
The growth of organized crime can be attributed to the massive amounts of data collection 
along with the increased cleverness of professional identity thieves. Starting with individually tai­
lored phishing and vishing scams, increasingly successful corporate and government databases 
hackings, and intricate networks of botnets that hijack millions of computers without a trace, we 
must wake up to this ever-increasing threat to all Americans.
You have the responsibility to protect yourself from data theft. In a group, visit the Federal 
Trade Commission’s Consumer Information Identity Theft website at http://www.consumer.ftc.gov/

458  *  Plug-In B7  Ethics
features/feature-0014-identity-theft and review what you can do today to protect your identity and 
how you can ensure that your personal information is safe.
4.	 Monitoring Employees 
Every organization has the right to monitor its employees. Organizations usually inform their 
employees when workplace monitoring is occurring, especially regarding organizational assets 
such as networks, email, and Internet access. Employees traditionally offer their consent to be 
monitored and should not have any expectations of privacy when using organizational assets.
Do you agree or disagree that organizations have an obligation to notify employees about the 
extent of workplace monitoring, such as how long employees are using the Internet and which web­
sites they are visiting? Do you agree or disagree that organizations have the right to read all employ­
ees’ email sent or received on an organizational computer, including personal Gmail accounts?
5.	 The Right to Be Forgotten
The European Commissioner for Justice, Fundamental Rights, and Citizenship, Viviane Reding, 
announced the European Commission’s proposal to create a sweeping new privacy right—the 
right to be forgotten, allowing individuals to request to have all content that violates their privacy 
removed. The right to be forgotten addresses an urgent problem in the digital age: the great dif­
ficulty of escaping your past on the Internet now that every photo, status update, and tweet lives 
forever in the cloud. To comply with the European Court of Justice’s decision, Google created 
a new online form by which individuals can request search providers to remove links that vio­
late their online privacy. In the first month, Google received more than 50,000 submissions from 
people asking the company to remove links. Many people in the United States believe that the 
right to be forgotten conflicts with the right to free speech. Do people who want to erase their past 
deserve a second chance? Do you agree or disagree?
6.	 Spying on Email
Technology advances now allow individuals to monitor computers that they do not even have 
physical access to. New types of software can capture an individual’s incoming and outgoing email 
and then immediately forward that email to another person. For example, if you are at work and 
your child is home from school and she receives an email from John at 3:00 p.m., at 3:01 p.m. you 
can receive a copy of that email sent to your email address. If she replies to John’s email, within 
seconds you will receive a copy of what she sent to John. Describe two scenarios (other than 
those described here) for the use of this type of software: one in which the use would be ethical 
and one in which it would be unethical.
7.	 Stealing Software
The software industry fights against pirated software on a daily basis. The major centers of soft­
ware piracy are in places such as Russia and China where salaries and disposable income are 
comparatively low. People in developing and economically depressed countries will fall behind the 
industrialized world technologically if they cannot afford access to new generations of software. 
Considering this, is it reasonable to blame someone for using pirated software when it could cost 
him or her two months’ salary to purchase a legal copy? Create an argument for or against the 
following statement: Individuals who are economically less fortunate should be allowed access to 
software free of charge to ensure that they are provided with an equal technological advantage.
8.	 Censoring Google
The Google debate over operations in China is an excellent example of types of global ethical and 
security issues U.S. companies face as they expand operations around the world. Google’s systems 
were targeted by highly sophisticated hacker attacks aimed at obtaining proprietary information, 
including personal data belonging to Chinese human rights activists who use Google’s Gmail service.

	
Plug-In B7  Ethics  *  459
Google, which originally agreed to filter search results based on Chinese government censor­
ship rules, decided to unfilter search results after what it called an infiltration of its technology 
and the email accounts of Chinese human-rights activists. China called Google’s plan to defy 
government censorship rules unfriendly and irresponsible and demanded Google to shut down 
all operations in China.
Why would China want to filter search results? Do you agree or disagree with China’s cen­
sorship rules? Do you think Google was acting ethically when it agreed to implement China’s 
censorship rules? Why do companies operating abroad need to be aware of the different ethical 
perspective found in other cultures?
9. Sources Are Not Friends
The Canadian Broadcasting Company (CBC) has issued a social networking policy directing jour­
nalists to avoid adding sources or contacts as friends on social networking sites such as Face­
book or LinkedIn. Basic rules state that reporters must never allow one source to view what 
another source says, and reporters must ensure that private conversations with sources remain 
private. Adding sources as friends can compromise a journalist’s work by allowing friends to view 
other friends in the network. It may also not be in a journalist’s best interest to become a friend 
in a source’s network. The CBC also discourages posting any political preferences in personal 
profiles, comments on bulletin boards, or people’s Facebook wall.
This might seem like common sense, but for employees who do not spend countless hours on 
the Internet, using social networking sites can be confusing and overwhelming. Why is it critical 
for any new hire to research and review all policies, especially social media policies? Research 
three companies you would like to work for after graduation and detail the types of social media 
policies that the company currently has or should implement.
10. Cheerleader Charged $27,750 for File Sharing 37 Songs
A federal appeals court is ordering a university student to pay the Recording Industry Associa­
tion of America $27,750—$750 a track—for file sharing 37 songs when she was a high school 
cheerleader. Have you ever illegally copied or downloaded a song or movie? If you have and 
you were forced to pay $750 per track, how much would you owe? What is the difference 
between file sharing and Internet radio streaming? Do you agree or disagree with the federal 
appeals decision? Why or why not? Why is claiming a lack of copyright knowledge not a good 
defense against illegally sharing movies or music? If you do not have a good understanding of 
information laws, what can you do to ensure that you are never named in a federal lawsuit for 
violating information laws?
11. Police Records Found in Old Copy Machine
Copy machines made after 2002 all contain a hard drive that stores a copy of every document the 
machine has ever scanned, printed, copied, or faxed. If the hard drive is not erased or scrubbed 
when the copy machine is resold, all of that digital information is still maintained inside the 
machine. The Buffalo, New York, Police Sex Crimes Division recently sold several copy machines 
without scrubbing the hard drives. The hard drives yielded detailed domestic violence complaints 
and a list of wanted sex offenders. A machine from the Buffalo Police Narcotics Unit contained 
targets in a major drug raid, and a copier once used by a New York construction company stored 
95 pages of pay stubs with names, addresses, and Social Security numbers.
Who do you think should be held responsible for the information issues caused at the ­Buffalo 
police department? What types of ethical issues and information security issues are being vio­
lated? What types of epolicies could a company implement to ensure that these situations do 
not occur? What forms of information security could a company implement to ensure that these 
situations do not occur? How does this case support the primary reason that ediscovery is so 
important to litigation?

460  *  Plug-In B8  Operations Management
P L U G - I N 
B8
Operations Management
LEARNING OUTCOMES
1.	 Explain operations management’s role in business.
2.	 Describe the correlation between operations management and information 
technology.
3.	 Describe the five characteristics of competitive priorities.
Introduction
Production is the creation of goods and services using the factors of production: land, labor, 
capital, entrepreneurship, and knowledge. Production has historically been associated with 
manufacturing, but the nature of business has changed significantly in the last 20 years. The 
service sector, especially Internet services, has grown dramatically. The United States now 
has what is called a service economy—that is, one dominated by the service sector.
Organizations that excel in operations management, specifically supply chain manage­
ment, perform better in almost every financial measure of success, according to a report from 
Boston-based AMR Research Inc. When supply chain excellence improves operations, com­
panies experience a 5 percent higher profit margin, 15 percent less inventory, 17 percent 
stronger “perfect order” ratings, and 35 percent shorter cycle times than their competitors. 
“The basis of competition for winning companies in today’s economy is supply chain superi­
ority,” said Kevin O’Marah, vice president of research at AMR Research. “These companies 
understand that value chain performance translates to productivity and market-share lead­
ership. They also understand that supply chain leadership means more than just low costs 
and efficiency: It requires a superior ability to shape and respond to shifts in demand with 
­innovative products and services.”
Operations Management Fundamentals
Books, DVDs, downloaded MP3s, and dental and medical procedures are all examples of 
goods and services. Production management describes all the activities managers do to help 
companies create goods. To reflect the change in importance from manufacturing to services, 
the term production often has been replaced by operations to reflect the manufacturing of 
LO 1 Explain operations manage­
ment’s role in business.

	
Plug-In B8  Operations Management  *  461
both goods and services. Operations management (OM) is the management of systems or 
processes that convert or transform resources (including human resources) into goods and 
services. Operations management is responsible for managing the core processes used to 
manufacture goods and produce services.
Essentially, the creation of goods or services involves transforming or converting inputs 
into outputs. Various inputs such as capital, labor, and information are used to create goods or 
services using one or more transformation processes (e.g., storing, transporting, and cutting). 
A transformation process is often referred to as the technical core, especially in manufactur­
ing organizations, and is the actual conversion of inputs to outputs. To ensure that the desired 
outputs are obtained, an organization takes measurements at various points in the transforma­
tion process (feedback) and then compares them with previously established standards to 
determine whether corrective action is needed (control). Figure B8.1 depicts the conversion 
system.
Figure B8.2 displays examples of inputs, transformation processes, and outputs. Although 
goods and services are listed separately in Figure B8.1 it is important to note that goods and ser­
vices often occur jointly. For example, having the oil changed in a car is a service, but the oil that 
is delivered is a good. Similarly, house painting is a service, but the paint is a good. The goods–
service combination is a continuum. It ranges from primarily goods with little service to primarily 
FIGURE B8.1
Operations Involves the 
Conversion of Inputs into 
Outputs.
INPUTS
TRANSFORMATION
OUTPUTS
Feedback
Feedback
Feedback
Land
Labor
Capital
Information
Conversion Process
Goods
Services
CONTROL
FIGURE B8.2
Examples of Inputs, 
Transformation, and 
Outputs.
Inputs
Transformation
Outputs
Restaurant inputs include hungry 
customers, food, wait staff.
Well-prepared food, well served: 
agreeable environment
Satisfied customers
Hospital inputs include patients, medical 
supplies, doctors, nurses.
Health care
Healthy individuals
Automobile inputs include sheet steel, 
engine parts, tires.
Fabrication and assembly of cars
High-quality cars
College inputs include high school 
graduates, books, professors, classrooms.
Imparting knowledge and skills
Educated individuals
Distribution center inputs include stock 
keeping units, storage bins, workers.
Storage and redistribution
Fast delivery of 
available products

462  *  Plug-In B8  Operations Management
service with few goods (see Figure B8.3). There are relatively few pure goods or pure services; 
therefore, organizations typically sell product packages, which are a combination of goods and 
services. This makes managing operations more interesting, as well as more challenging.
Value-added is the term used to describe the difference between the cost of inputs and the 
value of price of outputs. OM is critical to an organization because of its ability to increase 
value-added during the transformation process. In nonprofit organizations, the value of out­
puts (highway construction, police, and fire protection) is their value to society; the greater 
the value-added, the greater the effectiveness of the operations. In for-profit organizations, 
the value of outputs is measured by the prices that customers are willing to pay for those 
goods or services. Firms use the money generated by value-added for research and develop­
ment, investment in new facilities and equipment, worker salaries, and profits. Consequently, 
the greater the value-added, the greater the amount of funds available for these important 
activities. The scope of OM ranges across the organization and includes many interrelated 
activities, such as forecasting, capacity planning, scheduling, managing inventories, assuring 
quality, motivating employees, deciding where to locate facilities, and more.
Reviewing the activities performed in an airline company makes it easy to understand how 
a service organization’s OM team adds value. The company consists of the airplanes, airport 
facilities, and maintenance facilities, and typical OM activities include:
	■	
Forecasting: Estimating seat demand for flights, weather and landing conditions, and 
estimates for growth or reduction in air travel are all included in forecasting.
	■	
Capacity planning: This is the key essential metric for the airline to maintain cash flow 
and increase revenues. Underestimating or overestimating flights will hurt profits.
	■	
Scheduling: The airline operates on tight schedules that must be maintained including 
flights, pilots, flight attendants, ground crews, baggage handlers, and routine maintenance.
	■	
Managing inventory: Inventory of such items as foods, beverages, first-aid equipment, 
in-flight magazines, pillows, blankets, and life jackets is essential for the airline.
	■	
Assuring quality: Quality is indispensable in an airline where safety is the highest 
priority. Today’s travelers expect high-quality customer service during ticketing, check-in, 
curb service, and unexpected issues where the emphasis is on efficiency and courtesy.
	■	
Motivating and training employees: Airline employees must be highly trained and 
continually motivated, especially when dealing with frustrated airline travelers.
	■	
Locating facilities: Key questions facing airlines include which cities to offer services, 
where to host maintenance facilities, and where to locate major and minor hubs.
100% SERVICES
100% GOODS
Medical, Teaching, Consulting
Restaurants
Hotels
Automobiles, Groceries
FIGURE B8.3
The Goods–Service 
Continuum: Most Products 
Are a Bundle of Goods and 
Services.

	
Plug-In B8  Operations Management  *  463
Opposite from an airline is a bike factory, which is typically an assembly operation: buy­
ing components such as frames, tires, wheels, gears, and other items from suppliers, and then 
assembling bicycles. A bike factory also does some of the fabrication work itself, forming 
frames and making the gears and chains. Obviously, an airline company and a bike factory 
are completely different types of operations. One is primarily a service operation, the other 
a producer of goods. Nonetheless, these two operations have much in common. The same as 
the airline, the bike factory must schedule production, deal with components, order parts and 
materials, schedule and train employees, ensure quality standards are met, and above all sat­
isfy customers. In both organizations, the success of the business depends on short- and long-
term planning and the ability of its executives and managers to make informed decisions.
MIS’s Role in OM
Managers can use MIS to heavily influence OM decisions including productivity, costs, flexibil­
ity, quality, and customer satisfaction. One of the greatest benefits of MIS on OM is in making 
operational decisions because operations management exerts considerable influence over the 
degree to which the goals and objectives of the organization are realized. Most OM decisions 
involve many possible alternatives that can have varying impacts on revenues and expenses. 
OM information systems are critical for managers to be able to make well-informed decisions.
Decision support systems and executive information systems can help an organization 
­perform what-if analysis, sensitivity analysis, drill-down, and consolidation. Numerous man­
agerial and strategic key decisions are based on OM information systems that affect the entire 
organization, including:
	■	
What: What resources will be needed, and in what amounts?
	■	
When: When will each resource be needed? When should the work be scheduled? When 
should materials and other supplies be ordered? When is corrective action needed?
	■	
Where: Where will the work be performed?
	■	
How: How will the product or service be designed? How will the work be done 
(organization, methods, equipment)? How will resources be allocated?
	■	
Who: Who will perform the work?
OM STRATEGIC BUSINESS SYSTEMS
UPS uses package flow information systems at each of its locations. The custom-built sys­
tems combine operations strategy and mapping technology to optimize the way boxes are 
loaded and delivered. The goal is to use the package flow software to cut the distance that 
delivery trucks travel by more than 100 million miles each year. The project will also help 
UPS streamline the profitability of each of its facility locations.
Operations strategy is concerned with the development of a long-term plan for determining 
how to best utilize the major resources of the firm so that there is a high degree of compatibil­
ity between these resources and the firm’s long-term corporate strategy. Operations strategy 
addresses very broad questions about how these major resources should be configured to 
achieve the desired corporate objectives. Some of the major long-term issues addressed in 
operations strategy include:
	■	
How big to make the facilities.
	■	
Where to locate the facilities.
	■	
When to build additional facilities.
	■	
What type of process(es) to install to make the products.
Each of these issues can be addressed by OM decision support systems. In developing an 
operations strategy, management needs to consider many factors. These include (a) the level 
of technology that is or will be available, (b) the required skill levels of the workers, and (c) 
the degree of vertical integration, in terms of the extent to which outside suppliers are used.
LO 2 Describe the correlation 
between operations management 
and information technology.

464  *  Plug-In B8  Operations Management
Today, many organizations, especially larger conglomerates, operate in terms of strategic 
business units (SBUs), which consist of several stand-alone businesses. When companies 
become really large, they are best thought of as being composed of a number of businesses 
(or SBUs). As displayed in Figure B8.4, operations strategy supports the long-range strategy 
developed at the SBU level.
Decisions at the SBU level focus on being effective, that is, “on doing the right things.” 
These decisions are sometimes referred to as strategic planning, which focuses on long-range 
planning such as plant size, location, and type of process to be used. The primary system used 
for strategic planning is a materials requirement planning system. Materials requirement 
planning (MRP) systems use sales forecasts to make sure that needed parts and materials 
are available at the right time and place in a specific company. The latest version of MRP is 
enterprise resource planning.
Strategic decisions impact intermediate-range decisions, often referred to as tactical plan­
ning, which focuses on being efficient, that is, “doing things right.” Tactical planning focuses 
on producing goods and services as efficiently as possible within the strategic plan. Here 
the emphasis is on producing quality products, including when material should be delivered, 
when products should be made to best meet demand, and what size the workforce should be. 
One of the primary systems used in tactical planning includes global inventory management. 
Global inventory management systems provide the ability to locate, track, and predict the 
movement of every component or material anywhere upstream or downstream in the produc­
tion process. This allows an organization to locate and analyze its inventory anywhere in its 
production process.
Finally, operational planning and control (OP&C) deals with the day-to-day procedures 
for performing work, including scheduling, inventory, and process management. Inventory 
management and control systems provide control and visibility to the status of individual 
items maintained in inventory. The software maintains inventory record accuracy, generates 
material requirements for all purchased items, and analyzes inventory performance. Inventory 
management and control software provides organizations with the information from a variety 
of sources including:
	■	
Current inventory and order status.
	■	
Cost accounting.
	■	
Sales forecasts and customer orders.
	■	
Manufacturing capacity.
	■	
New-product introductions.
FIGURE B8.4
Hierarchy of Operational 
Planning.
Type of Planning
Time Frame
Issues
Decisions
Systems
Strategic Planning
Long range
Plant size, location, type 
of processes
How will we make the products? 
Where do we locate the facility or 
facilities? How much capacity do 
we require? When should we add 
additional capacity?
Materials requirement planning 
(MRP) systems
Tactical Planning
Intermediate
 range
Workforce size, material 
requirements
How many workers do we need? 
When do we need them? Should 
we work overtime or put on a 
section shift? When should we have 
material delivered? Should we have 
a finished goods inventory?
Global inventory management 
systems
Operational Planning 
and Control (OP&C)
Short range
Daily scheduling of 
employees, jobs, and 
equipment, process 
management, inventory 
management
What jobs do we work on today or 
this week? To whom do we assign 
what tasks? What jobs have priority?
Inventory management and 
control systems, transportation 
planning systems, distribution 
management systems

	
Plug-In B8  Operations Management  *  465
Two additional OP&C systems are transportation planning and distribution management. 
Transportation planning systems track and analyze the movement of materials and products 
to ensure the delivery of materials and finished goods at the right time, the right place, and the 
lowest cost. Distribution management systems coordinate the process of transporting materi­
als from a manufacturer to distribution centers to the final customers. Transportation routes 
directly affect the speed and cost of delivery. An organization will use these systems to help 
it decide if it wants to use an effectiveness route and ship its products directly to its custom­
ers or use an efficiency route and ship its products to a distributor that ships the products to 
customers.
Competitive OM Strategy
The key to developing a competitive OM strategy lies in understanding how to create value-
added goods and services for customers. Specifically, value is added through the competitive 
priority or priorities that are selected to support a given strategy. Five key competitive priori­
ties translate directly into characteristics that are used to describe various processes by which 
a company can add value to its OM decisions:
	1.	 Cost
	2.	 Quality
	3.	 Delivery
	4.	 Flexibility
	5.	 Service
COST
Every industry has low-cost providers. However, being the low-cost producer does not 
always guarantee profitability and success. Products sold strictly on the basis of cost are typi­
cally commodity-like products including such goods as flour, petroleum, and sugar. In other 
words, customers cannot distinguish the products made by one firm from those of another. 
As a result, customers use cost as the primary determinant in making a purchasing decision.
Low-cost market segments are frequently very large, and many companies are lured by the 
potential for significant profits, which are associated with large unit volumes of product. As 
a consequence, the competition in this segment is exceedingly fierce—and so is the failure 
rate. After all, there can be only one lowest-cost producer, and that firm usually establishes 
the selling price in the market.
QUALITY
Quality can be divided into two categories—product quality and process quality. Product 
quality levels vary as to the particular market that it aims to serve. For example, a generic 
bike is of significantly different quality than the bike of a world-class cyclist. Higher-­quality 
products command higher prices in the marketplace. Organizations must establish the “proper 
level” of product quality by focusing on the exact requirements of their customers. Overde­
signed products with too much quality will be viewed as being prohibitively expensive. 
Underdesigned products, on the other hand, will lose customers to products that cost a little 
more but are perceived by the customers as offering greater value.
Process quality is critical in every market segment. Regardless of whether the product is a 
generic bike or a bike for an international cyclist, customers want products without defects. 
Thus, the primary goal of process quality is to produce error-free products. The investment 
in improving quality pays off in stronger customer relationships and higher revenues. Many 
organizations use modern quality control standards, including:
	■	
Six sigma quality: The goal is to detect potential problems to prevent their occurrence 
and achieve no more than 3.4 defects per million opportunities. That is important to 
companies like Bank of America, which makes 4 million transactions a day.
LO 3 Describe the five character-
istics of competitive priorities.

466  *  Plug-In B8  Operations Management
	■	
Malcolm Baldrige National Quality Awards: In 1987 in the United States, a standard 
was set for overall company quality with the introduction of the Malcolm Baldrige National 
Quality Awards, named in honor of the late U.S. secretary of commerce. Companies 
can apply for these awards in each of the following areas: manufacturing, services, small 
businesses, education, and health care. To qualify, an organization has to show quality in 
seven key areas: leadership, strategic planning, customer and market focus, information and 
analysis, human resources focus, process management, and business results.
	■	
ISO 900: The common name given to quality management and assurance standards 
comes from the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), a 
nongovernmental organization established in 1947 to promote the development of 
world standards to facilitate the international exchange of goods and services. ISO is a 
worldwide federation of national standards bodies from more than 140 countries. ISO 
900 standards require a company to determine customer needs, including regulatory 
and legal requirements. The company must also make communication arrangements 
to handle issues such as complaints. Other standards involve process control, product 
testing, storage, and delivery.
	■	
ISO 14000: This collection of the best practices for managing an organization’s impact 
on the environment does not prescribe specific performance levels, but establishes 
environmental management systems. The requirements for certification include having 
an environmental policy, setting specific improvement targets, conducting audits 
of environmental programs, and maintaining top management review of processes. 
Certification in ISO 14000 displays that a firm has a world-class management system in 
both quality and environmental standards.
	■	
CMMI: Capability Maturity Model Integration is a framework of best practices. The 
current version, CMMI-DEV, describes best practices in managing, measuring, and 
monitoring software development processes. CMMI does not describe the processes 
themselves; it describes the characteristics of good processes, thus providing guidelines 
for companies developing or honing their own sets of processes.
DELIVERY
Another key factor in purchasing decisions is delivery speed. The ability of a firm to provide 
consistent and fast delivery allows it to charge a premium price for its products. George Stalk, 
Jr., of the Boston Consulting Group, has demonstrated that both profits and market share are 
directly linked to the speed with which a company can deliver its products relative to its com­
petition. In addition to fast delivery, the reliability of the delivery is also important. In other 
words, products should be delivered to customers with minimum variance in delivery times.
FLEXIBILITY
Flexibility, from a strategic perspective, refers to the ability of a company to offer a wide 
variety of products to its customers. Flexibility is also a measure of how fast a company can 
convert its process(es) from making an old line of products to producing a new product line. 
Product variety is often perceived by the customers to be a dimension of quality.
The flexibility of the manufacturing process at John Deere’s Harvester Works in Moline, 
Illinois, allows the firm to respond to the unpredictability of the agricultural industry’s equip­
ment needs. By manufacturing such small-volume products as seed planters in “modules,” 
or factories within a factory, Deere can offer farmers a choice of 84 different planter models 
with such a wide variety of options that farmers can have planters virtually customized to 
meet their individual needs. Its manufacturing process thus allows Deere to compete on both 
speed and flexibility.
Currently, there appears to be a trend toward offering environmentally friendly products 
that are made through environmentally friendly processes. As consumers become more aware 
of the fragility of the environment, they are increasingly turning toward products that are safe 
for the environment. Several flexible manufacturers now advertise environmentally friendly 
products, energy-efficient products, and recycled products.

	
Plug-In B8  Operations Management  *  467
SERVICE
With shortened product life cycles, products tend to migrate toward one common standard. 
As a consequence, these products are often viewed as commodities in which price is the pri­
mary differentiator. For example, the differences in laptops offered among PC manufactures 
are relatively insignificant so price is the prime selection criterion. For this reason, many 
companies attempt to place an emphasis on high-quality customer service as a primary dif­
ferentiator. Customer service can add tremendous value to an ordinary product.
Businesses are always looking toward the future to find the next competitive advantage 
that will distinguish their products in the marketplace. To obtain an advantage in such a com­
petitive environment, firms must provide “value-added” goods and services, and the primary 
area where they can capitalize on all five competitive priorities is in the supply chain.
OM and the Supply Chain
A supply chain consists of all parties involved, directly or indirectly, in the procurement 
of a product or raw material. Supply chain management (SCM) involves the management 
of information flows between and among stages in a supply chain to maximize total supply 
chain effectiveness and profitability. SCM software can enable an organization to generate 
efficiencies within these steps by automating and improving the information flows through­
out and among the different supply chain components. Figures B8.5 and B8.6 display the 
typical supply chains for goods and services.
FIGURE B8.6
A Typical Service Supply 
Chain.
FIGURE B8.5
A Typical Manufacturing 
Supply Chain.
Supplier
Supplier
Storage
(Raw Materials)
Storage
(Finished Goods)
Distribution
Retailer
Customer
Manufacturing
Supplier
Supplier
Supplier
Storage
(Raw Materials)
Customer
Service

468  *  Plug-In B8  Operations Management
P L U G - I N  S U M M A R Y
T
his plug-in introduced the concept of operations management, showcasing how information 
technology can be used to improve fundamental business processes. Operations manage­
ment exists across a variety of sectors and industries. Various examples were given showcas­
ing information technology’s ability to help organizations improve their interactions with suppliers, 
manufacturers, distributors, warehouses, and customers.
As a business student, you should understand this pivotal role that information technology plays 
in facilitating operations management and in supporting the basic infrastructure and coordination 
needed for core business operations to function.
Distribution management 
system  465
Global inventory management 
system  464
International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO)  466
Inventory management and 
c­ontrol system  464
Materials requirement planning 
(MRP) systems  464
K E Y  T E R M S
Operational planning and ­control 
(OP&C)  464
Operations management 
(OM)  461
Production  460
Production management  460
Strategic business 
unit (SBU)  464
Strategic planning  464
Supply chain  467
Supply chain management 
(SCM)  467
Tactical planning  464
Transformation process  461
Transportation planning 
system  465
Value-added  462
M A K I N G  B U S I N E S S  D E C I S I O N S
1.	 Operational Mowing
Mary Lou has worked for the same Fortune 500 company for almost 15 years. Although the com­
pany had gone through some tough times, things were starting to turn around. Customer orders 
were up, and quality and productivity had improved dramatically from what they had been only a 
few years earlier due to a companywide quality improvement program. So it came as a real shock 
to Mary Lou and about 400 of her co-workers when they were suddenly terminated following the 
new CEO’s decision to downsize the company.
After recovering from the initial shock, Mary Lou tried to find employment elsewhere. Despite 
her efforts, after eight months of searching she was no closer to finding a job than the day she 
started. Her funds were being depleted and she was getting more discouraged. There was one 
bright spot, though: She was able to bring in a little money by mowing lawns for her neighbors. 
She got involved quite by chance when she heard one neighbor remark that now that his children 
were on their own, nobody was around to cut the grass. Almost jokingly, Mary Lou asked him how 
much he’d be willing to pay. Soon Mary Lou was mowing the lawns of 10 neighbors. Other neigh­
bors wanted her to work on their lawns, but she did not feel that she could spare any more time 
from her job search.
However, as the rejection letters began to pile up, Mary Lou knew she had to make a decision 
if she would go into business for herself or continue her job search.
By the end of her first year in business, Mary Lou was easily earning a good living. She began 
performing other services such as fertilizing lawns, weeding gardens, trimming shrubs, and 

	
Plug-In B8  Operations Management  *  469
installing sprinkler systems. Business was so good that Mary Lou hired several employees to assist 
her and believed she could further expand her business. As Mary Lou begins to plan her expan­
sion, she needs your assistance in answering the following questions:
	1.	 In what ways are Mary Lou’s customers most likely to judge the quality of her lawn care 
services?
	2.	 Mary Lou is the operations manager of her business. Among her responsibilities are forecast­
ing, inventory management, scheduling, quality assurance, and maintenance.
	1.	 What kinds of things would likely require forecasts?
	2.	 What inventory items does Mary Lou probably have? Name one inventory decision she has 
to make periodically.
	3.	 What scheduling must she do? What things might occur to disrupt schedules and cause 
Mary Lou to reschedule?
	4.	 How important is quality assurance to Mary Lou’s business?
	3.	 What are some of the trade-offs that Mary Lou probably considered relative to:
	1.	 Working for a company instead of for herself?
	2.	 Expanding the business?
	3.	 Launching a website?
	4.	 The town is considering an ordinance that would prohibit grass clippings at the curb for pickup 
because local landfills cannot handle the volume. What options might Mary Lou consider if the 
ordinance is passed?
	5.	 Mary Lou decided to offer her employees a bonus of $250 for ideas on how to improve the 
business, and they provided several good ideas. One idea that she initially rejected now 
appears to hold great promise. The employee who proposed the idea has left the company and 
is currently working for a competitor. Should Mary Lou send the employee a check for the idea?
2.	 Total Recall
In mid-2000, the Firestone Tire Company issued a recall of some of its tires—those mounted on 
certain sport-utility vehicles (SUVs) of the Ford Motor Company. This was done in response to 
reports that tire treads on some SUVs separated in use, causing accidents, some of which involved 
fatal injuries as vehicles rolled over.
At first, Firestone denied there was a problem with its tires, but it issued the recall under pres­
sure from consumer groups and various government agencies. All of the tires in question were 
produced at the same tire plant, and there were calls to shut down that facility. Firestone sug­
gested that Ford incorrectly matched the wrong tires with its SUVs. There were also suggestions 
that the shock absorbers of the SUVs were rubbing against the tires, causing or aggravating the 
problem.
Both Ford and Firestone denied that this had been an ongoing problem. However, there was 
a public outcry when it was learned that Firestone had previously issued recalls of these tires in 
South America, and the companies had settled at least one lawsuit involving an accident caused 
by tread separation several years earlier.
This case raises a number of issues, some related to possible causes and others to ethics. 
­Discuss each of these factors and their actual or potential relevance to what happened:
	1.	 Product
	2.	 Quality control
	3.	 Ethics

470  *  Plug-In B9  Sustainable MIS  Infrastructures
P L U G - I N 
MIS and the Environment
The general trend in MIS is toward smaller, faster, and cheaper devices. Gordon Moore, 
­co-founder of Intel, the world’s largest producer of computer chips or microprocessors, 
observed in 1965 that continued advances in technological innovation made it possible to 
reduce the size of a computer chip (the brains of a computer, or even a cell phone now) while 
doubling its capacity every two years. His prediction that this trend would continue has come 
to be known as Moore’s Law, which refers to the computer chip performance per dollar dou­
bles every 18 months. Although Moore originally assumed a two-year period, many sources 
today refer to the 18-month figure.
Moore’s Law is great for many companies because they can acquire large amounts of 
MIS equipment for cheaper and cheaper costs. As ebusinesses continue to grow, compa­
nies equip their employees with multiple forms of electronic devices ranging from laptops 
to cell phones to iPads. This is great for supporting a connected corporation, but signifi­
cant unintended side effects include our dependence on fossil fuels and increased need for 
safe disposal of outdated computing equipment. Concern about these side effects has led 
many companies to turn to an ecological practice known as sustainable MIS. Sustainable, 
or green, MIS describes the production, management, use, and disposal of technology in 
a way that minimizes damage to the environment. Sustainable MIS is a critical part of 
­corporate social responsibility, that is, companies’ acknowledged responsibility to society. 
Clean computing, a subset of sustainable MIS, refers to the environmentally responsible 
use, manufacture, and disposal of technology products and computer equipment. Although 
sustainable MIS refers to the environmental impact of computing as a whole, clean com­
puting is specifically focused on the production of environmental waste. A green personal 
computer (green PC) is built using environment-friendly materials and designed to save 
energy. Building sustainable MIS infrastructures is a core initiative and critical success 
LO 1 Identify the environmental 
impacts associated with MIS.
B9
Sustainable MIS 
Infrastructures
LEARNING OUTCOMES
1.	 Identify the environmental impacts associated with MIS.
2.	 Explain the three components of a sustainable MIS infrastructure along with 
their business benefits.

	
Plug-In B9  Sustainable MIS Infrastructures   *  471
­factor for socially responsible corporations. Figure B9.1 displays the three 
primary side effects of businesses’ expanded use of technology.
INCREASED ELECTRONIC WASTE
The fulfillment of Moore’s Law has made technological devices smaller, 
cheaper, and faster, allowing more people from all income levels to purchase 
computing equipment. This increased demand is causing numerous envi­
ronmental issues. Ewaste refers to discarded, obsolete, or broken electronic 
devices. Ewaste includes CDs, DVDs, thumb drives, printer cartridges, cell 
phones, iPods, external hard drives, TVs, VCRs, DVD players, microwaves, 
and so on. Some say one human year is equivalent to seven years of tech­
nological advancements. A personal computer has a life expectancy of only 
three to five years and a cell phone is less than two years. An upcycle reuses 
or refurbishes ewaste and creates a new product.
Sustainable MIS disposal refers to the safe disposal of MIS assets at the end of their life 
cycle. It ensures that ewaste does not end up in landfills, causing environmental issues. A 
single computer contains more than 700 chemicals; some are toxic, such as mercury, lead, 
and cadmium. If a computer ends up in a landfill, the toxic substances it contains can leach 
into our land, water, and air. Recycling costs from $15 to $50 for a monitor or computer. 
Many companies, including public schools and universities, simply can’t afford the recy­
cling costs.
Ewaste also occurs when unused equipment stored in attics, basements, and storage facili­
ties never reaches a recycling center. Retrieving the silver, gold, and other valuable metals 
from these devices is more efficient and less environmentally harmful than removing it from 
its natural environment.
Currently, less than 20 percent of ewaste in the United States is recycled; however, 
even recycling does not guarantee the equipment is disposed of safely. While some recy­
clers process the material ethically, others ship it to countries such as China and India, 
where environmental enforcement is weak. This action poses its own global environmental 
problems.
INCREASED ENERGY CONSUMPTION
Energy consumption is the amount of energy consumed by business processes and systems. 
Huge increases in technology use have greatly amplified energy consumption. The energy 
consumed by a computer is estimated to produce as much as 10 percent of the amount of 
carbon dioxide produced by an automobile. Computer servers in the United States account 
for about 1 percent of the total energy needs of the country. Put in perspective, this is roughly 
equivalent to the energy consumption of Mississippi.
Computers consume energy even when they are not being used. For convenience and to 
allow for automatic updates and backup, the majority of computer equipment is never com­
pletely shut down. It draws energy 24 hours a day.
INCREASED CARBON EMISSIONS
The major human-generated greenhouse gases, such as carbon emissions from energy use, 
are very likely responsible for the increases in climatic temperature over the past half a cen­
tury. Additional temperature increases are projected over the next hundred years, with serious 
consequences for Earth’s environment, if carbon emissions, including the ­carbon dioxide and 
carbon monoxide produced by business processes and systems, are not reduced.
In the United States, coal provides more than 50 percent of electrical power. When left 
on continuously, a single desktop computer and monitor can consume at least 100 watts 
of power per hour. To generate that much energy 24 hours a day for a year would require 
approximately 714 pounds of coal. When that coal is burned, it releases on average 5 pounds 
of sulfur ­dioxide, 5 pounds of nitrogen oxides, and 1,852 pounds (that is almost a ton) of 
carbon dioxide.1
FIGURE B9.1
Three Pressures 
Driving Sustainable MIS 
Infrastructures.
Increased
Energy
Consumption
Increased
Carbon
Emissions
Increased
Electronic
Waste

472  *  Plug-In B9  Sustainable MIS Infrastructures 
Supporting the Environment: 
Sustainable MIS Infrastructure
Combating ewaste, energy consumption, and carbon emissions requires a firm to focus on 
creating sustainable MIS infrastructures. A sustainable MIS infrastructure identifies ways 
that a company can grow in terms of computing resources while simultaneously becoming 
less dependent on hardware and energy consumption. The components of a sustainable MIS 
infrastructure are displayed in Figure B9.2.
FIGURE B9.2
Sustainable MIS 
Infrastructure Components.
GRID COMPUTING
A collection of computers, often
geographically dispersed, that are
coordinated to solve a common
problem
VIRTUALIZATION
Creates multiple “virtual”
machines on a single
computing device
CLOUD COMPUTING
Accesses shared
resources that can be
rapidly provisioned and
released with minimal
management
UTILITY COMPUTING
Oﬀers a pay-per-use
revenue model similar to a
metered service such as
gas or electricity
LO 2 Explain the three com­
ponents of a sustainable MIS 
infrastructure along with their 
business benefits.
GRID COMPUTING
When a light is turned on, the power grid delivers exactly what is needed, instantly. Com­
puters and networks can now work that way using grid computing. Grid computing is a 
collection of computers, often geographically dispersed, that are coordinated to solve a com­
mon problem. With grid computing a problem is broken into pieces and distributed to many 
machines, allowing faster processing than could occur with a single system (see Figure B9.3). 
Computers typically use less than 25 percent of their processing power, leaving more than 
75 percent available for other tasks. Innovatively, grid computing takes advantage of this 
unused processing power by linking thousands of individual computers around the world 
to create a “virtual supercomputer” that can process intensive tasks. Grid computing makes 
­better use of MIS resources, allowing greater scalability as systems can easily grow to handle 
peaks and valleys in demand, become more cost efficient, and solve problems that would be 
impossible to tackle with a single computer (see Figures B9.4 and B9.5).
The uses of grid computing are numerous, including the creative environment of ani­
mated movies. DreamWorks Animation used grid computing to complete many of its hit 
films including Antz, Shrek, Madagascar, and How to Train Your Dragon. The third Shrek 
film required more than 20 million computer hours to make (compared to 5 million for the 
first Shrek and 10 million for the second). At peak production times, DreamWorks dedicated 
more than 4,000 computers to its Shrek grid, allowing it to complete scenes in days and hours 

	
Plug-In B9  Sustainable MIS Infrastructures   *  473
instead of months. With the increased grid computing power, the DreamWork’s animators 
were able to add more realistic movement to water, fire, and magic scenes (see Figure B9.6). 
With grid computing a company can work faster or more efficiently, providing a potential 
competitive advantage and additional cost savings.
Solving the Energy Issue with Smart Grids
A smart grid delivers electricity using two-way digital technology. It is meant to solve the 
problem of the world’s outdated electrical grid, making it more efficient and reliable by adding 
the ability to remotely monitor, analyze, and control the transmission of power. The ­current 
U.S. power grid is said to have outlived its life expectancy by as much as 30 years. Smart 
grids provide users with real-time usage monitoring, allowing them to choose off-peak times 
for noncritical or less urgent applications or processes. Residents of Boulder, Colorado, can 
monitor their use of electricity and control appliances remotely due to the city’s ­large-scale 
FIGURE B9.3
Virtual Organizations Using 
Grid Computing.
Virtual
organization
to provide
weather
prediction
Virtual
organization
to provide
ﬁnancial
modeling
Weather
report
Software Application
Provider
Hardware Service
Provider
Computer
System
Network
Bandwidth
Operating
System
Financial Service
Provider
Financial
Modeling
Database
Financial
report
User A
User B
What is the
weather for
the week?
What is the
stock market
outlook?
Weather
Prediction
Application
Financial
Modeling
Application

474  *  Plug-In B9  Sustainable MIS Infrastructures 
smart grid system. Xcel Energy has installed 21,000 smart grid 
meters since the $100 million program started several years ago. 
Energy use by early adopters is down as much as 45 percent.2
VIRTUALIZED COMPUTING
Most computers and even servers typically run only one operat­
ing system, such as Windows or Mac OS, and only one applica­
tion. When a company invests in a large system such as inventory 
management, it dedicates a single server to house the system. 
This ensures the system has enough capacity to run during peak 
times and to scale to meet demand. Also, many systems have 
specific hardware requirements along with detailed software 
requirements, making it difficult to find two systems with the 
same requirements that could share the same machine. Through 
the use of virtualization, computers can run multiple operating 
systems along with multiple software applications—all at the 
same time. Virtualization the creation of a virtual (rather than 
actual) version of computing resources, such as an operating sys­
tem, a server, a storage device, or network resources. A good 
analogy is a computer printer. In the past you had to purchase a 
fax machine, copy machine, answering machine, and computer printer separately. This was 
expensive, required enough energy to run four separate machines, not to mention created 
FIGURE B9.4
Grid Computer Network.
Data
Processing
Applications
Input / Output
Operating
System
Storage
FIGURE B9.5
Grid Computing Example.

	
Plug-In B9  Sustainable MIS Infrastructures   *  475
additional amounts of ewaste. Today, you can buy a virtualized computer printer that func­
tions as a fax machine, answering machine, and copy machine all on one physical machine, 
thereby reducing costs, power requirements, and ewaste. Virtualization is essentially a form 
of consolidation that can benefit sustainable MIS infrastructures in a variety of ways, for 
example:
	■	
By increasing availability of applications that can give a higher level of performance 
depending on the hardware used.
	■	
By increasing energy efficiency by requiring less hardware to run multiple systems or 
applications.
	■	
By increasing hardware usability by running multiple operating systems on a single 
computer.
Originally, computers were designed to run a single application on a single operating sys­
tem. This left most computers vastly underutilized (as mentioned earlier, 75 percent of most 
computing power is available for other tasks). Virtualization allows multiple virtual com­
puters to exist on a single machine, which allows it to share its resources, such as memory 
and hard disk space, to run different applications and even different operating systems. Mac 
computers have the ability to run both the Apple operating system and the Windows PC 
operating system, with the use of virtualization software (see Figure B9.7). Unfortunately, 
­virtualization, at least at the moment, is not available for a 
PC to run Mac software. There are three basic categories of 
virtualization:
	■	
Storage virtualization combines multiple network storage 
devices so they appear to be a single storage device.
	■	
Network virtualization combines networks by splitting the 
available bandwidth into independent channels that can be 
assigned in real time to a specific device.
	■	
Server virtualization combines the physical resources, 
such as servers, processors, and operating systems, from 
the applications. (This is the most common form and 
typically when you hear the term virtualization, you can 
assume server virtualization.)
Virtualization is also one of the easiest and quickest ways 
to achieve a sustainable MIS infrastructure because it reduces 
FIGURE B9.6
Making Shrek 2 with Grid 
Computing.
FIGURE B9.7
Virtualization Allows an 
Apple Macintosh Computer 
to Run OS X and Windows 8.
MAC OS X
Running
Mac
software
Sharing memory and hard disk
space
WINDOWS 8
Running
Windows 8
software
Apple Macintosh Computer

476  *  Plug-In B9  Sustainable MIS Infrastructures 
power consumption and requires less equipment that needs to be manufactured, maintained, 
and later disposed of safely. Managers no longer have to assign servers, storage, or network 
capacity permanently to single applications. Instead, they can assign the hardware resources 
when and where they are needed, achieving the availability, flexibility, and scalability a com­
pany needs to thrive and grow. Also, by virtually ­separating the operating system and applica­
tions from the hardware, if there is a disaster or hardware failure, it is easy to port the virtual 
machine to a new physical machine allowing a company to recover quickly from disasters. 
One of the primary uses of virtualization is for performing backup, recovery, and disaster 
recovery. Using virtual servers or a virtualization service provider, such as Google, Microsoft, 
or Amazon, to host disaster recovery is more sustainable than a single company incurring the 
expense of having redundant physical systems. Also, these providers’ data centers are built to 
withstand natural disasters and are typically located far away from big cities (see Figure B9.8).
System virtualization is the ability to present the resources of a single computer as if it 
is a collection of separate computers (“virtual machines”), each with its own virtual CPUs, 
network interfaces, storage, and operating system.
Virtual machine technology was first implemented on mainframes in the 1960s to allow the 
expensive systems to be partitioned into separate domains and used more efficiently by more 
users and applications. As standard PC servers became more powerful in the past decade, virtu­
alization has been brought to the desktop and notebook processors to provide the same benefits.
Virtual machines appear both to the user within the system and the world outside as sepa­
rate computers, each with its own network identity, user authorization and authentication 
capabilities, operating system version and configuration, applications, and data. The hard­
ware is consistent across all virtual machines: While the number or size of them may dif­
fer, devices are used that allow virtual machines to be portable, independent of the actual 
hardware type on the underlying systems. Figure B9.9 shows an overview of what a system 
virtualization framework looks like.
FIGURE B9.8
Virtualization Architecture.
Production Systems
Virtualization Infrastructure
Data Center
Ebusiness
Shipping
Ordering
Marketing
Accounting

	
Plug-In B9  Sustainable MIS Infrastructures   *  477
Virtual Data Centers
A data center is a facility used to house management information systems and associated 
components, such as telecommunications and storage systems. Data centers, sometimes 
referred to as server farms, consume power and require cooling and floor space while work­
ing to support business growth without disrupting normal business operations and the quality 
of service. The amount of data a data center stores has grown exponentially over the years as 
our reliance on information has increased. Backups, graphics, documents, presentations, pho­
tos, audio files, and video files all contribute to the ever-expanding information footprint that 
requires storage. One of the most effective ways to limit the power consumption and cooling 
requirements of a data center is to consolidate parts of the physical infrastructure, particularly 
by reducing the number of physical servers through virtualization. For this reason, virtualiza­
tion is having a profound impact on data centers as the sheer number of servers a company 
requires to operate decreases, thereby boosting growth and performance while reducing envi­
ronmental impact, as shown in Figure B9.10. Google, Microsoft, Amazon, and Yahoo! have 
all created data centers along the Columbia River in the northwestern United States. In this 
area, each company can benefit from affordable land, high-speed Internet access, plentiful 
water for cooling, and even more important, inexpensive electricity. These factors are critical 
to today’s large-scale data centers, whose sheer size and power needs far surpass those of the 
previous generation. Microsoft’s data center in Quincy, Washington, is larger than 10 football 
FIGURE B9.9
System Virtualization.
Virtual Machine 1
Virtual Machine 2
Virtualization Software
Operating System
Hardware (CPU, RAM, Network)
Virtual Machine 3
FIGURE B9.10
Ways for Data Centers to 
Become Sustainable.
Stores greater
amounts of
information in
less space
Reduce energy
consumption
Resources are
inexpensive,
clean, and
available
Carbon
Emissions
Floor
Space
Geographic
Location

478  *  Plug-In B9  Sustainable MIS Infrastructures 
fields and is powered entirely by hydroelectricity, power generated from flowing water rather 
than from the burning of coal or other fossil fuel.
If we take a holistic and integrated approach to overall company growth, the benefits of 
integrating information MIS infrastructures, environmental MIS infrastructures, and sus­
tainable MIS infrastructures become obvious. For example, a company could easily create 
a backup of its software and important information in one or more geographically dispersed 
locations using cloud computing. This would be far cheaper than building its own hot and 
cold sites in different areas of the country. In the case of a security breach, failover can be 
deployed as a virtual machine in one location of the cloud can be shut down as another virtual 
machine in a different location on the cloud comes online.
CLOUD COMPUTING
Imagine a cyclical business that specializes in Halloween decorations and how its sales trends 
and orders vary depending on the time of year. The majority of sales occur in September and 
October, and the remaining 10 months have relatively small sales and small system usage. The 
company does not want to invest in massive, expensive servers that sit idle 10 months of the 
year just to meet its capacity spikes in September and October. The perfect solution for this 
company is cloud computing, which makes it easier to gain access to the computing power that 
was once reserved for large corporations. Small to medium-size companies no longer have to 
make big capital investments to access the same powerful systems that large companies run.
According to the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), cloud ­computing 
is a model for enabling ubiquitous, convenient, on-demand network access to a shared pool of 
configurable computing resources (e.g., networks, servers, storage, applications, and services) 
that can be rapidly provisioned and released with minimal management effort or service pro­
vider interaction. Cloud computing offers new ways to store, access, process, and analyze 
information and connect people and resources from any location in the world where an Inter­
net connection is available. The easiest way to understand how cloud computing works is to 
imagine your home computer in a remote location. It has all of your applications and data on 
it and instead of turning it on, you contact it via the internet and sign in with a username and 
password.  Your applications and data/media are them immediately available and changeable 
from any device you own that can log into it. Each time you log in, your changed data and 
media are then viewable from any other device.
As shown in Figure B9.11, users connect to the cloud from their personal computers or 
portable devices using a client, such as a web browser. To these individual users, the cloud 
FIGURE B9.11
Cloud Computing Example.
Amazon EC2
Windows Live
Mozy
Facebook
Gmail

	
Plug-In B9  Sustainable MIS Infrastructures   *  479
FIGURE B9.13
Cloud Computing 
Advantages.
Cost Saving
Flexibility
Relaibility
Portability
Capacity on
Demand
Backup/Recovery
Scalability
Availability
Accessibility
appears as their personal application, device, or document. It is like storing all of your soft­
ware and documents “in the cloud,” and all you need is a device to access the cloud. No more 
hard drives, software, or processing power—that is all located in the cloud, transparent to 
the users. Users are not physically bound to a single computer or network; they can access 
their programs and documents from wherever they are, whenever they need to. Just think of 
having your hard drive located in the sky and you can access your information and programs 
using any device from wherever you are. The best part is that even if your machine crashes, 
is lost, or is stolen, the information hosted in the cloud is safe and always available. (See 
Figure B9.12 for cloud providers and Figure B9.13 for cloud computing advantages.)
Multi-tenancy in the cloud means that a single instance of a system serves multiple cus­
tomers. In the cloud, each customer is called a tenant and multiple tenants can access the 
same system. Multi-tenancy helps to reduce operational costs associated with implementing 
large systems as the costs are dispersed across many tenants as opposed to single-tenancy, 
in which each customer or tenant must purchase and maintain an individual system. With 
a multi-tenancy cloud approach, the service provider only has one place to update its sys­
tem. With a single-tenancy cloud approach, the service provider would have to update its 
system in every company where the software was running. The cloud fabric is the software 
that makes possible the benefits of cloud computing, such as multi-tenancy. A cloud fabric 
controller is an individual who monitors and provisions cloud resources, similar to a server 
administrator at an individual company. Cloud fabric controllers provision resources, bal­
ance loads, manage servers, update systems, and ensure all environments are available and 
    Cloud Providers  
  Amazon —Cloud Drive, Cloud
Player, Amazon Prime 
 Amazon Kindle Fire is sold at a loss to push various types of media 
through Amazon Prime and Cloud Player where users can stream videos 
and music. 
  Apple —iCloud, iWork, iBooks,
iTunes 
 iCloud brings together iPhones, iPads, and Mac to synchronize data 
across Apple devices. iWork helps users collaborate. 
  Google —Google Apps, Google
Drive, Gmail, Google Calendar 
 Google oﬀers a number of cloud services, including Google apps, Gmail, 
and Google Drive to store data. 
  Microsoft —Oﬃce 365, OneDrive,
OneNote, Exchange 
 OneDrive and Oﬃce 365 oﬀer ways to collaborate and share data, pho-
tos, email, and documents. 
FIGURE B9.12
Overview of Cloud Providers.

480  *  Plug-In B9  Sustainable MIS Infrastructures 
FIGURE B9.14
Top Cloud-Based Business 
Applications.
  CLOUD APPLICATIONS  
 Box  box.com  
  Box.com  is like a ﬁle folder that all your gadgets and devices can access. You 
simply drag a ﬁle into Box, and you can instantly access it from anywhere. 
  Chatter.com!  
  Chatter.com  
 Chatter is essentially an in-house social network. It allows your employees to 
share ﬁles, collaborate easily on projects, and pose questions to the whole com-
pany, which cuts down on meeting times, decreases the number of emails sent, 
and increases how quickly employees can gather information. 
Evernote evernote.com   
 Google Apps  Google.com 
 MailChimp  mailchimp.com 
 Moo  uk.moo.com
 Mozy  mozy.co.uk
 Outright  outright.com 
 Quickbooks  quickbooks.
intuit.co.uk  
 Quickbooks is an online accounting service and can help with all accounting 
needs, including monitoring cash ﬂow, creating reports, and setting budgets, 
and is accessible from anywhere in the world. 
 Skype  skype.com 
 Toggl  toggl.com 
Evernote makes organizing notes simple. It organizes online all the sticky notes, 
scribbled-on notepads, and random pictures that you would have cluttering up 
your desk. It can even recognize writing in images, so if you take a picture of 
a whiteboard full of notes, you can ﬁnd that image by searching for one of the 
phrases in it. 
Google Apps pretty much eliminates the need for many computer programs. You 
can create and save text documents, spreadsheets, slide shows and more on 
Google Docs, and several people can work on one ﬁle simultaneously. Google 
Calendar makes creating and sharing calendars easy, and event reminders can 
be emailed to invitees. Gmail for Business gives companies personalized email 
accounts that are easy to set up and amend and that have the ﬂexibility and 
storage space of Gmail. 
MailChimp is an email publishing platform that allows businesses of all sizes to 
design and send their email campaigns. Measuring the success of your email 
campaigns is really easy because the software integrates with Google Analytics 
for tracking purposes. 
Moo oﬀers a design and printing service for business cards, postcards, and 
minicards. Users can customize existing Moo designs, upload their own 
designs, or import their own images from their Etsy, Facebook, Flickr, Picasa, or 
SmugMug account. 
Mozy is an online backup service that continuously backs up the ﬁles on your 
computer or server. It gives small businesses the space to back up all their 
computer and server ﬁles for a very reasonable price, so owners know their 
ﬁles are retrievable, even during a data loss crisis. 
Outright is a cloud ﬁnance app that helps small businesses with their business 
accounting. It allows you to track income/expenses, tax obligations, and proﬁts/
losses in real time. Ideal for small companies or just entrepreneurs looking to 
get a hold on their ﬁnances. 
 Skype turns your computer into a phone; you can call or chat (with or without 
video) to other Skype users for free. 
 Toggl is a time-tracking application. It allows you to create tasks and projects 
and assign a certain amount of time to each project. It also logs how long tasks 
take to complete and how much time you have left to spend in a project. 
operating correctly. Cloud fabric is the primary reason cloud computing promotes all of the 
seven abilities, allowing a business to make its data and applications accessible, available, 
maintainable, portable, reliable, scalable, and usable. Figure B9.14 displays the top buis­
ness cloud applications.
The cloud offers a company higher availability, greater reliability, and improved 
­accessibility—all with affordable high-speed access. For flexibility, scalability, and cost 
efficiency, cloud computing is quickly becoming a viable option for companies of all sizes. 
With the cloud, you could simply purchase a single license for software such as Microsoft 
Office or Outlook at a far discounted rate and not worry about the hassle of installing and 
upgrading the software on your computer. No more worries that you don’t have enough 

	
Plug-In B9  Sustainable MIS Infrastructures   *  481
memory to run a new program because the hardware is provided in the cloud, along with 
the software. You simply pay to access the program. Think of this the same way you do 
your telephone service. You simply pay to access a vendor’s service, and you do not have 
to pay for the equipment required to carry the call around the globe. You also don’t have 
to worry about scalability because the system automatically handles peak loads, which can 
be spread out among the systems in the cloud. Figure B9.15 displays the benefits of cloud 
computing.
Because additional cloud resources are always available, companies no longer have to 
purchase systems for infrequent computing tasks that need intense processing power, such as 
preparing tax returns during tax season or increased sales transactions during certain holiday 
seasons. If a company needs more processing power, it is always there in the cloud—and 
available on a cost-efficient basis.
With cloud computing, individuals or businesses pay only for the services they need, when 
they need them, and where, much as we use and pay for electricity. In the past, a company 
would have to pay millions of dollars for the hardware, software, and networking equipment 
required to implement a large system such as payroll or sales management. A cloud comput­
ing user can simply access the cloud and request a single license to a payroll application. The 
user does not have to incur any hardware, software, or networking expenses. As the business 
grows and the user requires more employees to have access to the system, the business simply 
purchases additional licenses. Rather than running software on a local computer or server, 
companies can now reach to the cloud to combine software applications, data storage, and 
considerable computing power.
Regardless of which cloud model a business chooses, it can select from four different 
cloud computing environments—public, private, community, and hybrid (see Figure B9.16).
Public Cloud
Public cloud promotes massive, global, and industrywide applications offered to the general 
public. In a public cloud, customers are never required to provision, manage, upgrade, or 
replace hardware or software. Pricing is utility-style and customers pay only for the resources 
they use. Public clouds are the type used by service providers to offer free or paid-for ser­
vices to the general public.  They are open, but often with standard restrictions requiring 
passwords. A few great examples of public cloud computing include Amazon Web Services 
(AWS), Windows Azure, and Google Cloud Connect.
Private Cloud
Private cloud serves only one customer or organization and can be located on the customer’s 
premises or off the customer’s premises. A private cloud is the optimal solution for an orga­
nization such as the government that has high data security concerns and values information 
privacy. Private clouds are far more expensive than public clouds because costs are not shared 
ON-DEMAND SELF-SERVICE
Users can increase storage
and processing power as
needed
RAPID ELASTICITY
Storage, network bandwidth,
and computing capacity can
be increased or decreased
immediately, allowing for
optimal scalability
MEASURED SERVICE
Clients can monitor and
measure transactions and
use of resources
BROAD NETWORK ACCESS
All devices can access
data and applications
MULTI-TENANCY
Customers share pooled
computing resources
FIGURE B9.15
Benefits of Cloud Computing.

482  *  Plug-In B9  Sustainable MIS Infrastructures 
across multiple customers. Private clouds are mostly used by firms and groups who need to 
keep data secure. The main downside is that they still require significant investment of time 
and money to set them up.
Community Cloud
Community cloud serves a specific community with common business models, security 
requirements, and compliance considerations. Community clouds are emerging in highly 
regulated industries such as financial services and pharmaceutical companies. Community 
clouds are private, but spread over a variety of groups within one organization. Different 
­sections of the cloud can be set up specifically for each department or group.
Hybrid Cloud
Hybrid cloud includes two or more private, public, or community clouds, but each cloud 
remains separate and is only linked by technology that enables data and application portabil­
ity. For example, a company might use a private cloud for critical applications that maintain 
sensitive data and a public cloud for nonsensitive data applications. The usage of both private 
and public clouds together is an example of a hybrid cloud. Hybrid clouds offer services even 
if connectivity faults occur and are often used to provide backup to critical online services. 
Cloud bursting is when a company uses its own computing infrastructure for normal usage 
and accesses the cloud when it needs to scale for peak load requirements, ensuring a sudden 
spike in usage does not result in poor performance or system crashes.
Deploying an MIS infrastructure in the cloud forever changes the way an organization’s 
MIS systems are developed, deployed, maintained, and managed. Moving to the cloud is a 
fundamental shift from moving from a physical world to a logical world, making irrelevant 
FIGURE B9.16
Cloud Computing 
Environments.
• Multi-tenancy
• Off-premise
• Several organizations
• Example: private hospital,
all Colorado State
government organizations
• Mix of private, public, or
community
• Example: Private cloud of
the company and a public
cloud for customers,
suppliers, and partners
• Multi-tenancy
• Off-premise
• Several organizations
• Example: Amazon EC2,
Windows Azure
• Single-tenancy
• On-premise
• One organization
• Example: Bank,
government, corporation
Public Cloud
Community  Cloud
Private Cloud
Hybrid Cloud

	
Plug-In B9  Sustainable MIS Infrastructures   *  483
the notion of which individual server applications or data reside on. As a result, organizations 
and MIS departments need to change the way they view systems and the new opportunities to 
find competitive advantages.
UTILITY COMPUTING
Utility computing offers a pay-per-use revenue model similar to a metered service such as 
gas or electricity. Many cloud computing service providers use utility computing cloud infra­
structures, which are detailed in Figure B9.17.
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS)
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) delivers hardware networking capabilities, including the 
use of servers, networking, and storage, over the cloud using a pay-per-use revenue model. 
With IaaS the customer rents the hardware and provides its own custom applications or pro­
grams. IaaS customers save money by not having to spend a large amount of capital purchas­
ing expensive servers, which is a great business advantage considering some servers cost 
more than $100,000. The service is typically paid for on a usage basis, much like a basic 
utility service such as electricity or gas. IaaS offers a cost-effective solution for companies 
that need their computing resources to grow and shrink as business demand changes. This is 
known as dynamic scaling, which means the MIS infrastructure can be automatically scaled 
up or down based on needed requirements. Disaster Recovery as a Service (DRaaS) offers 
backup services that use cloud resources to protect applications and data from disruption 
caused by disaster. It gives an organization a total system backup that allows for business 
continuity in the event of system failure. DRaaS is typically part of a disaster recovery plan 
or business continuity plan.
Currently the most popular IaaS operation is Amazon’s Elastic Compute Cloud, generally 
known as Amazon EC2, or simply EC2. EC2 provides a web interface through which custom­
ers can load and run their own applications on Amazon’s computers. Customers control their 
own operating environment, so they can create, run, and stop services as needed, which is 
why Amazon describes EC2 as elastic. IaaS is a perfect fit for companies with research-inten­
sive projects that need to process large amounts of information at irregular intervals, such 
as those in the scientific or medical fields. Cloud computing services offer these companies 
considerable cost savings because they can perform testing and analysis at levels that are not 
possible without access to additional and very costly computing infrastructure.
FIGURE B9.17
Cloud Service Delivery 
Models.
 Example: Google Application Engine,
 Windows Azure, Amazon Elastic
 Oﬀers hardware, networking, and applications
 on a pay-per-use basis.
 Example: Salesforce.com, Google Apps,
 Zoho, Hotmail
 Oﬀers applications on a pay-per-use basis
 Example: Amazon EC2, Rackspace, VMware, 
 Google Cloud Storage
 Oﬀers computer hardware and networking
 equipment on a pay-per-use basis
Infrastructure
as a Service
Software as a
Service
Platform as a
Service

484  *  Plug-In B9  Sustainable MIS Infrastructures 
Software as a Service (SaaS)
Software as a Service (SaaS) delivers applications over the cloud using a pay-per-use revenue 
model. Before its introduction, companies often spent huge amounts of money implement­
ing and customizing specialized applications to satisfy their business requirements. Many of 
these applications were difficult to implement, expensive to maintain, and challenging to use. 
Usability was one of the biggest drivers for creating interest in and success for cloud comput­
ing service providers.
SaaS offers a number of advantages; the most obvious is tremendous cost savings. The 
software is priced on a per-use basis with no up-front costs, so companies get the immediate 
benefit of reducing capital expenditures. They also get the added benefits of scalability and 
flexibility to test new software on a rental basis.
Salesforce.com is one of the most popular SaaS providers. Salesforce.com built and deliv­
ered a sales automation application, suitable for the typical salesperson, that automates func­
tions such as tracking sales leads and prospects and forecasting. Tapping the power of SaaS 
can provide access to a large-scale, secure infrastructure, along with any needed support, 
which is especially valuable for a start-up or small company with few financial resources.
Data as a Service (DaaS) facilitates the accessibility of business-critical data in a timely, 
secure, and affordable manner. DaaS depends on the principle that specified, useful data can 
be supplied to users on demand, irrespective of any organizational or geographical separation 
between consumers and providers.
Platform as a Service (PaaS)
Platform as a Service (PaaS) supports the deployment of entire systems including hardware, 
networking, and applications using a pay-per-use revenue model. PaaS is a perfect solution 
for a business as it passes on to the service provider the headache and challenges of buying, 
managing, and maintaining web development software. With PaaS the development, deploy­
ment, management, and maintenance are based entirely in the cloud and performed by the 
PaaS provider, allowing the company to focus resources on its core initiatives. Every aspect 
of development, including the software needed to create it and the hardware to run it, lives 
in the cloud. PaaS helps companies minimize operational costs and increase productivity by 
providing all the following without up-front investment:
	■	
Increased security.
	■	
Access to information anywhere and anytime.
	■	
Centralized information management.
	■	
Easy collaboration with partners, suppliers, and customers.
	■	
Increased speed to market with significantly less cost.
One of the most popular PaaS services is Google’s Application Engine, which builds and 
deploys web applications for a company. Google’s Application Engine is easy to build, easy 
to maintain, and easy to scale as a company’s web-based application needs grow. Google’s 
Application Engine is free and offers a standard storage limit and enough processing power 
and network usage to support a web application serving about 5 million page views a month. 
When a customer scales beyond these initial limits, it can pay a fee to increase capacity and 
performance. This can turn into some huge cost savings for a small business that does not 
have enough initial capital to buy expensive hardware and software for its web applications. 
Just think, a two-person company can access the same computing resources as Google. That 
makes good business sense.
Combining infrastructure as a service, platform as a service, and data as a service we 
arrive at Big Data as a Service. Big Data as a Service (BDaaS) offers a cloud-based Big Data 
service to help organizations analyze massive amounts of data to solve business dilemmas. 
BDaaS is a somewhat nebulous term often used to describe a wide variety of outsourcing of 
various Big Data functions to the cloud. This can range from the supply of data, to the supply 
of analytical tools with which to interrogate the data (often through a web dashboard or con­
trol panel) to carrying out the actual analysis and providing reports. Some BDaaS providers 
also include consulting and advisory services within their BDaaS packages.

	
Plug-In B9  Sustainable MIS Infrastructures   *  485
1.	 Solving the Ewaste Problem (StEP)
The United States disposes of more than 384 million units of ewaste yearly and currently recycles 
less than 20 percent, according to the Electronics TakeBack Coalition. The remaining 80 percent is 
burned or dumped in landfills, leaking toxic substances such as mercury, lead, cadmium, arsenic, 
and beryllium into the environment. Reports predict that ewaste will weigh as much as 200 Empire 
State Buildings by 2017. Solving the Ewaste Problem (StEP) Initiative is a group represented by 
the United Nations organizations, governments, and science organizations, and their mission is 
to ensure safe and responsible ewaste disposal. StEP predicts ewaste will grow by a third in the 
next five years with the United States and China being the biggest contributors. Until recently, 
comprehensive data on global ewaste has been hard to collect because the definition of ewaste 
differs among countries. For example, the United States only includes consumer electronics such 
as TVs and computers, whereas Europe includes everything that has a battery or power cord in the 
ewaste category.
The growth of ewaste is an opportunity for entrepreneurs. Research the web and find exam­
ples of schools around the country that are responsibly tackling the ewaste problem. In a group, 
create a plan for implementing an ewaste recycling program at your school.
M A K I N G  B U S I N E S S  D E C I S I O N S
O
rganizations pay special attention to computing basics since these form the underlying 
foundation that supports a firm’s information systems. A solid underlying infrastructure is a 
necessity for ensuring the security, reliability, quality, and responsiveness of a firm’s informa­
tion systems. These systems are the tools that companies utilize and heavily rely upon to run their 
businesses and compete in today’s competitive environment. As a business student, it is important 
that you understand the components and activities underpinning an organization’s computing infra­
structure so that you may be attuned to what is involved and be able to take steps to ensure this 
infrastructure is kept up-to-date and running as smoothly as possible.
P L U G - I N  S U M M A R Y
Big Data as a Service 
(BDaaS)  484
Carbon emissions  471
Clean computing  470
Cloud bursting  482
Cloud computing  478
Cloud fabric  479
Cloud fabric controller  479
Community cloud  482
Corporate social 
responsibility  470
Data as a Service (DaaS)  484
Data center  477
Disaster Recovery as a Service 
(DRaaS)  483
K E Y  T E R M S
Dynamic scaling  483
Energy consumption  471
Ewaste  471
Green personal computer 
(green PC)  470
Grid computing  472
Hybrid cloud  482
Infrastructure as a Service 
(IaaS)  483
Moore’s Law  470
Multi-tenancy  479
Network virtualization  475
Platform as a Service (PaaS)  484
Private cloud  481
Public cloud  481
Server virtualization  475
Smart grid  473
Software as a Service (SaaS)  484
Storage virtualization  475
Sustainable, or green, MIS  470
Sustainable MIS disposal  471
System virtualization  476
Upcycle  471
Utility computing  483
Virtualization  474
M A K I N G  B U S I N E S S 

486  *  Plug-In B9  Sustainable MIS Infrastructures 
2	 Upcycle Your Old PCs
Imagine walking into your friend’s home and seeing her computer with live fish swimming around 
inside it. Upon taking a second look, you realize she has upcycled her old Mac into an innovative 
macquarium. Some young entrepreneurs are making a fortune by upcycling old Mac desktops as 
fish tanks. An upcycle reuses or refurbishes ewaste and creates a new product. With the growing 
problem of ewaste, one alternative is to upcycle your old technology by creating innovative house­
hold products or personal accessories. Take a look at one of the devices you are currently using 
to see whether you can create an upcycled product. Here are a few great ideas to get you started:
	■	
Keyboard magnets
	■	
Computer aquariums
	■	
Mac mailboxes
	■	
Keyboard calendars
	■	
Floppy disk pencil holders
	■	
Circuit board key rings
	■	
RAM key chains
	■	
Circuit earrings
	■	
Cable bracelets
	■	
Motherboard clocks
	■	
Mouse belt buckles
3.	 Ewaste and the Environment
By some estimates, there may be as many as 1 billion surplus or obsolete computers and moni­
tors in the world. Consider California, where 6,000 computers become surplus every day. If not 
disposed of properly, this enormous ewaste stream, which can contain more than 1,000 toxic 
substances, is harmful to human beings and the environment. Beryllium is found in computer 
motherboards, chromium in floppy disks, lead in batteries and computer monitors, and mercury in 
alkaline batteries. One of the most toxic chemicals known is cadmium, found in many old laptops 
and computer chips.
In poorer countries, where the United States and Europe export some of their ewaste, the 
full impact of the environmental damage is quickly being realized. These areas have little use 
for obsolete electronic equipment so local recyclers resell some parts and burn the rest in illegal 
dumps, often near residential areas, releasing toxic and carcinogenic substances into the air, land, 
and water.
Have you ever participated in ewaste? What can you do to ensure that you are safely disposing 
of electronic equipment including batteries? What can governments do to encourage companies 
to dispose of ewaste safely? What can be done to protect poorer countries from receiving ewaste? 
Create a list of the ways you can safely dispose of cell phones, computers, printers, ink cartridges, 
MP3 players, and batteries. What could you do to inform citizens of the issues associated with 
ewaste and educate them on safe disposal practices?
4.	 How Big Is Your Carbon Footprint?
Inevitably, in going about our daily lives—commuting, sheltering our families, ­eating—each of us 
contributes to the greenhouse gas emissions that are causing climate change. Yet there are many 
things each of us, as individuals, can do to reduce our carbon emissions. The choices we make in 
our homes, our travel, the food we eat, and what we buy and throw away all influence our carbon 
footprint and can help ensure a stable climate for future generations.
The Nature Conservancy’s carbon footprint calculator measures your impact on our climate. 
Its carbon footprint calculator estimates how many tons of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse 

	
Plug-In B9  Sustainable MIS Infrastructures   *  487
gases your choices create each year. Visit the Nature Conservancy’s carbon footprint calculator 
to determine your carbon footprint and what you can do to reduce your emissions (http://www
.nature.org/greenliving/carboncalculator/).
5.	 Universities Are Switching to Gmail
Schools around the world are moving to cloud computing applications such as Google Docs & 
Spreadsheets and Google Calendar. Yale had planned to move from its own email system to 
Google Mail, but at the last minute decided to cancel the project. The reason was because school 
administrators and faculty members did not believe the move could support their business require­
ments. Do you agree or disagree that Google Gmail would be unable to replace a university’s 
private email system? What are the advantages and disadvantages of a private email system? 
What are the advantages and disadvantages of using a cloud application such as Google Gmail? 
What choice would you make if you were the primary decision maker for choosing your school’s 
email system?
6.	 Desktop Virtualization
Every day users are becoming more comfortable with accessing and storing information in the 
cloud. This creates increased demand on MIS personnel to help manage, control, and provide 
access to that information—not just on company-issued computers, but on any number of devices, 
including personal ones. More and more employees want to be able to utilize their own computing 
devices—cell phones, netbooks, laptops—instead of company-issued ones. For instance, many 
students graduating from college have been exposed to Macs and may even own one, yet they are 
finding PCs as the standard computer of choice for most companies. Do you think it is a good busi­
ness practice to allow your employees to use their personal devices for work-related business? 
What are the challenges of allowing users to port business applications to their personal devices? 
What are the challenges of allowing users to connect to corporate systems with personal devices?
7.	 iTunes in the Cloud
Apple is considering a cloud version of its iTunes software that could possibly provide a host of 
new services for its users, as they would no longer be required to save iTunes to their computers, 
as it would reside in the cloud. With cloud computing, the software for iTunes would reside in cen­
tralized servers in data centers, rather than on a specific user computer. What would be the ben­
efits to customers if they could host iTunes in the clouds and access it using a variety of devices? 
What would be your fears if you were to use iTunes in the cloud?
8.	 Sustainable Departments
Energy prices and global warming are discussed daily in the news as the environmental impact of 
ewaste is just beginning to be recognized. Sustainability and corporate social responsibility need 
to be taken seriously by all managers, as everyone should take an active role in helping to pre­
serve the environment. List the different departments in a business and the types of environmental 
issues they typically encounter. Which department do you think creates the most ewaste? Which 
department uses the greatest amount of electricity or has the largest carbon footprint? What can 
each department do to help combat its environmental issues? Why do all managers, and for that 
matter all employees, need to be aware of environmental issues and ways they can create sustain­
able MIS infrastructures?
9.	 Making the Smart Grid Smart
ISO, a regional electricity company in New England, has launched an $18 million project in part 
because of an $8 million three-year federal grant. The project is designed to speed up the instal­
lation of 30 smart-grid devices covering every state in New England. The smart-grid devices will 
provide control room operators at ISO with enhanced tools to monitor and measure performance 

488  *  Plug-In B9  Sustainable MIS Infrastructures 
of the region’s electrical grid, allowing the company to improve its ability to detect and address 
problems on the system. System status information coming into ISO will increase from once 
every four seconds to 30 times per second. Would you invest in ISO if you had the chance? Why 
or why not? If you were awarded an $8 million three-year federal grant, what type of sustainable 
infrastructure would you create?
10.	 Box.net in the Cloud
Box.net was started by two college students, Aaron Levie and Dylan Smith, who needed a secure 
place to collaborate on group projects. The two immediately understood the value of cloud com­
puting, and they created Box.net to allow them to share ideas and collaborate on documents 
in a virtual work space located in the cloud. They knew the cloud would allow them to access 
their documents from anywhere and on any device and that there was no chance of their papers 
being stolen or accidently destroyed. Levie and Smith recognized the business opportunity of 
their site and jumped at turning Box.net into a real business. Explain how Box.net could help you 
if you were working on a project with four other students. What would be the challenges of using 
Box.net?


490  *  Plug-In B10  Business Intelligence
P L U G - I N 
Operational, Tactical, and Strategic BI
Claudia Imhoff, president of Intelligent Solutions, believes it is useful to divide the spectrum of 
data-mining analysis and business intelligence (BI) into three categories: operational, tactical, 
and strategic. Two trends are displayed when viewing the spectrum from operational through 
tactical to strategic. First, the analysis becomes increasingly complex and ad hoc. That is, it is 
less repetitive, it is less predictable, and it requires varying amounts and types of data. Second, 
both the risks and rewards of the analysis increase. That is, the often time-consuming, more 
strategic queries produce value less frequently but, when they do, the value can be extraordi­
nary. Figure B10.1 illustrates the differences among operational, tactical, and strategic BI.
These three forms are not performed in isolation from each other. It is important to under­
stand that they must work with each other, feeding results from strategic to tactical to promote 
better operational decision making. Figure B10.2 demonstrates this synergy. In this example, 
strategic BI is used in the planning stages of a marketing campaign. The results of these ana­
lytics form the basis for the beginnings of a new campaign, targeting specific customers or 
demographics, for example. The daily analyses of the campaign are used by the more tactical 
form of BI to change the course of the campaign if its results are not tracking where expected.
LO 1 Compare tactical,  
operational, and strategic BI.
B10
Business Intelligence
LEARNING OUTCOMES
	1.	 Compare tactical, operational, and strategic BI.
	2.	 Describe the four categories of BI business benefits.
FIGURE B10.1
Operational, Tactical, 
Strategic BI.
Operational BI
Tactical BI
Strategic BI
Business focus
Manage daily operations, 
integrate BI with operational 
systems
Conduct short-term 
analysis to achieve 
strategic goals
Achieve long-term 
organizational goals
Primary users
Managers, analysts, 
operational users
Executives, managers
Executives, managers
Time frame
Intraday
Day(s) to weeks to months
Months to years
Data
Real-time metrics
Historical metrics
Historical metrics

	
Plug-In B10  Business Intelligence  *  491
For example, perhaps a different marketing message is needed, or the inventory levels are 
not sufficient to maintain the current sales pace so the scope of marketing might be changed. 
These results are then fed into the operational BI for immediate actions—offering a differ­
ent product, optimizing the sale price of the product, or changing the daily message sent to 
selected customer segments.
For this synergy to work, the three forms of BI must be tightly integrated with each other. 
Minimal time should be lost transporting the results from one technological environment to 
another. Seamlessness in terms of data and process flow is a must. TruServ, the parent com­
pany of True Value Hardware, has used BI software to improve efficiency of its distribution 
operations and reap a $50 million reduction in inventory costs. The marketing department 
uses BI to track sales promotion results such as which promotions were most popular by store 
or by region. Now that TruServ is building promotion histories in its databases, it can ensure 
all stores are fully stocked with adequate inventory. TruServ was able to achieve a positive 
return on investment in about five to six months.
BI’S OPERATIONAL VALUE
A leading risk insurance company allows customers to access account information over the 
Internet. Previously, the company sent paper reports and diskettes to all of its customers. Any 
errors in the reports would take one to two months to correct because customers would first 
have to receive the report, catch the mistake, and then notify the company of the error. Now 
customers spot the errors in real time and notify the insurance company directly through an 
extranet, usually within a couple of days.
Richard Hackathorn of Bolder Technologies developed an interesting graph to demon­
strate the value of operational BI. Figure B10.3 shows the three latencies that impact the 
speed of decision making. These are data, analysis, and decision latencies.
Value
lost
Data
latency
Analysis
latency
Decision
latency
Business
Business
Value
Data ready for
Information
Action
taken
Time
Action time or
Action distance
FIGURE B10.3
The Latency between a 
Business Event and an 
Action Taken.
Helps with planning
STRATEGIC BI
Results in marketing
campaign
Helps with immediate actions
OPERATIONAL BI
Results in sales revenue
Helps with daily analysis
TACTICAL BI
Results in reﬁned campaign
FIGURE B10.2
The Three Forms of BI Must 
Work toward a Common Goal.

492  *  Plug-In B10  Business Intelligence
	■	
Data latency is the time duration to make data ready for analysis (i.e., the time for 
extracting, transforming, and cleansing the data) and loading the data into the database. 
All this can take time depending on the state of the operational data to begin with.
	■	
Analysis latency is the time from which data are made available to the time when 
analysis is complete. Its length depends on the time it takes a business to do analysis. 
Usually, we think of this as the time it takes a human to do the analysis, but this can be 
decreased by the use of automated analytics that have thresholds. When the thresholds 
are exceeded, alerts or alarms can be issued to appropriate personnel, or they can cause 
exception processes to be initiated with no human intervention needed.
	■	
Decision latency is the time it takes a human to comprehend the analytic result and 
determine an appropriate action. This form of latency is very difficult to reduce. The 
ability to remove the decision-making process from the human and automate it will 
greatly reduce the overall decision latency. Many forward-thinking companies are doing 
just that. For example, rather than send a high-value customer a letter informing him 
of a bounced check (which takes days to get to the customer), an automated system 
can simply send an immediate email or voice message informing the customer of the 
problem.
The key is to shorten these latencies so that the time frame for opportunistic influences on 
customers, suppliers, and others is faster, more interactive, and better positioned. As men­
tioned above, the best time to influence customers is not after they have left the store or the 
website. It is while they are still in the store or still wandering around the website.
For example, a customer who is searching a website for travel deals is far more likely to 
be influenced by appropriate messaging actions then and there. Actions taken immediately, 
while customers are still in the site, might include:
	■	
Offering customers an appropriate coupon for the trip they showed interest in while 
searching for cheap airfares.
	■	
Giving customers information about their current purchase such as the suggestion that 
visas are needed.
	■	
Congratulating them on reaching a certain frequent-buyer level and giving them 10 
percent off an item.
A website represents another great opportunity to influence a customer, if the interactions 
are appropriate and timely. For example:
	■	
A banner could announce the next best product to offer right after the customer puts an 
item in her basket.
	■	
The customer could receive an offer for a product he just removed from his shopping 
basket.
	■	
Appropriate instructions for the use of a product could come up on the customer’s screen, 
perhaps warning a parent that the product should not be used by children under three.
Business Benefits of BI
Agile BI is an approach to business intelligence (BI) that incorporates Agile software devel­
opment methodologies to accelerate and improve the outcomes of BI initiatives. When an 
organization embraces Agile BI, it generally embeds Agile software developers in the organi­
zation’s business intelligence team. As with all Agile initiatives, BI projects are broken down 
into a series of smaller projects that are planned for, developed, tested and rolled out on a con­
tinuous basis. This iterative development approach facilitates continuous improvement and 
helps an organization adapt more quickly to changing market conditions and organizational 
goals. Each iteration of an Agile BI project is planned and reviewed by both the software 
development team and the business owners who have requested work. This close collabora­
tion between business and MIS results in better communication, clearly-defined goals and 
end results that more accurately meet expectations.
LO 2 Describe the four categories 
of BI business benefits.

	
Plug-In B10  Business Intelligence  *  493
As with any Agile initiative, Agile BI tends to reduce total cost of change and promote 
a culture that values reflection, accepts change and understands how to respond flexibly to 
shifts in organizational value. Because BI project iterations are released on a regular basis, 
changes to a business intelligence dashboard or data warehouse can be made functional in a 
matter of weeks or months, providing business users with the information they need to make 
data-driven decisions much faster than could be realized with a more traditional waterfall 
project approach.
Rapid innovations in systems and data-mining tools are putting operational, tactical, and 
strategic BI at the fingertips of executives, managers, and even customers. With the success­
ful implementation of BI systems an organization can expect to receive the following:
	■	
Single Point of Access to Information for All Users. With a BI solution, organizations 
can unlock information held within their databases by giving authorized users a single 
point of access to data. Wherever the data reside, whether stored in operational systems, 
data warehouses, data marts, and/or enterprise applications, users can prepare reports 
and drill deep down into the information to understand what drives their business, 
without technical knowledge of the underlying data structures. The most successful BI 
applications allow users to do this with an easy-to-understand, nontechnical, graphical 
user interface.
	■	
BI across Organizational Departments. There are many different uses for BI and 
one of its greatest benefits is that it can be used at every step in the value chain. All 
departments across an organization from sales to operations to customer service can 
benefit from the value of BI.
	 	
Volkswagen AG uses BI to track, understand, and manage data in every department—
from finance, production, and development, to research, sales and marketing, and 
purchasing. Users at all levels of the organization access supplier and customer reports 
relating to online requests and negotiations, vehicle launches, and vehicle capacity 
management and tracking.
	■	
Up-to-the-Minute Information for Everyone. The key to unlocking information is 
to give users the tools to quickly and easily find immediate answers to their questions. 
Some users will be satisfied with standard reports that are updated on a regular 
basis, such as current inventory reports, sales per channel, or customer status reports. 
However, the answers these reports yield can lead to new questions. Some users 
will want dynamic access to information. The information that a user finds in a 
report will trigger more questions, and these questions will not be answered in a 
prepackaged report.
	 	
While users may spend 80 percent of their time accessing standard or personalized 
reports, for 20 percent of their tasks, they need to obtain additional information not 
available in the original report. To address this need and to avoid frustration (and related 
report backlog for the IT team), a BI system should let users autonomously make ad hoc 
requests for information from corporate data sources.
		
	
For merchants of MasterCard International, access to BI offers the opportunity to 
monitor their businesses more closely on a day-to-day basis. Advertising agencies are 
able to use information from an extranet when developing campaigns for merchants. On 
the authorization side, a call center can pull up cardholder authorization transactions to 
cut down on fraud. MasterCard expects that in the long term and as business partners 
increasingly demand access to system data, the system will support more than 20,000 
external users.
CATEGORIES OF BI BENEFITS
Management is no longer prepared to sink large sums of money into IT projects simply 
because they are the latest and greatest technology. Information technology has come of age, 
and it is expected to make a significant contribution to the bottom line.
When looking at how BI affects the bottom line, an organization should analyze not only 
the organization-wide business benefits, but also the various benefits it can expect to receive 

494  *  Plug-In B10  Business Intelligence
from a BI deployment. A practical way of breaking down these numerous benefits is to sepa­
rate them into four main categories:
	1.	 Quantifiable benefits
	2.	 Indirectly quantifiable benefits
	3.	 Unpredictable benefits
	4.	 Intangible benefits
Quantifiable Benefits
Quantifiable benefits include working time saved in producing reports, selling information to 
suppliers, and so on. A few examples include:
	■	
Moët et Chandon, the famous champagne producer, reduced its MIS costs from 
approximately 30 cents per bottle to 15 cents per bottle.
	■	
A leading risk insurance company provides customers with self-service access to their 
information in the insurance company’s database and no longer sends paper reports. This 
one benefit alone saves the organization $400,000 a year in printing and shipping costs. 
The total three-year ROI for this BI deployment was 249 percent.
	■	
Ingram Micro, a wholesale provider of high-tech goods and technology solutions 
providers, is working to create a new BI extranet to deliver advanced information to 
the company’s suppliers and business partners. Says Ingram Micro CIO Guy Abramo, 
“Today it’s incumbent on us to provide our partners with sell-through information so 
they can see what happened once their PCs hit distribution. That’s critical for them to 
do inventory planning and manufacturing planning—helping them to understand what 
products are selling to what segments of the marketplace.”
Indirectly Quantifiable Benefits
Indirectly quantifiable benefits can be evaluated through indirect evidence—improved cus­
tomer service means new business from the same customer, and differentiated service brings 
new customers. A few examples include:
	■	
A customer of Owens & Minor cited extranet access to the data warehouse as the primary 
reason for giving the medical supplies distributor an additional $44 million in business.
	■	
“When salespeople went out to visit TaylorMade’s customers at golf pro shops and 
sporting goods retail chains, they didn’t have up-to-date inventory reports. The sales reps 
would take orders for clubs, accessories, and clothing without confidence that the goods 
were available for delivery as promised,” Tom Collard, information systems director with 
TaylorMade, said. “The technology has helped TaylorMade not only reduce costs by 
eliminating the reporting backlog . . . it has eliminated a lot of wasted effort that resulted 
from booking orders that it couldn’t fill.”
Unpredictable Benefits
Unpredictable benefits are the result of discoveries made by creative users; a few examples 
include:
	■	
Volkswagen’s finance BI system allowed an interesting discovery that later resulted 
in significant new revenue. The customers of a particular model of the Audi product 
line had completely different behaviors than customers of other cars. Based on their 
socioeconomic profiles, they were thought to want long lease terms and fairly large 
up-front payments. Instead, the information revealed that Audi customers actually 
wanted shorter leases and to finance a large part of the purchase through the lease. Based 
on that insight, the company immediately introduced a new program combining shorter 
length of lease, larger up-front payments, and aggressive leasing rates, especially for that 
car model. The interest in the new program was immediate, resulting in over $2 million 
in new revenue.

	
Plug-In B10  Business Intelligence  *  495
	■	
Peter Blundell, former knowledge strategy manager for British Airways, and various 
company executives had a suspicion that the carrier was suffering from a high degree 
of ticket fraud. To address this problem, Blundell and his team rolled out business 
intelligence. “Once we analyzed the data, we found that this ticket fraud was not an issue 
at all. What we had supposed was fraud was in fact either data quality issues or process 
problems,” Blundell said. “What it did was give us so many unexpected opportunities 
in terms of understanding our business.” Blundell estimated that the BI deployment has 
resulted in around $100 million in cost savings and new revenues for the airline.
Intangible Benefits
Intangible benefits include improved communication throughout the enterprise, improved job 
satisfaction of empowered users, and improved knowledge sharing. A few examples include:
	■	
The corporate human resources department at ABN AMRO Bank uses BI to gain insight 
into its workforce by analyzing information on such items as gender, age, tenure, and 
compensation. Thanks to this sharing of intellectual capital, the HR department is in a 
better position to demonstrate its performance and contribution to the business successes 
of the corporation as a whole.
	■	
Ben & Jerry’s uses BI to track, understand, and manage information on the thousands 
of consumer responses it receives on its products and promotional activities. Through 
daily customer feedback analysis, Ben & Jerry’s is able to identify trends and modify its 
marketing campaigns and its products to suit consumer demand.

496  *  Plug-In B10  Business Intelligence
P L U G - I N  S U M M A R Y
M
ost corporations today are inundated with data—from their own internal operational sys­
tems, their vendors, suppliers, and customers and from other external sources such as credit 
bureaus or industry sales data. The problem with understanding where your company is 
going is not in the amount of data coming into it. The problem is that this tidal wave of data is not in a 
form that can easily be digested, comprehended, or even accessed. Ask simple questions like who are 
your best customers or what are your most profitable products and you will most likely get as many 
answers as there are employees, not a comforting position to have in today’s era of economic stress.
This is where business intelligence, or BI, comes in. The goal of BI is to provide the enterprise with 
a repository of “trusted” data—data that can be used in a multitude of applications to answer the 
questions about customers, products, supply and demand chains, production inefficiencies, financial 
trends, fraud, and even employees. It can be used to flag anomalies via alerts, provide visualization 
and statistical models, and understand the cause and effects of decisions upon the enterprise. Just 
about every aspect of an enterprise’s business can benefit from the insights garnered from BI.
You, as a business student, must understand how technology can help you make intelligent deci­
sions. But at the end of the day, how you interact with a customer face-to-face is the real test of your 
ability to foster and promote healthy customer relations.
Analysis latency  492
Data latency  492
Decision latency  492
K E Y  T E R M S
M A K I N G  B U S I N E S S  D E C I S I O N S
1.	 Gaining Business Intelligence from Strategic Initiatives
You are a new employee in the customer service department at Premier One, a large pet food dis­
tributor. The company, founded by several veterinarians, has been in business for three years and 
focuses on providing nutritious pet food at a low cost. The company currently has 90 employees 
and operates in seven states. Sales over the past three years have tripled, and the manual systems 
currently in place are no longer sufficient to run the business. Your first task is to meet with your 
new team and create a presentation for the president and chief executive officer describing tacti­
cal, operational, and strategic business intelligence. The presentation should highlight the main 
benefits Premier One can receive from business intelligence along with any additional added busi­
ness value that can be gained from the systems.
2.	 Second Life BI
The virtual world of Second Life could become the first point of contact between companies and 
customers and could transform the whole customer experience. Since it began hosting the likes 
of Adidas, Dell, Reuters, and Toyota, Second Life has become technology’s equivalent of India or 
China—everyone needs an office and a strategy involving it to keep their shareholders happy. But 
beyond opening a shiny new building in the virtual world, what can such companies do with their 
virtual real estate?

	
Plug-In B10  Business Intelligence  *  497
Like many other big brands, PA Consulting has its own offices in Second Life and has learned 
that simply having an office to answer customer queries is not enough. Real people, albeit behind 
avatars, must be staffing the offices—in the same way having a website is not enough if there is 
not a call center to back it up when a would-be customer wants to speak to a human being. The 
consultants believe call centers could one day ask customers to follow up a phone call with them 
by moving the query into a virtual world.
Unlike many corporate areas in the virtual world, the National Basketball Association incorpo­
rates capabilities designed to keep fans coming back, including real-time 3-D diagrams of games 
as they are being played.
You are the executive director of BI at StormPeak, an advanced AI company that develops 
robots. You are in charge of overseeing the first virtual site being built in Second Life. Create a BI 
strategy for gathering information in a virtual world. Here are a few questions to get you started:
	■	
How will gathering BI for a business be different in a virtual world?
	■	
How can BI help a business become more efficient in a virtual world?
	■	
How will supporting BI in Second Life differ from supporting BI in a traditional company?
	■	
What BI security issues might you encounter in Second Life?
	■	
What BI ethical issues might you encounter in Second Life?
3.	 Searching for BI
Imagine being able to Google customer phone requests for information, sort through the recorded 
files of customer complaint calls, or decipher the exact moment when an interaction between a 
customer and store employee went awry. Being able to query voice records using the same meth­
ods as querying textual ones would open up boundless areas of business opportunity. Web surfers 
can already search audio files and audio/video feeds, but now enterprises can use this technology 
to help employees search voice mails or recorded calls for keywords and phrases and, in the end, 
to decode important customer concerns.
You have recently started your own marketing firm. You have built a BI tool that allows custom­
ers to query all of their unique data stores. Now all you need is to prepare your marketing materi­
als to send to potential customers. Create a marketing pitch that you will deliver to customers 
detailing the business opportunities they could uncover if they purchased your product. Your mar­
keting pitch can be a one-page document, a catchy tune, a video, or a PowerPoint presentation.
4.	 Mining Physician Data
NPR recently released a story discussing how large pharmaceutical companies are mining physi­
cian data. Thousands of pharmaceutical drug company sales representatives visit doctors and try 
to entice them to prescribe their company’s newest drugs. The pharmaceutical companies buy 
prescription information from pharmacies all over the country describing which drugs are pre­
scribed by which doctors. There is no patient information in the data. The sales representatives 
receive this BI from their companies and can tailor their sales pitch based on what that particular 
doctor has been prescribing to patients. Many doctors do not even realize that the sales repre­
sentatives have this information and know exactly what drugs each individual doctor prescribes. 
The drug companies love mining data, but critics contend it is an invasion of privacy and drives up 
the cost of health care. Maine has just become the third state to pass a measure limiting access 
to the data.
You are working for your state government and your boss has asked you to create an argument 
for or against pharmaceutical data mining of physician data in your state. A few questions to get 
you started:
Do you agree that mining physician data should be illegal? Why or why not?
As a patient how do you feel about pharmaceutical companies mining your doctor’s data?

498  *  Plug-In B10  Business Intelligence
As an employee of one of the pharmaceutical companies how do you feel about mining physi­
cian data?
5.	 The Value of Plastic
Accepting credit cards at Wendy’s restaurants was a big decision facing corporate executives. 
There was no doubt that customers would appreciate the convenience of plastic, but could this 
option hurt overall sales? Wendy’s executives decided that the best way to determine the value 
of plastic was to test it at several stores. The BI system was set to monitor how a credit card pur­
chase affects sales, service speed, and cash sales. The intelligence gained from the system told 
executives that plastic sales were typically 35 percent higher than cash sales. Cash sales typically 
include a value meal—great for the customer but less profitable for the store. Plastic customers 
showed a trend of purchasing a la carte items generating a higher bill. Armed with BI, Wendy’s 
introduced credit card readers nationally in June 2003.
You are the vice president of BI for McDonald’s restaurants. The board of directors would like 
you to generate a report discussing the details of how you can use BI to analyze sales trends of 
menu items for all of its restaurants, including international locations. Identify several different 
variables you would monitor to determine menu item sales trends.


500  *  Plug-In B11  Global Information Systems
Global Information Systems
P L U G - I N
Introduction
Whether they are in Berlin or Bombay, Kuala Lumpur or Kansas City, San Francisco or 
Seoul, organizations around the globe are developing new business models to operate com­
petitively in a digital economy. These models are structured yet agile, global yet local; and 
they concentrate on maximizing the risk-adjusted return from both knowledge and technol­
ogy assets.
Globalization and working in an international global economy are integral parts of busi­
ness today. Fortune 500 companies to mom-and-pop shops are now competing globally, and 
international developments affect all forms of business.
Globalization
According to Thomas Friedman, the world is flat! Businesses are strategizing and operat­
ing on a global playing field. Traditional forms of business are simply not good enough in 
a global environment. Recall the way the Internet initially changed business by reviewing 
LO 1 Explain the cultural, political, 
and geoeconomic challenges fac-
ing global businesses.
B11
	1.	 Explain the cultural, political, and geoeconomic challenges facing global 
businesses.
	2.	 Describe the four global MIS business drivers that should be included in all MIS 
strategies.
	3.	 Describe governance and compliance and the associated frameworks an organization 
can implement.
	4.	 Identify why an organization would need to understand global enterprise architec­
tures when expanding operations abroad.
	5.	 Explain the many different global information issues an organization might encounter 
as it conducts business abroad.
	6.	 Identify global systems development issues organizations should understand before 
building a global system.
LEARNING OUTCOMES

	
Plug-In B11  Global Information Systems  *  501
Figure B11.1. To succeed in a global business environment, cultural, political, and geoeco­
nomic (geographic and economic) business challenges must be confronted.
CULTURAL BUSINESS CHALLENGES
Cultural business challenges include differences in languages, cultural interests, religions, cus­
toms, social attitudes, and political philosophies. Global businesses must be sensitive to such 
cultural differences. McDonald’s, a truly global brand, has created several minority-specific 
websites in the United States: McEncanta for Hispanics, 365Black for African ­Americans, 
and i-am-asian for Asians. But these minority groups are not homogenous. ­Consider Asians: 
There are East Asian, Southeast Asian, Asian Indian, and, within each of these, divisions 
of national, regional, and linguistic nature. No company has the budget to create a separate 
website for every subsegment, but to assume that all Asian Americans fit into a single room—
even a virtual room—risks a serious backlash. A company should ask a few key questions 
when creating a global website:
	■	
Will the site require new navigational logic to accommodate cultural preferences?
	■	
Will content be translated? If so, into how many languages?
	■	
Will multilingual efforts be included in the main site or will it be a separate site, perhaps 
with a country-specific domain?
	■	
Which country will the server be located in to support local user needs?
	■	
What legal ramifications might occur by having the website targeted at a particular 
country, such as laws on competitive behaviors, treatment of children, or privacy?
POLITICAL BUSINESS CHALLENGES
Political business challenges include the numerous rules and regulations surrounding data trans­
fers across national boundaries, especially personal information, tax implications, hardware and 
FIGURE B11.1
Examples of How the 
Internet Changed Business 
in 2000.
Industry
How the Internet Changed Business
Travel
Travel site Expedia.com is now the biggest leisure-travel agency, with higher 
profit margins than even American Express. Thirteen percent of traditional travel 
agencies closed in 2002 because of their inability to compete with online travel.
Entertainment
The music industry has kept Napster and others from operating, but $35 billion 
annual online downloads are wrecking the traditional music business. U.S. music 
unit sales are down 20 percent since 2000. The next big entertainment industry to 
feel the effects of ebusiness will be the $67 billion movie business.
Electronics
Using the Internet to link suppliers and customers, Dell dictates industry profits. Its 
operating margins rose from 7.3 percent in 2002 to 8 percent in 2003, even as it 
took prices to levels where rivals couldn’t make money.
Financial services
Nearly every public efinance company remaining makes money, with online 
mortgage service LendingTree growing 70 percent a year. Processing online 
mortgage applications is now 40 percent cheaper for customers.
Retail
Less than 5 percent of retail sales occur online, but eBay was on track in 2003 
to become one of the nation’s top 15 retailers, and Amazon.com will join the top 
40. Walmart’s ebusiness strategy is forcing rivals to make heavy investments in 
technology.
Automobiles
The cost of producing vehicles is down because of SCM and web-based 
purchasing. Also, eBay has become the leading U.S. used-car dealer, and most 
major car sites are profitable.
Education and 
training
Cisco saved $133 million by moving training sessions to the Internet, and the 
University of Phoenix online college classes please investors.

502  *  Plug-In B11  Global Information Systems
software importing and exporting, and trade agreements. The 
protection of personal information is a real concern for all coun­
tries. For example, evidence from a national survey about citizen 
satisfaction with the Canadian government online services speaks 
to the importance of paying attention to privacy concerns. This 
highly publicized survey, known as Citizens First, was admin­
istered by the Institute for Citizen-Centered Service (ICCS) and 
the Institute for Public Administration in Canada (IPCA). Results 
from the survey indicate that although other factors help pro­
mote citizen satisfaction with the Internet, such as ease of finding 
information, sufficient information, site navigation, and visual 
appeal, the key driver that directly impacts whether citizens will 
conduct online transactions is their concerns over information 
security and privacy.
For security, there are high levels of concerns over informa­
tion storage, transmission, and access and identity verification. 
For privacy and the protection of personal information, there 
are even stronger concerns about consolidation of information, 
unauthorized access, and sharing without permission.
GLOBAL GEOECONOMIC BUSINESS CHALLENGES
Geoeconomic refers to the effects of geography on the eco­
nomic realities of international business activities. Even with 
the Internet, telecommunications, and air travel, the sheer physical distances across the 
globe make it difficult to operate multinational business. Flying MIS specialists into 
remote sites is costly, communicating in real-time across the globe’s 24 time zones is 
challenging, and finding quality telecommunication services in every country is difficult. 
Skilled labor supplies, cost of living, and labor costs also differ among the various coun­
tries. When developing global business strategies, all of these geoeconomic challenges 
must be addressed.
Understanding the cultural, political, and geoeconomic business challenges is a good 
start to understanding global business, but the problems facing managers run far deeper. 
The remainder of this plug-in focuses on business management issues that are central to all 
global business. Business managers must understand four primary areas—global MIS busi­
ness strategies, global enterprise architectures, global information issues, and global systems 
­development—when running multinational companies (see Figure B11.2).
Global MIS Business Strategies
Global MIS business strategies must include detailed information on the application of 
information technology across the organization. MIS systems depend on global business 
drivers such as the nature of the industry, competitive factors, and environmental forces. 
For example, airlines and hotels have global customers who travel extensively and expect 
the same service regardless of location. Organizations require global MIS systems that can 
provide fast, convenient service to all international employees who are servicing these cus­
tomers. When a high-end hotel customer checks into a hotel in Asia she expects to receive 
the same high-end service as when she is checking into a hotel in Chicago or London. 
Figure B11.3 displays the global MIS business drivers that should be included in all MIS 
strategies.
Many global MIS systems, such as finance, accounting, and operations management, have 
been in operation for years. Most multinational companies have global financial budgeting 
and cash management. As global operations expand and global competition heats up, pres­
sure increases for companies to install global ebusiness applications for customers, suppliers, 
and employees. Examples include portals and websites geared toward customer service and 
supply chain management. In the past, such systems relied almost exclusively on privately 
LO 2 Describe the four global MIS 
business drivers that should be 
included in all MIS strategies.
Global IT
Business
Strategies
Global IT
Business
Management
Areas
Global
Systems
Development
Global
Enterprise
Architectures
Global
Information
Issues
FIGURE B11.2
Global IT Business 
Management Areas.

	
Plug-In B11  Global Information Systems  *  503
constructed or government-owned telecommunications networks. But the explosive business 
use of the Internet, intranets, and extranets for electronic commerce has made such applica­
tions more feasible for global companies.
GOVERNANCE AND COMPLIANCE
One fast-growing key area for all global business strategies is governance and compliance. 
Governance is a method or system of government for management or control. Compliance 
is the act of conforming, acquiescing, or yielding. A few years ago the ideas of governance 
and compliance were relatively obscure. Today, the concept of formal MIS governance and 
compliance is a must for virtually every company, both domestic and global. Key drivers for 
governance and compliance include financial and technological regulations as well as pres­
sure from shareholders and customers.
Organizations today are subject to many regulations governing data retention, confiden­
tial information, financial accountability, and recovery from disasters. By implementing MIS 
governance, organizations have the internal controls they need to meet the core guidelines of 
many of these regulations, such as the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
MIS governance essentially places structure around how organizations align MIS strategy 
with business strategy, ensuring that companies stay on track to achieve their strategies and 
goals, and implementing good ways to measure MIS’s performance. Governance makes sure 
that all stakeholders’ interests are considered and that processes provide measurable results. 
MIS governance should answer key questions including how the MIS department is function­
ing overall, what key metrics management requires, and what return the business is getting 
from its MIS investment. Figure B11.4 displays the five key areas of focus according to the 
MIS Governance Institute.
Organizations can follow a few different MIS governance frameworks, including:
	■	
CoBIT: Control Objectives for information and related technologies (CoBIT) is a set of 
best practices that helps an organization to maximize the benefits of an information system, 
while at the same time establishing appropriate controls to ensure minimum errors.
	■	
ISACA: Information Systems Audit and Control Association (ISACA) is a set of 
guidelines and supporting tools for IT governance that is accepted worldwide and 
generally used by auditors and companies as a way to integrate technology to implement 
controls and meet specific business objectives.
LO 3 Describe governance and 
compliance and the associated 
frameworks an organization can 
implement.
Global
Customers
Global
Collaboration
Global
Operations
and
Resources
Global
Products
Customers who travel anywhere or companies 
with global operations and global IT 
systems help provide fast, convenient,
homogeneous service.
The knowledge and expertise of
colleagues in a global company can 
only be accessed, shared, and organized 
by global IT systems.
Products are the same worldwide 
and global IT can help manage 
worldwide marketing, sales, and 
quality control. 
Common equipment, facilities,
assembly processes, and people
are shared by a global company
and IT can track shared
resources, geographic ﬂexibility,
operations, and global supply
chains.
FIGURE B11.3
Global MIS Business Drivers.

504  *  Plug-In B11  Global Information Systems
	■	
ITIL: The Information Technology Infrastructure Library (ITIL) is a framework 
provided by the government of the United Kingdom and offers eight sets of management 
procedures: (1) service delivery, (2) service support, (3) service management, (4) 
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) infrastructure management, (5) 
software asset management, (6) business perspective, (7) security management, and 
(8) application management. ITIL is a good fit for organizations concerned about 
operations.
	■	
COSO: The framework developed by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations 
(COSO) is key for evaluating internal controls such as human resources, logistics, 
information technology, risk, legal, marketing and sales, operations, financial functions, 
procurement, and reporting. This is a more business-general framework that is less 
IT-specific.
	■	
CMMI: Created by a group from government, industry, and Carnegie Mellon’s Software 
Engineering Institute, the Capability Maturity Model Integration (CMMI) method 
is a process improvement approach that contains 22 process areas. It is divided into 
VALUE DELIVERY
Ensuring the IT department
delivers the promised beneﬁts
for every project or
investment.
RISK MANAGEMENT
Instituting a formal risk
framework that puts some rigor
around how IT measures,
accepts, and manages risk.
RESOURCE
MANAGEMENT
Managing resources more
eﬀectively and eﬃciently.
This allows organizations
to deploy employees to
various projects on a
demand basis.
PERFORMANCE MEASURES
Putting structure around
measuring business
performance, such as a
balanced scorecard, which
uses both qualitative and
quantitative measures.
Linking business and IT so they
work well together. True alignment
can occur only when the corporate
side of the business communicates
eﬀectively with IT leaders about
costs, reporting, and impacts.
STRATEGIC ALIGNMENT
FIGURE B11.4
MIS Governance Institute 
Five Focus Areas.

	
Plug-In B11  Global Information Systems  *  505
appraisal, evaluation, and structure. CMMI is particularly well suited to organizations 
that need help with application development, life cycle issues, and improving the 
delivery of products throughout the life cycle.
Global Enterprise Architectures
An enterprise architecture includes the plans for how an organization will build, deploy, use, 
and share its data, processes, and MIS assets. An organization must manage its global enter­
prise architecture to support its global business operations. Management of a global enterprise 
architecture not only is technically complex, but also has major political and cultural implica­
tions. For example, hardware choices are difficult in some countries because of high prices, 
high tariffs, import restrictions, long lead times for government approvals, lack of local ser­
vice or replacement parts, and lack of documentation tailored to local conditions. Software 
choices also present issues; for example, European data standards differ from American or 
Asian standards, even when purchased from the same vendor. Some software vendors also 
refuse to offer service and support in countries that disregard software licensing and copyright 
agreements.
The Internet and the World Wide Web are critical to international business. This intercon­
nected matrix of computers, information, and networks that reaches tens of millions of users 
in hundreds of countries is a business environment free of traditional boundaries and limits. 
Linking to online global businesses offers companies unprecedented potential for expanding 
markets, reducing costs, and improving profit margins at a price that is typically a small per­
centage of the corporate communications budget. The Internet provides an interactive channel 
for direct communication and data exchange with customers, suppliers, distributors, manu­
facturers, product developers, financial backers, information providers—in fact, with all par­
ties involved in an international organization.
The Paris-based organization Reporters Without Borders notes that 45 countries 
restrict their citizens’ access to the Internet. “At its most fundamental, the struggle 
between Internet censorship and openness at the national level revolves around three 
main means: controlling the conduits, filtering the flows, and punishing the purveyors. 
In countries such as Burma, Libya, North Korea, Syria, and the countries of Central 
Asia and the Caucasus, Internet access is either banned or subject to tight limitations 
through government-controlled ISPs. These countries face a lose-lose struggle against 
the information age. By denying or limiting Internet access, they stymie a major engine 
of economic growth. But by easing access, they expose their citizenry to ideas potentially 
destabilizing to the status quo. Either way, many people will get access to the electronic 
information they want. In Syria, for example, people go to Lebanon for the weekend to 
retrieve their email,” said Virgini Locussol, Reporters Without Borders desk officer for 
the Middle East and North Africa.
Figure B11.5 displays the top 10 international telecommunication issues as reported by the 
MIS executives at 300 Fortune 500 multinational companies. Political issues dominate the 
listing over technology issues, clearly emphasizing their importance in the management of 
global enterprise architectures.
Estimating the operational expenses associated with international MIS operations is another 
global challenge. Companies with global business operations usually establish or contract 
with systems integrators for additional MIS facilities for their subsidiaries in other countries. 
These MIS facilities must meet local and regional computing needs, and even help balance 
global computing workloads through communications satellite links. However, offshore MIS 
facilities can pose major problems in headquarters’ support, hardware and software acquisi­
tion, maintenance, and security. This is why many global companies prefer to outsource these 
facilities to application service providers or systems integrators such as IBM or Accenture 
to manage overseas operations. Managing global enterprise architectures, including Internet, 
intranet, extranet, and other telecommunication networks, is a key global MIS challenge for 
the 21st century.
LO 4 Identify why an organization 
would need to understand global 
enterprise architectures when 
expanding operations abroad.

506  *  Plug-In B11  Global Information Systems
Global Information Issues
While many consumer gadgets and software applications can benefit a company—for instance, 
by helping employees get their jobs done more efficiently—the security implications are 
legion, said Ken Silva, chief security officer at VeriSign, which specializes in network secu­
rity software. “When we bolt those things onto corporate networks, we open up holes in the 
environment.” Drugmaker Pfizer found this out the hard way. An employee’s spouse loaded 
file-sharing software onto a Pfizer laptop at home, creating a security hole that appears to have 
compromised the names and Social Security numbers of 17,000 current and former Pfizer 
employees, according to a letter Pfizer sent to state attorneys general. Pfizer’s investigation 
showed that 15,700 of those employees actually had their data accessed and copied.
Rather than fight the trend, some companies are experimenting with giving employees 
more choice regarding the technology they use—so long as they accept more responsibil­
ity for it. In 2005, BP began a pilot project that gives employees about $1,000 to spend on 
productivity-enhancing tools in addition to standard-issue equipment, according to a report 
from the Leading Edge Forum. But before they can participate, employees must pass a test of 
their computer literacy skills.
The company takes other steps to give employees free rein while mitigating risk. BP cor­
dons off its network by letting employees link to the Internet via consumer connections, from 
outside the firewall, in the case of its 18,000 laptops. At the same time it beefs up security on 
those machines. This lets employees safely experiment with software such as Amazon’s on-
demand computing and storage services.
Deperimeterization occurs when an organization moves employees outside its firewall, a 
growing movement to change the way corporations address technology security. In a busi­
ness world where many employees are off-site or on the road, or where businesses increas­
ingly must collaborate with partners and customers, some say it’s not practical to rely on a 
hardened perimeter of firewalls. Instead, proponents of deperimeterization say companies 
should focus on beefing up security in end-user devices and organizations’ critical informa­
tion assets.
INFORMATION PRIVACY
For many years, global data access issues have been the subject of political controversy and 
technology barriers in global business environments. These issues have become more preva­
LO 5 Explain the many differ-
ent global information issues an 
organization might encounter as it 
conducts business abroad.
Network Issues
Regulatory Issues
Improving the operational eﬃciency of networks
Dealing with diﬀerent networks
Dealing with transborder data ﬂow restrictions
Managing network infrastructure across countries
Managing international integration of technologies
Reconciling national diﬀerences
Dealing with international tariﬀ structures
Controlling data communication security
Managing international telecommunication regulations
Handling international politics
Technology and Country-Oriented Issues
FIGURE B11.5
Top 10 International 
Telecommunication Issues.

	
Plug-In B11  Global Information Systems  *  507
lent with the growth of the Internet and the expansion 
of ebusinesses. Transborder data flows (TDF) occur 
when business data flows across international bound­
aries over the telecommunications networks of global 
information systems. Many countries view TDF as 
violating their national sovereignty because transbor­
der data flows avoid customs duties and regulations 
for the import or export of goods and services. Others 
view transborder data flows as violating their laws to 
protect the local IT industry from competition or their 
labor regulations from protecting local jobs. In many 
cases, the data flow issues that seem particularly polit­
ically sensitive are those that affect the movement out 
of a country of personal data in ebusiness and human 
resource applications.
Many countries, especially those in the European 
Union (EU), may view transborder data flows as a 
violation of their privacy legislation since, in many 
cases, data about individuals are being moved out 
of the country without stringent privacy safeguards. 
Figure B11.6 highlights the key provisions of a data privacy agreement between the United 
States and the European Union. The agreement exempts U.S. companies engaging in inter­
national ebusiness from EU data privacy sanctions if they join a self-regulatory program 
that provides EU consumers with basic information about, and control over, how their per­
sonal data are used. Thus, the agreement is said to provide a “safe harbor” for such com­
panies from the requirements of the EU’s Data Privacy Directive, which bans the transfer 
of personal information on EU citizens to countries that do not have adequate data privacy 
protection.
Information privacy concerns the legal right or general expectation of individuals, groups, 
or institutions to determine for themselves when and to what extent information about them is 
communicated to others. In essence, information privacy is about how personal information 
is collected and shared. To facilitate information privacy, many countries have established 
legislation to protect the collection and sharing of personal information. However, this legis­
lation varies greatly around the globe.
EUROPE
On one end of the spectrum lie European nations with their strong information privacy laws. 
Most notably, all member countries of the European Union adhere to a directive on the pro­
tection of personal data. A directive is a legislative act of the European Union that requires 
member states to achieve a particular result without dictating the means of how to achieve 
that result.
The directive on the protection of personal data grants European Union members the fol­
lowing rights:
	■	
The right to know the source of personal data processing and the purposes of such 
processing.
	■	
The right to access and/or rectify inaccuracies in one’s own personal data.
	■	
The right to disallow the use of personal data.
These rights are based on key principles pertaining to the collection or storage of personal 
data. The directive defines personal data to cover both facts and opinions about an individual. 
Any organization processing personal data of a person living in the European Union must 
comply with these key principles as outlined in the directive; these state that the data must be:
	■	
Fairly and lawfully processed.
	■	
Processed for limited purposes.
Notice of
purpose and
use of data
collected
Adequate
security, data
integrity, and
enforcement
provisions
Ability to opt
out of third-
party
distribution
of data
Access for
consumers to
their
information
FIGURE B11.6
U.S.–EU Data Privacy 
Requirements.

508  *  Plug-In B11  Global Information Systems
	■	
Adequate, relevant, and not excessive.
	■	
Accurate.
	■	
Not kept longer than necessary.
	■	
Processed in accordance with the data subject’s rights.
	■	
Not transferred to countries without adequate protection.
This last right restricts the flow of personal information outside the European Union by per­
mitting its transfer to only countries that provide an “adequate” level of privacy protection—
adequate in the sense that these other countries have to offer a level of privacy ­protection 
equivalent to that of the European Union. When first implemented, this part of the directive 
caused some concerns since countries outside the EU had much weaker privacy protection 
laws. Organizations in the United States were greatly concerned because they were at a legal 
risk if the personal data of EU citizens were transferred to computer servers in the United 
States—a likely scenario in today’s global world of ebusiness. This led to extensive negotia­
tions. The result was the establishment of a “safe harbor” program in the United States. This 
program provides a framework for U.S. organizations to show evidence of compliance with 
the EU directive. In this way, American companies can self-declare their compliance with the 
key principles of the directive and do business with EU nations without worrying about EU 
citizens suing them.
THE UNITED STATES
On the other end of the spectrum lies the United States. Information privacy is not highly 
legislated or regulated. There is no all-encompassing law that regulates the use of personal 
data or information. In many cases, access to public information is considered culturally 
acceptable, such as obtaining credit reports for employment or housing purposes. The 
reason for this may be historical. In the United States, the First Amendment protects 
free speech, and in many instances the protection of privacy might conflict with this 
amendment.
There are some exceptions. Though very few states recognize an individual’s right to 
privacy, California’s constitution protects an inalienable right to privacy. The ­California 
legislature has enacted several pieces of legislation aimed at protecting citizen informa­
tion privacy. For example, California’s Online Privacy Protection Act, established in 
2003, requires commercial websites or online services that collect personal information of 
­California residents to clearly post a privacy policy on the website or online service and 
to comply with this policy. Other nationwide exceptions include the Children’s Online 
Privacy Protection Act (COPPA) and the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability 
Act (HIPAA).
COPPA is a federal law established in 1998 that applies to the collection of personal 
information from American children who are under 13 years of age. The act outlines 
what a website should include in its privacy policy, how to seek consent from a parent or 
guardian, and the responsibilities a website operator has to protect children’s online safety 
and privacy. This law applies to any website that is perceived to be targeting American 
children. For example, if a toy company established in Canada wants to sell toys in the 
United States, the company’s website should have to comply with the ­collection and use 
of information as outlined in COPPA. To show compliance requires a substantial amount 
of paperwork. As a result, many websites disallow underage users to join online com­
munities and websites. Not complying with COPPA can be costly. In ­September 2006, 
the website Xanga, an online community, was fined $1 million for ­violating COPPA 
legislation.
HIPAA was enacted by the U.S. Congress in 1996. Provisions in HIPPA establish national 
standards for the electronic data interchange of health care–related transactions between 
health care providers, insurance plans, and employers. Embedded in these standards are rules 
for the handling and protection of personal health care information.

	
Plug-In B11  Global Information Systems  *  509
CANADA
Canada’s privacy laws follow the European model very closely. Canada as a nation is quite 
concerned about protecting the personal information of its citizens. Its primary privacy law 
is the Personal Information Protection and Electronic Document Act (PIPEDA). The purpose 
of PIPEDA is to provide Canadians with a right of privacy with respect to how their personal 
information is collected, used, or disclosed by an organization. This is most important today, 
especially in the private sector, when information technology increasingly facilitates the col­
lection and free flow of information.
Its precursor was the Privacy Act established in 1983, which restricted the handling of 
personal information within federal government departments and agencies only. This infor­
mation concerned such things as pension and employment insurance files, medical records, 
tax records, and military records.
PIPEDA took effect in January 2001 and, like the Privacy Act, applied only to federally 
regulated organizations. By January 2004, PIPEDA’s reach extended beyond government 
borders and applied to all other types of organizations, including commercial businesses. By 
doing so, Canada’s PIPEDA law brought Canada into compliance with the European Union’s 
directive on the protection of personal data. Hence, since January 2004, Canada no longer 
needed to implement safe harbor provisions for organizations wishing to collect and store 
personal information on European Union citizens.
Global Systems Development
It is extremely difficult to develop a domestic information system, but the added complexity 
of developing a global information system quadruples the effort. Global information sys­
tems must support a diverse base of customers, users, products, languages, currencies, laws, 
and so on. Developing efficient, effective, and responsive information systems for multiple 
countries, differing cultures, and global ebusinesses is an enormous challenge for any orga­
nization. Managers should expect conflicts over local versus global system requirements 
and difficulties agreeing on common system features. For the project to succeed, the devel­
opment environment should promote involvement and ownership by all local system users.
One of the most important global information systems development issues is the global 
standardization of data definitions. Common data definitions are necessary for sharing infor­
mation among the parts of an international business. Differences in language, culture, and 
technology platforms can make global data standardization quite difficult. For example, what 
Americans call a “sale” may be called “an order booked” in the United Kingdom, an “order 
scheduled” in Germany, and an “order produced” in France. These are all referring to the 
exact same business event, but could cause problems if global employees have different ver­
sions of the data definition. Businesses are moving ahead to standardize data definitions and 
business processes. Many organizations are implementing corporate wikis where all global 
employees can post and maintain common business definitions.
Organizations can use several strategies to solve some of the problems that arise in global 
information systems development. First is transforming and customizing an information sys­
tem used by the home office into a global application. This ensures the system uses the estab­
lished business processes and supports the primary needs of the end users. Second is setting 
up a multinational development team with key people from several subsidiaries to ensure that 
the system design meets the needs of all local sites as well as corporate headquarters. Third, 
an organization could use centers of excellence where an entire system might be assigned 
for development to a particular subsidiary based on its expertise in the business or technical 
dimensions needed for successful development. A final approach that has rapidly become a 
major development option is to outsource the development work to global or offshore devel­
opment countries that have the required skills and experience to build global information 
systems. All of these approaches require development team collaboration and managerial 
oversight to meet the global needs of the business.
LO 6 Identify global systems 
development issues organizations 
should understand before build-
ing a global system.

510  *  Plug-In B11  Global Information Systems
P L U G - I N  S U M M A R Y
W
hether you aspire to be an entrepreneur, manager, or other type of business leader, it is 
increasingly important to think globally in planning your career. As this plug-in points out, 
global markets offer many opportunities yet are laced with significant challenges and 
complexities including cultural, political, and geoeconomic issues, such as:
■	 Global business strategies
■	 Global enterprise architectures
■	 Global information issues
■	 Global systems development
K E Y  T E R M S
Capability Maturity Model 
Integration (CMMI) 
method  504
Committee of Sponsoring 
Organizations 
(COSO)  504
Compliance  503
Control objectives for 
information and related 
technologies (CoBIT)  503
Deperimeterization  506
enterprise architecture  505
Geoeconomic  502
Governance  503
Information privacy  507
Information Systems Audit 
and Control Association 
(ISACA)  503
Information Technology 
Infrastructure Library (ITIL)  504
Transborder data flows (TDF)  507
M A K I N G  B U S I N E S S  D E C I S I O N S
1.	 Transforming an Organization
Your college has asked you to help develop the curriculum for a new course titled “Building a 
21st-Century Organization.” Use the materials in this text, the Internet, and any other resources to 
outline the curriculum that you would suggest the course cover. Be sure to include your reasons 
why the material should be covered and the order in which it should be covered.
2.	 Connecting Components
Components of a solid enterprise architecture include everything from documentation to busi­
ness concepts to software and hardware. Deciding which components to implement and how to 
implement them can be a challenge. New IT components are released daily, and business needs 
continually change. An enterprise architecture that meets your organization’s needs today may 
not meet those needs tomorrow. Building an enterprise architecture that is scalable, flexible, avail­
able, accessible, and reliable is key to your organization’s success.
You are the enterprise architect for a large clothing company called Xedous. You are respon­
sible for developing the initial enterprise architecture. Create a list of questions you will need 
answered to develop your architecture. Below is an example of a few questions you might ask.
	■	
What are the company’s growth expectations?
	■	
Will systems be able to handle additional users?
	■	
How long will information be stored in the systems?
	■	
How much customer history must be stored?
	■	
What are the organization’s business hours?
	■	
What are the organization’s backup requirements?

	
Plug-In B11  Global Information Systems  *  511
3.	 IT Gets Its Say
CIOs need to speak the language of business to sell IT’s strategic benefits. It is no secret that the 
most successful companies today are the ones that deliver the right products and services faster, 
more efficiently, more securely, and more cost-effectively than their competitors, and the key to 
that is a practical implementation of enterprise technology to improve business performance. IT 
executives and managers therefore must speak the language of business to articulate how tech­
nology can solve business problems.
CIOs of tomorrow will focus on a number of changing dynamics: enabling the business to grow 
versus just optimizing performance; saying yes instead of no; allowing open innovation rather 
than closed, traditional R&D practices; creating a culture of strategic growth and innovation; and 
empowering the customer to make decisions that drive a heightened value proposition for both 
the customer and supplier. You have been charged with creating a slogan for your company that 
explains the correlation of business and IT. A few examples include:
	■	
IT should no longer be viewed as just an enabler of somebody else’s business strategy.
	■	
The distinction between technology and business is antediluvian—it’s gone.
Create a slogan that you can use to explain to your employees the importance of business and IT.
4.	 Mom-and-Pop Multinationals
Global outsourcing is no longer just for big corporations as small businesses jump into the multi­
sourcing game. Increasingly, Main Street businesses from car dealers to advertising agencies are 
finding it easier to farm out software development, accounting, support services, and design work 
to distant lands. For example, Randy and Nicola Wilburn run a micro-multinational organization 
right from their home. The Wilburns run real estate, consulting, design, and baby food companies 
from their home by taking outsourcing to the extreme. Professionals from around the globe are at 
their service. For $300, an Indian artist designed the cute logo of an infant peering over the words 
“Baby Fresh Organic Baby Foods” and Nicola’s letterhead. A London freelancer wrote promotional 
materials. Randy has hired “virtual assistants” in Jerusalem to transcribe voice mail, update his 
website, and design PowerPoint graphics. Retired brokers in Virginia and Michigan handle real 
estate paperwork.
Elance, an online-services marketplace, boasts 48,500 small businesses as clients—up 
70 ­percent in the past year—posting 18,000 new projects a month. Other online-services mar­
ketplaces such as Guru.com, Brickwork India, DoMyStuff.com, and RentACoder also report fast 
growth. You have decided to jump in the micro-multinational game and start your own online-
services marketplace. Research the following as you compile your start-up business plan.
	1.	 To compete in this market what types of services would you offer?
	2.	 What types of cultural, political, and geoeconomic challenges would your business experience?
	3.	 How would governance and compliance fit into your business strategy?
	4.	 What types of global information issues might your company experience?
	5.	 What types of customers would you want to attract and what vehicle would you use to find your 
customers?
	6.	 What types of global systems development issues would your company experience?
	7.	 What types of information security and ethical dilemmas should you anticipate?

512  *  Plug-In B12  Global Trends
P L U G - I N
Introduction
The core units brought out how important it is for organizations to anticipate and prepare for 
the future by studying emerging trends and new technologies. Having a broad view of emerg­
ing trends and new technologies as they relate to business can provide an organization with 
a valuable strategic advantage. Those organizations that can most effectively grasp the deep 
currents of technological evolution can use their knowledge to protect themselves against 
sudden and fatal technological obsolescence. This plug-in identifies several emerging trends 
that can help an organization prepare for future opportunities and challenges.
Reasons to Watch Trends
Organizations anticipate, forecast, and assess future events using a variety of rational, scien­
tific methods including:
	■	
Trend analysis: A trend is examined to identify its nature, causes, speed of development, 
and potential impacts.
	■	
Trend monitoring: Trends viewed as particularly important in a specific community, 
industry, or sector are carefully monitored, watched, and reported to key decision 
makers.
	■	
Trend projection: When numerical data are available, a trend can be plotted to display 
changes through time and into the future.
	■	
Computer simulation: Complex systems, such as the U.S. economy, can be modeled by 
means of mathematical equations and different scenarios can be run against the model to 
conduct “what if” analysis.
LO 1 Explain why businesses use 
trends to assess the future.
B12
Global Trends
LEARNING OUTCOMES
1.	 Explain why businesses use trends to assess the future.
2.	 Identify the global trends that will have the greatest impact on future business.
3.	 Identify the technologies that will have the greatest impact on future business.

	
Plug-In B12  Global Trends  *  513
	■	
Historical analysis: Historical events are studied to anticipate the outcome of current 
developments.
Foresight is one of the secret ingredients of business success. Foresight, however, is 
increasingly in short supply because almost everything in our world is changing at a faster 
pace than ever before. Many organizations have little idea what type of future they should 
prepare for in this world of hyperchange. Figure B12.1 displays the top reasons organizations 
should look to the future and study trends.
Trends Shaping Our Future
According to the World Future Society, the following trends have the potential to change our 
world, our future, and our lives.
	■	
The world’s population will double in the next 40 years.
	■	
People in developed countries are living longer.
	■	
The growth in information industries is creating a knowledge-dependent 
global society.
	■	
The global economy is becoming more integrated.
	■	
The economy and society are dominated by technology.
	■	
The pace of technological innovation is increasing.
	■	
Time is becoming one of the world’s most precious commodities.
THE WORLD’S POPULATION WILL DOUBLE IN THE NEXT 40 YEARS
The countries that are expected to have the largest increases in population between 2000 and 
2050 are:
	■	
Palestinian Territory—217 percent increase.
	■	
Niger—205 percent increase.
	■	
Yemen—168 percent increase.
LO 2 Identify the global trends 
that will have the greatest  
impact on future business.
FIGURE B12.1
Top Reasons to Study 
Trends.
Top Reasons to Study Trends
1.  Generate ideas and identify 
opportunities
Find new ideas and innovations by studying trends and analyzing 
publications.
2.  Identify early warning signals
Scan the environment for potential threats and risks.
3.  Gain confidence
A solid foundation of awareness about trends can provide an 
organization with the confidence to take risks.
4.  Beat the competition
Seeing what is coming before others can give an organization the 
lead time it requires to establish a foothold in the new market.
5.  Understand a trend
Analyzing the details within a trend can help separate truly significant 
developments from rapidly appearing and disappearing fads.
6.  Balance strategic goals
Thinking about the future is an antidote to a “profit now, worry later” 
mentality that can lead to trouble in the long term.
7.  Understand the future of 
specific industries
Organizations must understand everything inside and outside their 
industry.
8.  Prepare for the future
Any organization that wants to compete in this hyperchanging world 
needs to make every effort to forecast the future.

514  *  Plug-In B12  Global Trends
	■	
Angola—162 percent increase.
	■	
Democratic Republic of the Congo—161 percent increase.
	■	
Uganda—133 percent increase.
In contrast, developed and industrialized countries are expected to see fertility rates 
decrease below population replacement levels, leading to significant declines in population 
(see Figure B12.2).
Potential Business Impact
	■	
Global agriculture will be required to supply as much food as has been produced during 
all of human history to meet human nutritional needs over the next 40 years.
	■	
Developed nations will find that retirees will have to remain on the job to remain 
competitive and continue economic growth.
	■	
Developed nations will begin to increase immigration limits.
PEOPLE IN DEVELOPED COUNTRIES ARE LIVING LONGER
New pharmaceuticals and medical technologies are making it possible to prevent and cure 
diseases that would have been fatal to past generations. This is one reason that each gen­
eration lives longer and remains healthier than the previous generation. On average, each 
generation in the United States lives three years longer than the previous. An 80-year-old 
in 1950 could expect to live 6.5 years longer today. Many developed countries are now 
experiencing life expectancy over 75 years for males and over 80 years for females (see 
Figure B12.3).
FIGURE B12.2
Expected Population 
Decreases in Developed and 
Industrialized Nations.
50%
40
30
20
10
0
1950
2000
2050
Year
Developed
Nations
Percentage of
Total World
Population
FIGURE B12.3
Rising Life Expectancy in 
Developed Countries.
Rising Life Expectancy in Developed Countries
Country
Life Expectancy 
(Born 1950–1955)
Life Expectancy 
(Born 1995–2020)
United States
68.9
76.5
United Kingdom
69.2
77.2
Germany
67.5
77.3
France
66.5
78.1
Italy
66.0
78.2
Canada
69.1
78.5
Japan
63.9
80.5
Potential Business Impact
	■	
Global demand for products and services for the elderly 
will grow quickly in the coming decades.
	■	
The cost of health care is destined to skyrocket.
	■	
Pharmaceutical companies will be pushed for advances in 
geriatric medicine.
THE GROWTH IN INFORMATION INDUSTRIES IS CREATING 
A KNOWLEDGE-DEPENDENT GLOBAL SOCIETY
Estimates indicate that 90 percent of American management 
personnel are knowledge workers. Estimates for knowledge 
workers in Europe and Japan are not far behind. Soon, large 
organizations will be composed of specialists who rely on 
information from co-workers, customers, and suppliers to 

	
Plug-In B12  Global Trends  *  515
guide their actions. Employees will gain new power as they are provided with the authority to 
make decisions based on the information they acquire.
Potential Business Impact
	■	
Top managers must be computer-literate to retain their jobs and achieve success.
	■	
Knowledge workers are generally higher paid and their proliferation is increasing overall 
prosperity.
	■	
Entry-level and unskilled positions are requiring a growing level of education.
	■	
Information now flows from front-office workers to higher management for analysis. 
Thus, in the future, fewer mid-level managers will be required, flattening the corporate 
pyramid.
	■	
Downsizing, restructuring, reorganization, outsourcing, and layoffs will continue as typical 
large organizations struggle to reinvent and restructure themselves for greater flexibility.
THE GLOBAL ECONOMY IS BECOMING MORE INTEGRATED
International outsourcing is on the rise as organizations refuse to pay high salaries for activi­
ties that do not contribute directly to the bottom line. The European Union has relaxed its 
borders and capital controls making it easier for companies to outsource support functions 
throughout the continent.
The Internet is one of the primary tools enabling our global economy. One of the pri­
mary reasons for the increase in Internet use is the increase in connectivity technology. The 
increase in Internet use is increasing revenues for ebusinesses.
Potential Business Impact
	■	
Demand for personnel in distant countries will increase the need for foreign-language 
training, employee incentives suited to other cultures, and many other aspects of 
performing business globally.
	■	
The growth of ebusiness and the use of the Internet to shop globally for raw materials 
and supplies will reduce the cost of doing business.
	■	
The Internet will continue to enable small companies to compete with worldwide giants 
with relatively little investment.
	■	
Internet-based operations require sophisticated knowledge workers and thus people with 
the right technical skills will be heavily recruited over the next 15 years.
THE ECONOMY AND SOCIETY ARE DOMINATED BY TECHNOLOGY
Computers are becoming a part of our environment. Mundane commercial and service jobs, 
environmentally dangerous jobs, standard assembly jobs, and even the repair of inaccessible 
equipment such as space stations will be increasingly performed by robots. Artificial intelli­
gence and expert systems will help most companies and government agencies assimilate data 
and solve problems beyond the range of today’s computers including energy prospecting, 
automotive diagnostics, insurance underwriting, and law enforcement.
Superconductors operating at economically viable temperatures are now in commercial 
use. Products eventually will include supercomputers the size of a three-pound coffee can, 
electronic motors 75 percent smaller and lighter than those in use today, and power plants.
Potential Business Impact
	■	
New technologies provide dozens of new opportunities to create businesses and jobs.
	■	
Automation will continue to decrease the cost of products and services, making it 
possible to reduce prices while improving profits.
	■	
The Internet is expected to push prices of most products to the commodity level.
	■	
The demand for scientists, engineers, and technicians will continue to grow.

516  *  Plug-In B12  Global Trends
PACE OF TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION IS INCREASING
Technology is advancing at a phenomenal pace. Medical knowledge is doubling every eight 
years. Half of what students learn in their freshman year of college about innovative tech­
nology is obsolete, revised, or taken for granted by their senior year. In fact, all of today’s 
technical knowledge will represent only 1 percent of the knowledge that will be available 
in 2050.
Potential Business Impact
	■	
The time to get products and services to market is being shortened by technology. 
Products must capture their market quickly before the competition can copy them. 
During the 1940s the average time to get a product to market was 40 weeks. Today, a 
product’s entire life cycle seldom lasts 40 weeks.
	■	
Industries will face tighter competition based on new technologies. Those who adopt state-
of-the-art technology first will prosper, while those who ignore it eventually will fail.
TIME IS BECOMING ONE OF THE WORLD’S MOST PRECIOUS COMMODITIES
In the United States, workers today spend around 10 percent more time on the job than they 
did a decade ago. European executives and nonunionized workers face the same trend. This 
high-pressure environment is increasing the need for any product or service that saves time 
or simplifies life.
Potential Business Impact
	■	
Companies must take an active role in helping their employees balance their time at work 
with their family lives and need for leisure.
	■	
Stress-related problems affecting employee morale and wellness will continue to grow.
	■	
As time for shopping continues to evaporate, Internet and mail-order marketers will have 
a growing advantage over traditional stores.
Technologies Shaping Our Future
We sit at the center of an expanding set of devices, other people, information and services that 
are fluidly and dynamically interconnected. This “digital mesh” surrounds the individual and 
new, continuous and ambient experiences will emerge to exploit it. In his session revealing 
Gartner’s Top Strategic Technology Trends at Gartner/Symposium ITxpo 2015 in Orlando, 
David Cearley, vice president and Gartner Fellow, shared three categories for this year’s 
trends: the digital mesh, smart machines, and the new IT reality.
THE DIGITAL MESH
Trend No. 1: The Device Mesh
All devices such as cars, smartphones, appliances, and more are connecting people all over 
the globe enabling them to access data, applications, social communities, governments, and 
businesses. As the mesh of these smart devices continues to evolve, Gartner expects connec­
tion models to expand and greater cooperative interaction between devices to emerge. Recall 
that virtual reality is a computer-simulated environment that can be a simulation of the real 
world or an imaginary world. Augmented reality is the viewing of the physical world with 
computer-generated layers of information added to it. Expect to see amazing developments in 
wearables and augmented reality, especially, virtual reality.
Trend No. 2: Ambient User Experience
The ambient digital experience is a blend of the physical, virtual, and electronic environ­
ments creating a real-time ambient environment that changes as the user moves from one 
place to another. All of our digital interactions can become synchronized into a continuous 
LO 3 Identify the technologies 
that will have the greatest impact 
on future business.

	
Plug-In B12  Global Trends  *  517
and ­ambient digital experience. Users will be able to interact with applications for extended 
­periods of time. Organizations will need to consider their customers’ behavior journeys 
to shift the focus on design from applications to the entire mesh of products and services 
involved in the user experience.
Trend No. 3: 3D-Printing Materials
3D printing builds—layer by layer in an additive process—a three-dimensional solid object 
from a digital model. To date, 3D printers are generally capable of only printing one type of 
material at a time. Expect the next generation of 3D printers to be able to mix multiple materi­
als together in one build. Other advances for 3D printing include a wide range of materials 
such as advanced nickel alloys, carbon fiber, glass, conductive ink, electronics, and even 
pharmaceuticals and biological materials. Biological 3D printing includes the printing of skin 
and organs and is progressing from theory to reality, however, politicians and the public do 
not have a full understanding of the implications.
SMART MACHINES
Trend No. 4: Information of Everything
The Internet of things (IoT) is a world where interconnected Internet-enabled devices or 
“things” have the ability to collect and share data without human intervention. The Information 
of Everything (IoE) is a concept that extends the Internet of Things (IoT) emphasis on 
machine-to-machine communications to describe a more complex system that also encom­
passes people and processes. IoE encompasses the huge surge of information produced by 
the digital mesh including textual, audio, video, sensory and contextual information along 
with strategies and technologies to link data from all these disparate data sources. The digital 
mesh surrounds us virtually producing unmeasurable amounts of information. Organizations 
must learn how to identify what information provides strategic value, how to access data from 
different sources, and explore how algorithms leverage the information of everything to fuel 
new business designs.
Trend No. 5: Advanced Machine Learning
Machine learning is a type of artificial intelligence that enables computers to both under­
stand concepts in the environment, and also to learn. Machine learning focuses on the 
development of computer programs that can teach themselves to grow and change when 
exposed to new data and is responsible for making smart devices appear intelligent. For 
example, by analyzing vast databases of medical case histories, “learning” machines 
can reveal previously unknown insights in treatment effectiveness. This area is evolving 
quickly, and organizations must assess how they can apply these technologies to gain com­
petitive advantage.
Trend No. 6: Autonomous Agents and Things
In the future, people will move through a constant stream of information summoned at the 
touch of a finger. They will interact with life-size images, data, and text in homes and offices. 
The days of hunching over a computer will be gone. A virtual assistant (VA) will be a small 
program stored on a PC or portable device that monitors emails, faxes, messages, and phone 
calls. Virtual assistants will help individuals solve problems in the same way a real assistant 
would. In time, the VA will take over routine tasks such as writing a letter, retrieving a file, 
and making a phone call.
An autonomous agent is software that carries out some set of operations on behalf of a 
user or another program with some degree of independence or autonomy, and employ some 
knowledge or representation of the user’s goals or desires. Autonomous agent robotic sales­
people will take on human appearances and have the ability to perform all tasks associated 
with a sales job. Robots, vehicles, virtual assistants, and smart advisers acting autonomously 
feeds into the ambient user experience in which an autonomous agent becomes the main user 
interface. Instead of interacting with a tablet or a smartphone, users will talk directly to an 
autonomous application, which is really an intelligent agent.

518  *  Plug-In B12  Global Trends
THE NEW IT REALITY
Trend No. 7: Adaptive Security Architecture
Real-time adaptive security is the network security model necessary to accommodate 
the emergence of multiple perimeters and moving parts on the network, and increasingly 
advanced threats targeting enterprises. The emerging “hacker industry” along with cyberwar 
and cyberterrorism have significantly increased the threat surface for an organization. Tech­
nology leaders must increase their focus on detecting and responding to threats, as well as 
more traditional blocking and other measures to prevent attacks.
Trend No. 8: Advanced System Architecture
Autonomic computing is a self-managing computing model named after, and patterned on, 
the human body’s autonomic nervous system. Autonomic computing is one of the building 
blocks of widespread computing, an anticipated future computing model in which small—
even invisible—computers will be all around us, communicating through increasingly inter­
connected networks. The digital mesh and smart machines require autonomic computing 
architectures that function more like human brains that are particularly suited to be applied 
to deep learning and other pattern-matching algorithms. Autonomic architectures will allow 
distribution with less power into the tiniest IoT endpoints, such as homes, cars, wristwatches 
and even human beings.1

	
Plug-In B12  Global Trends  *  519
O
rganizations that can think ahead will be prepared to take advantage of all the new oppor­
tunities that rapid social and technological progress is creating. Trends shaping our future 
include:
■	
The world’s population will double in the next 40 years.
■	
People in developed countries are living longer.
■	
The growth in information industries is creating a knowledge-dependent global society.
■	
The global economy is becoming more integrated.
■	
The economy and society are dominated by technology.
■	
The pace of technological innovation is increasing.
■	
Time is becoming one of the world’s most precious commodities.
P L U G - I N  S U M M A R Y
3D printing  517
Ambient digital experience  516
Augmented reality  516
Autonomic computing  518
Autonomous agent  517
Biological 3D printing  517
Computer simulation  512
K E Y  T E R M S
Historical analysis  513
Information of Everything 
(IoE)  517
Internet of Things (IoT)  517
Machine learning  517
Real-time adaptive 
security  518
Trend analysis  512
Trend monitoring  512
Trend projection  512
Virtual assistant  517
Virtual reality  516
1.	 Identifying and Following Trends
Hot.com is a new business that specializes in helping companies identify and follow significant 
trends in their industries. You have recently been hired as a new business analyst and your first 
task is to highlight current trends in the ebusiness industry. Using the Internet and any other 
resources you have available, highlight five significant trends not discussed in this text. Prepare 
a PowerPoint presentation that lists the trends and discusses the potential business impacts for 
each trend.
2.	 NAO Robots
NAO (pronounced now) robots are about as cute as anything ever created and boy can they dance. 
A Nao robot is an autonomous, programmable, humanoid robot developed by Aldebaran Robotics, 
a French robotics company headquartered in Paris. Nao robots have been used for research and 
education purposes in numerous academic institutions worldwide. As of 2015, over 5,000 Nao 
units are in use in more than 50 countries. Visit the Web and search NAO robot videos and create 
a new product or service for a Nao robot.
3.	 Educational Robots
Robots have always grabbed the attention and imagination of kids (of all ages)! RobotLAB uses 
this attention to build core 21st century skills like programming, and computational thinking. Using 
advanced robots, RobotLAB creates abstract math and computer science real, by focusing lessons 
M A K I N G  B U S I N E S S  D E C I S I O N S

520  *  Plug-In B12  Global Trends
around complex problems which become intuitive through interaction and manipulation of the 
robots. Visit http://www.robotlab.com/ and review the many robots they are creating to help edu­
cation. Create a new robot that could help you with your college experience.
4.	 Less Is More
Your organization is teetering on the edge of systems chaos. Your systems administrator is 
stressed beyond tolerance by too many systems, too many applications, too few resources, and 
too little time. The scope, frequency, and diversity of demand are causing greater risk than anyone 
dares to admit. Automating (and reducing complexity of) the operating environment is critical for 
your business to survive. Research autonomic computing and write a report discussing how this 
technology can help an organization gain control over its systems.
5.	 Real-Time Adaptive Security
BusinessED specializes in creating new and innovative software for education in the business mar­
ket. Danny Henningson, founder and president of BusinessED, is interested in developing educa­
tional products elementary and high schools around the globe. Danny has hired you as the vice 
president of research and development and is excited to hear your ideas for new products. Your 
first assignment is to study the many threats and security issues facing public schools today and 
explain how real-time adaptive security measure could help BusinessED succeed.
6.	 Alternative Energy
With energy costs on the rise, many U.S. homes are turning to homegrown energy solutions. Your 
friend Cole Lazarus has decided to start a business offering such solutions. Cole would like your 
help developing his business. Begin by researching the Internet and find different ways that you 
could design a home with its own energy sources. Create a document listing the different sources 
along with advantages and disadvantages of each source.


AYK-2  *  Apply Your Knowledge
Project 
Number
Project Name
Project Type
Plug-In
Focus Area
Project Level
Skill Set
Page 
Number
  1
Financial  
Destiny
Excel
T2
Personal 
Budget
Introductory
Formulas
AYK.4
  2
Cash Flow
Excel
T2
Cash Flow
Introductory
Formulas
AYK.4
  3
Technology 
Budget
Excel
T1, T2
Hardware and 
Software
Introductory
Formulas
AYK.4
  4
Tracking 
Donations
Excel
T2
Employee 
Relationships
Introductory
Formulas
AYK.4
  5
Convert  
Currency
Excel
T2
Global 
Commerce
Introductory
Formulas
AYK.5
  6
Cost  
Comparison
Excel
T2
Total Cost of 
Ownership
Introductory
Formulas
AYK.5
  7
Time 
Management
Excel or Project
T12
Project 
Management
Introductory
Gantt Charts
AYK.6
  8
Maximize  
Profit
Excel
T2, T4
Strategic 
Analysis
Intermediate
Formulas or 
Solver
AYK.6
  9
Security  
Analysis
Excel
T3
Filtering Data
Intermediate
Conditional 
Formatting, 
Autofilter, 
Subtotal
AYK.7
10
Gathering  
Data
Excel
T3
Data Analysis
Intermediate
Conditional 
Formatting
AYK.8
11
Scanner  
System
Excel
T2
Strategic 
Analysis
Intermediate
Formulas
AYK.8
12
Competitive 
Pricing
Excel
T2
Profit 
Maximization
Intermediate
Formulas
AYK.9
13
Adequate 
Acquisitions
Excel
T2
Break-Even 
Analysis
Intermediate
Formulas
AYK.9
14
Customer 
Relations
Excel
T3
CRM
Intermediate
PivotTable
AYK.9
15
Assessing 
the Value of 
Information
Excel
T3
Data Analysis
Intermediate
PivotTable
AYK.10
16
Growth,  
Trends, and 
Forecasts
Excel
T2, T3
Data 
Forecasting
Advanced
Average, 
Trend, Growth
AYK.11
17
Shipping Costs
Excel
T4
SCM
Advanced
Solver
AYK.12
18
Formatting 
Grades
Excel
T3
Data Analysis
Advanced
If, LookUp
AYK.12
(Continued)
A P P LY  YO U R  K N O W L E D G E
Apply Your Knowledge Project Overview

	
  Apply Your Knowledge  *  AYK-3
NOTE: Many of the Excel projects support multiple data files. Therefore the naming convention that you see in 
the text may not be the same as what you see in a data folder. As an example, in the text we reference 
data files as AYK1_Data.xlsx; however, you may see a file named AYK1_Data_Version_1.xlsx, or AYK1_Data_
Version_2.xlsx.
Project 
Number
Project Name
Project Type
Plug-In
Focus Area
Project Level
Skill Set
Page
Number
19
Moving Dilemma
Excel
T2, T3
SCM
Advanced
Absolute 
vs. Relative 
Values
AYK.13
20
Operational 
Efficiencies
Excel
T3
SCM
Advanced
PivotTable
AYK.14
21
Too Much 
Information
Excel
T3
CRM
Advanced
PivotTable
AYK.14
22
Turnover Rates
Excel
T3
Data Mining
Advanced
PivotTable
AYK.15
23
Vital 
Information
Excel
T3
Data Mining
Advanced
PivotTable
AYK.15
24
Breaking Even
Excel
T4
Business 
Analysis
Advanced
Goal Seek
AYK.16
25
Profit Scenario
Excel
T4
Sales 
Analysis
Advanced
Scenario 
Manager
AYK.16
26
Electronic 
Résumés
HTML
T9, T10, 
T11
Electronic 
Personal 
Marketing
Introductory
Structural Tags
AYK.17
27
Gathering 
Feedback
Dreamweaver
T9, T10, 
T11
Data 
Collection
Intermediate
Organization of 
Information
AYK.17
28
Daily Invoice
Access
T5, T6, 
T7, T8
Business 
Analysis
Introductory
Entities, 
Relationships, 
and Databases
AYK.17
29
Billing Data
Access
T5, T6, 
T7, T8
Business 
Intelligence
Introductory
Entities, 
Relationships, 
and Databases
AYK.19
30
Inventory Data
Access
T5, T6, 
T7, T8
SCM
Intermediate
Entities, 
Relationships, 
and Databases
AYK.20
31
Call Center
Access
T5, T6, 
T7, T8
CRM
Intermediate
Entities, 
Relationships, 
and Databases
AYK.21
32
Sales Pipeline
Access
T5, T6, 
T7, T8
Business 
Intelligence
Advanced
Entities, 
Relationships, 
and 
Databases
AYK.23
33
Online 
Classified Ads
Access
T5, T6, 
T7, T8
Ecommerce
Advanced
Entities, 
Relationships, 
and 
Databases
AYK.23

AYK-4  *  Apply Your Knowledge
Project 1:
Financial Destiny
You have been introduced to Microsoft Excel and are ready to begin using it to help track your 
monthly expenses and take charge of your financial destiny. The first step is to create a personal 
budget so you can see where you are spending money and if you need to decrease your monthly 
expenses or increase your monthly income.
Project Focus
Create a template for a monthly budget of your income and expenditures, with some money set 
aside for savings (or you can use the data file, AYK1_Data.xlsx, we created). Create variations of 
this budget to show how much you could save if you cut back on certain expenses, found a room­
mate, or got a part-time job. Compare the costs of a meal plan to costs of groceries. Consider how 
much interest would be earned if you saved $100 a month, or how much debt paid on student 
loans or credit card bills. To expand your data set, make a fantasy budget for 10 years from now, 
when you might own a home, have student loan payments, and have a good salary.
Data File: AYK1_Data.xlsx
Project 2:
Cash Flow
Gears is a five-year-old company that specializes in bike components. The company is having 
trouble paying for its monthly supplies and would like to perform a cash flow analysis so it can 
understand its financial position. Cash flow represents the money an investment produces after 
subtracting cash expenses from income. The statement of cash flows summarizes sources and 
uses of cash, indicates whether enough cash is available to carry on routine operations, and offers 
an analysis of all business transactions, reporting where the firm obtained its cash and how it 
chose to allocate the cash. The cash flow statement shows where money comes from, how the 
company is going to spend it, and when the company will require additional cash. Gears would like 
to project a cash flow statement for the next month.
Project Focus
Using the data file AYK2_Data.xlsx complete the cash flow statement for Gears using Excel. Be sure 
to create formulas so the company can simply input numbers in the future to determine cash flow.
Data File: AYK2_Data.xlsx
Project 3:
Technology Budget
Tally is a start-up website development company located in Seattle, Washington. The company 
currently has seven employees and is looking to hire six new employees in the next month.
Project Focus
You are in charge of purchasing for Tally. Your first task is to purchase computers for the new 
employees. Your budget is $250,000 to buy the best computer systems with a scanner, three color 
printers, and business software. Use the web to research various products and calculate the costs 
of different systems using Excel. Use a variety of Excel formulas as you analyze costs and compare 
prices. Use the data file AYK3_Data.xlsx as a template.
Data File: AYK3_Data.xlsx
Project 4:
Tracking Donations
Lazarus Consulting is a large computer consulting company in New York. Pete Lazarus, the CEO 
and founder, is well known for his philanthropic efforts. Pete knows that most of his employees 
contribute to nonprofit organizations and wants to reward them for their efforts while encouraging 

	
  Apply Your Knowledge  *  AYK-5
others to contribute to charities. Pete began a program that matches 50 percent of each employee 
donation. The only stipulations are that the charity must be a nonprofit organization and the com­
pany will match only up to $2,000 per year per employee.
Project Focus
Open the data file AYK4_Data.xlsx and determine the following:
■	 What was the total donation amount per organization?
■	 What were the average donations per organization?
Data File: AYK4_Data.xlsx
Project 5:
Convert Currency
You have decided to spend the summer traveling abroad with your friends. Your trip is going to 
take you to France, England, Italy, Switzerland, Germany, Norway, and Ireland. You want to use 
Excel to convert currencies as you travel around the world.
Project Focus
Locate one of the exchange rate calculators on the Internet (www.xe.com or www.x-rates.com). 
Find the exchange rates for each of the countries listed above and create formulas in Excel to 
convert $100, $500, and $1,000. Use the data file AYK5_Data.xlsx as a template.
Data File: AYK5_Data.xls
Project 6:
Cost Comparison
You are thinking about purchasing a new computer because the machine you are using now is four 
years old, slow, and not always reliable, and it does not support the latest operating system. Your 
needs for the new computer are simple: anti-virus software, email, web browsing, word process­
ing, spreadsheet, database, iTunes, and some lightweight graphical tools. Your concern is what 
the total cost of ownership will be for the next three years. You have to factor in a few added costs 
beyond just the initial purchase price for the computer itself, such as added hardware (this could 
include a new printer, docking station, or scanner), software (purchase of a new operating system), 
training (you’re thinking about pursuing web training to get an internship next term), subsequent 
software upgrades, and maintenance.
Project Focus
■	 It is useful to think about costs over time—both direct as well as indirect costs. Part of the 
reason this distinction is important is that a decision should rest not on the nominal sum of the 
purchase, but rather on the present value of the purchase.
FIGURE AYK.1
Sample Layout of New 
Computer Spreadsheet.

AYK-6  *  Apply Your Knowledge
■	 A dollar today is worth more than a dollar one year from now.
■	 The relevant discount rate (interest rate) is your marginal cost of capital corresponding to a 
level of risk equal with the purchase.
■	 Use the data file AYK6_Data.xlsx as a template.
Data File: AYK6_Data.xlsx
Project 7:
Time Management
You have just been hired as a business analyst by a new start-up company called Multi-Media. 
Multi-Media is an interactive agency that constructs phased and affordable website marketing, 
providing its clients with real and measurable solutions that are supported by easy-to-use tools. 
Because the company is very new to the business arena, it needs help in creating a project man­
agement plan for developing its own website. The major tasks for the development team have 
been identified but you need to create the timeline.
Project Focus
1.	 The task names, durations, and any prerequisites are:
■	 Analyze and plan—two weeks. Cannot start anything else until done.
■	 Create and organize content—four weeks. Can start to develop “look and feel” before this 
is done.
■	 Develop the “look and feel”—four weeks. Start working on graphics and HTML at the same 
time.
■	 Produce graphics and HTML documents—two weeks. Create working prototype after the 
first week.
■	 Create a working prototype—two weeks. Give to test team when complete.
■	 Test, test, test—four weeks.
■	 Upload to a web server and test again—one week.
■	 Maintain.
2.	 Using Microsoft Excel or Microsoft Project, create a Gantt chart using the information provided 
above.
Project 8:
Maximize Profit
Books, Books, Books is a wholesale distributor of popular books. The business buys overstocked 
books and sells them for a discount of more than 50 percent to local area bookstores. The owner 
of the company, BK Kane, would like to determine the best approach to boxing books so he can 
make the most profit possible. The local bookstores accept all shipments from Books, Books, 
Books because of BK’s incredibly low prices. BK can order as many overstocked books as he 
requires, and this week’s options include:
Title
Weight
Cost
Sale Price
Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows, J. K. Rowling
5 lb
$9
$17
The Children of Húrin, J. R. R. Tolkien
4 lb
$8
$13
The Time Traveler’s Wife, Audrey Niffenegger
3.5 lb
$7
$11
The Dark River, John Twelve Hawks
3 lb
$6
$  9
The Road, Cormac McCarthy
2.5 lb
$5
$  7
Slaughterhouse-Five, Kurt Vonnegut
1 lb
$4
$  5

	
  Apply Your Knowledge  *  AYK-7
Project Focus
When packing a single box, BK must adhere to the following:
■	 20 books or less.
■	 Books by three different authors.
■	 Between four and eight books from each author.
■	 Weight equal to or less than 50 pounds.
BK has come to you to help him determine which books he should order to maximize his profit 
based on the above information. Using the data file AYK8_Data.xlsx, determine the optimal book 
order for a single box of books.
Data File: AYK8_Data.xlsx
Project 9:
Security Analysis
SecureWorks Inc. is a small computer security contractor that provides computer security 
analysis, design, and software implementation for the U.S. government and commercial cli­
ents. SecureWorks competes for both private and U.S. government computer security contract 
work by submitting detailed bids outlining the work the company will perform if awarded the 
contracts. Because all of the work involves computer security, a highly sensitive area, almost 
all of SecureWorks tasks require access to classified material or company confidential docu­
ments. Consequently, all of the security engineers (simply known as “engineers” within the 
company) have U.S. government clearances of either Secret or Top Secret. Some have even 
higher clearances for the 2 percent of SecureWorks work that involves so-called black box 
security work. Most of the employees also hold clearances because they must handle classi­
fied documents.
Leslie Mamalis is SecureWorks’s human resources (HR) manager. She maintains all employee 
records and is responsible for semiannual review reports, payroll processing, personnel records, 
recruiting data, employee training, and pension option information. At the heart of an HR sys­
tem are personnel records. Personnel record maintenance includes activities such as maintaining 
employee records, tracking cost center data, recording and maintaining pension information, and 
absence and sick leave record keeping. While most of this information resides in sophisticated 
database systems, Leslie maintains a basic employee worksheet for quick calculations and ad 
hoc report generation. Because SecureWorks is a small company, Leslie can take advantage of 
Excel’s excellent list management capabilities to satisfy many of her personnel information man­
agement needs.
Project Focus
Leslie has asked you to assist with a number of functions (she has provided you with a copy of her 
“trusted” personnel data file, AYK9_Data.xlsx):
1.	 Copy the worksheet Data to a new worksheet called Sort. Sort the employee list in ascending 
order by department, then by last name, then by first name.
2.	 Copy the worksheet Data to a new worksheet called Autofilter. Using the Autofilter feature, 
create a custom filter that will display employees whose birth date is greater than or equal to 
1/1/1965 and less than or equal to 12/31/1975.
3.	 Copy the worksheet Data to a new worksheet called Subtotal. Using the subtotal feature create 
a sum of the salary for each department.
4.	 Copy the worksheet Data to a new worksheet called Formatting. Using the salary column, 
change the font color to red if the cell value is greater than or equal to 55000. You must use the 
conditional formatting feature to complete this step.
Data File: AYK9_Data.xlsx

AYK-8  *  Apply Your Knowledge
Project 10:
Gathering Data
You have just accepted a new job offer from a firm that has offices in San Diego, Los Angeles, and 
San Francisco. You need to decide which location to move to. Because you have not visited any of 
these three cities and want to get in a lot of golf time, you determine that the main factor that will 
affect your decision is weather.
Go to www.weather.com and locate the box in which you can enter the city or zip code for 
which you want information. Enter San Diego, CA, and when the data appear, click the Averages 
and Records tab. Print this page and repeat this for Los Angeles and San Francisco. You will want 
to focus on the Monthly Average and Records section on the top of the page.
Project Focus
1.	 Create a spreadsheet to summarize the information you find.
2.	 Record the temperature and rainfall in columns, and group the cities into four groups of rows 
labeled Average High, Average Low, Mean, and Average Precipitation.
3.	 Fill in the appropriate data for each city and month.
4.	 Because rain is your greatest concern, use conditional formatting to display the months with an 
average precipitation below 2.5 inches in blue and apply boldface.
5.	 You also want to be in the warmest weather possible while in California. Use conditional for­
matting to display the months with average high temperatures above 65 degrees in green and 
apply an italic font face.
6.	 Looking at the average high temperatures above 65 degrees and average precipitation below 
two inches, to which city do you think you should relocate? Explain your answer.
Project 11:
Scanner System
FunTown is a popular amusement park filled with roller coasters, games, and water features. 
Boasting 24 roller coasters, 10 of which exceed 200 feet and 70 miles per hour, and five water 
parks, the park’s attendance remains steady throughout the season. Due to the park’s popularity, 
it is not uncommon for entrance lines to exceed one hour on busy days. FunTown would like your 
help to find a solution to decrease park entrance lines.
Project Focus
FunTown would like to implement a handheld scanner system that can allow employees to walk 
around the front gates and accept credit card purchases and print tickets on the spot. The park 
anticipates an overall increase in sales of 4 percent per year with online ticketing, with an expense 
of 6 percent of total sales for the scanning equipment. FunTown has created a data file for you to 
use, AYK11_Data.xlsx, that compares scanning sales and traditional sales. You will need to create 
the necessary formulas to calculate all the assumptions including:
■	 Tickets sold at the booth.
■	 Tickets sold by the scanner.
■	 Revenues generated by booth sales.
■	 Revenues generated by scanner sales.
■	 Scanner ticket expense.
■	 Revenue with and without scanner sales.
■	 Three year row totals.
Data File: AYK11_Data.xlsx

	
  Apply Your Knowledge  *  AYK-9
Project 12:
Competitive Pricing
Bill Schultz is thinking of starting a store that specializes in handmade cowboy boots. Bill is a 
longtime rancher in the town of Taos, New Mexico. Bill’s reputation for honesty and integrity is well 
known around town, and he is positive that his new store will be highly successful.
Project Focus
Before opening his store, Bill is curious about how his profit, revenue, and variable costs will 
change depending on the amount he charges for his boots. Bill would like you to perform the work 
required for this analysis and has given you the data file AYK12_Data.xlsx. Here are a few things to 
consider while you perform your analysis:
■	 Current competitive prices for custom cowboy boots are between $225 and $275 a pair.
■	 Variable costs will be either $100 or $150 a pair depending on the types of material Bill chooses to use.
■	 Fixed costs are $10,000 a month.
Data File: AYK12_Data.xlsx
Project 13:
Adequate Acquisitions
XMark.com is a major Internet company specializing in organic food. XMark.com is thinking of 
purchasing GoodGrow, another organic food Internet company. GoodGrow has current revenues 
of $100 million, with expenses of $150 million. Current projections indicate that GoodGrow’s rev­
enues are increasing at 35 percent per year and its expenses are increasing by 10 percent per 
year. XMark.com understands that projections can be erroneous, however; the company must 
determine the number of years before GoodGrow will return a profit.
Project Focus
You need to help XMark.com determine the number of years required to break even, using annual 
growth rates in revenue between 20 percent and 60 percent and annual expense growth rates 
between 10 percent and 30 percent. You have been provided with a template, AYK13_Data.xlsx, to 
assist with your analysis.
Data File: AYK13_Data.xlsx
Project 14:
Customer Relations
Schweizer Distribution specializes in distributing fresh produce to local restaurants in the Chicago 
area. The company currently sells 12 different products through the efforts of three sales repre­
sentatives to 10 restaurants. The company, like all small businesses, is always interested in finding 
ways to increase revenues and decrease expenses.
The company’s founder, Bob Schweizer, has recently hired you as a new business analyst. You 
have just graduated from college with a degree in marketing and a specialization in customer 
relationship management. Bob is eager to hear your thoughts and ideas on how to improve the 
business and help the company build strong, lasting relationships with its customers.
Project Focus
Bob has provided you with last year’s sales information in the data file AYK14_Data.xlsx. Help Bob 
analyze his distribution company by using a PivotTable to determine the following:
	
1.	Who is Bob’s best customer by total sales?
	
2.	Who is Bob’s worst customer by total sales?

AYK-10  *  Apply Your Knowledge
	
3.	Who is Bob’s best customer by total profit?
	
4.	Who is Bob’s worst customer by total profit?
	
5.	What is Bob’s best-selling product by total sales?
	
6.	What is Bob’s worst-selling product by total sales?
	
7.	What is Bob’s best-selling product by total profit?
	
8.	What is Bob’s worst-selling product by total profit?
	
9.	Who is Bob’s best sales representative by total profit?
	
10.	Who is Bob’s worst sales representative by total profit?
	
11.	What is the best sales representative’s best-selling product (by total profit)?
	
12.	Who is the best sales representative’s best customer (by total profit)?
	
13.	What is the best sales representative’s worst-selling product (by total profit)?
	
14.	Who is the best sales representative’s worst customer (by total profit)?
Data File: AYK14_Data.xlsx
Project 15:
Assessing the Value of Information
Recently Santa Fe, New Mexico, was named one of the safest places to live in the United States. 
Since then, housing development projects have been springing up all around Santa Fe. Six hous­
ing development projects are currently dominating the local market—Pinon Pine, Rancho Hondo, 
Creek Side, Vista Del Monte, Forest View, and Santa Fe South. These six projects each started with 
100 homes, have sold all of them, and are currently developing phase two.
As one of the three partners and real estate agents of Affordable Homes Real Estate, it is your 
responsibility to analyze the information concerning the past 600 home sales and choose which 
development project to focus on for selling homes in phase two. Because your real estate firm is 
so small, you and your partners have decided that the firm should focus on selling homes in only 
one of the development projects.
From the New Mexico Real Estate Association you have obtained a spreadsheet file that con­
tains information concerning each of the sales for the first 600 homes. It contains the following 
fields:
Column
Name
Description
A
LOT #
The number assigned to a specific home within each project.
B
PROJECT #
A unique number assigned to each of the six housing 
­development projects (see table on the next page).
C
ASK PRICE
The initial posted asking price for the home.
D
SELL PRICE
The actual price for which the home was sold.
E
LIST DATE
The date the home was listed for sale.
F
SALE DATE
The date on which the final contract closed and the home 
was sold.
G
SQ. FT.
The total square footage for the home.
H
# BATH.
The number of bathrooms in the home.
I
# BDRMS
The number of bedrooms in the home.

	
  Apply Your Knowledge  *  AYK-11
It is your responsibility to analyze the sales list and prepare a report that details which housing 
development project your real estate firm should focus on. Your analysis should be from as many 
angles as possible.
Project Focus
1.	 You do not know how many other real estate firms will also be competing for sales in each of 
the housing development projects.
2.	 Phase two for each housing development project will develop homes similar in style, price, and 
square footage to their respective first phases.
3.	 As you consider the information provided to you, think in terms of what information is impor­
tant and what information is not important. Be prepared to justify how you went about your 
analysis.
4.	 Upon completing your analysis, please provide concise, yet detailed and thorough, documen­
tation (in narrative, numeric, and graphic forms) that justifies your decision.
Data file: AYK15_Data.xlsx
Project 16:
Growth, Trends, and Forecasts
Analytics Software provides innovative search software, website accessibility testing software, 
and usability testing software. All serve as part of its desktop and enterprise content manage­
ment solutions for government, corporate, educational, and consumer markets. The company’s 
solutions are used by website publishers, digital media publishers, content managers, document 
managers, business users, consumers, software companies, and consulting services companies. 
Analytics Software solutions help organizations develop long-term strategies to achieve web 
content accessibility, enhance usability, and comply with U.S. and international accessibility and 
search standards.
You manage the customer service group for the company and have just received an email 
from CIO Sue Downs that the number of phone calls from customers having problems with one of 
your newer applications is on the increase. This company has a 10-year history of approximately 
1 percent in turnover a year, and its focus had always been on customer service. With the informal 
motto of ”Grow big, but stay small,” it takes pride in 100 percent callbacks in customer care, know­
ing that its personal service was one thing that made it outstanding.
The rapid growth to six times its original customer-base size has forced the company to deal 
with difficult questions for the first time, such as ”How do we serve this many customers?”
The following numbers have been assigned to each of the housing development projects:
Project Number
Project Name
23
Pinon Pine
47
Rancho Hondo
61
Creek Side
78
Vista Del Monte
92
Forest View
97
Santa Fe South

AYK-12  *  Apply Your Knowledge
One option might be for the company to outsource its customer service department. Before 
deciding to do that, Analytics Software needs to create a growth, trend, forecast analysis for future 
predictions.
Project Focus
1.	 Create a weekly analysis from the data provided in AYK16_Data.xlsx.
2.	The price of the products, the actual product type, and any warrantee information is 
irrelevant.
3.	 Develop a growth, trend, and forecast analysis. You should use a three-day moving average; a 
shorter moving average might not display the trend well, and a much longer moving average 
would shorten the trend too much.
4.	 Upon completing your analysis, please provide concise yet detailed and thorough documenta­
tion (in narrative, numeric, and graphic forms) that justifies your recommendations.
Data File: AYK16_Data.xlsx
Project 17:
Shipping Costs
One of the main products of the Fairway Woods Company is custom-made golf clubs. The clubs 
are manufactured at three plants (Denver, Colorado; Phoenix, Arizona; and Dallas, Texas) and are 
then shipped by truck to five distribution warehouses in Sacramento, California; Salt Lake City, 
Utah; Chicago, Illinois; Albuquerque, New Mexico; and New York City, New York. Because ship­
ping costs are a major expense, management has begun an analysis to determine ways to reduce 
them. For the upcoming golf season, the output from each manufacturing plant and how much 
each warehouse will require to satisfy its customers have been estimated.
The CIO from Fairway Woods Company has created a data file for you, AYK17_Data.xlsx, of the 
shipping costs from each manufacturing plant to each warehouse as a baseline analysis. Some 
business rules and requirements you should be aware of include:
■	 The problem presented involves the shipment of goods from three plants to five regional 
warehouses.
■	 Goods can be shipped from any plant to any warehouse, but it costs more to ship goods over 
long distances than over short distances.
Project Focus
1.	 Your goal is to minimize the costs of shipping goods from production plants to warehouses, 
thereby meeting the demand from each metropolitan area while not exceeding the supply 
available from each plant. To complete this project it is recommended that you use the Solver 
function in Excel to assist with the analysis.
2.	 Specifically you want to focus on:
■	 Minimizing the total shipping costs.
■	 Total shipped must be less than or equal to supply at a plant.
■	 Total shipped to warehouses must be greater than or equal to the warehouse demand.
■	 Number to ship must be greater than or equal to 0.
Data File: AYK17_Data.xlsx
Project 18:
Formatting Grades
Professor Streterstein is a bit absentminded. His instructor’s grade book is a mess, and he would 
like your help cleaning it up and making it easier to use. In Professor Streterstein’s course, the 

	
  Apply Your Knowledge  *  AYK-13
Total Points
Calculated Grade
675
A
635
A–
600
B
560
B–
535
C
490
C–
450
D
0
F
maximum possible points a student can earn is 750. The following table displays the grade equiva­
lent to total points for the course.
Project Focus
Help Professor Streterstein rework his grade book. Open the data file AYK18_Data.xlsx and 
­perform the following:
1.	 Reformat the workbook so it is readable, understandable, and consistent. Replace column 
labels, format and align the headings, and add borders and shading as appropriate.
2.	 Add a column in the grade book for final grade next to the total points earned column.
3.	 Use the VLookup Function to automatically assess final grades based on the total points column.
4.	 Using the If Function, format the workbook so each student’s grade shows a pass or fail—P for 
pass, F for fail—based on the total points.
Data File: AYK18_Data.xlsx
Project 19:
Moving Dilemma
Pony Espresso is a small business that sells specialty coffee drinks at office buildings. Each morn­
ing and afternoon, trucks arrive at offices’ front entrances, and the office employees purchase 
various beverages such as Java du Jour and Café de Colombia. The business is profitable. Pony 
Espresso offices, however, are located north of town, where lease rates are less expensive, and 
the principal sales area is south of town. This means the trucks must drive across town four times 
each day.
The cost of transportation to and from the sales area plus the power demands of the trucks’ 
coffee brewing equipment are a significant portion of variable costs. Pony Espresso could reduce 
the amount of driving and, therefore, the variable costs, if it moved the offices closer to the sales 
area.
Pony Espresso presently has fixed costs of $10,000 per month. The lease of a new office, closer 
to the sales area, would cost an additional $2,200 per month. This would increase the fixed costs 
to $12,200 per month.
Although the lease of new offices would increase the fixed costs, a careful estimate of the 
potential savings in gasoline and vehicle maintenance indicates that Pony Espresso could reduce 
the variable costs from $0.60 per unit to $0.35 per unit. Total sales are unlikely to increase as a 
result of the move, but the savings in variable costs should increase the annual profit.
Project Focus
Consider the information provided to you from the owner in the data file AYK19_Data.
xlsx. Especially look at the change in the variability of the profit from month to month. From 

AYK-14  *  Apply Your Knowledge
November through January, when it is much more difficult to lure office workers out into the 
cold to purchase coffee, Pony Espresso barely breaks even. In fact, in December, the business 
lost money.
1.	 Develop the cost analysis on the existing lease information using the monthly sales figures 
provided to you in the data file.
2.	 Develop the cost analysis from the new lease information provided above.
3.	 Calculate the variability that is reflected in the month-to-month standard deviation of earnings 
for the current cost structure and the projected cost structure.
4.	 Do not consider any association with downsizing such as overhead—simply focus on the infor­
mation provided to you.
5.	 You will need to calculate the EBIT (earnings before interest and taxes).
Data File: AYK19_Data.xlsx
Project 20:
Operational Efficiencies
Hoover Transportation Inc. is a large distribution company located in Denver, Colorado. The 
company is currently seeking to gain operational efficiencies in its supply chain by reducing the 
number of transportation carriers that it is using to outsource. Operational efficiencies for Hoover 
Transportation, Inc., suggest that reducing the number of carriers from the Denver distribution 
center to warehouses in the selected states will lead to reduced costs. Brian Hoover, the CEO of 
Hoover Transportation, requests that the number of carriers transporting products from its Denver 
distribution center to wholesalers in Arizona, Arkansas, Iowa, Missouri, Montana, Oklahoma, 
Oregon, and Washington be reduced from the current five carriers to two carriers.
Project Focus
Carrier selection should be based on the assumptions that all environmental factors are equal 
and historical cost trends will continue. Review the historical data from the past several years 
to determine your recommendation for the top two carriers that Hoover Transportation should 
continue to use.
1.	 Analyze the last 24 months of Hoover’s Transportation carrier transactions found in the data file 
AYK20_Data.xlsx.
2.	 Create a report detailing your recommendation for the top two carriers with which Hoover 
Transportation should continue to do business. Be sure to use PivotTables and PivotCharts in 
your report. A few questions to get you started include:
■	 Calculate the average cost per carrier.
■	 Calculate the total shipping costs per state.
■	 Calculate the total shipping weights per state.
■	 Calculate the average shipping costs per pound.
■	 Calculate the average cost per carrier.
Data File: AYK20_Data.xlsx
Project 21:
Too Much Information
You have just landed the job of vice president of operations for The Pitt Stop Restaurants, a 
national chain of full-service, casual-themed restaurants. During your first week on the job, 
Suzanne Graham, your boss and CEO of the company, has asked you to provide an analysis of how 
well the company’s restaurants are performing. Specifically, she would like to know which units 
and regions are performing extremely well, which are performing moderately well, and which are 

	
  Apply Your Knowledge  *  AYK-15
underperforming. Her goal is to identify where to spend time and focus efforts to improve the 
overall health of the company.
Project Focus
Review the data file AYK21_Data.xlsx and determine how best to analyze and interpret the data. 
Create a formal presentation of your findings. A few things to consider include:
■	 Should underperforming restaurants be closed or sold?
■	 Should high-performing restaurants be expanded to accommodate more seats?
■	 Should the company spend more or less on advertising?
■	 In which markets should the advertising budget be adjusted?
■	 How are The Pitt Stop Restaurants performing compared to the competition?
■	 How are units of like size performing relative to each other?
Data File: AYK21_Data.xlsx
Project 22:
Turnover Rates
Employee turnover rates are at an all-time high at Gizmo Manufacturing’s plants. The company 
is experiencing severe worker retention issues, which are leading to productivity and quality 
control problems. The majority of the company’s workers perform a variety of tasks and are paid 
by the hour. The company currently tests potential applicants to ensure they have the skills nec­
essary for the intense mental concentration and dexterity required to fill the positions. Because 
significant costs are associated with employee turnover, Gizmo Manufacturing wants to find a 
way to predict which applicants have the characteristics of being a short-term versus a long-
term employee.
Project Focus
1.	 Review the information that Gizmo Manufacturing has collected from two of its different data 
sources. The first data file, AYK22_Data_A.xlsx, contains information regarding employee 
wages. The second data file, AYK22_Data_B.xlsx, contains information regarding employee 
retention.
2.	 Using Excel analysis functions, determine the employee characteristics that you would recom­
mend Gizmo Manufacturing look for when hiring new personnel. It is highly recommended that 
you use PivotTables as part of your analysis.
3.	 Prepare a report based on your findings (which should include several forms of graphical rep­
resentation) for your recommendations.
Data Files: AYK22_Data_A.xlsx and AYK22_Data_B.xlsx
Project 23:
Vital Information
Martin Resorts Inc. owns and operates four Spa and Golf resorts in Colorado. The company has five 
traditional lines of business: (1) golf sales, (2) golf lessons, (3) restaurants, (4) retail and rentals, and 
(5) hotels. David Logan, director of marketing technology at Martin Resorts Inc., and Donald Mayer, 
the lead strategic analyst for Martin Resorts, are soliciting your input for their CRM strategic initiative.
Martin Resorts’s IT infrastructure is pieced together with various systems and applications. 
Currently, the company has a difficult time with CRM because its systems are not integrated. The 
company cannot determine vital information such as which customers are golfing and staying at 
the hotel or which customers are staying at the hotel and not golfing.
For example, the three details that the customer Diego Titus (1) stayed four nights at a Martin 
Resorts managed hotel, (2) golfed three days, and (3) took an all-day spa treatment the first day 

AYK-16  *  Apply Your Knowledge
are discrete facts housed in separate systems. Martin Resorts hopes that by using data warehous­
ing technology to integrate its data, the next time Diego reserves lodging for another trip, sales 
associates may ask him if he would like to book a spa treatment as well, and even if he would like 
the same masseuse that he had on his prior trip.
Martin Resorts is excited about the possibility of taking advantage of customer segmentation 
and CRM strategies to help increase its business.
Project Focus
The company wants to use CRM and data warehouse technologies to improve service and per­
sonalization at each customer touch point. Using a data warehousing tool, important customer 
information can be accessed from all of its systems either daily, weekly, monthly, or once or twice 
per year. Analyze the sample data in AYK23_Data.xlsx for the following:
1.	 Currently, the quality of the data within the above disparate systems is low. Develop a report for 
David and Donald discussing the importance of high-quality information and how low-­quality 
information can affect Martin Resorts’s business.
2.	 Review the data that David and Donald are working with from the data warehouse in the data 
file AYK23_Data.xlsx.
	a.	 Give examples from the data showing the kind of information Martin Resorts might be 
able to use to gain a better understanding of its customers. Include the types of data 
quality issues the company can anticipate and the strategies it can use to help avoid 
such issues.
	b.	 Determine who are Martin Resorts’s best customers, and provide examples of the types of 
marketing campaigns the company should offer these valuable customers.
	c.	 Prepare a report that summarizes the benefits Martin Resorts can receive from using 
business intelligence to mine the data warehouse. Include a financial analysis of the 
costs and benefits.
Data File: AYK23_Data.xlsx
Project 24:
Breaking Even
Mountain Cycle specializes in making custom mountain bikes. The company founder, PJ Steffan, is 
having a hard time making the business profitable. Knowing that you have great business knowl­
edge and solid financial sense, PJ has come to you for advice.
Project Focus
PJ would like you to determine how many bikes Mountain Cycle needs to sell per year to break 
even. Using Goal Seek in Excel solve using the following:
■	 Fixed cost equals	
$65,000
■	 Variable cost equals	
$1,575
■	 Bike price equals	
$2,500
Project 25:
Profit Scenario
Murry Lutz owns a small shop, Lutz Motors, that sells and services vintage motorcycles. Murry is 
curious how his profit will be affected by his sales over the next year.
Project Focus
Murry would like your help creating best, worst, and most-likely scenarios for his motorcycle sales 
over the next year. Using Scenario Manager, help Murry analyze the information in the data file 
AYK25_Data.xlsx.
Data File: AYK25_Data.xlsx

	
  Apply Your Knowledge  *  AYK-17
Project 26:
Electronic Résumés
Résumés are the currency of the recruitment industry. They are the cornerstone of communication 
between candidates, recruiters, and employers. Technology is automating elements of the recruit­
ment process, but a complete solution requires proper handling of the actual development of all 
the pieces and parts that comprise not just a résumé, but also an erésumé. Electronic résumés, or 
erésumés, have moved into the mainstream of today’s job market at lightning speed. Erésumés 
have stepped up the efficiency of job placement to such a point that you could get a call from a 
recruiter just hours after submitting your erésumé. With this kind of opportunity, you cannot afford 
to be left in the dark ages of using only a paper résumé.
Project Focus
In the text or HTML editor of your choice, write your résumé as though you were really putting it 
online and inviting prospective employers to see it. We recommend typing in all the text and then 
later adding the HTML tags (rather than trying to type in the tags as you go).
Use the following checklist to make sure you’re covering the basics. You do not need to match 
it exactly; it just shows what can be done.
■	 Add structural tags.
■	 Add paragraphs and headings.
■	 Find an opportunity to include a list.
■	 Add inline styles.
■	 Play with the alignment of elements.
■	 Add appropriate font selection, font size, and color.
Project 27:
Gathering Feedback
Gathering feedback from a website’s visitors can be a valuable way of assessing a site’s success, 
and it can help build a customer or subscriber database. For example, a business could collect 
the addresses of people who are interested in receiving product samples, email newsletters, or 
notifications of special offers.
Project Focus
Adding form elements to a web page is simple: They are created using a set of HTML form tags 
that define menus, text fields, buttons, and so on. Form elements are generally used to collect 
information from a web page.
In the text or HTML editor of your choice, create a web page form that would collect informa­
tion for a customer ordering a customized bicycle. Use proper web page design and HTML tools to 
understand the process and function of form elements. Be sure to pay attention to:
■	 Form layout and design.
■	 Visual elements, including labels, alignment, font selection, font size, color.
■	 Required versus nonrequired fields.
■	 Drop-down boxes, text fields, and radio buttons.
Project 28:
Daily Invoice
Foothills Animal Hospital is a full-service small animal veterinary hospital located in Morrison, 
Colorado, specializing in routine medical care, vaccinations, laboratory testing, and surgery. The 
hospital has experienced tremendous growth over the past six months due to customer referrals. 
While Foothills Animal Hospital has typically kept its daily service records in a workbook format, 
it feels the need to expand its reporting capabilities to develop a relational database as a more 
functional structure.

AYK-18  *  Apply Your Knowledge
Foothills Animal Hospital needs help developing a database, specifically:
■	 Create a customer table—name, address, phone, and date of entrance.
■	 Create a pet table—pet name, type of animal, breed, gender, color, neutered/spayed, weight, 
and comments.
■	 Create a medications table—medication code, name of medication, and cost of medication.
■	 Create a visit table—details of treatments performed, medications dispensed, and date of the visit.
■	 Produce a daily invoice report.
Figure AYK.2 displays a sample daily invoice report that the Foothills Animal Hospital accoun­
tants have requested. Foothills Animal Hospital organizes its treatments using the codes displayed 
in Figure AYK.3. The entities and primary keys for the database have been identified in Figure AYK.4.
The following business rules have been identified:
1.	 A customer can have many pets but must have at least one.
2.	 A pet must be assigned to one and only one customer.
3.	 A pet can have one or more treatments per visit but must have at least one.
4.	 A pet can have one or more medications but need not have any.
Project Focus
Your job is to complete the following tasks:
1.	 Develop and describe the entity-relationship diagram.
2.	 Use normalization to assure the correctness of the tables (relations).
FIGURE AYK.2
Foothills Animal Hospital Daily 
Invoice Report.

	
  Apply Your Knowledge  *  AYK-19
3.	 Create the database using a personal DBMS package (preferably Microsoft Access).
4.	 Use the data in Figure AYK.3 to populate your tables. Feel free to enter your own personal 
information.
5.	 Use the DBMS package to create the basic report in Figure AYK.2.
Project 29:
Billing Data
On-The-Level Construction Company is a Denver-based construction company that specializes 
in subcontracting the development of single-family homes. In business since 1998, On-The-Level 
Construction has maintained a talented pool of certified staff and independent consultants provid­
ing the flexibility and combined experience required to meet the needs of its nearly 300 com­
pleted projects in the Denver metropolitan area. The field of operation methods that On-The-Level 
Construction is responsible for includes structural development, heating and cooling, plumbing, 
and electricity.
The company charges its clients by billing the hours spent on each contract. The hourly bill­
ing rate is dependent on the employee’s position according to the field of operations (as noted 
above). Figure AYK.5 shows a basic report that On-The-Level Construction foremen would like 
to see every week concerning what projects are being assigned, the overall assignment hours, 
and the charges for the assignment. On-The-Level Construction organizes its internal structure 
in four different operations—Structure (500), Plumbing (501), Electrical (502), and Heating and 
Ventilation (503). Each of these operational departments can and should have many subcontrac­
tors who specialize in that area. On-The-Level Construction has decided to implement a relational 
database model to track project details according to project name, hours assigned, and charges 
per hour for each job description. Originally, On-The-Level Construction decided to let one of its 
employees handle the construction of the database. However, that employee has not had the time 
to completely implement the project. On-The-Level Construction has asked you to take over and 
complete the development of the database.
The entities and primary keys for the database have been identified in Figure AYK.6.
The following business rules have been identified:
1.	 A job can have many employees assigned but must have at least one.
2.	 An employee must be assigned to one and only one job number.
FIGURE AYK.3
Treatment Codes, Treatments, 
and Price Descriptions.
Treatment Code
Treatment
Price
0100
Tetrinious Shot
$10.00
0201
Rabonius Shot
$20.00
0300
General Exam
$50.00
0303
Eye/Ear Examination
$20.00
0400
Spay/Neuter
$225.00
0405
Reset Dislocation
$165.00
0406
Amputation of Limb
$450.00
0407
Wrap Affected Area
$15.00
0408
Cast Affected Area
$120.00
1000
Lab Work—Blood
$50.00
1003
Lab Work—Misc
$35.00
2003
Flea Spray
$25.00
9999
Other Not Listed
$10.00
FIGURE AYK.4
Entity Names and Primary Keys 
Foothills Animal Hospital.
Entity
Primary Key
CUSTOMER
Customer Number
PET
Pet Number
VISIT
Visit Number
VISIT DETAIL
Visit Number and Line Number 
(a composite key)
TREATMENT
Treatment Code
MEDICATION
Medication Code

AYK-20  *  Apply Your Knowledge
FIGURE AYK.5
On-The-Level-Construction 
Detail Report.
3.	 An employee can be assigned to work on one or more projects.
4.	 A project can be assigned to only one employee but need not be assigned to 
any employee.
Project Focus
Your job is to complete the following tasks:
1.	 Develop and describe the entity relationship diagram.
2.	 Use normalization to assure the correctness of the tables (relations).
3.	 Create the database using a personal DBMS package (preferably Microsoft Access).
4.	 Use the DBMS package to create the basic report in Figure AYK.5.
5.	 You may not be able to develop a report that looks exactly like the one in Figure AYK.5. 
However, your report should include the same information.
6.	 Complete personnel information is tracked by another database. For this application, include 
only the minimum: employee number, last name, and first name.
7.	 Information concerning all projects, employees, and jobs is not readily available. You should 
create information for several fictitious projects, employees, and jobs to include in your 
database.
Project 30:
Inventory Data
An independent retailer of mobile entertainment and wireless phones, iToys.com has built its busi­
ness on offering the widest selection, expert advice, and outstanding customer service. However, 
iToys.com does not use a formal, consistent inventory tracking system. Periodically, an iToys.com 
employee visually checks to see what items are in stock. Although iToys.com does try to keep a 
certain level of each “top seller” in stock, the lack of a formal inventory tracking system has led 
to the overstocking of some items and understocking of other items. On occasion, a customer will 
request a hot item, and it is only then that iToys.com realizes that the item is out of stock. If an item 
is not available, iToys.com risks losing a customer to a competitor.
Lately, iToys.com has become concerned with its inventory management methods. The owner 
of iToys.com, Dan Connolly, wants to better manage his inventory. The company receives orders 
FIGURE AYK.6
Entity Classes and Primary 
Keys for On-The-Level 
Construction.
Entity
Primary Key
PROJECT
Project Number
EMPLOYEE
Employee Number
JOB
Job Number
ASSIGNMENT
Assignment Number

	
  Apply Your Knowledge  *  AYK-21
by mail, by telephone, or through its website. Regardless of how the orders are received, Dan 
needs a database to automate the inventory checking and ordering process.
Project Focus
Dan has provided you with a simplified version of the company’s current system (an Excel work­
book) for recording inventory and orders in an Excel spreadsheet data file AYK30_Data.xlsx.
1.	 Develop an ERD diagram before you begin to create the database. You will need to use the 
information provided here as well as the data given in the Excel workbook.
2.	 Create the database using a personal DBMS package (preferably Microsoft Access) that will 
track items (i.e., products), orders, order details, categories, suppliers, and shipping methods.
3.	 In addition to what is mentioned above, the database needs to track the inventory levels for 
each product, according to a reorder level and lead time.
4.	 At this time, Dan does not need information stored about the customer; he simply needs you to 
focus on the inventory structure.
5.	 Develop a query that will display the products that need to be ordered from their supplier. To 
complete this, you will want to compare a reorder level with how many units are in stock.
6.	 Develop several reports that display:
	a.	 Each product ordered by its supplier. The report should include the product name, quantity 
on hand, and reorder level.
	b.	 Each supplier ordered by shipping method.
	c.	 Each product that requires more than five days lead time. (Hint: You will want to create a 
query for this first.)
	d.	 Each product ordered by category.
7.	 Here are some additional business rules to assist you in completing this task:
	a.	 An order must have at least one product, but can contain more than one product.
	b.	 A product can have one or more orders, but need not have any orders.
	c.	 A product must belong to one and only one category, but a category may contain many 
different products.
	d.	 A product can only be stocked by one supplier, but a supplier can provide more than one product.
	e.	 A supplier will use one type of shipping method, but shipping methods can be used by more 
than one supplier.
Data File: AYK30_Data.xlsx
Project 31:
Call Center
A manufacturing company, Teleworks, has been a market leader in the wireless telephone busi­
ness for the past 10 years. Other firms have imitated its product with some degree of success, but 
Teleworks occupies a dominant position in the marketplace because it has a first-mover advan­
tage with a quality product.
Recently Teleworks began selling a new, enhanced wireless phone. This new phone does not 
replace its current product, but offers additional features, greater durability, and better perfor­
mance for a somewhat higher price. Offering this enhanced phone has established a new revenue 
stream for the company.
Many sales executives at Teleworks seem to subscribe to the-more-you-have, the-more-you-
want theory of managing customer data. That is, they believe they can never accumulate too much 
information about their customers, and that they can do their jobs more effectively by collecting 
infinite amounts of customer details. Having a firm grasp on a wide range of customer-focused 
details—specifically reports summarizing call center information—can be critical in enabling your 

AYK-22  *  Apply Your Knowledge
company to successfully manage a customer relationship management (CRM) solution that cre­
ates a positive impact.
To continue to provide excellent customer support, and in anticipation of increased calls due 
to the release of its new product, Teleworks needs a database that it can use to record, track, and 
query call center information. Teleworks CIO KED Davisson has hired you to develop this database.
Project Focus
1.	 Teleworks has provided you with a data file AYK31_Data.xlsx; its current approach for recording 
cell center information is a spreadsheet file.
2.	 Develop an ERD diagram before you begin to create the database.
3.	 Create the database using a personal DBMS package (preferably Microsoft Access) that will 
allow data analysts to enter call center data according to the type of issue and the customer, 
assign each call to a consultant, and prioritize the call.
4.	 Develop a query that will display all issues that are “open.”
5.	 Develop a screen form to browse all issues.
6.	 Develop several reports that display:
	a.	 All closed issues.
	b.	 Each issue in detail ordered by issue ID.
	c.	 Each issue in detail ordered by consultant.
	d.	 Each issue in detail ordered by category.
	e.	 Each issue in detail ordered by status.
7.	 Here are some additional business rules to assist you in completing this task:
	a.	 An issue must have at least one customer.
	b.	 A customer can have more than one issue.
	c.	 Each issue must be assigned to one consultant.
	d.	 Each consultant can be assigned to more than one issue.
	e.	 An issue can only belong to one category.
	f.	 An issue must be assigned only one status code.
	g.	 An issue must be assigned a priority code.
8.	 Priorities are assigned accordingly:
Priority Level
Critical
High
Moderate
Standard
Low
	
9.	Status is recorded as either open or closed.
	
10.	The categories of each issue need to be recorded as:
Category
Hardware/Phone
Software/Voice mail
Internet/Web
Data File: AYK31_Data.xlsx

	
  Apply Your Knowledge  *  AYK-23
Project 32:
Sales Pipeline
Sales drive any organization. This is true for every for-profit business irrespective of size or indus­
try type. If customers are not buying your goods or services, you run the risk of not having a busi­
ness. This is when tough decisions have to be made, like whether to slash budgets, lay off staff, or 
seek additional financing.
Unfortunately, you do not wield ultimate power over your customers’ buying habits. While you 
can attempt to influence buying behavior through strategic marketing, smart businesses remain 
one step ahead by collecting and analyzing historical and current customer information from a 
range of internal and external sources to forecast future sales. In other words, managing the sales 
pipeline is an essential ingredient to business success.
You have recently been hired by RealTime Solutions, a new company that collects information 
to understand, manage, and predict specific sales cycle (including the supply chain and lead times) 
in the automobile business. Having an accurate forecast of future sales will allow the company to 
increase or decrease the production cycle as required and manage personnel levels, inventory, 
and cash flow.
Project Focus
Using a personal DBMS package (preferably Microsoft Access) create a sales pipeline database 
that will:
1.	 Track opportunities from employees to customers.
■	 Opportunities should have a ranking, category, source of opportunity, open date, closed 
date, description.
2.	 Create a form for inputting customer, employee, and opportunity data.
3.	 Create a few reports that display:
■	 All open opportunities, including relevant customer and employee information.
■	 Closed opportunities, including relevant customer and employee information.
■	 All customers.
4.	 Create your own data to test the integrity of the relationships. Use approximately 10 records 
per table.
Project 33:
Online Classified Ads
With the emergence of the Internet as a worldwide standard for communicating information, The 
Morrison Post, a medium-size community newspaper in central Colorado, is creating an electronic 
version of its paper-based classified ads.
Advertisers can place a small ad that lists items that they wish to sell and provide a means 
(e.g., telephone number and email) by which prospective buyers can contact them.
The nature of a sale via the newspaper’s classified system goes as follows:
■	 During the course of the sale, the information flows in different directions at different stages.
■	 First, there is a downstream flow of information (from seller to buyer): the listing in print in 
the newspaper. (Thus, the classified ad listing is just a way of bringing a buyer and seller 
together.)
■	 When a potential purchaser’s interest has been raised, then that interest must be relayed 
upstream, usually by telephone or by email.
■	 Finally, a meeting should result that uses face-to-face negotiation to finalize the sale, if the sale 
can be agreed.
By placing the entire system on the Internet, the upstream and downstream communications 
are accomplished using a web browser. The sale becomes more of an auction, because many 

AYK-24  *  Apply Your Knowledge
potential buyers, all with equal status, can bid for the same item. So it is fairer for all purchasers 
and gets a better deal for the seller.
Any user who is trying to buy an item can:
■	 View items for sale.
■	 Bid on an item he or she wishes to purchase.
Any user who is trying to sell an item can:
■	 Place a new item for sale.
■	 Browse a list of the items that he or she is trying to sell, and examine the bids that have been 
made on each of those items.
■	 Accept a bid on an item that he or she is selling.
Your job is to complete the following:
1.	 Develop and describe the entity-relationship diagram for the database that will support the 
listed activities.
2.	 Use normalization to ensure the correctness of the tables.
3.	 Create the database using a personal DBMS package.
4.	 Use Figure AYK.7 as a baseline for your database design.
Data File: AYK33_Data.xlsx
FIGURE AYK.7

Glossary  *  G-1
3D printing  Builds—layer by layer in an additive process—
a three-dimensional solid object from a digital model.
A
acceptable use policy (AUP)  A policy that a user must agree 
to follow in order to be provided access to a network or to the 
Internet.
access point (AP)  The computer or network device that serves 
as an interface between devices and the network.
accessibility  Refers to the varying levels that define what a user 
can access, view, or perform when operating a system.
accounting and finance ERP component  Manages accounting 
data and financial processes within the enterprise with functions 
such as general ledger, accounts payable, accounts receivable, 
budgeting, and asset management.
accounting department  Provides quantitative information 
about the finances of the business including recording, measuring, 
and describing financial information.
accounting  Analyzes the transactional information of the 
business so the owners and investors can make sound economic 
decisions.
active RFID tags  Have their own transmitter and a power 
source (typically a battery).
adaptive computer device  Input devices designed for special 
applications for use by people with different types of special needs.
administrator access  Unrestricted access to the entire system.
advanced encryption standard (AES)  Introduced by the 
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), AES is an 
encryption standard designed to keep government information 
secure.
adware  Software that, although purporting to serve some useful 
function and often fulfilling that function, also allows Internet 
advertisers to display advertisements without the consent of the 
computer user.
adwords  Keywords that advertisers choose to pay for and 
appear as sponsored links on the Google results pages.
affinity grouping analysis  Reveals the relationship between 
variables along with the nature and frequency of the relationships.
Agile BI  An approach to business intelligence (BI) that 
incorporates Agile software development methodologies to 
accelerate and improve the outcomes of BI initiatives.
agile methodology  Aims for customer satisfaction through early 
and continuous delivery of useful software components developed 
by an iterative process with a design point that uses the bare 
minimum requirements.
agile MIS infrastructure  Includes the hardware, software, and 
telecommunications equipment that, when combined, provides 
the underlying foundation to support the organization’s goals.
algorithm  A mathematical formula placed in software that 
performs an analysis on a data set.
alpha testing  Assess if the entire system meets the design 
requirements of the users.
ambient digital experience  A blend of the physical, virtual, and 
electronic environments creating a real-time ambient environment 
that changes as the user moves from one place to another.
analysis latency  The time from which data are made available 
to the time when analysis is complete.
analysis paralysis  Occurs when the user goes into an emotional 
state of over-analysis (or over-thinking) a situation so that a 
decision or action is never taken, in effect paralyzing the outcome.
analysis phase  Analyzing end-user business requirements and 
refining project goals into defined functions and operations of the 
intended system.
analytical CRM  Supports back-office operations and strategic 
analysis and includes all systems that do not deal directly with the 
customers.
analytical information  Encompasses all organizational 
information, and its primary purpose is to support the performing 
of managerial analysis tasks.
analytics  The science of fact-based decision making.
anomoly detection  The process of identifying rare or 
unexpected items or events in a data set that do not conform 
to other items in the data set.
anti-spam policy  States that email users will not send 
unsolicited emails (or spam).
antivirus software  Scans and searches hard drives to prevent, 
detect, and remove known viruses, adware, and spyware.
applet  A program that runs within another application such as 
a website.
appliance  A computer dedicated to a single function, such as a 
calculator or computer game.
application programming interface (API)  A set of routines, 
protocols, and tools for building software applications.
application service provider license  Specialty software paid for 
on a license basis or per-use basis or usage-based licensing.
application software  Used for specific information processing 
needs, including payroll, customer relationship management, 
project management, training, and many others.
arithmetic/logic unit (ALU)  Performs all arithmetic operations 
(for example, addition and subtraction) and all logic operations 
(such as sorting and comparing numbers).
artificial intelligence (AI)  Simulates human intelligence such as 
the ability to reason and learn.
As-Is process model  Represents the current state of 
the operation that has been mapped, without any specific 
improvements or changes to existing processes.
asset tracking  Occurs when a company places active or 
semipassive RFID tags on expensive products or assets to gather 
data on the items’ location with little or no manual intervention.
asset  Anything owned that has value or earning power.
asynchronous communication  Communication such as email in 
which the message and the response do not occur at the same time.
G L O S S A R Y

G-2  *  Glossary
attribute  The data elements associated with an entity.
augmented reality  The viewing of the physical world with computer-
generated layers of information added to it.
authentication  A method for confirming users’ identities.
authorization  The process of providing a user with permission 
including access levels and abilities such as file access, hours of access, 
and amount of allocated storage space.
automatic vehicle location (AVL)  Uses GPS tracking to track 
vehicles.
autonomic computing  A self-managing computing model named 
after, and patterned on, the human body’s autonomic nervous system.
autonomous agent  Software that carries out some set of 
operations on behalf of a user or another program with some degree 
of independence or autonomy, and employ some knowledge or 
representation of the user’s goals or desires.
availability  Refers to the time frames when the system is operational.
B
backup  An exact copy of a system’s information.
backward integration  Takes information entered into a given system 
and sends it automatically to all upstream systems and processes.
balance sheet  Gives an accounting picture of property owned by a 
company and of claims against the property on a specific date.
balanced scorecard  A management system, in addition to a 
measurement system, that enables organizations to clarify their vision 
and strategy and translate them into action.
behavioral analytics  Uses data about people’s behaviors to 
understand intent and predict future actions.
benchmark  Baseline values the system seeks to attain.
benchmarking  The process of continuously measuring system 
results, comparing those results to optimal system performance 
(benchmark values), and identifying steps and procedures to improve 
system performance.
best practices  The most successful solutions or problem-solving 
methods that have been developed by a specific organization or 
industry.
Big Data as a Service (BDaaS)  Offers a cloud-based Big Data 
service to help organizations analyze massive amounts of data to solve 
business dilemmas.
big data  A collection of large, complex data sets, including structured 
and unstructured data, which cannot be analyzed using traditional 
database methods and tools.
biological 3D printing  Includes the printing of skin and organs and 
is progressing from theory to reality, however, politicians and the public 
do not have a full understanding of the implications.
biometrics  The identification of a user based on a physical 
characteristic, such as a fingerprint, iris, face, voice, or handwriting.
blog  An online journal that allows users to post their own comments, 
graphics, and video.
Bluetooth  A wireless PAN technology that transmits signals over 
short distances among cell phones, computers, and other devices.
bookkeeping  The actual recording of the business’s transactions, 
without any analysis of the information.
brainstorming  A technique for generating ideas by encouraging 
participants to offer as many ideas as possible in a short period of time 
without any analysis until all the ideas have been exhausted.
break-even point  The point at which revenues equal costs.
bring your own device (BYOD)   A  policy allows employees to use 
their personal mobile devices and computers to access enterprise data 
and applications.
bug  Defects in the code of an information system.
bullwhip effect  Occurs when distorted product-demand information 
passes from one entity to the next throughout the supply chain.
business continuity planning (BCP)  Details how a company recovers 
and restores critical business operations and systems after a disaster or 
extended disruption.
business impact analysis  A process that identifies all critical 
business functions and the effect that a specific disaster may have 
upon them.
business intelligence (BI)  Information collected from multiple 
sources such as suppliers, customers, competitors, partners, and 
industries that analyzes patterns, trends, and relationships for strategic 
decision making.
business intelligence dashboard  Tracks corporate metrics such as 
critical success factors and key performance indicators and includes 
advanced capabilities such as interactive controls, allowing users to 
manipulate data for analysis.
business model  A plan that details how a company creates, delivers, 
and generates revenues.
business process management (BPM)  Integrates all of an 
organization’s business processes to make individual processes 
more efficient.
business process management tool  Used to create an application 
that is helpful in designing business process models and also helpful in 
simulating, optimizing, monitoring, and maintaining various processes 
that occur within an organization.
Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN)  A graphical notation 
that depicts the steps in a business process.
business process model  A graphic description of a process, showing 
the sequence of process tasks, which is developed for a specific 
purpose and from a selected viewpoint.
business process modeling (or mapping)  The activity of creating 
a detailed flowchart or process map of a work process, showing its 
inputs, tasks, and activities in a structured sequence.
business process patent  A patent that protects a specific set of 
procedures for conducting a particular business activity.
business process reengineering (BPR)  The analysis and redesign of 
workflow within and between enterprises.
business process  A standardized set of activities that accomplish a 
specific task, such as processing a customer’s order.
business requirement  The specific business requests the system 
must meet to be successful, so the analysis phase is critical because 
business requirements drive the entire systems development effort.
business rule  Defines how a company performs a certain aspect 
of its business and typically results in either a yes/no or true/false 
answer.
business strategy  A leadership plan that achieves a specific set of 
goals or objectives such as increasing sales, decreasing costs, entering 
new markets, or developing new products or services.
business unit  A segment of a company (such as accounting, 
production, marketing) representing a specific business function. 
business-critical integrity constraint  Enforces business rules vital 
to an organization’s success and often requires more insight and 
knowledge than relational integrity constraints.
business-facing process  Invisible to the external customer but 
essential to the effective management of the business; they include 

Glossary  *  G-3
goal setting, day-to-day planning, giving performance feedback and 
rewards, and resource allocation.
business-to-business (B2B)  Applies to businesses buying from and 
selling to each other over the Internet.
business-to-consumer (B2C)  Applies to any business that sells its 
products or services to consumers over the Internet.
buyer power  The ability of buyers to affect the price they must pay 
for an item.
C
cache memory  A small unit of ultra-fast memory that is used to store 
recently accessed or frequently accessed data so that the CPU does not 
have to retrieve this data from slower memory circuits such as RAM.
Call scripting system  Gathers product details and issue resolution 
information that can be automatically generated into a script for the 
representative to read to the customer.
campaign management system  Guides users through marketing 
campaigns by performing such tasks as campaign definition, planning, 
scheduling, segmentation, and success analysis.  
Capability Maturity Model Integration (CMMI) method  A process 
improvement approach that contains 22 process areas.
capacity planning  Determines future environmental infrastructure 
requirements to ensure high-quality system performance.
capacity  Represents the maximum throughput a system can deliver; 
for example, the capacity of a hard drive represents the size or volume.
capital  Represents money whose purpose is to make more money, 
for example, the money used to buy a rental property or a business.
carbon emission  Includes the carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide 
in the atmosphere, produced by business processes and systems.
cartography  The science and art of making an illustrated map or chart.
central processing unit (CPU) (or microprocessor)  The actual 
hardware that interprets and executes the program (software) 
instructions and coordinates how all the other hardware devices work 
together.
certificate authority  A trusted third party, such as VeriSign, that 
validates user identities by means of digital certificates.
change agent  A person or event that is the catalyst for implementing 
major changes for a system to meet business changes.
chief automation officer  Determines if a person or business process 
can be replaced by a robot or software.
chief data officer  Responsible for determining the types of 
information the enterprise will capture, retain, analyze, and share.
chief information officer (CIO)  Responsible for (1) overseeing all uses 
of information technology and (2) ensuring the strategic alignment of 
MIS with business goals and objectives.
chief intellectual property officer  Manage and defend intellectual 
property, copyrights, and patents.
chief knowledge officer (CKO)  Responsible for collecting, 
maintaining, and distributing the organization’s knowledge.
chief privacy officer (CPO)  Responsible for ensuring the ethical and 
legal use of information within an organization.
chief security officer (CSO)  Responsible for ensuring the security 
of MIS systems and developing strategies and MIS safeguards against 
attacks from hackers and viruses.
chief technology officer (CTO)  Responsible for ensuring the 
throughput, speed, accuracy, availability, and reliability of an 
organization’s information technology.
chief user experience officer  Create the optimal relationship 
between user and technology.
Child Online Protection Act (COPA)  A law that protects minors from 
accessing inappropriate material on the Internet.
chipless RFID tags  Use plastic or conductive polymers instead of 
silicon-based microchips, allowing them to be washed or exposed to 
water without damaging the chip.
classification analysis  The process of organizing data into categories 
or groups for its most effective and efficient use.
clean computing  Refers to the environmentally responsible use, 
manufacture, and disposal of technology products and computer 
equipment.
click-fraud  The abuse of pay-per-click, pay-per-call, and pay-per-
conversion revenue models by repeatedly clicking on a link to increase 
charges or costs for the advertiser.
click-to-talk  Allows customers to click a button and talk with a 
representative via the Internet.
clickstream data  Exact pattern of a consumer’s navigation through 
a site.
client/server network  A model for applications in which the bulk 
of the back-end processing, such as performing a physical search of 
a database, takes place on a server, while the front-end processing, 
which involves communicating with the users, is handled by the clients.
client  Computer that is designed to request information from a server.
closed source  Any proprietary software licensed under exclusive 
legal right of the copyright holder.
cloud bursting  When a company uses its own computing 
infrastructure for normal usage and accesses the cloud when it needs 
to scale for high/peak load requirements, ensuring a sudden spike in 
usage does not result in poor performance or system crashes.
cloud computing  Stores, manages, and processes data and 
applications over the Internet rather than on a personal computer 
or server.
cloud fabric controller  An individual who monitors and provisions 
cloud resources similar to a server administrator at an individual 
company.
cloud fabric  The software that makes the benefits of cloud computing 
possible, such as multi-tenancy.
cluster analysis  A technique used to divide an information set into 
mutually exclusive groups such that the members of each group are as 
close together as possible to one another and the different groups are 
as far apart as possible.
coaxial cable  Cable that can carry a wide range of frequencies with 
low signal loss.
cold site  A separate facility that does not have any computer 
equipment, but is a place where employees can move after a disaster.
collaboration system  A set of tools that supports the work of teams 
or groups by facilitating the sharing and flow of information.
collective intelligence  Collaborating and tapping into the core 
knowledge of all employees, partners, and customers.
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations (COSO)  Key for evaluating 
internal controls such as human resources, logistics, information 
technology, risk, legal, marketing and sales, operations, financial 
functions, procurement, and reporting.
common data repository  Allows every department of a company to 
store and retrieve information in real-time allowing information to be 
more reliable and accessible.
communication device  Equipment used to send information and 
receive it from one location to another.

G-4  *  Glossary
continuous process improvement model  Attempts to understand 
and measure the current process, and make performance 
improvements accordingly.
control objectives for information and related technologies 
(COBIT)  A set of best practices that helps an organization to 
maximize the benefits of an information system, while at the same 
time establishing appropriate controls to ensure minimum errors.
control panel  A Windows feature that provides a group of options 
that sets default values for the Windows operating system.
control unit  Interprets software instructions and literally tells the 
other hardware devices what to do, based on the software instructions.
conversion  The process of transferring information from a legacy 
system to a new system.
copyright  The legal protection afforded an expression of an idea, 
such as a song, book, or video game.
core ERP component  Traditional components included in most ERP 
systems and they primarily focus on internal operations.
core processes  Business processes, such as manufacturing goods, 
selling products, and providing service, that make up the primary 
activities in a value chain.
corporate social responsibility  Companies’ acknowledged 
responsibility to society.
corporation (also called organization, enterprise, or business)  
An artificially created legal entity that exists separate and apart from 
those individuals who created it and carry on its operations.
corrective maintenance  Makes system changes to repair design 
flaws, coding errors, or implementation issues.
counterfeit software  Software that is manufactured to look like the 
real thing and sold as such.
course management software  Contains course information such 
as a syllabus and assignments and offers drop boxes for quizzes and 
homework along with a grade book.
Cradle-to-grave  Provides logistics support throughout the entire 
system or life of the product.
critical path  Estimates the shortest path through the project ensuring 
all critical tasks are completed from start to finish.
critical success factor (CSF)  Crucial steps companies perform to 
achieve their goals and objectives and implement their strategies.
CRM analysis technologies  Help organizations segment their 
customers into categories such as best and worst customers.
CRM predicting technologies  Help organizations make predictions 
regarding customer behavior such as which customers are at risk of leaving.
CRM reporting technologies  Help organizations identify their 
customers across other applications.
cross-selling  Selling additional products or services to an existing 
customer.
crowdfunding  Sources capital for a project by raising many 
small amounts from a large number of individuals, typically via 
the Internet.
crowdsourcing  Refers to the wisdom of the crowd.
cryptography  The science that studies encryption, which is the hiding 
of messages so that only the sender and receiver can read them.
cube  The common term for the representation of multidimensional 
information.
customer analytics  Involves gathering, classifying, comparing, and 
studying customer data to identify buying trends, at-risk customers, 
and potential future opportunities.
communication plan  Defines the how, what, when, and who 
regarding the flow of project information to stakeholders and is 
key for managing expectations.
community cloud  Serves a specific community with common 
business models, security requirements, and compliance 
considerations.
comparative analysis  Compares two or more data sets to identify 
patterns and trends.
competitive advantage  A feature of a product or service that an 
organization’s customers place a greater value on than similar offerings 
from a competitor.
competitive click-fraud  A computer crime where a competitor or 
disgruntled employee increases a company’s search advertising costs 
by repeatedly clicking on the advertiser’s link.
competitive intelligence  The process of gathering information about 
the competitive environment, including competitors’ plans, activities, 
and products, to improve a company’s ability to succeed.
competitive monitoring  A company keeps tabs of its competitor’s 
activities on the web using software that automatically tracks all 
competitor website activities such as discounts and new products.
complex instruction set computer (CISC) chip  Type of CPU that can 
recognize as many as 100 or more instructions, enough to carry out 
most computations directly.
compliance  The act of conforming, acquiescing, or yielding.
computer simulation  Complex systems, such as the U.S. economy, 
can be modeled by means of mathematical equations and different 
scenarios can be run against the model to determine “what if” analysis.
computer-aided design/computer-aided manufacturing (CAD/
CAM)  Systems used to create the digital designs and then 
manufacture the products.
computer-aided software engineering (CASE)  Tools are software 
suites that automate systems analysis, design, and development.
computer  Electronic device operating under the control of instructions 
stored in its own memory that can accept, manipulate, and store data.
confidentiality  The assurance that messages and information are 
available only to those who are authorized to view them.
consolidation  Involves the aggregation of information and features 
simple roll-ups to complex groupings of interrelated information.
consumer-to-business (C2B)  Applies to any consumer that sells a 
product or service to a business over the Internet.
consumer-to-consumer (C2C)  Applies to customers offering goods 
and services to each other on the Internet.
contact center (or call center)  A place where customer service 
representatives answer customer inquiries and solve problems, usually 
by email, chat, or phone.
contact management CRM system   Maintains customer contact 
information and identifies prospective customers for future sales, 
using tools such as organizational charts, detailed customer notes, and 
supplemental sales information.
content creator  The person responsible for creating the original 
website content.
content editor  The person responsible for updating and maintaining 
website content.
content filtering  Occurs when organizations use software that filters 
content to prevent the transmission of unauthorized information.
content management system  Helps companies manage the 
creation, storage, editing, and publication of their website content.

Glossary  *  G-5
data model  Logical data structures that detail the relationships 
among data elements using graphics or pictures.
data point  An individual item on a graph or a chart.
data profiling  The process of collecting statistics and information 
about data in an existing source.
data replication  The process of sharing information to ensure 
consistency between multiple data sources.
data scientist  Extracts knowledge from data by performing statistical 
analysis, data mining, and advanced analytics on big data to identify 
trends, market changes, and other relevant information.
data set  An organized collection of data.
data steward  Responsible for ensuring the policies and procedures 
are implemented across the organization and acts as a liaison between 
the MIS department and the business.
data stewardship  The management and oversight of an 
organization’s data assets to help provide business users with high-
quality data that is easily accessible in a consistent manner.
data validation  Includes the tests and evaluations used to determine 
compliance with data governance polices to ensure correctness of data.
data visualization tools  Moves beyond Excel graphs and charts into 
sophisticated analysis techniques such as controls, instruments, maps, 
time-series graphs, and more.
data visualization  Describes technologies that allow users to “see” 
or visualize data to transform information into a business perspective.
data warehouse  A logical collection of information—gathered from 
many different operational databases—that supports business analysis 
activities and decision-making tasks.
data-driven decision management  An approach to business 
governance that values decisions that can be backed up with 
verifiable data.
data-driven website  An interactive website kept constantly updated 
and relevant to the needs of its customers through the use of a database.
data-mining tool  Uses a variety of techniques to find patterns and 
relationships in large volumes of information and infer rules from them 
that predict future behavior and guide decision making.
data  Raw facts that describe the characteristics of an event.
database management system (DBMS)  Creates, reads, updates, 
and deletes data in a database while controlling access and security
database  Maintains information about various types of objects 
(inventory), events (transactions), people (employees), and places 
(warehouses).
decision latency  The time it takes a human to comprehend the 
analytic result and determine an appropriate action.
decision support system (DSS)  Model information using OLAP, which 
provides assistance in evaluating and choosing among different courses 
of action.
decrypt  Decodes information and is the opposite of encrypted.
dependency  A logical relationship that exists between the project 
tasks, or between a project task and a milestone.
deperimeterization  Occurs when an organization moves employees 
outside its firewall, a growing movement to change the way 
corporations address technology security.
design phase  Involves describing the desired features and 
operations of the system including screen layouts, business rules, 
process diagrams, pseudo code, and other documentation.
destructive agents  Malicious agents designed by spammers and 
other Internet attackers to farm email addresses off websites or deposit 
spyware on machines.
customer relationship management (CRM) 
Involves managing 
all aspects of a customer’s relationship with an organization to 
increase customer loyalty and retention and an organization’s 
profitability.
customer segmentation  Divides a market into categories that share 
similar attributes such as age, location, gender, habits, and so on.
customer service and support (CSS)   A part of operational CRM 
that automates service requests, complaints, product returns, and 
information requests.
customer-facing process  Results in a product or service that is 
received by an organization’s external customer.
cyberbullying  Threats, negative remarks, or defamatory comments 
transmitted via the Internet or posted on a website.
cybermediation  Refers to the creation of new kinds of intermediaries 
that simply could not have existed before the advent of ebusiness.
cyberterrorism  The use of computer and networking technologies 
against persons or property to intimidate or coerce governments, 
individuals, or any segment of society to attain political, religious, or 
ideological goals.
cybervandalism  The electronic defacing of an existing website.
cyberwar  An organized attempt by a country’s military to disrupt or 
destroy information and communication systems for another country.
D
data aggregation  The collection of data from various sources for the 
purpose of data processing.
data artist  A business analytics specialist who uses visual tools to 
help people understand complex data.
data as a service (DaaS)  Facilitates the accessibility of business-
critical data in a timely, secure, and affordable manner.
data broker  A business that collects personal information about 
consumers and sells that information to other organizations.
data center  A facility used to house management information 
systems and associated components, such as telecommunications and 
storage systems.
data dictionary  Compiles all of the metadata about the data 
elements in the data model.
data element (or data field)  The smallest or basic unit of information.
data flow diagram (DFD)  Illustrates the movement of information 
between external entities and the processes and data stores within 
the system.
data gap analysis  Occurs when a company examines its data to 
determine if it can meet business expectations, while identifying 
possible data gaps or where missing data might exist.
data governance  Refers to the overall management of the 
availability, usability, integrity, and security of company data.
data lake  A storage repository that holds a vast amount of raw data 
in its native format until it is needed.
data latency  The time it takes for data to be stored or retrieved.
data map  A technique for establishing a match, or balance, between 
the source data and the target data warehouse.
data mart  Contains a subset of data warehouse information.
data mining  The process of analyzing data to extract information not 
offered by the raw data alone.
data mining tools  A variety of techniques to find patterns and 
relationships in large volumes of information that predict future 
behavior and guide decision making.

G-6  *  Glossary
dynamic report  A report that changes automatically during creation.
dynamic scaling  Means that the MIS infrastructure can be 
automatically scaled up or down based on needed requirements.
E
ebook  An electronic book that can be read on a computer or special 
reading device.
ebusiness model  A plan that details how a company creates, 
delivers, and generates revenues on the Internet.
ebusiness  Includes ecommerce along with all activities related to 
internal and external business operations such as servicing customer 
accounts, collaborating with partners, and exchanging real-time 
information.
ecommerce  The buying and selling of goods and services over the 
Internet.
edge matching (warping, rubber sheeting)  Occurs when paper 
maps are laid edge to edge, and items that run across maps but do not 
match are reconfigured to match.
ediscovery  Refers to the ability of a company to identify, search, 
gather, seize, or export digital information in responding to a litigation, 
audit, investigation, or information inquiry.
effectiveness MIS metric  Measures the impact MIS has on business 
processes and activities including customer satisfaction, conversion 
rates, and sell-through increases.
efficiency MIS metric  Measures the performance of the MIS system 
itself including throughput, speed, and availability.
egovernment  Involves the use of strategies and technologies to 
transform government(s) by improving the delivery of services and 
enhancing the quality of interaction between the citizen-consumer 
within all branches of government.
electronic data interchange (EDI)  A standard format for the 
electronic exchange of information between supply chain participants.
elogistics  Manages the transportation and storage of goods.
email privacy policy  Details the extent to which email messages may 
be read by others.
embedded operating system  Used for a single purpose in computer 
appliances and special-purpose applications, such as an automobile, 
ATM, or media player.
emergency notification service  An infrastructure built for notifying 
people in the event of an emergency.
emergency preparedness  Ensures a company is ready to respond to 
an emergency in an organized, timely, and effective manner.
emergency  A sudden, unexpected event requiring immediate 
action due to potential threat to health and safety, the environment, 
or property.
employee monitoring policy  Stating explicitly how, when, and where 
the company monitors its employees.
employee relationship management (ERM)  Provides employees 
with a subset of CRM applications available through a web browser.
encryption  Scrambles information into an alternative form that 
requires a key or password to decrypt the information.
energy consumption  The amount of energy consumed by business 
processes and systems.
enterprise application integration (EAI) middleware  Represents a 
new approach to middleware by packaging together commonly used 
functionality, such as providing prebuilt links to popular enterprise 
development phase  Involves taking all of the detailed design 
documents from the design phase and transforming them into the 
actual system.
development testing  Programmers test the system to ensure it is 
bug-free.
digital certificate  A data file that identifies individuals or 
organizations online and is comparable to a digital signature.
digital Darwinism  Organizations that cannot adapt to the new 
demands placed on them for surviving in the information age are 
doomed to extinction.
digital dashboard  Tracks key performance indicators (KPIs) and 
critical success factors (CSFs) by compiling information from multiple 
sources and tailoring it to meet user needs. 
digital rights management  A technological solution that allows 
publishers to control their digital media to discourage, limit, or prevent 
illegal copying and distribution.
dirty data  Erroneous or flawed data.
Disaster Recovery as a Service (DRaaS)  Offers backup services that 
use cloud resources to protect applications and data from disruption 
caused by disaster.
disaster recovery cost curve  Charts (1) the cost to the organization of 
the unavailability of information and technology and (2) the cost to the 
organization of recovering from a disaster over time.
disaster recovery plan  A detailed process for recovering information 
or a system in the event of a catastrophic disaster.
discovery prototyping  Builds a small-scale representation or 
working model of the system to ensure it meets the user and business 
requirements.
disintermediation  Occurs when a business sells direct to the 
customer online and cuts out the intermediary.
disruptive technology  A new way of doing things that initially does 
not meet the needs of existing customers.
distributed computing  Processes and manages algorithms across 
many machines in a computing environment.
distribution management system  Coordinates the process of 
transporting materials from a manufacturer to distribution centers 
to the final customer.
dividend  A distribution of earnings to shareholders.
domain name hosting  A service that allows the owner of a domain 
name to maintain a simple website and provide email capacity.
downtime  Refers to a period of time when a system is unavailable
drill-down  Enables users to get details, and details of details, of 
information.
drive-by hacking  A computer attack where an attacker accesses a 
wireless computer network, intercepts data, uses network services, 
and/or sends attack instructions without entering the office or 
organization that owns the network.
drone  An unmanned aircraft that can fly autonomously, or without 
a human.
dual boot  Provides the user with the option of choosing the operating 
system when the computer is turned on.
dumpster diving  Looking through people’s trash, another way 
hackers obtain information.
dynamic catalog  An area of a website that stores information about 
products in a database.
dynamic information  Includes data that change based on user actions.
dynamic process  Continuously changing and provides business 
solutions to ever-changing business operations.

Glossary  *  G-7
F
fact  The confirmation or validation of an event or object.
failback  Occurs when the primary machine recovers and resumes 
operations, taking over from the secondary server.
failover  Occurs when a redundant storage server offers an 
exact replica of the real-time data, and if the primary server crashes, 
the users are automatically directed to the secondary server or backup 
server.
Fair information practices  A general term for a set of standards 
governing the collection and use of personal data and addressing 
issues of privacy and accuracy.
fast data  The application of big data analytics to smaller data 
sets in near-real or real-time in order to solve a problem or create 
business value.
fault tolerance  The ability for a system to respond to unexpected 
failures or system crashes as the backup system immediately and 
automatically takes over with no loss of service.
feasibility  The measure of the tangible and intangible benefits of an 
information system.
feedback  Information that returns to its original transmitter (input, 
transform, or output) and modifies the transmitter’s actions.
fiber-optic (optical fiber)  The technology associated with the 
transmission of information as light impulses along a glass wire or 
fiber.
finance  Deals with the strategic financial issues associated with 
increasing the value of the business while observing applicable laws 
and social responsibilities.
financial accounting  Involves preparing financial reports that provide 
information about the business’s performance to external parties such 
as investors, creditors, and tax authorities.
financial quarter  A three-month period (four quarters per year).
financial statements  Written records of the financial status of the 
business that allow interested parties to evaluate the profitability and 
solvency of the business.
firewall  Hardware and/or software that guards a private network by 
analyzing the information leaving and entering the network.
first-mover advantage  Occurs when an organization can significantly 
impact its market share by being first to market with a competitive 
advantage.
flash memory  A special type of rewritable read-only memory (ROM) 
that is compact and portable.
folksonomy  Similar to taxonomy except that crowdsourcing 
determines the tags or keyword-based classification system.
for profit corporations  Primarily focus on making money and all 
profits and losses are shared by the business owners.
forecasting model  Predictions based on time-series 
information allowing users to manipulate the time series for 
forecasting activities.
foreign key  A primary key of one table that appears as an attribute 
in another table and acts to provide a logical relationship between the 
two tables.
forward integration  Takes information entered into a given 
system and sends it automatically to all downstream systems and 
processes.
fourth-generation language (4GL)  Programming languages that look 
similar to human languages.
fuzzy logic  A mathematical method of handling imprecise or 
subjective information.
applications, which reduces the time necessary to develop solutions 
that integrate applications from multiple vendors.
enterprise architect (EA)  Person grounded in technology, fluent 
in business, a patient diplomat, and provides the important bridge 
between IT and the business.
enterprise architecture  Includes the plans for how an organization 
will build, deploy, use, and share its data, processes, and MIS assets.
enterprise resource planning (ERP)  Integrates all departments and 
functions throughout an organization into a single system (or integrated 
set of MIS systems) so that employees can make decisions by viewing 
enterprisewide information on all business operations.
entity  Stores information about a person, place, thing, transaction, or 
event.
entry barrier  A feature of a product or service that customers have 
come to expect and entering competitors must offer the same for survival.
epolicies  Policies and procedures that address the ethical use of 
computers and Internet usage in the business environment.
eprocurement  The business-to-business (B2B) purchase and sale of 
supplies and services over the Internet.
eshop (estore or etailer)  An online version of a retail store where 
customers can shop at any hour.
estimated time enroute (ETE)  The time remaining before reaching 
a destination using the present speed; typically used for navigation 
applications.
estimated time of arrival (ETA)  The time of day of an expected 
arrival at a certain destination; typically used for navigation 
applications.
estimation analysis  Determine values for an unknown continuous 
variable behavior or estimated future value.
ethernet  A physical and data layer technology for LAN networking.
ethical computer use policy  Contains general principles to guide 
computer user behavior.
ewaste  Refers to discarded, obsolete, or broken electronic devices.
executive information system (EIS)  A specialized DSS that supports 
senior-level executives within the organization.
executive sponsor  The person or group who provides the financial 
resources for the project.
expense  Refers to the costs incurred in operating and maintaining 
a business.
expert system  Computerized advisory programs that imitate the 
reasoning processes of experts in solving difficult problems.
explicit knowledge  Consists of anything that can be documented, 
archived, and codified, often with the help of IT.
extended ERP component  The extra components that meet the 
organizational needs not covered by the core components and primarily 
focus on external operations.
extensible markup language (XML)   A markup language for 
documents, containing structured information.
extraction, transformation, and loading (ETL)  A process that 
extracts information from internal and external databases, transforms 
the information using a common set of enterprise definitions, and loads 
the information into a data warehouse.
extreme programming (XP) methodology  Breaks a project into tiny 
phases, and developers cannot continue on to the next phase until the 
first phase is complete.
ezine   A magazine published only in electronic form on a computer 
network.

G-8  *  Glossary
historical analysis  Historical events are studied to anticipate the 
outcome of current developments.
horizontal privilege escalation  Attacker grants themselves the 
same access levels they already have but assumes the identity of 
another user.
hot site  A separate and fully equipped facility where the company 
can move immediately after a disaster and resume business.
hotspots  Designated locations where Wi-Fi access points are publicly 
available.
HTML 5  The current version of HTML delivers everything from 
animation to graphics and music to movies.
human resources (HR)  Includes the policies, plans, and procedures 
for the effective management of employees (human resources).
human resources ERP component  Tracks employee information 
including payroll, benefits, compensation, and performance 
assessment, and assures compliance with the legal requirements of 
multiple jurisdictions and tax authorities.
human-generated data  Data that humans, in interaction with 
computers, generate.  
hybrid cloud  Includes two or more private, public, or community 
clouds, but each cloud remains separate and is only linked by 
technology that enables data and application portability.
hybrid ERP  Splits the ERP functions between an on-premises ERP 
system and one or more functions handled as Software as a Service 
(SaaS) in the cloud.
hypertext markup language (HTML)  Links documents allowing users 
to move from one to another simply by clicking on a hotspot or link.
I
identity management  A broad administrative area that deals with 
identifying individuals in a system (such as a country, a network, or 
an enterprise) and controlling their access to resources within 
that system by associating user rights and restrictions with the 
established identity.
identity theft  The forging of someone’s identity for the purpose of 
fraud.
IEEE 802.11n (or Wireless-N)  The standard for wireless networking.
implementation phase  Involves placing the system into production 
so users can begin to perform actual business operations with the 
system.
in-sourcing (in-house development)  A common approach using the 
professional expertise within an organization to develop and maintain 
the organization’s information technology systems.
incident management  The process responsible for managing how 
incidents are identified and corrected.
incident record  Contains all of the details of an incident.
incident  Unplanned interruption of a service.
income statement  Reports operating results (revenues minus 
expenses) for a given time period ending at a specified date.
infographics (information graphics)  Present the results of data 
analysis, displaying the patterns, relationships, and trends in a 
graphical format.
information age  A time when infinite quantities of facts are widely 
available to anyone who can use a computer.
information architecture  The set of ideas about how all information 
in a given context should be organized
information cleansing or scrubbing  A process that weeds out and 
fixes or discards inconsistent, incorrect, or incomplete information.
G
Gantt chart  A simple bar chart that lists project tasks vertically 
against the project’s time frame, listed horizontally.
genetic algorithm  An artificial intelligence system that mimics the 
evolutionary, survival-of-the-fittest process to generate increasingly 
better solutions to a problem.
geocache  A GPS technology adventure game that posts on the 
Internet the longitude and latitude location of an item for users to find.
geocoding  Spatial databases in a coding process that takes a digital 
map feature and assigns it an attribute that serves as a unique ID (tract 
number, node number) or classification (soil type, zoning category).
geocoin  A round, coin-sized object that is uniquely numbered and 
hidden in geocache.
geoeconomic  Refers to the effects of geography on the economic 
realities of international business activities.
geographic information system (GIS)  Stores, views, and analyzes 
geographic data creating multidimensional charts or maps.
gigabyte (GB)  Roughly 1 billion bytes.
gigahertz (GHz)  The number of billions of CPU cycles per second.
GIS map automation  Links business assets to a centralized system 
where they can be tracked and monitored over time.
global inventory management system  Provides the ability to locate, 
track, and predict the movement of every component or material 
anywhere upstream or downstream in the supply chain.
global positioning system (GPS)  A satellite-based navigation system 
providing extremely accurate position, time, and speed information.
goal-seeking analysis  Finds the inputs necessary to achieve a goal 
such as a desired level of output.
goods  Material items or products that customers will buy to satisfy a 
want or need.
governance  Method or system of government for management or 
control.
granularity  Refers to the level of detail in the model or the decision-
making process.
graphical user interface (GUI)  The interface to an information 
system.
green personal computer (green PC)  Built using environment-
friendly materials and designed to save energy.
grid computing  A collection of computers, often geographically 
dispersed, that are coordinated to solve a common problem.
H
hacker  Experts in technology who use their knowledge to break into 
computers and computer networks, either for profit or simply for the 
challenge.
hard drive  Secondary storage medium that uses several rigid disks 
coated with a magnetically sensitive material and housed together with 
the recording heads in a hermetically sealed mechanism.
hardware  Consists of the physical devices associated with a 
computer system.
hashtag    A keyword or phrase used to identify a topic and is 
preceded by a hash or pound sign (#).
help desk  A group of people who respond to internal system user 
questions.
high availability  Occurs when a system is continuously operational 
at all times.

Glossary  *  G-9
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE)  
An organization that researches and institutes electrical standards 
for communication and other technologies.
intangible benefits  Difficult to quantify or measure.
integration testing  Verifies that separate systems can work together 
passing data back and forth correctly.
integration  Allows separate systems to communicate directly with 
each other,  eliminating the need for manual entry into multiple 
systems.
integrity constraint  The rules that help ensure the quality of 
information.
intellectual property  Intangible creative work that is embodied in 
physical form and includes copyrights, trademarks, and patents.
intelligent agent  A special-purpose knowledge-based information 
system that accomplishes specific tasks on behalf of its users.
intelligent system  Various commercial applications of artificial 
intelligence.
interactivity  Measures advertising effectiveness by counting 
visitor interactions with the target ad, including time spent viewing 
the ad, number of pages viewed, and number of repeat visits to the 
advertisement.
intermediary  Agent, software, or business that brings buyers 
and sellers together to provide a trading infrastructure to enhance 
ebusiness.
International Organization for Standardization (ISO)  
A nongovernmental organization established in 1947 to promote the 
development of world standards to facilitate the international exchange 
of goods and services.
Internet censorship  Government attempts to control Internet traffic, 
thus preventing some material from being viewed by a country’s 
citizens.
Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN)  
A  nonprofit organization that has assumed the responsibility for Internet 
Protocol (IP) address space allocation, protocol parameter assignment, 
domain name system management, and root service system 
management functions previously performed under U.S. government.
Internet of things (IoT)  A world where interconnected Internet-
enabled devices or “things” have the ability to collect and share data 
without human intervention.
Internet protocol version 6 (IPv6)  The “next generation” protocol 
designed to replace the current version Internet protocol.
Internet service provider (ISP)  A company that provides access to 
the Internet for a monthly fee.
Internet use policy  Contains general principles to guide the proper 
use of the Internet.
Internet  A massive network that connects computers all over the 
world and allows them to communicate with one another.
interoperability  Capability of two or more computer systems to 
share data and resources, even though they are made by different 
manufacturers.
intrusion detection software (IDS)  Features full-time monitoring 
tools that search for patterns in network traffic to identify intruders.
inventory management and control system  Provides control and 
visibility to the status of individual items maintained in inventory.
IT consumerization  The blending of personal and business use of 
technology devices and applications.
iterative development  Consists of a series of tiny projects.
information ethics  Governs the ethical and moral issues 
arising from the development and use of information technologies, 
as well as the creation, collection, duplication, distribution, and 
processing of information itself (with or without the aid of computer 
technologies) .
information granularity  Refers to the extent of detail within the 
information (fine and detailed or “coarse” and abstract information).
information inconsistency  Occurs when the same data element has 
different values.
information integrity  A measure of the quality of information.
information MIS infrastructure  Identifies where and how important 
information, such as customer records, is maintained and secured.
Information of Everything (IoE)  A concept that extends the Internet 
of Things (IoT) emphasis on machine-to-machine communications to 
describe a more complex system that also encompasses people and 
processes.
information privacy policy  Contains general principles regarding 
information privacy.
information privacy  Concerns the legal right or general expectation 
of individuals, groups, or institutions to determine for themselves when 
and to what extent information about them is communicated to others.
information reach  Measures the number of people a firm can 
communicate with all over the world.
information redundancy  The duplication of data, or the storage of 
the same data in multiple places.
information richness  Refers to the depth and breadth of information 
transferred between customers and businesses.
information secrecy  The category of computer security that 
addresses the protection of data from unauthorized disclosure and 
confirmation of data source authenticity.
information security plan  Details how an organization will 
implement the information security policies.
information security policy  Identifies the rules required to maintain 
information security.
information security  A broad term encompassing the protection of 
information from accidental or intentional misuse by persons inside or 
outside an organization.
information silo  Occurs when one business unit is unable to freely 
communicate with other business units making it difficult or impossible 
for organizations to work cross-functionally.
Information Systems Audit and Control Association (ISACA)  A set 
of guidelines and supporting tools for IT governance that is accepted 
worldwide and generally used by auditors and companies as a way to 
integrate technology to implement controls and meet specific business 
objectives.
Information Technology Infrastructure Library (ITIL)  A framework 
provided by the government of the United Kingdom that offers eight 
sets of management procedures.
information  Data converted into a meaningful and useful context.
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS)  Delivers hardware networking 
capabilities, including the use of servers, networking, and storage, over 
the cloud using a pay-per-use revenue model.
input device  Equipment used to capture information and commands.
insider  Legitimate users who purposely or accidentally misuse their 
access to the environment and cause some kind of business-affecting 
incident.
instant messaging (IM or IMing)  A service that enables instant or 
real-time communication between people.

G-10  *  Glossary
M
machine learning  A type of artificial intelligence that enables 
computers to both understand concepts in the environment, and 
also to learn.
machine-generated data  Data created by a machine without human 
intervention.
machine-to-machine (M2M)  Refers to devices that connect directly 
to other devices
magnetic medium  Secondary storage medium that uses magnetic 
techniques to store and retrieve data on disks or tapes coated with 
magnetically sensitive materials.
magnetic tape  Older secondary storage medium that uses a strip of 
thin plastic coated with a magnetically sensitive recording medium.
mail bomb  A massive amount of email to a specific person or system 
that can cause that user’s server to stop functioning.
maintainability (or flexibility)  Refers to how quickly a system can 
transform to support environmental changes.
maintenance phase  The organization performs changes, corrections, 
additions, and upgrades to ensure the system continues to meet 
business goals.
maker movement  A cultural trend that places value on an individual’s 
ability to be a creator of things as well as a consumer of things.
makerspace  A community center that provides technology, 
manufacturing equipment, and educational opportunities to the public 
that would otherwise be inaccessible or unaffordable.
management information systems (MIS)  A business function, like 
accounting and human resources, which moves information about 
people, products, and processes across the company to facilitate 
decision making and problem solving.
managerial accounting  Involves analyzing business operations for 
internal decision making and does not have to follow any rules issued 
by standard-setting bodies such as GAAP.
managerial level  Employees are continuously evaluating company 
operations to hone the firm’s abilities to identify, adapt to, and leverage 
change.
market basket analysis  Evaluates such items as websites and 
checkout scanner information to detect customers’ buying behavior 
and predict future behavior by identifying affinities among customers’ 
choices of products and services.
market segmentation  The division of a market into similar groups of 
customers.
market share  The proportion of the market that a firm captures.
marketing communication  Seeks to build product or service 
awareness and to educate potential consumers on the product or service.
marketing mix  Includes the variables that marketing managers can 
control in order to best satisfy customers in the target market.
marketing  The process associated with promoting the sale of goods 
or services.
mashup editor  WYSIWYGs (What You See Is What You Get) for 
mashups that provide a visual interface to build a mashup, often 
allowing the user to drag and drop data points into a web application.
mashup  A website or web application that uses content from more 
than one source to create a completely new product or service.
mass customization  Ability of an organization to give its customers 
the opportunity to tailor its products or services to the customers’ 
specifications.
J
joint application development (JAD)  A session where employees 
meet, sometimes for several days, to define or review the business 
requirements for the system.
K
key performance indicator (KPI)  Quantifiable metrics a company 
uses to evaluate progress toward critical success factors.
kill switch  A trigger that enables a project manager to close the 
project prior to completion.
knowledge management (KM)  Involves capturing, classifying, 
evaluating, retrieving, and sharing information assets in a way that 
provides context for effective decisions and actions.
knowledge management system (KMS)  Supports the capturing, 
organization, and dissemination of knowledge (i.e., know-how) 
throughout an organization.
knowledge workers  Individuals valued for their ability to interpret 
and analyze information.
knowledge  Skills, experience, and expertise coupled with 
information and intelligence that creates a person’s intellectual 
resources.
L
latitude  Represents a north/south measurement of position.
legacy system  An old system that is fast approaching or beyond the 
end of its useful life within an organization.
liability  An obligation to make financial payments.
limited liability corporation (LLC)  A hybrid entity that has the legal 
protections of a corporation and the ability to be taxed (one time) as a 
partnership.
limited liability  Means that the shareholders are not personally liable 
for the losses incurred by the corporation.
limited partnership  Much like a general partnership except for one 
important fundamental difference; the law protects the limited partner 
from being responsible for all of the partnership’s losses.
list generator  Compile customer information from a variety of 
sources and segment it for different marketing campaigns.
local area network (LAN)  Designed to connect a group of 
computers in proximity to each other such as in an office building, 
a school, or a home.
location-based services (LBS)  Applications that use location 
information to provide a service.
logical view of information  Focuses on how users logically access 
information to meet their particular business needs.
logistics  Includes the processes that control the distribution, 
maintenance, and replacement of materials and personnel to 
support the supply chain.
long tail  Referring to the tail of a typical sales curve.
longitude  Represents an east/west measurement of position.
loose coupling   The capability of services to be joined on demand 
to create composite services or disassembled just as easily into their 
functional components.
loss  Occurs when businesses sell products or services for less than 
they cost to produce.
loyalty program  Rewards customers based on their spending.

Glossary  *  G-11
multiple-in/multiple-out (MIMO) technology  Multiple transmitters 
and receivers allow sending and receiving greater amounts of data than 
traditional networking devices.
multitasking  Allows more than one piece of software to be used at 
a time.
mutation  The process within a genetic algorithm of randomly 
trying combinations and evaluating the success (or failure) of the 
outcome.
N
native advertising   An online marketing concept in which the 
advertiser attempts to gain attention by providing content in the 
context of the user’s experience in terms of its content, format, style, or 
placement.
nearshore outsourcing  Contracting an outsourcing agreement with a 
company in a nearby country.
net income  The amount of money remaining after paying taxes.
network effect  Describes how products in a network increase in 
value to users as the number of users increases.
network operating system (NOS)  The operating system that runs 
a network, steering information between computers and managing 
security and users.
network topology  Refers to the geometric arrangement of the actual 
physical organization of the computers (and other network devices) in 
a network.
network transmission media  Various types of media used to carry 
the signal between computers.
network user license  Enables anyone on the network to install and 
use the software.
network virtualization  Combines networks by splitting the available 
bandwidth into independent channels that can be assigned in real time 
to a specific device.
network  A communications system created by linking two or more 
devices and establishing a standard methodology in which they can 
communicate.
neural network (artificial neural network)  A category of AI that 
attempts to emulate the way the human brain works.
nonrepudiation  A contractual stipulation to ensure that ebusiness 
participants do not deny (repudiate) their online actions.
nonvolatile  Does not require constant power to function.
not for profit (or nonprofit) corporation  Usually exists to accomplish 
some charitable, humanitarian, or educational purpose, and the profits 
and losses are not shared by the business owners.
O
object-oriented languages  Languages that group data and 
corresponding processes into objects.
off-the-shelf application  Supports general business processes 
and does not require any specific software customization to meet the 
organization’s needs.
offshore outsourcing  Using organizations from developing countries 
to write code and develop systems.
on-premise system  Includes a server at a physical location using 
an internal networkfor internal access and firewalls for remote user’s 
access.
master data management  The practice of gathering data and 
ensuring that it is uniform, accurate, consistent, and complete, including 
such entities as customers, suppliers, products, sales, employees, 
and other critical entities that are commonly integrated across 
organizational systems.
materials management   Includes activities that govern the flow of 
tangible, physical materials through the supply chain such as shipping, 
transport, distribution, and warehousing.
materials requirement planning (MRP) system  Sales forecasts to 
make sure that needed parts and materials are available at the right 
time and place in a specific company.
megabyte (MB or M or Meg)  Roughly 1 million bytes.
megahertz (MHz)  The number of millions of CPU cycles per second.
memory card  Contains high-capacity storage that holds data such as 
captured images, music, or text files.
memory stick  Provides nonvolatile memory for a range of portable 
devices including computers, digital cameras, MP3 players, and PDAs.
metadata  Details about data.
methodology  A set of policies, procedures, standards, processes, 
practices, tools, techniques, and tasks that people apply to technical 
and management challenges.
metrics  Measurements that evaluate results to determine whether a 
project is meeting its goals.
metropolitan area network (MAN)  A large computer network usually 
spanning a city.
microblogging  The practice of sending brief posts (140 to 
200 characters) to a personal blog, either publicly or to a private 
group of subscribers who can read the posts as IMs or as text 
messages.
middleware  Several different types of software that sit in the 
middle of and provide connectivity between two or more software 
applications.
MIS infrastructure  Includes the plans for how a firm will build, 
deploy, use, and share its data, processes, and MIS assets.
MIS skills gap  The difference between existing MIS workplace 
knowledge and the knowledge required to fulfill the business goals and 
strategies.
mobile application management  Administers and delivers 
applications to corporate and personal smartphones and tablets.
mobile business (mcommerce or mbusiness)  The ability to 
purchase goods and services through a wireless Internet-enabled 
device.
mobile device management (MDM)  Remotely controls smartphones 
and tablets, ensuring data security.
model  A simplified representation or abstraction of reality.
module software design  Divides the system into a set of functional 
units (named modules) that can be used independently or combined 
with other modules for increased business flexibility.
Moore’s Law  Refers to the computer chip performance per dollar 
doubling every 18 months.
multi-tenancy  A single instance of a system serves multiple 
customers.
multifactor authentication  Requires more than two means of 
authentication such as what the user knows (password), what the 
user has (security token), and what the user is (biometric 
verification).

G-12  *  Glossary
partner relationship management (PRM)  Focuses on keeping 
vendors satisfied by managing alliance partner and reseller 
relationships that provide customers with the optimal sales 
channel.
partnership agreement  A legal agreement between two or more 
business partners that outlines core business issues.
partnership  Similar to sole proprietorships, except that this legal 
structure allows for more than one owner.
passive RFID tags  Do not have a power source.
password   A string of alphanumeric characters used to authenticate a 
user and provide access to a system.
patent  An exclusive right to make, use, and sell an invention granted 
by a government to the inventor.
pay-per-call  Generates revenue each time users click on a link that 
takes them directly to an online agent waiting for a call.
pay-per-click  Generates revenue each time a user clicks on a link to 
a retailer’s website.
pay-per-conversion  Generates revenue each time a website visitor is 
converted to a customer.
peer-to-peer (P2P) network  A computer network that relies on the 
computing power and bandwidth of the participants in the network 
rather than a centralized server.
performance  Measures how quickly a system performs a certain 
process or transaction.
personal area network (PAN)  Provides communication for devices 
owned by a single user that work over a short distance.
personal information management (PIM) software  Software 
handles contact information, appointments, task lists, and email.
personalization  Occurs when a company can know enough about a 
person’s likes and dislikes that it can fashion offers that are more likely 
to appeal to that person.
PERT (Program Evaluation and Review Technique) chart  
A graphical network model that depicts a project’s tasks and the 
relationships between those tasks.
pharming attack  Uses a zombie farm, often by an organized crime 
association, to launch a massive phishing attack.
pharming  Reroutes requests for legitimate websites to false 
websites.
phased implementation  Installs the new system in phases (for 
example, by department) until it is verified that it works correctly.
phishing expedition  A masquerading attack that combines spam 
with spoofing.
phishing  Technique to gain personal information for the purpose of 
identity theft, usually by means of fraudulent email.
physical security  Tangible protection such as alarms, guards, 
fireproof doors, fences, and vaults.
physical view of information  The physical storage of information on 
a storage device such as a hard disk.
pilot implementation  A small group uses the new system until it is 
verified that it works correctly, then the remaining users migrate to the 
new system.
pirated software  The unauthorized use, duplication, distribution, or 
sale of copyrighted software.
planning phase  Involves establishing a high-level plan of the 
intended project and determining project goals.
Platform as a Service (PaaS)  Supports the deployment of entire 
systems including hardware, networking, and applications using a pay-
per-use revenue model.
online analytical processing (OLAP)  The manipulation of information 
to create business intelligence in support of strategic decision making.
online training  Runs over the Internet or on a CD or DVD, and 
employees complete the training on their own time at their own pace.
online transaction processing (OLTP)  The capturing of transaction 
and event information using technology to (1) process the information 
according to defined business rules, (2) store the information, and 
(3) update existing information to reflect the new information.
onshore outsourcing  The process of engaging another company 
within the same country for services.
open source  Refers to any software whose source code is made 
available free for any third party to review and modify.
open system  Consists of nonproprietary hardware and software 
based on publicly known standards that allow third parties to create 
add-on products to plug into or interoperate with the system.
operating system software  Controls the application software and 
manages how the hardware devices work together.
operational CRM  Supports traditional transactional processing for 
day-to-day front-office operations or systems that deal directly with the 
customers.
operational level  Employees develop, control, and maintain core 
business activities required to run the day-to-day operations.
operational planning and control (OP&C)  Deals with the day-to-day 
procedures for performing work, including scheduling, inventory, and 
process management.
operations management  The management of systems or processes 
that convert or transform resources (including human resources) into 
goods and services.
opportunity management CRM systems  Targets sales opportunities 
by finding new customers or companies for future sales.
Opt in  A user receives emails by choosing to allow permissions to 
incoming emails.
opt out  Receiving emails by choosing to deny permission to incoming 
emails.
optimization analysis  An extension of goal-seeking analysis, finds 
the optimum value for a target variable by repeatedly changing other 
variables, subject to specified constraints.
optimization model  A statistical process that finds the way to make a 
design, system, or decision as effective as possible, for example, finding 
the values of controllable variables that determine maximal productivity 
or minimal waste.
outlier   A data value that is numerically distant from most of the other 
data points in a set of data.
output device  Equipment used to see, hear, or otherwise accept the 
results of information processing requests.
outsourcing  An arrangement by which one organization provides a 
service or services for another organization that chooses not to perform 
them in-house.
owner’s equity  The portion of a company belonging to the owners.
P
packet-switching  Occurs when the sending computer divides a 
message into a number of efficiently sized units called packets, each of 
which contains the address of the destination computer.
paradigm shift  Occurs when a new radical form of business enters 
the market that reshapes the way companies and organizations behave.
parallel implementation  Uses both the legacy system and new 
system until all users verify that the new system functions correctly.

Glossary  *  G-13
profit  Occurs when businesses sell products or services for more than 
they cost to produce.
project assumption  Factor that is considered to be true, real, or 
certain without proof or demonstration.
project constraint  Specific factor that can limit options.
project deliverable  Any measurable, tangible, verifiable outcome, 
result, or item that is produced to complete a project or part of a project.
project management office (PMO)  An internal department that 
oversees all organizational projects.
project management  The application of knowledge, skills, tools, and 
techniques to project activities in order to meet or exceed stakeholder 
needs and expectations from a project.
project manager  An individual who is an expert in project planning 
and management, defines and develops the project plan, and tracks the 
plan to ensure all key project milestones are completed on time.
project milestone  Represents key dates when a certain group of 
activities must be performed.
project objective  Quantifiable criteria that must be met for the 
project to be considered a success.
project plan  A formal, approved document that manages and 
controls project execution.
project requirements document  Defines the specifications for 
product/output of the project and is key for managing expectations, 
controlling scope, and completing other planning efforts.
project scope statement  Links the project to the organization’s 
overall business goals.
project scope  Describes the business need (the problem the project 
will solve) and the justification, requirements, and current boundaries 
for the project.
project stakeholder  Individuals and organizations actively involved 
in the project or whose interests might be affected as a result of project 
execution or project completion.
project  A temporary endeavor undertaken to create a unique product 
or service.
protocol  A standard that specifies the format of data as well as the 
rules to be followed during transmission.
prototype  A modern design approach where the designers and 
system users use an iterative approach to building the system.
public cloud  Promotes massive, global, industrywide applications 
offered to the general public.
public key encryption (PKE)  Encryption system that uses two keys: 
a public key that everyone can have and a private key for only the 
recipient.
Q
query-by-example (QBE) tool  Helps users graphically design the 
answer to a question against a database.
R
radio frequency identification (RFID)  Uses electronic tags and labels 
to identify objects wirelessly over short distances.
random access memory (RAM)  The computer’s primary working 
memory, in which program instructions and data are stored so that they 
can be accessed directly by the CPU via the processor’s high-speed 
external data bus.
ransomware  A form of malicious software that infects your computer 
and asks for money.
plunge implementation  Discards the legacy system and immediately 
migrates all users to the new system.
podcasting  Converts an audio broadcast to a digital music player.
portability  Refers to the ability of an application to operate on 
different devices or software platforms, such as different operating 
systems.
Porter’s Five Forces Model  Analyzes the competitive forces within 
the environment in which a company operates to assess the potential 
for profitability in an industry.
Porter’s three generic strategies  Generic business strategies that 
are neither organization nor industry specific and can be applied to any 
business, product, or service.
prediction  A statement about what will happen or might happen in 
the future, for example, predicting future sales or employee turnover.
predictive analytics  Extracts information from data and uses it to 
predict future trends and identify behavioral patterns.
pretexting  A form of social engineering in which one individual lies to 
obtain confidential data about another individual.
preventive maintenance  Makes system changes to reduce the 
chance of future system failure.
primary key  A field (or group of fields) that uniquely identifies a given 
entity in a table.
primary storage  Computer’s main memory, which consists of the 
random access memory (RAM), cache memory, and read-only memory 
(ROM) that is directly accessible to the CPU.
primary value activities  Found at the bottom of the value chain, 
these include business processes that acquire raw materials and 
manufacture, deliver, market, sell, and provide after-sales services.
privacy  The right to be left alone when you want to be, to have 
control over your own personal possessions, and not to be observed 
without your consent.
private cloud  Serves only one customer or organization and can be 
located on the customer’s premises or off the customer’s premises.
privilege escalation   A network intrusion attack that takes advantage 
of programming errors or design flaws to grant the attacker elevated 
access to the network and its associated data and applications.
process owner  The person responsible for the end-to-end 
functioning of a business process.
procurement  The purchasing of goods and services to meet the 
needs of the supply chain.
product differentiation  An advantage that occurs when a company 
develops unique differences in its products with the intent to influence 
demand.
product life cycle  Includes the four phases a product progresses 
through during its life cycle including introduction, growth, maturity, 
and decline.
production and materials management ERP component  Handles 
the various aspects of production planning and execution such as 
demand forecasting, production scheduling, job cost accounting, and 
quality control.
production management  Describes all the activities managers do to 
help companies create goods.
production  The process where a business takes raw materials and 
processes them or converts them into a finished product for its goods 
or services.
productivity  The rate at which goods and services are produced 
based upon total output given total inputs.

G-14  *  Glossary
RFID accelerometer  A device that measures the acceleration (the 
rate of change of velocity) of an item and is used to track truck speeds 
or taxi cab speeds.
RFID reader (RFID interrogator)  A transmitter/receiver that reads the 
contents of RFID tags in the area.
RFID tag  An electronic identification device that is made up of a chip 
and antenna.
RFID’s electronic product code (RFID EPC)   Promotes serialization 
or the ability to track individual items by using the unique serial number 
associated with each RFID tag.
rivalry among existing competitors  High when competition is fierce 
in a market and low when competition is more complacent.
Robotics  Focuses on creating artificial intelligence devices that can 
move and react to sensory input.
router  An intelligent connecting device that examines each packet of 
data it receives and then decides which way to send it onward toward 
its destination.
S
safe mode  Occurs if the system is failing and will load only the most 
essential parts of the operating system and will not run many of the 
background operating utilities.
sales analytics  Involves gathering, classifying, comparing, and 
studying company sales data to analyze product cycles, sales pipelines, 
and competitive intelligence.
sales force automation (SFA)  Automatically tracks all the steps in the 
sales process.
sales management CRM systems  Automates each phase of the 
sales process, helping individual sales representatives coordinate and 
organize all their accounts.
sales  The function of selling a good or service that focuses on 
increasing customer sales, which increases company revenues.
satellite  A space station that orbits the Earth receiving and 
transmitting signals from Earth-based stations over a wide area.
scalability  Describes how well a system can scale up, or adapt to the 
increased demands of growth.
scripting language  A programming method that provides for 
interactive modules to a website.
scrum methodology  Uses small teams to produce small pieces of 
deliverable software using sprints, or 30-day intervals, to achieve an 
appointed goal.
search engine optimization (SEO)  Combines art along with science 
to determine how to make URLs more attractive to search engines 
resulting in higher search engine ranking.
search engine ranking  Evaluates variables that search engines use 
to determine where a URL appears on the list of search results.
search engine  Website software that finds other pages based on 
keyword matching.
secondary storage  Consists of equipment designed to store large 
volumes of data for long-term storage.
selfie   A self-photograph placed on a social media website.
selling chain management  Applies technology to the activities in the 
order life cycle from inquiry to sale.
semantic web  A component of Web 3.0 that describes things in a 
way that computers can understand.
semi-passive RFID tags  Include a battery to run the microchip’s 
circuitry, but communicate by drawing power from the RFID reader.
rapid application development (RAD) (also called rapid prototyping) 
methodology  Emphasizes extensive user involvement in the rapid 
and evolutionary construction of working prototypes of a system to 
accelerate the systems development process.
rational unified process (RUP) methodology  Provides a framework 
for breaking down the development of software into four gates.
read-only memory (ROM)  The portion of a computer’s primary 
storage that does not lose its contents when one switches off the 
power.
Real Simple Syndication (RSS)  A web format used to publish 
frequently updated works, such as blogs, news headlines, audio, and 
video, in a standardized format.
real-time adaptive security  The network security model necessary 
to accommodate the emergence of multiple perimeters and moving 
parts on the network, and increasingly advanced threats targeting 
enterprises.
real-time communication  Occurs when a system updates 
information at the same rate it receives it.
real-time information  Immediate, up-to-date information.
real-time system  Provides real-time information in response to query 
requests.
recommendation engine  A data-mining algorithm that analyzes a 
customer’s purchases and actions on a website and then uses the data 
to recommend complementary products.
record  A collection of related data elements.
recovery  The ability to get a system up and running in the event of a 
system crash or failure and includes restoring the information backup.
reduced instruction set computer (RISC) chip  Limits the number of 
instructions the CPU can execute to increase processing speed.
regression model  Includes many techniques for modeling and 
analyzing several variables when the focus is on the relationship 
between a dependent variable and one or more independent variables.
reintermediation  Steps are added to the value chain as new players 
find ways to add value to the business process.
relational database management system  Allows users to create, 
read, update, and delete data in a relational database.
relational database model  A type of database that stores 
information in the form of logically related two-dimensional tables.
relational integrity constraint  The rules that enforce basic and 
fundamental information-based constraints.
reliability (or accuracy)  Ensures all systems are functioning correctly 
and providing accurate information.
report   A document containing data organized in a table, matrix, or 
graphical format allowing users to easily comprehend and understand 
information.
repository  A central location in which data is stored and managed.
reputation system  Where buyers post feedback on sellers.
requirements definition document  Prioritizes all of the business 
requirements by order of importance to the company.
requirements management  The process of managing changes to 
the business requirements throughout the project.
responsibility matrix  Defines all project roles and indicates what 
responsibilities are associated with each role.
return on investment (ROI)  Indicates the earning power of 
a project.
revenue  Refers to the amount earned resulting from the delivery or 
manufacture of a product or from the rendering of a service.

Glossary  *  G-15
social networking  The practice of expanding your business and/or 
social contacts by constructing a personal network.
social tagging  Describes the collaborative activity of marking shared 
online content with keywords or tags as a way to organize it for future 
navigation, filtering, or search.
Software as a Service (SaaS)  Delivers applications over the cloud 
using a pay-per-use revenue model.
software customization  Modifies existing software according to the 
business’s or user’s requirements.
software engineering  A disciplined approach for constructing 
information systems through the use of common methods, techniques, 
or tools.
software updates (software patch)  Occurs when the software 
vendor releases updates to software to fix problems or enhance 
features.
software upgrade  Occurs when the software vendor releases a new 
version of the software, making significant changes to the program.
software  The set of instructions that the hardware executes to carry 
out specific tasks.
sole proprietorship  A business form in which a single person is the 
sole owner and is personally responsible for all the profits and losses of 
the business.
solid state drive  An all-electronic storage device that is an alternative 
to a hard disk and is faster than hard disks because there is zero latency 
(no read/write head to move).
solvency  Represents the ability of the business to pay its bills and 
service its debt.
source code  Contains instructions written by a programmer 
specifying the actions to be performed by computer software.
source data  Identifies the primary location where data is collected.
source document  Describes the original transaction record along 
with details such as its date, purpose, and amount spent and includes 
cash receipts, canceled checks, invoices, customer refunds, employee 
time sheet, etc.
spam  Unsolicited email.
spatial data (geospatial data or geographic information)  Identifies 
the geographic location of features and boundaries on Earth, such as 
natural or constructed features, oceans, and more.
spear phishing  A phishing expedition in which the emails are 
carefully designed to target a particular person or organization.
spyware  A special class of adware that collects data about the user 
and transmits it over the Internet without the user’s knowledge or 
permission.
stakeholder  A person or group that has an interest or concern in an 
organization.
statement of cash flows  Summarizes sources and uses of cash, 
indicates whether enough cash is available to carry on routine 
operations, and offers an analysis of all business transactions, reporting 
where the firm obtained its cash and how it chose to allocate the cash.
statement of owner’s equity  Tracks and communicates changes in 
the shareholder’s earnings.
static information  Includes fixed data that are not capable of change 
in the event of a user action.
static process  Uses a systematic approach in an attempt to improve 
business effectiveness and efficiency continuously.
static report  A report created once based on data that does not 
change.
status report  Periodic reviews of actual performance versus 
expected performance.
semistructured decisions  Occurs in situations in which a few 
established processes help to evaluate potential solutions, but not 
enough to lead to a definite recommended decision.
sensitivity analysis  The study of the impact on other variables when 
one variable is changed repeatedly.
server virtualization  Combines the physical resources, such as 
servers, processors, and operating systems, from the applications.
server  Computer that is dedicated to providing information in 
response to external requests.
service-oriented architecture (SOA)  A business-driven enterprise 
architecture that supports integrating a business as linked, repeatable 
activities, tasks, or services.
serviceability  How quickly a third party or vendor can change a 
system to ensure it meets user needs and the terms of any contracts, 
including agreed levels of reliability, maintainability, or availability.
services  Tasks performed by people that customers will buy to satisfy 
a want or need.
shareholder  Another term for business owners.
shopping bot  Software that will search several retailer websites and 
provide a comparison of each retailer’s offerings including price and 
availability.
sign-off  The system users’ actual signatures indicating they approve 
all of the business requirements.
single user license  Restricts the use of the software to one user at 
a time.
single-factor authentication  The traditional security process, which 
requires a username and password.
site license  Enables any qualified users within the organization 
to install the software, regardless of whether the computer is on a 
network.
slice-and-dice  The ability to look at information from different 
perspectives.
smart card  A device that is around the same size as a credit card, 
containing embedded technologies that can store information and small 
amounts of software to perform some limited processing.
smart grid  Delivers electricity using two-way digital technology.
smartphone  Offers more advanced computing ability and 
connectivity than basic cell phones.
snapshot  A view of data at a particular moment in time.
SOA service  A business task, such as checking a potential customer’s 
credit rating when opening a new account.
social bookmarking  Allows users to share, organize, search, and 
manage bookmarks.
social engineering  Hackers use their social skills to trick people into 
revealing access credentials or other valuable information.
social graph  Represents the interconnection of relationships in a 
social network.
social media monitoring  The process of monitoring and responding 
to what is being said about a company, individual, product, or brand.
social media policy  Outlines the corporate guidelines or principles 
governing employee online communications.
social media  Refers to websites that rely on user participation and 
user-contributed content.
social network  An application that connects people by matching 
profile information.
social networking analysis (SNA)  Maps group contacts, identifying 
who knows each other and who works together.

G-16  *  Glossary
SWOT analysis  Evaluates an organization’s strengths, weaknesses, 
opportunities, and threats to identify significant influences that work for 
or against business strategies.
synchronous communication  Communications that occur at the 
same time such as IM or chat.
system clock  Works like a wristwatch and uses a battery mounted on 
the motherboard to provide power when the computer is turned off.
system restore  Enables a user to return to the previous operating 
system.
system software  Controls how the various technology tools work 
together along with the application software.
system testing  Verifies that the units or pieces of code function 
correctly when integrated.
system virtualization  The ability to present the resources of a 
single computer as if it is a collection of separate computers (“virtual 
machines”), each with its own virtual CPUs, network interfaces, storage, 
and operating system.
system  A collection of parts that link to achieve a common purpose.
systems development life cycle (SDLC)  The overall process for 
developing information systems from planning and analysis through 
implementation and maintenance.
systems thinking  A way of monitoring the entire system by viewing 
multiple inputs being processed or transformed to produce outputs 
while continuously gathering feedback on each part.
T
tacit knowledge  The knowledge contained in people’s heads.
tactical planning  Focuses on producing goods and services as 
efficiently as possible within the strategic plan.
tags  Specific keywords or phrases incorporated into website content 
for means of classification or taxonomy.
tangible benefits  Easy to quantify and typically measured to 
determine the success or failure of a project.
taxonomy  The scientific classification of organisms into groups based 
on similarities of structure or origin.
technology failure  Occurs when the ability of a company to operate 
is impaired because of a hardware, software, or data outage.
technology recovery strategy  Focus specifically on prioritizing 
the order for restoring hardware, software, and data across the 
organization that best meets business recovery requirements.
teergrubbing  Anti-spamming approach where the receiving 
computer launches a return attack against the spammer, sending email 
messages back to the computer that originated the suspected spam.
telecommunication system  Enables the transmission of data over 
public or private networks.
terabyte (TB)  Roughly 1 trillion bytes.
test condition  The detailed steps the system must perform along with 
the expected results of each step.
testing phase  Involves bringing all the project pieces together into a 
special testing environment to test for errors, bugs, and interoperability 
and verify that the system meets all of the business requirements 
defined in the analysis phase.
threat of new entrants  High when it is easy for new competitors 
to enter a market and low when there are significant entry barriers to 
entering a market.
threat of substitute products or services  High when there are 
many alternatives to a product or service and low when there are few 
alternatives from which to choose.
storage virtualization   Combines multiple network storage devices 
so they appear to be a single storage device.
strategic business units (SBUs)  Consists of several stand-alone 
businesses.
strategic level  Managers develop overall business strategies, goals, 
and objectives as part of the company’s strategic plan.
strategic planning  Focuses on long-range planning such as plant 
size, location, and type of process to be used.
streaming  A method of sending audio and video files over the 
Internet in such a way that the user can view the file while it is being 
transferred.
structured data  Data that has a defined length, type, and format and 
includes numbers, dates, or strings such as Customer Address.
structured decisions  Involves situations where established 
processes offer potential solutions.
structured query language  Users write lines of code to answer 
questions against a database.
stylus  A pen-like device used to tap the screen to enter commands.
supplier power  The suppliers’ ability to influence the prices they 
charge for supplies (including materials, labor, and services).
supplier relationship management (SRM)  Focuses on keeping 
suppliers satisfied by evaluating and categorizing suppliers for different 
projects, which optimizes supplier selection.
supply chain design  Determines how to structure a supply chain 
including the product, selection of partners, the location and capacity 
of warehouses, transportation methods, and supporting management 
information systems.
supply chain execution system  Ensures supply chain cohesion by 
automating the different activities of the supply chain.
supply chain management (SCM)  Involves the management of 
information flows between and among activities in a supply chain to 
maximize total supply chain effectiveness and corporate profitability.
supply chain planning system  Uses advanced mathematical 
algorithms to improve the flow and efficiency of the supply chain while 
reducing inventory.
supply chain visibility  The ability to view all areas up and down the 
supply chain in real time.
supply chain  Consists of all parties involved, directly or indirectly, in 
the procurement of a product or raw material.
support value activities  Found along the top of the value chain 
and includes business processes, such as firm infrastructure, human 
resource management, technology development, and procurement that 
support the primary value activities.
sustainable MIS disposal  Refers to the safe disposal of MIS assets at 
the end of their life cycle.
sustainable MIS infrastructure  Identifies ways that a company can 
grow in terms of computing resources while simultaneously becoming 
less dependent on hardware and energy consumption.
sustainable, or green, MIS  Describes the production, management, 
use, and disposal of technology in a way that minimizes damage to the 
environment.
sustaining technology  Produces an improved product customers are 
eager to buy, such as a faster car or larger hard drive.
swimlane diagram  Documents the steps or activities of a workflow 
by grouping activities into swimlanes, which are horizontal or vertical 
columns containing all associated activities for that category or 
department.
switching cost  The costs that can make customers reluctant to switch 
to another product or service.

Glossary  *  G-17
usability  The degree to which a system is easy to learn, efficient, and 
satisfying to use.
user acceptance testing (UAT)  Determines if the system satisfies the 
user and business requirements.
user documentation  Highlights how to use the system and how to 
troubleshoot issues or problems.
user-contributed content (user-generated content)  Content created 
and updated by many users for many users.
utility computing  Offers a pay-per-use revenue model similar to a 
metered service such as gas or electricity.
utility software  Provides additional functionality to the operating 
system.
V
value chain analysis  Views a firm as a series of business processes 
that each add value to the product or service.
value-added  The term used to describe the difference between the 
cost of inputs and the value of price of outputs.
variable  A data characteristic that stands for a value that changes or 
varies over time.
vertical privilege escalation   Attackers grant themselves a higher 
access level such as administrator allowing the attacker to perform 
illegal actions such as running unauthorized code or deleting data.
videoconference  Allows people at two or more locations to interact 
via two-way video and audio transmissions simultaneously as well as 
share documents, data, computer displays, and whiteboards.
virtual assistant (VA)  A small program stored on a PC or portable 
device that monitors emails, faxes, messages, and phone calls.
virtual reality  A computer-simulated environment that can be a 
simulation of the real world or an imaginary world.
virtualization  The creation of a virtual (rather than actual) version of 
computing resources, such as an operating system, a server, a storage 
device, or network resources.
virus  Software written with malicious intent to cause annoyance or 
damage.
vishing (or voice phishing)  A phone scam that attempts to defraud 
people by asking them to call a bogus telephone number to “confirm” 
their account information.
Voice over LTE (VoLTE)   Allows mobile voice calls to be made over 
broadband networks, creating—under the right network conditions—
clearer audio and fewer dropped calls.
voiceprint  A set of measurable characteristics of a human voice that 
uniquely identifies an individual.
volatile  Must have constant power to function; contents are lost when 
the computer’s electric supply fails.
volatility  Refers to RAM’s complete loss of stored information if 
power is interrupted.
vulnerability  A system weakness that can be exploited by a threat; 
for example, a password that is never changed or a system left on while 
an employee goes to lunch.
W
war chalking  The practice of tagging pavement with codes displaying 
where Wi-Fi access is available.
war driving  Deliberately searching for Wi-Fi signals from a vehicle.
warm site  A separate facility with computer equipment that requires 
installation and configuration.
threat  An act or object that poses a danger to assets.
time bombs  Computer viruses that wait for a specific date before 
executing instructions.
time-series information  Time-stamped information collected at a 
particular frequency.
To-Be process model  Shows the results of applying change 
improvement opportunities to the current (As-Is) process model.
token  Small electronic devices that change user passwords 
automatically.
transaction processing system (TPS)  The basic business system that 
serves the operational level (analysts) in an organization.
transaction  Exchange or transfer of goods, services, or funds 
involving two or more people.
transactional information  Encompasses all of the information 
contained within a single business process or unit of work, and its 
primary purpose is to support the performing of daily operational tasks.
transborder data flows (TDF)  When business data flows across 
international boundaries over the telecommunications networks of 
global information systems.
transformation process  The technical core, especially in 
manufacturing organizations; the actual conversion of inputs to outputs.
transmission control protocol/Internet protocol (TCP/IP)  Provides 
the technical foundation for the public Internet as well as for large 
numbers of private networks.
transportation planning system  Tracks and analyzes the movement 
of materials and products to ensure the delivery of materials and 
finished goods at the right time, the right place, and the lowest cost.
trend analysis  A trend is examined to identify its nature, causes, 
speed of development, and potential impacts.
trend monitoring  Trends viewed as particularly important in a 
specific community, industry, or sector are carefully monitored, 
watched, and reported to key decision makers.
trend projection  When numerical data are available, a trend can be 
plotted to display changes through time and into the future.
twisted-pair cable  A type of cable composed of four (or more) copper 
wires twisted around each other within a plastic sheath.
two-factor authentication  Requires the user to provide two means of 
authentication, what the user knows (password) and what the user has 
(security token).
typosquatting  A problem that occurs when someone registers 
purposely misspelled variations of well-known domain names.
U
unavailable  When a system is not operating or cannot be used.
unit testing  Testing individual units or pieces of code for a system.
universal resource locator (URL)  The address of a file or resource on 
the web such as www.apple.com.
unstructured data  Data that is not defined and does not follow a 
specified format and is typically free-form text such as emails, Twitter 
tweets, and text messages.
unstructured decisions  Occurs in situations in which no procedures 
or rules exist to guide decision makers toward the correct choice.
up-selling  Increasing the value of the sale.
upcycle  Reuses or refurbishes ewaste and creates a new product.
uplift modeling  A form of predictive analytics for marketing 
campaigns that attempts to identify target markets or people who could 
be convinced to buy products.

G-18  *  Glossary
wire media  Transmission material manufactured so that signals will 
be confined to a narrow path and will behave predictably.
wired equivalent privacy (WEP)  An encryption algorithm designed to 
protect wireless transmission data.
wireless access point (WAP)  Enables devices to connect to a 
wireless network to communicate with each other.
wireless fidelity (Wi-Fi)  A means by which portable devices can 
connect wirelessly to a local area network, using access points that 
send and receive data via radio waves.
wireless LAN (WLAN)  A local area network that uses radio signals to 
transmit and receive data over distances of a few hundred feet.
wireless MAN (WMAN)  A metropolitan area network that uses radio 
signals to transmit and receive data.
wireless media  Natural parts of the Earth’s environment that can be 
used as physical paths to carry electrical signals.
wireless WAN (WWAN)  A wide area network that uses radio signals 
to transmit and receive data.
workflow control systems  Monitor processes to ensure tasks, 
activities, and responsibilities are executed as specified.
workflow  Includes the tasks, activities, and responsibilities required 
to execute each step in a business process.
workplace MIS monitoring  Tracks people’s activities by such 
measures as number of keystrokes, error rate, and number of 
transactions processed.
workshop training  Held in a classroom environment and led by an 
instructor.
World Wide Web (WWW)  A global hypertext system that uses the 
Internet as its transport mechanism.
World Wide Web consortium (W3C)  An international community that 
develops open standards to ensure the long-term growth of the Web 
(www.w3.org).
Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access (WiMAX)  
A communications technology aimed at providing high-speed wireless 
data over metropolitan area networks.
worm  Spreads itself not only from file to file but also from computer 
to computer.
Z
zombie farm  A group of computers on which a hacker has planted 
zombie programs.
zombie  A program that secretly takes over another computer for the 
purpose of launching attacks on other computers.
waterfall methodology  A sequence of phases in which the output of 
each phase becomes the input for the next.
Web 1.0 (or Business 1.0)  Refers to the World Wide Web during its 
first few years of operation between 1991 and 2003.
Web 2.0 (or Business 2.0)  The next generation of Internet use—a 
more mature, distinctive communications platform characterized by 
new qualities such as collaboration, sharing, and free.
web accessibility initiative (WAI)  Brings together people 
from industry, disability organizations, government, and research 
labs from around the world to develop guidelines and resources 
to help make the web accessible to people with disabilities, including 
auditory, cognitive, neurological, physical, speech, and visual 
disabilities.
web accessibility  Means that people with disabilities—including 
visual, auditory, physical, speech, cognitive, and neurological 
disabilities—can use the web.
web browser  Allows users to access the WWW.
web conferencing (webinar)  Blends videoconferencing with 
document sharing and allows the user to deliver a presentation over the 
web to a group of geographically dispersed participants.
web service   An open-standards way of supporting interoperability.
Web-based self-service systems  Allows customers to use the web to 
find answers to their questions or solutions to their problems.
website bookmark  A locally stored URL or the address of a file or 
Internet page saved as a shortcut.
website name stealing  The theft of a website’s name that occurs 
when someone, posing as a site’s administrator, changes the ownership 
of the domain name assigned to the website to another website owner.
website personalization  Occurs when a website has stored enough 
data about a person’s likes and dislikes to fashion offers more likely to 
appeal to that person.
what-if analysis  Checks the impact of a change in an assumption on 
the proposed solution.
Wi-Fi infrastructure  Includes the inner workings of a Wi-Fi service 
or utility, including the signal transmitters, towers, or poles, along with 
additional equipment required to send out a Wi-Fi signal.
Wi-Fi protected access (WPA)  A wireless security protocol to protect 
Wi-Fi networks.
wide area network (WAN)  Spans large geographic area, such as a 
state, province, or country.
wiki  A type of collaborative web page that allows users to add, 
remove, and change content, which can be easily organized and 
reorganized as required.

Notes  *  N-1
CHAPTER 1
	 1.	 Hiroko Tabuchi, “Stores Suffer From a Shift of Behavior in Buy­
ers”, NY Times, August 13, 2015, accessed 4/15/2016 Travis 
Bradberry, “You Should Spend Your Money on Experiences, 
Not Things”, Entrepreneur, March 1, 2016, accessed 4/14/2016. 
	 2.	 Interesting Facts, www.interestingfacts.org, accessed 
June 2012.
	 3.	 http://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/internet-of-things/
industrysolutions.html , accessed May 2014; Michael Chui, 
Markus Löffler, and Roger Roberts, “The Internet of Things,” 
Mckinsey Quarterly, March 2010, http://www.mckinsey.com/
insights/high_tech_ telecoms_internet/the_internet_of_things; 
Stefan Ferber, “How the Internet of Things Changes Every­
thing,” Harvard Business Review, May 2013. 
	 4.	 Thomas L. Friedman, The World Is Flat (New York: Farrar, 
Straus & Giroux, 2005); Thomas Friedman, “The World Is 
Flat,” www.thomaslfriedman.com, accessed June 2010; 
Thomas L. Friedman, “The Opinion Pages,” The New York 
Times, topics.nytimes.com/top/opinion/editorialsandoped/
oped/columnists/thomaslfriedman, accessed June 2012.
CHAPTER 2
	 1.	 Ina Fried, “Apple Earnings Top Estimates,” CNET News, 
October 11, 2005, http://news.cnet.com/Appleearningstopesti­
mates/2100-1041_3-5893289.html?tag=lia;rcol , accessed 
July 2012.
	 2.	 Frederic Paul, “Smart Social Networking for Your Small 
­Business,” Forbes.com, www.forbes.com/2009/06/05/social-
networkinginterop-entrepreneurs-technology-bmighty.html, 
accessed July 2012.
	 3.	 Michael E. Porter, “The Five Competitive Forces That Shape 
Strategy,” The Harvard Business Review Book Series, Harvard 
Business Review, January 2008; Michael E. Porter, “Competi­
tive Strategy: Techniques for Analyzing Industries and Com­
petitors,” Harvard Business Review, January 2002; Michael 
E. Porter, “On Competition,” The Harvard Business Review 
Book Series (Boston: Harvard Business School Publishing, 
1985); Harvard Institute for Strategy and Competitiveness, 
www.isc.hbs.edu/, accessed June 2012.
	 4.	 Michael E. Porter, “The Five Competitive Forces That Shape 
Strategy,” The Harvard Business Review Book Series, Harvard 
Business Review, January 2008; Michael E. Porter, “Competi­
tive Strategy: Techniques for Analyzing Industries and Com­
petitors,” Harvard Business Review, January 2002; Michael 
E. Porter, “On Competition,” The Harvard Business Review 
Book Series (Boston: Harvard Business School Publishing, 
1985); Harvard Institute for Strategy and Competitiveness, 
www.isc.hbs.edu/, accessed June 2012.
	 5.	 Michael E. Porter, “The Five Competitive Forces That Shape 
Strategy,” The Harvard Business Review Book Series, ­Harvard 
Business Review, January 2008; Michael E. Porter, “Competi­
tive Strategy: Techniques for Analyzing Industries and Com­
petitors,” Harvard Business Review, January 2002; Michael 
E. Porter, “On Competition,” The Harvard Business Review 
Book Series (Boston: Harvard Business School ­Publishing, 
1985); Harvard Institute for Strategy and Competitive­
ness, www.isc.hbs.edu/, accessed June 2012.
	 6.	 Michael E. Porter, “The Five Competitive Forces That Shape 
Strategy,” The Harvard Business Review Book Series, Harvard 
Business Review, January 2008; Michael E. Porter, “Competi­
tive Strategy: Techniques for Analyzing Industries and Com­
petitors,” Harvard Business Review, January 2002; Michael 
E. Porter, “On Competition,” The Harvard Business Review 
Book Series (Boston: Harvard Business School Publishing, 
1985); Harvard Institute for Strategy and Competitiveness,
www.isc.hbs.edu/, accessed June 2012.
	 7.	 Michael E. Porter, “The Five Competitive Forces That Shape 
Strategy,” The Harvard Business Review Book Series, Harvard 
Business Review, January 2008; Michael E. Porter, “Competi­
tive Strategy: Techniques for Analyzing Industries and Com­
petitors,” Harvard Business Review, January 2002; Michael 
E. Porter, “On Competition,” The Harvard Business Review 
Book Series (Boston: Harvard Business School Publishing, 
1985); Harvard Institute for Strategy and Competitiveness, 
www.isc.hbs.edu/, accessed June 2012.
	 8.	 Michael E. Porter, “The Five Competitive Forces That Shape 
Strategy,” The Harvard Business Review Book Series, Harvard 
Business Review, January 2008; Michael E. Porter, “Competi­
tive Strategy: Techniques for Analyzing Industries and Com­
petitors,” Harvard Business Review, January 2002; Michael 
E. Porter, “On Competition,” The Harvard Business Review 
Book Series (Boston: Harvard Business School Publishing, 
1985); Harvard Institute for Strategy and Competitiveness, 
www.isc.hbs.edu/, accessed June 2012.
	 9.	 Michael E. Porter, “The Five Competitive Forces That Shape 
Strategy,” The Harvard Business Review Book Series, Harvard 
Business Review, January 2008; Michael E. Porter, “Competi­
tive Strategy: Techniques for Analyzing Industries and Com­
petitors,” Harvard Business Review, January 2002; Michael 
E. Porter, “On Competition,” The Harvard Business Review 
Book Series (Boston: Harvard Business School Publishing, 
1985); Harvard Institute for Strategy and Competitiveness, 
www.isc.hbs.edu/, accessed June 2012.
	10.	 Michael E. Porter, “The Five Competitive Forces That Shape 
Strategy,” The Harvard Business Review Book Series, Harvard 
Business Review, January 2008; Michael E. Porter, “Competi­
tive Strategy: Techniques for Analyzing Industries and Com­
petitors,” Harvard Business Review, January 2002; Michael 
N O T E S

N-2  *  Notes
E. Porter, “On Competition,” The Harvard Business Review Book 
Series (Boston: Harvard Business School Publishing, 1985); Harvard 
Institute for Strategy and Competitiveness, www.isc.hbs.edu/, 
accessed June 2012.
	11.	 Michael E. Porter, “The Five Competitive Forces That Shape Strat­
egy,” The Harvard Business Review Book Series, Harvard Business 
Review, January 2008; Michael E. Porter, “Competitive Strategy: 
Techniques for Analyzing Industries and Competitors,” Harvard 
­Business Review, January 2002; Michael E. Porter, “On Competi­
tion,” The Harvard Business Review Book Series (Boston: Harvard 
Business School Publishing, 1985); Harvard Institute for Strategy and 
Competitiveness, www.isc.hbs.edu/, accessed June 2012.
	12.	 Michael E. Porter, “The Five Competitive Forces That Shape Strat­
egy,” The Harvard Business Review Book Series, Harvard Business 
Review, January 2008; Michael E. Porter, “Competitive Strategy: 
Techniques for Analyzing Industries and Competitors,” Harvard 
Business Review, January 2002; Michael E. Porter, “On Competi­
tion,” The Harvard Business Review Book Series (Boston: Harvard 
Business School Publishing, 1985); Harvard Institute for Strategy 
and Competitiveness, www.isc.hbs.edu/, accessed June 2012.
	13.	 “Harvard Business Review on Managing the Value Chain,” Harvard 
Business School Press, January 2000. 
	14.	 “Harvard Business Review on Managing the Value Chain,” Harvard 
Business School Press, January 2000. 
	15.	 Michael Porter, TED talk live,  https://www.ted.com/talks/michael_
porter_why_business_can_be_good_at_solving_social_problems, 
accessed 2015.
CHAPTER 3
	 1.	 Christopher Koch, “The ABC’s of Supply Chain Management,” 
www.cio.com, accessed October 2012.
	 2.	 Amazon Reveals Impressive Prime Air Drone, www.247supplychain
.com, accessed November 2015.
CHAPTER 4
	 1.	 Michael Schrage, “Rebuilding the Business Case,” CIO ­Magazine 
Online, www.cio.com, accessed November 2012.
	 2.	 “Integrating Information at Children’s Hospital,” KMWorld, www.
kmworld.com/Articles/ReadArticle.aspx, accessed April 2012.
	 3.	 The Future of Work, Fast Company, Accessed December 2015, 
http://www.fastcompany.com/3048398/the-future-of-work/
10-c-suite-jobs-of-the-future
	 4.	 Peter Drucker, “The Man Who Invented Management: Why Peter 
Drucker’s Ideas Still Matter,” www.businessweek.com/magazine/
content/05_48/b3961001.htm, accessed October 2010.
	 5.	 Neustar Webmetrics, www.webmetrics.com/, accessed April 2015.
	 6.	 Neustar Webmetrics, www.webmetrics.com/, accessed April 2015.
	 7.	 Neustar Webmetrics, www.webmetrics.com/, accessed April 2015.
	 8.	 The Balanced Scorecard, www.balancedscorecard.org, accessed 
February 2015.
	 9.	 Clive Thompson, “Do You Speak Statistics?” Wired, 
May 2010, p. 36.
CHAPTER 5
	 1.	 Scott Berinato, “The CIO Code of Ethical Data Management,” CIO 
Magazine, www.cio.com, accessed April 2015.
	 2.	 http://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/internet-of-things/­
industrysolutions.html, accessed May 2014; Michael Chui, Markus 
Löffler, and Roger Roberts, “The Internet of Things,” Mckinsey 
­Quarterly, March 2010, http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/high_
tech_ telecoms_internet/the_internet_of_things; Stefan Ferber, 
“How the Internet of Things Changes ­Everything,” Harvard Busi­
ness Review, May 2013.
CHAPTER 6
	 1.	 http://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/internet-of-things/
industrysolutions.html , accessed May 2014; Michael Chui, Markus 
Löffler, and Roger Roberts, “The Internet of Things,” Mckinsey 
Quarterly, March 2010, http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/
high_tech_telecoms_internet/the_internet_of_things; Stefan 
­Ferber, “How the Internet of Things Changes ­Everything,” Harvard 
­Business Review, September 2015. 
	 2.	 Julia Kiling, “OLAP Gains Fans among Data-Hungry Firms,” 
Computer­World, January 8, 2014, p. 54.
	 3.	 www.ellisisland.org, accessed October 2015 
	 4.	 www.zappos.com, accessed April, 2015. 
	 5.	 Stephen Baker, “What Data Crunchers Did for Obama,” ­Bloomberg 
Businessweek, January 2009.
CHAPTER 7
	 1.	 Prashant Gopal, “Zillow Opens Online Mortgage Marketplace,” 
BusinessWeek, April 3, 2012, http://www.­businessweek.com/­
lifestyle/content/apr2008/bw2008043_948040.htm.
CHAPTER 8
	 1.	 Julie Schlosser, “Looking for Intelligence in Ice Cream,” ­Fortune, 
March 2009; Leslie Goff, “Summertime Heats Up IT at Ben & 
­Jerry’s,” ComputerWorld, July 2010; Customer ­Success Stories, 
www.cognos.com, accessed January 2012
	 2.	 Maria Popova, “Data Visualization: Stories for the Information Age,” 
Bloomberg Businessweek, April 2011.
	 3.	 www.webdesignerdepot.com, accessed April 2012; ­flowingdata.
com/2011/12/21/the-best-data-visualization-­projects-of-2011/, 
accessed April 2012.
CHAPTER 9
	 1.	 Tim Kelly, Wired, Consumers are in the Connected Car’s Driver Seat 
in 2015, http://www.wired.com/insights/2015/01/consumers-are-in-
the-connected-cars-driver-seat-in-2015/, accessed April 2016
	 2.	 Tom Davenport, “Tom Davenport: Back to Decision-Making Basics,” 
Bloomberg Businessweek, March 2008.
	 3.	 “What Is Systems Thinking,” SearchCIO.com, http://searchcio.tech.
	 4.	 Rachel King, “Soon That Nearby Worker Might Be a Robot,” 
­Bloomberg Businessweek, June 1, 2014.
	 5.	 Sharon Begley, “Software au Natural”; Neil McManus, “Robots at 
Your Service”; Santa Fe Institute, www.dis.anl.gov/abms/, accessed 
June 24, 2007; Michael A. Arbib (Ed.), The Handbook of Brain 
Theory and Neural Networks (MIT Press, mitpress.mit.edu, 1995); 
L. Biacino and G. Gerla, “Fuzzy Logic, Continuity and Effectiveness,” 
Archive for Mathematical Logic.
	 6.	 “Darpa Grand Challenge,” www.darpa.mil/grandchallenge/, 
accessed September 1, 2015.

Notes  *  N-3
	 8.	 Ibid. 
	 9.	 Ibid. 
	10.	 Ibid. 
	11.	 Ibid. 
	12.	 Tim Berners-Lee, “Semantic Web Road Map,” October 14, 1998, 
www.w3.org/DesignIssues/Semantic.html, accessed April 12, 2012.
	13.	 Ingrid Lunden, “Pinterest Updates Terms of Service as It Preps an 
API and Private Pinboards: More Copyright Friendly,” Tech Crunch, 
April 2012; Chad McCloud, “What Pinterest Teaches Us About 
Innovation in Business,” Bloomberg Businessweek, May 2012; 
­Courteney Palis, “Pinterest Traffic Growth Soars to New Heights: 
Experian Report,” The Huffington Post, April 6, 2012.
	14.	 www.kiva.org, accessed 10/31/2015.
CHAPTER 16
	 1.	 “How Do Cellular Devices Work,” www.cell-phone101.info/devices.
php, accessed February 9, 2008.
	 2.	 Ibid.
	 3.	 Deepak Pareek, WiMAX: Taking Wireless to the MAX (Boca Raton, 
FL: CRC Press, 2006), pp. 150–51; V. C. Gungor and F. C. Lambert, 
“A Survey on Communication Networks for Electric System Automa­
tion, Computer Networks,” International Journal of Computer and 
Telecommunications Networking, May 15, 2006, pp. 877–97.
	 4.	 Ibid.
	 5.	 Ibid.
	 6.	 Ibid.
	 7.	 Ibid.
	 8.	 Ibid.
	 9.	 “RFID Privacy and You,” www.theyaretrackingyou.com/rfid-privacy-
and-you.html, accessed February 12, 2012. “RFID Roundup,” 
www.rfidgazette.org, accessed February 10, 2012. “Security-Free 
­Wireless Networks,” www.wired.com, accessed February 11, 2012.
	10.	 “RFID Privacy and You,” www.theyaretrackingyou.com/rfid-privacy-
and-you.html, accessed February 12, 2012. “RFID Roundup,” 
www.rfidgazette.org, accessed February 10, 2012. “Security-Free 
­Wireless Networks,” www.wired.com, accessed February 11, 2012.
	11.	 Natasha Lomas, “Location Based Services to Boom in 2008,” 
­Bloomberg Businessweek, February 11, 2008, www.businessweek
.com/globalbiz/content/feb2008/gb20080211_420894.htm.
	12.	 http://www.theverge.com/2014/8/12/5991005/slack-is-killing-email-
yes-really, www.slack.com, accessed April 2016.
	13.	 www.bitcoin.com, accessed January 2016.
	14.	 Brad Stone, “Invasion of the Taxi Snatchers: Uber Leads an 
Industry’s Disruption,” Bloomberg Businessweek, Febru­
ary 2014, http://www.businessweek.com/articles/2014-02-20/
uber-leads-taxi-industry-disruption-amid-fight-for-riders-drivers.
CHAPTER 17
	 1.	 http://www.gameindustrycareerguide.com/video-game-­
programmer-salary/, accessed 4/15/2016.
CHAPTER 18
	 1.	 “Four Steps to Getting Things on Track,” Bloomberg Businessweek, 
July 7, 2010, www.businessweek.com/idg/2010-07-07/project-
management-4-steps-to-getting-things-on-track.html.
CHAPTER 10
	 1.	 http://www.fastcodesign.com/3042352/how-one-knitter-makes-
almost-1-million-a-year-on-etsy, accessed January 2016.
CHAPTER 11
	 1.	 www.zappos.com, accessed April 9, 2010.
CHAPTER 12
	 1.	 http://www.cio.com/article/2429865/enterprise-resource-
planning/10-famous-erp-disasters--dustups-and-disappointments.
html, accessed February 2016.
	 2.	 Tim Kelly, Wired, Consumers are in the Connected Car’s 
Driver Seat in 2015, http://www.wired.com/insights/2015/01/­
consumers-are-in-the-connected-cars-driver-seat-in-2015/, 
accessed April 2016.
	 3.	 www.actionaly.com, accessed April 2012; www.socialmedia.
biz/2011/01/12/top-20-social-media-monitoring-vendors-­forbusiness, 
accessed April 2012; www.radian6.com, accessed April 2012; www.
collectiveintellect.com, accessed April 2012.
CHAPTER 13
	 1.	 Eugene Kim, Business Insider, The Man Behind One Of The Hottest 
Apps In The World Tells Us How Even Boring ­Enterprise Apps Can 
Go Viral, accessed August 2014.
	 2.	 “Polaroid Files for Bankruptcy Protection,” www.dpreview.com/
news/0110/01101201polaroidch11.asp, accessed July 2012.
	 3.	 Clayton Christensen, The Innovator’s Dilemma (Boston: ­Harvard
 Business School, 1997); Adam Lashinsky, “The ­Disrupters,” 
­Fortune, August 11, 2003, pp. 62–65.
	 4.	 Timothy Mullaney, “Netflix,” Bloomberg Businessweek, 
www.businessweek.com/smallbiz/, accessed June 2010.
	 5.	 “Disintermediation,” TechTarget, http://whatis.techtarget.com/
defition.html, accessed April 2010.
	 6.	 http://www.economist.com/blogs/economist-explains/2015/01/
economist-e, accessed January 2016.
CHAPTER 14
	 1.	 “The Complete Web 2.0 Directory,” www.go2web20.net/, accessed 
June 2012 “Web 2.0 for CIOs,” www.cio.com/article/16807; www.
emarketer.com, accessed January 2012.About.com.
CHAPTER 15
	 1.	 “The Complete Web 2.0 Directory,” www.go2web20.net/, accessed 
June 24, 2007; “Web 2.0 for CIOs,” www.cio.com/article/16807;www.
emarketer.com, accessed January 2010; Daniel Nations, “What Is Social 
Bookmarking,” About.com, “Web Trends,” http://webtrends.about.com/
od/socialbookmarking101/p/aboutsocialtags.htm, accessed April 5, 2010.
	 2.	 Ibid. 
	 3.	 Ibid. 
	 4.	 Ibid. 
	 5.	 Ibid. 
	 6.	 Ibid. 
	 7.	 Ibid. 

N-4  *  Notes
	 2.	 Cisco, “Network Media Types,” www.ciscopress.com/articles/
article.asp?p=31276, accessed January 2009.
	 3.	 Cisco, “TCP/IP Overview,” www.cisco.com/en/US/tech/tk365/­
technologies_white_paper09186a008014f8a9.shtml, accessed 
January 2009.
	 4.	 Cisco, “TCP/IP Overview.” 
	 5.	 Intel in Communications, “10 Gigabit Ethernet Technology Over­
view,” www.intel.com/network/connectivity/resources/doc_library/
white_papers/pro10gbe_lr_sa_wp.pdf, accessed January 2009.
	 6.	 “IPv6,” www.ipv6.org, accessed January 2009.
PLUG-IN B6
	 1.	 www.ftc.gov/ogc/coppa1.htm, accessed April 2013.
PLUG-IN B9
	 1.	 “Center Energy Efficiency,” www.energystar.gov/ia/partners/
prod_development/downloads/EPA_Report_Exec_Summary_Final.
pdf, accessed January 23, 2008.
	 2.	 Google Docs, docs.google.com, accessed June 4, 2010.
PLUG-IN B12
	 1.	 Heather Pemberton Levy, Top 10 Technology Trends Signal the Digi­
tal Mesh www.gartner.com, accessed January 2016.
CHAPTER 19
	 1.	 “Baggage Handling System Errors,” www.flavors.com, accessed 
November 16, 2003.
	 2.	 Edward Yourdon, Death March: The Complete Software ­Developer’s 
Guide to Surviving “Mission Impossible” Projects (Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Prentice Hall PTR, 1999).
	 3.	 Charles Bryant, “Top 10 Things You Should Not Share on Social 
­Networks,” Howstuffworks, howstuffworks.com, accessed May 2012.
	 4.	 Rachel King; “How Aaron Levie and his childhood friends built 
Box into a $2 billion business, without stabbing each other in 
the back,” March 8, 2014, http://www.techrepublic.com/article/
how-aaronlevie-and-his-childhood-friends-built-box-into-a-2-billion-
businesswithout-stabbing-each-other-in-the-back/.
PLUG-IN B3
	 1.	 Aaron Ricadela, “Seismic Shift,” Information Week, March 14, 2005.
	 2.	 “Electronic Breaking Points,” PC World, August 2005.
	 3.	 “The Linux Counter,” counter.li.org, accessed October 2005.
	 4.	 www.mit.com, accessed October 2005.
	 5.	 www.needapresent.com, accessed October 2005.
PLUG-IN B5
	 1.	 Andy Patrizio, “Peer-to-Peer Goes Beyond Napster,” Wired, 
February, 14, 2001, www.wired.com/science/discoveries/
news/2001/02/41768, accessed January 2009.

Index  *  I-1
A
Abandoning a virtual shopping cart, 264–265
ABN AMRO Bank, 495
AcceleGlove, 403
Acceptable encryption policy, 441
Acceptable use policy (AUP), 452
Access point (AP), 283
Accessibility, 419–420
Accounting, 12, 13, 367
Accounting and finance ERP components, 215
Accounting business processes, 381
Accounting department, 367
Accuracy, 421
Accurate information, 122–123
Actionly.com, 227–229
Active RFID tag, 289
Active Software, 213
Adaptive computer devices, 401
Add-on services, 26
Additive manufacturing, 184
Administrator access, 420
Advanced data analytics, 141
Advanced encryption standard (AES), 444
Adware, 76, 455
Adwords, 257
Aeropostale, 3
AES (advanced encryption standard), 444
Affiliate program, 249
Affinity grouping analysis, 137
Afinia, 230
Agent-based modeling, 175
Agile BI, 492–493
Agile methodology, 326
Agile MIS infrastructure
accessibility, 419–420
availability, 420–421
characteristics, 420
maintainability, 421
portability, 421
reliability, 421–422
scalability, 422
usability, 422
AI. See Artificial intelligence (AI)
Airline industry, 26–27
Aldebaran Robotics, 519
Alexa, 162
Algorithm, 141
All the President’s Men (film), 148
Alpha testing, 319
Altman, Eli, 254
ALU (arithmetic-logic unit), 397
Amazon, 3, 6, 26, 52, 162, 187, 188, 192, 205, 251, 256, 
477, 479
Amazon EC2, 483
Amazon Kindle, 479
Amazon Web Services (AWS), 481
Ambient digital experience, 516–517
American Family Immigration History Center, 108
American Sign Language (ASL), 402–403
Amoruso, Sophia, 264
Analysis latency, 492
Analysis paralysis, 143, 158
Analysis phase, 314–315
Analytical CRM, 195, 197, 201
Analytical information, 100, 101, 169
Analytics, 11, 141
Anderson, Chris, 246, 323
Android Auto, 162
Android operating system, 406
Anomaly detection, 141
Anti-spam policy, 453
Anticybersquatting Consumer Protection Act, 254
Antitheft apps, 295–296
Antivirus software, 445
Antz (film), 472
AOL, 259
API (application programming interface), 272
Apple, 21–22, 91, 162, 243, 479
Applebee’s, 119
Applet, 244
Appliance, 404
Application programming interface (API), 272
Application service provider license, 407
Application software, 408–409
Aristotle, 260
Arithmetic-logic unit (ALU), 397
ARPANET, 244
Art of War (Sun Tzu), 124
Artificial intelligence (AI)
defined, 172
expert system, 173
genetic algorithm, 174
intelligent agent, 175
neural network, 173–174
virtual reality, 175
As-is burger order process, 42, 386
As-is order fulfillment process, 42, 386
As-is process model, 40, 41, 385–387
Ascential Software, 122
Ashton, Kevin, 7, 83
ASL (American Sign Language), 402–403
Assembly language, 318
Asset, 368
Asset tracking, 289
Associate program, 249
Association detection analysis, 137
Asynchronous communication, 269
AT&T, 72, 259
Attributes, 105, 106
Audi, 88
Augmented reality, 175, 516
AUP (acceptable use policy), 452
Authentication and authorization, 441–444
Authorization, 442
Auto insurance claims processes reengineering, 39
Autodesk, 230
Automatic vehicle location (AVL), 290
Automobile industry, 245
Autonomic computing, 518
Autonomous agent, 517
AutoTrader.com, 245
Availability, 420–421
Avatar (film), 6
AVL (automatic vehicle location), 290
B
B2B (business-to-business), 255–256
B2C (business-to-consumer), 256
Babolat, 84
Back-office processes, 37
Back order, 63, 181
Backdoor program, 76
Backup, 118, 414
Backup and recovery plan, 414–415
Backward integration, 112
BAE, 347
Balance sheet, 368
Balanced scorecard, 64, 65
Baldridge award, 466
Bank account aggregation services, 248
Banner ad, 249
Bar code scanner, 402
Barn Raisers, 114
BCP (business continuity planning), 417–419
BDaaS (Big Data as a Service), 484
Behavioral analytics, 11, 141
Behavioral segmentation, 374
Ben & Jerry’s, 144, 495
Benchmark, 61
Benchmarking, 61
Berners-Lee, Tim, 274, 323, 420
Best Buy, 253
Best practices, 60
Bezos, Jeff, 6, 323
BI. See Business intelligence (BI)
Big data, 8, 84, 95–97, 131–159
data analysis, 140–141
data mining, 134–140
data visualization, 142–144
defined, 131
distributed computing, 131, 133
variety, veracity, volume, velocity, 132
virtualization, 133, 134
Big Data as a Service (BDaaS), 484
Bike manufacturing, 44
Biological 3D printing, 517
Biometric scanner, 402
Biometrics, 444
Bitcoin, 299
Black-hat hacker, 75
Black Planet, 352
BlackBerry, 284
Blog, 271
Blue Dog Inc., 225
Bluetooth, 282–283
Bluetooth, Harald, 282
Blundell, Peter, 495
Bookkeeping, 367
Bouchard, Gilles, 222
Boundary conditions, 321
Box, 130, 355–357
Box.com, 480
Box.net, 488
BP, 506
BPM. See Business process management (BPM)
BPMN (business process model and notation), 40, 41
BPMN activity, 41
BPMN event, 41
BPMN flows, 41
BPMN gateway, 41
BPR (business process reengineering), 37–40, 
375–376, 384–385
Brainstorming, 314
Brandon, John, 86
Branson, Richard, 323
Break-even analysis, 62, 370
Break-even point, 62, 370
Brick-and-mortar business, 256
Brickwork India, 511
Brin, Sergey, 323
Bring your own device (BYOD) policy, 451
Broadwell, Paula, 90
Browser, 408
Bugs, 316
Bullwhip effect, 182
Bureau of Labor Statistics, 148
Bus topology, 432
Business
social problems, 31
war, compared, 124
I N D E X

I-2  *  Index
Business 2.0
advantages, 266–269
challenges, 273
characteristics, 267
collaboration tools, 271–272
networking communities, 269–270
Business basics, 364–379. See also Business forms
Business continuity planning (BCP), 417–419
Business-critical integrity constraints, 109
Business Driven Technology, overview, 5
Business executives, 174
Business-facing processes, 37, 39
Business forms
corporation. See Corporation
partnership, 365, 367
sole proprietorship, 365, 367
Business impact analysis, 417
Business intelligence (BI), 10–11, 490–499
agile BI, 492–493
BI’s operational value, 491–492
business benefits, 492–495
comparative analysis, 125
competitive monitoring, 125
data-driven decisions, 126
data-driven website, 111
defined, 10
enterprise resource planning (ERP), 216
operational BI, 490, 491
strategic BI, 490, 491
tactical BI, 490, 491
uses, 125
Zillow, 127
Business intelligence dashboard, 144
Business model, 255
Business plug-ins, 5. See also individual plug-in names
Business process, 28, 37, 38, 380–395
BPM. See Business process management (BPM)
business process design, 385–387
business process improvement, 380, 383–385
business process modeling examples, 391–393
characteristics, 381
defined, 380–381
examples, 381–383
value chain, 381
Business process design, 385–387
Business process improvement, 380, 383–385
Business process improvement model, 393
Business process management (BPM), 387–390
benefits, 389
critical success factors, 390
functions, 388
is BPM for business or IT?, 388–389
risks and rewards, 389–390
tools, 389
Business process model, 40, 385
Business process model and notation (BPMN), 40, 41
Business process modeling, 40–42, 385
Business process patent, 40
Business process reengineering (BPR), 37–40, 375–376, 
384–385
Business requirements, 314, 320–321
Business rule, 109
Business strategy, 21
Business-to-business (B2B), 255–256
Business-to-consumer (B2C), 256
Business unit, 12
Butterfield, Stewart, 239
Butterfly effect, 147
“Buy experiences, not things” type of stories, 4
Buyer power, 24–25
BYOD (bring your own device) policy, 451
C
C2C (consumer-to-business), 256
C2C (consumer-to-consumer), 256
Cab booking process diagram, 41
Cache memory, 399
CAD/CAM (computer-aided design/computer-aided 
manufacturing), 185
California Pizza Kitchen (CPK), 145
Call center, 200
Call scripting system, 200–201
Campaign management system, 197
Canadian Broadcasting Company (CBC), 459
Canadian privacy laws, 509
Capability Maturity Model Integration (CMMI), 466, 504–505
Capacity, 422
Capacity planning, 422
Capek, Karl, 187
Capital, 365
Car Play, 162
Carbon emissions, 471
Carbon footprint, 486–487
Carfax, 256
Cartography, 291
CASE (computer-aided software engineering), 315
Cases
Actionly.com, 227–229
Amazon and drone delivery, 52
Ben & Jerry’s, 144
big data, 95–97
Bitcoin, 299
Box, 355–357
business requirements, 320–321
Buy experiences, not things, 3–4
California Pizza Kitchen (CPK), 145
connected cars, 161–162
DARPA Grand Challenge, 176
data visualization, 150–151
data warehousing and data mining, 144–145
Denver International Airport’s baggage system 
fiasco, 347
disruptive innovation, 250–251
Etsy, 189–190
famous ERP failures, 222–223
gaming industry, careers, 309–310
getting your project on track, 332–334
hackers, 85–86
HelloFresh, 261–262
infographics, 152–154
Internet of Things (IoT), 83–84
manipulating the data to distort the truth, 66
Noodles & Company, 145
Pinterest, 275–277
political microtargeting (2008 presidential election), 
114–115
Porter’s TED talk (let business solve social problems), 31
Slack, 239–240
social networking sites, 352–354
Square, 293
Target and hackers, 77–78
3D printing, 229–230, 231
Uber, 300–301
World is Flat, The (Friedman), 16–17
Zappos, 204–205
Zillow, 127
Cash flow analysis, 369
Cash flows statement, 369
CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Company), 459
CD-ROM (compact disk-read-only memory) device, 401
CD-RW (compact disk-read-write) drive, 401
CDO (chief data officer), 56, 57
Cearley, David, 516
Cell phone, 286
Cell phone generations, 286
Cellular communication system, 285–286
Central processing unit (CPU), 397–398, 399
Certificate authority, 445
Chabot, Christian, 147
Change agent, 314
Change.org, 208
Chapter-closing cases. See Cases
CharityFocus, 337
Charles Schwab, 243
Chatter, 480
Chief automation officer, 58
Chief data officer (CDO), 56, 57
Chief information officer (CIO), 56, 57
Chief intellectual property office, 58
Chief knowledge officer (CKO), 57, 58
Chief privacy officer (CPO), 57
Chief security officer (CSO), 57
Chief technology officer (CTO), 56–57, 58
Chief user experience officer, 58
Child Online Protection Act (COPA), 73
Children’s Hospital (Boston), 58
Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act (COPPA), 508
Christensen, Clayton, 243, 250
Chrome Experiments series, 150
Cinematch, 136
CIO (chief information officer), 56, 57
CISC (complex instruction set computer) chips, 398
Cisco, 241, 243, 245
Citibank, 174, 248
Citizens First, 502
CitySense, 304
CKO (chief knowledge officer), 57, 58
Clarkson, Jeremy, 52
Classic Cars Inc., 232
Classification analysis, 137, 138–139
Clean computing, 470
Clean desk policy, 441
Clearwire, 285
Click-and-mortar business, 256
Click-fraud, 451
Click-through, 249
Click-to-talk, 200
Clickstream, 455
Clickstream data, 248
Clickstream data metrics, 249
Client, 412, 431
Client/server network, 431
Climate change, 66
Clinton, Bill, 323
Closed source, 266
Cloud-based business applications, 480
Cloud bursting, 482
Cloud computing, 110, 218–220, 478–483
Cloud computing advantages, 220
Cloud computing environments, 481–483
Cloud fabric, 479, 480
Cloud fabric controller, 479
Cloud Player, 479
Cloud providers, 479
Cloud service delivery models, 483
Cluster analysis, 137–138
Clustering, 403
CMMI (Capability Maturity Model Integration), 466, 
504–505
CNBC, 250
Coarser information, 170
Coaxial cable, 435–436
CoBIT (Control Objectives for information and related 
technologies), 316, 503
Coca-Cola, 106–107
Cold site, 415, 416
Collaboration system, 267
Collaborative demand planning, 189
Collaborative engineering, 189
Collective intelligence, 267
College student startups, 6
Columns, 105
Comcast, 259
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations (COSO), 504
Common data repository, 49
Communication device, 403
Communication plan, 342
Communication satellite, 287, 436
Community cloud, 482
Compact disk-read-only memory (CD-ROM) device, 401
Compact disk-read-write (CD-RW) drive, 401
Comparative analysis, 125
Comparison-shopping sites, 248

Index  *  I-3
Competitive advantage
business process modeling, 40–42
business process reengineering (BPR), 37–40
customer relationship management (CRM), 46–49
defined, 21
disruptive strategies, 253
disruptive technologies, 184
enterprise resource planning (ERP), 49–51
first-mover advantage, 22
strategic initiatives, 36–55
supply chain management, 43–46
Competitive click-fraud, 451
Competitive intelligence, 22, 175
Competitive monitoring, 125
Complete information, 123
Complex instruction set computer (CISC) chips, 398
Compliance, 503
Computer, 397. See also Hardware and software basics
Computer-aided design/computer-aided manufacturing 
(CAD/CAM), 185
Computer-aided software engineering (CASE), 315
Computer programmers’ salary ranges, 346
Computer simulation, 512
Computer virus, 75, 76
Confidentiality, 71
conisint.com, 275
Connected cars, 161–162
Consolidation, 172
Consumer-to-business (C2C), 256
Consumer-to-consumer (C2C), 256
Contact center, 200
Contact center services, 200
Contact management CRM system, 199
Content creator, 110
Content editor, 110
Content filtering, 444
Content management system, 260
Content provider, 257
Continuing education, 245
Continuous process improvement model, 384
Control Objectives for information and related technologies 
(CoBIT), 316, 503
Control panel, 407
Control unit, 397
Conversion, 312
Conversion rates, 61
Cookie, 249, 455
COPA (Child Online Protection Act), 73
COPPA (Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act), 508
Copyright, 71, 273
Core ERP components, 214–215
Core processes, 40
Corporate social responsibility, 470
Corporation
accounting, 367–369
characteristics, 366
charter, 366
defined, 365
finance, 369–370
human resources (HR), 370–371
management information system (MIS), 376–377
marketing, 373–375
operations/production, 375–376
overview (figure), 367
sales, 371–373
Corrective maintenance, 319
Correlation analysis, 141
COSO (Committee of Sponsoring Organizations), 504
Cost, 465
Cost leadership strategy, 28
Cost savings, 246–248
Costco, 3–4
Counterfeit software, 71
Course management software, 407
CPO (chief privacy officer), 57
CPU (central processing unit), 397–398
Cracker, 75
Cradle-to-grave, 183
Craigslist, 90, 251
Creating, reading, updating, and deleting (CRUD), 168
Credit card companies, 174
Crib Point cemetery, 129
Critical path, 343
Critical success factors (CSFs), 59
CRM. See Customer relationship management (CRM)
CRM analysis technologies, 48
CRM predicting technologies, 48–49
CRM reporting technologies, 48
Cross-functional business process, 37
Cross-functional diagram, 41
Cross-selling, 198
Crowdfunding, 269
Crowdsourcing, 268
CRUD (creating, reading, updating, and deleting), 168
Cryptography, 444
CSFs (critical success factors), 59
CSO (chief security officer), 57
CSS (customer service and support), 198
CTO (chief technology officer), 56–57, 58
Cube, 140
Customer analytics, 47
Customer-centric supply chain strategy, 233
Customer contact points, 47
Customer-facing processes, 37, 39
Customer order actual cycle time, 63
Customer order business process model, 392
Customer order cycle time, 181
Customer order promised cycle time, 63
Customer perspective, 64, 65
Customer relationship management (CRM), 46–49, 194–208
analytical CRM, 201
asking what happened?, 49
asking what will happen?, 49
asking why it happened?, 49
customer analytics, 47
customer contact points, 47
customer service operational CRM technology, 
198, 200–201
defined, 46, 194
employee relationship management (ERM), 203
enterprise resource planning (ERP), 216
key players, 46
marketing operational CRM technology, 195–198
metrics, 64, 197
overview (figure), 48
partner relationship management (PRM), 202–203
phases, 48–49
RFM formula, 48
sales analytics, 47
sales operational CRM technology, 198–200
strategic goals, 46–47
supplier relationship management (SRM), 202
Customer relationship management metrics, 64, 197
Customer satisfaction, 61
Customer segmentation, 201, 373–374
Customer service, 467
Customer service and support (CSS), 198
Customer service business process, 382
Customer service business process model, 393
Customer service operational CRM technology, 
198, 200–201
CuteCircuit, 178
Cyber squatting, 254
Cyberbullying, 451
Cybermediation, 248
Cyberterrorism, 445
Cyberterrorist, 75
Cybervandalism, 452
Cyberwar, 445
D
DaaS (Data as a Service), 484
DARPA, 244
DARPA Grand Challenge, 176
DARPA Robotics Challenge, 176
Data
big. See Big data
defined, 7
dirty, 122
fast, 141
information, compared, 8, 9
machine-generated/human-generated, 7, 8
sensitive, 34
source, 125
structured/unstructured, 7, 8, 133
transforming data to knowledge, 12
Data aggregation, 121
Data analysis, 140–141
Data artist, 143
Data as a Service (DaaS), 484
Data broker, 124
Data center, 477
Data dictionary, 105
Data-driven decision management, 126
Data-driven website, 110–111
Data element, 104
Data field, 104
Data flow diagram (DFD), 315
Data gap analysis, 103
Data governance, 104
Data integration, 112–113
Data lake, 124
Data latency, 109, 492
Data management, 408
Data map, 126
Data mart, 121
Data mining, 134–140
affinity grouping analysis, 137
classification analysis, 137, 138–139
cluster analysis, 137–138
defined, 134
elements, 135
estimation analysis, 136–137
overview (figure), 135, 136
prediction, 139–140
recommendation engine, 136
Data mining tools, 139
Data model, 104
Data point, 124
Data profiling, 135
Data replication, 135
Data scientist, 141
Data set, 125
Data steward, 103
Data stewardship, 103
Data storage services, 130
Data validation, 104
Data visualization, 142–144, 143–144, 150–151
Data visualization tools, 144
Data warehouse, 119
Data warehousing, 119–130
Applebee’s, 119
business intelligence, 124–126
data mart, 121
definitions, 119
historical overview, 119
information cleansing, 122–123
Land’s End, 121
overview (figure), 121
purpose, 119–120
standardizing information, 120
uses, 120
Database, 104
Database management system (DBMS), 104. See also 
Relational database management system
DBMS (database management system), 104
DDos (distributed denial-of-service attack), 76
Death March (Yourdon), 350
DEC (Digital Equipment Corporation), 243, 433
Decision latency, 492
Decision making. See Organizational decision-making
Decision support system (DSS), 169, 170, 463
Decrypt, 444

I-4  *  Index
Deeley Harley-Davidson Canada (DHDC), 215
Del.icio.us, 270
Delivery speed, 466
Dell, Michael, 6
Dell Computer, 87, 192, 243, 247, 275
Demographic segmentation, 374
Denial-of-service attack (DoS), 76
Denver International Airport’s baggage system fiasco, 347
Department of Defense Advanced Research Project Agency 
(DARPA), 244
Departmental companies, 12–13, 14
Departmental structure, 367. See also Corporation
Dependency, 343
Deperimeterization, 506
Design phase, 315
Desktop computer, 405
Desktop publishing, 408
Desktop virtualization, 487
Destructive agents, 441
Detailed internal report, 320
Developing software. See Software development
Development phase, 316
Development testing, 319
Device mesh, 516
Devil’s Due (film), 265
DFD (data flow diagram), 315
Diamandis, Peter, 323
Differentiation strategy, 28
Digital certificate, 445
Digital Darwinism, 242
Digital dashboard, 170–172
Digital dashboard analytical components, 172
Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC), 243, 433
Digital information, 73
Digital rights management, 71
Digital signature acceptance policy, 441
Digital still camera, 402
Digital video camera, 402
Digital video disk (DVD), 401
Digital video disk-read/write (DVD-RW), 401
Dirty data, 122, 147
Disaster Recovery as a Service (DRaaS), 483
Disaster recovery cost curve, 416
Disaster recovery plan, 415–416, 417
Disaster recovery plan policy, 441
disasterhelp.gov, 275
Discovery prototyping, 326
Disintermediation, 247
Disposable income, 4
Disruptive innovation, 250–251
Disruptive strategies, 253
Disruptive technology, 184, 242
Distributed computing, 131, 133
Distributed denial-of-service attack (DDos), 76
Dividends, 368
Dole Organic, 272
Domain name hosting, 244
Domain squatting, 254
Domino’s Pizza, 265
DoMyStuff.com, 511
DoS (denial-of-service attack), 76
Downtime, 73–75
DRaaS (Disaster Recovery as a Service), 483
DreamCast, 371
DreamWorks Animation, 472
Drill-down, 172
Drive-by hacking, 75
Drones, 52, 187
DropBox, 130
Drucker, Peter, 60
DSS (decision support system), 169, 170, 463
Dual boot, 406
Dubai Ports World (DPW), 234
Dumpster diving, 440
Dunn, Elizabeth, 4
DVD (digital video disk), 401
DVD-ROM drive, 401
DVD-RW (digital video disk-read/write), 401
Dynamic catalog, 110
Dynamic information, 110
Dynamic process, 37
Dynamic report, 9
Dynamic scaling, 483
E
EA (enterprise architect), 413
EAI (enterprise application integration) middleware, 212–213
Earnings report, 368
Earthlink, 259
eBay, 147, 251, 256, 275
eBay buyer business process model, 392
eBay seller business process model, 392
ebook, 404
Ebusiness, 163, 255–265
advantages, 246–249
business models, 255–258, 275
challenges, 260–261
connecting and communicating, 258–260
defined, 241
disruption of traditional industries, 245
enterprise resource planning (ERP), 216–217
marketing benefits, 249
operational benefits, 248
revenue models, 258
what is it?, 245
Ebusiness forms, 257
Ebusiness model, 255–258, 275
Ebusiness process model, 391
Ebusiness retail sales, 245
Ebusiness revenue models, 258
Ebusiness websites, 241, 248
EC2, 483
Ecommerce, 245
Economic feasibility, 340
Edge matching, 291
EDI (electronic data interchange), 182
Ediscovery, 73, 149
Education and training, 245
Educational robots, 519–520
Effectiveness, 60–62, 248
Effectiveness MIS metrics, 60, 248
Efficiency metrics, 60–62
Efficiency MIS metrics, 60
Efinance companies, 245
egov.com, 275
Egovernment, 274, 275
EIS (executive information system), 170, 463
Elance, 511
Electronic data interchange (EDI), 182
Electronic discovery, 73
Electronic marketplace, 256
Elevation of privilege, 77
Elogistics, 216
Email, 258, 408
Email privacy policy, 452–453
Emarketplace, 256
Embedded operating system, 406
Emergency, 417
Emergency notification services, 417–418
Emergency preparedness, 417
Emersons’ Food Waste infographic, 154
Emotion-detection software, 207
Employee monitoring policy, 454, 455
Employee relationship management (ERM), 202, 203
Encryption, 444, 445
Energy consumption, 471
English, Paul, 304
Enterprise application integration (EAI) middleware, 212–213
Enterprise architect (EA), 413
Enterprise architecture, 505
Enterprise Rent-A-Car, 230
Enterprise resource planning (ERP), 49–51, 209–237
accounting and finance ERP components, 215
accounting information sample, 50
bringing the organization together, 210, 211
business intelligence components, 216
cloud ERP, 218–220
common data repository, 49
core ERP components, 214–215
customer relationship management components, 216
defined, 49
ebusiness components, 216–217
ERP costs, 217
ERP-II, 212
ERP implementation choices, 218
ERP integration data flow, 210
ERP process flow, 210
ERP vendors by tier, 221
extended ERP components, 216–217
famous ERP failures, 222–223
future of ERP, 218–221
historical overview, 211–212
human resources ERP components, 215
hybrid ERP, 220–221
measuring ERP success, 217
module software design, 49
on-premise ERP, 218
organization integration of ERP, 221
overview, 51
production and materials management ERP components, 215
sales information sample, 50
software customization, 217
supply chain management components, 216
what is the issue to be solved?, 51
Entertainment industry, 245
Entity, 105
Entity relationship diagram, 317
Entry barrier, 26
Environmental business processes, 382
Environmental scanning, 175
Epolicies, 450
Eprocurement, 216
Equifax, 72
Equity statement, 368
ERM (employee relationship management), 202, 203
ERP. See Enterprise resource planning (ERP)
ERP-II, 212
Eshop, 256
Estimated time enroute (ETE), 291
Estimated time of arrival (ETA), 291
Estimation analysis, 136–137
Estore, 256
ETA (estimated time of arrival), 291
Etailer, 256
ETE (estimated time enroute), 291
Ethernet, 432–433
Ethernet LAN diagram, 433
Ethernet network, 316
Ethical computer use policy, 450–451
Ethically questionable use of technology, 71
Ethics, 450–459
acceptable use policy (AUP), 452
email privacy policy, 452–453
ethical computer use policy, 450–451
information, 71–73
information privacy policy, 451–452
social media policy, 453–454
workplace monitoring policy, 454–455
ETL (extraction, transformation, and loading), 121
Etsy, 189–190
European Union (EU)
international outsourcing, 515
privacy laws, 507–508
work time, 516
Evernote, 480
Ewaste, 471, 485
Exabyte (EB), 401
Excel projects, 92
Exception report, 320
Executive information system (EIS), 170, 463
Executive-level of management, 54–56
Executive sponsor, 342
Exist, 147

Index  *  I-5
Expedia.com, 245
Expenses, 368
Expert system, 173
Explicit knowledge, 268
Exploratory data analysis, 141
export.gov, 275
Extended enterprise, 232
Extended ERP components, 214, 216–217
Extended supply chain, 188, 189
Extensible Markup Language (XML), 330
Extraction, transformation, and loading (ETL), 121
Extreme programming (XP) methodology, 327–328
Extricity, 213
F
Facebook, 100, 144, 279–280, 292, 352, 425
Fact, 6
Failback, 415
Failover, 415
Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA), 72
Fair information practices, 451–452
FAO Schwartz, 364
Fast data, 141
Fast Ethernet, 433
Fault tolerance, 414
FCRA (Fair Credit Reporting Act), 72
Feasibility, 339
Feasibility studies, 340
Federal-level chief technology officer (CTO), 58
Federal Reserve Bank, 34
FedEx, 22, 187, 200
Feedback, 15
Fiber-optic able, 435, 436
Field, 105
94Fifty Smart Sensor, 295
File Transfer Protocol (FTP), 434
Finance, 12, 13, 369–370
Finance business processes, 382
Finance industry, 174
Financial accounting, 367
Financial analysis, 369–370
Financial perspective, 64, 65
Financial quarter, 369
Financial ratios, 62, 369–370
Financial service industry, 245
Financial statements, 367–369
Finer information, 170
FireEye, 77
FireFighter AI Robot, 173
Firestone Tire Company, 469
Firewall, 445
Firm infrastructure, 29
First-mover advantage, 22
FirstGov.gov, 274
Five forces model
airline industry, 26–27
buyer power, 24–25
overview (figure), 24
rivalry among existing competitors, 26
supply chain management, 46
supplier power, 25
threat of new entrants, 26
threat of substitute products and services, 25–26
Flash memory, 400
Flexibility, 421, 466
Flickr, 270
Flight Patterns project, 151
Focus: HOPE, 366
Focused strategy, 28
Folksonomy, 270
For profit corporation, 365
Ford Motor Company, 162, 253
Forecasting model of prediction, 140
Foreign key, 106
Forms of business organization. See Business forms
Forward integration, 112, 113
Four V’s of Big Data, 132
Foursquare, 292
Fourth-generation language (4GL), 316, 318
Franklin, Benjamin, 342
Frequent-flyer programs, 25
Freshman hazing, 222
Friedman, Thomas, 16–17, 20, 500
Friendster, 352
Frito-Lay, 22–23, 396
Front-office processes, 37
FTP (File Transfer Protocol), 434
Fuelband, 147
Functional thinking, 37
Fuzzy logic, 174
Fwd Powershot, 295
G
GAAP (generally accepted accounting principles), 367
Game controller, 402
GameGear, 371
Gaming industry, careers, 309–310
Gantt chart, 344
Gao, Sunny, 231
“Garbage in, garbage out,” 172
Gart Sports, 253
Gates, Bill, 6, 19, 323
G2B (government-to-business), 275
G2C (government-to-commerce), 275
General Motors, 243
Generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP), 367
Generic business strategies, 27–28
Genetic algorithm, 174
Geocache, 290
Geocoding, 291
Geocoin, 290
Geoeconomic, 502
Geographic information, 291
Geographic information system (GIS), 291–292
Geographic segmentation, 374
Geospatial data, 291
G2G (government-to-government), 275
Ghods, Sam, 356
Gigabit Ethernet, 433
Gigabyte (GB), 301, 400
Gigahertz (GHz), 397
Gilovich, Thomas, 4
GIS (geographic information system), 291–292
GIS map automation, 291
Gladwell, Malcolm, 323
Global collaboration, 503
Global customers, 503
Global enterprise architecture, 505
Global geoeconomic business challenges, 502
Global information issues, 506–509
Global information systems, 500–511. See also 
Globalization
Global inventory management systems, 464
Global MIS business drivers, 503
Global MIS business strategies, 502–505
Global operations and resources, 503
Global positioning system (GPS), 290–291
Global products, 503
Global reach, 246
Global standardization of data definitions, 509
Global systems development, 509
Global trends, 512–520. See also Globalization
adaptive security architecture, 518
advanced system architecture, 518
ambient digital experience, 516–517
autonomous agents and things, 517
3D printing, 517
device mesh, 516
Information of Everything (IoE), 517
integration of global economy, 515
knowledge-dependent global society, 514–515
machine learning, 517
population increase, 513–514
reasons to study trends, 512–513
rising life expectancy, 514
technology and technological innovation, 515, 516
time and time management, 516
Globalization, 500–520
cultural business challenges, 501
deperimeterization, 506
global enterprise architecture, 505
global geoeconomic business challenges, 502
global information issues, 506–509
global MIS business drivers, 503
global MIS business strategies, 502–505
global standardization of data definitions, 509
global systems development, 509
governance and compliance, 503–505
information privacy, 506–509
international outsourcing, 515
international telecommunication issues, 506
network issues, 506
political business challenges, 501–502
regulatory issues, 506
technology and country-oriented issues, 506
trends. See Global trends
Goal-seeking analysis, 169
Godin, Seth, 323
Goebel, Jennifer, 304–305
Goldman, Eric, 279
Golf caddie, 268
Goods, 14
Goods-service continuum, 462
Google, 144, 150, 162, 251, 257, 297, 458–459, 477, 479
Google Analytics, 228
Google Apps, 480
Google Cloud Connect, 481
Google Docs, 130, 280
Google Earth, 272
Google Gmail, 425, 487
Google Now, 162
Google Print Library Project, 129
Google TV, 296
Google’s Application Engine, 484
Governance, 503
Government-to-business (G2B), 275
Government-to-commerce (G2C), 275
Government-to-government (G2G), 275
Gowalla, 292
GPS (global positioning system), 290–291
Granularity, 170
Graphical user interface (GUI), 315
Green, Tonja, 44
Green MIS, 470. See also Sustainable MIS infrastructure
Green personal computer (green PC), 470
Grid computing, 472–474
Griesel, Thomas, 262
Grikou, Afate, 192
Group 1 software, 122
Groupware, 408
Grupo Farmanova Intermed, 215
GUI (graphical user interface), 315
Guidelines on the Protection of Privacy and Transborder 
Flows of Personal Data, 452
Guru.com, 511
H
Hackathorn, Richard, 491
Hacker
activities, 77
defined, 74
drive-by hacking, 75
methods of getting into someone’s business, 85–86
types, 75
Hacker weapons, 77
Hactivist, 75
Hamburger, ordering a, 42, 386
Handheld computer, 405
Hanrahan, Pat, 147
Haptic technology, 178
Hard drive, 400

I-6  *  Index
Hardware and software basics, 396–410
application software, 408–409
central processing unit (CPU), 397–398, 399
communication device, 403
computer categories, 403–405
hardware/software, defined, 396
input devices, 401–402
operating system software, 406
output devices, 402–403
overview (figure), 397
primary storage, 398–400
secondary storage, 400–401
system software, 406–407
utility software, 407
Hardware key logger, 455
Harley-Davidson, 194, 195
Harley’s Owners Group (HOG), 194
Hashtag, 264, 270
HBOS, 202
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), 508
Hefner AI Robot Cleaner, 173
HelloFresh, 261–262
Help desk, 318
Hering, Lance, 358–359
Hernandez-Rebollar, Jose L., 403
Hershey Foods, 222
Hewlett-Packard (HP), 222, 243
High availability, 421
High-level programming languages, 318
HIPAA (Health Insurance Portability and Accountability 
Act), 508
Historical analysis, 513
Hoaxes, 77
Home Depot, 34, 243
Home wireless network, 303
Hoover’s Rentals, 253
Horizontal privilege escalation, 444
Hot site, 415, 416
Hotels.com travel infographic, 153
Hotspot, 283
How to Train Your Dragon (film), 472
HP, 222, 243
HR (human resources), 12, 13, 370–371
Hsieh, Tony, 204–205
HTML (Hypertext Markup Language), 244
HTML 5, 244
HTTP (Hypertext Transfer Protocol), 244, 434
Hui, Ben, 178
Human-generated data, 7
Human-generated unstructured data, 8
Human resources (HR), 12, 13, 370–371
Human resources business processes, 382
Human resources ERP components, 215
Human resources system, 30
Hummer, 88
Hybrid cloud, 482
Hybrid ERP, 220–221
Hybrid topology, 432
Hypertext Markup Language (HTML), 244
Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP), 244, 434
Hyundai, 88
I
I, Robot (Asimov), 187
IaaS (Infrastructure as a Service), 483
IBM, 175, 243, 251, 328
IBM Watson, 178
ICANN (Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and 
Numbers), 244
iCloud, 479
Identity management, 109
Identity theft, 441, 457
IDS (intrusion detection software), 446
IEEE (Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers), 283
IEEE 802.11, 283
IEEE 802.11a, 284
IEEE 802.11b, 284
IEEE 802.11g, 238, 284
IEEE 802.11n, 283, 284
Illuminate Live, 260
Image scanner, 402
Imhoff, Claudia, 490
Implementation phase, 318, 319
Implicit knowledge, 268
In-car infotainment, 162
In-house development, 345
Inappropriate data handling, 80
Inbound logistics, 29, 183
Inc. magazine, 54
Incident management, 419
Incident record, 419
Incidents, 419
Income statement, 368, 369
India, 345
Industry-specific customer facing processes, 39
Infographic health example, 143
Infographic news example, 142, 143
Infographics, 142, 152–154
Infomediaries, 257
Information, 99–104
accuracy vs. completeness, 122–123, 124
data, compared, 7, 9
defined, 9
finer/coarser, 170
formats, 100
governance, 104
granularity, 99, 100
high-quality, 102, 103–104
integration, 112–113
levels, 100
low-quality, 102–103
quality, 101–104
timeliness, 101
transactional/analytical, 100, 101
type, 100
Information accuracy, 61
Information age, 6, 7
Information architecture, 260
Information cleansing, 122–123
Information compliance, 73
Information consistency, 101
Information ethics, 71–73. See also Ethics
defined, 71
ethical guidelines for information 
management, 73
ethically questionnaire technology use, 72
legal vs. ethical conduct, 72
pirated/counterfeit software, 71
Information formats, 100
Information governance, 73, 104
Information granularity, 99, 100
Information graphics, 142, 152
Information integrity, 101, 109
Information levels, 100, 171
Information management, 73
Information MIS infrastructure, 413–419
Information of Everything (IoE), 517
Information privacy, 506–509. See also Privacy
Information privacy policy, 451–452
Information property, 73
Information quality, 101–104
Information reach, 246
Information redundancy, 109
Information richness, 246
Information secrecy, 73, 441–442
Information security, 73–77, 440–449
adware, spyware, ransomware, 76
authentication and authorization, 441–444
biometrics, 444
cloud computing, 110
defined, 74
detection and response, 445–446
digital certificate, 445
encryption, 444, 445
firewall, 445
first line of defense (people), 440–441
hacker. See Hacker
information security plan, 440, 441
information security policies, 440, 441
intrusion detection software (IDS), 446
password, 443
prevention and resistance, 444–445
relational database management system, 109–110
technology-based lines of defense, 441–446
token/smart card, 443
virus, 75, 76
Information security plan, 440, 441
Information security policies, 440, 441
Information services (IS), 376
Information silo, 12
Information system control report, 320
Information system metrics, 63
Information systems (IS), 16. See also Management 
information system (MIS)
Information Systems Audit and Control Association 
(ISACA), 503
Information systems audit report, 320
Information technology (IT), 16. See also Management 
information system (MIS)
Information Technology Infrastructure 
Library (ITIL), 504
Information timeliness, 101
Information vandalism, 273
Infosys, 345
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), 483
Ingram Micro, 494
Initiative for a Competitive Inner City, 31
Ink-jet printer, 403
Innovator’s dilemma, 251
Innovator’s Dilemma, The (Christensen), 243, 250
Input, process, output, 15
Input devices, 401–402
InsideFacebook.com, 279
Insiders, 440
Insourcing, 17, 345
Instant messaging (IMing), 259
Institute of Electrical and Electronics 
Engineers (IEEE), 283
Insurance companies, 174
Intangible benefits, 339
Integrated enterprise, 212
Integrated supply chain, 181
Integration, 112–113
Integration testing, 319
Integration tools, 212–213
Integrity constraints, 109
Intel, 241, 243, 285
Intellectual property, 71
Intelligent agent, 175
Intelligent system, 172
Interactivity, 248
Intermediaries, 247
Internal business process perspective, 64, 65
Internal rate of return (IRR), 62, 369
Internal report, 320
International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO), 466
International outsourcing, 515
International telecommunication issues, 506
Internet, 244, 501, 505, 515
Internet censorship, 452
Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers 
(ICANN), 244
Internet imposters, 207–208
Internet monitoring policies, 455
Internet of Things (IoT), 7, 79–80, 83–84, 517
Internet protocol version 6 (IPv6), 434
Internet service provider (ISP), 259
Internet use policy, 452
Interoperability, 330, 432
Intrusion detection software (IDS), 446
Intuit, 243
Inventory cycle time, 181

Index  *  I-7
Inventory management and control systems, 464
Inventory replenishment cycle time, 63
Inventory turnover, 63, 181
Inventory turns, 63
Investment companies, 174
IoE (Information of Everything), 517
IoT (Internet of Things), 7, 79–80, 83–84, 517
IP address, 434
iPad, 91
iPhone, 26, 284
iPod, 21–22
IPv6 (Internet protocol version 6), 434
IRR (internal rate of return), 62, 369
ISACA (Information Systems Audit and Control 
Association), 503
ISO, 466, 487–488
ISO 900, 466
ISO 14000, 466
ISP (Internet service provider), 259
IT consumerization, 288
Iterative development, 326, 327
ITIL (Information Technology Infrastructure Library), 504
iTunes, 21–22, 251, 487
iWork, 479
J
Jackson, Warren, 303
JAD (joint application development), 314
JetBlue, 87, 234, 253
Jobs, Steve, 21–22
John Deere, 466
Johnson, Derek, 91
Johnson & Johnson, 243
JoinAfrica, 304
Joint application development (JAD), 314
Jordan, Chris, 151
Josaitis, Eleanor, 366
K
Kalanick, Travis, 300, 301
Kamikaze project, 350
Kelkoo, 248
Kern, Stephen, 225
Key logger software, 455
Key performance indicators (KPIs), 59
Key trapper software, 455
Keyboard, 402
Kia, 88
Kill switch, 343
Kilobyte (KB), 401
King, Rachel, 356
Kirkland Signature brand, 3
Kiva robots, 188, 192
KM (knowledge management), 267–268
KMS (knowledge management system), 267
Knight, Philip, 312
Knowledge, 11–12
Knowledge-dependent global society, 514–515
Knowledge management (KM), 267–268
Knowledge management system (KMS), 267
Knowledge workers, 11
Koblin, Aaron, 150, 151
KPIs (key performance indicators), 59
KPMG Peat Marwick, 386
K
LaChappelle, Easton, 231
Lady Gaga, 6
LAN (local area network), 428–429, 430
Land’s End, 121
Laptop computer, 404, 405
Laser printer, 403
Latitude, 290
LBS (location-based services), 291–292
Learning and growth perspective, 64, 65
Legacy system, 218
Legal feasibility, 340
LendingTree.com, 127, 245
Leno, Jay, 231
Levi Strauss, 247
Levie, Aaron, 356, 488
Levitt, Steven D., 81, 323
Liability, 368
Life expectancy, 514
Limited liability, 365, 366
Limited liability corporation (LLC), 366
Limited partnership, 365
LinkedIn, 352
LinkExchange, 204
Linux, 406
List generator, 195–197
Live Help, 248
Lively, Mary Lou, 235
LLC (limited liability corporation), 366
Local area network (LAN), 428–429, 430
Location-based services (LBS), 291–292
lockheedmartin.com, 275
Locussol, Virgini, 505
Logical view of information, 108
Logistics, 183
Long-distance hugs, 178
Long tail, 246, 247
Longitude, 290
Lookout, 295
Loopt, 292
Loose coupling, 330–331
Loss, 364
Low-cost producer, 465
Lowermybills.com, 127
Loyalty programs, 25
Lulu.com, 245
Lutz, Bob, 271
Lyft, 300
Lying on your résumé, 81
Lynx, 371
M
M2M (machine-to-machine), 7, 83
Mac OS X, 406
Machine-generated data, 7
Machine-generated unstructured data, 8
Machine language, 318
Machine learning, 517
Machine-to-machine (M2M), 7, 83
Macy’s, 3
Madagascar (film), 472
Madoff, Bernard, 90
Magnetic medium, 400
Magnetic tape, 400
Mahindra Satyam, 345
Mail bomb, 453
MailChimp, 480
Mainframe computer, 405
Maintainability, 421
Maintenance phase, 319
Maker movement, 185
MakerBot, 230
Makerspace, 185
Malcolm Baldridge National Quality Awards, 466
Malicious code, 77
Malware, 75–77, 85
MAN (metropolitan area network), 429, 430
Managed service provider (MSP), 376
Management information system (MIS)
activities, 30, 376–377
business process engineering, 39
business processes, 43, 382–383
decision making, 167–172
defined, 15–16, 376
focus areas, 504
global MIS business strategies, 502–505
MIS governance, 503–505
MIS infrastructure. See MIS infrastructure
operations management (OM), 463–465
primary value activities, 30
roles and responsibilities, 54–56
skills gap, 58
support value activities, 30
Managerial accounting, 367
Managerial decision-making. See Organizational 
decision-making
Managerial level, 166, 167
Managerial support system, 169
Managing organizational projects. See Organizational 
project management
Manufacturing business processes, 383
Manufacturing supply chain, 467
Mapping, 40, 385
Marconi, Guglielmo, 282
Market basket analysis, 137
Market segmentation, 373
Market share, 59, 371–373
Marketing, 12, 13, 373–375
Marketing campaign management system, 30
Marketing communications, 373
Marketing metrics, 64
Marketing mix, 373, 374
Marketing operational CRM technology, 195–198
Markovich, Ray, 300
Mashup, 271, 272
Mashup editor, 272
Mass customization, 246
Master data management (MDM), 104
MasterCard, 174, 493
Matera, Alison, 359
Materials management, 183–184
Materials requirement planning (MRP) systems, 464
Matsushita, 173
Mbusiness, 274–275
McDonald’s, 253, 501
Mcommerce, 274
MDM (master data management), 104
MDM (mobile device management), 288
Measuring success, 59–65
balanced scorecard, 64, 65
benchmarking, 61
critical success factors (CSFs), 59
efficiency and effectiveness metrics, 60–62
financial ratios, 62
key performance indicators (KPIs), 59
market share, 59
MIS project, 60
return of investment (ROI), 60
strategic initiatives, 62–65
medicare.gov, 275
Megabyte (MB/Meg), 400, 401
Megahertz (MHz), 397
Memory cards, 400
Memory sticks, 400
Metadata, 105
Methodology, 325
Metrics, 59. See Measuring success
Metropolitan area network (MAN), 429, 430
Microblogging, 271
Microcomputer, 405
Microphone, 402
Microprocessor, 397
Microsoft, 175, 243, 477, 479
Microsoft Access, 104
Microsoft Sharepoint, 349
Microsoft Windows, 406
Middleware, 212
MIMO (multiple-in/multiple-out) technology, 283
Ming, Jenny, 373
Minicomputer, 405
MIS. See Management information system (MIS)
MIS governance, 503–505

I-8  *  Index
MIS infrastructure, 412–427
agile infrastructure, 419–422
backup and recovery plan, 414–415
business benefits, 412
business continuity planning (BCP), 417–419
business impact analysis, 417
defined, 412
disaster recovery plan, 415–416, 417
dynamic nature, 413
emergency notification services, 417–418
information infrastructure, 413–419
overview (figure), 413
supporting change, 419–422
supporting operations, 413–419
sustainable infrastructure. See Sustainable MIS 
infrastructure
technology recovery strategies, 419
MIS skills gap, 58
Mission impossible project, 350
Mobile application management, 288
Mobile business, 274–275
Mobile device management (MDM), 288
Model, 167
Modem, 404
Modern Meadow, 231
Module software design, 49
Moët et Chandon, 494
Mom-and-pop multinationals, 511
Monitor, 403
Moo, 480
Moore, Gordon, 470
Moore’s law, 470
Mosaic browser, 403
Most innovative companies, 69
Motorola, 285
Motorola DynaTAC, 285
Mouse, 402
Mozilla, 266
Mozy, 480
MRP (materials requirement planning) systems, 464
MS-DOS, 406
Mulcahy, Anne, 91
Multi-tenancy, 479
Multiagent system, 175
Multifactor authentication, 444
Multifunction printer, 403
Multiple-in/multiple-out (MIMO) technology, 283
Multitasking, 406
Murray, Bill, 336
Music industry, 245
Mutation, 174
My Starbucks Ide, 271
MySpace, 352
MySQL, 104
N
N12, 231
Nao robots, 519
Napster, 431
Nasty Gal, 264
National chief technology officer (CTO), 58
Native advertising, 267
Nearshore outsourcing, 345
Neeleman, David, 234
Negroponte, Nicholas, 69
Neiman Marcus, 28
Nestlé, 103
Net income, 368
Netflix, 6, 136, 144, 247, 251
Netflix Prize, 157
Network. See Networks and telecommunications
Network effect, 272
Network operating system (NOS), 431
Network topology, 431, 432
Network transmission media, 435
Network user license, 407
Network virtualization, 475
Networks and telecommunications, 428–439
client/server network, 431
definitions, 428
Ethernet, 432–433
LAN, 428–429, 430
MAN, 429, 430
peer-to-peer (P2P) network, 430–431
protocols, 431–434
TCP/IP, 433–434
topology, 431, 432
WAN, 429, 430
wire media, 435–436
wireless media, 436
Netzero, 259
Neural network, 173–174
News Dots, 148
Nice Systems, 207
NIIT, 345
Nike, 222, 312
Nokia, 285
Nonrepudiation, 452
Noodles & Company, 145
Nordstrom, 370
NOS (network operating system), 431
Not for profit (nonprofit) corporation, 365
Notebook computer, 405
Nylon 12, 231
O
Obama, Barack, 58, 114, 129
Object-oriented language, 316
Objet Connex500, 231
Off-the-shelf application software, 312
Office 365, 479
Offshore outsourcing, 345
Offshoring, 17
OLAP (online analytical processing), 169
OLTP (online transaction processing), 167
OM. See Operations management (OM)
O’Marah, Kevin, 460
On-premise system, 218
One Laptop per Child, 69
OneDrive, 479
Online air travel reservations, 248
Online analytical processing (OLAP), 169
Online banking business process model, 391
Online marketplace, 257
Online mortgage service, 245
Online Privacy Protection Act (California), 508
Online training, 318
Online transaction processing (OLTP), 167
Onshore outsourcing, 345
OP&C (operational planning and control), 464–465
Open source, 266
Open-sourcing, 17
Open system, 266
Open System Interconnection (OSI) model, 434
Operating statement, 368
Operating system software, 406
Operational BI, 490, 491
Operational CRM, 195, 197
Operational feasibility, 340
Operational level, 165, 166
Operational planning and control (OP&C), 464–465
Operational support system, 167–168
Operations management (OM), 12, 13, 375–376, 460–469
competitive OM strategy, 465–467
defined, 461
distribution management systems, 465
inventory management and control systems, 464
MIS, role of, 463–465
operational planning and control (OP&C), 464–465
overview (figure), 461
strategic business systems, 463–465
strategic planning, 464
supply chain, 467
tactical planning, 464
transformation process, 461
transportation planning systems, 465
typical OM activities, 462
value-added, 462
Opportunities and threats, 23, 24
Opportunity management CRM system, 199–200
Opt in, 453
Opt out, 453
Optical cable, 436
Optical character reader, 402
Optical mark reader, 402
Optical medium, 401
Optimization analysis, 169
Optimization model of prediction, 140
Optimization techniques, 174
Oracle, 104, 122, 243
Order fulfillment, 42
Order-to-delivery business process, 38
Ordering a hamburger, 42, 386
Organizational decision-making, 164–179
challenges, 165
decision support system (DSS), 169, 170
digital dashboard, 170–172
executive support system (EIS), 170
“garbage in, garbage out,” 172
interaction between systems, 170–172
managerial level, 166, 167
managerial support system, 169
operational level, 165, 166
operational support system, 167–168
overview (figure), 166
six-step process, 165
strategic level, 166, 167
strategic support system, 170–172
transaction processing system (TPS), 167–168
Organizational project management, 338–362
Gantt chart, 344
outsourcing projects, 345–346
PERT chart, 343, 344
PMBOK elements of project management, 342
project objectives, 343
project planning, 342–344
reasons for project failure, 338–341
triple constraints, 341–342
types of organizational projects, 338
OSI (Open System Interconnection) model, 434
Outbound logistics, 29, 183
Outlier, 141
Output devices, 402–403
Outright, 480
Outsourcing, 17, 345–346
Over-analysis (over-thinking), 143
Overview of textbook, 5
Owner’s equity, 368
Oxman, Neri, 231
P
P2P (peer-to-peer) network, 430–431
PaaS (Platform as a Service), 484
Packet-switching, 431
Packet tampering, 77
Page, Larry, 323
PAN (personal area network), 282–283
Pandora, 296
Pantelligent, 84
Paradigm shift, 245
Parallel implementation, 319
Parallel processing, 403
Parsons, Joey, 203
Partner relationship management (PRM), 202–203
Partnership, 365, 367
Partnership agreement, 365
Passive RFID tag, 289
Password, 85, 443
Password construction guidelines, 441
Password protection policy, 441
Patent, 71

Index  *  I-9
Pattern recognition analysis, 141
Pay-per-call, 257
Pay-per-click, 257
Pay-per-conversion, 257
Payback method, 62
Payless Shoes, 28
PDA (personal digital assistant), 405
Peer-to-peer (P2P) network, 430–431
Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Co. (P&O), 234
Perform, 207
Performance, 422
Performance measures, 504
Personal area network (PAN), 282–283
Personal career SWOT analysis, 33–34
Personal computer, 405
Personal digital assistant (PDA), 405
Personal information management (PIM) software, 407
Personal Information Protection and Electronic Document 
Act (PIPEDA), 509
Personalization, 246
PERT (Program Evaluation and Review Technique) chart, 
343, 344
Petabyte (PB), 131, 401
Petraeus, David, 90
Pfizer, 506
Pharming, 442
Pharming attack, 442
Phased implementation, 319
Phillips Petroleum, 243
Phishing, 85, 86, 442, 443
Phishing expedition, 442
Physical security, 454
Physical view of information, 108
Pilot implementation, 319
PIM (personal information management) software, 407
Pinterest, 275–277
PIPEDA (Personal Information Protection and Electronic 
Document Act), 509
Pirated software, 71
Pivot, 172
PivotTable, 111
Pixie Scientific, 84
PKE (public key encryption), 444, 445
P&L (profit-and-loss) statement, 368
Place, 374
Plagiarism, 273
Planning phase, 314
Platform as a Service (PaaS), 484
Playnix Toys, 364
Plotter, 403
Plug-ins, 5. See also individual plug-in names
Plunge implementation, 319
Pocket computer, 405
Podcasting, 259
Point-of-sale (POS), 402
Pointing device, 402
Polaroid, 25, 242
Political feasibility, 340
Political microtargeting (2008 presidential election), 
114–115
Polymorphic viruses and worms, 76
Pop-up ad, 249
Population increase, 513–514
Portability, 421
Portal, 257
Porter, Michael, 164
business and social problems, 31
five forces model. See Five forces model
three generic strategies, 27–28
value chain analysis, 28–30
Post-implementation report, 320
Postal Service, 90–91, 193
Pragmatic Chaos, 157
Prediction, 139–140
Predictive analytics, 11
Presentation graphics, 408
Presidential election (2008), 114–115
Pretexting, 440
Preventive maintenance, 319
Price, 374
Priceline.com, 256, 275
Primary key, 105, 106
Primary storage, 398–400
Primary value activities, 29, 30
Prime Air, 52
Printer, 403
Privacy, 71
Canada, 509
chief privacy officer (CPO), 57
email privacy policy, 452–453
EU, 507–508
information, 507
information privacy policy, 451–452
United States, 508
Privacy Act (Canada), 509
Private cloud, 481–482
Privilege escalation, 444
PRM (partner relationship management), 202–203
Process improvement model, 393
Process owner, 42
Process quality, 465
Procter & Gamble (P&G), 44, 243
Procurement, 29, 182–183
Product, 374
Product differentiation, 26
Product life cycle, 375
Product quality, 465
Product realization, 37
Production, 15, 460
Production and materials management ERP 
components, 215
Production management, 375, 460
Production planning process, 215
Productivity, 15
Profit, 364
Profit-and-loss (P&L) statement, 368
Programming, 408
Programming languages, 318
Progressive Insurance, 39, 376
Project, 59, 314
Project assumption, 342
Project constraint, 342
Project deliverable, 342
Project failure, 338–341
Project management, 314. See also Organizational project 
management
Project Management Body of Knowledge 
(PMBOK), 342
Project Management Institute (PMI), 314, 341, 342
Project management office (PMO), 342
Project manager, 314
Project milestone, 342
Project objectives, 342, 343
Project plan, 314
Project requirements document, 342
Project scope, 314
Project scope statement, 342
Project stakeholder, 342
Promotion, 374
Protocol, 431–434
Prototyping, 326
Psychographic segmentation, 374
Public cloud, 481
Public key encryption (PKE), 444, 445
Publishing industry, 245
Pure-play business, 256
Q
QBE (query-by-example) tool, 104
Quality, 465–466
Quantum, 243
Queisser, Jeff, 356
Query-by-example (QBE) tool, 104
Quickbooks, 480
R
Rackspace, 203, 206–207
RAD (rapid application development) 
methodology, 327
Radio-frequency identification (RFID), 185–186, 
289–290
RAM (random access memory), 398
Random access memory (RAM), 398
Ransomware, 76, 86
Rapid application development (RAD) methodology, 327
Rapid prototyping, 327
Rational unified process (RUP) methodology, 328
Read-only memory (ROM), 400
Real simple syndication (RSS), 271
Real-time adaptive security, 518
Real-time communication, 259
Real-time information, 101
Real-time systems, 101
Recommendation engine, 136
Record, 105, 106
Recovery, 414
Reding, Viviane, 458
Reduced instruction set computer (RISC) chips, 398
Redundant data, 109
Regression model of prediction, 140
Reidenberg, Joe, 72
Reintermediation, 247–248
Relational database, 140
Relational database management system, 104–110
advantages, 108–110
Coca-Cola, 106–107
entities/attributes, 105, 106
increased flexibility, 108
increased scalability and performance, 108–109
information integrity, 109
information redundancy, 109
information security, 109–110
primary/foreign key, 105, 106
records, 105, 106
Relational database model, 105
Relational integrity constraints, 109
Reliability, 421–422
RentACoder, 511
Report, 9
Reporters Without Borders, 505
Repository, 119
Reputation system, 267
Requirements definition document, 314
Requirements management, 314
Resource management, 504
Response time, 61
Responsibility matrix, 342
Résumé, lying on your, 81
Retail industry, 245
Return of investment (ROI), 60, 62, 369
Revenue, 368
RFID (radio-frequency identification), 185–186
RFID accelerometer, 290
RFID electronic product code (EPC), 185
RFID interrogator, 289
RFID reader, 186, 289
RFID tags, 185, 186, 289
RFM formula, 48
Richter, Dominik, 262
Right to be forgotten, 458
Ring topology, 432
RISC (reduced instruction set computer) chips, 398
Risk management, 504
Rivalry among existing competitors, 26
Robotic prosthetic, 231
Robotics, 187–188
RobotLAB, 519–520
ROI (return of investment), 60, 62, 369
ROM (read-only memory), 400
Romm, Joseph, 66
Rotation, 172
Router, 431

I-10  *  Index
RSS (real simple syndication), 271
Rubber sheeting, 291
Ruby, 207
RUP (rational unified process) methodology, 328
R.U.R. (Rossum’s Universal Robots) (Capek), 187
S
SaaS (Software as a Service), 219, 225, 484
Safe mode, 407
Sales, 12, 13, 371
Sales analytics, 47
Sales and marketing business processes, 383
Sales force automation (SFA), 199
Sales management CRM system, 199
Sales metrics, 64
Sales operational CRM technology, 198–200
Sales process, 199, 371, 372
Salesforce.com, 484
Samsung, 285
San Francisco earthquake (1906), 416
Sarbanes-Oxley Act, 503
SAS, 122
Satellite, 287
Satellite communication system, 287
SBU (strategic business unit), 464
SC Johnson Consumer Environmental Behaviors 
infographic, 154
Scalability, 422
SCEM (supply chain event management), 189
Schedule feasibility, 340
Scheduler.com, 253
Schick, David, 4
Schrenker, Marcus, 358
Schwartz, Barry, 207
Schwartz, Jonathan, 271
SCM. See Supply chain management (SCM)
Scratch, 336
Script bunnies, 75
Script kiddies, 75
Scripting language, 316
Scrum methodology, 328
SDLC (systems development life cycle), 312, 313
Search engine, 257
Search engine optimization (SEO), 257
Search engine ranking, 257
Sears, 3, 243, 370
Seattle Aquarium, 295
Second Life, 496–497
Secondary storage, 400–401
Security response plan policy, 441
Security threats, 74–77. See also Information security
Seigenthaler, John, Sr., 273
Self-publishing, 245
Selfie, 271
Selling chain management, 189
Semantic web, 274
Semi-passive RFID tag, 289
Semistructured decisions, 167
Sensitive data, 34
Sensitivity analysis, 169
Sensor, 294
SEO (search engine optimization), 257
Server, 405, 412, 431
Server virtualization, 475
Service metrics, 64
Service-oriented architecture (SOA)
business issues and SOA solutions, 329
defined, 328
interoperability, 330
loose coupling, 330–331
SOA concepts, 329
SOA integration, 331
SOA service, 331–332
Service provider, 257
Service supply chain, 467
Serviceability, 422
Services, 14
SFA (sales force automation), 199
Shaffer, Alicia, 189–190
Shareholder, 365
Sharepoint, 349
Sharptooth, 225–226
Shaw, Danny, 58
Shell Oil’s SmartPump, 173
Shipping, purchasing, and inventory control business 
processes, 383
Shopping bot, 175
Shrek (film), 472
Shrek 2 (film), 475
Sign-off, 314
Silva, Ken, 506
Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP), 434
Simple Network Management Protocol 
(SNMP), 434
Simplelocker, 76
Single-factor authentication, 444
Single user license, 407
Siri, 162
Site license, 407
Six sigma quality, 465
Skype, 251, 480
Slack, 239–240
Slate, 148
Slice-and-dice, 172
Smart card, 443
SMART criteria, 343
Smart diapers, 84
Smart frying pan, 84
Smart grid, 472–473
Smart tennis racket, 84
Smart thermostats, 84
Smart trash cans, 84
Smart yoga mats, 84
Smartphone, 286, 405
Smith, Dylan, 356, 488
Smith, Fred, 187
SMTP (Simple Mail Transfer Protocol), 434
SNA (social networking analysis), 269
Snapshot, 8
Sneakware, 455
Sniffer, 77
SNMP (Simple Network Management Protocol), 434
SOA. See Service-oriented architecture (SOA)
SOA service, 331–332
Sochie 2014 Winter Olympics, 68
Social bookmarking, 270
Social engineering, 86, 440
Social graph, 269
Social media, 269
Social media analysis, 141
Social media manager, 454
Social media monitoring, 454
Social media policy, 453–454
Social media sector, 227
Social network, 269
Social networking, 269
Social networking analysis (SNA), 269
Social networking sites, 352–354
Social tagging, 270
Socialtext, 303
Soden, Michael, 454
Soft-drink manufacturers, 25–26
Software, 396. See also Hardware and software basics
Software as a Service (SaaS), 219, 225, 484
Software customization, 217
Software development, 312–324
analysis phase, 314–315
design phase, 315
development phase, 316
implementation phase, 318, 319
maintenance phase, 319
overview, 313
planning phase, 314
system reports, 320
testing phase, 316–318, 319
Software development methodologies
agile methodology, 326
extreme programming (XP), 327–328
iterative development, 326, 327
prototyping, 326
rapid application development (RAD), 327
rational unified process (RUP), 328
scrum methodology, 328
waterfall methodology, 325–326
Software engineering, 316
Software patch, 407
Software piracy, 458
Software update, 407
Software upgrade, 407
Sole proprietorship, 365, 367
Solid state drive, 400
Solvency, 368
Solving the Ewaste Problem (StEP), 485
Sony, 192, 243, 294
Source code, 266
Source data, 125
Source documents, 168
Spam, 453
Spam blogs, 77
Spatial data, 291
Spear phishing, 442
Speech analysis, 141
Splogs, 77
Spoofing, 77
Sports sensors, 294–295
Spotlight Analysis, 114
Spreadsheet programs, 108, 408
Sprint Nextel, 285
Spyware, 76, 77, 455
SQL (structured query language), 104
SQL Server, 104
Square, 293
SRM (supplier relationship management), 202
Stakeholder, 21
Stakeholders’ interests, 22
Stalk, George, Jr., 466
Stamps.com, 193
Standardizing information, 120
Stang, Jeff, 43
Staples, 188, 192
Star topology, 432
Starbucks, 271
Start-up costs, 248
State compensation funds, 174
Statement of cash flows, 369
Statement of owner’s equity, 368
Statement of retained earnings, 368
Static information, 110
Static process, 37
Static report, 9
Status report, 342
Stealthware, 455
StEP (Solving the Ewaste Problem), 485
Stolte, Chris, 147
Storage virtualization, 475
Straightjacket customer service, 206–207
Strategic alignment, 504
Strategic BI, 490, 491
Strategic business systems, 463–465
Strategic business unit (SBU), 464
Strategic initiatives
business benefits, 213
competitive advantage, 36–55
measuring success, 62–65
organization structures, 71–92
primary users, 213
Strategic level, 166, 167
Strategic planning, 464
Strategic support system, 170–172
Streaming, 286
Strengths and weaknesses, 23
Structured data, 7, 133
Structured decisions, 165

Index  *  I-11
Structured query language (SQL), 104
Stuart, Alyssa, 234
StumbleUpon, 270
Stylus, 401
Substitute products and services, 25–26
Suicide project, 350
Summary internal report, 320
Sun Tzu, 124
Super Bowl advertising, 6
Supercomputer, 404, 405
Superconductors, 515
Supplier power, 25
Supplier relationship management (SRM), 202
Supply chain, 25, 44, 180, 467
Supply chain activities, 45
Supply chain design, 181
Supply chain event management (SCEM), 189
Supply chain execution system, 182
Supply chain management (SCM), 43–46, 180–193
benefits, 46
bike manufacturer, 44
collaborative demand planning, 189
collaborative engineering, 189
customer-centric supply chain strategy, 233
defined, 44
drones, 187
enterprise resource planning (ERP), 216
extended supply chain, 188, 189
functions, 180
integrated supply chain, 181
logistics, 183
manufacturing supply chain, 467
materials management, 183–184
overview (figure), 183
Porter’s five forces model, 46
procurement, 182–183
radio-frequency identification (RFID), 185–186
robotics, 187–188
role of information technology, 181
SCM activities, 45
SCM metrics, 63, 181
selling chain management, 189
service supply chain, 467
supply chain design, 181
supply chain event management (SCEM), 189
supply chain execution, 182
supply chain planning, 182
supply chain visibility, 181
3D printing, 184–185
typical supply chain, 180, 467
Walmart, 45
Supply chain management metrics, 63, 181
Supply chain planning system, 182
Supply chain visibility, 181
Supply-chaining, 17
Support value activities, 29, 30
Sustainable MIS disposal, 471
Sustainable MIS infrastructure, 470–489
carbon emissions, 471
clean computing, 470
cloud computing, 478–483
components, 472
defined, 470
energy consumption, 471
ewaste, 471
green PC, 470
grid computing, 472–474
utility computing, 483–484
virtualization, 474–478
Sustaining technology, 242
Swimlane diagram, 41
Swingbyte, 294
Switching costs, 24–25
SWOT analysis, 23–24
Synchronous communication, 269
System, 13
System availability, 61
System clock, 407
System implementation, 318, 319
System reports, 320
System restore, 407
System software, 406–407
System testing, 316–318, 319
System virtualization, 476, 477
Systems development life cycle (SDLC), 
312, 313
Systems thinking, 15, 37
T
Table, 105
Tableau, 147
Tablet computer, 405
Tactical BI, 490, 491
Tactical planning, 464
Tags, 270
Tangible benefits, 339
Target, 34, 77–78, 364
Tata Consultancy Services, 345
Tatango, 91
Taxonomy, 260
TCP/IP, 433–434
TDF (transborder data flows), 507
TechCrunch, 250
Technical director (game development 
company), 309
Technical feasibility, 340
Technology
ethics, 72
future business, 516–518
global trends, 515, 516
globalization, 506
information security, 441–446
Technology failure, 419
Technology recovery strategies, 419
TED talks, 90, 323
Teergrubing, 453
Telecommunication companies, 174
Telnet Protocol, 434
Terabyte (TB), 400, 401
Test conditions, 316, 318
Testing phase, 316–318, 319
Text analysis, 141
The Castle, 158
The Crunch Factory, 158
The Gap, 256
Thiel, Peter, 231
Thin ice reports, 80
Thinkmodo, 265
Threat, 451
Threat of new entrants, 26
Threat of substitute products and services, 25–26
3D printer, 403
3D printing, 184–185, 229–230, 231, 251, 517
3DSystems, 230
Three generic strategies, 27–28, 88
ThreeBirdNest, 190
Throughout, 61
Thurman, Howard, 337
Tiffany & Co., 28
Time and time management, 516
Time bombs, 444
Time management, 35
Time-series information, 140
TJ Maxx, 34
To-be burger order process, 42, 386
To-be order fulfillment process, 388
To-be process model, 40, 41, 385–388
Toggl, 480
Token, 443
Torvalds, Linus, 406
Touch pad, 402
Touch screen, 402
Toy business, 364
TPS (transaction processing system), 167–168
Trackur.com, 454
Transaction, 367
Transaction broker, 257
Transaction processing system (TPS), 167–168
Transaction speed, 61
Transactional information, 100, 101, 167
Transborder data flows (TDF), 507
Transformation, 168
Transformation process, 461
Transmission control protocol/Internet protocol (TCP/IP), 
433–434
Transportation planning systems, 465
Travel industry, 245
Trek, 43–44
Trend analysis, 512
Trend monitoring, 512
Trend projection, 512
Triple constraints, 341–342
Trojan-horse virus, 76
Twisted-pair cable, 435
Twitter, 158, 251, 271, 292
Two-factor authentication, 444
Typosquatting, 452
U
UAT (user acceptance testing), 319
Uber, 251, 300–301
Ugly project, 350
Unavailable, 421
Union Bank of California, 416
Unit opening/closing cases. See Cases
Unit testing, 319
United Arab Emirates (UAE), 234
United States
coal, 471
factory jobs lost to China, 69
privacy, 508
work time, 516
Universal resource locator (URL), 244
UNIX, 406
Unmanned aircraft system (drone), 52, 187
Unplanned downtime, 74
Unshielded twisted-pair (UTP), 435
Unstructured data, 8, 133
Unstructured decisions, 167
Up, 147
Up-selling, 198
Updates, 118
Uplift modeling, 201
UPS, 187, 463
Urban Chat, 352
Urbee, 231
URL (universal resource locator), 244
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 148
U.S.-EU data privacy requirements, 507
U.S. Postal Service, 90–91, 193
Usability, 422
User acceptance testing (UAT), 319
User-contributed content, 267
User documentation, 318
User-generated content, 267
User ID, 443
Utility computing, 483–484
Utility software, 407
UTP (unshielded twisted-pair), 435
V
VA (virtual assistant), 517
Value-added, 462
Value chain, 29
Value chain analysis, 28–30, 89–90
Value delivery, 504
van Herpen, Iris, 231
Variable, 9
VeriSign, 445
Vertical privilege escalation, 444

I-12  *  Index
Video game artists and animators, 310
Video game designer, 310
Video game producer, 310
Video game programmer, 309
Video gaming industry, 309–310, 371
Videoconference, 259–260
Viral marketing, 249
Virtual abandonment, 264–265
Virtual assistant (VA), 517
Virtual Boy, 371
Virtual business, 256
Virtual data center, 477
Virtual reality, 175, 516
Virtual surgery, 175
Virtual workforce, 175
Virtualization, 133, 134, 474–478
Virtualization architecture, 476
Virtualized computing, 474
Virus, 75, 76
Visa, 174
Vishing, 442
Visualization, 170
Vitria Technology, 213
Voice over LTE (VoLTE), 286
Voice phishing, 442
Voiceprint, 444
Volatile, 398
Volatility, 398
Volkswagen, 493, 494
VoLTE (Voice over LTE), 286
Vulnerability, 422
W
W3C (World Wide Web Consortium), 244
WAI (web accessibility initiative), 420
Walmart, 3, 28, 45, 52, 60, 87, 100, 101, 233, 243, 253, 364
Walmart/Procter & Gamble alliance, 233
Walton, Sam, 233
WAN (wide area network), 429, 430
WAP (wireless access point), 283
War chalking, 288
War driving, 288
Warm site, 415, 416
Warping, 291
Waste Management, 223
Waterfall methodology, 325–326
Weather bots, 303
Web 1.0, 245
Web 2.0. See also Business 2.0
Web 3.0, 273–275
Web accessibility, 420
Web accessibility initiative (WAI), 420
Web analysis, 141
Web-based self-service system, 200
Web browser, 244
Web-centric metric, 63
Web conferencing, 260
Web hosting, 244
Web log, 455
Web service, 330
Webby awards, 254
Webcam, 402
Webinar, 260
Website bookmark, 270
Website metrics, 63, 250
Website name stealing, 452
Website personalization, 201
Weiss, Noah, 240
Weiss Tech House, 303
Wendy’s restaurants, 498
WEP (wired equivalent privacy), 287
“What Does the Fox Say?,” 265
What-if analysis, 169
White-hat hacker, 75
Wi-Fi infrastructure, 283
Wi-Fi protected access (WPA), 288
Wi-Fi (Wireless fidelity), 283
Wide area network (WAN), 429, 430
Wiki, 271, 272, 302
Wiki vandalism, 273
WikiBlunders, 80
Wikipedia, 80, 272, 279
Wilburn, Randy and Nicola, 511
WiMAX (Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access), 
284–285
Windows Azure, 481
Wipro, 345
Wire media, 435–436
Wired equivalent privacy (WEP), 287
Wireless access point (WAP), 283
Wireless fidelity (Wi-Fi), 283
Wireless-G, 284
Wireless LAN (WLAN), 283–284
Wireless MAN (WMAN), 284–285
Wireless media, 436
Wireless-N, 283, 284
Wireless technology, 282–306
business applications, 288–292
geographic information system (GIS), 291–292
global positioning system (GPS), 290–291
managing mobile devices, 288
personal area network (PAN), 282–283
protecting wireless connections, 287–288
radio-frequency identification (RFID), 289–290
satellite communication system, 287
wireless LAN (WLAN), 283–284
wireless MAN (WMAN), 284–285
wireless WAN (WWAN), 285–287
Wireless topology, 432
Wireless WAN (WWAN), 285–287
WLAN (wireless LAN), 283–284
WMAN (wireless MAN), 284–285
Word processing, 408
Workflow, 37
Workflow control systems, 37
Workflow software, 17
Workplace MIS monitoring, 454
Workplace monitoring policy, 454–455
Workshop training, 318
World Is Flat, The (Friedman), 16–17, 20
World Wide Web Consortium (W3C), 244
World Wide Web (WWW), 244, 245, 505
Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access (WiMAX), 
284–285
Worm, 75
Worthen, Ben, 369
WPA (Wi-Fi protected access), 288
WWAN (wireless WAN), 285–287
WWW (World Wide Web), 244, 245, 505
www.dontbuydodgechryslervehicles.com, 196
www.ellisisland.org, 108
www.jetbluehostage.com, 196
X
Xcel Energy, 474
Xerox, 243, 433
XML (Extensible Markup Language), 330
XP (extreme programming) methodology, 327–328
Y
Yahoo!, 477
Ylvis, 265
Yourdon, Edward, 350
Z
Zappos, 6, 110–111, 188, 192, 204–205
Zepp, 295
Zillow, 127
Zip code target-marketing strategy, 137–138
Zoetrope project, 151
Zombie, 442
Zombie farm, 442
Zuckerberg, Mark, 6

