Storm Front by Jim
Butcher
For Debbie Chester, who taught me everything I really needed
to know about writing. And for my father, who taught me
everything I really needed to know about living. I miss you dad.
Chapter One
I heard the mailman approach my office door, half an hour
earlier than usual. He didn't sound right. His footsteps fell more
heavily, jauntily, and he whistled. A new guy. He whistled his
way to my office door, then fell silent for a moment. Then he
laughed.
Then he knocked.
I winced. My mail comes through the mail slot unless it's
registered. I get a really limited selection of registered mail, and
it's never good news. I got up out of my office chair and opened
the door.
The new mailman, who looked like a basketball with arms and
legs and a sunburned, balding head, was chuckling at the sign on
the door glass. He glanced at me and hooked a thumb toward the
sign. "You're kidding, right?"
I read the sign (people change it occasionally), and shook my
head. "No, I'm serious. Can I have my mail, please."
"So, uh. Like parties, shows, stuff like that?" He looked past
me, as though he expected to see a white tiger, or possibly some
skimpily clad assistants prancing around my one-room office.
I sighed, not in the mood to get mocked again, and reached for
the mail he held in his hand. "No, not like that. I don't do
parties."
He held on to it, his head tilted curiously. "So what? Some
kinda fortune-teller? Cards and crystal balls and things?"
"No," I told him. "I'm not a psychic." I tugged at the mail.

He held on to it. "What are you, then?"
"What's the sign on the door say?"
"It says 'Harry Dresden. Wizard.' "
"That's me," I confirmed.
"An actual wizard?" he asked, grinning, as though I should let
him in on the joke. "Spells and potions? Demons and
incantations? Subtle and quick to anger?"
"Not so subtle." I jerked the mail out of his hand and looked
pointedly at his clipboard. "Can I sign for my mail please."
The new mailman's grin vanished, replaced with a scowl. He
passed over the clipboard to let me sign for the mail (another
late notice from my landlord), and said, "You're a nut. That's
what you are." He took his clipboard back, and said, "You have a
nice day, sir."
I watched him go.
"Typical," I muttered, and shut the door.
My name is Harry Blackstone Copperfield Dresden. Conjure by
it at your own risk. I'm a wizard. I work out of an office in
midtown Chicago. As far as I know, I'm the only openly
practicing professional wizard in the country. You can find me in
the yellow pages, under "Wizards." Believe it or not, I'm the only
one there. My ad looks like this:
HARRY DRESDEN—WIZARD
Lost Items Found. Paranormal Investigations.
Consulting. Advice. Reasonable Rates.
No Love Potions, Endless Purses, Parties, or Other
Entertainment
You'd be surprised how many people call just to ask me if I'm
serious. But then, if you'd seen the things I'd seen, if you knew
half of what I knew, you'd wonder how anyone could not think I
was serious.
The end of the twentieth century and the dawn of the new
millennium had seen something of a renaissance in the public
awareness of the paranormal. Psychics, haunts, vampires—you
name it. People still didn't take them seriously, but all the things

Science had promised us hadn't come to pass. Disease was still a
problem. Starvation was still a problem. Violence and crime and
war were still problems. In spite of the advance of technology,
things just hadn't changed the way everyone had hoped and
thought they would.
Science, the largest religion of the twentieth century, had
become somewhat tarnished by images of exploding space
shuttles, crack babies, and a generation of complacent
Americans who had allowed the television to raise their children.
People were looking for something—I think they just didn't know
what. And even though they were once again starting to open
their eyes to the world of magic and the arcane that had been
with them all the while, they still thought I must be some kind of
joke.
Anyway, it had been a slow month. A slow pair of months,
actually. My rent from February didn't get paid until the tenth of
March, and it was looking like it might be even longer until I got
caught up for this month.
My only job had been the previous week, when I'd gone down
to Branson, Missouri, to investigate a country singer's possibly
haunted house. It hadn't been. My client hadn't been happy with
that answer, and had been even less happy when I suggested he
lay off of any intoxicating substances and try to get some
exercise and sleep, and see if that didn't help things more than
an exorcism. I'd gotten travel expenses plus an hour's pay, and
gone away feeling I had done the honest, righteous, and
impractical thing. I heard later that he'd hired a shyster psychic
to come in and perform a ceremony with a lot of incense and
black lights. Some people.
I finished up my paperback and tossed it into the DONE box.
There was a pile of read and discarded paperbacks in a
cardboard box on one side of my desk, the spines bent and the
pages mangled. I'm terribly hard on books. I was eyeing the pile
of unread books, considering which to start next, given that I
had no real work to do, when my phone rang.
I stared at it in a somewhat surly fashion. We wizards are
terrific at brooding. After the third ring, when I thought I
wouldn't sound a little too eager, I picked up the receiver and
said, "Dresden."

"Oh. Is this, um, Harry Dresden? The, ah, wizard?" Her tone
was apologetic, as though she were terribly afraid she would be
insulting me.
No, I thought. It's Harry Dresden the, ah, lizard. Harry the
wizard is one door down.
It is the prerogative of wizards to be grumpy. It is not,
however, the prerogative of freelance consultants who are late on
their rent, so instead of saying something smart, I told the
woman on the phone, "Yes, ma'am. How can I help you today?"
"I, um," she said. "I'm not sure. I've lost something, and I think
maybe you could help me."
"Finding lost articles is a specialty," I said. "What would I be
looking for?"
There was a nervous pause. "My husband," she said. She had a
voice that was a little hoarse, like a cheerleader who'd been
working a long tournament, but had enough weight of years in it
to place her as an adult.
My eyebrows went up. "Ma'am, I'm not really a
missing-persons specialist. Have you contacted the police or a
private investigator?"
"No," she said, quickly. "No, they can't. That is, I haven't. Oh
dear, this is all so complicated. Not something someone can talk
about on the phone. I'm sorry to have taken up your time, Mr.
Dresden."
"Hold on now," I said quickly. "I'm sorry, you didn't tell me
your name."
There was that nervous pause again, as though she were
checking a sheet of written notes before answering. "Call me
Monica."
People who know diddly about wizards don't like to give us
their names. They're convinced that if they give a wizard their
name from their own lips it could be used against them. To be
fair, they're right.
I had to be as polite and harmless as I could. She was about to
hang up out of pure indecision, and I needed the job. I could
probably turn hubby up, if I worked at it.
"Okay, Monica," I told her, trying to sound as melodious and

friendly as I could. "If you feel your situation is of a sensitive
nature, maybe you could come by my office and talk about it. If
it turns out that I can help you best, I will, and if not, then I can
direct you to someone I think can help you better." I gritted my
teeth and pretended I was smiling. "No charge."
It must have been the no charge that did it. She agreed to
come right out to the office, and told me that she would be there
in an hour. That put her estimated arrival at about two-thirty.
Plenty of time to go out and get some lunch, then get back to the
office to meet her.
The phone rang again almost the instant I put it down, making
me jump. I peered at it. I don't trust electronics. Anything
manufactured after the forties is suspect—and doesn't seem to
have much liking for me. You name it: cars, radios, telephones,
TVs, VCRs—none of them seem to behave well for me. I don't
even like to use automatic pencils.
I answered the phone with the same false cheer I had
summoned up for Monica Husband-Missing. "This is Dresden,
may I help you?"
"Harry, I need you at the Madison in the next ten minutes. Can
you be there?" The voice on the other end of the line was also a
woman's, cool, brisk, businesslike.
"Why, Lieutenant Murphy," I gushed, overflowing with
saccharine, "It's good to hear from you, too. It's been so long. Oh,
they're fine, fine. And your family?"
"Save it, Harry. I've got a couple of bodies here, and I need you
to take a look around."
I sobered immediately. Karrin Murphy was the director of
Special Investigations out of downtown Chicago, a de facto
appointee of the Police Commissioner to investigate any crimes
dubbed unusual. Vampire attacks, troll mauraudings, and faery
abductions of children didn't fit in very neatly on a police
report—but at the same time, people got attacked, infants got
stolen, property was damaged or destroyed. And someone had to
look into it.
In Chicago, or pretty much anywhere in Chicagoland, that
person was Karrin Murphy. I was her library of the supernatural
on legs, and a paid consultant for the police department. But two

bodies? Two deaths by means unknown? I hadn't handled
anything like that for her before.
"Where are you?" I asked her.
"Madison Hotel on Tenth, seventh floor."
"That's only a fifteen-minute walk from my office," I said.
"So you can be here in fifteen minutes. Good."
"Um," I said. I looked at the clock. Monica No-Last-Name
would be here in a little more than forty-five minutes. "I've sort
of got an appointment."
"Dresden, I've sort of got a pair of corpses with no leads and no
suspects, and a killer walking around loose. Your appointment
can wait."
My temper flared. It does that occasionally. "It can't, actually,"
I said. "But I'll tell you what. I'll stroll on over and take a look
around, and be back here in time for it."
"Have you had lunch yet?" she asked.
"What?"
She repeated the question.
"No," I said.
"Don't." There was a pause, and when she spoke again, there
was a sort of greenish tone to her words. "It's bad."
"How bad are we talking here, Murph?"
Her voice softened, and that scared me more than any images
of gore or violent death could have. Murphy was the original
tough girl, and she prided herself on never showing weakness.
"It's bad, Harry. Please don't take too long. Special Crimes is
itching to get their fingers on this one, and I know you don't like
people to touch the scene before you can look around."
"I'm on the way," I told her, already standing and pulling on
my jacket.
"Seventh floor," she reminded me. "See you there."
"Okay."
I turned off the lights to my office, went out the door, and
locked up behind me, frowning. I wasn't sure how long it was

going to take to investigate Murphy's scene, and I didn't want to
miss out on speaking with Monica Ask-Me-No-Questions. So I
opened the door again, got out a piece of paper and a
thumbtack, and wrote:
Out briefly. Back for appointment at 2:30. Dresden
That done, I started down the stairs. I rarely use the elevator,
even though I'm on the fifth floor. Like I said, I don't trust
machines. They're always breaking down on me just when I need
them.
Besides which. If I were someone in this town using magic to
kill people two at a time, and I didn't want to get caught, I'd
make sure that I removed the only practicing wizard the police
department kept on retainer. I liked my odds on the stairwell a
lot better than I did in the cramped confines of the elevator.
Paranoid? Probably. But just because you're paranoid doesn't
mean that there isn't an invisible demon about to eat your face.
Chapter Two
Karrin Murphy was waiting for me outside the Madison.
Karrin and I are a study in contrasts. Where I am tall and lean,
she's short and stocky. Where I have dark hair and dark eyes,
she's got Shirley Temple blond locks and baby blues. Where my
features are all lean and angular, with a hawkish nose and a
sharp chin, hers are round and smooth, with the kind of cute
nose you'd expect on a cheerleader.
It was cool and windy, like it usually is in March, and she wore
a long coat that covered her pantsuit. Murphy never wore
dresses, though I suspected she'd have muscular, well-shaped
legs, like a gymnast. She was built for function, and had a pair of
trophies in her office from aikido tournaments to prove it. Her
hair was cut at shoulder length and whipped out wildly in the
spring wind. She wasn't wearing earrings, and her makeup was
of sufficient quality and quantity that it was tough to tell she had
on any at all. She looked more like a favorite aunt or a cheerful
mother than a hard-bitten homicide detective.
"Don't you have any other jackets, Dresden?" she asked, as I
came within hailing distance. There were several police cars
parked illegally in front of the building. She glanced at my eyes

for a half second and then away, quickly. I had to give her credit.
It was more than most people did. It wasn't really dangerous
unless you did it for several seconds, but I was used to anyone
who knew I was a wizard making it a point not to glance at my
face.
I looked down at my black canvas duster, with its heavy
mantling and waterproof lining and sleeves actually long enough
for my arms. "What's wrong with this one?"
"It belongs on the set of El Dorado."
"And?"
She snorted, an indelicate sound from so small a woman, and
spun on her heel to walk toward the hotel's front doors.
I caught up and walked a little ahead of her.
She sped her pace. So did I. We raced one another toward the
front door, with increasing speed, through the puddles left over
from last night's rain.
My legs were longer; I got there first. I opened the door for her
and gallantly gestured for her to go in. It was an old contest of
ours. Maybe my values are outdated, but I come from an old
school of thought. I think that men ought to treat women like
something other than just shorter, weaker men with breasts. Try
and convict me if I'm a bad person for thinking so. I enjoy
treating a woman like a lady, opening doors for her, paying for
shared meals, giving flowers—all that sort of thing.
It irritates the hell out of Murphy, who had to fight and claw
and play dirty with the hairiest men in Chicago to get as far as
she has. She glared up at me while I stood there holding open the
door, but there was a reassurance about the glare, a relaxation.
She took an odd sort of comfort in our ritual, annoying as she
usually found it.
How bad was it up on the seventh floor, anyway?
We rode the elevator in a sudden silence. We knew one another
well enough, by this time, that the silences were not
uncomfortable. I had a good sense of Murphy, an instinctual
grasp for her moods and patterns of thought—something I
develop whenever I'm around someone for any length of time.
Whether it's a natural talent or a supernatural one I don't know.

My instincts told me that Murphy was tense, stretched as tight
as piano wire. She kept it off her face, but there was something
about the set of her shoulders and neck, the stiffness of her back,
that made me aware of it.
Or maybe I was just projecting it onto her. The confines of the
elevator made me a bit nervous. I licked my lips and looked
around the interior of the car. My shadow and Murphy's fell on
the floor, and almost looked as though they were sprawled there.
There was something about it that bothered me, a nagging little
instinct that I blew off as a case of nerves. Steady, Harry.
She let out a harsh breath just as the elevator slowed, then
sucked in another one before the doors could open, as though she
were planning on holding it for as long as we were on the floor
and breathing only when she got back in the elevator again.
Blood smells a certain way, a kind of sticky, almost metallic
odor, and the air was full of it when the elevator doors opened.
My stomach quailed a little bit, but I swallowed manfully and
followed Murphy out of the elevator and down the hall past a
couple of uniform cops, who recognized me and waved me past
without asking to see the little laminated card the city had given
me. Granted, even in a big-city department like Chicago P.D.,
they didn't exactly call in a horde of consultants (I went down in
the paperwork as a psychic consultant, I think), but still.
Unprofessional of the boys in blue.
Murphy preceded me into the room. The smell of blood grew
thicker, but there wasn't anything gruesome behind door
number one. The outer room of the suite looked like some kind of
a sitting room done in rich tones of red and gold, like a set from
an old movie in the thirties—expensive-looking, but somehow
faux, nonetheless. Dark, rich leather covered the chairs, and my
feet sank into the thick, rust-colored shag of the carpet. The
velvet velour curtains had been drawn, and though the lights
were all on, the place still seemed a little too dark, a little too
sensual in its textures and colors. It wasn't the kind of room
where you sit and read a book. Voices came from a doorway to
my right.
"Wait here a minute," Murphy told me. Then she went through
the door to the right of the entryway and into what I supposed
was the bedroom of the suite.

I wandered around the sitting room with my eyes mostly
closed, noting things. Leather couch. Two leather chairs. Stereo
and television in a black glossy entertainment center.
Champagne bottle warming in a stand holding a brimming tub
of what had been ice the night before, with two empty glasses set
beside it. There was a red rose petal on the floor, clashing with
the carpeting (but then, in that room, what didn't?).
A bit to one side, under the skirt of one of the leather recliners,
was a little piece of satiny cloth. I bent at the waist and lifted the
skirt with one hand, careful not to touch anything. A pair of
black-satin panties, a tiny triangle with lace coming off the
points, lay there, one strap snapped as though the thong had
simply been torn off. Kinky.
The stereo system was state of the art, though not an expensive
brand. I took a pencil from my pocket and pushed the PLAY
button with the eraser. Gentle, sensual music filled the room, a
low bass, a driving drumbeat, wordless vocals, the heavy
breathing of a woman as background.
The music continued for a few seconds more, and then it began
to skip over a section about two seconds long, repeating it over
and over again.
I grimaced. Like I said, I have this effect on machinery. It has
something to do with being a wizard, with working with magical
forces. The more delicate and modern the machine is, the more
likely it is that something will go wrong if I get close enough to it.
I can kill a copier at fifty paces.
"The love suite," came a man's voice, drawing the word love
out into luuuuuuuv. "What do you think, Mister Man?"
"Hello, Detective Carmichael," I said, without turning around.
Carmichael's rather light, nasal voice had a distinctive quality.
He was Murphy's partner and the resident skeptic, convinced
that I was nothing more than a charlatan, scamming the city out
of its hard-earned money. "Were you saving the panties to take
home yourself, or did you just overlook them?" I turned and
looked at him. He was short and overweight and balding, with
beady, bloodshot eyes and a weak chin. His jacket was rumpled,
and there were food stains on his tie, all of which served to
conceal a razor intellect. He was a sharp cop, and absolutely
ruthless at tracking down killers.

He walked over to the chair and looked down. "Not bad,
Sherlock," he said. "But that's just foreplay. Wait'll you see the
main attraction. I'll have a bucket waiting for you." He turned
and killed the malfunctioning CD player with a jab from the
eraser end of his own pencil.
I widened my eyes at him, to let him know how terrified I was,
then walked past him and into the bedroom. And regretted it. I
looked, noted details mechanically, and quietly shut the door on
the part of my head that had started screaming the second I
entered the room.
They must have died sometime the night before, as rigor
mortis had already set in. They were on the bed; she was astride
him, body leaned back, back bowed like a dancer's, the curves of
her breasts making a lovely outline. He stretched beneath her, a
lean and powerfully built man, arms reaching out and grasping
at the satin sheets, gathering them in his fists. Had it been an
erotic photograph, it would have made a striking tableau.
Except that the lovers' rib cages on the upper left side of their
torsos had expanded outward, through their skin, the ribs
jabbing out like ragged, snapped knives. Arterial blood had
sprayed out of their bodies, all the way to the mirror on the
ceiling, along with pulped, gelatinous masses of flesh that had to
be what remained of their hearts. Standing over them, I could
see into the upper cavity of the bodies, I noted the now greyish
lining around the motionless left lungs and the edges of the ribs,
which apparently were forced outward and snapped by some
force within.
It definitely cut down on the erotic potential.
The bed was in the middle of the room, giving it a subtle
emphasis. The bedroom followed the decor of the sitting room—a
lot of red, a lot of plush fabrics, a little over the top unless viewed
in candlelight. There were indeed candles in holders on the wall,
now burned down to the nubs and extinguished.
I stepped closer to the bed and walked around it. The carpet
squelched as I did. The little screaming part of my brain, safely
locked up behind doors of self-control and strict training,
continued gibbering. I tried to ignore it. Really I did. But if I
didn't get out of that room in a hurry, I was going to start crying
like a little girl.

So I took in the details fast. The woman was in her twenties, in
fabulous condition. At least I thought she had been. It was hard
to tell. She had hair the color of chestnuts, cut in a pageboy style,
and it seemed dyed to me. Her eyes were only partly open, and I
couldn't quite guess at their color beyond not-dark. Vaguely
green?
The man was probably in his forties, and had the kind of
fitness that comes from a lifetime of conditioning. There was a
tattoo on his right bicep, a winged dagger, that the pull of the
satin sheets half concealed. There were scars on his knuckles,
layers deep, and across his lower abdomen was a vicious, narrow,
puckered scar that I guessed must have come from a knife
wound.
There were discarded clothes around—a tux for him, a little
sheath of a black dress and a pair of pumps for her. There were a
pair of overnight bags, unopened and set neatly aside, probably
by a porter.
I looked up. Carmichael and Murphy were watching me in
silence.
I shrugged at them.
"Well?" Murphy demanded. "Are we dealing with magic here,
or aren't we?"
"Either that or it was really incredible sex," I told her.
Carmichael snorted.
I laughed a little, too—and that was all the screaming part of
my brain needed to slam open the doors I'd shut on it. My
stomach revolted and heaved, and I lurched out of the room.
Carmichael, true to his word, had set a stainless-steel bucket
outside the room, and I fell to my knees throwing up.
It only took me a few seconds to control myself again—but I
didn't want to go back in that room. I didn't need to see what
was there anymore. I didn't want to see the two dead people,
whose hearts had literally exploded out of their chests.
And someone had used magic to do it. They had used magic to
wreak harm on another, violating the First Law. The White
Council was going to go into collective apoplexy. This hadn't
been the act of a malign spirit or a malicious entity, or the attack

of one of the many creatures of the Nevernever, like vampires or
trolls. This had been the premeditated, deliberate act of a
sorcerer, a wizard, a human being able to tap into the
fundamental energies of creation and life itself.
It was worse than murder. It was twisted, wretched perversion,
as though someone had bludgeoned another person to death
with a Botticelli, turned something of beauty to an act of utter
destruction.
If you've never touched it, it's hard to explain. Magic is created
by life, and most of all by the awareness, intelligence, emotions of
a human being. To end such a life with the same magic that was
born from it was hideous, almost incestuous somehow.
I sat up again and was breathing hard, shaking and tasting the
bile in my mouth, when Murphy came back out of the room with
Carmichael.
"All right, Harry," Murphy said. "Let's have it. What do you see
happening here?"
I took a moment to collect my thoughts before answering.
"They came in. They had some champagne. They danced for a
while, made out, over there by the stereo. Then went into the
bedroom. They were in there for less than an hour. It hit them
when they were getting to the high point."
"Less than an hour," Carmichael said. "How do you figure?"
"CD was only an hour and ten long. Figure a few minutes for
dancing and drinking, and then they're in the room. Was the CD
playing when they found them?"
"No," Murphy said.
"Then it hadn't been set on a loop. I figure they wanted music,
just to make things perfect, given the room and all."
Carmichael grunted, sourly. "Nothing we hadn't already
figured out for ourselves," he said to Murphy. "He'd better come
up with more than this."
Murphy shot Carmichael a look that said "shut up," then said,
softly, "I need more, Harry."
I ran one of my hands back over my hair. "There's only two
ways anyone could have managed this. The first is by evocation.
Evocation is the most direct, spectacular, and noisy form of

expressed magic, or sorcery. Explosions, fire, that sort of thing.
But I doubt it was an evocator who did this."
"Why?" Murphy demanded. I heard her pencil scritching on
the notepad she always kept with her.
"Because you have to be able to see or touch where you want
your effect to go," I told her. "Line of sight only. The man or
woman would have had to be there in the room with them.
Tough to hide forensic evidence with something like that, and
anyone who was skilled enough to pull off a spell like that would
have had the sense to use a gun instead. It's easier."
"What's the other option?" Murphy asked.
"Thaumaturgy," I said. "As above, so below. Make something
happen on a small scale, and give it the energy to happen on a
large scale."
Carmichael snorted. "What bullshit."
Murphy's voice sounded skeptical. "How would that work,
Harry? Could it be done from somewhere else?"
I nodded. "The killer would need to have something to connect
him or her to the victims. Hair, fingernails, blood samples. That
sort of thing."
"Like a voodoo doll?"
"Exactly the same thing, yes."
"There's fresh dye in the woman's hair," Murphy said,
I nodded. "Maybe if you can find out where she got her hair
styled, you could find something out. I don't know."
"Is there anything else you could tell me that would be of use?"
"Yes. The killer knew the victims. And I'm thinking it was a
woman."
Carmichael snorted. "I don't believe we got to sit here and
listen to this. Nine times out of ten the killer knows the victim."
"Shut up, Carmichael," Murphy said. "What makes you say
that, Harry?"
I stood up, and rubbed at my face with my hands. "The way
magic works. Whenever you do something with it, it comes from
inside of you. Wizards have to focus on what they're trying to do,

visualize it, believe in it, to make it work. You can't make
something happen that isn't a part of you, inside. The killer
could have murdered them both and made it look like an
accident, but she did it this way. To get it done this way, she
would have had to want them dead for very personal reasons, to
be willing to reach inside them like that. Revenge, maybe. Maybe
you're looking for a lover or a spouse.
"Also because of when they died—in the middle of sex. It wasn't
a coincidence. Emotions are a kind of channel for magic, a path
that can be used to get to you. She picked a time when they'd be
together and be charged up with lust. She got samples to use as a
focus, and she planned it out in advance. You don't do that to
strangers."
"Crap," Carmichael said, but this time it was more of an
absentminded curse than anything directed at me.
Murphy glared at me. "You keep saying 'she,' " she challenged
me. "Why the hell do you think that?"
I gestured toward the room. "Because you can't do something
that bad without a whole lot of hate," I said. "Women are better
at hating than men. They can focus it better, let it go better. Hell,
witches are just plain meaner than wizards. This feels like
feminine vengeance of some kind to me."
"But a man could have done it," Murphy said.
"Well," I hedged.
"Christ, you are a chauvinist pig, Dresden. Is it something that 
only a woman could have done?"
"Well. No. I don't think so."
"You don't think so?" Carmichael drawled. "Some expert."
I scowled at them both, angry. "I haven't really worked through
the specifics of what I'd need to do to make somebody's heart
explode, Murph. As soon as I have occasion to I'll be sure to let
you know."
"When will you be able to tell me something?" Murphy asked.
"I don't know." I held up a hand, forestalling her next
comment. "I can't put a timer on this stuff, Murph. It just can't
be done. I don't even know if I can do it at all, much less how
long it will take."

"At fifty bucks an hour, it better not be too long," Carmichael
growled. Murphy glanced at him. She didn't exactly agree with
him, but she didn't exactly slap him down, either.
I took the opportunity to take a few long breaths, calming
myself down. I finally looked back at them. "Okay," I asked.
"Who are they? The victims."
"You don't need to know that," Carmichael snapped.
"Ron," Murphy said. "I could really use some coffee."
Carmichael turned to her. He wasn't tall, but he all but loomed
over Murphy. "Aw, come on, Murph. This guy's jerking your
chain. You don't really think he's going to be able to tell you
anything worth hearing, do you?"
Murphy regarded her partner's sweaty, beady-eyed face with a
sort of frosty hauteur, tough to pull off on someone six inches
taller than she. "No cream, two sugars."
"Dammit," Carmichael said. He shot me a cold glance (but
didn't quite look at my eyes), then jammed his hands into his
pants pockets and stalked out of the room.
Murphy followed him to the door, her feet silent, and shut it
behind him. The sitting room immediately became darker,
closer, with the grinning ghoul of its former chintzy intimacy
dancing in the smell of the blood and the memory of the two
bodies in the next room.
"The woman's name was Jennifer Stanton. She worked for the
Velvet Room."
I whistled. The Velvet Room was a high-priced escort service
run by a woman named Bianca. Bianca kept a flock of beautiful,
charming, and witty women, pandering them to the richest men
in the area for hundreds of dollars an hour. Bianca sold the kind
of female company that most men only see on television and the
movies. I also knew that she was a vampiress of considerable
influence in the Nevernever. She had Power with a capital P.
I'd tried to explain the Nevernever to Murphy before. She
didn't really comprehend it, but she understood that Bianca was
a badass vampiress who sometimes squabbled for territory. We
both knew that if one of Bianca's girls was involved, the
vampiress must have been involved somehow, too.

Murphy cut right to the point. "Was this part of one of
Bianca's territorial disputes?"
"No," I said. "Unless she's having it with a human sorcerer. A
vampire, even a vamp sorcerer, couldn't have pulled off
something like this outside of the Nevernever."
"Could she be at odds with a human sorcerer?" Murphy asked
me.
"Possible. But it doesn't sound like her. She isn't that stupid."
What I didn't tell Murphy was that the White Council made sure
that vampires who trifled with mortal practitioners never lived
to brag about it. I don't talk to regular people about the White
Council. It just isn't done. "Besides," I said, "if a human wanted
to take a shot at Bianca by hitting her girls, he'd be better off to
kill the girl and leave the customer healthy, to let him spread the
tale and scare off business."
"Mmph," Murphy said. She wasn't convinced, but she made
notes of what I had said.
"Who was the man?" I asked her.
Murphy looked up at me for a moment, and then said, evenly,
"Tommy Tomm."
I blinked at her to let her know she hadn't revealed the mystery
of the ages. "Who?"
"Tommy Tomm," she said. "Johnny Marcone's bodyguard."
Now it made sense. "Gentleman" Johnny Marcone had been
the thug to emerge on top of the pile after the Vargassi family
had dissolved into internal strife. The police department saw
Marcone as a mixed blessing, after years of merciless struggle
and bloody exchanges with the Vargassis. Gentleman Johnny
tolerated no excesses in his organization, and he didn't like
freelancers operating in his city. Muggers, bank robbers, and
drug dealers who were not a part of his organization somehow
always seemed to get ratted out and turned in, or else simply
went missing and weren't heard from again.
Marcone was a civilizing influence on crime—and where he
operated, it was more of a problem in terms of scale than ever
before. An extremely shrewd businessman, he had a battery of
lawyers working for him that kept him fenced in from the law

behind a barricade of depositions and papers and tape
recordings. The cops never said it, but sometimes it seemed like
they were almost reluctant to chase him. Marcone was better
than the alternative—anarchy in the underworld.
"I remember hearing he had an enforcer," I said. "I guess he
doesn't anymore."
Murphy shrugged. "So it would seem."
"So what will you do next?"
"Run down this hairstylist angle, I guess. I'll talk to Bianca and
to Marcone, but I can already tell you what they'll tell me." She
flicked her notebook closed and shook her head, irritated.
I watched her for a minute. She looked tired. I told her so.
"I am tired," she replied. "Tired of being looked at like I'm
some sort of nutcase. Even Carmichael, my own partner, thinks
I've gone over the edge in all of this."
"The rest of the station think so too?" I asked her.
"Most of them just scowl and spin their index fingers around
their temples when they think I'm not looking, and file my
reports without ever reading them. The rest are the ones who
have run into something spooky out there, and they're scared
shitless. They don't want to believe in anything they didn't see
on Mister Science when they were kids."
"How about you?"
"Me?" Murphy smiled, a curving of her lips that was a
vibrantly feminine expression, making her look entirely too
pretty to be such a hardass. "The world's falling apart at the
seams, Harry. I guess I just think people are pretty arrogant to
believe we've learned everything there is to know in the past
century or so. What the hell. I can buy that we're just now
starting to see the things around us in the dark again. It appeals
to the cynic in me."
"I wish everyone thought like you do," I said. "It would cut
down on my crank calls."
She continued to smile at me, impish. "But could you imagine
a world where all the radio stations played ABBA?"
We shared a laugh. God, that room needed a laugh.

"Hey, Harry," Murphy said, grinning. I could see the wheels
spinning in her head.
"Yeah?"
"What you said about being able to figure out how the killer
did this. About how you're not sure you can do it."
"Yeah?"
"I know it's bullshit. Why did you lie to me about it?"
I stiffened. Christ, she was good. Or maybe I'm just not much
of a liar. "Look, Murph," I said. "There's some things you just
don't do."
"Sometimes I don't want to get into the head of the slime I go
after, either. But you do what needs to be done to finish the job. I
know what you mean, Harry."
"No," I said, shortly. "You don't know." And she didn't. She
didn't know about my past, or the White Council, or the Doom of
Damocles hanging over my head. Most days, I could pretend I
didn't know about it, either.
All the Council needed now was an excuse, just an excuse, to
find me guilty of violating one of the Seven Laws of Magic, and
the Doom would drop. If I started putting together a recipe for a
murder spell, and they found out about it, that might be all the
excuse they needed.
"Murph," I told her. "I can't try figuring this spell out. I can't
go putting together the things I'd need to do it. You just don't
understand."
She glared at me, without looking at my eyes. I hadn't ever met
anyone else who could pull that one off. "Oh, I understand. I
understand that I've got a killer loose that I can't catch in the
act. I understand that you know something that can help, or you
can at least find out something. And I understand that if you dry
up on me now, I'm tearing your card out of the department
Rolodex and tossing it in the trash."
Son of a bitch. My consulting for the department paid a lot of
my bills. Okay, most of my bills. I could sympathize with her, I
supposed. If I was operating in the dark like she was, I'd be
nervous as hell, too. Murphy didn't know anything about spells
or rituals or talismans, but she knew human hatred and violence

all too well.
It wasn't as though I was actually going to be doing any black
magic, I told myself. I was just going to be figuring out how it
was done. There was a difference. I was helping the police in an
investigation, nothing more. Maybe the White Council would
understand that.
Yeah, right. And maybe one of these days I'd go to an art
museum and become well rounded.
Murphy set the hook a second later. She looked up at my eyes
for a daring second before she turned away, her face tired and
honest and proud. "I need to know everything you can tell me,
Harry. Please."
Classic lady in distress. For one of those liberated, professional
women, she knew exactly how to jerk my old-fashioned chains
around.
I gritted my teeth. "Fine," I said. "Fine. I'll start on it tonight."
Hoo boy. The White Council was going to love this one. I'd just
have to make sure they didn't find out about it.
Murphy nodded and let out a breath without looking at me.
Then she said, "Let's get out of here," and walked toward the
door. I didn't try to beat her to it.
When we walked out, the uniform cops were still lazing around
in the hall outside. Carmichael was nowhere to be seen. The guys
from forensics were there, standing around impatiently, waiting
for us to come out. Then they gathered up their plastic bags and
tweezers and lights and things and filed past us into the room.
Murphy was brushing at her windblown hair with her hand
while we waited for the ancient elevator to take its sweet time
getting up to the seventh floor. She was wearing a gold watch,
which reminded me. "Oh, hey," I asked her. "What time is it?"
She checked. "Two twenty-five. Why?"
I breathed out a curse, and turned for the stairs. "I'm late for
my appointment."
I fairly flew down the stairs. I've had a lot of practice at them,
after all, and I hit the lobby at a jog. I managed to dodge a porter
coming through the front doors with an armload of luggage, and
swung out onto the sidewalk at a lope. I have long legs that eat a

lot of ground. I was running into the wind, my black duster
billowing out behind me.
It was several blocks to my building, and after covering half of
them I slowed to a walk. I didn't want to arrive at my
appointment with Monica Missing-Man puffing like a bellows,
with my hair windblown and my face streaming with sweat.
Blame it on being out of shape from an inactive winter season,
but I was breathing hard. It occupied enough of my attention
that I didn't see the dark blue Cadillac until it had pulled up
beside me, and a rather large man had stepped out of it onto the
sidewalk in front of me. He had bright red hair and a thick neck.
His face looked like someone had smashed it flat with a board,
repeatedly, when he was a baby—except for his jutting eyebrows.
He had narrow little blue eyes that got narrower as I sized him
up.
I stopped, and backed away, then turned around. Two more
men, both of them as tall as me and a good deal heavier, were
slowing down from their own jog. They had apparently been
following me, and they looked annoyed. One was limping slightly,
and the other wore a buzz cut that had been spiked up straight
with some kind of styling gel. I felt like I was in high school
again, surrounded by bullying members of the football team.
"Can I help you gentlemen?" I asked. I looked around for a cop,
but they were all over at the Madison, I supposed. Everyone likes
to gawk.
"Get in the car," the one in front of me said. One of the others
opened the rear door.
"I like to walk. It's good for my heart."
"You don't get in the car, it isn't going to be good for your
legs," the man growled.
A voice came from inside the car. "Mister Hendricks, please.
Be more polite. Mister Dresden, would you join me for a
moment? I'd hoped to give you a lift back to your office, but your
abrupt exit made it somewhat problematic. Perhaps you will
allow me to convey you the rest of the way."
I leaned down to look into the backseat. A man of handsome
and unassuming features, dressed in a casual sports jacket and
Levi's, regarded me with a smile. "And you would be?" I asked

him.
His smile widened, and I swear it made his eyes twinkle.
"My name is John Marcone. I would like to discuss business
with you."
I stared at him for a moment. And then my eyes slid aside to
the very large and very over-developed Mister Hendricks. The
man growled under his breath, and it sounded like Cujo just
before he jumped at the woman in the car. I didn't feel like
duking it out with Cujo and his two buddies.
So I got into the back of the Caddy with Gentleman Johnny
Marcone.
It was turning out to be a very busy day. And I was still late for
my appointment.
Chapter Three
Gentleman Johnny Marcone didn't look like the sort of man
who would have my legs broken or my jaw wired shut. His
salt-and-pepper hair was cut short, and there were lines from
sun and smiling etched into the corners of his eyes. His eyes were
the green of well-worn dollar bills. He seemed more like a college
football coach: good-looking, tanned, athletic, and enthusiastic.
The impression was reinforced by the men he kept with him.
Cujo Hendricks hulked like an all-pro player who had been
ousted for extreme unnecessary roughness.
Cujo got in the car again, glowered at me in the rearview
mirror, then pulled out into the street, driving slowly toward my
office. The steering wheel looked tiny and delicate in his huge
hands. I made a mental note: Do not let Cujo put his hands
around your throat. Or hand. It looked almost like one of them
could manage it.
The radio was playing, but as I got in the car it fouled up,
squealing feedback out over the speakers. Hendricks scowled and
thought about it for a second. Maybe he had to relay the message
through his second brain or something. Then he reached out and
fiddled with the knobs before finally turning the radio off. At this
rate I hoped the car would make it all the way to my office.
"Mister Dresden," Marcone said, smiling, "I understand that

you work for the police department, from time to time."
"They throw the occasional tidbit my way," I agreed. "Hey,
Hendricks. You should really wear your seat belt. Statistics say
you're fifty or sixty percent safer."
Cujo growled at me in the rearview mirror again, and I
beamed at him. Smiling always seems to annoy people more
than actually insulting them. Or maybe I just have an annoying
smile.
Marcone seemed somewhat put off by my attitude. Maybe I
was supposed to be holding my hat in my hand, but I had never
really liked Francis Ford Coppola, and I didn't have a Godfather.
(I do have a Godmother, and she is, inevitably perhaps, a faery.
But that's another story.) "Mister Dresden," he said. "How much
would it cost to retain your services?"
That made me wary. What would someone like Marcone want
me for? "My standard fee is fifty dollars an hour plus travel
expenses," I told him. "But it can vary, depending on what you
need done."
Marcone nodded along with my sentences, as if encouraging
me to speak. He wrinkled up his face as if carefully considering
what he would say, and taking my well-being into account with
grandfatherly concern. "How much would it set me back to have
you not investigate something?"
"You want to pay me to not do something?"
"Let's say I pay you your standard fee. That comes out to
fourteen hundred a day, right?"
"Twelve hundred, actually," I corrected him.
He beamed at me. "An honest man is a rare treasure. Twelve
hundred a day. Let's say I pay you for two weeks worth of work,
Mister Dresden, and you take some time off. Go catch a few
movies, get some extra sleep, that sort of thing."
I eyed him. "And for more than a thousand dollars a day, you
want me to … ?"
"Do nothing, Mister Dresden," Marcone smiled. "Nothing at
all. Just relax, and put your feet up. And stay out of Detective
Murphy's way."
Ah-hah. Marcone didn't want me looking into Tommy Tomm's

murder. Interesting. I looked out the window and squinted my
eyes, as though thinking about it.
"I've got the money with me," Marcone said. "Cash on the spot.
I'll trust you to fulfill your end of the deal, Mister Dresden. You
come highly recommended for your honesty."
"Mmmm. I don't know, John. I'm kind of busy to be accepting
any more accounts right now." The car was almost to my office
building. The car door was still unlocked. I hadn't worn my seat
belt, either—just in case I needed to throw the door open and
jump out. See how I think ahead? It's that wizardly
intellect—and paranoia.
Marcone's smile faltered. His expression became earnest.
"Mister Dresden, I am quite eager to establish a positive working
relationship, here. If it's the money, I can offer you more. Let's
say double your usual fee." He steepled his hands in front of him
as he talked, half-turning toward me. My God, I kept expecting
him to tell me to go out there and win one for the Gipper. He
smiled. "How does that sound?"
"It isn't the money, John," I told him. I lazily locked my eyes
onto his. "I just don't think it's going to work out."
To my surprise, he didn't look away.
Those who deal in magic learn to see the world in a slightly
different light than everyone else. You gain a perspective you had
never considered before, a way of thinking that would just never
have occurred to you without exposure to the things a wizard
sees and hears.
When you look into someone's eyes, you see them in that other
light. And, for just a second, they see you in the same way.
Marcone and I looked at one another.
He was a soldier, a warrior, behind that relaxed smile and
fatherly manner. He was going to get what he wanted and he was
going to get it in the most efficient way possible. He was a
dedicated man—dedicated to his goals, dedicated to his people.
He never let fear affect him. He made a living on human misery
and suffering, peddling in drugs and flesh and stolen goods, but
he took steps to minimize that suffering because it was simply
the most efficient means of running his business. He was furious
over Tommy Tomm's death—a cold and practical kind of fury

that his rightful dominion had been invaded and challenged. He
intended to find those responsible and deal with them in his own
way—and he didn't want the police interfering. He had killed
before, and would again, and it would all mean nothing more to
him than a business transaction, than paying for groceries in the
checkout line. It was a dry and cool place, inside Gentleman
Johnny Marcone. Except for one dim corner. There, hidden away
from his everyday thoughts, there lurked a secret shame. I
couldn't quite see what it was. But I knew that, somewhere in the
past there was something that he would give anything to undo,
would spill blood to erase. It was from that dark place that he
drew his resolve, his strength.
That was the way I saw him when I looked inside, past all his
pretenses and defenses. And I was, on some instinctual level,
certain that he had been aware of what I would see if I
looked—that he had deliberately met my gaze, knowing what he
would give away. That was his purpose in getting me alone. He
wanted to take a peek at my soul. He wanted to see what sort of
man I was.
When I look into someone's eyes, into their soul, their
innermost being, they can see mine in return—the things I had
done, the things I was willing to do, the things I was capable of
doing. Most people who did that got really pale, at least. One
woman had passed out entirely. I didn't know what they saw
when they looked in there—it wasn't a place I poked around
much, myself.
John Marcone wasn't like the other people who had seen my
soul. He didn't even blink an eye. He just looked and assessed,
and after the moment had passed, he nodded at me as though he
understood something. I got the uncomfortable impression that
he had duped me. That he had found out more about me than I
had about him. The first thing I felt was anger, anger at being
manipulated, anger that he should presume to soulgaze upon
me.
Just a second later, I felt scared to death of this man. I had
looked on his soul and it had been as solid and barren as a
stainless-steel refrigerator. It was more than unsettling. He was
strong, inside, savage and merciless without being cruel. He had
a tiger's soul.

"All right, then," he said, smoothly, and as though nothing had
happened. "I won't try to force my offer on you, Mister Dresden."
The car was slowing down as it approached my building, and
Hendricks pulled over in front of it. "But let me offer you some
advice?" He had dropped the father-talking-to-son act, and
spoke in a calm and patient voice.
"If you don't charge for it." Thank God for wisecracks. I was
too rattled to have said anything intelligent.
Marcone almost smiled. "I think you'll be happier if you come
down with the flu for a few days. This business that Detective
Murphy has asked you to look into doesn't need to be dragged
out into the light. You won't like what you see. It's on my side of
the fence. Just let me deal with it, and it won't ever trouble you."
"Are you threatening me?" I asked him. I didn't think he was,
but I didn't want him to know that. It would have helped if my
voice hadn't been shaking.
"No," he said, frankly. "I have too much respect for you to
resort to something like that. They say that you're the real thing,
Mister Dresden. A real magus."
"They also say I'm nutty as a fruitcake."
"I choose which 'they' I listen to very carefully," Marcone said.
"Think about what I've said, Mister Dresden? I do not think our
respective lines of work need overlap often. I would as soon not
make an enemy of you over this matter."
I clenched my jaw over my fear, and spat words out at him
quick and hard. "You don't want to make an enemy of me,
Marcone. That wouldn't be smart. That wouldn't be smart at all."
He narrowed his eyes at me, lazy and relaxed. He could meet
my eyes by then without fear. We had taken a measure of one
another. It would not happen in such a way again. "You really
should try to be more polite, Mister Dresden," he said. "It's good
for business."
I didn't give him an answer to that: I didn't have one that
wouldn't sound frightened or stupidly macho. Instead, I told
him, "If you ever lose your car keys, give me a call. Don't try
offering me money or threats again. Thanks for the ride."
He watched me, his expression never changing, as I got out of

the car and shut the door. Hendricks pulled out and drove away,
after giving me one last dirty look. I had soulgazed on several
people before. It wasn't the sort of thing you forgot. I had never
run into someone like that, someone so cool and controlled—even
the other practitioners I had met gazes with had not been that
way. None of them had simply assessed me like a column of
numbers and filed it away for reference in future equations.
I stuck my hands in the pockets of my duster, and shivered as
the wind hit me. I was a wizard, throwing around real magic, I
reminded myself. I was not afraid of big men in big cars. I do not
get rattled by corpses blasted from life by magic more intense
than anything I could manage. Really. Honest.
But those dollar-bill-colored eyes, backed by that cool and
nearly passionless soul, had me shaking as I took the stairs back
up to my office. I had been stupid. He had surprised me, and the
sudden intimacy of the soulgaze had startled and frightened me.
All added together, it had caused me to fall apart, throwing
threats at him like a frightened schoolkid. Marcone was a
predator. He practically smelled my fear. If he got to thinking I
was weak, I had a feeling that polite smile and fatherly facade
would vanish as thoroughly and as quickly as it had appeared.
What a rotten first impression.
Oh, well. At least I was going to be on time for my
appointment.
Chapter Four
Monica No-Last-Name was standing outside of my office when
I got there, writing on the back of the note I had left taped to my
office door.
I walked toward her, and she was too intent upon her writing
to look up. She was a good-looking woman, in her
mid-thirty-somethings. Ash blond hair that I thought must be
natural, after a morbid and involuntary memory of the dead
woman's dye job. Her makeup was tasteful and well applied, and
her face was fair, friendly, with enough roundness of cheek to
look fresh-faced and young, enough fullness of mouth to look very
feminine. She was wearing a long, full skirt of palest yellow with
brown riding boots, a crisp white blouse, and an

expensive-looking green cardigan over it, to ward off the chill of
early spring. She had to be in good shape to pull off a color
combination like that, and she did it. Overall, it was a naggingly
familiar look, something like Annette Funicello or Barbara
Billingsley, maybe—wholesome and all-American.
"Monica?" I asked. I put on my most innocent and friendly
smile.
She blinked at me as I approached. "Oh. Are you, um, Harry
…"
I smiled and offered her my hand. "Harry Dresden, ma'am.
That's me."
She took my hand after a tiny pause and kept her eyes firmly
focused on my chest. At this point, I was just as glad to be
dealing with someone who was too nervous to risk looking at my
eyes. I gave her a firm, but gentle handshake, and let go of her,
brushing past her to unlock the office door and open it up. "I
apologize for being late, I got a call from the police that I had to
look in on."
"You did?" she asked. "You mean, the police, um …" She waved
her fingers instead of finishing the sentence and entered when I
held the door open for her.
"Sometimes," I nodded. "They run into something and want
my take on it."
"What sorts of things?"
I shrugged and swallowed. I thought of the corpses at the
Madison, and felt green. When I looked up at Monica, she was
studying my face, chewing on her lip nervously. She hurriedly
averted her gaze.
"Can I get you some coffee?" I asked her. I shut the door
behind us, flicked on the lights.
"Oh. No, thank you. I'm fine." She stood there, looking at my
box of discarded paperbacks and holding her purse over her
tummy with both hands. I thought she might scream if I said 
boo so I made sure to move carefully and slowly, making myself a
cup of instant coffee. I breathed in and out, going through the
familiar motions, until I had calmed down from my encounter
with Marcone. By the time I was done, so was my coffee. I went

to my desk, and invited her to have a seat in one of the two
chairs across from me.
"Okay, Monica," I said. "What can I do for you today?"
"Well, um. I told you that my husband was … was …" She
nodded at me, gesturing.
"Missing?" I supplied.
"Yes," she said with an exhalation of almost relief. "But he's not
mysteriously missing or anything. Just gone." She flushed and
stammered. "Like he just packed up a few things and left. But he
didn't say anything to anyone. And he hasn't showed up again.
I'm concerned about him."
"Uh-huh," I said. "How long has he been gone?"
"This is the third day," she said.
I nodded. "There must be some reason why you're coming to
me, rather than a private investigator or the police."
She blushed again. She had a good face for blushing, fair skin
that colored girlishly. It was quite fetching, really. "Yes, um. He
had been interested in … in …"
"Magic?"
"Yes. He had been buying books on it in the religion section at
the bookstore. Not like those Dungeons and Dragons games. The
real thing. He bought some of those tarot cards." She
pronounced it like carrot. Amateurs.
"And you think his disappearance might have had something
to do with this interest?"
"I'm not sure," she confessed. "But maybe. He was very upset.
He had just lost his job and was under a lot of pressure. I'm
worried about him. I thought whoever found him might need to
be able to talk to him about all of this stuff." She took a deep
breath, as if the effort of completing so many sentences without
a single um had tired her.
"I'm still not clear on this. Why me? Why not the police?"
Her knuckles whitened on her purse. "He packed a bag, Mr.
Dresden. I think the police will just assume he left his wife and
his children. They won't really look. But he didn't. He's not like
that. He only wants to make a good life for us, really, that's all he

wants."
I frowned at her. Nervous that maybe hubby has run out on
you after all, dear? "Even so," I said, "why come to me? Why not
a private investigator? I know a reliable man if you need one."
"Because you know about …" She gestured, fitfully.
"About magic," I said.
Monica nodded. "I think it might be important. I mean, I don't
know. But I think it might."
"Where did he work?" I asked her. While I spoke, I got a pad of
paper out of my pocket and jotted down a few notes.
"SilverCo," she told me. "They're a trading company. They
locate good markets for products and then advise companies
where they can best spend their money."
"Uh-huh," I said. "What is his name, Monica?"
She swallowed, and I saw her twitching, trying to think of
something to tell me other than his real name. "George," she
supplied at last.
I looked up at her. She was staring furiously down at her
hands.
"Monica," I said. "I know this must be really hard for you.
Believe me, ma'am, there are plenty of people who are nervous
when they come into my office. But please, hear me out. I am not
out to hurt you or anyone else. What I do, I do to help people. It's
true that someone with the right skills could use your names
against you, but I'm not like that." I borrowed a line from
Johnny Marcone. "It isn't good business."
She gave a nervous little laugh. "I feel so silly," she confessed.
"But there's so many things that I've heard about …"
"Wizards. I see." I put my pencil down and steepled my fingers
in wizardly fashion. The woman was nervous and had certain
expectations. I might ease her fears a little if I fulfilled some of
them. I tried not to look over her shoulder at the calendar I had
hanging on the wall, and the red circle around the fifteenth of
last month. Late rent. Need money. Even with the fee from today
and what I would make in the future, it would take the city
forever to pay up.

Besides. I could never resist going to the aid of a lady in
distress. Even if she wasn't completely, one hundred percent sure
that she wanted to be rescued by me.
"Monica," I told her. "There are powers in the universe that
most people don't even know about. Powers that we still don't
fully understand. The men and women who work with these
powers see things in a different light than regular people. They
come to understand things in a slightly different way. This sets
them apart. Sometimes it breeds unwarranted suspicion and
fear. I know you've read books and seen movies about how
horrible people like me are, and that whole 'suffer not a witch to
live' part of the Old Testament hasn't made things all roses. But
we really aren't any different from anyone else." I gave her my
best smile. "I want to help you. But if I'm going to do that, you're
going to have to give me a little trust. I promise. I give you my
word that I won't disappoint you."
I saw her take this in and chew on it for a while, while staring
down at her hands,
"Victor," she said at last. "Victor Sells."
"All right," I said, picking up my pencil and duly noting it. "Is
there anyplace he might have gone that you can think of,
offhand?"
She nodded. "The lake house. We have a house down by …" She
waved her hand.
"The lake?"
She beamed at me, and I reminded myself to be patient. "In
Lake Providence, over the state line, around Lake Michigan. It's
beautiful up there in the autumn."
"Okay, then. Are you aware of any friends he might have run
off to see, family he might have visited, anything like that?"
"Oh, Victor wasn't on speaking terms with his family. I never
knew why. He didn't talk about them, really. We've been married
for ten years, and he never once spoke to them."
"Okay," I said, noting that down, too. "Friends, then?"
She fretted her lip, a gesture that seemed familiar to her. "Not
really. He was friends with his boss, and some people at work,
but after he was fired …"

"Uh-huh," I said. "I understand." I continued writing things
down, drawing bold lines between thoughts to separate them. I
spilled over onto the next page before I was finished writing
down the facts and my observations about Monica. I like to be
thorough about this kind of thing.
"Well, Mr. Dresden?" she asked. "Can you help me?"
I looked over the page and nodded. "I think so, Monica. If
possible, I'd like to see these things your husband collected.
Which books and so on. It would help if I had a picture of him,
too. I might like to take a look around your house at Lake
Providence. Would that be all right?"
"Of course," she said. She seemed relieved, but at the same
time even more nervous than before. I noted down the address of
the lake house and brief directions.
"You're aware of my fees?" I asked her. "I'm not cheap. It
might be less costly for you to hire someone else."
"We've got quite a bit of savings, Mr. Dresden," she told me.
"I'm not worried about the money." That seemed an odd
statement from her, at the time—out of tune with her generally
nervous manner.
"Well, then," I told her. "I charge fifty dollars an hour, plus
expenses. I'll send you an itemized list of what I do, so you'll have
a good idea what I'm working on. A retainer is customary. I'm
not going to guarantee that I work exclusively on your case. I try
to handle each of my customers with respect and courtesy, so I
can't put any one of them before another."
She nodded to me, emphatically, and reached into her purse.
She drew out a white envelope and passed it over to me. "There's
five hundred inside," she told me. "Is that enough for now?"
Cha-ching. Five hundred dollars would take care of last
month's rent and a good bit of this month's, too. I could get into
this bit with nervous clients wanting to preserve the anonymity
of their checking accounts from my supposed sorcerous might.
Cash always spends.
"That will be fine, yes," I told her. I tried not to fondle the
envelope. At least I wasn't crass enough to dump the money on
my desk and count it out.

She drew out another envelope. "He took most of his things
with him," she said. "At least, I couldn't find them where he
usually keeps them. But I did find this." There was something in
the envelope, making it bulge, an amulet, ring, or charm of some
kind, I was betting. A third envelope came out of her purse—the
woman must be compulsively well organized. "There's a picture
of him in here, and my phone number inside. Thank you, Mr.
Dresden. When will you call?"
"As soon as I know something," I told her. "Probably by
tomorrow afternoon or Saturday morning. Sound good?"
She almost looked at my eyes, caught herself, and smiled
directly at my nose instead. "Yes. Yes, thank you so much for
your help." She glanced up at the wall. "Oh, look at the time. I
need to go. School's almost out." She closed her teeth over her
words and flushed again, as though embarrassed that she had let
such an important fact about her slip out.
"I'll do whatever I can, ma'am," I assured her, rising, and
walking her to the door. "Thank you for your business. I'll be in
touch soon."
She said her good-byes, never looking me in the face, and fled
out the door. I shut it behind her and went back to the envelopes.
First, the money. It was all in fifties, which always look new
even when they're years old because they get so little circulation.
There were ten of them. I put them in my wallet, and trashed the
envelope.
The envelope with the photo in it was next. I took it out and
regarded a picture of Monica and a man of lean and handsome
features, with a wide forehead and shaggy eyebrows that skewed
his handsomeness off onto a rather eccentric angle. His smile
was whiter-than-white, and his skin had the smooth, dark tan of
someone who spends a lot of time in the sun, boating maybe. It
was a sharp contrast against Monica's paleness. Victor Sells, I
presume.
The phone number was written on a plain white index card
that had been neatly trimmed down to fit inside the envelope.
There was no name or area code, just a seven-digit number. I got
out my cross-listing directory and looked it up.
I noted that down as well. I wondered what the woman had

expected to accomplish by only giving out first names, when she
had been going to hand me a dozen other ways of finding out in
any case. It only goes to show that people are funny when they're
nervous about something. They say screwy things, make odd
choices which, in retrospect, they feel amazingly foolish for
making. I would have to be careful not to say anything to rub
that in when I spoke to her again.
I trashed the second envelope and opened the last one, turning
it upside down over my desk.
The brown husk of a dead, dried scorpion, glistening with
some sort of preservative glaze, clicked down onto my desk. A
supple, braided leather cord led off from a ring set through the
base of its tail, so that if it was worn, it would hang head down,
tail up and curled over the dried body to point at the ground.
I shuddered. Scorpions were symbolically powerful in certain
circles of belief. They weren't usually symbols of anything good or
wholesome, either. A lot of petty, mean spells could be focused
around a little talisman like that. If you wore it next to your skin,
as such things are supposed to be worn, the prickly legs of the
thing would be a constant poking and agitation at your chest, a
continual reminder that it was there. The dried stinger at the
tail's tip might actually pierce the skin of anyone who tried to
give the wearer a hug. Its crablike pincers would catch in a
man's chest hair, or scratch at the curves of a woman's breasts.
Nasty, unpleasant thing. Not evil, as such—but you sure as hell
weren't likely to do happy shiny things with magic with such an
item around your neck.
Maybe Victor Sells had gotten involved in something real,
something that had absorbed his attention. The Art could do
that to a person—particularly the darker aspects of it. If he had
turned to it in despair after losing his job, maybe that would
explain his sudden absence from his home. A lot of sorcerers or
wanna-be sorcerers secluded themselves in the belief that
isolation would increase their ability to focus on their magic. It
didn't—but it did make it easier for a weak or untrained mind to
avoid distractions.
Or maybe it wasn't even a true talisman. Maybe it was just a
curiosity, or a souvenir from some visit to the Southwest. There
wasn't any way for me to tell if it was indeed a device used to

improve the focus and direction of magical energies, short of
actually using it to attempt a spell—and I really didn't want to be
using such a dubious article, for a variety of good reasons.
I would have to keep this little un-beauty in mind as I tried to
run this man down. It might well mean nothing. On the other
hand, it might not. I looked up at the clock. A quarter after
three. There was time to check with the local morgues to see if
they had turned up any likely John Does—who knew, my search
might be over before the day's end—and then to get to the bank
to deposit my money and fire off a check to my landlord.
I got out my phone book and started calling up hospitals—not
really my routine line of work, but not difficult, either, except for
the standard problems I had using the telephone: static, line
noise, other people's conversations being louder than mine. If
something can go wrong, it will.
Once I thought I saw something out of the corner of my eye, a
twitch of motion from the dried scorpion that sat on my desk. I
blinked and stared at it. It didn't move. Cautiously, I extended
my senses toward it like an invisible hand, feeling about for any
traces of enchantment or magical energy.
Nothing. It was as dry of enchantment as it was of life.
Never let it be said that Harry Dresden is afraid of a dried,
dead bug. Creepy or not, I wasn't going to let it ruin my
concentration.
So I scooped it up with the corner of the phone book and
popped it into the middle drawer of my desk. Out of sight, out of
mind.
So I have a problem with creepy, dead, poisonous things. So
sue me.
Chapter Five
McAnally's is a pub a few blocks from my office. I go there
when I'm feeling stressed, or when I have a few extra bucks to
spend on a nice dinner. A lot of us fringe types do. Mac, the pub's
owner, is used to wizards and all the problems that come along
with us. There aren't any video games at McAnally's. There are
no televisions or expensive computer trivia games. There isn't

even a jukebox. Mac keeps a player piano instead. It's less likely
to go haywire around us.
I say pub in all the best senses of the word. When you walk in,
you take several steps down into a room with a deadly
combination of a low clearance and ceiling fans. If you're tall,
like me, you walk carefully in McAnally's. There are thirteen
stools at the bar and thirteen tables in the room. Thirteen
windows, set up high in the wall in order to be above ground
level, let some light from the street into the place. Thirteen
mirrors on the walls cast back reflections of the patrons in dim
detail, and give the illusion of more space. Thirteen wooden
columns, carved with likenesses from folktales and legends of the
Old World, make it difficult to walk around the place without
weaving a circuitous route—they also quite intentionally break
up the flow of random energies, dispelling to one degree or
another the auras that gather around broody, grumpy wizards
and keeping them from manifesting in unintentional and
colorful ways. The colors are all muted, earth browns and sea
greens. The first time I entered McAnally's, I felt like a wolf
returning to an old, favorite den. Mac makes his own beer, ale
really, and it's the best stuff in the city. His food is cooked on a
wood-burning stove. And you can damn well walk your own self
over to the bar to pick up your order when it's ready, according
to Mac. It's my sort of place.
Since the calls to the morgues had turned up nothing, I kept a
few bills out of Monica Sells's retainer and took myself to
McAnally's. After the kind of day I'd had, I deserved some of
Mac's ale and someone else's cooking. It was going to be a long
night, too, once I went home and started trying to figure out how
whoever it was had pulled off the death spell used on Johnny
Marcone's hatchet man, Tommy Tomm, and his girlfriend,
Jennifer Stanton.
"Dresden," Mac greeted me, when I sat down at the bar. The
dim, comfortable room was empty, but for a pair of men I
recognized by sight at a back table, playing chess. Mac is a tall,
almost gangly man of indeterminate age, though there's a sense
to him that speaks of enough wisdom and strength that I
wouldn't venture that he was less than fifty. He has squinty eyes
and a smile that is rare and mischievous when it manifests. Mac
never says much, but when he does it's almost always worth

listening to.
"Hey there, Mac," I hailed him. "Been one hell of a day. Give
me a steak sandwich, fries, ale."
"Ungh," Mac said. He opened a bottle of his ale and began to
pour it warm, staring past me, into the middle distance. He does
that with everyone. Considering his clientele, I don't blame him.
I wouldn't chance looking them in the face, either.
"You hear about what happened at the Madison?"
"Ungh," he confirmed.
"Nasty business."
Such an inane comment apparently didn't merit even a
grunted reply. Mac set my drink out and turned to the stove
behind the bar, checking the wood and raking it back and forth
to provide even heating for it.
I picked up a prethumbed newspaper nearby and scanned the
headlines. "Hey, look at this. Another ThreeEye rampage. Jesus,
this stuff is worse than crack." The article detailed the virtual
demolition of a neighborhood grocery store by a pair of ThreeEye
junkies who were convinced that the place was destined to
explode and wanted to beat destiny to the punch.
"Ungh."
"You ever seen anything like this?"
Mac shook his head.
"They say the stuff gives you the third sight," I said, reading
the article. Both junkies had been admitted to the hospital and
were in critical condition, after collapsing at the scene. "But you
know what?"
Mac looked back at me from the stove, while he cooked.
"I don't think that's possible. What a bunch of crap. Trying to
sell these poor kids on the idea that they can do magic."
Mac nodded at me.
"If it was serious stuff, the department would have already
called me by now."
Mac shrugged, turning back to the stove. Then he squinted up
and peered into the dim reflection of the mirror behind the bar.

"Harry," he said, "you were followed."
I had been too tense for too much of the day to avoid feeling
my shoulders constrict in a sudden twinge. I put both hands
around my mug and brought a few phrases of quasi-Latin to
mind. It never hurt to be ready to defend myself, in case someone
was intending to hurt me. I watched someone approach, a dim
shape in the reflection cast by the ancient, worn mirror. Mac
went on with cooking, unperturbed. Nothing much perturbed
Mac.
I smelled her perfume before I turned around. "Why, Miss
Rodriguez," I said. "It's always pleasant to see you."
She came to an abrupt stop a couple of paces from me,
apparently disconcerted. One of the advantages of being a wizard
is that people always attribute anything you do to magic, if no
other immediate explanation leaps to mind. She probably
wouldn't think about her perfume giving her identity away when
she could assign my mysterious, blind identification of her to my
mystical powers.
"Come on," I told her. "Sit down. I'll get you a drink while I
refuse to tell you anything."
"Harry," she admonished me, "you don't know I'm here on
business." She sat down on the barstool next to me. She was a
woman of average height and striking, dark beauty, wearing a
crisp business jacket and skirt, hose, pumps. Her dark, straight
hair was trimmed in a neat cut that ended at the nape of her
neck and was parted off of the dark skin of her forehead,
emphasizing the lazy appeal of her dark eyes.
"Susan," I chided her, "you wouldn't be in this place if you
weren't. Did you have a good time in Branson?"
Susan Rodriguez was a reporter for the Chicago Arcane, a
yellow magazine that covered all sorts of supernatural and
paranormal events throughout the Midwest. Usually, the events
they covered weren't much better than: "Monkey Man Seen With
Elvis's Love Child," or "JFK's Mutant Ghost Abducts
Shapeshifting Girl Scout." But once in a great, great while, the 
Arcane covered something that was real. Like the Unseelie
Incursion of 1994, when the entire city of Milwaukee had simply
vanished for two hours. Gone. Government satellite photos
showed the river valley covered with trees and empty of life or

human habitation. All communications ceased. Then, a few
hours later, there it was, back again, and no one in the city itself
the wiser.
She had also been hanging around my investigation in Branson
the previous week. She had been tracking me ever since
interviewing me for a feature story, right after I'd opened up my
business. I had to hand it to her—she had instincts. And enough
curiosity to get her into ten kinds of trouble. She had tricked me
into meeting her eyes at the conclusion of our first interview, an
eager young reporter investigating an angle on her interviewee.
She was the one who had fainted after we'd soulgazed.
She smirked at me. I liked her smirk. It did interesting things
to her lips, and hers were already attractive. "You should have
stayed around for the show," she said. "It was pretty impressive."
She put her purse on the bar and slid up onto the stool beside
me.
"No thanks," I told her. "I'm pretty sure it wasn't for me."
"My editor loved the coverage. She's convinced it's going to win
an award of some kind."
"I can see it now," I told her. " 'Mysterious Visions Haunt
Drug-Using Country Star.' Real hard-hitting paranormal
journalism, that." I glanced at her, and she met my eyes without
fear. She didn't let me see if my jibe had ruffled her.
"I heard you got called in by the S.I. director today," she told
me. She leaned toward me, enough that a glance down would
have afforded an interesting angle to the V of her white shirt. "I'd
love to hear you tell me about this one, Harry." She quirked a
smile at me that promised things.
I almost smiled back at her. "Sorry," I told her. "I have a
standard nondisclosure agreement with the city."
"Something off the record, then?" she asked. "Rumor has it
that these killings were pretty sensational."
"Can't help you, Susan," I told her. "Wild horses couldn't drag
it out of me, et cetera."
"Just a hint," she pressed. "A word of comment. Something
shared between two people who are very attracted to one
another."

"Which two people would that be?"
She put an elbow on the counter and propped her chin in her
hand, studying me through narrowed eyes and thick, long lashes.
One of the things that appealed to me about her was that even
though she used her charm and femininity relentlessly in pursuit
of her stories, she had no concept of just how attractive she really
was—I had seen that when I looked within her last year. "Harry
Dresden," she said, "you are a thoroughly maddening man." Her
eyes narrowed a bit further. "You didn't look down my blouse
even once, did you," she accused.
I took a sip of my ale and beckoned Mac to pour her one as
well. He did. "Guilty."
"Most men are off-balance by now," she complained. "What
does it take with you, anyway, Dresden?"
"I am pure of heart and mind," I told her. "I cannot be
corrupted."
She stared at me in frustration for a moment. Then she tilted
back her head to laugh. She had a good laugh, too, throaty and
rich. I did look down at her chest when she did that, just for a
second. A pure heart and mind only takes you so far—sooner or
later the hormones have their say, too. I mean, I'm not a
teenager or anything, anymore, but I'm not exactly an expert in
things like this, either. Call it an overwhelming interest in my
professional career, but I've never had much time for dating or
the fair sex in general. And when I have, it hasn't turned out too
well.
Susan was a known quantity—she was attractive, bright,
appealing, her motivations were clear and simple, and she was
honest in pursuing them. She flirted with me because she
wanted information as much as because she thought I was
attractive. Sometimes she got it. Sometimes she didn't. This one
was way too hot for Susan or the Arcane to touch, and if Murphy
heard I'd tipped someone off about what had happened, she'd
have my heart between two pieces of bread for lunch.
"I'll tell you what, Harry," she said. "How about if I ask some
questions, and you just answer them with a yes or a no?"
"No," I said promptly. Dammit. I am a poor liar, and it didn't
take a reporter with Susan's brains to tell it.

Her eyes glittered with cheerfully malicious ambition. "Was
Tommy Tomm murdered by a paranormal being or means?"
"No," I said again, stubbornly.
"No he wasn't?" Susan asked, "Or no it wasn't a paranormal
being."
I glanced at Mac as though to appeal for help. Mac ignored me.
Mac doesn't take sides. Mac is wise.
"No, I'm not going to answer questions," I said.
"Do the police have any leads? Any suspects?"
"No."
"Are you a suspect yourself, Harry?"
Disturbing thought. "No," I said, exasperated. "Susan—"
"Would you mind having dinner with me Saturday night?"
"No! I—" I blinked at her. "What?"
She smiled at me, leaned over, and kissed me on the cheek. Her
lips, that I'd admired so much, felt very, very nice. "Super," she
said. "I'll pick you up at your place. Say around nine?"
"Did I just miss something?" I asked her.
She nodded, dark eyes sparkling with humor. "I'm going to
take you to a fantastic dinner. Have you ever eaten at the Pump
Room? At the Ambassador East?"
I shook my head.
"Steaks you wouldn't believe," she assured me. "And the most
romantic atmosphere. Jackets and ties required. Can you
manage?"
"Um. Yes?" I said, carefully. "This is the answer to the question
of whether or not I'll go out with you, right?"
"No," Susan said, with a smile. "That was the answer I tricked
out of you, so you're stuck, there. I just want to make sure you
own something besides jeans and button-down Western shirts."
"Oh. Yes," I said.
"Super," she repeated, and kissed me on the cheek once more
as she stood up and gathered her purse. "Saturday, then." She
drew back and quirked her smirky little smile at me. It was a

killer look, sultry and appealing. "I'll be there. With bells on."
She turned and walked out. I sort of turned to stare after her.
My jaw slid off the bar as I did and landed on the floor.
Had I just agreed to a date? Or an interrogation session?
"Probably both," I muttered.
Mac slapped my steak sandwich and fries down in front of me.
I put down some money, morosely, and he made change.
"She's going to do nothing but try to trick information out of
me that I shouldn't be giving her, Mac," I said.
"Ungh," Mac agreed.
"Why did I say yes?"
Mac shrugged.
"She's pretty," I said. "Smart. Sexy."
"Ungh."
"Any red-blooded man would have done the same thing."
"Hngh," Mac snorted.
"Well. Maybe not you."
Mac smiled a bit, mollified.
"Still. It's going to make trouble for me. I must be crazy to go
for someone like that." I picked up my sandwich, and sighed.
"Dumb," Mac said.
"I just said she was smart, Mac."
Mac's face flickered into that smile, and it made him look years
younger, almost boyish. "Not her," he said. "You."
I ate my dinner. And had to admit that he was right.
This threw a wrench into my plans. My best idea for poking
around the Sells lake house and getting information had to be
carried out at night. And I already had tomorrow night slated for
a talk with Bianca, since I had a feeling Murphy and Carmichael
would fail to turn up any cooperation from the vampiress. That
meant I would have to drive out to Lake Providence tonight,
since Saturday night was now occupied by the date with
Susan—or at least the pre-midnight portion was.

My mouth went dry when I considered that maybe the rest of
the night might be occupied, too. One never knew. She had
dizzied me and made me look like an idiot, and she was probably
going to try every trick she knew to drag more information out of
me for the Monday morning release of the Arcane. On the other
hand, she was sexy, intelligent, and at least a little attracted to
me. That indicated that more might happen than just talk and
dinner. Didn't it?
The question was, did I really want that to happen?
I had been a miserable failure in relationships, ever since my
first love went sour. I mean, a lot of teenage guys fail in their first
relationships.
Not many of them murder the girl involved.
I shied away from that line of thought, lest it bring up too
many old memories.
I left McAnally's, after Mac had handed me a doggy bag with a
grunt of "Mister," by way of explanation. The chess game in the
corner was still in progress, both players puffing up a
sweet-smelling smog cloud from their pipes. I tried to figure out
how to deal with Susan, while I walked out to my car. Did I need
to clean up my apartment? Did I have all the ingredients for the
spell I would cast at the lake house later tonight? Would Murphy
go through the roof when I talked to Bianca?
I could still feel Susan's kiss lingering on my cheek as I got in
the car.
I shook my head, bewildered. They say we wizards are subtle.
But believe you me, we've got nothing, nothing at all, on women.
Chapter Six
Mister was nowhere to be seen when I got home, but I left the
food in his dish anyway. He would eventually forgive me for
getting home late. I collected the things I would need from my
kitchen—fresh-baked bread with no preservatives, honey, milk, a
fresh apple, a sharp silver penknife, and a tiny dinner set of a
plate, bowl, and cup that I had carved myself from a block of
teakwood.
I went back out to my car. The Beetle isn't really blue anymore,

since both doors have been replaced, one with a green clone, one
with a white one, and the hood of the storage trunk in front had
to be replaced with a red duplicate, but the name stuck anyway.
Mike is a super mechanic. He never asked questions about the
burns that slagged a hole in the front hatch or the claw marks
that ruined both the doors. You can't pay for service like that.
I revved up the Beetle and drove down I-94, around the shore
of Lake Michigan, crossing through Indiana, briefly, and then
crossing over the state line into Michigan itself. Lake Providence
is an expensive, high-class community with big houses and
sprawling estates. It isn't cheap to own land there. Victor Sells
must have been doing well in his former position at SilverCo to
afford a place out that way.
The lakeshore drive wound in and out among thick, tall trees
and rolling hills down to the shore. The properties were well
spread out, several hundred yards between them. Most of them
were fenced in and had gates on the right side of the road, away
from the lake as I drove north. The Sells house was the only one I
saw on the lake side of the drive.
A smooth gravel lane, lined by trees, led back from the
lakeshore drive to the Sells house. A peninsula jutted out into the
lake, leaving enough room for the house and a small dock, at
which no boats were moored. The house was not a large one, by
the standards of the rest of the Lake Providence community.
Built on two levels, it was a very modern dwelling—a lot of glass
and wood that was made to look like something more synthetic
than wood by the way it had been smoothed and cut and
polished. The drive curved around to the back of the house,
where a driveway big enough to host a five-on-five game of
basketball around a backboard erected to one side was
overlooked by a wooden deck leading off the second level of the
house.
I drove the Blue Beetle around to the back of the house and
parked there. My ingredients were in a black-nylon backpack,
and I picked that up and brought it with me as I got out of the
car and stretched my legs. The breeze coming up from the lake
was cool enough to make me shiver a little, and I drew my
mantled duster closed across my belly.
First impressions are important, and I wanted to listen to what

my instincts said about the house. I stopped for a long moment
and just stared up at it.
My instincts must have been holding out for another bottle of
Mac's ale. They had little to say, other than that the place looked
like a pricey little dwelling that had hosted a family through
many a vacation weekend. Well, where instinct fails, intellect
must venture. Almost everything was fairly new. The grass
around the house had not grown long enough, this winter, to
require a cutting. The basketball net was stretched out and loose
enough to show that it had been used fairly often. The curtains
were all drawn.
On the grass beneath the deck something red gleamed, and I
went beneath the deck to retrieve it. It was a plastic film
canister, red with a grey cap, the kind you keep a roll of film in
when you send it in to the processors. Film canisters were good
for holding various ingredients I used, sometimes. I tucked it in
my duster's pocket and continued my inspection.
The place didn't look much like a family dwelling, really. It
looked like a rich man's love nest, a secluded little getaway
nestled back in the trees of the peninsula and safe from spying
eyes. Or an ideal location for a novice sorcerer to come to try out
his fledgling abilities, safe from interruptions. A good place for
Victor Sells to set up shop and practice.
I made a quick circuit of the house, tried the front and rear
doors, and even the door up on the deck that led, presumably, to
a kitchen. All were locked. Locks really weren't an obstacle, but
Monica Sells hadn't invited me actually to take a look inside the
house, just around it. It's bad juju to go tromping into people's
houses uninvited. One of the reasons vampires, as a rule, don't
do it—they have enough trouble just holding themselves
together, outside of the Nevernever. It isn't harmful to a human
wizard, like me, but it can really impair anything you try to do
with magic. Also, it just isn't polite. Like I said, I'm an
old-fashioned sort of guy.
Of course, the TekTronic Securities control panel that I could
see through the front window had some say in my decision—not
that I couldn't hex it down to a useless bundle of plastic and
wires, but a lot of security systems will cause an alarm with their
contact company if they abruptly stop working without notice. It

would be a useless exercise, in any case—the real information
was to be had elsewhere.
Still, something nagged at me, a sense of not-quite-emptiness
to the house. On a hunch, I knocked on the front door, several
times. I even rang the bell. No one came to answer the door, and
no lights were on, inside. I shrugged and walked back to the rear
of the house, passing a number of empty trash cans as I did.
Now that was a bit odd. I mean, I would expect a little
something in the trash, even if someone hadn't been there in a
while. Did the garbage truck come all the way down the drive to
pick up the trash cans? That didn't seem likely. If the Sellses
came out to the house for the weekend and wanted the trash
emptied, it would stand to reason that they'd have to leave it out
by the drive near the road as they left. Which would seem to
imply that the garbage men would leave the empty trash cans
out by the road. Someone must have brought them back to the
house.
Of course, it needn't have been Victor Sells. It could have been
a neighbor, or something. Or maybe he tipped the garbagemen
to carry the cans back away from the road. But it was something
to go on, a little hint that maybe the house hadn't been empty all
week.
I left the house behind me and walked out toward the lake. The
night was breezy but clear, and a bit cool. The tall old trees
creaked and groaned beneath the wind. It was still early for the
mosquitoes to be too bad. The moon was waxing toward full
overhead, with the occasional cloud slipping past her like a gauzy
veil.
It was a perfect night for catching faeries.
I swept an area of dirt not far from the lakeshore clear of leaves
and sticks, and took the silver knife from the backpack. Using
the handle, I drew a circle in the earth, then covered it up with
leaves and sticks again, marking the location of the circle's
perimeter in my head. I was careful to focus in concentration on
the circle, without actually letting any power slip into it and spoil
the trap. Then, working carefully, I prepared the bait by setting
out the little cup and bowl. I poured a thimbleful of milk into the
cup and daubed the bowl full of honey from the little plastic bear
in my backpack.

Then I tore a piece of bread from the loaf I had brought with
me and pricked my thumb with the knife. In the silver light of
the moon, a bit of dark blood welled up against the skin, and I
touched it daintily to the underside of the coarse bread, letting it
absorb the blood. Then I set the bread, bloody side down, on the
tiny plate.
My trap was set. I gathered up my equipment and retreated to
the cover of the trees.
There are two parts of magic you have to understand to catch a
faery. One of them is the concept of true names. Everything in
the whole world has its own name. Names are unique sounds
and cadences of words that are attached to one specific
individual—sort of like a kind of theme music. If you know
something's name, you can associate yourself with it in a magical
sense, almost in the same way a wizard can reach out and touch
someone if he possesses a lock of their hair, or fingernail
clippings, or blood. If you know something's name, you can
create a magical link to it, just as you can call someone up and
talk to them if you know their phone number. Just knowing the
name isn't good enough, though: You have to know exactly how
to say it. Ask two John Franklin Smiths to say their names for
you, and you'll get subtle differences in tone and pronunciation,
each one unique to its owner. Wizards tend to collect names of
creatures, spirits, and people like some kind of huge Rolodex.
You never know when it will come in handy.
The other part of magic you need to know is magic-circle
theory. Most magic involves a circle of one kind or another.
Drawing a circle sets a local limit on what a wizard is trying to
do. It helps him refine his magic, focus and direct it more
clearly. It does this by creating a sort of screen, defined by the
perimeter of the circle, that keeps random magical energy from
going past it, containing it within the circle so that it can be
used. To make a circle, you draw it out on the ground, or close
hands with a bunch of people, or walk about spreading incense,
or any of a number of other methods, while focusing on your
purpose in drawing it. Then, you invest it with a little spark of
energy to close the circuit, and it's ready.
One other thing such a circle does: It keeps magical creatures,
like faeries, or even demons, from getting past it. Neat, huh?
Usually, this is used to keep them out. It's a bit trickier to set up

a circle to keep them in. That's where the blood comes into play.
With blood comes power. If you take in some of someone else's
blood, there is a metaphysical significance to it, a sort of energy.
It's minuscule if you aren't really trying to get energy that way
(the way vampires do), but it's enough to close a circle.
Now you know how it's done. But I don't recommend that you
try it at home. You don't know what to do when something goes
wrong.
I retreated to the trees and called the name of the particular
faery I wanted. It was a rolling series of syllables, quite beautiful,
really—especially since the faery went by the name of Toot-toot
every time I'd encountered him before. I pushed my will out
along with the name, just made it a call, something that would
be subtle enough to make him wander this way of his own
accord. Or at least, that was the theory.
What was his name? Please, do you think wizards just give
information like that away? You don't know what I went through
to get it.
About ten minutes later, Toot came flickering in over the water
of Lake Michigan. At first I mistook him for a reflection of the
moon on the side of the softly rolling waves of the lake. Toot was
maybe six inches tall. He had silver dragonfly's wings sprouting
from his back and the pale, beautiful, tiny humanoid form that
echoed the splendor of the fae lords. A silver nimbus of ambient
light surrounded him. His hair was a shaggy, silken little mane,
like a bird of paradise's plumes, and was a pale magenta.
Toot loved bread and milk and honey—a common vice of the
lesser fae. They aren't usually willing to take on a nest of bees to
get to the honey, and there's been a real dearth of milk in the
Nevernever since hi-tech dairy farms took over most of the
industry. Needless to say, they don't grow their own wheat,
harvest it, thresh it, and then mill it into flour to make bread,
either.
Toot alighted on the ground with caution, scanning around the
trees. He didn't see me. I saw him wipe at his mouth and walk in
a slow circle around the miniature dining set, one hand rubbing
greedily at his stomach. Once he took the bread and closed the
circle, I'd be able to bargain information for his release. Toot was
a lesser spirit in the area, sort of a dockworker of the Nevernever.

If anyone had seen anything of Victor Sells, Toot would have, or
would know someone who had.
Toot dithered for a while, fluttering back and forth around the
meal, but slowly getting closer. Faeries and honey. Moths and
flame. Toot had fallen for this several times before, and it wasn't
in the nature of the fae to keep memories for very long, or to
change their essential natures. All the same, I held my breath.
The faery finally hunkered down, picked up the bread, dipped
it in the honey, then greedily gobbled it down. The circle closed
with a little snap that occurred just at the edge of my hearing.
Its effect on Toot was immediate. He screamed a shrill little
scream, like a trapped rabbit, and took off toward the lake in a
buzzing flurry of wings. At the perimeter of the circle, he
smacked into something as solid as a brick wall, and a little puff
of silver motes exploded out from him in a cloud. Toot grunted
and fell onto his little faery ass on the earth.
"I should have known!" he exclaimed, as I approached from the
trees. His voice was high-pitched, but more like a little kid's than
the exaggerated kind of faery voices I'd heard in cartoons. "Now
I remember where I've seen those plates before! You ugly, sneaky,
hamhanded, big-nosed, flat-footed mortal worm!"
"Hiya, Toot," I told him. "Do you remember our deal from last
time, or do we need to go over it again?"
Toot glared defiantly up at me and stomped his foot on the
ground. More silver faery dust puffed out from the impact.
"Release me!" he demanded. "Or I will tell the Queen!"
"If I don't release you," I pointed out, "you can't tell the Queen.
And you know just as well as I do what she would say about any
dewdrop faery who was silly enough to get himself caught with a
lure of bread and milk and honey."
Toot crossed his arms defiantly over his chest. "I warn you,
mortal. Release me now, or you will feel the awful, terrible,
irresistible might of the faery magic! I will rot your teeth from
your head! Take your eyes from their sockets! Fill your mouth
with dung and your ears with worms!"
"Hit me with your best shot," I told him. "After that, we can
talk about what you need to do to get out of the circle."

I had called his bluff. I always did, but he probably wouldn't
remember the details very well. If you live a few hundred years,
you tend to forget the little things. Toot sulked and kicked up a
little spray of dirt with one tiny foot. "You could at least pretend
to be afraid, Harry."
"Sorry, Toot. I don't have the time."
"Time, time," Toot complained. "Is that all you mortals can
ever think about? Everyone's complaining about time! The whole
city rushes left and right screaming about being late and
honking horns! You people used to have it right, you know."
I bore the lecture with good nature. Toot could never keep his
mind on the same subject long enough to be really trying, in any
case.
"Why, I remember the folk who lived here before you pale,
wheezy guys came in. And they never complained about ulcers
or—" Toot's eyes wandered to the bread and milk and honey
again, and glinted. He sauntered that way, then snatched the
remaining bread, sopping up all the honey with it and eating it
with greedy, birdlike motions.
"This is good stuff, Harry. None of that funny stuff in it that we
get sometimes."
"Preservatives," I said.
"Whatever." Toot drank down the milk, too, in a long pull, then
promptly fell down on his back, patting at his rounded tummy.
"All right," he said. "Now, let me out."
"Not yet, Toot. I need something first."
Toot scowled up at me. "You wizards. Always needing
something. I really could do the thing with the dung, you know."
He stood up and folded his arms haughtily over his chest, looking
up at me as though I weren't a dozen times taller than he. "Very
well," he said, his tone lofty. "I have deigned to grant you a single
request of some small nature, for the generous gift of your
cuisine."
I worked to keep a straight face. "That's very kind of you."
Toot sniffed and somehow managed to look down his little pug
nose at me. "It is my nature to be both benevolent and wise."
I nodded, as though this were a very great wisdom. "Uh-huh.

Look, Toot. I need to know if you were around this place for the
past few nights, or know someone who was. I'm looking for
someone, and maybe he came here."
"And if I tell you," Toot said, "I take it you will disassemble this
circle which has, by some odd coincidence no doubt, made its
way around me?"
"It would be only reasonable," I said, all seriousness.
Toot seemed to consider it, as though he might be inclined not
to cooperate, then nodded. "Very well. You will have the
information you wish. Release me."
I narrowed my eyes. "Are you sure? Do you promise?"
Toot stamped his foot again, scattering more silver dust motes.
"Harry! You're ruining the drama!"
I folded my arms. "I want to hear you promise."
Toot threw up his hands. "Fine, fine, fine! I promise, I promise,
I promise! I'll dig up what you want to know!" He started to buzz
about the circle in great agitation, wings lifting him easily into
the air. "Let me out! Let me out!"
A promise thrice made is as close to absolute truth as you can
get from a faery. I went quickly to the circle and scuffed over the
line drawn in the dirt with my foot, willing the circle to part. It
did, with a little hiss of released energy.
Toot streaked out over Lake Michigan's waters again, a
miniature silver comet, and vanished in a twinkling, just like
Santa Claus. Though I should say that Santa is a much bigger
and more powerful faery than Toot, and I don't know his true
name anyway. You'd never see me trying to nab Saint Nick in a
magic circle, even if I did. I don't think anyone has stones that
big.
I waited around, walking about to keep from falling asleep. If I
did that, Toot would be perfectly within his rights as a faery to
fulfill his promise by telling me the information while I was
sleeping. And, given that I had just now captured and humiliated
him, he'd probably do something to even the scales—two weeks
from now he wouldn't even remember it, but if I let him have a
free shot at me tonight, I might wake up with an ass's head, and
I didn't think that would be good for business.

So I paced, and I waited. Toot usually took about half an hour
to round up whatever it was I wanted to know.
Sure enough, half an hour later he came sparkling back in and
buzzed around my head, drizzling faery dust from his blurring
wings at my eyes. "Hah, Harry!" he said. "I did it!"
"What did you find out, Toot?"
"Guess!"
I snorted. "No."
"Aw, come on. Just a little guess?"
I scowled, tired and irritated, but tried not to let it show. Toot
couldn't help being what he was. "Toot, it's late. You promised to
tell me."
"No fun at all," he complained. "No wonder you can't get a
date unless someone wants to know something from you."
I blinked at him, and he chortled in glee. "Hah! I love it! We're
watching you, Harry Dresden!"
Now that was disconcerting. I had a sudden image of a dozen
faery voyeurs lingering around my apartment's windows and
peering inside. I'd have to take precautions to make sure they
couldn't do that. Not that I was afraid of them, or anything. Just
in case.
"Just tell me, Toot," I sighed.
"Incoming!" he shrilled, and I held out my hand, fingers flat
and palm up. He alighted in the center of my palm. I could
barely feel his weight, but the sense, the aura of him ran through
my skin like a tiny electric current. He stared fearlessly at my
eyes—the fae have no souls to gaze upon, and they could not
fathom a mortal's soul, even if they could see it.
"Okay!" Toot said. "I talked to Blueblossom, who talked to
Rednose, who talked to Meg O' Aspens, who said that Goldeneyes
said that he was riding the pizza car when it came here last
night!" Toot thrust out his chest proudly.
"Pizza car?" I asked, bewildered.
"Pizza!" Toot cried, jubilant. "Pizza! Pizza! Pizza!" His wings
fluttered again, and I tried to blink the damned faery dust out of
my eyes before I started sneezing.

"Faeries like pizza?" I asked.
"Oh, Harry," Toot said breathlessly. "Haven't you ever had
pizza before?"
"Of course I have," I said.
Toot looked wounded. "And you didn't share?"
I sighed. "Look. Maybe I can bring you guys some pizza
sometime soon, to thank you for your help."
Toot leapt about in glee, hopping from one fingertip to the
other. "Yes! Yes! Wait until I tell them! We'll see who laughs at
Toot-toot next time!"
"Toot," I said, trying to calm him, "did he see anything else?"
Toot tittered, his expression sly and suggestive. "He said that
there were mortals sporting and that they needed pizza to regain
their strength!"
"Which delivery place, Toot?"
The faery blinked and stared at me as though I were hopelessly
stupid. "Harry. The pizza truck." And then he darted off
skyward, vanishing into the trees above.
I sighed and nodded. Toot wouldn't know the difference
between Domino's and Pizza Hut. He had no frame of reference,
and couldn't read—most faeries were studiously averse to print.
So, I had two pieces of information. One, someone had ordered
a pizza to be delivered here. That meant two things. First, that
someone was here last night. Second, that someone had seen
them and talked to them. Maybe I could track down the pizza
driver, and ask if he had seen Victor Sells.
The second piece of information had been Toot's reference to
sporting. Faeries didn't think too much of mortals' idea of
"sporting" unless there was a lot of nudity and lust involved.
They had a penchant for shadowing necking teenagers and
playing tricks on them. So Victor had been here with a lover of
some kind, for there to be any "sport" going on.
I was beginning to think that Monica Sells was in denial. Her
husband wasn't wandering around learning to be a sorcerer,
spooky scorpion talismans notwithstanding. He was lurking
about his love nest with a girlfriend, like any other husband

bored with a timid and domestic wife might do under pressure.
It wasn't admirable, but I guess I could understand the
motivations that could cause it.
The only problem was going to be telling Monica. I had a
feeling that she wasn't going to want to listen to what I had
found out.
I picked up the little plate and bowl and cup and put them
back into my black-nylon backpack, along with the silver knife.
My legs ached from too much walking and standing about. I was
looking forward to getting home and getting some sleep.
The man with the naked sword in his hands appeared out of
the darkness without a warning rustle of sound or whiff of magic
to announce his presence. He was tall, like me, but broad and
heavy-chested, and he carried his weight with a ponderous sort
of dignity. Perhaps fifty years old, his listless brown hair going
grey in uneven patches, he wore a long, black coat, a lot like mine
but without the mantle, and his jacket and pants, too, were done
in dark colors—charcoal and a deep blue. His shirt was crisp,
pure white, the color that you usually only see with tuxedos. His
eyes were grey, touched with crow's-feet at the corners, and
dangerous. Moonlight glinted off those eyes in the same shade it
did from the brighter silver of the sword's blade. He began to
walk deliberately toward me, speaking in a quiet voice as he did.
"Harry Blackstone Copperfield Dresden. Irresponsible use of
true names for summoning and binding others to your will
violates the Fourth Law of Magic," the man intoned. "I remind
you that you are under the Doom of Damocles. No further
violations of the Laws will be tolerated. The sentence for further
violation is death, by the sword, to be carried out at once."
Chapter Seven
Have you ever been approached by a grim-looking man,
carrying a naked sword with a blade about ten miles long in his
hand, in the middle of the night, beneath the stars on the shores
of Lake Michigan? If you have, seek professional help. If you have
not, then believe you me, it can scare the bejeezus out of you.
I took in a quick breath, and had to work not to put it into a
quasi-Latin phrase on the exhale, one that would set the man's

body on fire and reduce him to a mound of ashes. I react badly to
fear. I don't usually have the good sense to run, or hide—I just try
to smash whatever it is that is making me afraid. It's a primitive
sort of thing, and one I don't question too much.
But reflex-based murder seemed a tad extreme, so rather than
setting him on fire, I nodded instead. "Evening, Morgan. You
know as well as I do that those laws apply to mortals. Not faeries.
Especially for something as trivial as I just did. And I didn't
break the Fourth Law. He had the choice whether to take my
deal or not."
Morgan's sour, leathery face turned a bit more sour, the lines
at the corners of his mouth stretching and becoming deeper.
"That's a technicality, Dresden. A pair of them." His hands,
broad and strong, resettled their grip upon the sword he held.
His unevenly greying hair was tied into a ponytail in the back,
like Sean Connery's in some of his movies, except that Morgan's
face was too pinched and thin to pull off the look.
"Your point being?" I did my best to keep from looking nervous
or impressed. Truth be told, I was both. Morgan was my
Warden, assigned to me by the White Council to make sure I
didn't bend or break any of the Laws of Magic. He hung about
and spied on me, mostly, and usually came sniffing around after
I'd cast a spell of some kind. I would be damned if I was going to
let the White Council's guard dog see any fear out of me. Besides,
he would take it as a sign of guilt, in the true spirit of paranoid
fanatics everywhere. So, all I had to do was keep a straight face
and get out before my weariness made me slip up and do or say
something he could use against me.
Morgan was one of the deadliest evocators in the world. He
wasn't bright enough to question his loyalties to the Council, and
he could do quick-and-dirty magic like few others could.
Quick and dirty enough to rip the hearts out of Tommy Tomm
and Jennifer Stanton's chests, in fact, if he wanted to.
"My point," he said, scowling, "is that it is my assigned duty to
monitor your use of your power, and to see to it that you do not
abuse it."
"I'm on a missing-persons case," I said. "All I did was call up a
dewdrop faery to get some information. Come on, Morgan.
Everybody calls up faeries now and then. There's no harm in it.

It's not as though I'm mind-controlling the things. Just leaning
on them a little."
"Technicality," Morgan growled.
I stuck out my chin at him belligerently. We were of a height,
though he outweighed me by about a hundred pounds. I could
pick better people to antagonize, but he'd really gotten under my
skin. "A technicality I'm prepared to hide wildly behind. So,
unless you want to convene a meeting of the Council to call me
on it, we can just drop the discussion right here. I'm pretty sure
it will only take them about two days to cancel all their plans,
make travel arrangements, and then get here. I can put you up
until then. I mean, you'd be dragging a bunch of really crotchety
old men away from their experiments and things for nothing,
but if you really think it's necessary …"
Morgan scowled at me. "No. It isn't worth it." He opened his
dark trench coat and slid the sword away into its scabbard. I
relaxed a little. The sword wasn't the most dangerous thing
about him, not by a long shot, but it was his symbol of the
authority given to him by the White Council, and if rumors were
true, it was enchanted to cut through the magical spells of
anyone resisting him. I didn't want things ever to go far enough
for me to find out if the rumors were true.
"I'm glad we agree about something," I said. "Nice seeing you
again." I started to walk past him.
Morgan put one of those big hands on my arm as I went by,
and his fingers closed around it. "I'm not finished with you,
Dresden."
I didn't dare mess around with Morgan when he was acting in
his role as a Warden of the White Council. But he wasn't wearing
that hat, now. Once he'd put the sword away, he was acting on
his own, without any more official authority than any other
man—or at least, that was the technical truth. Morgan was big
on technicalities. He had scared the heck out of me and annoyed
the heck out of me, in rapid succession. Now he was trying to
bully me. I hate bullies.
So I took a calculated risk, used my free hand, and hit him as
hard as I could in the mouth.
I think the blow startled him more than anything. He took a

step back, letting go of my arm in surprise, and just blinked at
me. He put one hand to his mouth, and when he drew his fingers
away, there was blood on them.
I planted my feet and faced him, without meeting his eyes.
"Don't touch me."
Morgan continued to stare at me. And then I saw anger creep
over his face, set his jaw, make the veins at his temple stand out.
"How dare you," he said. "How dare you strike me."
"It wasn't so hard," I said. "If you've got Council business with
me, I'm willing to give you whatever respect is your due. When
you come on strong to me on personal business, I don't have to
put up with it."
I saw the steam coming out of his ears as he mulled it over. He
looked for a reason to come after me, and realized that he didn't
have one, according to the Laws. He wasn't too bright—did I
mention that already?—and he was a big one for following the
Laws. "You're a fool, Dresden," he sputtered finally. "An arrogant
little fool."
"Probably," I told him. I tensed myself to move quickly if
necessary. I may not like to run away from what scares me, but I
try not to fight hopeless battles, either, and Morgan had me by
years of experience and a hundred pounds, at least. There was no
Law of Magic that protected me from him and his fists, either,
and if that occurred to him, he might decide to do something
about it. That punch I'd landed had been lucky, coming out of
the blue. I wouldn't get away with it again.
"Someone killed two people with sorcery last night, Dresden. I
think it was you. And when I find how you did it and can trace it
back to you, don't think you're going to live long enough to cast
the same spell at me." Morgan swiped at the blood with one big
fist.
It was my turn to blink. I tried to shift mental gears, to keep up
with the change in subject. Morgan thought I was the killer. And
since Morgan didn't do too much of his own thinking, that
meant that the White Council thought I was the killer. Holy shit.
Of course, it made sense, from Morgan's narrow and
single-minded point of view. A wizard had killed someone. I was
a wizard who had already been convicted of killing another with

magic, even if the self-defense clause had kept me from being
executed. Cops looked for people who had already committed
crimes before they started looking for other culprits. Morgan was
just another kind of cop, as far as I was concerned.
And, as far as he was concerned, I was just one more
dangerous con.
"You're not serious," I told him. "You think I did it?"
He sneered at me. His voice was contemptuous, confident, and
seethed with absolute conviction. "Don't try to hide it, Dresden.
I'm sure you think you're clever enough to come up with
something innovative that we hidebound old men won't be able
to trace. But you're wrong. We'll determine how you did it, and
we'll follow it back to you. And when we do, I'll be there to make
sure you never hurt anyone again."
"Knock yourself out," I told him. It was hard, really hard, to
keep my voice as blithe as I wanted it to sound. "I didn't do it.
But I'm helping the police find the man who did."
"The police?" Morgan asked. He narrowed his eyes, as though
gauging my expression. "As if they could have any authority on
this matter. They won't do you any good. Even if you do set
someone up to take the fall for you under mortal law, the White
Council will still see that justice is done." His eyes glittered,
fanatic-bright underneath the stars.
"Whatever. Look, if you find something out about the killer,
anything that could help the cops out, would you give me a call?"
Morgan looked at me with profound distaste. "You ask me to
warn you when we are closing in on you, Dresden? You are
young, but I never thought you stupid."
I bit back the obvious comment that leapt to mind. Morgan
was on the edge of outrage already. If I'd realized how rabid he
was to catch me slipping, I wouldn't have added more fuel to his
fire by hitting him in the mouth.
Okay. I probably still would have hit him in the mouth. But I
wouldn't have done it quite so hard.
"Good night, Morgan," I told him. I started to walk away again,
before I could let my mouth get me into more trouble.
He moved faster than I would have given a man his age credit

for. His fist went across my jaw at approximately a million miles
an hour, and I spun down to the dirt like a string-cut puppet. For
several long moments, I was unable to do anything at all, even
breathe. Morgan loomed over me.
"We'll be watching you, Dresden." He turned and started
walking away, the shadows of the evening quickly swallowing up
his black coat. His voice drifted back to me. "We'll find out what
really happened."
I didn't dare spout out a snappy comeback. I felt my jaw with
my fingers, and made sure it wasn't broken, before I stood up
and walked back to the Beetle, my legs feeling loose and watery. I
fervently hoped that Morgan would find out what had really
happened. It would keep the White Council from executing me
for breaking the First Law, for one thing.
I could feel his eyes on my back, all the way to the Beetle.
Damn that Morgan. He didn't have to take quite so much
pleasure in being assigned to spy on me. I had a sinking feeling
that anywhere I went over the next few days, he would be likely
to turn up, watching. He was like this big, cartoon tomcat
waiting outside the mousehole for the little mouse to stick its
nose out so he could smash it flat with one big paw. I was feeling
a lot like that little mouse.
I let that analogy cheer me up a bit. The cartoon cats always
seemed to get the short end of the stick, in the final analysis.
Maybe Morgan would, too.
Part of the problem was that seeing Morgan always brought up
too many memories of my angsty teenage days. That was when
I'd started to learn magic, when my mentor had tried to seduce
me into Black wizardry, and when he had attempted to kill me
when he failed. I killed him instead, mostly by luck—but he was
just as dead, and I'd done it with sorcery. I broke the First Law of
Magic: Thou Shalt Not Kill. There is only one sentence, if
someone is found guilty, and one sword that they use to carry it
out.
The White Council commuted the death sentence, because
tradition demands that a wizard can resort to the use of deadly
force if he is defending his own life, or the lives of the defenseless,
and my claim that I had been attacked first could not be
contested by my master's corpse. So instead, they'd stuck me on

a kind of accelerated probation: One strike and I was out. There
were some wizards who thought that the judgment against me
was a ludicrous injustice (I happened to be one of them, but my
vote didn't really count), and others who thought that I should
have been executed regardless of extenuating circumstances.
Morgan belonged to that latter group. Just my luck.
I was feeling more than a bit surly at the entire White Council,
benevolent intentions aside. I guess it only made sense that
they'd suspect me, and God knows I'd been a thorn in their side,
flying in the face of tradition by practicing my art openly. There
were plenty of people on the Council who might well want me
dead. I would have to start being more careful.
I rolled down the Beetle's windows on the way back to Chicago
to help me stay awake. I was exhausted, but my mind was racing
around like a hamster on an exercise wheel, working furiously,
getting nowhere.
The irony was thick enough to make my tongue curl. The
White Council suspected me of the killings, and if no other
suspect came forward, I was going to take the rap. Murphy's
investigation had just become very, very important to me. But to
pursue the investigation, I would have to try to figure out how
the killer had pulled off that spell, and to do that, I would have to
indulge in highly questionable research that would probably be
enough to get me a death sentence all by itself. Catch
twenty-two. If I had any respect at all for Morgan's intelligence, I
would have suspected him of pulling off the killings himself and
setting me up to take the blame.
But that just didn't track. Morgan might twist and bend the
rules, to get what he saw as justice, but he'd never blatantly
violate them. But if not Morgan, then who could have done it?
There just weren't all that many people who could get enough
power into that kind of spell to make it work—unless there was
some flaw in the quasiphysics that governed magic that let
hearts explode more easily than other things; and I wouldn't
know that until I had pursued the forbidden research.
Bianca would have more information on who might have done
it—she had to. I had already planned on talking to the vampiress,
but Morgan's visit had made it a necessity, rather than merely a
priority. Murphy was not going to be thrilled that I was

thrusting myself into her side of this investigation. And, better
and better, because White Council business was all hush-hush to
nonwizards, I wouldn't be able to explain to her why I was doing
it. Further joy.
You know, sometimes I think Someone up there really hates
me.
Chapter Eight
By the time I got home, it was after two o'clock in the morning.
The clock in the Beetle didn't work (of course), but I made a
pretty good guess from the position of the stars and the moon. I
was strung out, weary, and my nerves were stretched as tight as
guitar strings.
I didn't think sleep was likely, so I decided to do a little
alchemy to help me unwind.
I've often wished that I had some suave and socially acceptable
hobby that I could fall back on in times like this. You know, play
the violin (or was it the viola?) like Sherlock Holmes, or maybe
twiddle away on the pipe organ like the Disney version of
Captain Nemo. But I don't. I'm sort of the arcane equivalent of a
classic computer geek. I do magic, in one form or another, and
that's pretty much it. I really need to get a life, one of these days.
I live in a basement apartment beneath a big, roomy old house
that has been divided up into lots of different apartments. The
basement and the subbasement below it are both mine, which is
sort of neat. I'm the only tenant living on two floors, and my rent
is cheaper than all the people who have whole windows.
The house is full of creaks and sighs and settling boards, and
time and lives have worn their impressions into the wood and
the brick. I can hear all the sounds, all the character of the place,
above and around me all through the night. It's an old place, but
it sings in the darkness and is, in its own quirky little way, alive.
It's home.
Mister was waiting for me at the bottom of the stairs that led
down to the apartment's front door. Mister is an enormous grey
cat. I mean, enormous. There are dogs smaller than Mister. He
weighs in at just over thirty pounds, and there isn't an undue
amount of fat on his frame. I think maybe his father was a

wildcat or a lynx or something. I had found Mister in a garbage
can about three years before, a mewling kitten, with his tail torn
off by a dog or a car—I was never sure which, but Mister hated
both, and would either attack or flee from them on sight.
Mister had recovered his dignity over the next few months, and
shortly came to believe that he was the apartment's tenant, and I
was someone he barely tolerated to share the space with him.
Right now he looked up and mrowed at me in an annoyed tone.
"I thought you had a hot date," I told him.
He sauntered over to me and rammed one shoulder playfully
against my knee. I wavered, recovered my balance, and unlocked
the door. Mister, as was his just due, entered before I did.
My apartment is a studio, one not-too-large room with a
kitchenette in the corner and a fireplace to one side. There's a
door that leads to the other room, my bedroom and bathroom,
and then there's the hinged door in the floor that goes down to
the subbasement, where I keep my lab. I've got things pretty
heavily textured—there are multiple carpets on the floor,
tapestries on the walls, a collection of knickknacks and oddities
on every available surface, my staff and my sword cane in the
corner, and several bulging bookshelves which I really will
organize one day.
Mister went to his spot before the fireplace and demanded that
it be made warm. I obliged him with a fire and lit a lamp as well.
Oh, I have lights and so on, but they foul up so often it almost
isn't worth turning them on. And I'm not even about to take
chances with the gas heater. I stick with the simple things, the
fireplace and my candles and lamps. I have a special charcoal
stove and a vent to take most of the smoke out, though the whole
place smells a little of woodsmoke and charcoal, no matter what
I do.
I took off my duster and got out my heavy flannel robe before I
went down into the lab. That's why wizards wear robes, I swear
to you. It's just too damned cold in the lab to go without one. I
clambered down the ladder to the lab, carrying my candle with
me, and lit a few lamps, a pair of burners, and a kerosene heater
in the corner.
The lights came up and revealed a long table in the center of
the room, other tables against three of the walls around it, and a

clear space at one end of the room where a brass circle had been
laid out on the floor and fastened into the cement with U-shaped
bolts. Shelves over the tables were crowded with empty cages,
boxes, Tupperware, jars, cans, containers of all descriptions, a
pair of unusual antlers, a couple of fur pelts, several musty old
books, a long row of notebooks filled with my own cramped
writing, and a bleached white human skull.
"Bob," I said. I started clearing space off of the center table,
dumping boxes and grocery sacks and plastic tubs over the brass
circle on the floor. I needed room to work. "Bob, wake up."
There was a moment of silence, while I started getting some
things down from the shelves. "Bob!" I said, louder. "Come on,
lazybones."
A pair of lights came up in the empty sockets of the skull,
orangish, flickering like candle flames. "It isn't enough," the skull
said, "that I have to wake up. I have to wake up to bad puns.
What is it about you that you have to make the bad puns?"
"Quit whining," I told him, cheerfully. "We've got work to do."
Bob the Skull grumbled something in Old French, I think,
though I got lost when he got to the anatomical improbabilities
of bullfrogs. He yawned, and his bony teeth rattled when his
mouth clicked closed again. Bob wasn't really a human skull. He
was a spirit of air—sort of like a faery, but different. He made his
residence inside the skull that had been prepared for him several
hundred years ago, and it was his job to remember things. For
obvious reasons, I can't use a computer to store information and
keep track of the slowly changing laws of quasiphysics. That's
why I had Bob. He had worked with dozens of wizards over the
years, and it had given him a vast repertoire of knowledge—that,
and a really cocky attitude. "Blasted wizards," he mumbled.
"I can't sleep, so we're going to make a couple of potions.
Sound good?"
"Like I have a choice," Bob said. "What's the occasion?"
I brought Bob up to speed on what had happened that day. He
whistled (no easy trick without lips), and said, "Sounds sticky."
"Pretty sticky," I agreed.
"Tell you what," he said. "Let me out for a ride, and I'll tell you

how to get out of it."
That made me wary. "Bob, I let you out once. Remember?"
He nodded dreamily, scraping bone on wood. "The sorority
house. I remember."
I snorted, and started some water to boiling over one of the
burners. "You're supposed to be a spirit of intellect. I don't
understand why you're obsessed with sex."
Bob's voice got defensive. "It's an academic interest, Harry."
"Oh yeah? Well maybe I don't think it's fair to let your
academia go peeping in other people's houses."
"Wait a minute. My academia doesn't just peep—"
I held up a hand. "Save it. I don't want to hear it."
He grunted. "You're trivializing what getting out for a bit
means to me, Harry. You're insulting my masculinity."
"Bob," I said, "you're a skull. You don't have any masculinity to
insult."
"Oh yeah?" Bob challenged me. "Pot kettle black, Harry! Have
you gotten a date yet? Huh? Most men have something better to
do in the middle of the night than play with their chemistry
sets."
"As a matter of fact," I told him, "I'm set up for Saturday
night."
Bob's eyes fluttered from orange to red. "Oooooo," he leered.
"Is she pretty?"
"Dark skin," I said. "Dark hair, dark eyes. Legs to die for.
Smart, sexy as hell."
Bob chortled. "Think she'd like to see the lab?"
"Get your mind out of the gutter."
"No, seriously," Bob said. "If she's so great, what's she doing
with you? You aren't exactly Sir Gawain, you know."
It was my turn to get defensive. "She likes me," I said. "Is that
such a shock?"
"Harry," Bob drawled, his eye lights flickering smugly, "what
you know about women, I could juggle."

I stared at Bob for a moment, and realized with a somewhat
sinking feeling that the skull was probably right. Not that I
would admit that to him, not in a million years, but he was.
"We're going to make an escape potion," I told him. "I don't
want to be all night, so can we get to work? Huh? I can only
remember about half the recipe."
"There's always room to make two if you're making one, Harry.
You know that."
That much was true. The process of mixing up an alchemical
potion is largely stirring, simmering, and waiting. You can
always get another one going and alternate between them.
Sometimes you can even do three, though that's pushing it.
"Okay, so, we'll make a copy."
"Oh, come on," Bob chided me. "That's dull. You should stretch
yourself. Try something new."
"Like what?"
Bob's eye sockets twinkled cheerfully. "A love potion, Harry! If
you won't let me out, at least let me do that! Spirits know you
could use it, and—"
"No," I said, firmly. "No way. No love potion."
"Fine," he said. "No love potion, no escape potion either."
"Bob," I said, warningly.
Bob's eye lights winked out.
I growled. I was tired and cranky, and under the best of
circumstances I am not exactly a type A personality. I stalked
over, picked up Bob by the jaws and shook him. "Hey!" I shouted.
"Bob! You come out of there! Or I'm going to take this skull and
throw it down the deepest well I can find! I swear to you, I'll put
you somewhere where no one can ever let you out ever again!"
Bob's eyes winked on for a moment. "No you won't. I'm far too
valuable." Then they winked out again.
I gritted my teeth and tried not to smash the skull to little
pieces on the floor. I took deep breaths, summoning years of
wizardly training and control to not throw a tantrum and break
the nice spirit to little pieces. Instead, I put the skull back on the
shelf and counted slowly to thirty.

Could I make the potion by myself? I probably could. But I had
the sinking feeling that it might not have precisely the effect I
wanted. Potions were a tricky business, and a lot more relied
upon precise details than upon intent, like in spells. And just
because I made a love potion didn't mean I had to use it. Right?
It would only be good for a couple of days, in any case—surely not
through the weekend. How much trouble could it cause?
I struggled to rationalize the action. It would appease Bob, and
give him some kind of vicarious thrill. Love potions were about
the cheapest things in the world to make, so it wouldn't cost me
too much. And, I thought, if Susan should ask me for some kind
of demonstration of magic (as she always did), I could always—
No. That would be too much. That would be like admitting I
couldn't get a woman to like me on my own, and it would be
unfair, taking advantage of the woman. What I wanted was the
escape potion. I might need it at Bianca's place, and I could
always use it, if worse came to worst, to make a getaway from
Morgan and the White Council. I would feel a lot better if I had
the escape potion.
"Okay, Bob. Fine. You win. We'll do them both. All right?"
Bob's eye lights came up warily. "You're sure? You'll do the love
potion, just like I say?"
"Don't I always make the potions like you say, Bob?"
"What about that diet potion you tried?"
"Okay. That one was a mistake."
"And the antigravity potion, remember that?"
"We fixed the floor! It was no big deal!"
"And the—"
"Fine, fine," I growled. "You don't have to rub it in. Now cough
up the recipes."
Bob did so, in fine humor, and for the next two hours we made
potions. Potions are all made pretty much the same way. First
you need a base to form the essential liquid content; then
something to engage each of the senses, and then something for
the mind and something else for the spirit. Eight ingredients, all
in all, and they're different for each and every potion, and for
each person who makes them. Bob had centuries of experience,

and he could extrapolate the most successful components for a
given person to make into a potion. He was right about being an
invaluable resource—I had never even heard of a spirit with
Bob's experience, and I was lucky to have him.
That didn't mean I didn't want to crack that skull of his from
time to time, though.
The escape potion was made in a base of eight ounces of Jolt
cola. We added a drop of motor oil, for the smell of it, and cut a
bird's feather into tiny shavings for the tactile value. Three
ounces of chocolate-covered espresso beans, ground into powder,
went in next. Then a shredded bus ticket I'd never used, for the
mind, and a small chain which I broke and then dropped in, for
the heart. I unfolded a clean white cloth where I'd had a
flickering shadow stored for just such an occasion, and tossed it
into the brew, then opened up a glass jar where I kept my mouse
scampers and tapped the sound out into the beaker where the
potion was brewing …
"You're sure this is going to work, Bob?" I said.
"Always. That's a super recipe, there."
"Smells terrible."
Bob's lights twinkled. "They usually do."
"What's it doing? Is this the superspeed one, or the
teleportation version?"
Bob coughed. "A little of both, actually. Drink it, and you'll be
the wind for a few minutes."
"The wind?" I eyed him. "I haven't heard of that one before,
Bob."
"I am an air spirit, after all," Bob told me. "This'll work fine.
Trust me."
I grumbled, and set the first potion to simmering, then started
on the next one. I hesitated, after Bob told me the first
ingredient.
"Tequila?" I asked him, skeptically. "Are you sure on that one?
I thought the base for a love potion was supposed to be
champagne."
"Champagne, tequila, what's the difference, so long as it'll

lower her inhibitions?" Bob said.
"Uh. I'm thinking it's going to get us a, um, sleazier result."
"Hey!" Bob protested, "Who's the memory spirit here! Me or
you?"
"Well—"
"Who's got all the experience with women here? Me or you?"
"Bob—"
"Harry," Bob lectured me, "I was seducing shepherdesses when
you weren't a twinkle in your great-grandcestor's eyes. I think I
know what I'm doing."
I sighed, too tired to argue with him. "Okay, okay. Sheesh.
Tequila." I got down the bottle, measured eight ounces into the
beaker, and glanced up at the skull.
"Right. Now, three ounces of dark chocolate."
"Chocolate?" I demanded.
"Chicks are into chocolate, Harry."
I muttered, more interested in finishing than anything else,
and measured out the ingredients. I did the same with a drop of
perfume (some name-brand imitation that I liked), an ounce of
shredded lace, and the last sigh at the bottom of the glass jar. I
added some candlelight to the mix, and it took on a rosy golden
glow.
"Great," Bob said. "That's just right. Okay, now we add the
ashes of a passionate love letter."
I blinked at the skull. "Uh, Bob. I'm fresh out of those."
Bob snorted. "How did I guess. Look on the shelf behind me."
I did, and found a pair of romance novels, their covers filled
with impossibly delightful flesh. "Hey! Where did you get these?"
"My last trip out," Bob answered blithely. "Page one
seventy-four, the paragraph that starts with, 'Her milky-white
breasts.' Tear that page out and burn it and add those ashes in."
I choked. "That will work?"
"Hey, women eat these things up. Trust me."
"Fine," I sighed. "This is the spirit ingredient?"

"Uh-huh," Bob said. He was rocking back and forth on his
jawbones in excitement. "Now, just a teaspoon of powdered
diamond, and we're done."
I rubbed at my eyes. "Diamond. I don't have any diamonds,
Bob."
"I figured. You're cheap, that's why women don't like you.
Look, just tear up a fifty into real little pieces and put that in
there."
"A fifty-dollar bill?" I demanded.
"Money," Bob opined, "Very sexy."
I muttered and got the remaining fifty out of my pocket,
shredding it and tossing it in to complete the potion.
The next step was where the effort came in. Once all the
ingredients are mixed together, you have to force enough energy
through them to activate them. It isn't the actual physical
ingredients that are important—it's the meaning that they carry,
too, the significance that they have for the person making the
potion, and for those who will be using it.
The energy from magic comes from a lot of places. It can come
from a special place (usually some spectacular natural site, like
Mount St. Helens, or Old Faithful), from a focus of some kind
(like Stonehenge is, on a large scale), or from inside of people.
The best magic comes from the inside. Sometimes it's just pure
mental effort, raw willpower. Sometimes it's emotions and
feelings. All of them are viable tinder to be used for the
proverbial fire.
I had a lot of worry to use to fuel the magic, and a lot of
annoyance and one hell of a lot of stubbornness. I murmured the
requisite quasi-Latin litany over the potions, over and over,
feeling a kind of resistance building, just out of the range of the
physical senses, but there, nonetheless. I gathered up all my
worry and anger and stubbornness and threw them all at the
resistance in one big ball, shaping them with the strength and
tone of my words. The magic left me in a sudden wave, like a
pitcher abruptly emptied out.
"I love this part," Bob said, just as both potions exploded into
puffs of greenish smoke and began to froth up over the lips of the
beakers.

I sagged onto a stool, and waited for the potions to fizz down,
all the strength gone out of me, the weariness building up like a
load of bricks on my shoulders. Once the frothing had settled, I
leaned over and poured each potion into its own individual
sports bottle with a squeeze-top, then labeled the containers with
a permanent Magic Marker—very clearly. I don't take chances in
getting potions mixed up anymore, ever since the
invisibility/hair tonic incident, from when I was trying to grow
out a decent beard.
"You won't regret this, Harry," Bob assured me. "That's the
best potion I've ever made."
"I made it, not you," I growled. I really was exhausted,
now—way too tired to let petty concerns like possible execution
keep me from bed.
"Sure, sure," Bob agreed. "Whatever, Harry."
I went around the room putting out all the fires and the
kerosene heater, then climbed the ladder back to the basement
without saying good night. Bob was chortling happily to himself
as I did.
I stumbled to my bed and fell into it. Mister always climbs in
and goes to sleep draped over my legs. I waited for him, and a
few seconds later he showed up, settling down and purring like a
miniature outboard motor.
I struggled to put together an itinerary for the next couple of
days through the haze of exhaustion. Talk to the vampire. Locate
missing husband. Avoid the wrath of the White Council. Find the
killer.
Before he found me.
An unpleasant thought—but I decided that I wasn't going to let
that bother me, either, and curled up to go to sleep.
Chapter Nine
Friday night, I went to see Bianca, the vampiress.
I didn't just leap out of bed and go see her, of course. You don't
go walking into the proverbial lion's den lightly. You start with a
good breakfast.

My breakfast took place around three in the afternoon, when I
woke up to hear my phone ringing. I had to get out of bed and
pad into the main room to answer it.
"Mmmrrmmph," I grumbled.
"Dresden," Murphy said, "what can you tell me?"
Murphy sounded stressed. Her voice had that distinct edge
that she got whenever she was nervous, and it rankled me, like
fingernails scraping on bones. The investigation into Tommy
Tomm's murder must not be going well. "Nothing yet," I said.
Then I lied to her, a little. "I was up most of the night working,
but nothing to show yet."
She answered me with a swear word. "That's not good enough,
Harry. I need answers, and I need them yesterday."
"I'll get to it as quick as I can."
"Get to it faster," she snarled. She was angry. Not that this was
unusual for Murphy, but it told me that something else was
going on. Some people panic when things get rough, harried.
Some people fall apart. Murphy got pissed.
"Commissioner riding your back again?" City Police
Commissioner Howard Fairweather used Murphy and her team
as scapegoats for all sorts of unsolvable crimes that he had
dumped in her lap. Fairweather was always lurking around,
trying for an opportunity to make Murphy look bad, as though
by doing so he could avoid being crucified himself.
"Like a winged monkey from The Wizard of Oz. Kind of makes
you wonder who's leaning on him to get things done." Her voice
was sour as ripe lemons. I heard her drop an Alka-Seltzer into a
glass of liquid. "I'm serious, Harry. You get me those answers I
need, and you get them to me fast. I need to know if this was
sorcery, and, if so, how it was done and who could have done it.
Names, places—I need to know everything."
"It isn't that simple, Mur—"
"Then make it simple. How long before you can tell me? I need
an estimate for the Commissioner's investigative committee in
fifteen minutes or I might as well turn in my badge today."
I grimaced. If I was able to get something out of Bianca, I
might be able to help Murph on the investigation—but if it

proved fruitless, I was going to have spent the entire evening
doing nothing productive, and Murphy needed her answers now.
Maybe I should have made a stay-awake potion. "Does the
committee work weekends?"
Murphy snorted. "Are you kidding?"
"We'll have something by Monday, then."
"You can have it figured out by then?" she asked.
"I don't know how much good it will do you, even if I can puzzle
it out. I hope you've got more to go on than this."
I heard her sigh into the phone and drink the fizzy drink.
"Don't let me down, Harry."
Time to change the subject, before she pinned me down and
smelled me lying. I had no intention of doing the forbidden
research if I could find a way out of doing it. "No luck with
Bianca?"
Another swear word. "That bitch won't talk to us. Just smiles
and nods and blows smoke, makes small talk, and crosses her
legs. You should have seen Carmichael drooling."
"Well. Tough to blame him, maybe. I hear she's cute. Listen,
Murph. What if I just—"
"No, Harry. Absolutely not. You will not go over to the Velvet
Room, you will not talk to that woman, and you will not get
involved in this."
"Lieutenant Murphy," I drawled. "A little jealous, are we?"
"Don't flatter yourself. You're a civilian, Dresden, even if you do
have your investigator's license. If you get your ass laid out in the
hospital or the morgue, it'll be me that suffers for it."
"Murph, I'm touched."
"I'll touch your head to a brick wall a few times if you cross me
on this, Harry." Her voice was sharp, vehement.
"Hey, wind down, Murph. If you don't want me to go, no
problem." Whups. A lie. She'd be all over that like a troll on a
billy goat.
"You're a lousy liar, Harry. Godammit, I ought to take you
down to lockup just to keep you from—"

"What?" I said, loudly, into the receiver. "Murph, you're
breaking up. I can't hear you. Damn phone again. Call me back."
Then I hung up on her.
Mister padded over to me and batted at my leg. He watched
me with serious green eyes as I leaned down and unplugged the
phone as it started to ring again.
"Okay, Mister. You hungry?"
I got us breakfast. Leftover steak sandwich for him,
SpaghettiOs heated up on the wood stove for me. I rationed out
my last can of Coke, which Mister craves at least as badly as I do,
and by the time I was done eating and drinking and petting, I
was awake and thinking again—and getting ready for sundown.
Daylight savings time hadn't cut in yet, and dark would fall
around six. I had about two hours to get set to go.
You might think you know a thing or two about vampires.
Maybe some of the stuff you've heard is accurate. Likely, it's not.
Either way, I wasn't looking forward to the prospect of going into
Bianca's lair to demand information from her. I was going to
assume that things were going to get ugly before all was said and
done, just to make sure I didn't get caught with my staff down.
Wizardry is all about thinking ahead, about being prepared.
Wizards aren't really superhuman. We just have a leg up on
seeing things more clearly than other people, and being able to
use the extra information we have for our benefit. Hell, the word 
wizard comes from the same root as wise. We know things. We
aren't any stronger or faster than anyone else. We don't even
have all that much more going in the mental department. But
we're god-awful sneaky, and if we get the chance to get set for
something, we can do some impressive things.
As a wizard, if you're ready to address a problem, then it's
likely that you'll be able to come up with something that will let
you deal with it. So, I got together all the things I thought I
might need: I made sure my cane was polished and ready. I put
my silver knife in a sheath that hung just under my left arm. I
put the escape potion in its plastic squeeze-bottle into my
duster's pocket. I put on my favorite talisman, a silver pentacle
on a silver chain—it had been my mother's. My father had passed
it down to me. And I put a small, folded piece of white cloth into
my pocket.

I had several enchanted items around—or half-enchanted
items, anyway. Carrying out a full enchantment is expensive and
time-consuming, and I just couldn't afford to do it very much.
We blue-collar wizards just have to sling a few spells out where
we can and hope they don't go stale at the wrong time. I would
have been a lot more comfortable if I had been carrying my
blasting rod or my staff, but that would be like showing up at
Bianca's door in a tank, walking in carrying a machine gun and a
flamethrower, while announcing my intention to fight.
I had to maintain a fine balance between going in ready for
trouble and going in asking for trouble.
Not that I was afraid, mind you. I didn't think Bianca would be
willing to cause problems for a mortal wizard. Bianca wouldn't
want to piss off the White Council by messing with me.
On the other hand, I wasn't exactly the White Council's favorite
guy. They might even look the other way if Bianca decided to
take me quietly out of the picture.
Careful, Harry, I warned myself. Don't get entirely paranoid. If
you get like that, you'll be building your little apartment into a
Basement of Solitude.
"What do you think?" I asked Mister, once I was decked out in
what paraphernalia I was willing to carry.
Mister went to the door and batted at it insistently.
"Everyone's a critic. Fine, fine." I sighed. I let him out, then I
went out, got into my car and drove down to the Velvet Room in
its expensive lakeside location.
Bianca runs her business out of a huge old mansion from the
early days of the Roaring Twenties. Rumor has it that the
infamous Al Capone had it built for one of his mistresses.
There was a gate with an iron fence and a security guard. I
pulled the Beetle up into the little swath of driveway that began
at the street and ended at the fence. There was a hiccoughing
rattle from back in the engine as I brought the machine to a halt.
I rolled down the window and stuck my head out, peering back.
Something went whoomph, and then black smoke poured out
from the bottom of the car and scuttled down the slope of the
drive and into the street.

I winced. The engine gave an almost apologetic rattle and
shuddered to its death. Great. Now I had no ride home. I got out
of the Beetle, and stood mourning it for a moment.
The security guard on the other side of the gate was a blocky
man, not overly tall but overly muscled and hiding it under an
expensive suit. He studied me with attack-dog eyes, and then
said, through the gate, "Do you have an appointment?"
"No," I told him. "But I think Bianca will want to see me."
He looked unimpressed. "I'm sorry," he said. "Bianca is out for
the evening."
Things are never simple anymore. I shrugged at him, folded my
arms, and leaned on the hood of the Beetle. "Suit yourself. I'll just
stay until a tow truck comes by, then, until I can get this thing
out of the drive for you."
He stared at me, his eyes narrowed down to tiny slits with the
effort of thinking. Eventually, the thoughts got to his brain, got
processed, and sent back out with a message to "pass the buck."
"I'll call your name in," he said.
"Good man," I approved. "You won't be sorry."
"Name," he growled.
"Harry Dresden."
If he recognized my name, it didn't show on his face. He glared
at me and the Beetle then walked a few paces off, lifting a cellular
phone from his pocket and to his ear.
I listened. Listening isn't hard to do. No one has practice at it,
nowadays, but you can train yourself to pay attention to your
senses if you work at it long enough.
"I've got a guy down here says that Bianca will want to talk to
him," the guard said. "Says his name is Harry Dresden." He was
silent for a moment. I couldn't quite make out the buzz of the
other voice, other than that it was female. "Uh-huh," he said. He
glanced back at me. "Uh-huh," he said again. "Sure. Sure, I will.
Of course, ma'am."
I reached in through the window of the Beetle and got out my
cane. I rested it on the concrete beside my boots and tapped it a
few times, as though impatient.

The guard turned back to me, leaned over to one side, and
pushed a button somewhere. The gate buzzed and clicked open.
"Come on in, Mr. Dresden," he said. "I can have someone come
tow your car, if you like."
"Super," I told him. I gave him the name of the wrecker Mike
has a deal with and told him to tell the guy that it was Harry's
car again. Fido the Guard dutifully noted this down, writing on a
small notebook he drew from a pocket. While he did, I walked
past him toward the house, clicking my cane on the concrete
with every pace.
"Stop," he told me, his voice calm and confident. People don't
speak with that kind of absolute authority unless they have a gun
in their hands. I stopped.
"Put the cane down," he told me, "And put your arms up. You
are to be searched before you are allowed inside."
I sighed, did what he said, and let him pat me down. I didn't
turn around to face him, but I could smell the metal of his gun.
He found the knife and took it. His fingers brushed the nape of
my neck, felt the chain there.
"What's this?" he said.
"Pentacle," I told him.
"Let me see it. Use one hand."
I used my left to draw it out of my shirt and show it to him, a
silver five-pointed star within a circle, all smooth geometry. He
grunted, and said, "Fine." The search went on, and he found the
plastic squeeze-bottle. He took it out of my pocket, opened it,
and sniffed at it.
"What's this?"
"A health cola," I told him.
"Smells like shit," he said, capped it, and put it back in my
pocket.
"What about my cane?"
"Returned when you leave," he said.
Damn. My knife and my cane had been my only physical lines
of defense. Anything else I did would have to rely wholly upon

magic and that could be dicey on the best of days. It was enough
to rattle me.
Of course, Fido the Guard had missed a couple of things. First,
he'd overlooked the clean white handkerchief in my pocket.
Second, he'd passed me on with my pentacle still upon my neck.
He probably figured that since it wasn't a crucifix or a cross, that
I couldn't use it to keep Bianca away from me.
Which wasn't true. Vampires (and other such creatures) don't
respond to symbols as such. They respond to the power that
accompanies an act of faith. I couldn't ward off a vampire
mosquito with my faith in the Almighty—He and I have just
never seemed to connect. But the pentacle was a symbol of magic
itself, and I had plenty of faith in that.
And, of course, Fido had overlooked my getaway potion. Bianca
really ought to trust her guards with more awareness of the
supernatural and what sort of things to look for.
The house itself was elegant, very roomy, with the high ceilings
and the broad floors that they just don't make anymore. A
well-groomed young woman with a short, straight haircut
greeted me in the enormous entry hall. I was passing polite to
her, and she showed me to a library, its walls lined with old
books in leather bindings, similar to the leather-cushioned
chairs around the enormous old dogfoot table in the room's
center.
I took a seat and waited. And waited. And waited. More than
half an hour went by before Bianca finally arrived.
She came into the room like a candle burning with a cold, clear
flame. Her hair was a burnished shade of auburn that was too
dark to cast back any ruddy highlights, but did anyway. Her eyes
were dark, clear, her complexion flawlessly smooth and elegantly
graced with cosmetics. She was not a tall woman, but shapely,
wearing a black dress with a plunging neckline and a slash in one
side that showed off a generous portion of pale thigh. Black
gloves covered her hands to above the elbows, and her
three-hundred-dollar shoes were a study in high-heeled torture
devices. She looked too good to be true.
"Mister Dresden," she greeted me. "This is an unexpected
pleasure."

I rose when she entered the room. "Madame Bianca," I replied,
nodding to her. "We meet at last. Hearsay neglected to mention
how lovely you are."
She laughed, lips shaping the sounds, head falling back just
enough to show a flash of pale throat. "A gentleman, they said. I
see that they were correct. It is a charmingly passe thing to be a
gentleman in this country."
"You and I are of another world," I said.
She approached me and extended her hand, a motion oozing
feminine grace. I bowed over her hand briefly, taking it and
brushing my lips against the back of her glove. "Do you really
think I'm beautiful, Mister Dresden?" she asked me.
"As lovely as a star, Madame."
"Polite and a pretty one, too," she murmured. Her eyes
flickered over me, from head to toe, but even she avoided
meeting gazes with me, whether from a desire to avoid
inadvertently directing her power at me, or being on the
receiving end of mine, I couldn't tell. She continued into the
room, and stopped beside one of the comfortable chairs. As a
matter of course, I stepped around the table, and drew out the
chair for her, seating her. She crossed her legs, in that dress, in
those shoes, and made it look good. I blinked for just a moment,
then returned to my own seat.
"So, Mister Dresden. What brings you to my humble house?
Care for an evening of entertainment? I quite assure you that you
will never have another experience like it." She placed her hands
in her lap, smiling at me.
I smiled at her, and put one hand into my pocket, onto the
white handkerchief. "No, thank you. I came to talk."
Her lips parted in a silent, ah. "I see. About what, if I might
ask?"
"About Jennifer Stanton. And her murder."
I had all of a second's warning. Bianca's eyes narrowed, then
widened, like those of a cat about to spring. Then she was
coming at me over the table, faster than a breath, her arms
extended toward my throat.
I toppled over backward in my chair. Even though I'd started

to move first, it almost wasn't enough to get away from her
reaching nails in time. One grazed my throat with a hot
sensation of pain, and she kept coming, following me down to
the floor, those rich lips drawn back from sharp fangs.
I jerked my hand out of my pocket, and flapped open my white
hanky at her, releasing the image of sunlight I'd been storing for
use in potions. It lit up the room for a moment, brilliant.
The light smashed into Bianca, hurled her back across the old
table into one of the shelves, and tore pieces of flesh away from
her like bits of rotten meat being peeled off a carcass by a
sandblaster. She screamed, and the flesh around her mouth
sloughed and peeled away like a snake's scales.
I had never seen a real vampire before. I would have time to be
terrified later. I took in the details as I tugged my talisman off
over my neck. It had a batlike face, horrid and ugly, the head too
big for its body. Gaping, hungry jaws. Its shoulders were
hunched and powerful. Membranous wings stretched between
the joints of its almost skeletal arms. Flabby black breasts hung
before it, spilling out of the black dress that no longer looked
feminine. Its eyes were wide, black, and staring, and a kind of
leathery, slimy hide covered its flesh, like an inner tube lathered
with Vaseline, though there were tiny holes corroded in it by the
sunlight I had brought with me.
It recovered quickly, crouching and spreading long arms that
ended in claw-tipped fingers to either side with a hiss of rage.
I drew my pentacle into my fist, raised it like every vampire
slayer you ever saw does it, and said, "Jesus Christ, lady. I just
came here to talk."
The vampire hissed and started toward me with a gangling,
weirdly graceful step. Its clawed feet were still wearing the
three-hundred-dollar black pumps.
"Back," I said, taking a step towards it, myself. The pentacle
began to burn with the cold, clear light of applied will and
belief—my faith, if you will, that it could turn such a monster
aside.
It hissed, and turned its face aside, lifting its membranous
arms to shield its eyes from the light. It took one step back, and
then another, until its hunched back was pressed against a wall

of books.
Now what did I do? I wasn't going to go try to put a stake
through her heart. But if I lowered my will, she might come at
me again—and I didn't think I had anything, even the quickest
evocations, that I could get out of my mouth before she tore it off
of my head. And even if I got past her, she probably had mortal
lackies, like the security guard at the gate, who would be happy
to kill me if they saw me trashing their mistress.
"You killed her," the vampire snarled, and its voice was exactly
the same, sultry and feminine, even though twisted by rage and
coming from that horrid mouth. It was unsettling. "You killed
Jennifer. She was mine, mageling."
"Look," I told her. "I didn't come here for any of this. And the
police know I'm here. Save yourself a lot of trouble. Sit down, talk
with me, and then we'll both go away happy. Christ, Bianca, do
you think that if I'd killed Jennifer and Tommy Tomm that I'd
just be waltzing in here like this?"
"You expect me to believe that you didn't? You will never leave
this house alive."
I was feeling angry myself, and frightened. Christ, even the 
vampire thought I was the bad guy. "What'll it take to convince
you that I didn't do it?"
Black, bottomless eyes stared at me through the burning fire of
my faith. I could feel some sort of power there, trying to get at
me, and held off by the force of my will, just as the creature itself
was. The vampire snarled, "Lower the amulet, wizard."
"If I do, are you going to come at my throat again?"
"If you do not, I most certainly will."
Shaky logic, that. I tried to work through the situation from
her point of view. She had been scared when I showed up. She'd
had me searched and divested of weapons as best she could. If
she thought that I was Jennifer Stanton's murderer, would the
mere mention of that name have brought that sudden violence
out of her? I began to get that sinking feeling you get when you
realize that not everything is as it appears.
"If I put this down," I told her, "I want your word that you'll sit
down and talk to me. I swear to you, by fire and wind, that I had

nothing to do with her death."
The vampire hissed at me, shielding its eyes from the light
with one taloned hand. "Why should I believe you?"
"Why should I believe you!" I countered.
Yellowed fangs showed in its mouth. "If you do not trust my
word, wizard, then how can I trust yours?"
"Then you give it?"
The vampire stiffened, and though its voice was still harsh with
rage and pain, still sexy as a silk shirt without any buttons, I
thought I heard the ring of truth in its words. "You have my
promise. Lower your talisman, and we will talk."
Time for another calculated risk. I tossed the pentacle onto the
table. The cold light drained away, leaving the room lit by mere
electricity once more.
The vampire slowly lowered its arms, blinking its too-big eyes
at me and then at the pentacle upon the table. A long, pink
tongue flickered out nervously over its jaws and lower face, then
slipped back into its mouth. It was surprised, I realized.
Surprised that I had done it.
My heart was racing, but I forced my fear back down out of my
forebrain and into the background. Vampires are like demons,
like wolves, like sharks. You don't let them think that you are
potential food and get their respect at the same time. The
vampire's true appearance was grotesque—but it wasn't as bad
as some of the things I had seen in my day. Some demons were a
lot worse, and some of the Elder Things could rip your mind
apart just by letting you look at them. I regarded the creature
with a level gaze.
"How about it?" I said. "Let's talk. The longer we sit around
staring at one another, the longer Jennifer's killer stays free."
The vampire stared at me for a moment more. Then it
shuddered, drawing its wing membranes about itself. Black
slime turned into patches of pale, perfect flesh that spread over
the vampire's dark skin like a growth of fungus. The flabby black
breasts swelled into softly rounded, rosy-tipped perfection once
more.
Bianca stood before me a moment later, settling her dress back

into modesty again, her arms crossed over her as though she was
cold, her back stiff and her eyes angry. She was no less beautiful
than she had been a few moments before, not a line or a curve
any different. But for me, the glamour had been ruined. She still
had the same eyes, dark and fathomless and alien. I would
always remember what she truly looked like, beneath her flesh
mask.
I stooped and picked up my chair, righting it. Then I went
around the table, turned my back on her, and stood hers up as
well. Then I held it out for her, just as I had when I had entered
the room.
She stared at me for a long minute. Some expression flickered
across her face. She was disconcerted by my apparent lack of
concern about the way she looked, and it told. Then she lifted her
chin, proud, and settled gracefully into the chair again, regal as
any queen, every line stiff with anger. The Old World rules of
courtesy and hospitality were holding—but for how long?
I returned to my seat and leaned over to pick up my white
handkerchief, toying with it. Bianca's angry eyes flickered down
to it, and once again she repeated the nervous gesture of licking
her teeth and lips, though this time her tongue looked human.
"So. Tell me about Jennifer and Tommy Tomm," I said.
She shook her head, almost sneering. "I can tell you what I told
the police. I don't know who could have killed them."
"Come on, Bianca. We don't have to hide things from one
another. We're not a part of the mortal world."
Her eyebrows slanted down, revealing more anger. "No. You're
the only one in the city with the kind of skill required to cast that
sort of spell. If you didn't do it, I have no idea who else could
have."
"You don't have any enemies? Anyone who might have been
wanting to make an impression on you?"
A bitter little line appeared at the corner of her lips, something
that was not quite a smile. "Of course. But none of them could
have managed what happened to Tommy and Jenny." She
drummed her fingernails over the tabletop, leaving little score
marks in the wood. "I don't let any enemies that dangerous run
around alive. At least, not for long."

I settled back in my chair, frowning, and did my damnedest
not to let her see how scared I was. "How did you know Tommy
Tomm?"
She shrugged, her shoulders gleaming like porcelain, and just
as brittle. "You may have thought he was just a bruiser for
Johnny Marcone, Mister Dresden. But Tommy was a very gentle
and considerate man, underneath. He was always good to his
women. He treated them like real people." Her gaze shifted from
side to side, not lifting. "Like human beings. I wouldn't take on a
client if I thought he wouldn't be a gentleman, but Tommy was
better than most. I met him years ago, elsewhere. I always made
sure he had someone to take care of him when he wanted an
evening of company."
"You sent Jennifer out to him that night?"
She nodded, her expression bleak. Her nails drummed the
tabletop again, gouging out more wood.
"Was there anyone else he saw on a regular basis? Maybe
someone who would have talked to him, known what was going
on in his life?"
Bianca shook her head. "No," she said. But then she frowned.
I just watched her, and absently tossed the handkerchief on the
tabletop. Her eyes flicked to it, then up to mine.
I didn't flinch. I met her bottomless gaze and quirked my
mouth up in a little smile, as though I had something more, and
worse, to pull out of my hat if she wanted to come after me
again. I saw her anger, her rage, and for just a moment I got a
peek inside, saw the source of it. She was furious that I had seen
her true form, horrified and embarrassed that I had stripped her
disguise away and seen the creature beneath. And she was afraid
that I could take away even her mask, forever, with my power.
More than anything else, Bianca wanted to be beautiful. And
tonight, I had destroyed her illusion. I had rattled her gilded
little world. She sure as hell wasn't going to let me forget that.
She shuddered and jerked her eyes away, furious and
frightened at the same time, before I could see any deeper into
her—or she into me. "If I had not given you my word, Dresden,"
she whispered, "I would kill you this instant."

"That would be unfortunate," I said. I kept my voice hard. "You
should know the risks in a wizard's death curse. You've got
something to lose, Bianca. And even if you could take me out,
you can bet your pretty ass I'd be dragging you into hell with
me."
She stiffened, then turned her head to one side, and let her
fingers go limp. It was a silent, bitter surrender. She didn't move
quickly enough for me to miss seeing a tear streak down one
cheek.
I'd made the vampire cry. Great. I felt like a real superhero.
Harry Dresden, breaker of monsters' hearts.
"There may be one person who might know something," she
said, her lovely voice dull, flat, lifeless. "I had a woman who
worked for me. Linda Randall. She and Jennifer went out on calls
together, when customers wanted that sort of thing. They were
close."
"Where is she now?" I asked.
"She's working as a driver for someone. Some rich couple who
wanted a servant that would do more than windows. She wasn't
the type I usually keep around in any case. I think Jennifer had
her phone number. I can have someone fetch it for you, Mister
Dresden." She said my name as though it were something bitter
and poisonous that she wanted to spit out.
"Thank you. That would be very kind." I kept my tone carefully
formal, neutral. Formality and a good bluff were all that was
keeping her from my throat.
She remained quiet, controlling her evident emotions, before
she started to look up again, at last. Her eyes froze, then widened
when they came to my throat. Her expression went perfectly,
inhumanly still.
I grew tense. Not just tense, but steel-tight, wire-bound,
spring-coiled. I was out of tricks and weapons. If she came after
me now, I wasn't going to get the chance to defend myself. There
was no way I would be able to drink the potion before she tore
me apart. I gripped the arms of my chair hard, to keep myself
from bolting. Do not show fear. Do not run away. It would only
make her chase me, snap her instincts into the reaction of
pursuing the prey.

"You're bleeding, Mister Dresden," she whispered.
I lifted my hand, slowly, to my throat, where her nails had
scored me, earlier. My fingertips came away slick with my own
blood.
Bianca kept on staring. Her tongue flickered around her mouth
again. "Cover it," she whispered. A strange, mewling sound came
out of her mouth. "Cover it, Dresden."
I picked up my handkerchief, and pressed it over my throat.
Bianca blinked her eyes closed, slowly, and then, turned away,
half-hunched over her stomach. She didn't stand up.
"Go," she told me. "Go now. Paula's coming. I'll send her down
to the gate with the phone number in a little while."
I walked toward the door, but then stopped, glancing back at
her. There was a sort of horrid fascination to it, to knowing what
was beneath the alluring exterior, the flesh mask, but seeing it
twist and writhe with need.
"Go," Bianca whimpered. Fury, hunger, and some emotion I
couldn't even begin to fathom made her voice stretched out,
thinner. "Go. And do not think that I will not remember this
night. Do not think that I will not make you regret it."
The door to the library opened, and the straight-haired young
woman who had greeted me earlier entered the room. She gave
me a passing glance, then walked past me, kneeling at Bianca's
side. Paula, I presumed.
Paula murmured something too soft to hear, gently brushing
Bianca's hair back from her face with one hand. Then she
unbuttoned the sleeve of her blouse, rolled it up past her elbow,
and pressed her wrist to Bianca's mouth.
I had a good view of what happened. Bianca's tongue flashed
out, long and pink and sticky, smearing Paula's wrist with
shining saliva. Paula shuddered at the touch, her breath coming
quicker. Her nipples stiffened beneath the thin fabric of the
blouse, and she let her head fall slowly backwards. Her eyes were
glazed over with a narcotic languor, like a junkie who had just
shot up.
Bianca's fangs extended and slashed open Paula's pale, pretty
skin. Blood welled. Bianca's tongue began to flash in and out,

faster than could really be seen, lapping the blood up as quickly
as it appeared. Her dark eyes were narrowed, distant. Paula was
gasping and moaning in pleasure, her entire body shivering.
I felt a little sick and withdrew step by step, not turning my
back on the scene. Paula toppled slowly to the floor, writhing her
way toward unconsciousness with an evident glee. Bianca
followed her down, unladylike now, a creature of bestial hunger.
She crouched over the supine woman, and in the hunch of her
pale shoulders I could see the batlike thing beneath the flesh
mask, lapping up Paula's blood.
I got out of there, fast, shutting the door behind me. My heart
was hammering, too quickly. The scene with Paula might have
aroused me, if I hadn't seen what was underneath Bianca's mask.
Instead, it only made me sick to my stomach, afraid. The woman
had given herself to that thing, as quickly and as willingly as any
woman to her lover.
The saliva, some part of me rationalized, desperate to latch on
to something cold and logical and detached. The saliva was
probably narcotic, perhaps even addictive. It would explain
Paula's behavior, the need to have more of her drug. But I
wondered if Paula would have been so eager, had she known
Bianca's true face.
Now I understood why the White Council was so hard-nosed
with vampires. If they could get that kind of control over a
mortal, what would happen if they could get their hooks into a
wizard? If they could addict a wizard to them as thoroughly as
Bianca had the girl I'd just seen? Surely, it wasn't possible.
But if it wasn't, why would the Council be so nervous about
them?
Do not think I will not make you regret it, she had said.
I felt cold as I hurried down the dark driveway toward the gate.
Fido the security guard was waiting for me at the front gate,
and passed back my knife and my cane without a word. A tow
truck was out front, latching itself to the Beetle. I put one hand
on the cold metal of the gate and kept the other, with its
handkerchief, pressed to my throat, as I watched George the
tow-truck guy work. He recognized me and waved, flashing a
grin that showed the white teeth in his dark face. I nodded back.

I wasn't up to answering the smile.
A few minutes later, the guard's cellular phone beeped at him.
He withdrew several paces, repeated several affirmatives, then
took a notebook from his pocket, writing something down. He
put the phone away and walked back over to me, offering me the
piece of paper.
"What's this?" I said.
"The phone number you were looking for. And a message."
I glanced at the paper, but avoided reading it just then. "I
thought Bianca was going to send Paula down with it."
He didn't say anything. But his jaw tightened, and I saw his
eyes flick toward the house, where his mistress was. He
swallowed. Paula wasn't coming out of the house, and Fido was
afraid.
I took the paper. I kept my hand from shaking as I looked at it.
On it was a phone number. And a single word: Regret.
I folded the piece of paper in half and put it away into the
pocket of my duster. Another enemy. Super. At least with my
hands in my pockets, Fido couldn't see them shaking. Maybe I
should have listened to Murphy. Maybe I should have stayed
home and played with some nice, safe, forbidden black magic
instead.
Chapter Ten
I departed Bianca's place in George's loaner, a wood-panel
Studebaker that grumbled and growled and squealed everywhere
it went. I stopped at a pay phone, a short distance from the
house, and called Linda Randall's number.
The phone rang several times before a quiet, dusky contralto
answered, "Beckitts', this is Linda."
"Linda Randall?" I asked.
"Mmmm," she answered. She had a furry, velvety voice,
something tactile. "Who's this?"
"My name is Harry Dresden. I was wondering if I could talk to
you."

"Harry who?" she asked.
"Dresden. I'm a private investigator."
She laughed, the sound rich enough to roll around naked in.
"Investigating my privates, Mr. Dresden? I like you already."
I coughed. "Ah, yes. Ms. Randall—"
"Miss," she said, cutting in. "Miss Randall. I'm not occupied.
At the moment."
"Miss Randall," I amended. "I'd like to ask you some questions
about Jennifer Stanton, if I could."
Silence on the other end of the line. I could hear some sounds
in the background, a radio playing, perhaps, and a recorded
voice talking about white zones and red zones and loading and
unloading of vehicles.
"Miss Randall?"
"No," she said.
"It won't take long. And I assure you that you aren't the subject
of anything I'm doing. If you could just give me a few moments
of your time."
"No," she told me. "I'm on duty, and will be the rest of the
night. I don't have time for this."
"Jennifer Stanton was a friend of yours. She's been murdered.
If there's anything you could tell me that might help—"
She cut me off again. "There isn't," she said. "Good-bye, Mr.
Dresden."
The line went dead.
I scowled at the phone, frustrated. That was it, then. I had
gone through all the preparation, the face-off with Bianca, and
possible future trouble for nothing.
No way, I thought. No way in hell.
Bianca had said that Linda Randall was working as a driver for
someone, the Beckitts, I presumed, whoever they were. I'd
recognized the voice in the background as a recorded message
that played outside the concourses at O'Hare airport. So she was
in a car at the airport, maybe waiting to pick up the Beckitts,
and definitely not there for long.

With no time to lose, I kicked the wheezing old Studebaker
into gear and drove to O'Hare. It was far easier to blow off
someone over the phone than it was to do it in person. There
were several concourses, but I had to trust to luck—luck to guide
me to the right one, and luck to get me there before Miss
I-am-not-occupied Randall had the opportunity to pick up her
employers and leave. And a little more luck to keep the
Studebaker running all the way to O'Hare.
The Studebaker did make it all the way there, and on the
second concourse I came across a silver baby limo, idling in a
parking zone. The interior was darkened, so I couldn't see inside
very well. It was a Friday evening, and the place was busy,
business folk in their sober suits returning home from long trips
about the country. Cars continually purred in and out of the
semicircular drive. A uniformed cop was directing traffic,
keeping people from doing brainless things like parking in the
middle of one of the traffic lanes in order to load up the car.
I swerved the old Studebaker into a parking place, racing a
Volvo for it and winning by dint of driving the older and heavier
vehicle and having the more suicidal attitude. I kept an eye on
the silver limo as I got out of the car and strode over to a bank of
pay phones. I plopped my quarter in, and once more dialed the
number provided by Bianca.
The phone rang. In the silver limo, someone stirred.
"Beckitts', this is Linda," she purred.
"Hello, Linda," I said. "This is Harry Dresden again."
I could almost hear her smirk. There was a flicker of light from
inside the car, the silhouette of a woman's face, then the orange
glow of a cigarette being lit. "I thought I told you I didn't want to
talk to you, Mr. Dresden."
"I like women who play hard to get."
She laughed that delicious laugh. I could see her head move in
the darkened car when she did. "I'm getting harder to get by the
second. Good-bye again." She hung up on me.
I smiled, hung up the phone, walked over to the limo, and
rapped on the window.
It buzzed down, and a woman in her mid-twenties arched an

eyebrow at me. She had beautiful eyes the color of rain clouds, a
little too much eye shadow, and brilliant scarlet lipstick on her
cupid's-bow lips. Her hair was a medium brown, drawn back
into a tight braid that made her cheeks look almost sharp,
severe, except for her forelocks, which hung down close to her
eyes in insolent disarray. She had a predatory look to her, harsh,
sharp. She wore a crisp white shirt, grey slacks, and held a lit
cigarette in one hand. The smoke curled up around my nose, and
I exhaled, trying to push it away.
She looked me up and down, frankly assessing. "Don't tell me.
Harry Dresden."
"I really need to talk to you, Miss Randall. It won't take long."
She glanced at her watch and then at the terminal doors. Then
back up at me. "Well. You've got me cornered, don't you? I'm at
your mercy." Her lips quirked. She took a drag of her cigarette.
"And I like a man who just won't stop."
I cleared my throat again. The woman was attractive, but not
unduly so. Yet there was something about her that revved my
engines, something about the way she held her head or shaped
her words that bypassed my brain and went straight to my
hormones. Best to head directly to the point and minimize my
chances of looking moronic. "How did you know Jennifer
Stanton?"
She looked up at me through long lashes. "Intimately."
Ahem. "You, uh. Worked for Bianca with her."
Linda blew more smoke. "That prissy little bitch. Yes, I worked
with Jen. We were even roommates for a while. Shared a bed."
She wrapped her lips around the last word, drawing it out with a
little tremor that dripped wicked, secret laughter.
"Did you know Tommy Tomm?" I asked.
"Oh, sure. Fantastic in bed." She lowered her eyes and shifted
on the car's seat, lowering one of her hands out of sight, and
making me wonder where it had gone. "He was a regular
customer. Maybe twice a month Jen and I would go over to his
place, have a little party." She leaned toward me. "He could do
things to a woman that would turn her into a real animal, Harry
Dresden. You know what I mean? Growling and snarling. In
heat."

She was driving me crazy. That voice of hers inspired the kinds
of dreams you wish you could remember more clearly in the
morning. Her expression promised to show me things that you
don't talk about with other people, if I would give her half a
chance. Your job, Harry. Think about your job.
Some days I really hate my job.
"When was the last time you talked to her?"
She took another drag, and this time I saw a small shake to her
fingers, one she quickly hid. Just not quickly enough. She was
nervous. Nervous enough to be shaking, and now I could see
what she was up to. She was wearing the alley-cat mask,
appealing to my glands instead of my brain, and trying to
distract me with it, trying to keep me from finding something
out.
I'm not inhuman. I can be distracted by a pretty face, or body,
like any other youngish man. Linda Randall was damned good at
playing the part. But I do not like to be made the fool.
So, Miss Sex Goddess. What are you hiding?
I cleared my throat, and asked, mildly, "When was the last
time you spoke to Jennifer Stanton, Miss Randall?"
She narrowed her eyes at me. She wasn't dumb, whatever else
she was. She'd seen me reading her, seeing through her pretense.
The flirting manner vanished. "Are you a cop?" she demanded.
I shook my head. "Scout's honor. I'm just trying to find out
what happened to her."
"Dammit," she said, softly. She flicked the butt of the cigarette
out onto the concrete and blew out a mouthful of smoke. "Look. I
tell you anything and see a cop coming around, I never saw you
before. Got it?"
I nodded.
"I talked to Jen on Wednesday evening. She called me. It was
Tommy's birthday. She wanted to get together again." Her
mouth twisted. "Sort of a reunion."
I glanced about and leaned down closer to her. "Did you?"
Her eyes were roving about now, nervous, like a cat who has
found herself shut into a small room. "No," she said. "I had to

work. I wanted to, but—"
"Did she say anything unusual? Anything that might have
made you suspect she was in danger?"
She shook her head again. "No, nothing. We hadn't talked
much for a while. I didn't see her as much after I split from the
Velvet Room."
I frowned at her. "Do you know what else she was doing?
Anything she might have been involved with that could have
gotten her hurt?"
She shook her head. "No, no. Nothing like that. That wasn't her
style. She was sweet. A lot of girls get like—They get pretty jaded,
Mr. Dresden. But it never really touched her. She made people
feel better about themselves somehow." She looked away. "I
could never do that. All I did was get them off."
"There's nothing you can tell me? Nothing you can think of?"
She pressed her lips together and shook her head. She shook
her head, and she lied to me as she did it. I was just sure of it.
She was closing in, tightening up, and if there was nothing to tell
me, she wouldn't be trying to hide it. She must know
something—unless she was just shutting down because I'd
stomped all over her feelings, as I had Bianca's. Either way, she
wasn't telling me anything else.
I tightened my fist, frustrated. If Linda Randall had no
information for me, I was at a dead end. And I'd romped all over
another woman's feelings—two in one night. You are on a roll,
Dresden. Even if one of them had been something not-human.
"Why," I asked her, the words slipping out before I thought
about them. "Why the slut act?"
She looked up at me again, and smirked. I saw the subtle
shifting in her, magnifying that sort of animal appeal she had,
once more, as she had been doing when I first approached
her—but it didn't hide the self-loathing in her eyes. I looked
away, quickly, before I had to see any more of it. I got the feeling
that I didn't want to see Linda Randall's soul. "Because it's what
I do, Mr. Dresden. For some people it's drugs. Booze. For me,
orgasms. Sex. Passion. Just another addict. City's full of them."
She glanced aside. "Next best thing to love. And it keeps me in
work. Excuse me."

She swung open the door. I took a quick step back and out of
her way as she moved to the back of the limo, long legs taking
long steps, and opened the trunk.
A tall couple, both wearing glasses and dressed in stylish grey
business clothes emerged from the terminal and approached the
limo. They had the look of lifestyle professionals, the kind that
have a career and no kids, with enough money and time to spend
on making themselves look good—a NordicTrack couple. He was
carrying an overnight bag over his shoulder and a small suitcase
in one hand, while she bore only a briefcase. They wore no
jewelry, not even watches or wedding rings. Odd.
The man slung the luggage items into the limo's trunk and
looked from Linda to me. Linda avoided his eyes. He tried to
speak quietly enough not to be heard, but I have good ears.
"Who's this?" he asked. His voice had a strained note to it.
"Just a friend, Mr. Beckitt. A guy I used to see," she answered
him.
More lies. More interesting.
I looked across the limo to the woman, presumably Mrs.
Beckitt. She regarded me with a calm face, entirely void of
emotion. It was a little spooky. She had the look I'd seen in films,
on the faces of prisoners released from the German stalags at the
end of World War II. Empty. Numb. Dead, and just didn't know
it yet.
Linda opened the back door and let Mr. and Mrs. Beckitt into
the car. Mrs. Beckitt briefly put a hand on Linda's waist in
passing, a gesture that was too intimate and possessive for the
hired help. I saw Linda shiver, then close the door. She walked
back around the car to me.
"Get out of here," she said, quietly. "I don't want to get in any
trouble with my boss."
I reached for her hand, grabbed it, and held it between both of
mine, as an old lover might, I supposed. My business card was
pressed between our palms. "My card. If you think of anything
else, give me a call. Okay?"
She turned away from me without answering, but the card
vanished into a pocket before she got back into the limo.

Mrs. Beckitt's dead eyes watched me through the side window
as the limo went by me. It was my turn to shiver. Like I said,
spooky.
I went on into the airport. The monitors displaying flight times
flickered to fuzz when I walked by. I went to one of the cafes
inside, sat down, and ordered myself a cup of coffee. I had to pay
for it with change. Most of my money had gone into paying off
last month's rent and into the love potion I'd let Bob talk me into
making. Money. I needed to get to work on Monica Sells's case,
finding her husband. I didn't want to get out of hot water with
the White Council only to lose my office and apartment because I
couldn't pay the bills.
I sipped coffee and tried to organize my thoughts. I had two
areas of concern. The most important was finding who had killed
Tommy Tomm and Jennifer Stanton. Not only to catch the killer
before any more corpses turned up, but because if I didn't, the
White Council would probably use the opportunity to have me
put to death.
And, while tracking down killers and avoiding execution
squads, I had to do some work for someone who would pay me.
Tonight's excursion wasn't something I could charge Murphy
for—she'd have my ass in a sling if she knew I was running
around asking questions, poking my nose in where it shouldn't
be. So, if I wanted money from Chicago P.D., I would have to
spend time doing the research Murphy wanted—the black-magic
research that could get me killed all by itself.
Or, I could work on Monica Sells's missing husband case. I
thought I had that one pretty well pegged down, but it wouldn't
hurt to get it fleshed out fully. I could spend time working on it,
fill out the hours on the retainer, maybe even get a few more
added on. That appealed to me a lot more than trying to work
out some black magic.
So, I could follow up on the lead Toot-toot had given me.
There'd been pizza delivered out to the Lake Providence home
that night. Time to talk to the deliveryman, if possible.
I left the cafe, went out to the pay phones, and dialed directory
assistance. There was only one place near the Lake Providence
address that delivered pizza. I got the number and dialed
through.

"Pizza 'Spress," someone with his mouth full said. "What'll it
be tonight?"
"Hey there," I said. "I wonder if you can help me out. I'm
looking for the driver who took an order out to an address on
Wednesday night." I told him the address, and asked if I could
speak to the driver.
"Another one," he snorted. "Sure, hang on. Jack just got in
from a run." The voice on the other end of the line called out to
someone, and a minute later the high baritone of a young man
spoke tentatively into my ear.
"H-hello?"
"Hello," I answered. "Are you the driver who took pizza to—"
"Look," he said, his voice exasperated and nervous. "I said I
was sorry already. It won't happen again."
I blinked for a minute, off balance. "Sorry for what?"
"Jeezus," he said. I heard him move across a room, with a lot of
music and loud talk in the background, and then the background
noise cut off, as though he had stepped into another room and
shut the door behind him. "Look," he said in a half whine. "I told
you I'm not gonna say anything to anyone. I was only looking.
You can't blame me, right? No one answered the door, what was
I supposed to do?" His voice cracked in the middle of his
sentences. "Hell of a party, but hey. That's your business. Right?"
I struggled to keep up with the kid. "What, exactly, did you see,
Jack?" I asked him.
"No one's face," he assured me, his voice growing more
nervous. He gave a jittery little laugh and tried to joke. "Better
things to look at than faces, right? I mean, I don't give a damn
what you do in your own house. Or your friends, or whoever.
Don't worry about me. Never going to say a thing. Next time I'll
just leave the pizza and run a tab, right?"
Friends, plural. Interesting. The kid was awfully nervous. He
must have gotten an eyeful. But I had a gut instinct that he was
hiding something else, keeping it back.
"What else?" I asked him. I kept my voice calm and neutral.
"You saw something else. What was it?"
"None of my business," he said, instantly. "None of my

business. Look, I gotta get off this line. We have to keep it open
for orders. It's Friday night, we're busy as hell."
"What," I said, separating my words, keeping them clipped,
"else?"
"Oh, shit," he breathed, his voice shaking. "Look, I wasn't with
that guy. Didn't know anything about him. I didn't tell him you
were having an orgy out there. Honest. Jeezus, mister, I don't
want any trouble."
Victor Sells seemed to have a real good idea of how to
party—and of how to frighten teenagers. "One more question,
and I'll let this go," I told him. "Who was it you saw? Tell me
about him."
"I don't know. I don't know him, didn't recognize him. Some
guy, with a camera, that's all. I went around the back of the
house to try the back door, got up on your deck, and just saw
inside. I didn't keep on looking. But he was up there, all in black,
with this camera, taking pictures." He paused as someone
pounded on the door he had closed earlier. "Oh, God, I have to
go, mister. I don't know you. I don't know nothing." And then
there was a scrambling of feet, and he hung up the phone.
I hung up the phone myself and ambled back to George's
loaner. I worked out the details I had just learned on the way
back to my apartment.
Someone else had called Pizza 'Spress, evidently just before I
had. Someone else had gone asking after the pizza boy. Who?
Why, Victor Sells, of course. Tracing down people who might
have information about him, his possible presence in the lake
house. Victor Sells, who had been having some sort of
get-together out there that night. Maybe he'd been drunk, or one
of his guests had, and ordered the pizza—and now Victor was
trying to cover his tracks.
Which implied that Victor knew someone was looking for him.
Hell, as far as I knew, he'd been in the house when I'd gone out
there last night. This made things a lot more interesting. A
missing man who doesn't want to be found could get dangerous
if someone came snooping after him.
And a photographer? Someone lurking around outside of
windows and taking pictures? I rummaged in my duster pocket

and felt the round plastic film canister. That explained where the
canister had come from, at any rate. But why would someone be
out there at the house, taking pictures of Victor and his friends?
Maybe because Monica had hired someone else, a PI, without
telling me. Maybe just a neighbor with the hots for taking dirty
pictures. No way to tell, really. More mysteries.
I pulled the Studebaker into my drive and killed the engine. I
tallied the score for the evening. Enigmas: lots. Harry: zero.
My investigation for Monica Sells had netted me one husband
throwing wild parties in his beach house after losing his job, and
working hard not to be found. Probably an advanced case of
male menopause. Monica didn't seem to be the kind of woman
who would take such a thing with good grace—more like the kind
who would close her eyes and call me a liar if I told her the truth.
But at least it merited a little more looking into—I could log a
few more hours in on the case, maybe earn some more money
out of it before I gave her the bill. But I still didn't really know
anything.
The angle with Bianca had come to a dead end at Linda
Randall. All I had were more questions for Miss Randall, and she
was as closed as a bank on Sunday. I didn't have anything solid
enough to hand to Murphy to let her pursue the matter.
Dammit. I was going to have to do that research after all. Maybe
it would turn up something helpful, some kind of clue to help
lead me and the police to the murderer.
And maybe dragons would fly out my butt. But I had to try.
So I got out of the car to go inside and get to work.
He was waiting for me behind the trash cans that stood next to
the stairs leading down to my front door. The baseball bat he
swung at me took me behind the ear and pitched me to the
bottom of the stairs in a near-senseless heap. I could hear his
footsteps, but couldn't quite move, as he came down the stairs
toward me.
It figured. It was just the kind of day I was having.
I felt his foot on the back of my neck. Felt him lift the baseball
bat. And then it came whistling down toward my skull with a
mighty crack of impact.
Except that it missed my motionless head, and whacked into

the concrete next to my face, right by my eyes, instead.
"Listen up, Dresden," my attacker said. His voice was rough,
low, purposefully hoarse. "You got a big nose. Stop sticking it
where it doesn't belong. You got a big mouth. Stop talking to
people you don't need to talk to. Or we're going to shut that
mouth of yours." He waited a melodramatically appropriate
moment, and then added, "Permanently."
His footsteps retreated up the stairs and vanished.
I just lay there watching the stars in front of my eyes for a
while. Mister appeared from somewhere, probably drawn by the
groaning noises, and started licking at my nose.
I eventually regained my mobility and sat up. My head was
spinning, and I felt sick to my stomach. Mister rubbed up
against me, as though he sensed something was wrong, purring
in a low rumble. I managed to stand up long enough to unlock
my apartment door, let Mister and myself in, and lock it behind
me. I staggered over to my easy chair in the darkness and sat
down with a whuff of expelled breath.
I sat motionless until the spinning slowed down enough to
allow me to open my eyes again, and until the pounding of my
head calmed down. Pounding head. Someone could have been
pounding on my head with a baseball bat just then, pounding my
head into new and interesting shapes that were inconducive to
carrying on businesslike pursuits. Someone could have been
pounding Harry Dresden right into the hereafter.
I cut off that line of thought. "You are not some poor rabbit,
Dresden!" I reminded myself, sternly. "You are a wizard of the
old school, a spellslinger of the highest caliber. You're not going
to roll over for some schmuck with a baseball bat because he tells
you to!"
Galvanized by the sound of my own voice, or maybe only by the
somewhat unsettling realization that I had begun talking to
myself, I stood up and built up the fire in the fireplace, then
walked unsteadily back and forth in front of it, trying to think, to
work out the details.
Had this evening's visits triggered the warning? Who had
reason to threaten me? What were they trying to keep me from
finding? And, most importantly, what was I going to do about it?

Someone had seen me talking to Linda Randall, maybe. Or,
more likely, someone had seen me showing up at Bianca's place,
asking questions. The Blue Beetle may not be glitzy, but it is sort
of difficult to mistake for anyone else's car. Who would have
reason to have me watched?
Why, hadn't Gentleman Johnny Marcone followed me so that
he could have a word with me? So he could ask me to keep out of
this business with Tommy Tomm's murder? Yes he had. Maybe
this had been another reminder from the mob boss. It had that
kind of mafioso feel to it.
I staggered to my kitchenette and fixed myself a tisane tea for
the headache, then added in some aspirin. Herbal remedies are
well and good, but I don't like to take chances.
Working on that same principle, I got my Smith & Wesson .38
Chief's Special out of its drawer, took the cloth covering off of it,
and made sure it was loaded. Then I stuck the revolver in my
jacket pocket.
Wizardry aside, it's tough to beat a gun for discouraging men
with baseball bats. And I sure as hell wasn't going to roll over for
the tiger-souled Johnny Marcone, let him push me around, let
him know that it was all right to walk all over me whenever he
felt like it. No way in hell or on earth, either.
My head was throbbing, and my hands were shaking, but I
went down the ladder to my workroom—and started figuring out
how to rip someone's heart out of his chest from fifty miles away.
Who says I never do anything fun on a Friday night?
Chapter Eleven
It took me the rest of the night and part of the morning, but I
worked out how I could murder someone in the same manner
that Tommy Tomm and Jennifer Stanton had been killed. After
the fifth or sixth time I'd checked the figures, I stared at my
calculations.
It didn't make any sense. It was impossible.
Or maybe we were all underestimating just how dangerous this
killer was.
I grabbed my duster, and headed out without bothering to

check my looks. I don't keep any mirrors in my home. Too many
things can use mirrors as windows—or doors—but I was pretty
sure I looked like a wreck. The Studebaker's rearview mirror
confirmed this. My face was haggard, with a shadow of a beard,
deep circles under bloodshot eyes, and hair that looked as
though it had been riding a speeding motorcycle through a cloud
of greasy smoke. Smoothing your hair back with sweaty palms as
a study habit will do that to you. Especially if you do it for twelve
or fourteen hours straight.
It didn't matter. Murphy wanted this information, and she
needed to have it. Things were bad. They were very, very bad!
I made quick time down to the station, knowing Murphy would
want to hear this from me face-to-face. The police station
Murphy worked in was one in an aged complex of buildings that
housed the metro police department. It was run-down, sagging
in places like an old soldier who nonetheless stood at attention
and struggled to hold in his gut. There was graffiti along one wall
that the janitor wouldn't come to scrub off until Monday
morning.
I parked in the visitors' parking—easy to do on a Saturday
morning—and headed up the steps and into the building. The
desk sergeant wasn't the usual mustached old warhorse who I
had run into before, but a greying matron with steely eyes who
disapproved of me and my lifestyle in a single glance, then made
me wait while she called up Murphy.
While I waited, a pair of officers came in, dragging a
handcuffed man between them. He wasn't resisting them—just
the opposite, in fact. His head was down, and he was moaning in
an almost musical way. He was on the thin side, and I got the
impression that he was young. His denim jeans and jacket were
battered, unkempt, as was his hair. The officers dragged him
past the desk, and one of them said, "That DUI we called in.
We're going to take him up to holding until he can see straight."
The desk sergeant passed a clipboard over, and one of the
officers took it under his arm, before the two of them dragged
the young man up the stairs. I waited, rubbing at my tired eyes,
until the sergeant managed to get through to someone upstairs.
She gave a rather surprised "Hmph," and then said, "All right,
Lieutenant. I'll send him on up." She waved a hand at me to go

on past. I could feel her eyes on me as I went by, and I smoothed
my palm self-consciously over my head and jaw.
Special Investigations kept a little waiting area just within the
door at the top of the staircase. It consisted of four wooden
chairs and a sagging old couch that would probably kill your
back if you tried to sleep on it. Murphy's office was at the end of
a double row of cubicles.
Murphy stood just inside her office with a phone pressed to her
ear, wearing a martyred expression. She looked like a teenager
having a fight with an out-of-town boyfriend, though she'd tear
my head off if she heard me saying any such thing. I waved my
hand, and she nodded back at me. She pointed at the waiting
area, then shut her office door.
I took a seat in one of the chairs and leaned my head back
against a wall. I had just closed my eyes when I heard a scream
from behind me in the hallway. There was a struggling sound,
and a few startled exclamations, before the scream repeated
itself, closer this time.
I acted without thinking—I was too tired to think. I rose and
went into the hall, towards the source of the sound. To my left
was the staircase, and to my right the hallway stretched ahead of
me.
A figure appeared, the silhouette of a running man, moving
toward me with long strides. It was the man who had hung so
limply between the two officers, humming, a few minutes before.
He was the one screaming. I heard a scrabbling sound, and then
the pair of officers I had seen downstairs a few moments before
came around the corner. Neither of them was a young man
anymore, and they both ran with their bellies out, puffing for
breath, holding their gun belts against their hips with one hand.
"Stop!" one of the officers shouted, panting. "Stop that man!"
The hair on the back of my neck prickled. The man running
toward me kept on screaming, high and terrified, his voice a long
and uninterrupted peal of … something. Terror, panic, lust, rage,
all rolled up into a ball and sent spewing out into the air through
his vocal cords.
I had a quick impression of wide, staring eyes, a dirty face, a
denim jacket, and old jeans as he came down the shadowy

hallway. His hands were behind his back, presumably held there
by cuffs. He wasn't seeing the hall he was running through. I
don't know what he was looking at, but I got the impression that
I didn't want to know. He came hurtling toward me and the
stairs, blind and dangerous to himself.
It wasn't any of my business, but I couldn't let him break
himself apart in a tumble down the stairs. I threw myself toward
him as hard as I could, attempting to put my shoulder into his
stomach and drive him backward in a football-style tackle.
There is a reason I got cut every year during high school. I
rammed into him, but he just whuffed out a breath and spun to
one side, into a wall. It was as though he hadn't seen me coming
and had no realization that I was there. He just kept staring
blindly and screaming, careening off the wall and continuing on
his way, toward the stairs. I went down to the floor, my head
abruptly throbbing again where the unknown tough had rapped
me with a baseball bat last night.
One good thing about being as tall as I am—I have long arms. I
rolled back toward him and lashed out with one hand, fingers
clutching. I caught his jeans at the cuff and gave his leg a solid
sideways tug.
That did it. He spun, off-balance, and went down to the tile
floor. The scream stopped as the fall took the wind from him. He
slid to the top of the stairs and stopped, feebly struggling. The
officers pounded past me toward him, one going to either side.
And then something strange happened.
The young man looked up at me, and his eyes rounded and
dilated, until I thought they had turned into huge black coins
dotted onto his bloodshot eyeballs. His eyes rolled back into his
head until he could hardly have been able to see, and he started
to shout in a clarion voice.
"Wizard!" he trumpeted. "Wizard! I see you! I see you, wizard!
I see the things that follow, those who walk before and He Who
Walks Behind! They come, they come for you!"
"Jesus Christ on a crutch," the shorter, rounder officer said, as
they took the man by his arms and started dragging him back
down the hall. "Junkies. Thanks for the assist, buddy."
I stared at the man, stunned. I caught the sleeve of the taller

officer. "What's going on, sir?" I asked him.
He stopped, letting the prisoner hang between him and his
partner. The prisoner's head was bowed forward, and his eyes
were still rolled back, but he had his head turned toward me and
was grinning a horrible, toothy grin. His forehead was wrinkled
oddly, almost as though he were somehow focusing on me
through the bones of his browridges and the frontal lobes of his
brain.
"Junkie," the taller officer said. "One of those new ThreeEye
punks. Caught him down by the lake in his car with nearly four
grams of the stuff. Probably more in him." He shook his head.
"You okay?"
"Fine, fine," I assured him. "ThreeEye? That new drug?"
The shorter officer snorted. "One that's supposed to make
them see the spirit world, that kind of crap."
The taller one nodded. "Stuff hooks harder than crack. Thanks
for the help. Didn't know you were a civilian, though. Didn't
expect anyone but police down here this time of day."
"No problem," I assured him. "I'm fine."
"Hey," the stouter one said. He squinted at me and shook his
finger. "Aren't you the guy? That psychic consultant Carmichael
told me about?"
"I'll take the fifth," I said to him with a grin that I didn't feel.
The two officers chuckled and turned back to their business,
quickly shouldering me aside as they dragged their prisoner
away.
He whispered in a mad little voice, all the way down the hall.
"See you, see you, wizard. See He Who Walks Behind."
I returned to my chair in the waiting area at the end of the row
of cubicles and sat down, my head throbbing, my stomach
rolling uncomfortably. He Who Walks Behind. I had never seen
the junkie before. Never been close to him. I hadn't sensed the
subtle tension of power in the air around him that signified the
presence of a magical practitioner.
So how the hell had he seen the shadow of He Who Walks
Behind flowing in my wake?
For reasons I don't have time to go into now, I am marked,

indelibly, with the remnants of the presence of a hunter-spirit, a
sort of spectral hit man known as He Who Walks Behind. I had
beaten long odds in surviving the enemy of mine who had called
up He Who Walks Behind and sent him after me—but even
though the hunter-spirit had never gotten to me, the mark could
still be seen upon me by those who knew how, by using the Third
Sight, stretching out behind me like a long and horribly shaped
shadow. Sort of a spiritual scar to remind me of the encounter.
But only a wizard had that kind of vision, the ability to sense
the auras and manifestations of magical phenomena. And that
junkie had been no wizard.
Was it possible that I had been wrong in my initial assessment
of ThreeEye? Could the drug genuinely grant to its users the
visions of the Third Sight?
I shuddered at the thought. The kind of things you see when
you learn how to open your Third Eye could be blindingly
beautiful, bring tears to your eyes—or they could be horrible,
things that made your worst nightmares seem ordinary and
comforting. Visions of the past, the future, of the true natures of
things. Psychic stains, troubled shades, spirit-folk of all
description, the shivering power of the Nevernever in all its
brilliant and subtle hues—and all going straight into your brain:
unforgettable, permanent. Wizards quickly learn how to control
the Third Eye, to keep it closed except in times of great need, or
else they go mad within a few weeks.
I shivered. If the drug was real, if it really did open the Third
Eye in mortals instead of just inflicting ordinary hallucinations
upon its users, then it was far more dangerous than it seemed,
even with the deleterious effects demonstrated by the junkie I
had tackled. Even if a user didn't go mad from seeing too many
horrible or otherworldly things, he might see through the
illusions and disguises of any of a number of beings that passed
among mankind regularly, unseen—which could compel such
creatures to act in defense, for fear of being revealed. Double
jeopardy.
"Dresden," Murphy snapped, "wake up."
I blinked. "Not asleep," I slurred. "Just resting my eyes."
She snorted. "Save it, Harry," and pushed a Styrofoam cup into
my hands. She'd made me coffee with a ton of sugar in it, just

the way I like, and even though it was a little stale, it smelled like
heaven.
"You're an angel," I muttered. I took a sip, then nodded down
the row of cubicles. "You want to hear this one in your office."
I could feel her eyes on me as I drank. "All right," she said.
"Let's go. And the coffee's fifty cents, Harry."
I followed her to her office, a hastily assembled thing with
cheap plywood walls and a door that wasn't hung quite straight.
The door had a paper sign taped to it, neatly lettered in black
Magic Marker with LT. KARRIN MURPHY. There was a
rectangle of lighter wood where a plaque had once held some
other hapless policeman's name. That the office never bothered
to put up a fresh plaque was a not-so-subtle reminder of the
precarious position of the Special Investigations director.
Her office furniture, the entire interior of the office, in fact,
was a contrast with the outside. Her desk and chair were sleek,
dark, and new. Her PC was always on and running on its own
desk set immediately to her left. A bulletin board covered most of
one little wall, and current cases were neatly organized on it. Her
college diploma, the aikido trophies, and her marksman's awards
were on the wall to one's immediate right as you entered the
office, and sitting there right next to your face if you were
standing before her desk or sitting in the chair in front of it.
That was Murphy—organized, direct, determined, and just a
little bit belligerent.
"Hold it," Murphy told me. I stopped outside of her office, as I
always did, while she went inside and turned off, then unplugged
her computer and the small radio on her desk. Murphy is used to
the kind of mayhem that happens whenever I get around
machinery. After she was done, I went on in.
I sat down and slurped more coffee. She slid up onto the edge
of her desk, looking down at me, her blue eyes narrowed. She was
dressed no less casually on a Saturday than she was on a
workday—dark slacks, a dark blouse, set off by her golden hair,
and bright silver necklace and earrings. Very stylish. I, in my
rumpled sweats and T-shirt, black duster, and mussed hair, felt
very slouchy.
"All right, Harry," she said. "What have you got for me."

I took one last drink of coffee, stifled a yawn, and put the cup
down on her desk. She slipped a coaster under it as I started
speaking. "I was up all night working on it," I said, keeping my
voice soft. "I had a hell of a time figuring out the spell. And as
near as I can figure it, it's almost impossible to do it to one
person, let alone two at once."
She glared at me. "Don't tell me almost impossible. I've got two
corpses that say otherwise."
"Keep your shirt on," I growled at her. "I'm just getting started.
You've got to understand the whole thing if you're going to
understand any of it."
Her glare intensified. She put her hands on the edge of her
desk, and said in a deadly, reasonable tone, "All right. Why don't
you explain it to me."
I rubbed at my eyes again. "Look. Whoever did this did it with
a thaumaturgic spell. That much I'm sure of. He or she used
some of Tommy Tomm and Jennifer Stanton's hair or fingernails
or something to create a link to them. Then they ripped out a
symbolic heart from some kind of ritual doll or sacrificial animal
and used a whale of an amount of energy to make the same thing
happen to the victims."
"This doesn't tell me anything new, Harry."
"I'm getting there, I'm getting there," I said. "The amount of
energy you need to do this is staggering. It would be a lot easier
to manage a small earthquake than to affect a living being like
that. Best-case scenario, I might be able to do it without killing
myself. To one person who had really, really pissed me off."
"You're naming yourself as a suspect?" Murphy's mouth
quirked at the corner.
I snorted. "I said I was strong enough to do it to one person. I
think it would kill me to try two."
"You're saying that some sort of wizard version of Arnold
Schwarzenegger pulled this off?"
I shrugged. "It's possible, I suppose. More likely, someone
who's just really good pulled it off. Raw power doesn't determine
all that you can do with magic. Focus matters, too. The better
your focus is, the better you are at putting your power in one

place at the same time, the more you can get done. Sort of like
when you see some ancient little Chinese martial-arts master
shatter a tree trunk with his hands. He couldn't lift a puppy over
his head, but he can focus what power he does have with
incredible effect."
Murphy glanced at her aikido trophies and nodded. "Okay,"
she said, "I can understand that, I think. So we're looking for the
wizard version of Mister Miyagi."
"Or," I said, lifting a finger, "more than one wizard worked on
this at the same time. Pooled their power together and used it all
at once." My pounding head, combined with the queasy stomach
and the caffeine, was making me a little woozy. "Teamwork,
teamwork, that's what counts."
"Multiple killers," Murphy drawled. "I don't have one, and
you're telling me there might be fifty."
"Thirteen," I corrected her. "You can never use more than
thirteen. But I don't think that's very likely. It's a bitch to do.
Everyone in the circle has to be committed to the spell, have no
doubts, no reservations. And they have to trust one another
implicitly. You don't see that kind of thing from your average
gang of killers. It just isn't something that's going to happen,
outside of some kind of fanaticism. A cult or political
organization."
"A cult," Murphy said. She rubbed at her eyes. "The Arcane is
going to have a field day with this one, if it gets out. So Bianca is
involved in this, after all. Surely she's got enough enemies out
there who could do this. She could inspire that kind of effort to
get rid of her."
I shook my head. The pain was getting worse, heavier, but
pieces were falling into place. "No. You're thinking the wrong
angle here. The killer wasn't taking out the hooker and Tommy
Tomm to get at Bianca."
"How do you know?"
"I went to see her," I responded.
"Dammit, Harry!"
I didn't react to her anger. "You know she wasn't going to talk
to you, Murph. She's an old-fashioned monster girl. No

cooperation with the authorities."
"But she did talk to you?" Murphy demanded.
"I said pretty please."
"I would beat you to crap if you didn't already look like it,"
Murphy said. "What did you find out?"
"Bianca wasn't in on it. She didn't have a clue who it could
have been. She was nervous, scared." I didn't mention that she'd
been scared enough to try to take me to pieces.
"So someone was sending a message—but not to Bianca?"
"To Johnny Marcone," I confirmed.
"Gang war in the streets," Murphy said. "And now the outfit is
bringing sorcery into it as well. Mafioso magic spells. Jesus
Christ." She drummed her heels on the edge of the desk.
"Gang war. ThreeEye suppliers versus conventional narcotics.
Right?"
She stared at me for a minute. "Yeah," Murphy said. "Yeah, it
is. How did you know? We've been holding out details from the
papers."
"I just ran into this guy who was stoned out of his mind on
ThreeEye. Something he said makes me think that stuff isn't a
bunch of crap. It's for real. And you would have to be one very,
very badass wizard to manufacture a large quantity of this kind
of drug."
Murphy's blue eyes glittered. "So, whoever is the one supplying
the streets with ThreeEye—"
"—is the one who murdered Jennifer Stanton and Tommy
Tomm. I'm pretty sure of it. It feels right."
"I'd tend to agree," Murphy said, nodding. "All right, then.
How many people do you know of who could manage the killing
spell?"
"Christ, Murphy," I said, "you can't ask me to just hand you a
list of names of people to drag downtown for questioning."
She leaned down closer to me, blue eyes fierce. "Wrong, Harry.
I can ask you. I can tell you to give them to me. And if you don't,
I can haul you in for obstruction and complicity so quick it will

make your head spin."
"My head's already spinning," I told her. A little giggle slipped
out. Throbbing head, pound, pound, pound. "You wouldn't do
that, Murph. I know you. You know damned well that if I had
anything you could use, I would give it to you. If you'd just let me
in on the investigation, give me the chance to—"
"No, Harry," she said, her voice flat. "Not a chance. I am ass
deep in alligators already without you getting difficult on me.
You're already hurt, and don't ask me to buy some line about
falling down the stairs. I don't want to have to scrape you off the
concrete. Whoever did Tommy Tomm is going to get nasty when
someone comes poking around, and it isn't your job to do it. It's
mine."
"Suit yourself," I told her. "You're the one with the deadline."
Her face went pale, and her eyes blazed. "You're such an
incredible shit, Harry."
I started to answer her, I really did—but my skull got loose and
shaky on my neck, and things spun around, and my chair sort of
wobbled up onto its back legs and whirled about precariously. I
thought it was probably safest to slide my way along to the floor,
rubbery as a snake. The tiles were nice and cool underneath my
cheek and felt sort of comforting. My head went boom, boom,
boom, the whole time I was down there, spoiling what would
have otherwise been a pleasant little nap.
Chapter Twelve
I woke up on the floor of Murphy's office. The clock on the wall
said that it was about twenty minutes later. Something soft was
underneath my head, and my feet were propped up with several
phone books. Murphy was pressing a cool cloth against my
forehead and throat.
I felt terrible. Exhausted, achy, nauseous, my head throbbing. I
wanted to do nothing so much as curl up and whimper myself to
sleep. Given that I would never live that down, I made a
wisecrack instead. "Do you have a little white dress? I've had this
deep-seated nurse fantasy about you, Murphy."
"A pervert like you would. Who hit your head?" she demanded.

"No one," I mumbled. "Fell down the stairs to my apartment."
"Bullshit, Harry," she said, her voice hard. Her hands were no
less gentle with the cool cloth, though. "You've been running
around on this case. That's where you got the bump on the head.
Isn't it?"
I started to protest.
"Oh, save it," she said, letting out a breath. "If you didn't
already have a concussion, I'd tie your heels to my car and drive
through traffic." She held up two fingers. "How many fingers am
I holding up?"
"Fifty," I said, and held up two of my own. "It's not a
concussion. Just a little bump on the head. I'll be fine." I started
to sit up. I needed to get home, get some sleep.
Murphy put her hand on my neck and pressed me back down
on the pillow beneath my head, which was, apparently, her
jacket, because she wasn't wearing it. "Stay down," she growled.
"How did you get here? Not in that heap of a car, I hope."
"The Beetle is doing its phoenix impression," I told her. "I've
got a loaner. Look, I'll be fine. Just let me out of here, and I'll go
home and get some sleep."
"You aren't in any shape to drive," Murphy said. "You're a
menace. I'd have to arrest myself if I let you behind a wheel in
your condition."
"Murph," I said, annoyed, "unless you can pay up what you owe
me already, right now, I can't exactly afford a cab."
"Dream on, Harry," Murphy said. "And save your breath. I'll
give you a ride home."
"I don't need a—" I began, but she got up from her knees and
stalked out of her office.
Foolishness, I thought. Stupidity. I was perfectly capable of
moving myself around. So I sat up and heaved myself to my feet.
Or tried to. I actually managed to half sit up. And then I just
heaved.
Murphy came back in to find me curled on my side, her office
stinking from where I'd thrown up. She didn't, for a change, say
anything. She just knelt by me again, cleaned off my mouth, and

put another cool cloth over the back of my neck.
I remember her helping me out to her car. I remember little
pieces of the drive back to my apartment. I remember giving her
the keys to the loaner, and mumbling something about Mike and
the tow-truck driver.
But mostly I remember the way her hand felt on mine—cold
with a little bit of nervousness to the soft fingers, small beneath
my great gawking digits, and strong. She scolded and threatened
me the entire way back to the apartment, I think. But I
remember the way she made sure she held my hand, as though
to assure herself that I was still there. Or to assure me that she
was, that she wasn't going anywhere.
There's a reason I'll go out on a limb to help Murphy. She's
good people. One of the best.
We got back to my apartment sometime before noon. Murphy
helped me down the stairs and unlocked the door for me. Mister
came running up and hurled himself against her legs in greeting.
Maybe being short gives her better leverage or something, since
she didn't really wobble when Mister rammed her, like I do. Or
maybe it's the aikido.
"Christ, Harry," she muttered. "This place is dark." She tried
the light switch, but the bulbs had burnt out last week, and I
hadn't had the cash to replace them. So she sat me down on the
couch and lit some candles off of the glowing coals in the
fireplace. "All right," she said. "I'm putting you in bed."
"Well. If you insist."
The phone rang. It was in arm's reach so I picked it up.
"Dresden," I mumbled.
"Mister Dresden, this is Linda. Linda Randall. Do you
remember me?"
Heh. Do men remember the scene in the movie with Marilyn
standing over the subway grating? I found myself remembering
Linda Randall's eyes and wondering things a gentleman
shouldn't.
"Are you naked?" I said. It took me a minute to register what
I'd said. Whoops.
Murphy gave me an arch look. She stood up and walked into

my bedroom, and busied herself straightening the covers and
giving me a modicum of privacy. I felt cheered. My slip had
thrown Murphy off better than any lie I could have managed.
Maybe a woozy Harry was not necessarily a bad Harry.
Linda purred laughter into the phone. "I'm in the car right
now, honey. Maybe later. Look, I've come up with a few things
that might help you. Can you meet me tonight?"
I rubbed at my eyes. It was Saturday. Tonight was Saturday
night. Wasn't there something I was supposed to do tonight?
To hell with it, I thought. It couldn't have been all that
important if I couldn't even remember it. "Sure," I told her.
"Fine."
She mmmmed into the phone. "You're such a gentleman. I like
that, once in a while. I get off at seven. All right? Do you want to
meet me? Say at eight?"
"My car exploded," I said. My tongue felt fuzzy. "I can meet you
at the 7-Eleven down the street from my apartment."
She poured that rich, creamy laughter into my ear again. "Tell
you what. Give me an extra hour or so to go home, get a nice hot
bath, make myself all pretty, and then I'll be there in your arms.
Sound good to you?"
"Well. Okay."
She laughed again, and didn't say good-bye before
disconnecting.
Murphy appeared again as soon as I hung up the phone. "Tell
me you didn't just make a date, Dresden."
"You're just jealous."
Murphy snorted. "Please. I need more of a man than you to
keep me happy." She started to get an arm beneath me to help
me up. "You'd break like a dry stick, Dresden. You'd better get to
bed before you get any more delusions."
I put a hand against her shoulder to push her back. I didn't
have that kind of strength, but she backed off, frowning. "What?"
"Something," I said. I rubbed at my eyes. Something was
bothering me. I was forgetting something, I was sure of it.
Something I said I would do on Saturday. I struggled to push

thoughts of drug wars and people driven mad by the Third Sight
visions given them by the ThreeEye drug, and tried to
concentrate.
It didn't take long to click. Monica. I had told her I would get
in contact with her. I patted at my duster pockets until I found
my notepad, and took it out. Fumbled it open, and waved at
Murphy.
"Candle. Need to read something."
"Christ, Dresden. I swear you're at least as bad as my first
husband. He was stubborn enough to kill himself, too." She
sighed, and brought a candle over. The light hurt my eyes for a
moment. I made out Monica's number and I dialed her up.
"Hello?" a male child's voice asked.
"Hi," I said. "I need to speak to Monica, please."
"Who's this?"
I remembered I was working for her on the sly and answered,
"Her fourth cousin, Harry, from Vermont."
" 'Kay," the kid said. "Hold on." Then he screamed, without
lowering the mouthpiece of the phone from his lips, "MOM!
YOUR COUSIN HARRY FROM VERMONT IS ON THE PHONE
LONG-DISTANCE!"
Kids. You gotta love them. I adore children. A little salt, a
squeeze of lemon—perfect.
I waited for the pounding in my head to resolve into mere
agony as the kid dropped the phone and ran off, feet thumping
on a hardwood floor.
A moment later, there was the rattle of the phone being picked
up, and Monica's quiet, somewhat nervous voice said, "Um.
Hello?"
"It's Harry Dresden," I told her. "I just wanted to call to let you
know what I'd been able to find out for y—"
"I'm sorry," she interrupted me. "I don't, um … need any of
those."
I blinked. "Uh, Monica Sells?" I read her the phone number.
"Yes, yes," she said, her voice hurried, impatient. "We don't

need any help, thank you."
"Is this a bad time?"
"No. No, it's not that. I just wanted to cancel my order.
Discontinue the service. Don't worry about me." There was an
odd quality to her voice, as though she were forcing a housewife's
good cheer into it.
"Cancel? You don't want me looking for your husband
anymore? But ma'am, the money—" The phone began to buzz
and static made the line fuzzy. I thought I heard a voice in the
background, somewhere, and then the sound went dead except
for the static. For a moment, I thought I'd lost the connection
entirely. Blasted unreliable phones. Usually, they messed up on
my end, not on the receiving end. You can't even trust them to
foul up dependably.
"Hello? Hello?" I said, cross and grumpy.
Monica's voice returned. "Don't worry about that. Thank you 
so much for all of your help. Good day, bye-bye, thank you." Then
she hung up on me.
I took the phone away from my ear and stared at it. "Bizarre," I
said.
"Come on, Harry," Murphy said. She took the phone from my
hand and planted it firmly in its cradle.
"Aww, mom. It's not even dark yet." I made the lame joke to try
to think about something besides how terribly my head was
going to hurt when Murphy helped me up. She did. It did. We
hobbled into the bedroom and when I stretched out on the cool
sheets I was reasonably certain I was going to set down roots.
Murphy took my temperature and felt my scalp with her
fingers, careful around the goose egg on the back of my skull. She
shined a penlight into my eyes, which I did not like. She also got
me a drink of water, which I did like, and had me swallow a
couple of aspirin or Tylenol or something.
I only remember two more things about that morning. One
was Murphy stripping me out of my shirt, boots, and socks, and
leaning down to kiss my forehead and ruffle my hair. Then she
covered me up with blankets and put out the lights. Mister
crawled up and lay down across my legs, purring like a small

diesel engine, comforting.
The second thing I remember was the phone ringing again.
Murphy was just about to leave, her car keys rattling in her
hand. I heard her turn back to pick up the phone, and say,
"Harry Dresden's residence."
There was a silence.
"Hello?" Murphy said.
After another pause Murphy appeared in the doorway, a small
shadow, looking down at me. "Wrong number. Get some rest,
Harry."
"Thanks, Karrin." I smiled at her, or tried to. It must have
looked ghastly. She smiled back, and I'm sure hers was nicer
than mine.
She left then. The apartment got dark and quiet. Mister
continued to rumble soothingly in the dark.
It kept nagging at me, even as I fell asleep. What had I
forgotten? And another, less sensible question—who had been on
the line who hadn't wanted to speak to Murphy? Had Monica
Sells tried to call me back? Why would she call me off the case
and tell me to keep the money?
I pondered that, and baseball bats and other matters until
Mister's purring put me to sleep.
Chapter Thirteen
I woke up when thunder rattled the old house above me.
True dark had fallen. I had no idea of what time it was. I lay in
bed for a moment, confused and a little dizzy. There was a warm
spot on my legs, where Mister must have been until a few
moments before, but the big grey cat was nowhere to be seen. He
was a chicken about thunderstorms.
Rain was coming down in sheets. I could hear it, on the
concrete outside and on the old building above me. It creaked
and swayed in the spring thunderstorm and the wind, timbers
gently flexing, wise enough with age to give a little, rather than
put up stubborn resistance until they broke. I could probably
stand to learn something from that.

My stomach was growling. I got out of bed, wobbled a little,
and rooted about for my robe. I couldn't find it in the dark, but
came across my duster where Murphy had left it on a chair,
neatly folded. Laying on top of it was a scattering of cash, along
with a napkin bearing the words "You will pay me
back.—Murphy." I scowled at the money and tried to ignore the
flash of gratitude I felt. I picked up my duster and tugged it on
over my bare chest. Then I padded on naked feet out into the
living room.
Thunder rumbled again, growling outside. I could feel the
storm, in a way that a lot of people can't, and that most of those
who can put down to nerves. It was raw energy up there, naked
and pulsing through the clouds. I could feel the water in the rain
and clouds, the moving air blowing the droplets in gusts against
the walls of the house above. I could sense, waiting, the fire of the
deadly lightning, leaping from cloud to cloud above and seeking
a path of least resistance to the patient, timeless earth that bore
the brunt of the storm's attack. All four elements, interacting,
moving, energy flashing from place to place in each of its forms.
There was a lot of potential in storms, that a sorcerer could tap
into if he was desperate or stupid enough. A lot of energy to be
used, up there, where the forces of ancient nature brawled and
tumbled.
I frowned, thinking about that. It hadn't occurred to me
before. Had there been a storm on Wednesday night? Yes, there
had. I remember thunder waking me for a few moments in the
hours before dawn. Could our killer have tapped into it to fuel his
spells? Possibly. It bore looking into. Such tapped magic was
often too unstable or volatile to use in such a carefully directed
fashion.
Lightning flashed again, and I counted three or four seconds
before the rumble reached me. If the killer was using the storms,
it would make sense that if he or she were to strike again, it
would happen tonight. I shivered.
My stomach growled, and more mundane matters took my
attention. My head was feeling somewhat better. I wasn't dizzy
anymore. My stomach was furious with me—like a lot of tall,
skinny men, I eat endlessly, but it never stays on. I have no idea
why. I shambled into the kitchen and started building up the
grill.

"Mister?" I called. "You hungry, bud? I'm gonna fry up some
burgers, mmm, mmm, mmm."
Lightning flashed again, closer this time, the thunder following
right on its heels. The flash was bright enough to sear through
my half-sunken windows and make me wince against it. But, in
the flash of light, I caught sight of Mister.
The cat was up on the top of my bookshelf, in the far corner of
the apartment—as far as it was possible to get away from my
front door. He was watching it, his eyes luminous in the half
dark, and though he had the cat-lazy look of any lounging feline,
his ears were tilted forward, and his gaze focused unwaveringly
upon the door. If he'd had a tail, it would have been twitching.
There came a knocking, a rapping, at my chamber door.
Maybe it was the storm making me nervous, but I quested out
with my senses, feeling for any threat that might have been
there. The storm made a mess of things, and all of that noise,
both physical and spiritual, kept me from being able to tell
anything more than that there was someone outside my door.
I felt in the pocket of my duster for the gun—but I remembered
that I had set it aside in the lab last night and not taken it with
me down to the police station. Police don't take kindly to anyone
but police toting firearms inside the station, don't ask me why.
In any case, it was out of easy reach now.
And then I remembered that Linda Randall was supposed to be
showing up. I berated myself for getting spooked so easily, and
then again for sleeping so long, and then again for looking and
smelling like I hadn't showered in a couple of days or combed my
hair or shaved or anything else that might have made me
marginally less unappealing. Ah, well. I got the impression that
with Linda, that sort of thing didn't seem to matter too much.
Maybe she was into eau des hommes.
I walked over to the door and opened it, smoothing back my
hair with one hand and trying to keep a sheepish grin off of my
face.
Susan Rodriguez waited outside in the rain, her black umbrella
held above her. She wore a khaki trench coat and an expensive
black dress beneath it, with heels. Pearls shone at her throat and
ears. She blinked at me when I appeared in the door. "Harry?" I

stared at her. Oh my gosh. I had forgotten my date with Susan.
How in the world could I have forgotten that? I mean, the White
Council, the police, vampires, concussions, junkies, mob bosses,
and baseball-bat-swinging thugs notwithstanding—
Well, no. There probably weren't any women incredible enough
to make me keep my mind on them through all of that. But all
the same, it seemed a little rude of me.
"Hi, Susan," I said, lamely. I peered past her. When had Susan
said she was going to show up? Nine? And when had Linda said?
Eight—no, wait. She'd said eight o'clock at first, and then said
she'd be by in another hour after that. At nine. Hooboy. This was
not going to be pretty.
Susan read me like a book and glanced back behind her in the
rain, before looking back up at me. "Expecting someone, Harry?"
"Not exactly," I told her. "Uh, well. Maybe. Look, come on in.
You're getting drenched." Which wasn't exactly true. I was
getting drenched, my bare feet soaked, standing there in the
open door, the wind blowing rain down the stairway at me.
Susan's mouth quirked in a malicious, predatory little smile,
and she came in, folding down her umbrella and brushing past
me. "This is your apartment?"
"Nah," I told her. "This is my summer home in Zurich." She
eyed me as I closed the door, took her coat, and hung it up on a
tall old wooden hat stand near the doorway.
Susan turned away from me as I hung up her coat. Her dress
showed her back, the long curve of her spine, all the way down to
her waist. It had a fairly tame hemline, and long, tight sleeves. I
liked it. A lot. She let me see her back for a while as she walked
away from me, toward the fireplace, then slowly turned to face
me, smirking, leaning one smooth hip on the couch. Her
midnight hair was bound up on top of her head, displaying a
long and slender neck, her skin an advertisement for something
smooth and wonderful. Her lips quirked up at the corners, and
she narrowed her dark, flashing eyes at me. "The police having
you put in overtime, Harry?" she drawled. "The killings must be
sensational. Major crime figure, murdered with magic. Care to
make a statement?"
I winced. She was still hunting for an angle for the Arcane.

"Sure," I told her. Her eyes widened in surprise. "I need a
shower," I said. "I'll be right back. Mister, keep an eye on the
lady, eh?"
Susan gave me a little roll of her eyes, then glanced up and
studied Mister on his perch on the bookcase. Mister, for his part,
flicked an ear and continued staring at the door.
More thunder rumbled overhead.
I lit a few candles for her, then took one with me into the
bathroom. Think, Harry. Get awake, and get your head clear.
What to do?
Get clean, I told myself. You smell like a horse. Get some cool
water over your head and work this out. Linda Randall is going
to be here in a minute, and you need to figure out how to keep
Susan from prying her nose into the murders.
So advised, I agreed with myself and hurriedly got undressed
and into the shower. I don't use a water heater, and consequently
I am more than used to cold showers. Actually, given how often I,
and wizards in general, get to date actual real women, maybe
that's just as well.
I was just lathering up with shampoo when the lightning got a
lot worse, the thunder a lot louder, the rain a lot harder. The
height of the storm had hit the old house and hit it hard. It was
almost possible to see clearly in the violent electrical discharge.
Almost impossible to hear over the thunder. But I caught a
flicker of motion out of the corner of my eye, a shadow that
moved across the sunken window (covered by modest curtains)
in the bathroom. Someone was moving toward the stairs down
to my apartment.
Did I mention how I haven't had a ton of success with women?
Nights like this are one reason why. I panicked, hard. I leapt out
of the shower, my head all a-sudsy, wrapped a towel around my
waist, and headed out into the front room.
I couldn't let Linda just come to the door and have Susan
answer it. That would be the cattiest thing you've ever seen, and
I would be the one to get all the scratches and bites, too.
I rounded the corner from my bedroom into the main room
and saw Susan reaching for the doorknob. Lightning flashed
again, and thunder kept me from hearing the knob's click-clack.

I heard something else, though, a snarling, spitting sound, and
saw Mister, on his feet now, his back arched up and all his fur
fluffed out, teeth bared, his no-longer-sleepy eyes fastened on the
door.
The thunder passed as Susan swung the door open. I could see
her face in profile. One hand was on her hip, and there was an
amused, dangerous little smile on her pretty mouth.
As the door opened, I felt it, the cloud of energies that
accompanies a spirit-being when it comes into the mortal world,
disguised until now by the background clutter of the storm. A
figure stood in the doorway, rather squat, less than five feet tall,
dressed in a plain brown trench coat, illuminated by blue
lightning overhead. There was something wrong to the shape,
something that just wasn't a part of good old Mother Earth. It's
"head" turned to look at me, and sudden twin points of fire, as
blue as the lightning dancing above, flared up, illuminating the
leathery, inhuman curves of a face that most closely resembled
that of a large and warty toad.
Susan got a good look at the demon's eyes and face from two
feet away and screamed.
"Susan!" I shouted, already moving toward the couch. "Get out
of the way!" I threw myself to the floor behind the couch, landed
with a whumph of hard floor hitting my ribs.
The demon's jaws parted in a silent hiss, and its throat
constricted weirdly as I vanished behind the couch. There was a
hissing sound, and a heart-sized section of the couch just 
dissolved in a cloud of mist and foul stench. Droplets of liquid
spattered through, onto the floor near me, and where they
touched little holes corroded outward in the space of two
seconds. I rolled away from the couch and the demon's acid.
"Susan!" I shouted. "Get back toward the kitchen! Don't get
between it and me!"
"What is it?" she screamed back at me.
"A bad guy." I poked my head up and peered through the
smoking hole in the couch, ready to duck back down at a
moment's notice. The demon, squat and bulkier than a human,
was standing in the doorway, both long-fingered, pad-tipped
hands leaning forward toward the inside of the house. It paused

as though resting against a light screen.
"Why isn't it coming in?" Susan asked from the far corner,
near the door. Her back was pressed to the wall, and her eyes
were wide and terrified. My God, I thought, just don't pass out
on me, Susan.
"Homestead laws," I said. "It isn't a mortal creature. It has to
gather its energy to push through the barrier around a home."
"Can it get in?" she said. Her voice was thin, reedy. She was
asking questions, gathering information, data, falling back on
her ingrained career instincts—because, I suspected, her rational
brain had short-circuited. That happens to people who get a
good hard look at a demon for the first time.
I hurried over to her and grabbed her arm, dragging her back
toward the door leading down to my lab. "Get down there," I
shouted, jerking the door up and revealing the folding
ladder-staircase.
"It's dark!" Susan protested. "Oh, God." She blinked down at
my waist. "Harry? Why are you naked?"
I looked down. And blushed. The towel must have fallen off
while I was dancing around. Looking down made the shampoo
suds still in my hair runnel down into my eyes, making them
sting and burn. Could this evening get any worse?
There was a tearing sound from the doorway, and the
toad-demon sort of surged forward a stumbling step. It was now
in my house. Lightning still danced in the sky behind it, and I
could only see it in ugly, hunchbacked outline, except for the
electric light of its wide, round, googly eyes as it came toward
me. Its throat was working in little, undulating motions.
"Crap," I said. I'm quite eloquent in times of crisis. I shoved
Susan toward the stairs, and turned toward the demon, tips of
my thumbs touching, fingers spread, palms out toward it.
The demon's mouth opened again, and it made a slick,
spittooning sound.
"Vento Riflittum," I shouted, willing my fear and anxiety into a
tangible shape, throwing it down from my pounding heart
through my shoulders and arms, directed at the foe. The globule
of demonacid sped toward my face.

My terror and adrenaline roared out of my fingertips in the
form of wind, gathering up speed enough to tear the hair from a
man's head. It caught the blob of acid and flung it back at the
demon in a fine spray, stopped the thing dead in its tracks, and
even drove it back several feet, its claw-tipped feet sliding on my
smooth floor, catching on the rugs.
The acid sizzled and spat little electric blue sparks on its skin,
but it didn't seem to harm the demon. It did, however, dissolve
the trench coat to shreds in less time than it takes to draw a
breath and wreaked havoc on my rugs and furniture.
The demon shook its head, gathering its wits. I turned to the
far corner, near the door, and extended my hand, trumpeting, "
Vento servitas!" The pale, smooth wood of my wizard's staff all
but glowed in the darkness as it flew toward me, driven by a
gentler, finer blast of the same wind. I caught it in my hand and
spun it toward the demon, calling on the lines of power and force
deep within the long, unbroken grains of wood in the staff. I
extended the staff toward it, horizontally like a bar, and shouted,
"Out! Out! Out! You are not welcome here!" A touch dramatic in
any other circumstance, maybe—but when you've got a demon in
your living room, nothing seems too extreme.
The toad-demon hunched its shoulders, planted its broad feet,
and grunted as a wave of unseen force swept out from my staff
like a broom whisking along the floor. I could feel the demon
resist me, pressing against the strength of the staff, as though I
were leaning the wood against a vertical steel bar and
attempting to snap it across that length.
We strained silently for several seconds until I realized that
this thing was just too strong for me. I wasn't going to be able to
brush it off like a minor imp or a niggling poltergeist. It wouldn't
take me long to exhaust myself, and once the demon could move
again it was either going to dissolve me with its acid or else just
waddle up to me and rip me into pieces. It would be stronger
than a mortal, a hell of a lot faster, and it was not going to stop
until I was dead or the sun had come up or one of any of a
number of other unlikely conditions were met.
"Susan!" I shouted, my chest heaving. "Are you down there?"
"Yes," she said. "Is it gone?"
"Not exactly, no." I felt my palms get sweaty, the smooth wood

of the staff begin to slip. The burning of the soap suds in my eyes
increased, and the lights of the demon's eyes brightened.
"Why don't you set it on fire? Shoot it! Blow it up!" Her voice
had a searching quality to it, as though she were looking around,
down there in the lab.
"I can't," I said to her. "I can't pump enough juice into it to
hurt the thing without blowing us up along with it. You've got to
get out of there." My mind was racing along, calculating
possibilities, numbers, my reserves of energy, cold and rational.
The thing was here for me. If I drew it off to one side, into my
bedroom and bathroom, Susan might be able to escape. On the
other hand, it might be under orders to kill me and any
witnesses, in which case after it had finished me it would simply
go after her as well. There had to be another way to get her out of
here. And then I remembered it.
"Susan!" I shouted. "There's a sports bottle on my table down
there. Drink what's in it, and think about being away from here.
Okay? Think about being far away."
"I found it," she called up a second later. "It smells bad."
"Dammit, it's a potion. It'll get you out of here. Drink it!"
There was a gagging noise, and then a moment later she said,
"Now what?"
I blinked and looked at the stairs going down. "It should have
work—" I broke off as the toad thing leaned forward, reached out
a clawed foot, and in that stride gained three feet of ground
toward me. I was able to stop it again, barely, but I knew that it
was going to be coming for my throat in a few more seconds.
"Nothing happened," she said. "Dammit, Harry, we have to do
something." And then she came pounding up the ladder, dark
eyes flashing, my .38 revolver in her hand.
"No!" I told her. "Don't!" I felt the staff slip more. The demon
was getting ready to come through all my defenses.
Susan raised the gun, face pale, her hands shaking, and started
shooting. A .38 Chief's Special carries six rounds, and I use a
medium-speed load, rather than armor-piercing or explosive
bullets or anything fancy like that. Fewer chances that something
will go wrong in the presence of a lot of magic.

A gun is a pretty simple machine. A revolver approaches very
simple. Wheels, gears, and a simple lever impact to ignite the
powder. It's tough for magic to argue with physics, most of the
time.
The revolver roared six times.
The first two shots must have gone wide and hit somewhere
else. The next two struck the demon's hide and made deep dents
in it before springing off and rebounding wildly around the
room, as I had feared they would, more of a threat to us than to
it. Fortunately, neither of us was injured or killed by the
ricochets. The fifth shot went between its long, oddly shaped legs
and past it.
The sixth hit the thing square between its lightning-lantern
eyes, knocked it off-balance, and sent it tumbling over with a
toady hiss of frustration.
I gasped and grabbed at Susan's wrist. "Basement," I wheezed,
as she dropped the gun. We both scrambled down the ladder. I
didn't bother to shut it behind me. The thing could just tear its
way through the floor, if it needed to. This way, I would at least
know where it would come down, rather than have it tunnel
through the floor and come out on top of my head.
At my will, the tip of the staff I still held burst into light,
illuminating the room.
"Harry?" Bob's voice came from the shelf. The skull's eyelights
came on, and he swiveled around to face me. "What the hell is
going on? Woo woo, who is the babe?"
Susan jumped. "What is that?"
"Ignore him," I said, and followed my own advice. I went to the
far end of my lab table and started kicking boxes, bags,
notebooks, and old paperbacks off the floor. "Help me clear this
floor space. Hurry!"
She did, and I cursed the lack of cleaning skills that had left
this end of the lab such a mess. I was struggling to get to the
circle I had laid in the floor, a perfect ring of copper, an
unbroken loop in the concrete that could be empowered to hold a
demon in—or out.
"Harry!" Bob gulped as we worked. "There's, a, um. A seriously

badass toad-demon coming down the ladder."
"I know that, Bob." I heaved a bunch of empty cardboard
boxes aside as Susan frantically tossed some papers away,
exposing the entirety of the copper ring, about three feet across.
I took her hand and stepped into the circle, drawing her close to
me.
"What's happening?" Susan asked, her expression bewildered
and terrified.
"Just stay close," I told her. She clung tightly to me.
"It sees you, Harry," Bob reported. "It's going to spit something
at you, I think."
I didn't have time to see if Bob was right. I leaned down,
touched the circle with the tip of my staff, and willed power into
it, to shut the creature out. The circle sprang up around us, a
silent and invisible tension in the air.
Something splattered and hissed against the air a few inches
from my face. I looked up to see dark, sputtering acid slithering
off the invisible shield the circle's power provided us. Half a
second earlier and it would have eaten my face off. Cheery
thought.
I tried to catch my breath, stand straight, and not let any part
of me extend outside the circle, which would break its circuit
and negate its power. My arms were shaking and my legs felt
weak. Susan, too, was visibly trembling.
The demon stalked over to us. I could see it clearly in the light
of my staff, and I wished that I couldn't. It was horribly ugly,
misshapen, foul, heavily muscled, and I compared it to a toad
only because I knew of nothing else that even remotely
approached a description of it. It glared at us and drove a fist at
the circle's shield. It rebounded in a shower of blue sparks, and
the thing hissed, a horrible and windy sound.
Outside, the storm continued to rumble and growl, muffled by
the thick walls of the subbasement.
Susan was holding close to me, and almost crying. "Why isn't it
killing us? Why isn't it getting us?"
"It can't," I said, gently. "It can't get through, and it can't do
anything to break the circle. So long as neither of us crosses that

line, we'll be safe."
"Oh, God," Susan said. "How long do we have to stand here?"
"Dawn," I said. "Until dawn. When the sun rises, it has to go."
"There's no sun down here," she said.
"Doesn't work that way. It's got a sort of power cord stretching
back to whoever summoned it. A fuel line. As soon as the sun
comes up, that line gets cut, and he goes away, like a balloon
with no air."
"When does the sun come up?" she asked.
"Oh, well. About ten more hours."
"Oh," she said. She laid her head against my bare chest and
closed her eyes.
The toad-demon paced in a slow circuit around the circle,
searching for a weakness in the shield. It would find none. I
closed my eyes and tried to think.
"Uh, Harry," Bob began.
"Not now, Bob."
"But Harry—" Bob tried again.
"Dammit, Bob. I'm trying to think. If you want to be really
useful, you could try to figure out why that escape potion you
were so confident of didn't work for Susan."
"Harry," Bob protested, "that's what I'm trying to tell you."
Susan murmured, against my chest, "Is it getting warm in
here? Or is it just me?"
A terrible suspicion struck me. I looked down at Susan and got
a sinking feeling. Surely not. No. It couldn't be.
She looked up at me, her dark eyes smoky. "We're going to die,
aren't we Harry? Have you ever thought you'd want to die
making love?"
She kissed my chest, almost absently.
It felt nice. Really, really nice. I tried not to notice all the bare,
lovely back that was naked underneath my hand.
"I've thought that, many times," she said, against my skin.
"Bob," I began, my voice getting furious.

"I tried to tell you," Bob wailed. "I did! She grabbed the wrong
potion and just chugged it down." Bob's skull turned toward me
a bit, and the lights brightened. "You've got to admit, though.
The love potion works great."
Susan was kissing my chest and rubbing her body up against
me in a fashion that was unladylike and extremely pleasant and
distracting. "Bob, I swear, I am going to lock you in a wall safe
for the next two hundred years."
"It's not my fault!" Bob protested.
The demon watched what was happening in the circle with
froggy eyes and kicked a section of floor clear enough of debris
for it to squat down on its haunches and stare, restless and ready
as a cat waiting for a mouse to stick its head out of its hole.
Susan stared up at me with sultry eyes and tried to wrench me to
the floor, and consequently out of the circle's protective power.
Bob continued to wail his innocence.
Who says I don't know how to show a lady a good time?
Chapter Fourteen
Susan tugged at my neck and jerked my head down to hers for
a kiss. As kisses went, well. It was, um, extremely interesting.
Perfectly passionate, abandoned, not a trace of
self-consciousness or hesitation to it. Or at any rate not from her.
I came up for air a minute later, my lips itching with the
intensity of it, and she stared up at me with burning eyes. "Take
me, Harry. I need you."
"Uh, Susan. That's not really a good idea right now," I said.
The potion had taken hold of her hard. No wonder she had
recovered from her terror enough to come back up the stairs and
fire my gun at the demon. It had lowered her inhibitions to a
sufficient degree that it must also have dulled her fears.
Susan's fingers wandered, and her eyes sparkled. "Your mouth
says no," she purred, "but this says yes."
I went up on my toes, and swallowed, trying to keep my
balance and get her hand off me at the same time. "That thing is 
always saying something stupid," I told her. She was beyond
reason. The potion had kicked her libido into suicidal overdrive.

"Bob, help me out here!"
"I'm stuck in the skull," Bob said. "If you don't let me out, I
can't do much of anything, Harry."
Susan stood up on tiptoe to gnaw at my ear, wrapped her
shapely thigh around one of mine, and started whimpering and
pulling me toward the floor. My balance wavered. A three-foot
circle was not enough to perform wrestling or gymnastics or …
anything else in, without leaving something sticking out for the
waiting demon to chew on.
"Is the other potion still there?" I asked.
"Sure," Bob said. "I can see it where it fell on the floor. Could
throw it to you, too."
"Okay," I said, growing excited—well. More excited. I might yet
get out of this basement alive. "I'm going to let you out for five
minutes. I want you to help me by throwing me the potion."
"No, boss," Bob said, his voice maddeningly cheerful.
"No? No?!"
"I get a twenty-four-hour leave, or nothing."
"Dammit, Bob! I'm responsible for what you do if I let you out!
You know that!"
Susan whispered, into my ear, "I'm not wearing any
underwear," and tried something approximating a pro-wrestling
takedown to drop me to the floor. I wavered in balance and
barely managed to stave her off. The demon's frog-eyes
narrowed, and it came to its feet, ready to leap on us.
"Bob!" I yelled. "You slimy jerk!"
"You try living in a bony old skull for a few hundred years,
Harry! You'd want to get a night off once in a while, too!"
"Fine!" I shouted, my heart leaping into my throat as my
balance wavered again. "Fine! Just make sure you get me the
potion! You have twenty-four hours."
"Just make sure you catch it," Bob replied. And then a flood of
orangish light flowed out of both of the skull's eye sockets and
into the room. The lights swooped down in an elongated cloud
over the potion bottle that lay on the floor at the far side of the
lab, gathered it up, and hurled it through the air toward me. I

reached up with my spare hand and caught it, bobbled it for a
minute, and then secured it again.
The orange lights that were Bob's spirit-form danced a little
jig, then whizzed up the ladder and out of the lab, vanishing.
"What's that?" Susan murmured, eyes dazed.
"Another drink," I said. "Drink this with me. I think I can cover
us both in the focus department, get us out of here."
"Harry," she said. "I'm not thirsty." Her eyes smoldered. "I'm
hungry."
I hit upon an idea. "Once we drink this, I'll be ready, and we
can go to bed."
She looked up at me hazily and smiled, wicked and delighted.
"Oh, Harry. Bottoms up." Her hands made a sort of silent
commentary on her words, and I jumped, almost dropping the
bottle. More shampoo from my hair trailed down my already
burning eyes, and I squeezed them closed.
I slugged away about half the potion, trying to ignore the
flat-cola taste, and quickly passed the rest to Susan. She smiled
lazily and drank it down, licking her lips.
It started in my guts—a sort of fluttery, wobbly feeling that
moved out, up through my lungs and out along my shoulders,
down my arms. It also went down, over my hips and into my legs.
I began to shake and quiver uncontrollably.
And then I just flew apart into a cloud of a million billion tiny
pieces of Harry, each one with its own perspective and view. The
room wasn't just a square, cluttered basement to me, but a
pattern of energies, grouped into specific shapes and uses. Even
the demon was only a cloud of particles, slow and dense. I flowed
around that cloud, up through the opening in the ceiling pattern,
and outside of the apartment and into the raging nonpattern of
the storm.
It took maybe five seconds, and then the power of the potion
faded. I felt all the little pieces of me abruptly rush back together
and slam into one another at unthinkable speed. It hurt, and
made me nauseous, a sort of heavy-duty thump of impact that
didn't come from any one direction, but from every direction at
once. I staggered, planted my staff on the ground, and felt the

rain wash down over me.
Susan appeared next to me a heartbeat later, and promptly sat
down on her butt on the ground, in the rain. "Oh, God. I feel
terrible."
Inside the apartment, the demon screamed, a raging, voiceless
hiss. I could hear it madly rampaging around inside. "Come on,"
I told her. "We've got to get out of here before it gets smart and
starts looking outside for us."
"I'm sick," she said. "I'm not sure I can walk."
"The mixed potions," I said. "They can do that to you. But we
have to go now. Come on, Susan. Up and at 'em." I bent down
and got her up on her feet and moving away from my apartment.
"Where are we going?" she asked.
"Do you have your car keys?"
She patted the dress, as if looking for pockets, and then shook
her head dazedly. "They were in my coat pocket."
"We walk, then."
"Walk where?"
"Over to Reading Road. It always floods when there's this much
rain. It'll be enough water to ground that thing if it tries to follow
us." It was only a couple of blocks away. The cold rain came
down in buckets. I was shaking, shivering, and naked, and more
soap was getting into my eyes. But hey. At least I was clean.
"Wha?" she mumbled. "What will the rain do to it?"
"Not rain. Running water. It kills him if he tries to go over it
after us," I explained to her, patiently. I hoped the potions
mixing together in her stomach hadn't done anything
irreversible. There had been accidents before. We were moving
at good speed, all things considered, and had covered maybe
forty yards in the pouring rain. Not much farther to go.
"Oh. Oh, that's good," she said. And then she convulsed and
pitched to the ground. I tried to hold her, but I was just too
tired, my arms too weak. I nearly went down with her. She rolled
to her side and lay that way, retching horribly, vomiting herself
empty.
Thunder and lightning raged around us again, and I heard the

sharp crack of the storm's power touching a tree nearby. I saw a
bright flash of contact and then the subdued glow of burning
branches. I looked in the direction we had been heading. The
flooding Reading Road, safety from the demon, was still thirty
yards away.
"I didn't think you'd last this long," someone said.
I almost jumped out of my skin. I picked my staff up in both
hands and turned in a slow circle, searching for the source of the
voice. "Who's there?" There, to one side, a spot of cold—not
physical cold, but something deeper and darker that my other
senses detected. A pooling of shadows, an illusion in the darkness
between lights, gone when lightning flashed and back again
when it had passed.
"Do you expect me to give you my name?" the shadows
scorned. "Suffice to say that I am the one who has killed you."
"You're an underachiever," I shot back, still turning, eyes
searching. "The job's not done."
In the darkness underneath a broken streetlight, then, maybe
twenty feet away, I could make out the shape of a person. Man or
woman, I couldn't tell, nor could I distinguish from the voice.
"Soon," the shape said. "You can't last much longer. My demon
will finish you before another ten minutes have passed." The
voice was supremely confident.
"You called that demon here?"
"Indeed," the shadowy shape confirmed.
"Are you crazy?" I demanded, stunned. "Don't you know what
could happen to you if that thing gets loose?"
"It won't," the shape assured me. "It is mine to control."
I extended my senses toward the shape, and found that what I
had suspected was true. It wasn't a real person, or an illusion
masking a real person. It was only the seeming of one, a
phantasm of shape and sound, a hologram that could see and
hear and speak for its creator, wherever he or she was.
"What are you doing?" it demanded. It must have sensed me
feeling it out.
"Checking your credentials," I said, and sent some of my
remaining will toward it, the sorcerous equivalent of a slap in the

face.
The image cried out in surprise and reeled back. "How did you 
do that?" it snarled.
"I went to school."
The hologram growled, then raised up its voice, calling out in
rolling syllables. I tried to hear what had been said, but another
peal of thunder blocked out the middle half of what was
undoubtedly the demon's name.
From within my apartment, the distant, faint sound of the
demon's smashing ruckus came to an abrupt halt.
"Now," the image said, a sneer to its voice. "Now you will pay."
"Why are you doing this?" I demanded.
"You're in my way."
"Let the woman go."
"Sorry," the image said. "She's seen too much. She's in the way,
too, now. My demon will kill you both."
"You bastard," I snarled.
It laughed at me.
I looked over my shoulder, back toward the apartment.
Through the rain I heard a dry and raspy hiss, underlaid with a
sort of clicking growl. Blue frog-eyes, reflecting the storm's
lightning, came up the stairs from my basement apartment. It
focused on me immediately and started forward. The back
fender of Susan's car, which she had parked outside my
apartment, got in its way, and with the pad-tipped fingers of one
skinny, soft-looking hand, it picked up the back end of the car
and tossed it to one side, where it landed with a heavy crunch.
I tried not to think about those fingers around my throat.
"You see?" the image said. "Mine to call. Time for you to die,
Mr. Dresden."
Another flash of lightning showed the demon falling to all fours
and scrambling toward me like an overweight lizard scuttling
across hot sand to shade, in an exaggerated wagging motion that
looked ridiculous but brought it closer and closer at deceptive
speed.

"Deposit another quarter to continue your call, asshole," I said.
I thrust my staff toward the shadowy image, this time, focusing
my will into a full-fledged attack. "Stregallum finitas."
Scarlet light abruptly flooded over it, devouring its edges and
moving inward.
The image snarled, then gasped in pain. "Dresden! My demon
will roll in your bones!" And then it broke off into a scream of
anguish as my counterspell began to tear the image-sending
apart. I was better than whoever had made the image, and they
couldn't hold the spell in the face of my counter. The image and
the scream alike faded slowly into the distance until both were
gone. I allowed myself the smallest touch of satisfaction, and
then turned to the woman on the ground.
"Susan," I said, crouching by her, keeping my eyes on the
onrushing demon. "Susan, get up. We have to go."
"I can't," she sobbed. "Oh, God," and she threw up some more.
She tried to rise but collapsed back to the ground, moaning
piteously.
I looked back at the water, gauging the thing's speed. It was
coming, fast, but not quite as fast as a man could run. I could
still escape it, if I ran, full out. I could get across the water. I
could be safe.
But I couldn't carry Susan there. I'd never make it, with her
slowing me down. But if I didn't go, both of us would die.
Wouldn't it be better for one of us, at least, to live?
I looked back at the demon. I was exhausted, and it had caught
me unprepared. The heavy rain would keep fire, man's ancient
weapon against the darkness and the things it hid, from being
effective in holding it back. And I didn't have enough left in me
to do anything else. It would be as good as suicide to stand
against it.
Susan sobbed on the ground, helpless in the rain, sick from my
potions, unable to rise.
I leaned my head back and let the rain wash the last traces of
shampoo from my eyes, my hair. Then I turned, took a step
toward the oncoming demon. I couldn't leave Susan to that
thing. Not even if it meant dying. I'd never be able to live with
myself afterward.

The demon squalled something at me in its hissing, toady
voice, and raised both its hands toward me, coming up onto its
hind legs. Lightning flashed overhead, blinding bright. Thunder
came hard on its heels, deep enough to shake the street beneath
my bare feet.
Thunder.
Lightning.
The storm.
I looked up at the boiling clouds overhead, lit by the dancing
lightning moving among them, deadly beautiful and luminous.
Power seethed and danced in the storm, mystic energies as old
as time, enough power to shatter stones, superheat air, boil
water to steam, burn anything it touched to ashes.
At this point, I think it is safe to say, I was desperate enough to
try anything.
The demon howled and waddled forward, clumsy and quick. I
raised my staff to the sky with one hand, and with the other
pointed a finger at the demon. This was dangerous work,
tapping the storm. There was no ritual to give it shape, no circle
to protect me, not even words to shield my mind from the way
the energies of magic would course through it, I sent my senses
coursing upward, toward the storm, taking hold of the formless
powers and drawing them into patterns of raw energy that began
to surge toward me, toward the tip of my staff.
"Harry?" Susan said. "What are you doing?" She huddled on
the ground in her evening dress, shuddering. Her voice was
weak, thready.
"You ever form a line of people holding hands when you were a
kid, and scuff your feet across the carpeting together, and then
have the last person in the line touch someone on the ear to zap
them?"
"Yeah," she said, confused.
"I'm doing that. Only bigger."
The demon squalled again and drove itself into the air with its
powerful toad-legs, hurtling toward me, sailing through the air
with a frightening and unnatural grace.
I focused what little I had left of my will on the staff, and the

clouds and raging power above. "Ventas!" I shouted, "Ventas
fulmino!"
At my will, a spark leapt up from the tip of my staff toward the
clouds above. It touched the rolling, restless belly of the storm.
Hell roared down in response.
Lightning, white-hot fury, with a torrent of wind and rain, all
fell upon me, centered around the staff. I felt the power hit the
end of the soaking wet wood with a jolt like a sledgehammer. It
coursed down the staff and into my hand, making my muscles
convulse, bowing my naked body with the strain. It took
everything I had to hold the image of what I wanted in my mind,
to keep my hand pointed at the demon as it came for me, to keep
the energy surging through me to wreak its havoc on flesh less
tender than mine.
The demon was maybe six inches away when the storm's fury
boiled down my body and out through my arm, out of my
pointing finger, and took it in the heart. The force of it threw the
thing back, back and up, into the air, and held it there, wreathed
in a corona of blinding energy.
The demon struggled, screamed, toad-hands flailing, toad-legs
kicking.
And then it exploded in a wash of blue flame. The night was lit
once more, bright as day. I had to shield my eyes against it.
Susan cried out in fear, and I think I must have been screaming
along with her.
Then the night grew quiet again. Flaming bits of something
that I didn't want to think about were raining down around us,
landing with little, wet, plopping sounds upon the road, the
sidewalk, the yards of the houses around me, burning quickly to
little briquettes of charcoal and then hissing into sputtering
coolness. The wind abruptly died down. The rain slowed to a
gentle patter, the storm's fury spent.
My legs gave out, and I sat down shakily on the street, stunned.
My hair was dry, and standing on end. There was smoke curling
up from the blackened ends of my toenails. I just sat there,
happy to be alive, to be breathing in and out again. I felt like I
could crawl back in bed and go to sleep for a few days, even
though I'd gotten up not half an hour ago.

Susan sat up, blinking, her face blank. She stared at me.
"What are you doing next Saturday?" I asked her.
She just kept on staring for a minute. And then quietly lay
down again on her side.
I heard the footsteps approach from the darkness off to one
side. "Summoning demons," the sour voice said, disgusted. "In
addition to the atrocities you have already committed. I knew I
smelled black magic on the winds tonight. You are a blight,
Dresden."
I sort of rolled my head over to one side to regard Morgan, my
warden, tall and massive in his black trench coat. The rain had
plastered his greying hair down to his head, and coursed down
the lines of his face like channels in a slab of stone.
"I didn't call that thing," I said. My voice was slurred with
fatigue. "But I damn well sent it back to where it belongs. Didn't
you see?"
"I saw you defend yourself against it," Morgan said. "But I
didn't see anyone else summon it. You probably called it up
yourself and lost control of it. It couldn't have taken me anyway,
Dresden. It wouldn't have done you any good."
I laughed, weakly. "You're flattering yourself," I said. "I sure as
hell wouldn't risk calling up a demon just to get to you, Morgan."
He narrowed his already-narrow eyes. "I have convened the
Council," he said. "They will be here two dawns hence. They will
hear my testimony, Dresden, and the evidence I have to present
to them against you." There was another, more subdued flash of
lightning, and it gave his eyes a wild, madman's gleam. "And
then they will order you put to death."
I just stared at him for a moment, dully. "The Council," I said.
"They're coming here. To Chicago."
Morgan smiled at me, the kind of smile sharks reserve for baby
seals. "Dawn, on Monday, you will be brought before them. I
don't usually enjoy my position as executioner, Harry Blackstone
Copperfield Dresden. But in your case, I am proud to fulfill that
role."
I shuddered when he pronounced my full name. He did it
almost exactly right—maybe by accident, and maybe not, too.

There were those on the White Council who knew my name,
knew how to say it. To run from the Council convened, to avoid
them, would be to admit guilt and invite disaster. And because
they knew my name, they could find me. They could get to me.
Anywhere.
Susan moaned and stirred. "H-H-Harry?" she mumbled.
"What happened?"
I turned to her, to make sure she was all right. When I glanced
back over my shoulder, Morgan was gone. Susan sneezed and
huddled against me. I put an arm around her, to share what
little warmth I had.
Monday morning.
Monday morning, Morgan would bring his suspicions and level
his accusations, and it would likely be enough to get me voted
dead. Whoever Mister or Miss Shadows was, I had to find him,
her, it, or them before Monday morning, or I was as good as
dead.
I was reflecting on what a miserable date I was, when the
squad car pulled up, turned its spotlights on us, and the officer
said, over the loudspeaker, "Set the stick down and put your
hands up. Don't make any sudden moves."
Perfectly natural, I thought, embracing a sort of exhausted
stoicism, for the officer to arrest a naked man and a woman
dressed in an evening gown, sitting on a sidewalk in the pouring
rain like a couple of drunks fresh off a bender.
Susan shielded her eyes and then looked at the spotlight. All
the throwing up she'd done must have gotten rid of the potion in
her, ended its amorous effects. "This," she said, in a calm and
dispassionate voice, "is the worst night of my life." The officers
got out of the car and started toward us.
I grunted. "That's what you get for trying to go out with a
wizard."
She glanced aside at me, and her eyes glittered darkly for a
moment. She almost smiled, and there was a sort of vindictive
satisfaction to her tone when she spoke.
"But it's going to make a fantastic story."

Chapter Fifteen
As it turned out, Linda Randall had a darn good reason for
skipping out on our appointment Saturday night.
Linda Randall was dead.
I sneezed as I ducked under the yellow police tape in the
sweatpants and T-shirt I had been allowed to pluck from the
mess of my place before the police car had brought me across
town to Linda Randall's apartment. And cowboy boots. Mister
had dragged one of my sneakers off, and I hadn't had time to
find it, so I wore what I had. Freaking cat.
Linda had died a bit earlier that evening. After getting to the
scene, Murphy had tried to phone me, failed to get through, and
then sent a squad car down to pick me up and bring me in to do
my consultant bit. The dutiful patrolmen sent to collect me had
stopped to check out the crazy naked guy a block away from my
apartment, and had been surprised and more than a little
suspicious when I turned out to be the very same man they were
supposed to pick up and bring to the crime scene.
Dear Susan had come to my rescue, explaining away what had
happened as "Just one of those things, tee-hee," and assuring the
officers that she was all right and would be fine to drive home.
She got a little pale around the edges when she saw once more
the ruins of my apartment and the enormous dent the demon
had put in the side of her car, but she made a bold face of it and
eventually left the scene with that "I have a story to write" gleam
in her eye. She stopped and gave me a kiss on the cheek on her
way out, and whispered, "Not bad, Harry," in my ear. Then she
patted my bare ass and got in her car.
I blushed. I don't think the cops noticed it, in the rain and the
dark. The patrolmen had looked at me askance, but were more
than happy to let me go put on some fresh clothes. The only
things I had clean were more sweats and another T-shirt, this
one proclaiming in bold letters over a little cartoon graveyard,
"EASTER HAS BEEN CANCELED—THEY FOUND THE BODY."
I put those on, and my duster, which had somehow survived
the demon attack, and my utterly inappropriate cowboy boots,
and then I had gotten in the patrol car and been driven across

town. I clipped my little ID card to my coat's lapel and followed
the uniforms in. One of them led me to Murphy.
On the way, I took in little details. There were a lot of people
standing around gawking. It was still fairly early, after all. The
rain came down in a fine mist and softened the contours of the
scene. There were several police cars parked in the apartment
building's parking lots, and one on the lawn by the door leading
out to the little concrete patio from the apartment in question.
Someone had left his bulbs on, and blue lights flashed over the
scene in alternating swaths of shadow and cold light. There was
a lot of yellow police tape around.
And right in the middle of it all was Murphy.
She looked terrible, like she hadn't eaten anything that didn't
come out of a vending machine or drunk anything but stale
coffee since I had seen her last. Her blue eyes were tired, and
bloodshot, but still sharp. "Dresden," she said. She peered up at
me. "You planning on having King Kong climb your hair?"
I tried to smile at her. "We still need to cast our screaming
damsel. Interested?"
Murphy snorted. She snorts really well for someone with such a
cute nose. "Come on." She spun on one heel and walked up to the
apartment, as though she wasn't exhausted and at the end of her
rope.
The forensics team was already there, so we got some nifty
plastic booties to put over our shoes and loose plastic gloves for
our hands from an officer standing beside the door. "I tried to
call earlier," Murphy said, "but your phone was out of service.
Again, Harry."
"Bad night for it," I responded, wobbling as I slipped the
booties on. "What's the story?"
"Another victim," she said. "Same M.O. as Tommy Tomm and
the Stanton woman."
"Jesus," I said. "They're using the storms."
"What?" Murphy turned and fixed her eyes on me.
"The storm," I repeated. "You can tap storms and other natural
phenomena to get things done. All natural fuel for the mojo."
"You didn't say anything about that before," Murphy accused.

"I hadn't thought of it until tonight." I rubbed at my face. It
made sense. Hell's bells, that was how the Shadowman had been
able to do all of that in one night. He'd called the demon and
been able to send it after me, as well as appearing in the shadow
he'd projected. And he'd been able to kill again.
"Have you got an ID on the victim?" I asked.
Murphy turned to go inside as she answered. "Linda Randall.
Chauffeur. Age twenty-nine."
It was a good thing Murphy had turned away, or the way my
jaw dropped would have told her that I knew the deceased, and
she would have had all sorts of uncomfortable questions. I stared
after Murphy for a second, then hurriedly veiled my expression
and followed her inside the apartment.
Linda Randall's one-room apartment looked like the trailer of a
rock band that did little besides play concerts, host parties, and
fall into a stupor afterward. Dirty clothes were strewn on one
side of a king-size bed. There was a disproportionate amount of
clothing that looked as though it had been purchased from a
Frederick's of Hollywood catalog—lacy and silky and satiny
colors, all bright, designed to attract the eye. There were many
candles around the bed, on shelves and dressers and a night
table, most burned halfway down. The drawer of the night table
was partly open, revealing a number of personal
amusements—Linda Randall had, apparently, liked her toys.
The kitchenette, off to one side, looked largely unused, except
for the coffeepot, the microwave, and the trash can, in which
several pizza boxes were crammed. Maybe it was the pizza boxes
that did it, that gave me a sudden pang of understanding and
empathy for Linda. My own kitchen looked the same, a lot of the
time, minus the microwave. Here had lived someone else who
knew that the only thing waiting at home was a sense of
loneliness. Sometimes it is comforting. Most often, it isn't. I'll bet
Linda would have understood that.
But I'd never have the chance to know. The forensics team was
gathered around the bed, concealing whatever was there, like a
cluster of buzzards around the exposed head of the outlaws they
used to bury up to their necks in the Old West. They spoke
among themselves in low, calm voices, dispassionate as skilled
dinner chatter, calling little details to the attention of their

companions, complimenting one another on their observations.
"Harry?" Murphy said, quietly. Her tone of voice suggested
that it wasn't the first time she'd said it. "Are you sure you're all
right for this?"
My mouth twitched. Of course I wasn't all right for this. No
one should ever be all right for this sort of thing. But instead of
saying that, I told her, "My head's just aching. Sorry. Let's just
get it over with."
She nodded and led me over toward the bed. Murphy was a lot
shorter than most of the men and women working around the
bed, but I had almost a head of height on all of them. So I didn't
have to ask anyone to move, just stepped up close to the bed and
looked.
Linda had been on the phone when she died. She was naked.
Even this early in the year, she had tan lines around her hips.
She must have gone to a tanning booth during the winter. Her
hair was still damp. She lay on her back, her eyes half-closed, her
expression tranquil as it hadn't been any time I'd seen her.
Her heart had been torn out. It was lying on the king-size bed
about a foot and a half from her, pulped and squashed and
slippery, sort of a scarlet and grey color. There was a hole in her
chest, too, showing where bone had been splintered outward by
the force that had removed her heart.
I just stared for a few moments, noting details in a sort of
detached way. Again. Again someone had used magic to end a
life.
I had to think of her as she sounded on the phone. Joking, a
quick wit. A sort of sly sensuality, in the way she said her words
and phrased her sentences. A little hint of insecurity around the
edges, vulnerability that magnified the other parts of her
personality. Her hair was damp because she'd been taking a bath
before she came to see me. Whatever anyone said of her, she had
been passionately, vitally alive. Had been.
Eventually, I realized how quiet the room was.
The men and women of the forensics team, all five of them,
were looking up at me. Waiting. As I looked around, they all
averted their gazes, but you didn't have to be a wizard to see
what was in their faces. Fear, pure and simple. They had been

faced with something that science couldn't explain. It rattled
them, shook them to their cores, this sudden, violent, and bloody
evidence that three hundred years of science and research was
no match for the things that were still, even after all this time,
lurking in the dark.
And I was the one who was supposed to have the answers.
I didn't have any for them, and I felt like shit for remaining
silent as I stepped back and turned away from Linda's body, then
walked across the room to the small bathroom. The tub was still
full of water. A bracelet and earrings were laid out on the
counter in front of a mirror, plus a little makeup, a bottle of
perfume.
Murphy appeared beside me and stood with me, looking at the
bathroom. She seemed a lot smaller than she usually does.
"She called us," Murphy said. "Nine one one has the call
recorded. That's how we knew to come out here. She called and
said that she knew who had killed Jennifer Stanton and Tommy
Tomm and that now they were coming for her. Then she started
screaming."
"That's when the spell hit her. The phone probably went out
right after."
Murphy frowned up at me and nodded. "Yeah. It did. But it
was working fine when we got here."
"Magic disrupts technology sometimes. You know that." I
rubbed at one eye. "Have you talked to any relatives, anything
like that?"
Murphy shook her head. "There aren't any relatives in town.
We're looking, now, but it might take some time. We tried to
reach her boss, but he wasn't available. A Mr. Beckitt?" She
studied my face, waiting for me to say something. "You ever
heard of him?" she asked, after a moment.
I didn't look back at Murphy. I shrugged.
Murphy's jaw tensed, little motions at the corners of her face.
Then she said, "Greg and Helen Beckitt. Three years ago, their
daughter, Amanda, was killed in a cross fire. Johnny Marcone's
thugs were shooting it out with some of the Jamaican gang that
was trying to muscle in on the territory back then. One of them

shot the little girl. She lived for three weeks in intensive care and
died when they took her off life support."
I didn't say anything. But I thought of Mrs. Beckitt's numb face
and dead eyes.
"The Beckitts attempted to lodge a wrongful death suit against
Johnny Marcone, but Marcone's lawyers were too good. They got
it thrown out before it even went to court. And they never found
the man who shot the little girl. Word has it that Marcone
offered to pay them blood money. Make reparation. But they
turned him down."
I didn't say anything. Behind us, they were putting Linda in a
body bag, sealing her in. I heard men count to three and lift her,
put her onto a gurney of some kind, and wheel her out. One of
the forensics guys told Murphy they were going to take a break
and would be back in ten minutes. She nodded and sent them
out. The room got even more quiet.
"Well, Harry," she said. Her voice was hushed, like she didn't
want to disturb the apartment's new stillness. "What can you tell
me?" There was a subtle weight to the question. She might as
well have asked me what I wasn't telling her. That's what she
meant. She took her hand out of her jacket pocket and handed
me a plastic bag.
I took it. Inside was my business card, the one I'd given to
Linda. It was still curled a little, where I'd had to palm it. It was
also speckled with what I presumed was Linda's blood. I looked
at the part of the bag where you write the case number and the
identification of the piece of evidence. It was blank. It wasn't on
the records. It wasn't official. Yet.
Murphy was waiting for my answer. She wanted me to tell her
something. I just wasn't sure if she was waiting for me to tell her
that a lot of people have my card, and that I didn't know how it
had gotten here, or if she wanted me to say how I had known the
victim, how I had been involved with her. Then she would have
to ask me questions. The kinds of questions you ask suspects.
"If I tell you," I said, "that I was having a psychic premonition,
would you take me seriously?"
"What kind of premonition?" she said. She didn't look up at
me.

"I sense …" I paused, thinking of my words. I wanted them to
be very clear. "I sense that this woman will have a police record,
probably for possession of narcotics and solicitation. I sense that
she used to work at the Velvet Room for Madame Bianca. I sense
that she used to be close friends and lovers with Jennifer
Stanton. I sense that if she had been approached, yesterday, and
asked about those deaths, that she would have claimed to know
nothing."
Murphy mulled over my words for a moment. "You know,
Dresden," she said, and her voice was tight, cool, furious, "if
you'd sensed these things yesterday, or maybe even this morning,
it's possible that we could have talked to her. It's possible that we
could have found out something from her. It's even possible
"—and she turned to me and slammed me against the doorway
with one forearm and the weight of her body, suddenly and
shockingly hard—"it's even possible," she snarled, "that she'd still
be alive." She stared up at my face, and she didn't look at all like
a cutesy cheerleader, now. She looked like a mother wolf
standing over the body of one of her cubs and getting ready to
make someone pay for it.
This time I was the one to look away. "A lot of people have my
card," I said. "I put them up all over the place. I don't know how
she got it."
"Godammit, Dresden," she said. She stepped back from me
and walked away, toward the bloodstained sheets. "You're
holding out on me. I know you are. I can get a warrant for your
arrest. I can have you brought in for questioning." She turned
back to me. "Someone's killed three people already. It's my job to
stop them. It's what I do."
I didn't say anything. I could smell the soap and shampoo from
Linda Randall's bath.
"Don't make me choose, Harry." Her voice softened, if not her
eyes or her face. "Please."
I thought about it. I could bring everything to her. That's what
she was asking—not half the story, not part of the information.
She wanted it all. She wanted all the pieces in front of her so she
could puzzle them together and bring the bad guys in. She didn't
want to work the puzzle knowing that I was keeping some of the
pieces in my pocket.

What could it hurt? Linda Randall had called me earlier that
evening. She had planned on coming to me, to talk to me. She
was going to give me some information and someone had shut
her up before she could.
I saw two problems with telling Murphy that. One, she would
start thinking like a cop. It would not be hard to find out that
Linda wasn't exactly a high-fidelity piece of equipment. That she
had numerous lovers on both sides of the fence. What if she and I
were closer than I was admitting? What if I'd used magic to kill
her lovers in a fit of jealous rage and then waited for another
storm to kill her, too? It sounded plausible, workable, a crime of
passion—Murphy had to know that the DA would have a hell of a
time proving magic as a murder weapon, but if it had been a gun
instead, it would have flown.
The second problem, and the one that worried me a lot more,
was that there were already three people dead. And if I hadn't
gotten lucky and creative, there would have been two more dead
people, back at my apartment. I still didn't know who the bad
guy was. Telling Murphy what little more I knew wouldn't give
her any helpful information. It would only make her ask more
questions, and she wanted answers.
If the voice in the shadows knew that Murphy was heading the
investigation to find him, and was on the right track, he would
have no qualms about killing her, too. And there was nothing she
could do to protect herself against it. She might have been
formidable to your average criminal, but all the aikido in the
world wouldn't do her any good against a demon.
Then, too, there was the White Council. Men like Morgan and
his superiors, secure in their own power, arrogant and
considering themselves above the authority of any laws but their
own, wouldn't hesitate to remove one police lieutenant who had
discovered the secret world of the White Council.
I looked at the bloodstained sheets and thought of Linda's
corpse. I thought of Murphy's office, and what it would look like
with her sprawled on the floor, her heart torn from her chest, or
her throat torn out by some creeping thing from beyond.
"Sorry, Murph," I said. My voice came out in a rasping
whisper. "I wish I could help you. I don't know anything useful." I
didn't try to look up at her, and I didn't try to hide that I was

lying.
I sensed, more than saw, the hardening around her eyes, the
little lines of hurt and anger. I'm not sure if a tear fell, or if she
really just raised a hand to brush back some of her hair. Then
she turned to the front door, and shouted, "Carmichael! Get your
ass in here!"
Carmichael looked equally as slobbish as he had a few days
ago, as though the passage of time hadn't changed him—it
certainly hadn't changed his jacket, only the food stains on his
tie and the particular pattern of rumplement to his hair. There
had to be something comforting, I reflected, in that kind of
stability. No matter how bad things got, no matter how horrible
or sickening the scene, you could count on Carmichael to look
like the same quality of crap. He glared at me as he came in.
"Yeah?"
She tossed the plastic bag to him, and he caught it. "Mark that
and log it," she said. "Hang around for a minute. I want a
witness."
Carmichael looked down at the bag and saw my card. His
beady eyes widened. He looked back up at me, and I saw the shift
in gears in his head, reclassifying me from annoying ally to
suspect.
"Mr. Dresden," Murphy said. She kept her tone frosty, polite.
"There are some questions we'd like to ask you. Do you think you
could come down to the station and make a statement?"
Questions to be asked. The White Council would convene and
execute me in a little more than thirty hours. I didn't have time
for questions. "I'm sorry, Lieutenant. I've got to comb my hair
tonight."
"Tomorrow morning, then," she said.
"We'll see," I said.
"If you aren't there in the morning," Murphy said, "I'm going
to ask for a warrant. We'll come and find you and by God, Harry,
I'll get some answers to this."
"Suit yourself," I told her, and I started for the door.
Carmichael took a step forward and stood in my way. I stopped
and looked at him, and he kept his eyes focused on the center of

my chest. "If I'm not under arrest," I told her, "then I presume
I'm free to go."
"Let him go, Ron," Murphy said. Her tone of voice was
disgusted, but I could hear the hurt underneath it. "I'll talk to
you again soon, Mr. Dresden." She stepped closer and said, in a
perfectly even tone, "And if it turns out that you're the one
behind all this, rest assured. Whatever you can do and whatever
you can pull, I will find you and I will bring you down. Do you
understand me?"
I did understand, really. I understood the pressure she was
under, her frustration, her anger, and her determination to stop
the killing from happening again. If I was some kind of hero
from a romance novel, I'd have said something brief and
eloquent and heartrending. But I'm just me, so I said, "I do
understand, Karrin."
Carmichael stepped out of my way.
And I walked away from Murphy, who I couldn't talk to, and
from Linda, who I couldn't protect, my head aching, weary to my
bones, and feeling like a total piece of shit.
Chapter Sixteen
I walked down the block from Linda Randall's apartment
building, my thoughts and emotions a far more furious
thunderstorm than the one now rolling away from the city, out
over the vastness of the lake. I called a cab from the pay phone
outside a gas station and stood about with my back resting
against the wall of the building in the misting rain, scowling and
waiting.
I had lost Murphy's trust. It didn't matter that I had done what
I had to protect both her and myself. Noble intentions meant
nothing. It was the results that counted. And the results of my
actions had been telling a bald-faced lie to one of the only people
I could come close to calling a friend. And I wasn't sure that,
even if I found the person or persons responsible, even if I
worked out how to bring them down, even if I did Murphy's job
for her, that what had happened between us could ever be
smoothed over.
My thoughts were on that topic and similar issues of doom and

gloom when a man with a hat pulled low over his face began to
walk past me, stopped halfway, then turned and drove his fist
into my belly.
I had time to think, Not again, and then he struck me a
second, and third time. Each blow drove into my guts, thrust me
back against the unyielding wall, made me sick. My breath flew
out of my mouth in a little, strangling gasp, and even if I'd had a
spell already in mind, I wouldn't have had the breath to speak it.
I sort of sagged when he stopped hitting me, and he threw me
to the ground. We were at a well-lit gas station, just before
midnight on a Friday night, and anything he did was in full view
of any cars going by. Surely, God, he didn't plan on killing me.
Though at the moment, I was too tired and achy to care.
I lay there for a moment, dazed. I could smell my attacker's
sweat and cologne. I could tell it was the same person who had
jumped me the night before. He grabbed my hair, jerked my
head up, and, with an audible snip of steel scissors, cut off a big
lock of my hair. Then let me go.
My blood went cold.
My hair. The man had cut off my hair. It could be used in
almost any kind of magic, any kind of deadly spell, and there
wouldn't be a damned thing I could do to stop it.
The man turned away, walking quickly, but not running. In a
flood of panic and desperation, I leapt at his leg, got him around
the knee, and yanked hard. I heard a distinctive little pop, and
then the man screamed, "Son of a bitch!" and fell heavily to
earth. One fist, one very large and knob-knuckled fist, was
clutched around my hair. I tried to suck in a breath, and leapt
for that hand.
My attacker's hat had fallen off, and I recognized him—one of
Johnny Marcone's men who had followed me from the hotel on
Thursday afternoon, the one who had begun limping after
jogging after me for several blocks. Apparently, Gimpy had a
trick knee, and I had just made it jump through its hoop.
I grabbed his wrist and held on with both hands. I'm not a
particularly strong man, but I'm made out of wire, and stubborn
as hell. I curled up around his wrist and hung on, trying to pry at
his thick fingers. Gimpy tried to jerk his arm away. He was

carrying a lot of muscle on that arm, but it wasn't enough to
move the weight of my whole body. He shoved at me with his
other arm, trying to push me off of him, then started pounding
at me with one fist.
"Let go of me, dammit," Gimpy shouted. "Get off of me!"
I hunched my head down, my shoulders up, and hung on. If I
could dig my thumbs into his tendons for long enough, his hand
would have to open, no matter how strong he was. I tried to
imagine his wrist as Play-Doh and my thumbs as solid steel,
pushing into him, and held on for everything I was worth. I felt
his fingers start to loosen. I could see the dark, thin strands of
my hair.
"Jesus Christ," someone shouted. "Hey, Mike, come on!"
There were running footsteps.
And then a couple of young guys dressed in jogging suits and
sneakers came over and dragged me off Gimpy. I screamed,
incoherently, as my hands slipped from Gimpy's wrist. Some of
my hair spilled out, onto the wet concrete, but more stayed in his
grip as his fingers closed over it again.
"Easy, easy man," one of the guys was saying as they dragged
me off. "Take it easy."
There wasn't any use struggling against the pair of them.
Instead, I dragged in a breath and managed to gasp, "Wallet.
He's got my wallet."
Considering the way I was dressed, compared to Gimpy's suit
and coat, that was one lie that was never going to get off the
ground. Or at least, it wouldn't have, if Gimpy hadn't turned and
started hurrying away. The two men let me go, confused. Then,
taking the cautious route, they started away, walking hurriedly
back to their car.
I struggled to my feet and after Gimpy, wheezing like a leaky
accordion. Gimpy headed across the street to a car, and was
already in it and leaving by the time I got there. I shambled to a
halt in a cloud of his exhaust, and stared dully after his taillights
as he drove off into the misting rain.
My heart pounded in my chest and didn't slow down even after
I recovered my breath. My hair. Johnny Marcone now had a lock

of my hair. He could give it to someone who used magic, and use
it to do whatever they damn well pleased to me.
They could use my hair to tear my heart from my chest, rip it
right out, like they had done to Jennifer Stanton, Tommy Tomm,
and poor Linda Randall. Marcone had warned me to stop, twice,
and now he was going to take me out once and for all.
My weariness, fear, and fatigue were abruptly burned away by
anger. "Like hell," I snarled. "Like hell you will!"
All I had to do was to find them, find Johnny Marcone, find
Gimpy, and find Marcone's wizard, whoever he or she was. Find
them, get my hair back, lay them out like ninepins, and send in
Murphy to round them up.
By God, I wasn't going to take this lying down. These assholes
were serious. They'd already tried to kill me once, and they were
coming after me again. Marcone and his boys—
No, I thought. Not Marcone. That didn't make any sense,
unless it had been Marcone's gang dealing the ThreeEye from the
very beginning. If Marcone had a wizard in residence, why would
he have tried to bribe me away? Why not just swipe a lock of
hair from me when he'd sent the thug with the bat, and then kill
me when I didn't pay attention?
Could it be Marcone? Or could his thug be playing two sides of
the street?
I decided that ultimately it didn't matter. One thing was clear:
Someone had a lock of my hair. Some wizard, somewhere, meant
to kill me.
Whoever this wizard was, he wasn't much good—I'd seen that
when I'd wiped out his shadow-sending spell. He couldn't stand
up to me if I could force him into a direct confrontation—he
might have a lot of moxie, and a lot of raw power, to harness the
storms as he had and to slap a demon into servitude. But he was
like a big, gawky teenager, new to his strength. I had more than
just strength, more than just moxie. I had training, experience,
and savvy on my side.
Besides. At the moment I was mad enough to chew up nails
and spit out paper clips.
The Shadowman couldn't take a shot at me yet. He didn't have

that kind of strength. He needed to wait for the storms that
came each spring, and to use them to kill me. I had time. I had
time to work. If I could just find out where they were, where
Gimpy had taken my hair, I could go after him.
The answer came to me in a flash, and it seemed simple. If the
hair could be used as a link to the rest of me, I should be able to
reverse it—to create a link from me back to the hair. Hell, maybe
I could just set it on fire, burn it all up from my apartment. The
formula for a spell like that would be screwy as hell, though. I
needed Bob. Bob could help me work out a spell, figure out a
formula like that in minutes instead of hours or days.
I grimaced. Bob was gone, and would be for almost another
twenty-four hours. There was no way I could work out that
formula in less than ten or twelve hours by myself, and I didn't
think my brain was coherent enough to come up with solid
calculations at the moment, anyway.
I could have called Murphy. Murphy would have known where
Marcone was lurking, and Gimpy would probably be nearby. She
could have given me an idea, at least, of how to find Gentleman
Johnny, Gimpy, and the Shadowman. But she never would, now.
And even if she did, she'd demand to know the whole story, and
after I'd told it to her, she'd try to take me into protective
custody or something ridiculous like that.
I clenched my fists, hard, and my nails dug into my palms. I
should trim them sometime—
I looked down at my nails. Then hurriedly crossed the street to
stand under the gas station's lights, and stared at my hands.
There was blood under my fingernails, where they'd bitten into
Gimpy's wrists. I threw back my head and laughed. I had
everything I needed.
I moved back out of the misting rain and squatted down on the
concrete sidewalk. I used a bit of chalk I keep in my duster
pocket to sketch out a circle on the concrete, surrounding me.
Then I scraped the blood out from under my nails and put it
onto the concrete between my feet. It glistened in the fine, misty
fall of rain.
The next part took me a moment to figure out, but I settled for
using the tracking spell I already knew rather than trying to

modify it to something a little more dignified. I plucked out a
couple of nose hairs and put them in the circle, too, on top of the
bits of Gimpy's skin and blood. Then I touched a finger to the
chalk circle and willed energy into it, closing it off.
I gathered up my energy, from my anger, my renewed fear, my
aching head and queasy stomach, and hurled it into the spell. "
Segui votro testatum."
There was a rush of energy that focused on my nostrils and
made me sneeze several times in a row. And then it came to me,
quite strongly, the scent of Gimpy's cologne. I stood up, opened
the circle again with a swipe of my foot, and walked out of it. I
turned in a slow circle, all the way around. Gimpy's scent came
to me strongly from the southwest, out toward some of the richer
suburbs of Chicago.
I started laughing again. I had the son of a bitch. I could follow
him back to Marcone, or whoever he was working for, but I had
to do it now. I hadn't had enough blood to make it last long.
"Hey, buddy!" The cabby leaned out the window and glared at
me, the engine running at an idle, the end of his cheroot glowing
orange. I stared at him for a second. "What?" He scowled.
"What, are you deaf? Did someone call for a cab?"
I grinned at him, still angry, still a little light-headed, still
eager to go kick Gimpy and the Shadowman's teeth in. "I did."
"Why do I get all the nuts?" he said. "Get in." I did, closing the
door behind me. He eyed me suspiciously in the mirror and said,
"Where to?"
"Two stops," I told him. I gave him my apartment's address,
and sat back in the seat, my head automatically drawn toward
the southwest, toward where the men who wanted to kill me
were.
"That's one," he said. "Where's number two?" I narrowed my
eyes. I needed a few things from my apartment. My talismans,
my blasting rod, my staff, a fetish that should still be vital. And
after that, I was going to have a serious talk with one of
Chicago's biggest gangsters.
"I'll tell you when we get there."

Chapter Seventeen
We ended up at the Varsity, a club Marcone owned in a
Chicago suburb. It was a busy place, catering to much of the
college-age crowd to be found on this side of the city, and even at
one-thirty in the morning it was still fairly crowded for
someplace so isolated, alone in a strip mall, the only business
open at this time of the evening, the only lit windows in sight.
"Loony," the cabby muttered as he drove away, and I had to
pause for a moment and agree with him. I had directed him
about in a meandering line, the spell I'd cast letting me literally
follow my nose along Gimpy's trail. The spell had begun fading
almost the moment I'd cast it—I didn't have enough blood to
make a more lasting enchantment—but it had held long enough
for me to zero in on the Varsity, and to identify Gimpy's car in
the parking lot. I walked past the windows and, sure enough, in a
large, circular booth in the back I saw Johnny Marcone, the
bull-necked Mr. Hendricks, Gimpy, and Spike, sitting together
and talking. I ducked out of sight in a hurry, before one of them
noticed me. Then walked back into the parking lot to consider
exactly what I had at my disposal.
A bracelet on each wrist. A ring. My blasting rod. My staff.
I thought of all the subtle and devious means by which I might
tilt the situation in my favor—clever illusions, convenient
faltering of electricity or water, a sudden invasion of rats or
cockroaches. I could have managed any of them. Not many
people who use magic are that versatile, but very few have the
kind of experience and training it takes to put such spells
together on the fly.
I shook my head, irritated. I didn't have time to bother with
subtlety.
Power into the talismans, then. Power into the ring. I reached
for the power in both the staff and rod, cool strength of wood
and seething anger of fire, and stepped up to the front door of
the Varsity.
Then I blew it off its hinges.
I blew it out, rather than in. Pieces flew toward me and
bounced off the shield of air I held in front of me, while others

rained back behind me, into the parking lot. It wouldn't do to
injure a bunch of innocent diners on the other side. You only get
one chance to make a first impression.
Once the door was off, I pointed my blasting rod inside and
spoke a command. The jukebox slammed back against the wall
as though a cannonball had impacted it, and then melted into a
puddle of liquid-plastic goo. The music squealed out the
speakers and stopped. I stepped into the doorway and released a
pent-up wave of energy from my ring. Starting at the door and
then circling throughout the room, the lightbulbs began to
explode with sharp little detonations and showers of powdered
glass and glowing bits of filament. People at the bar and at all
the wooden tables scattered around the room reacted as people
tend to do in this sort of situation. They started screaming and
shouting, rising to their feet or ducking beneath their tables in
confusion. A few ducked out the fire door at the back of one side
of the room. Then there was an abrupt and profound silence.
Everyone stood stock-still and stared at the doorway—they stared
at me.
At the back table, Johnny Marcone regarded the doorway with
his passionless, money-colored eyes. He was not smiling. Mr.
Hendricks, beside him, was glaring at me, his single eyebrow
lowered far enough to threaten him with blinding. Spike was
tight-lipped and pale. Gimpy stared at me in pure horror. None
of them made any moves or any sound. I guess seeing a wizard
cut loose can do that to you.
"Little pig, little pig, let me in," I said, into the silence. I
planted my staff on the ground and narrowed my eyes at
Marcone. "I'd really like to talk to you for a minute, John."
Marcone stared at me for a moment, then his lips twitched up
at the corners. "You have a singular manner of persuasion, Mr.
Dresden." He stood up and spoke aloud to the room without ever
taking his eyes off me. He must have been angry, but the icy
exterior concealed it. "Ladies and gentlemen, the Varsity is
closing early, it would seem. Please make an orderly exit through
the door nearest you. Don't worry about your bills. Mr. Dresden,
if you would step out of the doorway and allow my customers to
leave?"
I stepped out of the doorway. The place cleared out fast,

customers and staff alike, leaving me alone in the room with
Marcone, Hendricks, Spike, and Gimpy. None of them moved as
they waited for the customers, the witnesses, to leave. Gimpy
started sweating. Hendricks's expression never changed. The big
man was as patient as a mountain lion, ready to leap out on the
unsuspecting deer.
"I want my hair back," I said, as soon as the last college-age
couple had hustled out the door.
"Beg pardon?" Marcone said. His head tilted to one side, and
he seemed genuinely puzzled.
"You heard me," I said. "This piece of trash of yours"—I swung
my blasting rod up and pointed it at Gimpy—"just jumped me
outside a gas station across town and cut off some of my hair. I
want it back. I'm not going to go out like Tommy Tomm did."
Marcone's eyes abruptly shone with a terrible, cold,
money-colored anger. He turned his head, deliberately, to
Gimpy.
Gimpy's broad face went a bit more pasty. He blinked a trickle
of sweat out of his eyes. "I don't know what he's talking about,
boss."
Marcone's gaze never wavered. "I presume, Mr. Dresden," he
said, "that you have some kind of proof?"
"Look at his left wrist," I said. "He's got several fingernail
marks on his skin where I grabbed him."
Marcone nodded, those cold, tiger's eyes on Gimpy's, and said,
almost gently, "Well?"
"He's lying, boss," Gimpy protested. He licked at his lips. "Hell,
I got some fingernail marks from my girl. He knew that. You
know what you said, he's for real, he knows things."
The pieces of the puzzle fell into place. "Whoever killed Tommy
Tomm knows that I'm on his trail," I said. "Your rival, whoever it
is selling the ThreeEye, Gimpy here must have gotten a sweet
deal from him to turn on you. He's been providing your rival
with information all along, running errands for him."
Gimpy couldn't have played a game of poker to save his life. He
stared at me in horror, shook his head in protest.
"There's an easy way to settle this," Marcone said, his voice

smooth and even. "Lawrence. Show me your wrist."
"He's lying, boss," Gimpy Lawrence said again, but his voice
was shaking. "He's just trying to mess with your head."
"Lawrence," Marcone said, his tone the gentle reproof of
parent to child.
Gimpy Lawrence knew it was over. I saw the desperate
decision in his face before he actually moved. "Liar!" he howled
at me. He got up, lifting his hand from underneath the table. I
had time to realize he held a revolver, virtually a twin to my own
.38, in his fist, before he started shooting.
Several things happened at the same time. I lifted my hand,
focusing my will on the bracelet of tiny medieval-style shields
around my left wrist, and hardened the protective energies
around me. Bullets hammered against it with whining noises,
striking sparks in the near dark of the restaurant.
Spike leapt clear of the table, staying low, a small Uzi-style
automatic now in his hand. Hendricks was more ruthless and
direct, reacting with the mindlessly violent instincts of a savage.
With one hand, the big bodyguard hauled Marcone back, putting
his own bulk between the mob boss and Gimpy Lawrence. With
the other hand, he produced a compact semiautomatic.
Gimpy Lawrence turned his head and saw Hendricks and his
gun. He panicked, turning his own weapon toward the larger
man.
Hendricks shot him with a ruthless efficiency, three sharp
claps of sound, three flashes of muzzle light. The first two shots
hit Gimpy in the middle of his chest, driving him back a pair of
steps. The third hit him over the right eyebrow, jerked his head
back, and toppled him to the ground.
Gimpy Lawrence had dark eyes, like mine. I could see them.
His head turned toward me as he lay there on the floor. I saw
him blink, once. Then the lights went out of them, and he was
gone.
I stood there for a moment, stunned. Grand entrance or not,
this wasn't what I had wanted to happen. I didn't want to kill
anyone. Hell, I didn't want anyone to die, not me and not them. I
felt sick. It had been a sort of game, a macho contest of
showmanship I had been determined to win. All of a sudden, it

wasn't a game anymore, and I just wanted to walk away from it
alive.
We all stood there, no one moving. Then Marcone said, from
beneath Hendricks, "I wanted him alive. He could have answered
several questions, first."
Hendricks frowned and got up off of Marcone. "Sorry, boss."
"That's all right, Mr. Hendricks. Better to err on the side of
caution, I suppose." Marcone stood up, straightened his tie, then
went and knelt by the body. He felt the man's throat, then wrist,
and shook his head. "Lawrence, Lawrence. I would have paid you
twice what they offered you, if you'd come to me with it. You
never were very smart, were you?" Then, his face showing no
more emotion than it had the entire evening, Marcone peeled
back Gimpy Lawrence's left sleeve, and studied the man's wrist.
He frowned, and lowered the arm again, his expression pensive.
"It would seem, Mr. Dresden," he said, "that we have a
common enemy." He turned to focus his gaze on me. "Who is it?"
I shook my head. "I don't know. If I did, I wouldn't be here. I
thought maybe it was you."
Marcone lifted his eyebrows. "You should have known me
better than that, Mr. Dresden."
It was my turn to frown. "You're right. I should have." The
killings had been more vicious, savage than Marcone would have
cared to use. Competitors might have to be removed, but there
would be no sense in making a production of it. Certainly, there
was no reason to murder bystanders, like Linda, like Jennifer
Stanton. It was inefficient, bad for business.
"If he has something of yours, you are welcome to take it, Mr.
Dresden," Marcone said. He looked around the room and sighed.
"Better hurry. I think the Varsity has seen its last crowd. A
shame."
It was hard, but I walked over to Gimpy Lawrence's body. I had
to set aside my staff, my rod, to rifle the corpse's pockets. I felt
like a ghoul, crouched over the body of a dead man, picking what
was valuable to me off of it, out of his pockets.
I didn't find my hair anywhere. I looked up at Marcone, and he
regarded me, my eyes, without any readable emotion.

"Nothing," I told him.
"Interesting. He must have passed the material in question to
someone else before he came here," Marcone said.
"Someone after he got here, maybe?"
Marcone shook his head. "I am quite sure he did not do that. I
would have noticed."
"I believe you," I told him, and I did. "But who?"
"Our enemy," Marcone said. "Obviously."
I closed my eyes, suddenly sagging with weariness. "Dammit."
Marcone said nothing. He stood up, and issued a few quiet
orders to Hendricks and Spike. Hendricks wiped down his gun
with a napkin, then left it lying on the floor. Spike went over
behind the bar and started to do something involving a power
cord and a bottle of whiskey.
I gathered up my staff and rod, stood up, and turned to
Marcone. "Tell me what else you know. I need everything you
have if I'm going to catch this guy."
Marcone considered that, and nodded. "Yes, you do.
Unfortunately, you chose a public forum for this discussion. You
have set yourself up in the eyes of anyone who cared to watch as
my enemy. As understandable as your reasons might have been,
the fact that you have publicly defied me remains. I cannot let
that go without response, regardless of my personal feelings,
without inviting more of the same. I must maintain control. It
isn't personal, Mr. Dresden. It's business."
I tightened my jaw, and my grip on my blasting rod, and made
sure my shield was still there, ready to go. "So what are you
going to do about it?"
"Nothing," he said. "I need do nothing. Either our enemy will
kill you, in which case I need not risk myself or my people in
removing you, or you will find him in time and bring him down.
If you do defeat him, I will let it be understood to any who ask
that you did so at my behest, after which I will be inclined to
forget this evening. Either way, it profits me best to wait and
see."
"If he kills me," I pointed out, "if I'm the next one to have my
heart ripped out, you still won't know where he is. You won't be

any closer to removing him and protecting your business."
"True," Marcone said. Then he smiled, an expression that
lasted for only a fraction of a second. "But I think you will not be
such easy prey. I think that even if he kills you, he will reveal
himself in some way. And since our encounter the other day, I
think I have a better feel for what sorts of things to look for."
I scowled at him and turned to go, moving briskly toward the
door.
"Harry," he said. I stopped and turned back around.
"On a personal note—I know nothing that would profit you in
any case. All of his people we managed to take revealed nothing.
They were that afraid of him. No one seems to know just where
the drug comes from, from what it is made, or where this person
does business. Shadows, they say. That he is always in the
shadows. That is all that I have learned."
I regarded Johnny Marcone for a moment, and then nodded,
once. "Thank you."
He shrugged. "Good luck. I think it would be best if you and I
did not encounter one another in the future. I cannot tolerate
any more interference in my affairs."
"I think that's a good idea, too," I said.
"Excellent. It is good to have someone who understands." And
then he turned back toward his remaining two men, leaving the
corpse of Gimpy Lawrence on the floor behind him.
I turned and trudged out of the place, into the night and the
cold and the misty rain. I still felt sick, could still see Gimpy
Lawrence's eyes as he died. I could still hear Linda Randall's
husky laughter in my head. I still regretted lying to Murphy, and
I still had no intentions of telling her any more than I already
had. I still didn't know who was trying to kill me. I still had no
defense to present to the White Council.
"Let's face it, Harry," I told myself. "You're still screwed."
Chapter Eighteen
Have you ever felt despair? Absolute hopelessness? Have you
ever stood in the darkness and known, deep in your heart, in

your spirit, that it was never, ever going to get better? That
something had been lost, forever, .and that it wasn't coming
back?
That's what it felt like, walking out of the Varsity, walking out
into the rain. When I'm in turmoil, when I can't think, when I'm
exhausted and afraid and feeling very, very alone, I go for walks.
It's just one of those things I do. I walk and I walk and sooner or
later something comes to me, something to make me feel less like
jumping off a building.
So I walked. It was pretty stupid, in retrospect, walking around
Chicago late on a Saturday night. I didn't look up very often. I
walked and let things roll around in my head, my hands in the
pockets of my duster, which flapped around my long legs while
the light rain gradually plastered my hair to my head.
I thought about my father. I usually do, when I get that low. He
was a good man, a generous man, a hopeless loser. A stage
magician at a time when technology was producing more magic
than magic, he had never had much to give his family. He was on
the road most of the time, playing run-down houses, trying to
scratch out a living for my mother. He wasn't there when I was
born.
He wasn't there when she died.
He showed up more than a day after I'd been born. He gave me
the names of three magicians, then took me with him, on the
road, entertaining children and retirees, performing in school
gymnasiums and grocery stores. He was always generous,
kind—more kind and more generous than we could afford, really.
And he was always a little bit sad. He would show me pictures of
my mother, and talk about her, every night. It got to where I
almost felt that I knew her, myself.
As I got older, the feeling increased. I saw my father, I think, as
she must have—as a dear, sweet, gentle man. A little naive, but
honest and kind. Someone who cared for others, and who didn't
value material gain over all else. I can see why she would have
loved him.
I never got to be old enough to be his assistant, as he had
promised me. He died in his sleep one night. An aneurism, the
doctors said. I found him, cold, smiling. Maybe he'd been
dreaming of Mother when he went. And as I looked at him, I

suddenly felt, for the very first time in my life, utterly, entirely
alone. That something was gone that would never return, that a
little hole had been hollowed out inside of me that wasn't ever
going to be filled again.
And that was how I felt, that rainy spring night in Chicago,
walking along the streets, my breath pluming into steam, my
right boot creaking with every step, dead people occupying all of
my thoughts.
I shouldn't have been surprised, I suppose, when after hours of
walking, my steps carried me back to Linda Randall's apartment.
The police were all gone, now, the lights all off, all the gawking
neighbors cozy in their beds. It was quiet in the apartment
complex. Dawn wasn't yet brushing the sky, but somewhere, on a
window ledge or in a rooftop nest, a bird was twittering.
I was at the end of my strength, my resources. I hadn't thought
of anything, hadn't come up with any brilliant ideas. The killer
was going to get a spell together to kill me the next time he had a
storm to draw on, and from the way the air felt that could be
anytime. If he didn't kill me, Morgan would certainly have the
White Council set to execute me at dawn on Monday. The
bastard was probably out lobbying votes, already. If the matter
came before the Council, I wouldn't stand a chance.
I leaned against the door to Linda's apartment. It was striped
with POLICE LINE—DO NOT CROSS yellow-and-black tape. I
didn't really realize what I was doing until I had already worked
a spell that opened the door, unfastened the lowest strip of yellow
tape, and walked into her apartment.
"This is stupid, Harry," I told myself. I guess I wasn't in the
mood to listen. I walked around Linda's apartment, smelling her
perfume and her blood. They hadn't come to clean up the blood,
yet. The apartment manager would probably have to handle that,
later. They never really show you details like that at the movies.
I eventually found myself lying on the floor, on the carpeting
next to Linda Randall's large bed. I was curled on my side, my
back to her bed, my face toward the sliding glass doors that led
out to her little concrete patio. I didn't feel like moving, like
going anywhere, like doing anything. Useless. It had all been
useless. I was going to die in the next two days.
The worst part was that I wasn't sure that I cared. I was just so

tired, exhausted from all the magic I'd had to use, from the
walking, from the bruises and punches and lack of sleep. It was
dark. Everything was dark.
I think I must have fallen asleep. I needed it, after everything
that had happened. I don't remember anything else, until the sun
was too bright in my eyes.
I blinked and lifted a hand against the light, keeping my eyes
closed. Mornings had never been my best time, and the sun had
risen above the tops of the buildings across the street, cheerful
springtime sunshine that dashed down through Linda Randall's
curtains, through my eyelids and into my brain. I grumbled
something, and rolled over, face to the cool darkness under
Linda's bed, back to the warm sunlight.
But I didn't go back to sleep. Instead, I started to get disgusted
with myself.
"What the hell are you doing, Harry?" I demanded, out loud.
"Lying down to die," I told myself, petulantly.
"Like hell," my wiser part said. "Get off the floor and get to
work."
"Don't wanna. Tired. Go away."
"You're not too tired to talk to yourself. So you're not too tired
to bail your ass out of the alligators, either. Open your eyes," I
told myself, firmly.
I hunched my shoulders, not wanting to obey, but against my
better judgment, I did open my eyes. The sunlight had turned
Linda Randall's apartment into an almost cheerful place,
overlaid with a patina of gold—empty still, to be sure, but warm
with a few good memories. I saw a high-school yearbook lying
nearby, underneath the bed, several photographs serving as
bookmarks. There was also a framed picture of a much-younger
Linda Randall, smiling brightly, none of the jaded weariness I
had seen in her in evidence, standing in her graduation robes
between a kind-looking couple in their late fifties. Her parents, I
presumed. She looked happy.
And, lying just in the edge of a stray little beam of sunlight, one
that was already retreating as the sun rose above the edge of the
buildings, was a small, red plastic cylinder with a grey cap.

My salvation.
I snatched it out from under the bed. I was shaking. I shook
the canister, and it rattled. A roll of film was inside. I opened up
the canister and dumped the film into my hand. The plastic
leader had been retracted into the case—there were pictures on
the film, but they hadn't been developed yet. I closed the film up
again and reached into the pocket of my duster and drew out
another canister, the one I'd found at Victor Sells's lake house.
The two were a match.
My mind spun around, taking off down a whole new track. An
entirely new realm of possibility had opened up to me, and
somewhere in it might be my opportunity, my chance to get out
of this alive, to catch the killer, to salvage everything that had
started going to hell.
But it still wasn't clear. I couldn't be sure what was going on,
but I had a possible link now, a link between the murder
investigation and Monica Sells's aborted inquiry into the
disappearance of her husband, Victor. I had another lead to
follow, but there wasn't much time to follow it. I had to get up, to
get on my feet, and get going, fast. You can't keep a good wizard
down.
I stood up, grabbed my staff and rod, and started toward the
door. The last thing I needed was to get caught trespassing on a
crime scene. It could get me arrested and stuck in holding, and
I'd be dead before I could get bail. My mind was already rolling
ahead, working out the next step, trying to find this
photographer who had been at Victor's beach house, and getting
these pictures developed and seeing if there was anything in
them that was worth Linda Randall's death.
It was then that I heard a sound, and stopped. It came again, a
quiet scraping.
Someone turned the key in the dead bolt of the apartment's
front door and swung it open.
Chapter Nineteen
There was no time to flee beneath the bed, or into the
bathroom, and I didn't want to be limited in mobility in any
case. I leapt forward and stood behind the door as it opened,

keeping very still.
A man entered—slim, short, harried-looking. His hair, a listless
shade of brown, was drawn back into a ponytail. He wore dark
cotton pants, a dark jacket, and carried a pouch on a strap at his
side. He shut the door, most of the way, and looked around with
great agitation. But, like most people who are too nervous to be
thinking clearly, he was seeing less than he should have been,
and though his head swept over where I would have been in his
peripheral vision, he didn't notice me. He was a good-looking
man, or so it seemed, with strong lines to his jaw and
cheekbones.
He crossed the room and stopped short when he saw the
bloodstained bed. I saw him clench his hands into fists. He made
a strange, cawing little sound, then hurried forward, to throw
himself down on the floor by the bed and start pawing
underneath it. After a few seconds, his pawing grew more
frantic, and I heard him curse out loud.
I slid my fingers over the smooth surface of the film canister in
my pocket. So. The mysterious photographer lurking outside of
Victor Sells's lake house was here looking for the film. I had a
feeling in my stomach like I get when I finish a particularly
difficult jigsaw puzzle—a peculiar satisfaction mingled with a
touch of smugness.
I settled my staff and rod silently into the corner by the door
and nipped my official police consultant's badge, complete with
my photograph on it, out of my duster, so that it showed against
the black canvas. I covered my ratty old T-shirt with the coat and
hoped that the man would be too rattled and nervous to notice
that I was wearing sweatpants and cowboy boots beneath the
duster.
I kept my hands in my pockets, pushed the door shut with a
little nudge of my boot, and just as it closed, said, "So. Returning
to the scene of the crime. I knew we'd catch you if I just waited."
The man's reaction would have had me rolling in laughter on
any other day. He jerked, slammed his head against the bottom
of the bed, yelped, drew himself back from the bed, turned to
look at me, and all but leapt back over the bed in surprise when
he saw me. I revised my opinion of his looks—his mouth was too
pinched, his eyes too small and too close together, giving him the

intent, predatory look of a ferret.
I narrowed my eyes and stalked toward him one slow pace at a
time. "Just couldn't stay away, could you?"
"No!" he said, "Oh, God! You don't understand. I'm a
photographer. See? See?" He fumbled with the case at his side
and produced a camera from it. "Taking pictures. For the
papers. That's what I'm doing here, just trying to get a good look
around."
"Save it," I told him. "We both know you aren't here to take
pictures. You were looking for this." And I pulled the film
canister out of my pocket, held it up, and showed it to him.
His babbling stopped, and he stood stock-still, staring at me.
Then at the canister. He licked his lips and started trying to say
something.
"Who are you?" I asked. I kept my voice gruff, demanding. I
tried to think of what Murphy would sound like, if I was
downtown with her right now, waiting for her to ask me
questions.
"Uh, Wise. Donny Wise." He swallowed, staring at me. "Am I in
some kind of trouble?"
I narrowed my eyes at him and sneered, "We'll see about that.
Do you have identification?"
"Sure, yeah."
"Let me see it." I speared him with a glance, and added,
"Slowly."
He goggled at me and reached for his hip pocket with
exaggerated slowness. With one hand, he drew out his wallet and
flipped it open to his driver's license. I stalked toward him,
snatched it, and studied it. His license and picture agreed with
the name he'd given me.
"Well, Mr. Wise," I began, "this is an ongoing investigation. So
long as you give me your cooperation, I don't think that we—"
I looked up to see him peering at my name badge, and my
voice trailed off. He jerked his wallet back, and accused, "You're
not a cop!"
I tilted my head back at an arrogant angle. "Okay. Maybe not.

But I work with the cops. And I've got your film."
He cursed again and started stuffing his camera back into his
bag, clearly meaning to leave. "No. You got nothing. Nothing
that connects any of this to me. I'm out of here."
I watched him start past me, toward the door. "Don't be so
hasty, Mr. Wise. I really think you and I have things to discuss.
Like a dropped film canister underneath the deck of a house in
Lake Providence, last Wednesday night."
He flicked a quick glance up at me. "I have nothing to say to
you," he mumbled, "whoever the hell you are." He reached for the
door and started to open it.
I gestured curtly to my staff in the corner, and hissed, in my
best dramatic voice, "Vento servitas," jerking my hand at the
doorway. My staff, driven by tightly controlled channels of air
moving in response to my evocation, leapt across the room and
slammed the door shut in front of Donny Wise's nose. He went
stiff as a board. He turned to face me, his eyes wide.
"My God. You're one of them. Don't kill me," he said. "Oh, God.
You've got the pictures. I don't know anything. Nothing. I'm no
danger to you." He tried to keep his voice calm, but it was
shaking. I saw him tilt his eyes at the glass sliding doors to the
little patio, as though calculating his chances of making it there
before I could stop him.
"Relax, Mr. Wise," I told him. "I'm not here to hurt you. I'm
after the man who killed Linda. Help me. Tell me what you know.
I'll take care of the rest."
He let out a harsh little laugh, and eased a half step toward the
glass windows. "And get myself killed? Like Linda, like those
other people? No way."
"No, Mr. Wise. Tell me what you know. I'll put a stop to the
killings. I'll bring Linda's murderer to justice." I tried to keep my
voice soothing, even, fighting against the frustration I felt. Hell,
I'd wanted to rattle him, but I hadn't meant to scare him so
badly that he wanted to jump through a plate-glass sliding door.
"I want these people stopped just as badly as you do."
"Why?" he demanded. I saw a little contempt in his eyes, now.
"What was she to you? Were you sleeping with her, too?"

I shook my head. "No. No, she's just one more dead person who
shouldn't be."
"You're not a cop. Why risk your ass to do this? Why go up
against these people? Haven't you seen what they can do?"
I shrugged. "Who else is going to?" He didn't answer me, so I
held up the film canister. "What are these pictures, Mr. Wise?
What is on this film that was worth killing Linda Randall for?"
Donny Wise rubbed his palms over his thighs. His ponytail
twitched as he looked about the room. "I'll make you a deal. Give
me the film, and I'll tell you what I know."
I shook my head. "I might need what's on here."
"What's there isn't any good to you if you don't know what
you're looking at," he pointed out. "I don't know you from Adam.
I don't want any trouble. All I want is to get my ass out of this
alive and in one piece."
I stared at him for a moment. If I traded him, I'd lose the film,
and whatever was on it. If I didn't, and if he was telling me the
truth, the film wouldn't do me any good. The trail had led me
here, to him. If I didn't dig up a lead to somewhere else, I was
dead.
So I snapped my fingers, letting my staff rattle to the floor.
Then I tossed him the film, underhand. He dropped it, and
stooped to recover it, studying me warily.
"After I get out of here," he said, "we're quits. I've never seen
you before."
I nodded. "Fine. Let's have it."
Donny swallowed and ran a hand back over his hair, giving his
ponytail a nervous little tug at the end of the motion. "I knew
Linda from around. I'd taken some pictures of her, for a
portfolio. I do shoots for some of the girls around town. They
want to make it into magazines, most of them."
"Adult magazines?" I asked.
"No," he snapped, nervous still, "Uncle Abner's magazine for
children. Of course adult mags. Nothing really classy, but you
can make some good money even if you're not Hugh Hefner's
type.

"So on Wednesday, Linda comes to me. She says she's got a
deal for me. I shoot some pictures for her and give her the film,
and I get—and she's real nice to me. All I have to do is show up
where she says, shoot a roll through the windows, and go. Deliver
to her the next day. So I did it. And now she's dead."
"Out in Lake Providence," I said.
"Yeah."
"What did you see there?" I asked.
Donny Wise shook his head, his eyes drawn past me to the bed
again. "Linda. Some other people. No one I knew. They were
having some kind of party. All candles and stuff. It was storming
like hell, a lot of thunder and lightning, so I couldn't really hear
them. I worried for a while about someone looking up and seeing
me in the lightning, but I guess they were too busy."
"They were having sex," I said.
"No," he snapped. "They was playing canasta. Yeah, sex. The
real thing, not fake stuff on a set. The real thing don't look as
good. Linda, some other woman, three men. I shot my roll and
got out."
I grinned, but he didn't seem to have noticed the double
entendre. You just don't get quality lowlife often enough
anymore. "Can you describe any of these other people?"
He shook his head. "I wasn't looking. But they wasn't being too
particular, if you take my meaning. Turned my stomach."
"Did you know what Linda wanted with the pictures?"
He looked at me and then snickered, as though I were
extremely simple. "Jesus, buddy. What do you think someone
wants with pictures like that? She wanted to get leverage on
somebody. Hell, it wouldn't hurt her reputation any if pictures of
her in the middle of an orgy got out. But it might have, some of
the people with her. What kind of simp, wanna-be cop are you?"
I ignored the question. "What are you going to do with the
film, Donny?"
He shrugged. "Trash it, probably." I saw his eyes flick from side
to side, and I knew that he was lying to me. He'd keep the film,
find out who was in the pictures, and if he thought he could get
away with it, he'd try to weasel whatever profit he could out of it.

He seemed the type, and I trusted my instincts.
"Allow me," I said, and snapped my fingers. "Fuego."
The canister's grey lid flew off in a little whoosh of flame, and
Donny Wise yelped, drawing his hand back sharply. The red
canister burst into flame on its way to the ground and landed
there in a crumpled, smoking lump.
He stared at the film, then up at me, his mouth gaping.
"I hope I don't find out you've lied to me, Donny," I told him.
He went white as a sheet, assured me that he hadn't, then turned
and fled out of the apartment, knocking loose two bits of police
tape on the way out. He didn't close the door behind him.
I let him go. I believed him. He didn't seem bright enough to
make up a story on the fly, as rattled as he'd been. I felt a
ferocious surge of triumph, of anger, and of the desire to find
this person, whoever it was, who was taking the raw forces of life
and creation and turning them to the ends of destruction, and to
put him in the trash with the rest of the garbage. Whoever he
was, murdering with magic and killing people by degrees with
the ThreeEye drug, he was someone I wanted to put down. My
brain lurched into gear, now that there was something to work
with, some other possibility for tomorrow morning than me
dying in a variety of gruesome ways.
Linda Randall had been planning on blackmailing someone, I
took a staggering mental leap and figured it was Victor, or
someone out at his house during the party. But why? I didn't
have any pictures now, only the information I'd gotten from
Donny Wise. I couldn't afford to wait around. I had to pursue the
lead he'd given me if I was to get to the bottom of this, and find
out who had killed Linda.
How had I managed to get into all of this trouble in only a few
days? And how in the world had I managed to stumble across
what appeared to be a complex and treacherous little plot by
chance, out at the house in Lake Providence, on a separate
investigation entirely?
Simple answer—it hadn't been an accident. It had all been by
design. I had been directed there. Someone had wanted me out
at the lake house, had wanted me to get involved and to find out
what was going on out there. Someone who was nervous as hell

around wizards, who refused to give out her name, who had
carefully dropped phrases that would make me believe her
ignorance, who had to rush out quickly from her appointment
and who was willing to let five hundred dollars go, just to get me
off the phone a few seconds faster. Someone had drawn me out
and forced me into the open, where I had attracted all sorts of
hostile attention.
That was the key.
I gathered up my staff and rod and stalked out the door.
It was time to talk to Monica Sells.
Chapter Twenty
The cabby dropped me off a block away from Monica Sells's
house in the suburbs. I was running out of time, out of Murphy's
loan, and out of patience, so I didn't waste any daylight in
walking down the street toward her place.
It was a cute little house, two stories, a couple of young trees in
the front yard, just now starting to rival the house for height.
There was a minivan in the driveway, and a basketball goal, well
used. The lawn was grown rather long, but all the recent rains
left a good excuse for that. The street was a quiet one, and it took
me a moment to realize that most of the houses on it were not
occupied. FOR SALE signs stood in many of the yards. Sparse
curtains draped over empty, gaping windows, like cobwebs.
There wasn't a lot of birdsong, for a street with so many trees,
and I couldn't hear any dogs barking as I walked along the
sidewalk. Overhead, clouds were thickening, building up for
another thunderstorm.
Taken all together, it had the feel of someplace blighted, a
place where a black wizard had set up shop. I swung up through
the Sells yard and to the front door.
I rang the bell, and waited.
There was no answer.
I knocked. I leaned on the doorbell.
Still no answer.
I tightened my jaw and looked around. I didn't see anyone, so I

turned back to the door, preparing to use a spell to open it.
Instead, the door swung open, maybe six inches. Monica Sells
stood inside, peering out at me with her green eyes. She was
dressed in jeans, a plain flannel shirt with the sleeves rolled up,
and her hair was covered by a bandana. She wore no makeup.
She looked both older and more appealing that way—I think
maybe because it was a more natural look for her, something
that was closer to the sort of person she really was, rather than
the nicer clothes and jewelry she'd worn when she visited my
office. Her face went pale, her lips bloodless.
"I don't have anything to say to you, Mr. Dresden," she said.
"Go away."
"I can't do that," I said. She started to swing the door shut, but
I jammed the end of my staff into the doorway, keeping it from
closing.
"I'll call the police," she said, voice strained. She leaned against
the door, trying to keep me from coming in.
"Do it," I growled, and then I played a hunch, "and I'll tell them
about you and your husband." I was taking a shot in the dark,
but what the hell. She didn't know that I didn't know what the
hell was going on.
My instincts paid off. I heard her suck in a breath and felt her
resistance on the door sag a little. I put my shoulder to the door,
leaned into it hard, and she stepped back from me in surprise. I
don't think she'd expected me to physically force my way into her
house. Hell, I hadn't expected me to do that. I hadn't realized
how angry I was until I saw the look of panic on her face when
she looked up at me. I don't know what I looked like, but it must
not have been friendly.
I stopped. I closed my eyes. I took a deep breath, and tried to
get a handle on my anger. It wouldn't profit me anything to lose
control.
That was when she went for the stunner.
I heard her move, opened my eyes in time to see her snatch a
black-plastic case the size of a cellular phone from the piano and
lunge toward me. Her face was pale, frightened. Blue lightning
danced between the two tines of the stunner as she shoved it at
my stomach.

I swept my staff, upright, from right to left, and the buzzing
device went past me, along with her lunge, striking the
doorframe behind me. I slipped past her, into the living room,
turning to face her as she recovered and turned around.
"I won't let you hurt them," she snarled. "Not you, not anyone.
I'll kill you before I let you touch them, wizard." And then she
was coming at me again, fury replacing the terror in her eyes, a
grim determination to succeed that made me think of Murphy
for a second. For the first time, she was looking me in the face.
For the first time she forgot to keep her eyes averted from mine,
and in that second, I saw inside of her.
Things seemed to slow down for a moment. I had time to see
the color of her eyes, the structure of her face. To recognize
where I had seen them before, why she had looked familiar to
me. I had time to see, behind her eyes, the fear and the love that
motivated every move she made, every step she took. I saw what
had moved her to come to me, why she was afraid. I saw her
grief, and I saw her pain.
And the pieces all fell into place. Knowing the emotions that
drove her, the terrible love that she was showing even now, it all
seemed perfectly obvious, and I felt stupid for not figuring it out
days ago.
"Stop," I said, or tried to say, before she thrust the stunner at
my chest. I dropped staff and rod alike in a clatter of falling
wood, and caught her wrist in both of my hands. She pushed the
stunner up at my face, and I let her do it.
It got to within about three inches of me, the light bright in my
eyes. Then I drew in a breath and puffed it out onto the stunner,
along with an effort of will. There was a spark, a little puff of
smoke, and then it went dead in her hands, like every other
electronic gizmo seemed to do whenever I came around. Hell, I
was surprised it had taken as long as it did to stop working. And
even if it hadn't, it wasn't any trouble for me to hex it into
uselessness.
I continued holding her wrist, but the driving tension behind
her arm had eased away to nothing. She was staring at my face,
her eyes wide with shock from the meeting of our gazes. She
started shaking and dropped the useless stunner from limp
fingers. It clattered to the floor. I let go of her, and she just

stared at me.
I was shaking, too. A soulgaze is never something pleasant or
simple. God, sometimes I hated that I had to live with that. I
hadn't wanted to know that she had been abused as a child. That
she'd married a man who provided her with more of the same, as
an adult. That the only hope or light that she saw in her life was
in her two children. There hadn't been time to see all of her
reasons, all of her logic. I still didn't know why she had drawn me
into this entire business—but I knew that it was, ultimately,
because she loved her two kids.
And that was all I really needed, that and one other connection,
the nagging resemblance to someone that I had noticed in her at
my office. The rest fell into place from there.
It took Monica Sells a moment to recover herself. She did it
with remarkable speed, as though she were a woman used to
drawing on a mask again after having it knocked off. "I … I'm
sorry, Mr. Dresden." She lifted her chin, and regarded me with a
fragile, wounded pride. "What do you want here?"
"A couple of things," I told her. I stooped down to recover my
staff, my rod. "I want my lock of hair back. I want to know why
you came to me last Thursday, why you dragged me into this
mess. And I want to know who killed Tommy Tomm and
Jennifer Stanton and Linda Randall."
Monica's eyes grew even duller, and her face paled. "Linda's
dead?"
"Last night," I told her. "And someone's planning on taking me
out the same way, the next chance they get."
Outside, in the far distance, thunder rumbled. Another storm
was in the works, slowly building. When it got to town, I was a
dead man. It was as simple as that.
I looked back to Monica Sells, and it was all over her face—she
knew about the storm just as well as I did. She knew about it,
and there was a sort of sad and weary frustration in her eyes.
"You have to go, Mr. Dresden," she said. "You can't be here
when … You've got to go, before it's too late."
I stepped toward her. "You're the only chance I have, Monica. I
asked you once before to trust me. You've got to do it again.

You've got to know that I'm not here to hurt you or your—"
A door opened, in the hallway behind Monica. A girl, on the
gawky end of preadolescence, with hair the color of her mother's,
leaned out into the hallway. "Mom?" she said in a quavering
voice. "Mom, are you okay? Do you want me to call the police?" A
boy, perhaps a year or two younger than his sister, poked his
head out, too. He was carrying a well-used basketball in his
hands, turning it in nervous little gestures.
I looked back to Monica. Her eyes were closed. There were
tears coming, trailing down her cheeks. It took her a moment,
but she drew in a breath and spoke to the girl in a clear, calm
voice, without turning around. "I'm fine," she told them. "Jenny,
Billy, get back into the room and lock the door. I mean it."
"But Mom—" the boy began.
"Now," Monica said. Her voice was strained.
Jenny put a hand on her brother's shoulder. "C'mon, Billy." She
looked at me for just a moment. Her eyes were too old and too
knowing for a child her age. "C'mon." The two vanished back
into the room, closed the door, and locked it behind them.
Monica waited until they were gone, and then broke down into
more tears. "Please. Please, Mr. Dresden. You have to go. If
you're here when the storm comes, if he knows …" She buried her
face in her hands and made a quiet, croaking sound.
I stepped closer to her. I had to have her help. No matter how
much pain she was in, no matter what kind of agony she was
going through, I had to have her help. And I thought I knew the
names to invoke to get it.
I can be such a bastard sometimes.
"Monica. Please. I'm up against a wall. I'm out of options.
Everything I have leads here. To you. And I don't have time to
wait. I need your help, before I wind up just like Jennifer and
Tommy and Linda." I sought her eyes, and she looked up at me
without turning her gaze away. "Please. Help me." I watched her
eyes, saw the fear and the grief and the weariness there. I saw
her look at me as I leaned on her, and demanded more out of her
than she could afford to give.
"All right," she whispered. She turned away and walked toward

the kitchen. "All right. I'll tell you what I know, wizard. But
there's nothing I can do to help you." She paused at the doorway
and looked back at me. Her words fell with the weight of
conviction, simple truth. "There's nothing anyone can do, now."
Chapter Twenty-One
Monica Sells had a cheerful, brightly colored kitchen. She
collected painted cartoon cows, and they ranged over the walls
and cabinet doors of the room in a cheerful, bovine sort of
indolence. The refrigerator was covered with crayon drawings
and report cards. There was a row of colored glass bottles on the
windowsill. I could hear wind chimes outside, restlessly stirred
by a cool, rising wind. A big, friendly cow clock on the wall
swung its tail back and forth, tick, tick, tick.
Monica sat down at the kitchen table. She drew up her legs
beneath her, and seemed to relax by a few degrees. Her kitchen, I
sensed, was her sanctuary, the place where she retreated when
she was upset. It was lovingly maintained, sparkling clean.
I let her relax for as long as I could, which wasn't long. I could
almost feel the air building up to greater tension, the storm
brewing in the distance. I couldn't afford to play with kid gloves.
I was just about to open my mouth, to start pushing, when she
said, "Ask questions, wizard. I'll answer them. I wouldn't even
know where to start, myself." She didn't look at me. She didn't
look at anything.
"All right," I said. I leaned against the kitchen counter. "You
know Jennifer Stanton, don't you. You're related to her."
Her expression didn't change. "We have our mother's eyes,"
she confirmed. "My little sister was always the rebel. She ran
away to become an actress, but became a whore instead. It
suited her, in her own way. I always wanted her to stop, but I
don't think she wanted to. I'm not sure she knew how."
"Have the police contacted you yet, about her death?"
"No. They called my parents, down in St. Louis. They haven't
realized, yet, that I live in town. Someone will notice soon, I'm
sure."
I frowned. "Why didn't you go to them? Why did you come to

me?"
She looked over at me. "The police can't help me, Mr. Dresden.
Do you think they would believe me? They'd look at me like I was
some kind of lunatic, if I went to them babbling about magic
spells and rituals." She grimaced. "Maybe they'd be right.
Sometimes I wonder if I'm going crazy."
"So you came to me," I said. "Why didn't you just tell me the
truth?"
"How could I?" she asked. "How could I walk into the office of
someone I didn't even know, and tell him—" She swallowed, and
squeezed her eyes shut over more tears.
"And tell me what, Monica?" I asked. I kept my voice soft.
"Who killed your sister?"
Wind chimes tinkled outside. The friendly cow clock went tick,
tick, tick. Monica Sells drew in a long, shuddering breath and
closed her eyes. I saw her gathering up the frayed threads of her
courage, knotting them up as tightly as she could. I knew the
answer, already, but I needed to hear it from her. I needed to be
sure. I tried to tell myself that it would be good for her to face
such a thing, just to say it out loud. I wasn't sure I bought
that—like I said, I'm not a very good liar.
Monica squeezed her hands into tight fists, and said, "God help
me. God help me. It was my husband, Mr. Dresden. It was
Victor." I thought she would dissolve into tears, but instead she
just hunched tighter into her little defensive ball, as though she
expected someone to start hitting her.
"That's why you wanted me to find him," I heard myself say.
"That's why you sent me out to the lake house, to look for him.
You knew he was there. You knew that if you sent me out there,
he would see me." My voice was quiet, not quite angry, but the
words pounded around Monica Sells like sledgehammers
throwing up chips of concrete. She flinched from each of them.
"I had to," she moaned. "God, Mr. Dresden. You don't know
what it was like. And he was getting worse. He didn't start as a
bad man, really, but he kept getting worse and worse, and I was
afraid."
"For your kids," I said.

She nodded, and rested her forehead on her knees. And then
the words started spilling out of her, slowly at first, and then in a
greater and greater rush, as if she couldn't hold back the
immense weight of them any longer. I listened. I owed it to her,
for walking all over her feelings, for forcing her to talk to me.
"He was never a bad man, Mr. Dresden. You have to
understand. He worked hard. He worked so hard for us, to give
us something better. I think it was because he knew that my
parents had been so wealthy. He wanted to give me just as much
as they could have, and he couldn't. It would make him so
frustrated, so angry. Sometimes he would lose his temper. But it
wasn't always so bad. And he could be so kind, sometimes, too. I
thought that maybe the children would help him to stabilize.
"It was when Billy was about four that Victor found the magic.
I don't know where. But he started getting obsessed with it. He
brought home books and books. Strange things. He put a lock on
the door to the attic, and after dinner he'd vanish up there. Some
nights, he wouldn't come to bed. Some nights, I thought I could
hear things, up there. Voices. Or things that weren't voices." She
shuddered.
"He started to get worse. He'd get angry, and things would
happen. Little things. The drapes would catch on fire at one
edge. Or things would fly off the walls and break." She turned her
haunted gaze toward her cute, tacky cows for a moment, as
though assuring herself that they were still there.
"He'd scream at us for no reason. Or burst out laughing for no
reason. He … He saw things. Things I couldn't see. I thought he
was going crazy."
"But you never confronted him," I said, quietly.
She shook her head. "No. God forgive me. I couldn't. I had
gotten used to being quiet, Mr. Dresden. To not making a fuss."
She took a deep breath and continued. "Then, one night, he
came to me and woke me up. He made me drink something. He
told me that it would make me see, make me understand him.
That if I drank, I would see the things he saw. That he wanted
me to understand him, that I was his wife." This time, she did
start crying, tears that coursed silently down her cheeks, the
corners of her mouth.
Something else clicked solidly into place, where I'd already

thought it would go. "The ThreeEye," I said.
She nodded. "And … I saw things, Mr. Dresden. I saw him."
Her face screwed up, and I thought she was going to vomit. I
could sympathize. To have the Third Sight suddenly opened to
you like that, not knowing what it was, what was happening to
you; to look on the man you had wed, who had given you
children, and to see him for what he truly was, obsessed with
power, consumed by greed—it had to have been hell. And it
would remain with her. Always. She would never find the
memory fading, never find the comfort and solace of years
putting a comfortable padding between her and the image of her
husband as a monster.
She continued, speaking in a low, hurried rush. "I wanted
more. Even when it was over, even though it was horrible, I
wanted more. I tried not to let it show, but he could tell. He
looked into my eyes and he knew, Mr. Dresden. Like you did just
now. And he started to laugh. Like he'd just won the lottery. He
kissed me, he was so happy. And it made me sick.
"He started making more of the drug. But he could never make
enough. It drove him berserk, furious. And then he started to
realize that when he was angry, he could do more. He'd look for
excuses to be angry. He'd drive himself into rages. But it still
wasn't enough." She swallowed. "That's when … when."
I thought of frightened pizza drivers and faerie commentary on
human "sporting."
"That's when he realized that he could touch other people's
emotions, too," I said. "Use them to help power his magic."
She nodded, and curled tighter in on herself. "It was only me,
at first. He'd frighten me. And afterward I would be so
exhausted. Then he found out that for what he was doing, lust
worked better. So he started looking around. For backers.
Investors, he called them." She looked up at me, her eyes
pleading. "Please, Mr. Dresden. You have to understand. It
wasn't always so bad. There were moments that I could almost
see him again. That I thought he was going to come back to us."
I tried to look on her with compassion. But I wasn't sure I felt
anything but fury, that someone, anyone should treat his family
that way—or anyone else, for that matter. My feelings must have
showed on my face, because Monica quickly averted her eyes,

and huddled down in fear. She spoke in a hurried voice, as
though to put off my rage, in the voice of a woman who has put
off rage with desperate words more than once.
"He found the Beckitts. They had money. And he told them
that if they would help him, he would help them get their
vengeance on Johnny Marcone. For their daughter. They put
their trust in him. They gave him all the money he needed."
I thought of the Beckitts, and their lean, hungry faces. I
thought of Mrs. Beckitt's dead eyes.
"And he started the rituals. The ceremony. He said he needed
our lust." Her eyes shifted left and right, and the sickened look
on her face grew deeper. "It wasn't so bad. He would close the
circle, and all of a sudden, nothing mattered. Nothing but flesh. I
could lose myself for a while. It was almost like an escape." She
rubbed her hand on the leg of her jeans, as if trying to wipe
something foul off of it. "But it wasn't enough. That's when he
started talking to Jennifer. He knew what she did. That she
would know the right kind of people. Like her, like Linda. Linda
introduced him to Marcone's man. I don't know his name, but
Victor promised him something that was enough to bring him
into the circle.
"I didn't have to go all the time, then. Either Jenny or I would
stay with the children. Victor made the drug. We started to
make money. Things got better for a little while. As long as I
didn't think too much." Monica took a deep breath. "That's when
Victor started getting darker. He called demons. I saw them. And
he said he needed more power. He was hungry for it. It was
horrible, like watching a starving animal, forever pacing. And I
saw him start … start looking at the children, Mr. Dresden. It
made me afraid. The way he looked at them, sometimes, I
knew—" This time she buckled and doubled toward the floor
with a groan. She shuddered and wept, out of control. "Oh, God.
My babies. My babies."
I wanted to go over to her. To offer her my hand to hold, to put
an arm over her shoulders and to tell her that it would be all
right. But I knew her, now. I had looked inside. It would make
her scream. God, Harry, I thought. Haven't you tortured this
poor woman enough?
I rummaged in cabinets until I found a glass. I ran cold water

from the sink, poured it into the glass, then went over and put it
down by her. She straightened in her chair and took the glass
between shaking hands. She took a sip, and spilled a little onto
her chin.
"I'm sorry," I said. It was all I could think of to say.
If she heard me, it didn't show. She sipped water, then
continued, as if desperate to finish, to get the taste of the words
out of her mouth. "I wanted to leave him. I knew he'd be furious,
but I couldn't let the children stay close to him. I tried to talk to
Jenny about it. And she took matters into her own hands. My
little sister, trying to protect me. She went to Victor and told him
that if he didn't let me leave, she'd go to the police and to Johnny
Marcone. She'd tell them all about him. And he … He …"
"He killed her," I said. Hell. Victor hadn't needed any of
Jennifer Stanton's hair to kill her. Any kind of sample of bodily
fluids would have worked. With the ceremonies of lust that he'd
been holding, he'd have had ample opportunity to collect from
poor Jennifer Stanton. Maybe he'd even had her bring him a
sample from Tommy Tomm. Or maybe Jennifer and Tommy
Tomm had just been too close, as they were making love, for the
spell to affect just one of them when he killed them.
"He killed her," Monica confirmed. Her shoulders slumped
with a sudden weariness. "That's when I came to you. Because I
thought you might be able to see. Be able to do something,
before he hurt my babies. Before he killed someone else. And now
Linda's dead, too. And soon you, Mr. Dresden. You can't stop
him. No one can."
"Monica," I said.
She shook her head and curled up in a miserable little ball.
"Go," she said. "Oh, God. Please go, Mr. Dresden. I don't want to
see it when he kills you, too."
My heart felt like a lump of cold wax in my chest. I wanted so
badly to tell her that everything would be all right. I wanted to
dry her tears and tell her that there was still joy in the world,
that there was still light and happiness. But I didn't think she
would hear me. Where she was, there was nothing but an
endless, hopeless darkness full of fear, pain, and defeat.
So I did the only thing I could. I withdrew in silence and left

her to her weeping. Perhaps it would help her start to heal.
To me, it only sounded like pieces of glass falling from a
shattered window.
As I walked toward the front door, a little motion to the left
caught my eye. Jenny Sells stood in the hallway, a silent wraith.
She regarded me with luminous green eyes, like her mother's,
like the dead aunt whose namesake she was. I stopped and faced
her. I'm not sure why.
"You're the wizard," she said, quietly. "You're Harry Dresden. I
saw your picture in the newspaper, once. The Arcane."
I nodded.
She studied my face for a long minute. "Are you going to help
my mom?"
It was a simple question. But how do you tell a child that
things just aren't that simple, that some questions don't have
simple answers—or any answer at all?
I looked back into her too-knowing eyes, and then quickly
away. I didn't want her to see what sort of person I was, the
things I had done. She didn't need that. "I'm going to do
everything I can to help your mom."
She nodded. "Do you promise?"
I promised her.
She thought that over for a moment, studying me. Then she
nodded. "My daddy used to be one of the good guys, Mr.
Dresden. But I don't think that he is anymore." Her face looked
sad. It was a sweet, unaffected expression. "Are you going to kill
him?"
Another simple question.
"I don't want to," I told her. "But he's trying to kill me. I might
not have any choice."
She swallowed and lifted her chin. "I loved my Aunt Jenny,"
she said. Her eyes brightened with tears. "Momma won't say,
and Billy's too little to figure it out, but I know what happened."
She turned, with more grace and dignity than I could have
managed, and started to leave. Then said, quietly, "I hope you're
one of the good guys, Mr. Dresden. We really need a good guy. I

hope you'll be all right." Then she vanished down the hall on
bare, silent feet.
I left the house in the suburbs as quickly as I could. My legs
drove me down the oddly silent sidewalk, and back to the corner
where the cabby was waiting, meter ticking away.
I got in the cab and told the cabby to drive me to the nearest
pay phone. Then I closed my eyes and struggled to think. It was
hard, through all the pain I felt. Maybe I'm stupid or something,
but I hate to see people like Monica, like little Jenny, hurting like
that. There shouldn't be pain like that in the world, and every
time I run into it, it makes me furious. Furious and sad. I didn't
know if I wanted to scream or to cry. I wanted to pound Victor
Sells's face in, and I wanted to crawl into bed and hide under the
covers. I wanted to give Jenny Sells a hug, and to tell her that
everything would be all right. And I was still afraid, all tight and
burning in my gut. Victor Sells, of the shadows and demons, was
going to kill me as soon as the storm rolled in.
"Think, Harry," I told myself. "Think, dammit." The cabby gave
me an odd look in the rearview mirror.
I stuffed down all the feelings, all the fear, all the anger into a
tight little ball. I didn't have time to let those feelings blind me
now. I needed clarity, focus, purpose. I needed a plan.
Murphy. Murphy might be able to help me. I could tip her off
about the lake house and send in the cavalry. They might find a
stockpile of ThreeEye there. They could then arrest Victor like
any other dealer.
But there were too many holes in that plan. What if Victor
wasn't keeping his stores at the lake house? What if he eluded
the police? Monica and her children would be in danger, if he
did. Not only that, what if Murphy didn't listen to me? Hell, the
judge might not issue a warrant to search private property on
the word of a man who probably had a warrant out for his own
arrest, now. Not only that, but the bureaucracy involved in
working with the authorities in Lake Providence, on a Sunday,
no less, would slow things down. It might not happen in time to
save me from having my heart torn out. No, I couldn't rely on the
police.
If this was any other time, if I was held in less suspicion by the
White Council, I would report Victor Sells to them and let them

handle the whole thing. They're not exactly soft on people using
magic like Victor used it, to call up demons, to kill, to produce
drugs. He had probably broken every Law of Magic. The White
Council would waste no time in sending someone like Morgan to
wipe Victor out.
But I couldn't do that, either. I was already under suspicion,
thanks to Morgan's narrow-minded blindness. The Council was
already meeting at sunrise on Monday. Some of the other
members of the Council might listen to me, but they would be
traveling, now. I had no way of reaching any of those who were
sympathetic to me, no way of asking for help. There wasn't time,
in fact, to try to round up any of my usual allies.
So, I concluded. It was up to me. Alone.
It was a sobering thought.
I had to confront Victor Sells, as strong a practitioner as I had
ever gone up against, in his own place of power—the lake house.
Not only that, but I had to do it without breaking any of the laws
of magic. I couldn't kill him with sorcery—but somehow, I had to
stop him.
Odds seemed really good that I was going to get killed, whether
I tried to face him or not. To hell with it, then. If I was going to
go out, it wasn't going to be while I was lying around moaning
and bitching about how useless it all was. If Victor Sells wanted
to take out Harry Blackstone Copperfield Dresden, he was going
to have to shove his magic right down my throat.
This decision cheered me somewhat. At least I knew what I
was doing now, where I was going. What I needed was an edge, I
decided. Something to pull on Victor, something he wouldn't
expect.
Now that I knew who he was, I understood the magic I had run
into outside of my apartment a little bit better. It had been
potent, deadly, but not sophisticated, not well controlled. Victor
was powerful, strong, a natural mage—but he wasn't practiced.
He didn't have any training. If only I had something of his,
something like his own hair, that I could use against him. Maybe
I should have checked the bathroom at Monica's, but I had the
feeling that he wouldn't have been that careless. Anyone who
spends time thinking about how to use that sort of thing against
people is going to be doubly paranoid that no one have the

opportunity to use it against him.
And then it struck me—I did have something of Victor's. I had
his scorpion talisman, back in the drawer of my desk at the
office. It was one of his own devices, something close and
familiar. I could use it to create a bond to him, to sort of judo his
own power back against him and beat him with it, hands down,
no questions asked.
I might have a chance, yet. I wasn't finished, not by a long shot.
The cabby pulled into a gas station and parked next to the pay
phone. I told him to wait for me a minute and got out, fumbling
a quarter from my pocket to make the call. If it did turn out that
I wouldn't live to see tomorrow, I wanted to make damn sure
that the hounds of Hell would be growling at Victor Sells's heels.
I dialed Murphy's number, down at the station.
It rang several times, and finally someone answered. The line
was scratchy, noisy, and I could barely make out who it was.
"Murphy's desk, this is Carmichael."
"Carmichael," I said loudly into the phone. "It's Harry Dresden.
I need to talk to Murphy."
"What?" Carmichael said. There was a squeal of static.
Dammit, the phones go to hell on me at the worst times. "I can't
hear you. Murphy? You want Murphy? Who is this? Anderson, is
that you?"
"It's Harry Dresden," I shouted. "I need to talk to Murphy."
"Eh," Carmichael grunted. "I can't hear you, Andy. Look,
Murphy's out. She took that warrant down to Harry Dresden's
office to take a look around."
"She what?" I said.
"Harry Dresden's office," Carmichael said. "She said she'd be
back soon. Look, this connection is awful, try to call back." He
hung up on me.
I fumbled for another quarter, my hands shaking, and dialed
my own office number. The last thing I needed was for Murphy
to go poking around in my office, maybe impounding things. If
she stuck the scorpion in evidence, I was done for. I'd never be
able to explain it to her in time. And if she saw me face-to-face,
she might be furious enough with me to just have me slapped

into holding and left there overnight. If that happened, I'd be
dead by morning.
My phone rang a couple of times, then Murphy answered. The
line was blissfully clear. "Harry Dresden's office."
"Murph," I said. "Thank God. Look, I need to talk to you."
I could practically feel her anger. "Too late for that now, Harry.
You should have come to talk to me this morning." I heard her
moving around. She started opening drawers.
"Dammit, Murph," I said, frustrated. "I know who the killer is.
Look, you've got to keep out of that desk. It could be dangerous."
I thought I had been going to tell her a lie, but I realized as I said
it that I was telling the truth. I remembered seeing, or thinking I
had seen, movement from the talisman when I had examined it
before. Maybe I hadn't been imagining things.
"Dangerous," Murphy growled. I heard her scattering pens out
of the top drawer of my desk, moving things around. The
talisman was in the drawer beneath. "I'll tell you what's
dangerous. Fucking with me is dangerous, Dresden. I'm not
playing some kind of game here. And I can't trust what you say
anymore."
"Murphy," I said, trying to keep my voice even, "you've got to
trust me, one more time. Stay out of my desk. Please."
There was silence for a moment. I heard her draw in a breath,
and let it out through her mouth. Then Murphy said, her voice
hard, professional, "Why, Dresden? What are you hiding?"
I heard her open the middle drawer.
There was a clicking sound, and a startled oath from Murphy.
The receiver clattered to the floor. I heard gunshots, shockingly
loud, whining ricochets, and then a scream.
"Dammit!" I shouted at the phone. "Murphy!" I slammed the
phone down and sprinted back to the cab.
The cabby blinked at me. "Hey, buddy. Where's the fire?"
I slammed the door shut, and gave him the address to my
office. Then I thrust all of my remaining cash at him, and said,
"Get me there five minutes ago."
The cabby blinked at the money, shrugged, and said, "Crazies.

Cabbies get all the crazies." Then he tore out into the street,
leaving a cloud of smoke behind us.
Chapter Twenty-Two
The building was locked on Sunday. I jammed my key in the
lock, twisted it hard to open it, and jerked the keys out again. I
didn't bother with the elevator, just hurtled up the stairs as
quickly as I could.
Five stories' worth of stairs. It took me less than a minute, but
I begrudged every second of it. My lungs were burning and my
mouth was dry as sand as I reached the fifth floor and sprinted
down the hallway to my office. The halls were quiet, empty, dim.
The only light came from the exit signs and from the overcast
day outside. Shadows stretched and settled in the closed
doorways.
The door to my office was ajar. I could hear my ceiling fan
squeaking on its mounting, underneath the labored wheezing of
my own breath. The overhead light wasn't on, but the reading
light on my desk must have been, because yellow light outlined
the doorway and laid a swath of gold across the floor of the hall. I
stopped at the threshold. My hands were shaking so much I
could hardly hold my staff and rod.
"Murphy?" I called out. "Murphy, can you hear me?" My voice
was hoarse, breathless.
I closed my eyes, and listened. I thought I heard two things.
The first was a labored breath, with a faint moan on the
exhale. Murphy.
The second was a dry, scuttling sound.
I could smell gunpowder on the air.
I clenched my jaw in sudden anger. Victor Sells's little beastie,
whatever it was, had hurt my friend. Like hell I was going to
stand out here and give it the run of my office.
I shoved the door open with my staff and stalked into the
office, my blasting rod extended before me and words of power
upon my lips.
Directly in front of my office door is a table arranged with a

series of pamphlets with titles like Real Witches Don't Float So
Good, and Magic in the Twenty-first Century. I had written
some of them myself. They were meant for the curious, for people
who just wanted to know about witches and magic. I squatted
for a moment, blasting rod aimed beneath the table, but saw
nothing. I rose again, looking back and forth, rod still ready.
To the right of the door is a wall lined with filing cabinets and
a couple of easy chairs. The cabinets were shut, but something
could have been hiding beneath one of the chairs. I slid to my
left, checked behind the door to the office, and pressed my
shoulders to the wall, keeping my eyes on the room.
My desk is in the back corner, to the right as you come in the
door, diagonal from it. It's a corner office. There are windows on
either of the outside walls. My shades were, as usual, drawn. The
overhead fan, in the center of the room, spun around with a tired
little groan on every rotation.
I kept my eyes moving, my senses alert. I choked down my
anger, ferociously, and made myself remain cautious. Whatever
had happened to Murphy, I wouldn't do her any good by letting
it happen to me, too. I moved slowly, carefully, my blasting rod
held ready.
I could see Murphy's tennis shoes behind my desk. She looked
like she was curled on her side, from the way her feet were
angled, but I couldn't see the rest of her. I pushed forward,
striding to the center of the back wall, keeping my blasting rod
leveled like a gun at the floor behind the desk as it became
visible.
Murphy lay there, curled on her side, her golden hair in an
artless sprawl about her head, her eyes open and staring blindly.
She was dressed in jeans, a button-down shirt, and a Cubs satin
jacket. Her left shoulder was stained with a blot of blood. Her
gun lay next to her, a couple of feet away. My heart stepped up
into my throat. I heard her take a little breath and groan when
she let it out.
"Murphy," I said. Then, louder, "Murphy."
I saw her stir, a fitful little motion that was in response to my
voice. "Easy, easy," I told her. "Relax. Don't try to move. I'm
going to try to help you."

I knelt next to her, very slowly, watching the room all around. I
didn't see anything. I set my staff aside, and felt her throat. Her
pulse was racing, thready. There was not enough blood for it to
be a serious injury, but I touched her shoulder. Even through the
jacket, I could feel the swelling.
"Harry?" Murphy rasped. "Is that you?"
"It's me, Murph," I told her, setting my blasting rod aside and
slowly reaching for the phone. The middle drawer of my desk,
where the scorpion talisman had been, was open and empty.
"Just hang on. I'm going to call an ambulance to help you."
"Can't believe it. You bastard," Murphy wheezed. I felt her stir
around a little. "You set me up."
I drew the phone down and dialed 911. "Hush, Murph. You've
been poisoned. You need help, fast."
The 911 operator came on and took my name and address. I
told her to send an ambulance prepared to treat someone for
poisoning, and she told me to stay on the line. I didn't have time
to stay on the line. Whatever had done this to Murphy, it was
still around, somewhere. I had to get her out of there, and then I
had to recover Victor's talisman, to be able to use it against him
when I went out to the lake house.
Murphy stirred again, and then I felt something hard and cool
flick around my wrist and clicker-clack shut. I blinked and
looked down at her. Murphy's jaw was set in a stubborn line as
she clicked the other end of the handcuffs shut around her own
wrist.
"You're under arrest," she wheezed. "You son of a bitch. Wait
till I get you in an interrogation room. You aren't going
anywhere."
I stared at her, stunned. "Murph," I stammered. "My God. You
don't know what you're doing."
"Like hell," she said, her lip lifting in a ghost of its usual snarl.
She twisted her head around, grimacing in pain, and squinted at
me. "You should have talked to me this morning. Got you now,
Dresden." She broke off in a panting gasp, and added, "You
jerk."
"You stubborn bitch from hell." I felt at a loss for a second,

then shook my head. "I've got to get you out of here before it
comes back," I said, and I stooped forward to try to gather her
up.
That was when the scorpion exploded toward me from the
shadows beneath my desk, a harsh burst of dry, scuttling motion.
It wasn't a bug I could squash with my fingers, anymore. It was
the size of a large terrier, all brown and glinting, and it was
almost too fast to see coming.
I convulsed away from it, and saw the flash of its tail, saw its
stinger whip forward and miss my eye by a hair breadth.
Something cool and wet speckled my cheek, and my skin started
to burn. Venom.
My startled motion made my leg jerk, and kicked my staff and
rod away from me. I rolled after the latter desperately. Murphy's
handcuffs brought me up short, and both of us made sounds of
discomfort as the steel bands cut at the base of our hands. I
stretched for the rod, felt the smooth roundness of it on my
fingertips, and then there was another scuttling sound and the
scorpion came at my back. The rod squirted out from beneath
my grasping fingers and rolled away, out of reach.
I didn't have time for a spell, but I grabbed at the middle
drawer of my desk, jerked it all the way out of its frame and
barely managed to shove it between the scorpion and myself.
There was a hiss of air and a smacking sound of breaking wood.
The scorpion's stinger plunged through the bottom of the desk
drawer and stuck fast. A crab-claw pincer gouged a hole through
my sweatpants and into my leg.
I screamed and hurled the drawer away. The scorpion, its tail
still stuck, went with it, and they both landed in a heap a few feet
away.
"Won't do you any good, Dresden," Murphy moaned
incoherently. She must have been too far gone from the poison to
understand what was going on. "I've got you. Stop fighting it.
Get some answers from you, now."
"Sometimes, Murph," I panted, "you make things just a little
harder than they need to be. Anyone ever tell you that?" I bent
down to her, and slipped my cuffed wrist beneath her arm and
around her back, drawing her own arm back with me, my right
arm and her left bound by the handcuff.

"My ex-husbands," she moaned. I strained and lifted us both
up off the ground, then started hobbling toward the door. I could
feel the blood on my leg, the pain where the scorpion had ripped
it, hot and hateful. "What's happening?" Confusion and fear
trembled in Murphy's voice. "Harry, I can't see."
Shit. The poison was getting to her. The poison of the common
brown scorpion found all over most of the United States isn't
much more venomous than the sting of a bumblebee. Of course,
most bumblebees aren't the size of the family dog, either. And
Murphy wasn't a big person. If a lot of poison had been
introduced into her system, the odds were against her. She
needed medical attention, and she needed it immediately.
If my hands had been free, I would have taken up my staff and
rod and done battle, but I didn't like my odds tied to
Murphy—even if I could keep the thing off of me, it might land
on her, sting her again, and put an end to her. I was at a bad
angle to search for her keys, and I didn't have time to go down
the ring trying them on the handcuffs one by one. Any magic
that I could work fast enough to shatter the cuffs in time would
probably kill me with flying shrapnel, and there wasn't time to
work out a gentler escape spell. Dammit, Dad, I thought, I wish
you'd lived long enough to show me how to slip out of a pair of
handcuffs.
"Harry," Murphy repeated, her voice thready, "what's
happening? I can't see."
I saved my breath and lugged Murphy toward the door without
answering her. Behind me, there was a furious scraping and
clicking. I looked back over my shoulder. The scorpion's stinger
was stuck fast in the drawer, but the thing was rapidly ripping
the wood to shreds with its pincers and legs.
I gulped, turned, and hobbled out of my office and down the
hall with Murphy. I managed to swing the door to my office shut
with one foot. Murphy's legs did little to support her, and the
difference in our heights made the trip awkward as hell. I was
straining to keep her upright and moving.
I reached the end of the hall, the door to the stairway on my
right, the elevator on my left.
I stopped for a moment, panting, trying not to let the sounds of
splintering wood down the hall rattle my judgment. Murphy

sagged against me, speechless now, and if she was breathing, I
couldn't tell. There was no way I was going to be able to carry her
down the stairs. Neither one of us had enough left to manage
that. The ambulance would be arriving in minutes, and if I didn't
have Murphy down there when it arrived, I might as well just
leave her on the floor to die.
I grimaced. I hated elevators. But I pushed the button and
waited. Round lights over the elevator doors began counting up
to five.
Down the hall from me, the splintering sounds stopped, and
something crashed into my office door, rattling it on its frame.
"Hell's bells, Harry," I said aloud. I looked up at the lights. Two.
A pause approximately ten centuries long. Three. "Hurry up," I
snarled, and jabbed the button a hundred more times.
Then I remembered the bracelet of shields around my left
wrist. I tried to focus on it but couldn't, with it twisted
awkwardly beneath Murphy, supporting her. So I laid her down
as gently and quickly as I could, then lifted my left hand and
focused on the bracelet.
The lower third of my office door exploded outward, and the
brown, gleaming form of the scorpion bounded across the
hallway and into the wall. It was bigger, now. The damn thing
was growing. It bounced off of the wall with a scrabbling,
horrible agility, oriented on me, and hurtled down the hall
toward me as fast as a man can run, its legs clicking and
scuttling furiously over the floor. It leapt at me, claws extended,
stinger flashing. I focused my will on the defensive shield the
bracelet helped me form and maintain, struggling to get it
together before the scorpion hit me.
I did it, barely. The invisible shield of air met the scorpion a
handsbreadth from my body and sent it rebounding back onto
its back. There it struggled for a second, awkward and flailing.
Behind me, the elevator dinged, and the doors swooped
graciously open.
Without time to be delicate, I grabbed Murphy's wrist and
hauled her into the elevator with me, jabbing at the button for
the lobby. In the hall, the scorpion thrashed its tail and righted
itself, oriented on me again with an uncanny intelligence, and

flew toward me. There wasn't time to get my shield together
again. I screamed.
The elevator doors swooped shut. There was a sharp thud, and
the car rattled, as the scorpion smashed into them.
The car started down, and I tried to regain my breath. What
the hell was that thing?
It wasn't just an insect. It was too fast, too damn smart for
that. It had ambushed me, waiting until I had set my weapons
aside to come after me. It had to be something else, some kind of
power construct, built small, but designed to draw in energy, to
get bigger and stronger, an arthropod version of Frankenstein's
monster. It wasn't really alive, just a golem, a robot, a
programmed thing with a mission. Victor must have figured out
where his talisman had gotten to, and set a spell on it to attack
anyone it came in contact with, the crazy bastard. Murphy had
stumbled right into it.
It was still growing, getting faster and stronger and more
vicious. Getting Murphy out of danger wasn't enough. I had to
find a way to deal with the scorpion. I didn't want to, but I was
the only one on the block who could. There was too much
potential danger involved. What if it didn't stop growing? I had
to kill it before it got out of control.
The lights on the elevator panel kept counting down, four to
three to two. And then the elevator shuddered and ground to a
stop. The lights flickered and went out.
"Oh, crap," I said. "Not now. Not now." Elevators hate me. I
jabbed at the buttons, but nothing happened, and a second later
there was a cough of smoke, and the lights behind the buttons
went out, too, leaving me in darkness. The emergency lighting
came on for just a second, but then there was the pop of a
burning filament, and it went away too. Murphy and I were left
huddling in the darkness on the floor.
Overhead, outside in the elevator shaft, there was the sound of
shrieking metal. I looked up at the invisible roof of the elevator
car in the darkness. "You have got to be kidding me," I muttered.
Then there was a rattling bang, and something the weight of a
small gorilla landed on the roof of the elevator. There was a
second's silence, and then something started a deafening tearing

at the roof.
"You have got to be kidding me!" I shouted. But the scorpion
wasn't. It was wrenching back the roof of the elevator, rattling
the bolts and supports, making it groan. Dust rattled down in
the darkness, unseen grit for my unseeing eyes. We were sardines
in a can, waiting to be torn up and eaten. I got the feeling that if
the thing stung me now, the poison would be redundant—I
would bleed to death before it became an issue.
"Think, Harry," I shouted at myself. "Think, think, think!" I
was stuck in a frozen elevator, handcuffed to my unconscious
friend who was dying of poison while a magical scorpion the size
of some French cars tried to tear its way into me and rip me
apart. I didn't have my blasting rod or my staff, the other gizmos
I'd brought with me to the Varsity were drained and useless, and
my shield bracelet would only prolong the inevitable.
A long strip of metal ripped away in the roof, letting in a strip
of dim light, and I looked up at the scorpion's underbelly, saw it
wedge a claw into the breach and start to tear it open wider.
I should have smashed it when it was just a bug. I should have
taken off my shoe and smashed it right there on my desk. My
heart leapt into my throat as the thing tilted up, drove an
exploratory pincer down into the upper third of the elevator,
then started tearing the hole even larger.
I gritted my teeth and started drawing in every ounce of power
that I had. I knew it was useless. I could direct a firestorm up at
the thing, but it would slag the metal it was on and that would
come raining back down on us and kill us, make the elevator
shaft too hot for us to survive. But I wasn't just going to let the
thing have me, either, by God. Maybe, if I did it just right, I
could catch it as it leapt, minimize the damage that I did to the
surrounding scenery. That was the problem with not being too
great at evocation. Plenty of speed, plenty of power, not much
refinement. That's what the staff did, and the blasting rod—they
were designed to help me focus my power, give me pinpoint
control. Without them I might as well have been a suicide soldier
carrying a dozen grenades strapped to his belt and ready to jerk
out the pin.
And then it occurred to me. I was thinking in the wrong
direction.

I swung my eyes down from the ceiling, to the elevator's floor,
pressed my palms against it. Bits of something rained down on
my head and shoulders, and the clicking and scuttling of the
scorpion got louder. I took all the power I'd drawn in and focused
it beneath my palms. There was airspace beneath the elevator, in
the elevator shaft, and that was what I reached for—air, instead
of fire.
This was a simple spell, one I'd done hundreds of times, I told
myself. It wasn't any different from calling my staff to my hand.
Just … a little bigger.
"Vento servitas!" I shouted, pouring every bit of strength, every
ounce of anger, every shred of fear I had into the spell.
And, beneath the elevator, the winds rose up at my call, a solid
column of air that caught the bottom of the elevator like a giant's
palm and hurled it upward, through the darkness of the elevator
shaft. The brakes squealed, threw off sparks, and fell to pieces
that dropped through the hole the scorpion had torn, to land
next to me. The force of it pressed me down to the floor with a
groan. There was a long and rising whine as the car accelerated
up the elevator shaft.
I hadn't meant for there to be quite that much wind, I thought,
and prayed that I hadn't just killed me and Murphy both.
The elevator hurtled up and up and up, and I could feel my face
sagging down with the speed of it. My office building is twelve
stories high. We'd started at the second floor, so assuming an
average of nine feet per story, it was almost a hundred feet to the
building's roof.
The car shot up it in less than a half dozen of my frantic
heartbeats, slammed past the blocks at the top of the line, and
hammered into the roof of the shaft like the bell on the
strongman's sledgehammer game at the amusement park. The
impact crushed the scorpion into the concrete with a series of
sharp popping sounds as chitinous plates cracked and
splintered, flattening it into a shapeless brown splotch. Colorless
goo, the ectoplasm of magically created mass, spattered out
between the crushed plates and hide and down into the car.
At the same time, Murphy and I were hurled up, meeting the
goo halfway. I kept Murphy in the shelter of my body, trying to
stay between her and the roof, and my back hit it hard enough to

make me see stars. We tumbled loosely back down to the
elevator's floor in a sprawl of limbs, and Murphy groaned
beneath me when I landed on her.
I lay still for a moment, stunned. The scorpion was dead. I'd
killed it, crushed it between the elevator and the roof of the shaft,
and drenched myself and Murphy in ichor doing it. I'd saved our
lives from the murderous device, against the odds.
But I just couldn't shake the nagging impression that I was
forgetting something.
There was a little groan from the elevator, and then it
shuddered, and started sliding back down the shaft, no longer
supported by the powerful but short-lived pillar of wind that had
driven it up there. We were falling back down the way we had
come, and I had the feeling that we weren't going to have a much
better time of it at the bottom than the scorpion had at the top.
Now was the time for the bracelet, and I didn't waste a
heartbeat grabbing Murphy close to me, and bringing the shield
into being around us. I only had a couple of seconds to focus, to
think—I couldn't make the globe around us too brittle, too
strong, or we'd just smash ourselves against the inside of it in the
same way we would if we just rode the elevator down. There had
to be some give to it, some flexibility, to distribute the
tremendous force of the abrupt stop at the first floor.
It was dark, and there wasn't much time. Murphy and I rose
up to the center of the space of the elevator while I pushed the
shield out all around us, filled up the space with layer after layer
of flexible shielding, semicohesive molecules of air, patterns of
force meant to spread the impact around. There was a sense of
pressure all around me, as though I had been abruptly stuffed in
Styrofoam packing peanuts.
We fell, faster and faster. I sensed the bottom of the shaft
coming. There was an enormous sound, and I held on to the
shield with all of my might.
When I opened my eyes again, I was sitting on the floor of the
shattered, devastated elevator, holding a sagging, unconscious
Murphy. The elevator doors gave a warped, gasping little ding,
then shuddered open.
A pair of EMTs with emergency kits in hand stood staring at

the elevator, at Murphy and me, their jaws hanging open to their
knees. Dust billowed everywhere.
I was alive.
I blinked at that, somewhat stunned. I was alive. I looked down
at myself, at my arms and legs, and they were all there. Then I let
my head fall back and howled out a defiant laugh, a great,
gawping whoop of primal joy.
"Take that, Victor Shadowman!" I shouted. "Hah! Hah! Give
me your best shot, you murderous bastard! I'm going to take my
staff and shove it down your throat!"
I was still laughing when the EMTs gathered me up and helped
me and Murphy toward the ambulance, too stunned to ask any
questions. I saw them both give me wary looks, though, and then
trade a glance with one another that said they were going to
sedate me with something as soon as they got the chance.
"The champion!" I howled, still on an adrenaline rush the size
of the Colorado River, as they helped me out toward the
ambulance. I thrust my fist into the air, scarcely noting or caring
that my bracelet of silver shields had turned into a blackened
ring of curled and wilted links, burned to uselessness by the
energies I had forced through it. "I am the man! Shadowman,
you'd better put your head between your legs and kiss your—"
The EMTs helped me outside. Into the rain. The wet slaps of
raindrops on my face shut me up, made me cold sober faster
than anything else in the world could have done. I was suddenly
acutely aware of the handcuffs around my wrist, still, of the fact
that I did not have Victor's talisman to use to turn his own
power against him. Victor was still out there, out at his lake
house, he still had a hank of my hair, and he was still planning
on ripping my heart out as soon as he possibly could, when the
storm gave him the strength he needed.
I was alive, and Murphy was alive, but my elation was
premature. I didn't have anything to be celebrating, yet. I lifted
my face to the sky.
Thunder growled, near at hand. Lightning danced overhead,
somewhere in the clouds, casting odd light and spectral shadows
through the roiling overcast.
The storm had arrived.

Chapter Twenty-Three
Raindrops pelted down around me, the big, splashy kind you
only really see in the spring. The air grew thicker, hotter, even
with the rain falling. I had to think fast, use my head, be calm,
hurry up. Murphy's handcuffs still held me fastened to her wrist.
Both of us were coated in dust that was stuck to the stinking,
colorless goo, the ectoplasm that magic called from somewhere
else whenever generic mass was called for in a spell. The goo
wouldn't last long—within a few more minutes, it would simply
dissipate, vanish into thin air, return to wherever it had come
from in the first place. For the moment, it was just a rather
disgusting, slimy annoyance.
But maybe one that I could put to use.
My own hands were too broad, but Murphy had delicate little
lady's hands, except where practice with her gun and her martial
arts staff routines had left calluses. If she had heard me thinking
that, and had been conscious, she would have punched me in the
mouth for being a chauvinist pig.
One of the EMTs was babbling into a handset, while the other
was on Murphy's other side, supporting her along with me. It
was the only chance I was going to get. I hunched over beside
Murphy's diminutive form and tried to shroud what I was doing
with the dark folds of my black duster. I worked at her hand,
squeezing her limp, slimy fingers together and trying to slip the
steel loop of the handcuffs over her hand.
I took some skin off of her, and she groaned a lot, but I
managed to get the cuffs off of her wrist just as the EMT and I
sat her down on the curb next to the ambulance. The other EMT
ran to the back of the ambulance and swung it open, rummaging
around inside of it. I could hear sirens, both police cars and fire
engines, approaching from all directions.
Nothing's ever simple when I'm around.
"She's been poisoned," I told the EMT. "The wound site is on
her right upper arm or shoulder. Check for a massive dose of
brown scorpion venom. There should be some antivenin
available somewhere. She'll need a tourniquet and—"
"Buddy," the EMT said, annoyed, "I know my job. What the

hell happened in there?"
"Don't ask," I said, glancing back at the building. The rain
came down more heavily by slow degrees. Was I too late? Would
I be dead before I could get to the lake house?
"You're bleeding," the EMT told me, without looking up from
Murphy. I looked down at my leg, but it didn't start hurting until
I actually saw the injury and remembered I had it. The
scorpion's claw had ripped me pretty good, opening a six-inch
tear in the leg of my sweats and a comparable gash in the leg
beneath, ragged and painful. "Sit down," the EMT said. "I'll take
care of it in a second." He wrinkled up his face. "What the hell is
this stinking shit all over you?"
I wiped rain from my hair, slicking it back. The other EMT
came running with a bottle of oxygen and a stretcher, and they
both bent over their work with Murphy. Her face had discolored,
pale in parts, too brightly red in others. She was as limp as a wet
dollar, except for the occasional shudder or flinch, quivers of her
muscles that came from nowhere, pained her for a moment, and
then apparently vanished.
It was my fault Murphy was there. It had been my decision to
hold information away from her that had compelled her to take
direct action, to search my office. If I'd just been more open,
more honest, maybe she wouldn't be lying there right now, dying.
I didn't want to walk away from her. I didn't want to turn my
back on her again and leave her behind me, alone.
But I did. Before the support units arrived, before police
started asking questions, before the EMTs began looking around
for me and giving my description to police officers, I turned on
my heel and walked away.
I hated myself every step. I hated leaving before I knew if
Murphy would survive the scorpion's venomous sting. I hated
that my apartment and my office building had been trashed,
torn to pieces by demons and giant insects and my own clumsy
power. I hated to close my eyes and see the twisted, mangled
bodies of Jennifer Stanton and Tommy Tomm, and Linda
Randall. I hated the sick twisting of fear in my guts when I
imagined my own spare frame torn asunder by the same forces.
And, most of all, I hated the one responsible for all of it. Victor
Sells. Victor, who was going to kill me as soon as this storm

grew. I could be dead in another five minutes.
No. I couldn't. I got a little more excited as I thought about the
problem and looked up at the clouds. The storm had come in
from the west, and was only now going over the city. It wasn't
moving fast; it was a ponderous roller of a thunderstorm that
would hammer at the area for hours. The Sells's lake house was
to the east, around the shore of Lake Michigan, maybe thirty or
forty miles away, as the crow flies. I could beat the storm to the
lake house, if I was fast enough, if I could get a car. I could get
out to the lake house and challenge Victor directly.
My rod and staff were gone, dropped when the scorpion
attacked. I might have been able to call them down from my
office with winds, but as worked up as I was, I might accidentally
blow out the wall if I tried. I didn't care to be crushed by
hundreds of pounds of flying brick, called to my outstretched
hand by the strength of my magic and my fury. My shield
bracelet was gone, too, burned out by countering the tremendous
force of the impact of the falling elevator.
I still had my mother's pentacle talisman at my throat, the
symbol of order, of the controlled patterns of power that were at
the heart of white magic. I still had the advantage of years of
formal training. I still had the edge in experience, in sorcerous
confrontations. I still had my faith.
But that was about all. I was weary, battered, tired, hurt, and I
had already pulled more magic out of the hat in one day than
most wizards could in a week. I was pushing the edge already, in
both mystic and physical terms. But that just didn't matter to
me.
The pain in my leg didn't make me weaker, didn't discourage
me, didn't distract me as I walked. It was like a fire in my
thoughts, my concentration, burning ever more brightly, more
pure, refining my anger, my hate, into something steel-hard,
steel-sharp. I could feel it burning, and reached for it eagerly,
shoving the pain inside to fuel my incandescent anger.
Victor Shadowman was going to pay for what he'd done to all
those people, to me and to my friends. Dammit all, I was not
going out before I'd caught up to that man and shown him what
a real wizard could do.
It didn't take me long to walk to McAnally's. I came through

the door in a storm of long legs, rain, wind, flapping duster, and
angry eyes.
The place was packed, people sitting at every one of the
thirteen stools at the bar, at every one of the thirteen tables,
leaning against most of the thirteen columns. Pipe smoke drifted
through the air in a haze, stirred by the languidly spinning
blades of the ceiling fans. The light was dim, candles burning at
the tables and in sconces on the walls, plus a little grey storm
light sliding in through the windows. The light made the
carvings on the columns vague and mysterious, the shadows
changing them in a subtle fashion. All of Mac's chessboards were
out on the tables, but my sense of it was that those playing and
watching the games were trying to keep their minds off of
something that was disturbing them.
They all turned to stare at me as I came in the door and down
the steps, dripping rainwater and a little blood onto the floor.
The room got really quiet.
They were the have-nots of the magical community. Hedge
magi without enough innate talent, motivation, or strength to be
true wizards. Innately gifted people who knew what they were
and tried to make as little of it as possible. Dabblers, herbalists,
holistic healers, kitchen witches, troubled youngsters just
touching their abilities and wondering what to do about it. Older
men and women, younger people, faces impassive or concerned
or fearful, they were all there. I knew them all by sight, if not by
name.
I swept my gaze around the room. Every one of the people I
looked at dropped their eyes, but I didn't need to look deep to see
what was happening. Word has a way of getting around between
practitioners of magic, and the arcane party line was working as
it usually did. Word was out. There was a mark on my head, and
they all knew it. Trouble was brewing between two wizards,
white and black, and they had all come here, to the shelter
offered by McAnally's winding spaces and disruptive
configurations of tables and columns. They'd come here to
shelter until it was over.
It didn't offer any shelter to me, though. McAnally's couldn't
protect me against a sharply directed spell. It was an umbrella,
not a bomb shelter. I couldn't get away from what Victor would

do to me, unless I cared to flee to the Nevernever itself, and for
me that was more dangerous, in some ways, than staying at
Mac's.
I stood there in the silence for a moment, but said nothing.
These people were associates, friends of a casual sort, but I
couldn't ask them to stand beside me. Whatever Victor thought
he was, he had the power of a real wizard, and he could crush
any of these people like a boot could a cockroach. They weren't
prepared to deal with this sort of thing.
"Mac," I said, finally. My voice fell on the silence like a hammer
on glass. "I need to borrow your car."
Mac hadn't quit polishing the bar with a clean white cloth
when I entered, his spare frame gaunt in a white shirt and dark
breeches. He hadn't stopped when the room had grown still. And
he didn't stop when he pulled the keys out of his pocket and
tossed them to me with one hand. I caught them, and said,
"Thanks, Mac."
"Ungh," Mac said. He glanced up at me, and then behind me. I
took the gesture for the warning it was, and turned.
Lightning flashed outside. Morgan stood silhouetted in the
doorway at the top of the little flight of stairs, his broad frame
black against the grey sky. He came down the stairs toward me,
and the thunder came in on his heels. Rain had made little
difference in the lay of his dull brown and grey hair, except for
changing the texture of curl in his warrior's ponytail. I could see
the hilt of the sword he wore, beneath his black overcoat. He had
a muscular, scarred hand on it.
"Harry Dresden," he said. "I finally figured it out. Using the
storms to kill those people is insanely dangerous, but you are just
the sort of ambitious fool who would do it." He set his jaw in a
hard line. "Have a seat," he said, gesturing at a table. The people
sitting at it cleared away, fast. "We're going to stay here, both of
us. And I'm going to make sure that you don't have the chance to
use this storm to hurt anyone else. I'm going to make sure you
don't get to try your cowardly tricks until the Council decides
your fate." His grey eyes glittered with grim determination and
certainty.
I stared at him. I swallowed my anger, the words I wanted to
throw back at him, the spell I wanted to use to blast him out of

my way, and spoke gently. "Morgan, I know who the killer is. And
he's after me, next. If I don't get to him and stop him, I'm as
good as dead."
His eyes hardened, a fanatic's gleam. He spoke in two sharp
little explosions of single syllables. "Sit. Down." He drew the
sword out from its scabbard by a couple of inches.
I let my shoulders sag. I turned toward the table. I leaned
against the back of one of the chairs for a moment, taking a little
weight off of my injured leg, and drew the chair out from the
table.
Then I picked it up, spun in a half circle with it to gather
momentum, and smashed it into the Warden's stomach. Morgan
tried to recoil, but I'd caught him off guard, and the blow struck
home, hard and heavy with the weight of Mac's handmade
wooden chair. In real life, the chair doesn't break when you slug
somebody with it, the way it does in the movies. The person you
hit is the one who breaks.
Morgan doubled forward, dropping to one hand and one knee.
I didn't wait for him to recover. Instead, as the chair bounced off
his ribs, I used the momentum of it to spin all the way around in
a complete circle in the other direction, lifting the chair high,
and brought it smiting down over the other man's back. The
blow drove him hard into the floor, where he lay unmoving.
I sat the chair back at the table and looked around the room.
Everyone was staring, pale. They knew who Morgan was, what
his relationship to me was. They knew about the Council, and my
precarious stance with it. They knew that I had just assaulted a
duly appointed representative of the Council in pursuit of the
execution of his duty. I'd rolled the stone over my own grave.
There wasn't a prayer that I could convince the Council that I
wasn't a rogue wizard fleeing justice, now.
"Hell with him," I said aloud, to no one in particular. "I haven't
got time for this."
Mac came out from behind the bar, not moving in a hurry, but
not with his usual laconic lack of concern, either. He knelt by
Morgan and felt at his throat, then peeled back an eyelid and
peered at the man. Mac squinted up at me and said,
expressionless, "Alive."

I nodded, feeling some slight relief. However much of an ass
Morgan was, he had good intentions. He and I wanted the same
thing, really. He just didn't realize that. I didn't want to kill him.
But, I had to admit in some gleeful little corner of my soul, that
the look of shocked surprise on his arrogant face as I hit him
with the chair was a sight worth remembering.
Mac stooped and picked up the keys, where I'd dropped them
on the floor as I swung the chair. I hadn't noticed that I had.
Mac handed them back to me and said, "Council will be pissed."
"Let me worry about that."
He nodded. "Luck, Harry." Mac offered me his hand, and I took
it. The room was still silent. Fearful, worried eyes watched me.
I took the keys and walked up, out of the light and shelter of
McAnally's and into the storm, my bridges burning behind me.
Chapter Twenty-Four
I drove for my life.
Mac's car was an '89 TransAm, pure white, with a big
eight-cylinder engine. The speedometer goes to 130 miles an
hour. In places, I went past that. The falling rain made the roads
dangerous at the speed I was driving, but I had plenty of
incentive to keep the car moving as quickly as possible. I was still
riding the steel-hard edge of anger that had carried me away
from the ruins of my office and through Morgan.
The sky grew darker, a combination of building banks of storm
clouds and the approaching dusk. The lighting was strange,
greenish, the leaves of the trees as I left the city standing out too
sharply, too harshly, the yellows of the lines in the road too dim.
Most of the cars I saw had their headlights on, and streetlights
were clicking alight as I barreled down the highway.
Fortunately, Sunday evening isn't a busy one, as far as traffic
goes. I'd have been dead any other night. I must also have been
driving during the watch rotation for the highway patrol,
because not one of them tried to pull me over.
I tried to tune in the weather station, on the radio, but gave it
up. The storm, plus my own agitation, was creating a cloud of
squealing feedback on the radio's speakers, but nothing

intelligible about the storm. I could only pray that I was going to
get over to Lake Providence before it did.
I won. The curtains of rain parted for me as I whipped past the
city-limits sign for Lake Providence. I hit the brakes to slow for
the turn onto the lakefront road that led to the Sells house,
started hydroplaning, turned into the slide with more composure
and ability than I really should have had, and got the vehicle
back under control in time to slide onto the correct road.
I pulled into the Sells' gravel drive, on the swampy little
peninsula that stretched out into Lake Michigan. The TransAm
slid to a halt in a shower of gravel and a roar of mighty engine,
then sputtered and gasped into silence. I felt, for a giddy second
and a half, like Magnum, P.I. Blue Beetle aside, I could get into
this sports-car thing. At least it had lasted long enough for me to
get to the Sells place. "Thanks, Mac," I grunted, and got out of
the car.
The gravel driveway leading back to the lake house was
half-sunk in water from the recent storms. My leg hurt me too
much to run very fast, but I set off down the drive at a
long-legged lope, rapidly eating the distance to the house. The
storm loomed before me, rolling across the lake toward the
shore—I could see columns of rain, dimly lit by the fading light,
falling into its waters.
I raced the storm to the house, and as I did I drew in every bit
of power and alertness that I could, keyed myself to a tighter
level, tuned my senses to their sharpest pitch. I came to a halt
twenty yards shy of the house and closed my eyes, panting. There
could be magical traps or alarms strewn about, or spiritual or
shrouded guardians invisible to the naked eye. There could be
spells waiting, illusions meant to hide Victor Sells from anyone
who came looking. I needed to be able to see past all that. I
needed to have every scrap of knowledge I could get.
So I opened my Third Eye.
How can I explain what a wizard sees? It isn't something that
lends itself readily to description. Describing something helps to
define it, to give it limits, to set guardrails of understanding
around it. Wizards have had the Sight since time began, and
they still don't understand how it works, why it does what it
does.

The only thing I can say is that I felt as though a veil of thick
cloth had been lifted away from me as I opened my eyes
again—and not only from my eyes, but from all of my senses. I
could abruptly smell the mud and fish odor of the lake, the trees
around the house, the fresh scent of the coming rain preceding
the storm on the smoke-stained wind. I looked at the trees. Saw
them, not just in the first green coat of spring, but in the full
bloom of summer, the splendor of the fall, and the barren
desolation of winter, all at the same time. I Saw the house, and
each separate part of it as its own component, the timbers as
parts of spectral trees, the windows as pieces of distant sandy
shores. I could feel the heat of summer and the cold of winter in
the wind coming off the lake. I Saw the house wreathed in
ghostly flames, and knew that those were part of its possible
future, that fire lay down several of the many paths of possibility
that lay ahead in the next hour.
The house itself was a place of power. Dark emotions—greed,
lust, hatred—all hung over it as visible things, molds and slimes
that were strewn over it like Spanish moss with malevolent eyes.
Ghostly things, restless spirits, moved around the place, drawn
to the sense of fear, despair, and anger that hung over it,
mindless shades that were always to be found in such places, like
rats in granaries.
The other thing that I Saw over the house was a grinning,
empty skull. Skulls were everywhere, wherever I looked, just at
the edge of my vision, silent and still and bleach white, as solid
and real as though a fetishist had scattered them around in
anticipation of some bizarre holiday. Death. Death lay in the
house's future, tangible, solid, unavoidable.
Maybe mine.
I shuddered and shoved the feeling away. No matter how
strong the vision, how powerful the image gained with the Sight,
the future was always mutable, always something that could be
changed. No one had to die tonight. It didn't have to come to
that, not for them and not for me.
But a sick feeling had settled into me, as I looked on this
darkling house, with all of its stinking lust and fear, all of its
horrid hate worn openly upon it to my Sight, like a mantle of
flayed human skin on the shoulders of a pretty girl with gorgeous

hair, luscious lips, sunken eyes, and rotting teeth. It repulsed me
and it made me afraid.
And something about it, intangible, something I couldn't
name, called to me. Beckoned. Here was power, power I had
thrust aside once before, in the past. I had thrown away the only
family I had ever known to turn away power exactly like this.
This was the sort of strength that could reach out and change the
world to my will, bend it and shape it to my desiring, could cut
through all the petty trivialities of law and civilization and
impose order where there was none, guarantee my security, my
position, my future.
And what had been my reward for turning that power aside
thus far? Suspicion and contempt from the very wizards I had
acted to support and protect, condemnation from the White
Council whose Law I had clung to when all the world had been
laid at my feet.
I could kill the Shadowman, now, before he knew I was here. I
could call down fury and flame on the house and kill everyone in
it, not leave one stone upon another. I could reach out and
embrace the dark energy he had gathered in this place, draw it
in and use it for whatever I wanted, and the consequences be
damned.
Why not kill him now? Violet light, visible to my Sight,
throbbed and pulsed inside the windows, power being gathered
and prepared and shaped. The Shadowman was inside, and he
was gathering his might, preparing to unleash the spell that
would kill me. What reason had I to let him go on breathing?
I clenched my fists in fury, and I could feel the air crackle with
tension as I prepared to destroy the lake house, the Shadowman,
and any of the pathetic underlings he had with him. With such
power, I could cast my defiance at the Council itself, the
gathering of white-bearded old fools without foresight, without
imagination, without vision. The Council, and that pathetic
watchdog, Morgan, had no idea of the true depths of my
strength. The energy was all there, gleeful within my anger, ready
to reach out and reduce to ashes all that I hated and feared.
The silver pentacle that had been my mother's burned cold on
my chest, a sudden weight that made me gasp. I sagged forward
a little, and lifted a hand. My fingers were so tightly crushed into

fists that it hurt to try to open them. My hand shook, wavered,
and began to fall again.
Then something strange happened. Another hand took mine.
The hand was slim, the fingers long and delicate. Feminine. The
hand gently covered mine, and lifted it, like a small child's, until
I held my mother's pentacle in my grasp.
I held it in my hand, felt its cool strength, its ordered and
rational geometry. The five-pointed star within the circle was the
ancient sign of white wizardry, the only remembrance of my
mother. The cold strength of the pentacle gave me a chance, a
moment to think again, to clear my head.
I took deep breaths, struggling to see clear of the anger, the
hate, the deep lust that burned within me for vengeance and
retribution. That wasn't what magic was for. That wasn't what
magic did. Magic came from life itself, from the interaction of
nature and the elements, from the energy of all living beings, and
especially of people. A man's magic demonstrates what sort of
person he is, what is held most deeply inside of him. There is no
truer gauge of a man's character than the way in which he
employs his strength, his power.
I was not a murderer. I was not like Victor Sells. I was Harry
Blackstone Copperfield Dresden. I was a wizard. Wizards control
their power. They don't let it control them. And wizards don't use
magic to kill people. They use it to discover, to protect, to mend,
to help. Not to destroy.
The anger abruptly evaporated. The burning hate subsided,
leaving my head clear enough to think again. The pain in my leg
settled into a dull ache, and I shivered in the wind and the first
droplets of rain. I didn't have my staff, and I didn't have my rod.
The trinkets I did have with me were either expended or burned
to uselessness. All I had was what was inside me.
I looked up, suddenly feeling smaller and very alone. There was
no one near me. No hand was touching mine. No one stood close
by. For just a moment, I thought I smelled a whiff of perfume,
familiar and haunting. Then it was gone. And the only one I had
to help me was myself.
I blew out a breath. "Well, Harry," I told myself, "that's just
going to have to be enough."

And so, I walked through a spectral landscape littered with
skulls, into the teeth of the coming storm, to a house covered in
malevolent power, throbbing with savage and feral mystic
strength. I walked forward to face a murderous opponent who
had all the advantages, and who stood prepared and willing to
kill me from where he stood within the heart of his own
destructive power, while I was armed with nothing more than
my own skill and wit and experience.
Do I have a great job or what?
Chapter Twenty-Five
The Sight of Victor's lake house will always be with me. It was
an abomination. It looked innocuous enough, physically. But on
a deeper level, it was foul, rotten. It seethed with negative energy,
anger and pride and lust. Especially lust. Lust for wealth, lust for
power, more than physical desire.
Shadowy spirit-beings that weren't wholly real, only
manifestations of the negative energy of the place, clung to the
walls, the rain gutters, the porch, the windowsills, glutting
themselves on the negative energy left over from Victor's
spellcasting. I was guessing that there was a lot of it. He didn't
strike me as someone who would be able to make sure that his
spells were energy-efficient.
I limped up the front steps. My Sight revealed no alarms, no
sorcerous trip wires. I might be giving Victor Shadowman too
much credit. He was as powerful as a full-blown wizard, but he
didn't have the education. Muscle, not brains, that was Victor
Shadowman. I had to keep that in mind.
I tried the front door, just for the hell of it.
It opened.
I blinked. But I didn't question the good fortune, or the
overconfidence that had seen to it that Victor left his front door
standing unlocked. Instead, I took a breath, gathered up what
will I had, and pressed inside.
I forget how the house was furnished or decorated. All I
remember is what the Sight showed me. More of the same as the
outside, but more concentrated, more noxious. Things clung

everywhere, things with silent, glittering eyes and hungry
expressions. Some reptilian, some more like rats, some insectoid.
All of them were unpleasant, hostile, and shied away from me as
I came in, as the aura of energy I held in readiness around me
touched them. They made quiet noises, things I would never
have heard with my ears—but the Sight encompasses all of that.
There was a long, dark hallway coated with the things. I
advanced slowly, quietly, and they oozed and crept and slithered
from my path. The dark purple light of magic, that I had seen
from the outside, was ahead of me, and growing brighter. I could
hear music playing, and recognized it as the same piece that had
been playing on the CD player at the Madison in Tommy Tomm's
suite when Murphy had asked me there on Thursday. Slow,
sensuous music, steady rhythm.
I closed my eyes for a moment, listening. I heard sounds. A
quiet whisper, being repeated over and over, a man's voice
repeating an incantation, holding a spell in readiness for release.
That would be Victor. I heard soft sighs of pleasure from a
woman. The Beckitts? I could only assume so.
And, in a rumble that I could feel through the soles of my
boots, I heard thunder over the lake. The low, chanting voice
took on an edge of vicious, spiteful satisfaction, and continued
the incantation.
I gathered up what energy I had and stepped around the
corner, out of the hallway, into a spacious room that stretched
up to the full height of the house without interruption, yards of
open air. The room below was a living room. A spiral staircase
wound its way up to what looked like a kitchen and dining room
on a sort of platform or balcony above the rest of the room. The
elevated deck on the back of the house must be accessible from
the platform.
There was no one in the main room. The chanting, and the
occasional sigh, came from the platform above. The CD player
was down in the room beneath, music flowing from speakers
that were covered with an image of fire and dozens of bloated,
disgusting creature forms, feeding on the music as it came out. I
could see the influence of the music as a faint, violet mist, in
tune with the light coming from the platform above. This was a
complex ritual spell, then, involving many base elements

coordinated by the central wizard, Victor. Tricky. No wonder it
was so effective. It must have taken Victor a lot of trial and error
to figure it out.
I glanced up at the platform, then crossed the room, keeping as
far away as I could from the CD player. I slipped under the
platform without making any noise, and dozens upon dozens of
slimy not-physical spirit things oozed from my path. Rain
increased to a dull, steady rhythm outside, on the roof and on the
wooden deck and against the windows.
There were boxes stacked all around me, plastic cases and
cartons and cardboard boxes and wooden crates. I opened the
nearest one, and saw, inside, at least a hundred slender vials like
the ones I had seen before, full of the liquid ThreeEye. Beneath
the vision of my Sight, it looked different, thick and cloudy with
possibility, potential disaster lurking in every vial. Faces, twisted
in horror and torment, swam through the liquid, ghostly images
of what might be.
I looked at the other boxes. In one, ancient liquor bottles full of
an almost luminescent green liquid. Absinthe? I leaned closer,
sniffing, and could almost taste the madness that swam latent in
the liquid. I leaned back from the boxes, stomach churning. I
checked the other boxes, quickly. Ammonia, reminiscent of
hospitals and mental wards. Peyote mushrooms in plastic
Tupperware—I was familiar with them. Alum, white and
powdery. Antifreeze. Glitter in a hundred metallic shades in a
huge plastic bag. Other things, deeper in the shadows, that I
didn't take the time to look at. I had already figured out what all
the articles were for.
Potions.
Ingredients for potions. This was how Victor was making the
ThreeEye. He was doing the same thing I did when I made my
little potions, but on a grander scale, using energy he stole from
other places, other people. He used absinthe as the base, and
moved out from there. Victor was mass-producing what
amounted to a magical poison, one that probably remained inert
until it was inside someone, interacting with their emotions and
desires. That would explain why I hadn't noticed anything about
it, before. It wouldn't have been obvious to a cursory
examination, or to anything short of fully opening up my Sight,

and that wasn't something I did very often.
I closed my eyes, shaking. The Sight was showing me too
much. That was always the problem with it. I could look at these
ingredients, the cases of the finished drug, and catch flash
images of exactly how much suffering could be caused. There
was too much. I was starting to get disoriented.
Thunder came again, more sharply, and above me, Victor's
voice rose in pitch, to something audible. He was chanting in an
ancient language. Egyptian? Babylonian? It didn't really matter.
I could understand the sense of the words clearly enough. They
were words of hate, malevolence. They were words that were
meant to kill.
My shaking was becoming more pronounced. Was it only the
effects of the Sight? The presence of so much negative energy,
reacting with me?
No. I was simply afraid. Terrified to come out of my hiding
place under the platform and to meet the master of the slithering
horde that was draped over everything in sight. I could feel his
strength from here, his confidence, the force of his will infusing
the very air with a sort of hateful certainty. I was afraid with the
same fear that a child feels when confronted with a large, angry
dog, or with the neighborhood bully, the kind of fear that
paralyzes, makes you want to make excuses and hide.
But there was no time for hiding. No time for excuses. I had to
act. So I forced my Sight closed and gathered my courage as best
I could
Thunder roared outside and there was a flash of lightning, the
two happening close together. The lights flickered, and the music
skipped a track. Victor screamed out the incantation in a kind of
ecstasy above me. The woman's voice, presumably Mrs. Beckitt's,
rose to a fevered pitch.
"You pays your money, you takes your chances," I muttered to
myself.
I focused my will, extended my right arm and open palm to the
stereo system, and shouted, "Fuego!" A rush of heat from my
hand exploded into flame on the far side of the room and
engulfed the stereo, which began to emit a sound more like a
long, tortured scream than music. Murphy's handcuffs still

dangled from my wrist, one loop swinging free.
Then I turned, extended my arms and roared, "Veni che!"
Wind swept up beneath me, making my duster billow like
Batman's cloak, lifting me directly up to the platform above and
over its low railing into the suspended room.
Even expecting the sight, it rattled me. Victor was dressed in
black slacks, a black shirt, black shoes—very stylish, especially
compared to my sweatpants and cowboy, boots. His shaggy
eyebrows and lean features were highlighted eerily by the dark
light flowing up from the circle around him, where the
implements of his ritual spell were ready to complete the
ceremony that would kill me. He had what looked like a spoon,
its edges sharpened to razor keenness, a pair of candles, black
and white, and a white rabbit, its feet bound with red cord. One
of its legs was bleeding from a small tear, staining the white fur.
And tied against its head with a cord was the lock of my own
dark, straight hair. Over to one side was another circle, laid out
in chalk upon the carpeting, maybe fifteen feet across. The
Beckitts were inside, writhing together in mindless, sweating
desire, generating energy for Victor's spell.
Victor stared at me in shock as I landed upon the balcony,
wind whipping around me, roaring inside the small room like a
miniature cyclone, knocking over potted plants and knickknacks.
"You!" he shouted.
"Me," I confirmed. "There's something I've been meaning to
talk to you about, Vic."
His shock transformed into snarling anger in a heartbeat. He
snatched up the sharpened spoon, raised it in his right hand,
and screamed out words of the incantation. He dragged the
rabbit in front of him, the ceremonial representation of me, and
prepared to gouge out its, and therefore my, heart.
I didn't give him the chance to finish. I reached into a pocket
and hurled the empty plastic film canister at Victor Shadowman.
As a weapon, it wasn't much. But it was real, and it had been
hurled by a real person, a mortal. It could shatter the integrity of
a magic circle.
The canister went through the air above Victor's circle and
broke it, just as he completed the incantation and drove the

spoon's blade down at the poor rabbit. The energy of the storm
came whipping down the cylinder of focus created by Victor's
now-flawed circle.
Power shattered out into the room, wild, undirected, and
unfocused, naked color and raw sound spewing everywhere with
hurricane force. It sent objects flying, including Victor and me,
and shattered the secondary circle the Beckitts were in, sending
them rolling and bumping across the floor and into one wall.
I braced myself against the guardrail and held on as the power
raged around me, charging the air with raw, dangerous magic,
surging about like water under pressure, seeking an outlet.
"You bastard!" Victor screamed into the gale. "Why don't you
just die!" He lifted a hand and screamed something at me, and
fire washed across the space between us, instant and hot.
I tapped some of the ample power now available in the room
and formed a hard, high wall in front of me, squeezing my eyes
shut in concentration. It was a dozen times harder to shield
without my bracelet, but I blocked the flame, sent it swirling
high and over me, huddling under a little quarter dome of
hardened air that would not let Victor's magic past it. I opened
my eyes in time to see the flames touch the ceiling beams and set
them alight.
The air still thrummed with energy as the wash of flame
passed. Victor snarled when he saw me rise, lifted a hand to one
side, and snarled out words of summoning. A crooked stick that
looked like it might be some kind of bone soared through the air
toward him, and he caught it in one hand, turning to me with
the attitude of a man holding a gun.
The problem with most wizards is that they get too used to
thinking in terms of one venue: Magic. I don't think Victor
expected me to rise, lurch across the trembling floor toward him,
and drive my shoulder into his chest, slamming him back into
the wall with a satisfying thud. I leaned back a little and drove a
knee toward his gut, missed, and got him square between the
legs instead. The breath went out of him in a rush, and he
doubled over to the ground. By this time, I was screaming at
him, senseless and incoherent. I started kicking at his head.
I heard a metallic, ratcheting sound behind me and spun my
head in time to see Beckitt, naked, point an automatic weapon at

me. I threw myself to one side, and heard a brief explosion of
gunfire. Something hot tore at my hip, spinning me into a roll,
and I kept going, into the kitchen. I heard Beckitt snarl a curse.
There were a number of sharp clicking sounds. The automatic
had jammed. Hell, with this much magic flying around the room,
we were all lucky the thing hadn't just exploded.
Victor, meanwhile, shook the end of the bone tube he held, and
a half dozen dried, brown scorpion husks fell out onto the
carpeting. His whiter-than-white teeth flashed in his boater
brown face, and he snarled, "Scorpis, scorpis, scorpis!" His eyes
gleamed with lust and fury.
One of my legs wasn't answering my calls to action, so I
crab-walked backward into the kitchen on the heels of my hands
and one leg. Out on the dining section of the balcony, the
scorpions shuddered to life and started to grow. First one, and
then the others, oriented on the kitchen and started toward me
in scuttling bursts of speed, getting larger as they came.
Victor howled his glee. The Beckitts rose, both naked, lean and
savage-looking, both sporting guns, their eyes empty of
everything but a wild sort of bloodlust.
I felt my shoulders press against a counter. There was a rattle,
and then a broom fell down against me, its handle bouncing off
of my head and landing on the tile floor beside me. I grabbed at
it, my heart pounding somewhere around my throat.
A roomful of deadly drug. One evil sorcerer on his home turf.
Two crazies with guns. One storm of wild magic looking for
something to set it into explosive motion. And half a dozen
scorpions like the one I had barely survived earlier, rapidly
growing to movie-monster size. Less than a minute on the clock
and no time-outs remaining for the quarterback.
All in all, it was looking like a bad evening for the home team.
Chapter Twenty-Six
I was so dead. There was no way out of the kitchen, no time to
use an explosive evocation in close quarters, and the deadly
scorpions would rip me to pieces well before Victor could blow
me up with explosive magic or one of the blood-maddened
Beckitts could get their guns working long enough to put a few

more bullets in me. My hip was beginning to scream with pain,
which I supposed was better than the deadly dull numbness of
more serious injuries and shock, but at the moment it was the
least of my worries. I clutched the broom to me, my only pitiful
weapon. I didn't even have the mobility to use it.
And then something occurred to me, something so childish
that I almost laughed. I plucked a straw from the broomstick
and began a low and steady chant, a bobbing about in the air
with the fingers that held the straw. I reached out and took hold
of the immense amounts of untapped energy running rampant in
the air and drew them into the spell. "Pulitas!" I shouted,
bringing the chant to a crescendo. "Pulitas, pulitas!"
The broom twitched. It quivered. It jerked upright in my
hands. And then it took off across the kitchen floor, its brush
waving menacingly, to meet the scorpions' advance. The last
thing I had expected to use that cleaning spell for when I had
laboriously been forced to learn it was a tide of poisonous
scorpion monsters, but any port in a storm. The broom swept
into them with ferocious energy and started flicking them across
the kitchen toward the rest of the balcony with tidy, efficient
motions. Each time one of the scorpions would try to dodge
around it, the broom would tilt out and catch the beastie before
it could, flick it neatly onto its back and continue about its job.
I'm pretty sure it got all the dirt on the way, too. When I do a
spell, I do it right.
Victor screeched in anger when he saw his pets, still too small
to carry much mass, being so neatly corralled and ushered off the
balcony. The Beckitts lifted their guns and opened fire on the
broom, while I hunkered down behind the counter. They must
have been using revolvers, now, because they fired smoothly and
in an ordered rhythm. Bullets smacked into the walls and the
counters at the back of the kitchen, but none of them came
through the counter that sheltered me.
I caught my breath, pressing my hand against the blood on my
hip. It hurt like bloody hell. I thought the bullet was stuck,
somewhere by the bone. I couldn't move my leg. There was a lot
of blood, but not so much that I was sitting in a puddle. Out on
the balcony, the fire was beginning to catch, spreading over the
roof. The entire place was going to come crashing down before

much longer.
"Stop shooting, stop shooting, damn you!" Victor screamed, as
the gunfire came to a halt. I risked a peek over the counter. My
broom had swept the scorpions off the edge of the balcony and to
the floor of the room below. As I watched, Victor caught the
broom by its handle and broke it over the balcony railing with a
snarl. The straw I still held in my fingers broke with a sharp
little twang, and I felt the energy fade from the spell.
Victor Shadowman snarled. "A cute trick, Dresden," he said,
"but pathetic. There's no way you can survive this. Give up. I'll be
willing to let you walk away."
The Beckitts were reloading. I ducked my head back down
before they got any funny ideas, and hoped that they didn't have
heavier rounds that could penetrate the counters I hid behind
and whatever contents they contained, to kill me.
"Sure, Vic," I replied, keeping my voice as calm as I could.
"You're known for your mercy and sense of fair play, right?"
"All I have to do is keep you in there until the fire spreads
enough to kill you," Victor said.
"Sure. Let's all die together, Vic. Too bad about all your
inventory down there, though, eh?"
Victor snarled and pitched another burst of flame into the
kitchen. This time, it was much easier to cover myself,
half-shielded as I already was by the counters. "Oh, cute," I said,
my voice dripping scorn. "Fire's the simplest thing you can do.
All the real wizards learn that in the first couple of weeks and
move on up from there." I looked around the kitchen. There had
to be something I could use, some way I could escape, but
nothing presented itself.
"Shut up!" Victor snarled. "Who's the real wizard here, huh?
Who's the one with all the cards and who's the one bleeding on
the kitchen floor? You're nothing, Dresden, nothing. You're a
loser. And do you know why?"
"Gee," I said. "Let me think."
He laughed, harshly. "Because you're an idiot. You're an
idealist. Open your eyes, man. You're in the jungle, now. It's
survival of the fittest, and you've proved yourself unfit. The

strong do as they wish, and the weak get trampled. When this is
over, I'm going to wipe you off my shoe and keep going like you
never existed."
"Too late for that," I told him. I was in the mood to tell a white
lie. "The police know all about you, Vic. I told them myself. And I
told the White Council, too. You've never even heard of them,
have you, Vic? They're like the Superfriends and the Inquisition
all rolled up into one. You'll love them. They'll take you out like
yesterday's garbage. God, you really are an ignorant bastard."
There was a moment's silence. Then, "No," he said. "You're
lying. You're lying to me, Dresden."
"If I'm lying I'm dying," I told him. Hell, as far as I knew, I was.
"Oh. And Johnny Marcone, too. I made sure that he knew who
and where you were."
"Son of a bitch," Victor said. "You stupid son of a bitch. Who
put you up to this, huh? Marcone? Is that why he pulled you off
the street."
I had to laugh, weakly. A bit of flaming cabinet fell off an upper
shelf onto the tiles next to me. It was getting hot in there. The
fire was spreading. "You never figured it out, did you, Vic?"
"Who?" Victor screamed at me. "Who was it, damn you? That
whore, Linda? Her whore friend Jennifer?"
"Strike two, strike three, the other side gets a chance to steal,"
I said back. Hell, At least if I could keep him talking, I might
keep him in the house long enough to go down with me. And if I
could make him mad enough, he might make a mistake.
"Stop talking to him," Beckitt said. "He's not armed. Let's kill
him and get out of here before we all die."
"Go ahead," I said in a cheerful tone. "Hell, I've got nothing to
lose. I'll send this whole house up in a fireball that'll make
Hiroshima look like a hibachi. Make my day."
"Shut up," Victor shouted. "Who was it, Dresden? Who, damn
you?"
If I gave him Monica, he might still be able to get to her if he
got away. There was no sense in risking that. So all I said was,
"Go to hell, Vic."
"Get the car started," Victor snarled. "Go out through the deck

doors. The scorpions will kill anything on the first floor."
I heard motion in the room, someone moving out the doors
onto the elevated deck at the back of the house. The fire
continued to spread. Smoke rode the air in a thick haze.
"I've got to go, Dresden," Victor told me. His voice was gentle,
almost a purr, "but there's someone I want you to meet, first."
I got a sick, twisty little feeling in the pit of my stomach.
"Kalshazzak," Victor whispered.
Power thrummed. The air shimmered and shone, began to
twist and spiral.
"Kalshazzak," Victor whispered again, louder, more
demanding. I heard something, a warbling hiss that seemed to
come from a great distance, rushing closer. The black wizard
called the name for the third and final time, his voice rising to a
screech, "Kalshazzak!"
There was a thundercrack in the house, a dull and sulfurous
stench, and I craned my neck to see over the counter, risking a
glance.
Victor stood by the sliding glass doors that led out onto the
wooden deck. Red-orange flames wreathed the ceiling on that
side of the house, and smoke was filling the room below, casting
the whole place in a hellish glow.
Crouched down on the floor in front of Victor was the
toad-demon I had banished the night before. I had known that I
hadn't killed it. You can't kill demons, as such, only destroy the
physical vessels they create for themselves when they come to the
mortal world. If called again, they can create a new vessel
without difficulty.
I watched in fascination, stunned. I had seen only one person
call a demon before—and I had killed my old master shortly
after. The thing crouched in front of Victor, its lightning blue
eyes whirling with shades of scarlet hate, staring up at the
black-clad wizard, trembling with the need to tear into him, to
rend and destroy the mortal being who had dared summon it
forth.
Victor's eyes grew wider and more mad, glittering with fevered
intensity. Sweat ran down his face, and he tilted his head slowly

to one side, as though his vision were skewing along the
horizontal and by the motion he would compensate for it. I gave
silent thanks that I had closed my Third Eye when I did. I did not
want to see what that thing really looked like—and I didn't want
to get a good look at the real Victor Sells, either.
The demon finally gave a hiss of frustration and turned toward
me with a croaking growl. Victor dropped his head back and
laughed, his will triumphant over that of the being he had called
from beyond. "There, Dresden. Do you see? The strong survive,
and the weak are torn to little pieces." He flapped his hand at me
and said, to the demon, "Kill him."
I struggled to my feet, supporting my weight on the counter, to
face the demon as it rose and began its slow stalk toward me.
"My God, Victor," I said. "I can't get over how clumsy you are."
Victor's smile immediately became a snarling sneer once
again. I saw fear touch the corners of his eyes, uncertainty even
though he was on top, and I felt a little smile quirk my lips. I
moved my gaze to the demon's.
"You really shouldn't just hand someone else a demon's name,"
I told him. Then I drew in a breath, and shouted out in a voice of
command, "Kalshazzak!"
The demon stopped in its tracks and gave a whistling howl of
agony and rage as I called its name and drew my will up to hurl
against it.
"Kalshazzak," I snarled again. The demon's presence was
suddenly there, in my head, raging slippery and slimy and
wriggling like a venomous tadpole. It was a pressure, a horrible
pressure on my temples that made me see stars and threatened
to steal enough of my balance to send me falling to the floor.
I tried to speak again and the words stuck in my throat. The
demon hissed in anticipation, and the pressure on my head
redoubled, trying to force me down, to make me give up the
struggle, at which point the demon would be free to act. The
lightning blue of its eyes became glaringly bright, painful to look
upon.
I thought of little Jenny Sells, oddly enough, and of Murphy,
lying pale and unconscious on a stretcher in the rain, of Susan,
crouched next to me, sick and unable to run.

I had beaten this frog once. I could do it again.
I cried out the demon's name for the third and final time, my
throat burning and raw. The word came out garbled and
imperfect, and for a sinking moment I feared the worst, but
Kalshazzak howled again, and hurled itself furiously to the floor,
thrashing its limbs about like a poisoned bug, raging and tearing
great swaths out of the carpet. I sagged, the weariness that came
over me threatening to make me black out.
"What are you doing?" Victor said, his voice rising to a
high-pitched shriek. "What are you doing?" He was staring at
the demon in horror. "Kill him! I am your master! Kill him, kill
him!" The demon howled in rage, turned its burning glare to me
and then Victor, as though trying to decide who to devour first.
Its eyes settled on Victor, who went pale and ran for the doors.
"Oh no you don't," I muttered, and I uttered the last spell I
could manage. One final time, on the last gasps of my power, the
winds rose and lifted me from the earth. I hurtled into Victor like
an ungainly cannonball, driving him away from the doors, past
the demon as it made an awkward lunge at us, and toward the
railing of the balcony.
We fell in a confused heap at the edge of the balcony that
overlooked the room beneath, full of dark smoke and the red
glow of flame. The air had grown almost too hot to breathe. Pain
jolted through my hip, more bright and blinding than anything I
had ever imagined, and I sucked in a breath. The smoky air
burned, made me choke and gasp.
I looked up. Fire was spreading everywhere. The demon was
crouched between us and the only way out. Over the edge of the
balcony was only chaos and flame and smoke—strange, dark
smoke that should have been rising, but instead was mostly
settled along the floor like London fog. The pain was too great. I
simply couldn't move. I couldn't even take in enough breath to
scream.
"Damn you," Victor screamed. He regained his feet and hauled
me up toward his face with berserk strength. "Damn you," he
repeated. "What happened? What did you do?"
"The Fourth Law of Magic forbids the binding of any being
against its will," I grated out. Pain was tight around my throat,
making me fight to speak the words. "So I stepped in and cut

your control over it. And didn't establish any of my own."
Victor's eyes widened, "You mean …"
"It's free," I confirmed. I glanced at the demon. "Looks
hungry."
"What do we do," Victor said. His voice was shaking, and he
started shaking me, too. "What do we do?"
"We die," I said. "Hell, I was going to do that anyway. But at
least this way, I take you out with me."
I saw him glance at the demon, then back to me, eyes terrified
and calculating. "Work with me," he said. "You stopped it before.
You can stop it again. We can beat it, together, and leave."
I studied him for a moment. I couldn't kill him with magic. I
didn't want to. And it would only have brought a death sentence
on my head in any case. But I could stand by and do nothing.
And that's exactly what I did. I smiled at him, closed my eyes,
and did nothing.
"Fuck you, then, Dresden," Victor snarled. "It can only eat one
of us at a time. And I'm not going to be the one to get eaten
today." And he picked me up to hurl me toward the demon.
I objected with fragile tenacity. We grappled. Fire raged.
Smoke billowed. The demon came closer, lightning eyes
gleaming through the hell-lit gloom. Victor was shorter than me,
stockier, better at wrestling, and he hadn't been shot in the hip.
He levered me up and almost threw me, but I moved quicker,
whipping my right arm at his head and catching him with the
flailing free end of Murphy's handcuffs, breaking his motion. He
tried to break away, but I held on to him, dragged him in a circle
to slam against the guardrail of the balcony, and we both toppled
over.
Desperation gives a man extraordinary resources. I flailed at
the balcony railing and caught it at the base, keeping myself
from going over into the roiling smoke below. I shot a glance
below, and saw the glistening brown hide of one of the scorpions,
its stinging tail held up like the mast of a ship cutting through
smoke at least four feet deep. The room was filled with angry
clicking, scuttling sounds. Even in a single desperate glance, I
saw a couch torn to pieces by a pair of scorpions in less time
than it took to take a breath. They loomed over it, their tails

waving in the air like flags from the back of golf carts. Hell's
bells.
Victor had grabbed on to the railing a little above me and to
the left, and he stared at the oncoming demon with a face
twisted with hatred. I saw him draw in a breath, and try to plant
a foot firmly enough to free one hand to point at the oncoming
demon in some sort of magical attack or defense.
I couldn't allow Victor to get out of this. He was still whole. If
he could knock the demon down, he might still slip out. So I had
to tell him something that would make him mad enough to try to
take my head off. "Hey, Vic," I shouted. "It was your wife. It was
Monica that ratted on you."
The words hit him like a physical blow, and his head whipped
around toward me, his face contorting in fury. He started to say
something to me, the words of a spell meant to blow me to bits,
maybe, but the toad-demon interrupted him by rearing up with
an angry hiss and snapping its jaws down over Victor's
collarbone and throat. Bone broke with audible snaps, and
Victor squealed in pain, his arms and legs shuddering. He tried
to push his way down, away from the demon, and the creature's
balance wobbled.
I gritted my teeth and tried to hold on. A scorpion leapt at me,
brown and gleaming, and I drew my legs up out of reach of its
pincers, just barely.
"Bastard," Victor cried, struggling uselessly in the demon's
jaws. There was blood running down his body, fast and hot. The
demon had hit an artery, and it was simply holding on, wavering
at the edge of the balcony as Victor struggled and started kicking
at my near hand. He hit me once, twice, and my balance
wavered, my grip slipping. A quick glance below me showed me
another scorpion, getting ready to jump at me, this one closer.
Murphy, I thought. I should have listened to you. If the
scorpions didn't kill me, the demon would, and if the demon
didn't, the fire was going to kill me. I was going to die.
There was a certain peace in thinking that, in knowing that it
was all about to be over. I was going to die. It was as simple as
that. I had fought as hard as I could, done everything I could
think of, and it was over. I found myself, in my final seconds, idly
wishing that I could have had time to apologize to Murphy, that

I could apologize to Jenny Sells for killing her daddy, that I could
apologize to Linda Randall for not figuring things out fast
enough and saving her life. Murphy's handcuffs lay tight and
cold against my forearm as monsters and demons and black
wizards and smoke closed in all around me. I closed my eyes.
Murphy's handcuffs.
My eyes snapped open.
Murphy's handcuffs.
Victor swung his foot at my left hand again. I kicked with my
legs and hauled with my shoulders to give me a second of lift,
and grabbed Victor Sells's pant leg in my left hand. With my
right, I flicked the free end of the handcuffs around one of the
bars of the guardrail. The ring of metal cycled around on its
hinge and locked into place.
Then, as I started to fall back down, I hauled hard on Victor's
leg. He screamed, a horrible, high-pitched squeal, as he started
to fall. Kalshazzak, finally overbalanced by the additional weight
and leverage I had added to Victor's struggles, pitched over the
balcony guardrail and into the smoke below, crashing down to
the floor, carrying Victor with him.
There was a rush of scuttling, clicking sounds, a piercing
whistle-hiss from the demon. Victor's screams rose to something
high-pitched and horrible, until he sounded more like an animal,
a pig squealing at slaughter, than a man.
I swung from the balcony, my feet several feet above the fray,
held suspended in an acutely painful fashion by Murphy's
handcuffs, one loop around my wrist, the other locked around
the balcony railing. I looked down as my vision started to fade. I
saw a sea of brown, gleaming plates of segmented, chitinous
armor. I saw the scorpions' stinging tails flashing down, over and
over again. I saw the lightning eyes of Kalshazzak's physical
vessel, and I saw one of them pierced and put out by the flashing
sting of one of the scorpions.
And I saw Victor Sells, struck over and over again by stingers
the size of ice picks, the wounds foaming with poison. The
demon ignored the pincers and the stingers of the scorpions to
begin tearing him apart. His face contorted in the final agony of
rage and fear.

The strong survive, and the weak get eaten. I guess Victor had
invested in the wrong kind of strength.
I didn't want to watch what was happening below me. The fires
consuming the ceiling above were rather beautiful, actually,
rolling waves of flame, cherry red, sunset orange. I was too weak
to try to get out of this mess, and the entire thing had become
far too annoying and painful to even consider anymore. I just
watched the flames, and waited and noticed, oddly, that I was
simply starving. And no wonder. I hadn't eaten a decent meal
since … Friday? Friday. You notice odd things in those final
moments, they say.
And then you start seeing things. For instance, I saw Morgan
come through the sliding glass doors leading in from the outside
deck, the silver sword of the White Council's justice in his hands.
I saw one of the scorpions, now the size of a German shepherd,
figure out the stairs, scuttle up them, and hurtle at Morgan. I
saw Morgan's silver sword slash, snickersnack, and leave the
scorpion in writhing pieces on the floor.
Then I saw Morgan, his expression grim, his weight making
the fire-chewed balcony shudder, come for me. His eyes
narrowed when he saw me, and he lifted the sword, leaning far
over the balcony railing. The blade flashed bright silver in the
firelight as it started to come down.
Typical, was my last thought. How perfectly typical, to
survive everything the bad guys could do, and get taken down
by the people for whose cause I had been fighting.
Chapter Twenty-Seven
I awoke somewhere cool and dark, in tremendous pain,
coughing my lungs out. Rain was falling on my face, and it was
the greatest feeling I'd ever known. Morgan's face was over mine,
and I realized he'd been giving me CPR. Eww.
I coughed and spluttered and sat up, wheezing for breath.
Morgan watched me for a moment, then scowled and stood up,
eyes flickering around.
I managed to get enough wind to speak, and said, numbly,
"You saved me."

He grimaced. "Yes."
"But why?"
He looked at me again, then stooped to pick up his sword and
slip it into the scabbard at his side. "Because I saw what
happened in there. I saw you risk your life to stop the
Shadowman. Without breaking any of the Laws. You weren't the
killer."
I coughed some more, and said, "That doesn't mean you had to
save me."
He turned and blinked at me, as though puzzled. "What do you
mean?"
"You could have let me die."
His hard expression never changed, but he said, "You weren't
guilty. You're a part of the White Council." His mouth twisted as
though the words were fresh lemons. "Technically. I had an
obligation to preserve your life. It was my duty."
"I wasn't the killer," I said.
"No."
"So," I wheezed, "that would make me right. And then that
would make you—"
Morgan scowled. "More than ready to carry out the Doom if
you cross the line, Dresden. Don't think this has gotten you off
the hook, as far as I'm concerned."
"So. If I remember correctly, as a Warden, it is your duty to
report on my conduct to the Council, isn't it?"
His scowl darkened.
"So you're going to have to go to them on Monday and tell
them all about what really happened. The whole truth and
nothing but the truth."
"Yes," he snarled. "It is even possible they will lift the Doom."
I started laughing, weakly.
"You haven't won, Dresden. There are many on the Council
who know full well that you have consorted with the powers of
darkness. We, at least, will not relax our vigil on you. We will
watch you day and night, we will prove that you are a danger

who must be stopped."
I kept laughing. I fell over on my side, I laughed so much.
Morgan arched an eyebrow and simply stared at me. "Are you
all right?"
"Give me about a gallon of Listerine," I choked, "and I'll be just
fine."
Morgan just stared at me, and I laughed harder. He rolled his
eyes and growled something about the police being here any
moment to provide medical care. Then he turned and stomped
off into the woods, muttering to himself the whole way.
The police arrived in time to catch the Beckitts trying to leave
and arrested them for, of all things, being naked. Later, they
were implicated in the ThreeEye drug ring, and prosecuted on
distribution charges. Just as well for them that they're in the
Michigan justice system. They wouldn't have come out of a cell
alive if they'd been in Chicago. It wouldn't have been good for
Johnny Marcone's business.
The Varsity suffered a mysterious fire the night of my visit. I
hear Marcone didn't have any trouble collecting the insurance
money, in spite of all the odd rumors going around. Word hit the
street that Marcone had hired Harry Dresden to take out the
head of the ThreeEye gang, one of those rumors that you can't
trace back to any one person. I didn't try to deny it. It was a
cheap enough price to not have to worry about anyone bombing
my car.
I was too hospitalized to show up at the meeting of the White
Council, but it turned out that they decided to lift the Doom of
Damocles (which I had always thought a rather pretentious
name in any case) from me, due to "valorous action above and
beyond the call of duty." I don't think Morgan ever forgave me
for being a good guy. He had to eat crow in front of the whole
Council, relentlessly driven by his anal-retentive sense of duty
and honor. There's no love lost between us. But the guy was
honest. I'll give him credit for that.
And hell. At least I don't have to look forward to him popping
out from nowhere every time I cast a spell. I hope.
Murphy was in critical condition for nearly seventy-two hours,
but she pulled through. They gave her a room right down the hall

from me, in fact. I sent flowers to her hospital room, along with
the surviving ring of her handcuffs. I told her, in a note, not to
ask how the chain between the rings had been so neatly severed.
I didn't think she'd buy that someone cut it with a magic sword.
The flowers must have helped. The first time she got out of bed
was to totter down the hall to my room, throw them in my face,
and leave without saying a word.
She professed to have no memory of what had happened at my
office, and maybe she didn't. But in any case, she got the warrant
for my arrest rescinded, and a couple weeks later, when she went
back to work, she called me in for advice the next day. And she
sent a big check to cover my expenses in the murder
investigations. I guess that means we're friends again, in a
professional sense. But we don't joke anymore. Some wounds
don't heal very quickly.
The police found the remains of the huge ThreeEye stash in
what was left of the lake house, and Victor Sells eventually came
up as the bad guy. Monica Sells and her children vanished into
Witness Protection. I hope they've got a better life now than they
had before. I suppose it couldn't be much worse.
Bob eventually came home again, more or less within the
twenty-four-hour time limit, I suppose. I turned a deaf ear to
rumors of a particularly wild party at the University of Chicago
which lasted from Saturday night to Sunday night, and Bob
wisely never mentioned it.
DATE WITH A DEMON was a headliner for the Arcane when
it came out the following Monday, and Susan came by my
hospital room to bring me a copy and to talk to me about it. She
seemed greatly amused by the cast that held my hips
immobilized until the docs could be sure that there wasn't too
much fracturing (the X-ray machine kept fouling whenever they
tried to use it on me, for some reason), and commented that it
was a pity I wasn't more mobile. I used the sympathy factor to
badger another date out of her, and she didn't seem to mind too
much.
That time, we were not interrupted by a demon. And I didn't
need any of Bob's love potions or advice, thank you very much.
Mac got his TransAm back. I got the Blue Beetle back. That
didn't seem exactly equitable, but at least the Beetle still runs.

Most of the time.
I made sure to send pizza out to Toot-toot and his faerie
buddies every night for a week, and once a week ever since. I'm
pretty sure the kid from Pizza 'Spress thought I was a loony,
having him drop off pizza by the roadside. Heck with him. I
make good on my promises.
Mister got a little shortchanged on the whole deal, but it is well
beneath his dignity to notice such things.
And me? What did I get out of it? I'm not really sure. I escaped
from something that had been following me for a long time. I'm
just not sure what. I'm not sure who was more certain that I was
a walking Antichrist waiting to happen—the conservative branch
of the White Council, the men like Morgan, or me. For them, at
least, the question has been partly laid to rest. For myself,
though, I'm not so sure. The power is there. The temptation is
there. That's just the way it's going to be.
I can live with that.
The world is getting weirder. Darker every single day. Things
are spinning around faster and faster, and threatening to go
completely awry. Falcons and falconers. The center cannot hold.
But in my corner of the country, I'm trying to nail things down.
I don't want to live in Victor's jungle, even if it did eventually
devour him. I don't want to live in a world where the strong rule
and the weak cower. I'd rather make a place where things are a
little quieter. Where trolls stay the hell under their bridges and
where elves don't come swooping out to snatch children from
their cradles. Where vampires respect the limits, and where the
faeries mind their p's and q's.
My name is Harry Blackstone Copperfield Dresden. Conjure by
it at your own risk. When things get strange, when what goes
bump in the night flicks on the lights, when no one else can help
you, give me a call.
I'm in the book.
 
 
[Version History]
Version 1.0—Scanned. OCR'd, spellchecked, and formatted.

Version 2.0–June 21, 2003—proofread in detail and corrected by The_Ghiti.
If you find errors, please fix, increment version number by 0.1 and re-post.
Version 2.1-September 29, 2003—Converted to html and proofed again by
Highroller.
Version 2.2-February 13, 2004—Proofed again by billbo196.

