www.ebook3000.com

CONTENTS
Contents
i
1
1 Minute Calculus: X-Ray and Time-Lapse Vision
1
2
Practice X-Ray and Time-Lapse Vision
5
3
Expanding Our Intuition
11
4
Learning The Ofﬁcial Terms
14
5
Music From The Machine
21
6
Improving Arithmetic And Algebra
25
7
Seeing How Lines Work
29
8
Playing With Squares
35
9
Working With Inﬁnity
40
10 The Theory Of Derivatives
43
11 The Fundamental Theorem Of Calculus (FTOC)
47
12 The Basic Arithmetic Of Calculus
51
13 Patterns In The Rules
57
14 The Fancy Arithmetic Of Calculus
61
15 Discovering Archimedes’ Formulas
67
i
www.ebook3000.com

C H A P T E R
1
1 MINUTE CALCULUS: X-RAY AND
TIME-LAPSE VISION
We usually take shapes, formulas, and situations at face value. Calculus gives
us two superpowers to dig deeper:
• X-Ray Vision: You see the hidden pieces inside a pattern. You don’t just
see the tree, you know it’s made of rings, with another growing as we
speak.
• Time-Lapse Vision: You see the future path of an object laid out before
you (cool, right?). “Hey, there’s the moon. For the next few days it’ll be
white, but on the sixth it’ll be low in the sky, in a color I like. I’ll take a
photo then.”
1
www.ebook3000.com

CHAPTER 1. 1 MINUTE CALCULUS: X-RAY AND TIME-LAPSE VISION
2
So why is Calculus useful? Well, just imagine having X-Ray or Time-Lapse
vision to use at will. That object over there, how was it put together? What
will happen to it?
(Strangely, my letters to Marvel about Calculus-man have been ignored to
date.)
1.1
Calculus In 10 Minutes: See Patterns Step-By-Step
What do X-Ray and Time-Lapse vision have in common? They examine pat-
terns step-by-step. An X-Ray shows the individual slices inside, and a time-
lapse puts each future state next to the other.
This seems pretty abstract. Let’s look at a few famous patterns:
We have a vague feeling these formulas are connected, right?
www.ebook3000.com

CHAPTER 1. 1 MINUTE CALCULUS: X-RAY AND TIME-LAPSE VISION
3
Let’s turn our X-Ray vision and see where this leads. Suppose we know the
equation for circumference (2πr) and want to ﬁgure out the equation for area.
What can we do?
This is a tough question. Squares are easy to measure, but what can we do
with an ever-curving shape?
Calculus to the rescue. Let’s use our X-Ray vision to realize a disc is really
just a bunch of rings put together. Similar to a tree trunk, here’s a “step-by-
step” view of a ﬁlled-in circle:
Why does this viewpoint help? Well, let’s unroll those curled-up rings so
they’re easier to measure:
www.ebook3000.com

CHAPTER 1. 1 MINUTE CALCULUS: X-RAY AND TIME-LAPSE VISION
4
Whoa! We have a bunch of straightened rings that form a triangle, which
is much easier to measure (Wikipedia has an animation).
The height of the largest ring is the full circumference (2πr), and each ring
gets smaller. The height of each ring depends on its original distance from the
center; the ring 3 inches from the center has a height of 2π · 3 inches. The
smallest ring is a pinpoint, more or less, without any height at all.
And because triangles are easier to measure than circles, ﬁnding the area
isn’t too much trouble.
The area of the “ring triangle” = 1
2base · height =
1
2r(2πr) = πr 2, which is the formula for a circle’s area!
Our X-Ray vision revealed a simple, easy-to-measure structure within a
curvy shape. We realized a circle and a set of glued-together rings were re-
ally the same. From another perspective, a ﬁlled-in disc is the “time lapse” of a
ring that got larger and larger.
Remember learning arithmetic? We learned a few things to do with num-
bers (and equations): add/subtract, multiply/divide, and use exponents/roots.
Not a bad start.
Calculus gives us two new options: split apart and glue together. A key
epiphany of calculus is that our existing patterns can be seen as a bunch of
glued-together pieces. It’s like staring at a building and knowing it was made
brick-by-brick.
1.2
So. . . What Can I Do With Calculus?
It depends. What can you do with arithmetic?
Technically, we don’t need numbers. Our caveman ancestors did ﬁne (well,
for some version of “ﬁne”). But having an idea of quantity makes the world a
lot easier. You don’t have a “big” and “small” pile of rocks: you have an exact
count. You don’t need to describe your mood as “good” or “great” – you can
explain your mood from 1 to 10.
Arithmetic provides universal metaphors that go beyond computation, and
once seen, they’re difﬁcult to give up.
Calculus is similar: it’s a step-by-step view of the world. Do we need X-Ray
and Time Lapse vision all the time? Nope. But they’re nice perspectives to
“turn on” when we face a puzzling situation. What steps got us here? What’s
the next thing that will happen? Where does our future path lead?
There are speciﬁc rules to calculus, just like there are rules to arithmetic.
And they’re quite useful when you’re cranking through an equation. But don’t
forget there are general notions of “quantity” and “step-by-step thinking” that
we can bring everywhere.
Our primary goal is to feel what a calculus perspective is like (What Would
Archimedes Do?). Over time, we’ll work up to using the speciﬁc rules ourselves.
www.ebook3000.com

C H A P T E R
2
PRACTICE X-RAY AND TIME-LAPSE VISION
Calculus trains us to use X-Ray and Time-Lapse vision, such as re-arranging a
circle into a “ring triangle” (diagram). This makes ﬁnding the area. . . well, if
not exactly easy, much more manageable.
But we were a little presumptuous. Must every circle in the universe be
made from rings?
Heck no! We’re more creative than that. Here’s a few more options for our
X-Ray:
Now we’re talking. We can imagine a circle as a set of rings, pizza slices, or
vertical boards. Each underlying “blueprint” is a different step-by-step strategy
in action.
Imagine each strategy unfolding over time, using your time-lapse vision.
Have any ideas about what each approach is good for?
Ring-by-ring Analysis
Rings are the old standby. What’s neat about a ring-by-ring progression?
5
www.ebook3000.com

CHAPTER 2. PRACTICE X-RAY AND TIME-LAPSE VISION
6
• Each intermediate stage is an entire “mini circle” on its own. i.e., when
we’re halfway done, we still have a circle, just one with half the regular
radius.
• Each step is an increasing amount of work. Just imagine plowing a cir-
cular ﬁeld and spreading the work over several days. On the ﬁrst day,
you start at the center and don’t even move. The next, you make take
the tightest turn you can. Then you start doing laps, larger and larger,
until you are circling the entire yard on the last day. (Note: The change
between each ring is the same; maybe it’s 1 extra minute each time you
make the ring larger).
• The work is reasonably predictable, which may help planning.
If we
know it’s an extra minute for each lap, then the 20th ring will take 20
minutes.
• Most of the work happens in the ﬁnal laps. In the ﬁrst 25% of the time-
lapse, we’ve barely grown: we’re adding tiny rings. Near the end, we
start to pick up steam by adding long slices, each nearly the ﬁnal size.
Now let’s get practical: why is it that trees have a ring pattern inside?
It’s the ﬁrst property: a big tree must grow from a complete smaller tree.
With the ring-by-ring strategy, we’re always adding to a complete, fully-formed
circle. We aren’t trying to grow the “left half” of the tree and then work on the
right side.
In fact, many natural processes that grow (trees, bones, bubbles, etc.) take
this inside-out approach.
Slice-by-slice Analysis
Now think about a slice-by-slice progression. What do you notice?
• We contribute the same amount with each step. Even better, the parts
are identical. This may not matter for math, but in the real world (aka
cutting a cake), we make the same action when cutting out each slice,
which is convenient.
• Since the slices are symmetrical, we can use shortcuts like making cuts
across the entire shape to speed up the process. These “assembly line”
speedups work well for identical components.
• Progress is extremely easy to measure. If we have 10 slices, then at slice
6 we are exactly 60% done (by both area and circumference).
www.ebook3000.com

CHAPTER 2. PRACTICE X-RAY AND TIME-LAPSE VISION
7
• We follow a sweeping circular path, never retracing our steps from an
“angular” point of view. When carving out the rings, we went through
the full 360-degrees on each step.
Time to think about the real world. What follows this slice-by-slice pattern,
and why?
Well food, for one. Cake, pizza, pie: we want everyone to have an equal
share. Slices are simple to cut, we get nice speedups (like cutting across the
cake), and it’s easy to see how much is remaining. (Imagine cutting circular
rings from a pie and trying to estimate how much area is left.)
Now think about radar scanners: they sweep out in a circular path, “clear-
ing” a slice of sky before moving to another angle. This strategy does leave
a blind spot in the angle you haven’t yet covered, a tradeoff you’re hopefully
aware of.
Contrast this to sonar used by a submarine or bat, which sends a sound
“ring” propagating in every direction. That works best for close targets (cover-
ing every direction at once). The drawback is that unfocused propagation gets
much weaker the further out you go, as the initial energy is spread out over a
larger ring. We use megaphones and antennas to focus our signals into beams
(thin slices) to get the max range for our energy.
Operationally, if we’re building circular shape from a set of slices (like a
paper fan), it helps to have every part be identical. Figure out the best way
to make a single slice, then mass produce them. Even better: if one slice can
collapse, the entire shape can fold up!
Board-by-board Analysis
Getting the hang of X-Rays and Time-lapses? Great. Look at the progression
above, and spend a few seconds thinking of the pros and cons. Don’t worry, I’ll
wait.
Ready? Ok. Here’s a few of my observations:
• This is a very robotic pattern, moving left-to-right and never returning to
a previous horizontal position.
• The contribution from each step starts small, gradually gets larger, maxes
out in the middle, and begins shrinking again.
• Our progress is somewhat unpredictable.
Sure, at the halfway mark
we’ve ﬁnished half the circle, but the pattern rises and falls which makes
it difﬁcult to analyze. By contrast, the ring-by-ring pattern changed the
same amount each time, always increasing. It was clear that the later
www.ebook3000.com

CHAPTER 2. PRACTICE X-RAY AND TIME-LAPSE VISION
8
rings would add the most work. Here, it’s the middle section which seems
to be doing the heavy lifting.
Ok, time to ﬁgure out where this pattern shows up in the real world.
Decks and wooden structures, for one. When putting down wooden planks,
we don’t want to retrace our steps, or return to a previous position (especially
if there are other steps involved, like painting). Just like a tree needs a fully-
formed circle at each step, a deck insists upon components found at Home
Depot (i.e., rectangular boards).
In fact, any process with a linear “pipeline” might use this approach: ﬁnish
a section and move onto the next. Think about a printer that has to spray a
pattern top-to-bottom as the paper is fed through (or these days, a 3d printer).
It doesn’t have the luxury of a ring-by-ring or a slice-by-slice approach. It will
see a horizontal position only once, so it better make it count!
From a human motivation perspective, it may be convenient to start small,
work your way up, then ease back down. A pizza-slice approach could be
tolerable (identical progress every day), but rings could be demoralizing: every
step requires more than the one before, without yielding.
Getting Organized
So far, we’ve been using natural descriptions to explain our thought processing.
“Take a bunch of rings” or “Cut the circle into pizza slices”. This conveys a gen-
eral notion, but it’s a bit like describing a song as “Dum-de-dum-dum” – you’re
pretty much the only one who knows what’s happening. A little organization
can make it perfectly clear what we mean.
The ﬁrst thing we can do is keep track of how we’re making our steps. I like
to imagine a little arrow in the direction we move as we take slices:
In my head, I’m moving along the yellow line, calling out the steps like
Oprah giving away cars (you get a ring, you get a ring, you get a ring. . . ).
(Hey, it’s my analogy, don’t give me that look!)
The arrow is handy, but it’s still tricky to see the exact progression of slices.
Why don’t we explicitly “line up” the changes? As we saw before, we can unroll
the steps, put them side-by-side, and make them easier to compare:
www.ebook3000.com

CHAPTER 2. PRACTICE X-RAY AND TIME-LAPSE VISION
9
The black arrow shows the trend. Pretty nice, right? We can tell, at a
glance, that the slices are increasing, and by the same amount each time (since
the trend line is straight).
Math fans and neurotics alike enjoy these organized layouts; there is some-
thing soothing about it, I suppose. And since you’re here, we might as well
organize the other patterns too:
Now it’s much easier to compare each X-Ray strategy:
• With rings, steps increase steadily (upward sloping line)
• With slices, steps stay the same (ﬂat line)
• With boards, steps get larger, peak, then get smaller (up and down; note,
the curve looks elongated because the individual boards are lined up on
the bottom)
The charts made our comparisons easier, wouldn’t you say? Sure. But wait,
isn’t that trendline looking like a dreaded x-y graph?
Yep. Remember, a graph is a visual explanation that should help us. If it’s
confusing, it needs to be ﬁxed.
Many classes present graphs, divorced from the phenomena that made
them, and hope you see an invisible sequence of steps buried inside. It’s a
recipe for pain – just be explicit about what a graph represents!
Archimedes did ﬁne without x-y graphs, ﬁnding the area of a circle using
the “ring-to-triangle” method. In this primer we’ll leave our level of graphing
to what you see above (the details of graphs will be a nice follow-up, after our
intuition is built).
So, are things starting to click a bit? Thinking better with X-Rays and Time-
lapses?

CHAPTER 2. PRACTICE X-RAY AND TIME-LAPSE VISION
10
PS. It may bother you that our steps create a “circle-like” shape, but not a
real, smooth circle. We’ll get to that :). But to be fair, it must also bother you
that the square pixels on this screen make “letter-like” shapes, and not real,
smooth letters. And somehow, the “letter-like pixels” convey the same meaning
as the real thing!
Questions
1) Can you describe a grandma-friendly version of what you’ve learned?
2) Let’s expand our thinking into the 3rd dimension. Can you of a few ways
to build a sphere? (No formulas, just descriptions)
I’ll share a few approaches with you in the next lesson. Happy math.

C H A P T E R
3
EXPANDING OUR INTUITION
Hope you thought about the question from last time: how do we take our X-Ray
strategies into the 3rd dimension?
Here’s my take:
• Rings become shells, a thick candy coating on a delicious gobstopper.
Each layer is slightly bigger than the one before.
• Slices become wedges, identical sections like slices of an orange.
• Boards become plates, thick discs which can be stacked together. (I some-
times daydream of opening a bed & breakfast that only serves spherical
stacks of pancakes. And they say math has no real-world uses!)
The 3d steps can be seen as the 2d versions, swept out in various ways. For
example, spin the individual rings (like a coin) to create a shell. Imagine slices
pushed through a changing mold to make wedges. Lastly, imagine we spin the
boards to make plates, like carving a wooden sphere with a lathe (video).
The tradeoffs are similar to the 2d versions:
11

CHAPTER 3. EXPANDING OUR INTUITION
12
• Organic processes grow in layers (pearls in an oyster)
• Fair divisions require wedges (cutting an apple for friends)
• The robotic plate approach seems easy to manufacture
An orange is an interesting hybrid: from the outside, it appears to be made
from shells, growing over time. And inside, it forms a symmetric internal struc-
ture – a better way to distribute seeds, right? We could analyze it both ways.
Exploring The 3d Perspective
In the ﬁrst lesson we had the vague notion the circle/sphere formulas were
related:
Well, now we have an idea how:
• Circumference: Start with a single ring
• Area: Make a ﬁlled-in disc with a ring-by-ring time lapse
• Volume: Make the circle into a plate, and do a plate-by-plate time lapse
to build a sphere
• Surface area: X-Ray the sphere into a bunch of shells; the outer shell is
the surface area

CHAPTER 3. EXPANDING OUR INTUITION
13
Wow! These descriptions are pretty detailed. We know, intuitively, how to
morph shapes into alternate versions by thinking “time-lapse this” or “X-Ray
that”. We can move backwards, from a sphere back to circumference, or try
different strategies: maybe we want to split the circle into boards, not rings.
The Need For Math Notation
You might have noticed it’s getting harder to explain your ideas. We’re reaching
for physical analogies (rings, boards, wedges) to explain our plans: “Ok, take
that circular area, and try to make some discs out of it. Yeah, like that. Now
line them up into the shape of a sphere. . . ”.
I love diagrams and analogies, but should they be required to explain an
idea? Probably not.
Take a look how numbers developed. At ﬁrst, we used very literal symbols
for counting: I, II, III, and so on. Eventually, we realized a symbol like V could
take the place of IIIII, and even better, that every digit could have its own
symbol (we do keep our metaphorical history with the number 1).
This math abstraction helped in a few ways:
• It’s shorter. Isn’t “2 + 3 = 5” better than “two added to three is equal
to ﬁve”? Fun fact: In 1557, Robert Recorde invented the equals sign,
written with two parallel lines (=), because “noe 2 thynges, can be moare
equalle”. (I agrye!)
• The rules do the work for us. With Roman numerals, we’re essentially
recreating numbers by hand (why should VIII take so much effort to write
compared to I? Oh, because 8 is larger than 1? Not a good reason!). Dec-
imals help us “do the work” of expressing numbers, and make them easy
to manipulate. So far, we’ve been doing the work of calculus ourselves:
cutting a circle into rings, realizing we can unroll them, looking up the
equation for area and measuring the resulting triangle. Couldn’t the rules
help us here? You bet. We just need to ﬁgure them out.
• We generalized our thinking. “2 + 3 = 5” is really “twoness + three-
ness = ﬁveness”. It sounds weird, but we have an abstract quantity (not
people, or money, or cows. . . just “twoness”) and we see how it’s related
to other quantities. The rules of arithmetic are abstract, and it’s our job
to apply them to a speciﬁc scenario.
Multiplication started as a way to count groups and measure rectangular
area. But when you write “$15/hour × 2.5 hours = $37.50” you probably
aren’t thinking of “groups” of hours or getting the area of a “wage-hour” rect-
angle. You’re just applying arithmetic to the concepts.
In the upcoming lessons we’ll learn the ofﬁcial language to help us commu-
nicate our ideas and work out the rules ourselves. And once we’ve internalized
the rules of calculus, we can explore patterns, whether they came from geo-
metric shapes, business plans, or scientiﬁc theories.

C H A P T E R
4
LEARNING THE OFFICIAL TERMS
We’ve been able to describe our step-by-step process with analogies (X-Rays,
Time-lapses, and rings) and diagrams:
However, this is a very elaborate way to communicate. Here’s the Ofﬁcial
Math® terms:
Let’s walk through the fancy names.
14

CHAPTER 4. LEARNING THE OFFICIAL TERMS
15
The Derivative
The derivative is splitting a shape into sections as we move along a path (i.e.,
X-Raying it). Now here’s the trick: although the derivative generates the entire
sequence of sections (the black line), we can also extract a single one.
Think about a function like f (x) = x2. It’s a curve that describes a giant list
of possibilities (1, 4, 9, 16, 25, etc.). We can graph the entire curve, sure, or
examine the value of f(x) *at* a speciﬁc value, like x = 3.
The derivative is similar. Ofﬁcially, it’s the entire pattern of sections, but we
can zero into a speciﬁc one by asking for the derivative at a certain value. (The
derivative is a function, just like f (x) = x2; if not otherwise speciﬁed, we’re
describing the entire function.)
What do we need to ﬁnd the derivative? The shape to split apart, and the
path to follow as we cut it up (the orange arrow). For example:
• The derivative of a circle with respect to the radius creates rings
• The derivative of a circle with respect to the perimeter creates slices
• The derivative of a circle with respect to the x-axis creates boards
I agree that “with respect to” sounds formal: Honorable Grand Poombah
radius, it is with respect to you that we derive. Math is a gentleman’s game, I
suppose.
Taking the derivative is also called “differentiating”, because we are ﬁnding
the difference between successive positions as a shape grows. (As we grow the
radius of a circle, the difference between the current disc and the next size up
is that outer ring.)
The Integral, Arrows, and Slices
The integral is glueing together (time-lapsing) a group of sections and mea-
suring the ﬁnal result. For example, we glued together the rings (into a “ring
triangle”) and saw it accumulated to πr 2, aka the area of a circle.
Here’s what we need to ﬁnd the integral:
• Which direction are we gluing the steps together? Along the orange
line (the radius, in this case)
• When do we start and stop? At the start and end of the arrow (we start
at 0, no radius, and move to r, the full radius)
• How big is each step? Well. . . each item is a “ring”. Isn’t that enough?
Nope! We need to be speciﬁc. We’ve been saying we cut a circle into “rings”
or “pizza slices” or “boards”. But that’s not speciﬁc enough; it’s like a BBQ
recipe that says “Cook meat. Flavor to taste.”
Maybe an expert knows what to do, but we need more speciﬁcs. How large,
exactly, is each step (technically called the “integrand”)?

CHAPTER 4. LEARNING THE OFFICIAL TERMS
16
Ah. A few notes about the variables:
• If we are moving along the radius r, then dr is the little chunk of radius
in the current step
• The height of the ring is the circumference, or 2πr
There’s several gotchas to keep in mind.
First, dr is its own variable, and not “d times r”. It represents the tiny
section of the radius present in the current step. This symbol (dr, dx, etc.)
is often separated from the integrand by just a space, and it’s assumed to be
multiplied (written 2πr dr).
Next, if r is the only variable used in the integral, then dr is assumed to
be there. So if you see
R
2πr this still implies we’re doing the full
R
2πr dr.
(Again, if there are two variables involved, like radius and perimeter, you need
to clarify which step we’re using: dr or dp?)
Last, remember that r (the radius) changes as we time-lapse, starting at 0
and eventually reaching its ﬁnal value. When we see r in the context of a step,
it means “the size of the radius at the current step” and not the ﬁnal value it
may ultimately have.
These issues are extremely confusing. I’d prefer we use rdr to indicate an
intermediate “r at the current step” instead of a general-purpose “r” that’s easily
confused with the max value of the radius. I can’t change the symbols at this
point, unfortunately.
Practicing The Lingo
Let’s learn to talk like calculus natives. Here’s how we can describe our X-Ray
strategies:

CHAPTER 4. LEARNING THE OFFICIAL TERMS
17
Remember, the derivative just splits the shape into (hopefully) easy-to-
measure steps, such as rings of size 2πr dr. We broke apart our lego set and
have pieces scattered on the ﬂoor. We still need an integral to glue the parts
together and measure the new size. The two commands are a tag team:
• The derivative says: “Ok, I split the shape apart for you. It looks like a
bunch of pieces 2πr tall and dr wide.”
• The integral says: “Oh, those pieces resemble a triangle – I can measure
that! The total area of that triangle is 1
2base ·height, which works out to
πr 2 in this case.”.
Here’s how we’d write the integrals to measure the steps we’ve made:

CHAPTER 4. LEARNING THE OFFICIAL TERMS
18
A few notes:
• Often, we write an integrand as an unspeciﬁed “pizza slice” or “board”
(use a formal-sounding name like s(p) or b(x) if you like). First, we setup
the integral, and then we worry about the exact formula for a board or
slice.
• Because each integral represents slices from our original circle, we know
they will be the same. Gluing any set of slices should always return the
total area, right?
• The integral is often described as “the area under the curve”. It’s accurate,
but shortsighted. Yes, we are gluing together the rectangular slices under
the curve. But this completely overlooks the preceding X-Ray and Time-
Lapse thinking. Why are we dealing with a set of slices vs. a curve in the
ﬁrst place? Most likely, because those slices are easier than analyzing the
shape itself (how do you “directly” measure a circle?).
Questions
1) Can you think of another activity which is made simpler by shortcuts and
notation, vs. written English?
2) Interested in performance? Let’s drive the calculus car, even if you can’t
build it yet.
Question 1: How would you write the integrals that cover half of a circle?
www.ebook3000.com

CHAPTER 4. LEARNING THE OFFICIAL TERMS
19
Each should would be similar to:
integrate [size of step] from [start] to [end] with respect to [path
variable]
(Answer for the ﬁrst half and the second half. This links to Wolfram Alpha,
an online calculator, and we’ll learn to use it later on.)
Question 2: Can you ﬁnd the complete way to describe our “pizza-slice”
approach?
The “math command” should be something like this:
integrate [size of step] from [start] to [end] with respect to [path
variable]
Remember that each slice is basically a triangle (so what’s the area?). The
slices move around the perimeter (where does it start and stop?). Have a guess
for the command? Here it is, the slice-by-slice description.
Question 3: Can you ﬁgure out how to move from volume to surface area?

CHAPTER 4. LEARNING THE OFFICIAL TERMS
20
Assume we know the volume of a sphere is 4/3 * pi * rˆ3. Think about
the instructions to separate that volume into a sequence of shells. Which vari-
able are we moving through?
derive [equation] with respect to [path variable]
Have a guess? Great. Here’s the command to turn volume into surface area.

C H A P T E R
5
MUSIC FROM THE MACHINE
In the previous lessons we’ve gradually sharpened our intuition:
• Appreciation: I think it’s possible to split up a circle to measure its area
• Natural Description: Split the circle into rings from the center outwards,
like so:
• Formal Description: integrate 2 * pi * r * dr from r=0 to r=r
• Performance: (Sigh) I guess I’ll have to start measuring the area. . .
Wait! Our formal description is precise enough that a computer can do the
work for us:
21

CHAPTER 5. MUSIC FROM THE MACHINE
22
Whoa! We described our thoughts well enough that a computer did the
legwork.
We didn’t need to manually unroll the rings, draw the triangle, and ﬁnd
the area (which isn’t overly tough in this case, but could have been). We saw
what the steps would be, wrote them down, and fed them to a computer:
boomshakala, we have the result. (Just worry about the “deﬁnite integral”
portion for now.)
Now, how about deriviatives, X-Raying a pattern into steps? Well, we can
ask for that too:
Similar to above, the computer X-Rayed the formula for area and split it
step-by-step as it moved. The result is 2πr, the height of the ring at every
position.
Seeing The Language In Action
Wolfram Alpha is an easy-to-use tool: the general format for calculus questions
is
• integrate [equation] from [variable=start] to [variable=end]
• derive [equation] with respect to [variable]
That’s a little wordy. These shortcuts are closer to the math symbols:
• \int [equation] dr - integrate equation (by default, assume we go
from r = 0 to r = r, the max value)
• d/dr equation - derive equation with respect to r
• There’s shortcuts for exponents (3ˆ2 = 9), multiplication (3 * r), and
roots (sqrt(9) = 3)
Now that we have the machine handy, let’s try a few of the results we’ve
seen so far:

CHAPTER 5. MUSIC FROM THE MACHINE
23
Click the formal description to see the computer crunch the numbers. As
you might have expected, they all result in the familiar equation for area. A
few notes:
• The size of the wedge is 1
2base ·height. The base is dp (the tiny section
of perimeter) and the height is r, the distance from the perimeter back
to the center.
• The size of board is tricky. In terms of x & y coordinates, we have x2+y2 =
r 2, by the Pythagorean Theorem:
We solve for the height to get y =
p
r 2 −x2. We actually need 2 copies of
height, because y is the positive distance above the axis, and the board
extends above and below. The boards are harder to work with, and it’s
not just you: Wolfram Alpha takes longer to compute this integral than
the others!
The approach so far has been to immerse you in calculus thinking, and
gradually introduce the notation. Some of it may be a whirl – which is com-
pletely expected. You’re sitting at a cafe, overhearing conversation in a foreign
language.

CHAPTER 5. MUSIC FROM THE MACHINE
24
Now that you have the sound in your head, we’ll begin to explore the details
piece-by-piece.

C H A P T E R
6
IMPROVING ARITHMETIC AND ALGEBRA
We’ve intuitively seen how calculus dissects problems with a step-by-step view-
point. Now that we have the ofﬁcial symbols, let’s see how to bring arithmetic
and algebra to the next level.
Better Multiplication And Division
Multiplication makes addition easier. Instead of grinding through questions
like 2+2+2+2+2+2+2+2+2+2+2+2+2, we can rewrite it as: 2×13.
Boomshakala. If you wanted 13 copies of a number, just write it like that!
Multiplication makes repeated addition easier (likewise for division and
subtraction). But there’s a big limitation: we must use identical, average-sized
pieces.
• What’s 2×13? It’s 13 copies of the same element.
• What’s 100 / 5? It’s 100 split into 5 equal parts.
Identical parts are ﬁne for textbook scenarios (“Drive an unwavering 30mph
for exactly 3 hours”). The real world isn’t so smooth. Calculus lets us accumu-
late or separate shapes according to their actual, not average, amount:
• Derivatives are better division that splits a shape along a path (into
possibly different-sized slices)
• Integrals are better multiplication that accumulates a sequence of steps
(which could be different sizes)
Operation
Example
Notes
Division
y
x
Split whole into identical parts
Differentiation
d
dx y
Split whole into (possibly different) parts
Multiplication
y · x
Accumulate identical steps
Integration
R
y dx
Accumulate (possibly different) steps
25

CHAPTER 6. IMPROVING ARITHMETIC AND ALGEBRA
26
Let’s analyze our circle-to-ring example again. How does arithmetic/algebra
compare to calculus?
Division spits back the averaged-sized ring in our pattern. The derivative
gives a formula (2πr) that describes every ring (just plug in r). Similarly, mul-
tiplication lets us scale up the average element (once we’ve found it) into the
full amount. Integrals let us add up the pattern directly.
Sometimes we want to use the average item, not the fancy calculus steps,
because it’s a simpler representation of the whole (“What’s the average trans-
action size? I don’t need the full list”). That’s ﬁne, as long as it’s a conscious
choice.
Better Formulas
If calculus provides better, more-speciﬁc version of multiplication and division,
shouldn’t we rewrite formulas with it? You bet.
An equation like distance = speed·time explains how to ﬁnd total distance
assuming an average speed. An equation like distance =
R
speed dt tells us
how to ﬁnd total distance by breaking time into instants (split along the “t”
axis), and accumulating the (potentially unique) distance traveled each instant
(speed ·dt).

CHAPTER 6. IMPROVING ARITHMETIC AND ALGEBRA
27
Algebra
Calculus
distance = speed · time
distance =
R
speed dt
speed = distance
time
speed = d
dt distance
area = height · width
area =
R
height dw
weight = densit y ·leng th · width ·height
weight =
Ð
densit y dx d y dz
Similarly, speed = d
dt distance explains that we can split our trajectory into
time segments, and the (potentially unique) amount we moved in that time
slice was the speed.
The overused “integrals are area under the curve” explanation becomes
more clear. Multiplication, because it deals with static quantities, can only
measure the area of rectangles. Integrals let measurements curve and undulate
as we go: we’ll add their contribution, regardless.
A series of multiplications becomes a series of integrals (called a triple in-
tegral). It’s beyond this primer, but your suspicion was correct: we can mimic
the multiplications and integrate several times in a row.
Math, and speciﬁcally calculus, is the language of science because it de-
scribes relationships extremely well. When I see a formula with an integral or
derivative, I mentally convert it to multiplication or division (with the under-
standing that will give the “average” element, not the actual one).
Better Algebra
Algebra lets us start with one fact and systematically work out others. Imagine
I want to know the area of an unknown square. I can’t measure the area, but I
overhead someone saying it was 13.3 inches on a side.
Algebra
Thinking process
Area o f square =?
The area of this square is unknown. . .
p
Area = 13.3
. . . but I know the square root.
¡p
Area
¢2 = (13.3)2
Square both sides. . .
Area = 176.89
. . . and I can recreate the original area
Remember learning that along with add/subtract/multiply/divide, we could
take powers and roots? We added two new ways to transform an equation.
Well, calculus extends algebra with two more operations: integrals and
derivatives. Now we can work out the area of a circle, algebra-style:

CHAPTER 6. IMPROVING ARITHMETIC AND ALGEBRA
28
Algebra + Calculus
Thinking process
Area o f circle =?
The area of a circle is unknown. . .
d
dr Area = 2πr
. . . but I know it splits into rings (along the radius)
R d
dr Area =
R
2πr
Integrate both sides. . .
Area = πr 2
. . . and I can recreate the original area
The abbreviated notation helps see the big picture. If the integrand only
uses a single variable (as in 2πr), we can assume we’re using dr from r = 0
to r = r. This helps think of integrals and derivatives like squares and square
roots: operations that cancel!
It’s pretty neat: “gluing together” and “splitting apart” should behave like
opposites, right?
With our simpler notation, we can write
R
d
dr Area = Area instead of the
bulky
R r
0
³
d
dr Area
´
dr = Area.
Learning The Rules
With arithmetic, we learned special techniques for combining whole numbers,
decimals, fractions, and roots/powers. Even though 3+9 = 12, we can’t assume
p
3+
p
9 =
p
12.
Similarly, we need to learn the rules for how integrals/derivatives work
when added, multiplied, and so on. Yes, there are fancy rules for special cat-
egories (what to do with eˆx, natural log, sine, cosine, etc.), but I’m not con-
cerned with that. Let’s get extremely comfortable with the basics. The fancy
stuff can wait.

C H A P T E R
7
SEEING HOW LINES WORK
Let’s start by analyzing a fairly simple pattern, a line:
f (x) = 4x
In everyday terms, we enter an input, x, and get an output, f (x). And in
this case, the output is 4 times the input. Suppose we’re buying fencing. For
every foot we ask for (the input, x), it costs us $4 (the output, f (x)). 3 feet of
fence would cost $12. Fair enough.
Notice the abstract formula f (x) = 4x only considers quantities, not units.
We could have written that a foot of fence costs 400 pennies, f (x) = 400x, and
it’s up to us to remember it’s dollars in the ﬁrst formula and pennies in the
second. Our equations use abstract, unitless quantities, and we have to bring
the results back to the real world.
Finding the Derivative Of A Line
The derivative of a pattern,
d
dx f (x), is sequence of steps generated as make
slices along an input variable (x is the natural choice here). How do we ﬁgure
out the sequence of steps?
Well, I imagine going to Home Depot and pestering the clerk:
You: I’d like some lumber please. What will it run me? Clerk: How much
do you want? You: Um. . . 1 feet, I think. Clerk: That’ll be $4. Anything else
I can help you with? You: Actually, it might be 2 feet. Clerk: That’ll be $8.
Anything else I can help you with? You: It might be 3 feet. Clerk: (sigh) That’ll
be $12. Anything else I can help you with? You: How about 4 feet?
We have a relationship (f (x) = 4x) and investigate it by changing the input
a tiny bit. We see if there’s a change in output (there is!), then we change the
input again, and so on.
In this case, it’s clear that an additional foot of fencing raises the cost by
$4. So we’ve just determined the derivative to be a constant 4, right?
Not so fast. Sure, we thought about the process and worked it out, but let’s
be a little more organized (not every pattern is so simple). Can we describe
our steps?
• 1: Get the current output, f (x). In our case, f (1) = 4.
29

CHAPTER 7. SEEING HOW LINES WORK
30
• 2: Step forward by dx (1 foot, for example)
• 3: Find the new amount, f (x +dx). In our case, it’s f (1+1) = f (2) = 8.
• 4: Compute the difference: f (x +dx)−f (x), or 8 - 4 = 4
Ah! The difference between the next step and the current one is the size of
our slice. For f (x) = 4x we have:
f (x +dx)−f (x) = 4(x +dx)−4(x) = 4·dx
Increasing length by dx increases the cost by 4·dx.
That statement is true, but a little awkward: it talks about the total change.
Wouldn’t it be better to have a ratio, such as “cost per foot”?
We can extract the ratio with a few shortcuts:
• dx = change in our input
• d f = resulting change in our output, f (x +dx)−f (x)
•
d f
dx = ratio of output change to input change
In our case, we have
d f
dx = 4·dx
dx
= 4
Notice how we express the derivative as d f
dx instead of
d
dx f (x). What gives?
It turns out there’s a few different versions we can use.
Think about the various ways we express multiplication:
• Times symbol: 3 × 4 (used in elementary school)
• Dot: 3 · 4 (used in middle school)
• Implied multiplication with parentheses: (x +4)(x +3)
• Implied multiplication with a space: 2πr dr
The more subtle the symbol, the more we focus on the relationship be-
tween the quantities; the more visible the symbol, the more we focus on the
computation.
The notation for derivatives is similar:
Some versions, like f ′(x), remind us the sequence of steps is a variation
of the original pattern. Notation like d f
dx puts us into detail-oriented mode,
thinking about the ratio of output change relative to the input change (“What’s
the cost per additional foot?”).

CHAPTER 7. SEEING HOW LINES WORK
31
Remember, the derivative is a complete description of all the steps, but it
can be evaluated at a certain point to ﬁnd the step there: What is the additional
cost/foot when x = 3? In our case, the answer is 4.
Let’s check our ﬁndings with the computer:
Nice! Linear relationships are simple enough that we don’t need to visualize
the steps (but if you do, imagine a 1-d line being split into segments: - - -), and
we can work with the symbols directly.
Finding The Integral Of A Constant
Now let’s work in the other direction: given the sequence of steps, can we ﬁnd
the size of the original pattern?
In our fence-building scenario, it’s fairly straightforward. Solving
d f
dx = 4
means answering “What pattern has an output change of 4 times the input
change?”
Well, we’ve just seen that f (x) = 4x results in f ′(x) = 4. So, if we’re given
f ′(x) = 4, we can guess the original function must have been f (x) = 4x.
I’m pretty sure we’re right (what else could the integral of 4 be?) but let’s
check with the computer:

CHAPTER 7. SEEING HOW LINES WORK
32
Whoa – there’s two different answers (deﬁnite and indeﬁnite). Why? Well,
there’s many functions that could increase cost by $4/foot! Here’s a few:
• Cost = $4 per foot, or f (x) = 4x
• Cost = $4 + $4 per foot, or f (x) = 4+4x
• Cost = $10 + $4 per foot, or f (x) = 10+4x
There could be a ﬁxed per-order fee, with the fence cost added in. All the
equation f ′(x) = 4 says is that each additional foot of fencing is $4, but we don’t
know the starting conditions.
• The deﬁnite integral tracks the accumulation of a set amount of slices.
The range can be numbers, such as
R 13
0 4, which measures the slices from
x=0 to x=13 (13×4 = 52). If the range includes a variable (0 to x), then
the accumulation will be an equation (4x).
• The indeﬁnite integral ﬁnds the actual formula that created the pattern
of steps, not just the accumulation in that range. It’s written with just an
integral sign:
R
f (x). And as we’ve seen, the possibilities for the original
function should allow for a starting offset of C.
The notation for integrals can be fast-and-loose, and it’s confusing. Are we
looking for an accumulation, or the original function? Are we leaving out dx?
These details are often omitted, so it’s important to feel what’s happening.
The Secret: We Can Work Backwards
The little secret of integrals is that we don’t need to solve them directly. Instead
of trying to glue slices together to ﬁnd out their area, we just learn to recognize
the derivatives of functions we’ve already seen.
If we’ve know the derivative of 4x is 4, then if someone asks for the integral
of 4, we can respond with “4x” (plus C, of course). It’s like memorizing the
squares of numbers, not the square roots. When someone asks for the square
root of 121, dig through and remember that 11 × 11 = 121.

CHAPTER 7. SEEING HOW LINES WORK
33
An analogy: Imagine an antiques dealer who knows the original vase just
from seeing a pile of shards.
How does he do it? Well, he takes replicas in the back room, drops them,
and looks at the pattern of pieces. Then he comes to your pile and says “Oh, I
think this must be a Ming Dynasty Vase from the 3rd Emperor.”
He doesn’t try to glue your pile back together – he’s just seen that exact
vase break before, and your pile looks the same!
Now, there may be piles he’s never seen, that are difﬁcult or impossible to
recognize. In that case, the best we can do is to just add up the pieces (with a
computer, most likely). We might determine the original vase weighed 13.78
pounds. That’s a data point, ﬁne, but it’s not as nice as knowing what the vase
was before it shattered.
This insight was never really explained to me: it’s painful to add up (possi-
bly changing) steps directly, especially when the pattern gets complicated. So,
just learn to recognize the pattern from the derivatives we’ve already seen.
Getting To Better Multiplication
Gluing together equally-sized steps looks like regular multiplication, right? You
bet. If we wanted 3 steps (0 to 1, 1 to 2, 2 to 3) of size 2, we might write:
Z 3
0
2 dx = 6
Again, this is a fancy way of saying “Accumulate 3 steps of size 2: what do
you get in total?”. We are time-lapsing a sequence of equal changes.
Now, suppose someone asks you to add 2 + 2 + 2 + 2 + 2 + 2 + 2 + 2 +
2 + 2 + 2 + 2 + 2. You might say: Geez, can’t you write it more simply? You
know, something like:
Z 13
0
2 dx = 26
Creating The Abstract Rules
Have an idea how linear functions behave? Great. We can make a few abstract
rules – like working out the rules of algebra for ourselves.
If we know our output is a scaled version of our input (f (x) = ax) then
d
dx a · x = a
and
Z
a = ax +C
That is, the ratio of each output step to each input step is a constant a (4,
in our examples above). And now that we’ve broken the vase, we can work
backwards: if we accumulate steps of size a, they must have come from a
pattern similar to a · x (plus C, of course).

CHAPTER 7. SEEING HOW LINES WORK
34
Notice how I wrote
R
a and not
R
a dx – I wanted to focus on a, and not
details like the width of the step (dx). Part of calculus is learning to expose the
right amount of detail.
One last note: if our output does not react at all to our input (we’ll charge
you a constant $2 no matter how much you buy. . . including nothing!) then
“steps” are a constant 0:
d
dx a = 0
In other words, there is no difference in the before-and-after measurement.
Now, a pattern may have an occasional zero slice, if it stands still for a moment.
That’s ﬁne. But if every slice it zero, it means our pattern never changes.
There are a few subtleties down the road, but let’s ﬁrst learn “Me want
food” and then “Verily, I hunger”.

C H A P T E R
8
PLAYING WITH SQUARES
We’ve seen how lines behave. Now let’s hone our skills with a more complex
function like f (x) = x2.
This scenario is more complex, so let’s visualize it and walk through the
properties.
Imagine you’re building a square garden, to plant veggies and enjoy cu-
cumbers in a few months. You’re not sure how large to make it. Too small,
and there’s not enough food, but too large, and you’ll draw the attention of the
veggie maﬁa.
You’ll build the garden incrementally, foot-by-foot, until it looks right. Let’s
say you build it slowly, starting from scratch and growing to a 10×10 plot:
What do we have?
To the untrained eye, we’ve built a 10×10 garden,
which uses 40 feet of perimeter fencing (10 · 4) and 100 square feet of topsoil
(10 · 10). (Pretend topsoil is sold by the square foot, assuming a standard
thickness.)
Bring On The Calculus
That’s it? The analysis is just the current perimeter and square footage? No
way.
By now, you should be clamoring to use X-Ray and Time-Lapse vision to see
what’s happening under the hood. Why settle for a static description when we
can know the step-by-step description too?
We can analyze the behavior of the perimeter pretty easily:
35

CHAPTER 8. PLAYING WITH SQUARES
36
Per imeter = 4· x
d
dx Per imeter = 4
The change in perimeter ( dP
dx ) is a constant 4. For every 1-foot increase in
x, we have a 4-foot jump in the perimeter.
We can visualize this process. As the square grows, we push out the existing
sides, and just add 4 corner pieces (in yellow):
The visual is nice, but not required. After our exposure to lines, we should
glance at an equation like p = 4x and realize that p jumps by 4 when x jumps
by 1.
Changing Area
Now, how does area change? Since squares are fairly new, let’s X-Ray the shape
as it grows:
We can write out the size of each jump, like so:
Now that’s interesting. The gap from 02 to 12 is 1. The gap from 12 to 22
is 3. The gap from 22 to 32 is 5. And so on – the odd numbers are sandwiched
between the squares! What’s going on?

CHAPTER 8. PLAYING WITH SQUARES
37
Ah! Growing to the next-sized square means we’ve added a horizontal and
vertical strip (x + x) and a corner piece (1). If we currently have a square with
side x, the jump to the next square is 2x + 1. (If we have a 5×5 square, getting
to a 6×6 will be a jump of 2·5 + 1 = 11. And yep, 36 - 25 = 11.)
Again, the visualization was nice, but it took effort. Algebra can simplify
the process.
In this setup, if we set our change to dx = 1, we get
d f = f (x +1)−f (x) = (x +1)2 −x2 = (x2 +2x +1)−x2 = 2x +1
Algebra predicted the size of the slices without a hitch.
Integrals and the Veggie Maﬁa
The derivative takes a shape and get the slices. Can we work backwards, from
the slices to the shape? Let’s see.
Suppose the veggie maﬁa spies on your topsoil and fencing orders. They
can’t see your garden directly, but what can they deduce from your purchases?
Let’s say they observe a constant amount of fencing being delivered (4, 4,
4, 4. . . ) but increasing orders of topsoil (1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11. . . ). What can they
work out?
A low-level goon might just add up the total amount accumulated (the
deﬁnite integral): “Heya boss, looks like they’ve built some garden with a total
perimeter of 40-feet, and total area of 100 square feet.”
But that’s not good enough! The goon doesn’t know the shape you’re trying
to build. He saw order after order go by without noticing the deeper pattern.
The crime boss is different: he wants the indeﬁnite integral, the pattern you
are following. He’s savvy enough to track the pattern as the orders come in:
“The area is increasing 1, 3, 5, 7. . . that’s following a 2x + 1 area increase!”
Now, there are likely many shapes that could grow their area by 2x +1. But,
combined with a constant perimeter increase of 4, he suspects you’re making a
square garden after a few deliveries.
How does the godfather do it? Again, by working backwards. He’s split
apart enough shapes (triangles, squares, rectangles, etc.) that he has a large
table of before-and-afters, just like the antiques dealer.
When he sees a change of 2x+1, a square (x2) is a strong candidate. Another
option might be a right triangle with sides x and 2x. Its area equation is 1
2 x·2x =
x2, so the area would change the same as a square.

CHAPTER 8. PLAYING WITH SQUARES
38
And when he sees a perimeter change of 4, he knows the perimeter must
be 4x. Ah! There aren’t too many shapes with both properties: a square is his
guess. Part of learning calculus is getting familiar with the typical origins of
the patterns you see, so you can quickly reverse-engineer them.
Suppose they see your orders change: your fencing deliveries drop to (2, 2,
2, 2. . . ) and your topsoil orders change to (20, 20, 20, 20). What’s going on?
Make a guess if you like.
Ready?
The veggie boss ﬁgures you’ve moved to a rectangular garden, with one side
determined by x, and the other side a ﬁxed 20-feet. Does this guess work?
f (x) = 20x
Per imeter = 20+20+ x + x = 40+2x
Area = 20x
d
dx Per imeter = 2
d
dx Area = 20
Wow, it checks out. No wonder he’s the godfather.
Lastly, what if the godfather saw topsoil orders of (5, 7, 9, 11, 13)? He
might assume you’re still building a square (2x + 1 pattern), but you started
with a 2×2 garden already made. Your ﬁrst jump was 5, which would have
happened if x was already 2 (2x +1 = 5).
The mob boss is a master antiques dealer: he sees the pattern of shards
you’re bringing in and quickly determines the original shape (indeﬁnite in-
tegral). The henchman can only tell you the running totals so far (deﬁnite
integral).
Wrapping It All Up
It looks like we’re ready for another rule, to explain how squares change. If we
leave dx as it is, we can write:
d
dx x2 = f (x +dx)−f (x)
dx
= (x +dx)2 −(x)2
dx
= x2 +2x ·dx +(dx)2 −x2
dx
= 2x ·dx +(dx)2
dx
= 2x +dx
Ok! That’s the abbreviated way of saying “Grow by two sides and the cor-
ner”. Let’s plug this into the computer to check:

CHAPTER 8. PLAYING WITH SQUARES
39
Uh oh! We hand-computed the derivative of x2 as 2x +dx (which is usually
2x +1), but the computer says it’s just 2x.
But isn’t the difference from 42 to 52 exactly 25 - 16 = 9, and not 8? What
happened to that corner piece? The mystery continues in the next episode.

C H A P T E R
9
WORKING WITH INFINITY
Last time, we manually worked on the derivative of x2 as 2x+1. But the ofﬁcial
derivative, according to the calculator, was 2x. What gives?
The answer relies on the concept of inﬁnite accuracy. Inﬁnity is a fascinating
and scary concept – there are entire classes (Analysis) that study it. We’ll avoid
learning the nuances of every theory: our goal is a practical understanding
how inﬁnity can help us work out the rules of calculus.
Insight: Sometimes Inﬁnity Can Be Measured
Here’s a quick brainteaser for you. Two friends are 10 miles apart, moving
towards each other at 5mph each. A mosquito ﬁles quickly between them,
touching one person, then the other, on and on, until the friends high-ﬁve and
the mosquito is squished.
Let’s say the mosquito travels a zippy 20mph as it goes. Can you ﬁgure out
how far it ﬂew before its demise?
Yikes. This one is tricky: once the mosquito leaves the ﬁrst person, touches
the second, and turns around. . . the ﬁrst person has moved closer! We have an
inﬁnite number of ever-diminishing distances to add up. The question seems
painfully difﬁcult to solve, right?
Well, how about this reasoning: from the perspective of the people walking,
they’re going to walk for an hour total. After all, they start 10 miles apart, and
the gap shrinks at 10 miles per hour (5mph + 5mph). Therefore, the mosquito
must be ﬂying for an hour, and go 20 miles.
Whoa! Did we just ﬁnd the outcome of a process with an inﬁnite number
of steps? I think so!
40

CHAPTER 9. WORKING WITH INFINITY
41
Splitting A Whole Into Inﬁnite Parts
It’s time to turn our step-by-step thinking into overdrive. Can we think about
a ﬁnite shape being split into inﬁnite parts?
• In the beginning of the course, we saw a circle could be split into rings.
How many? Well, an inﬁnite number!
• A number line can be split into an inﬁnite number of neighboring points.
How many decimals would you say there are between 1.0 and 2.0?
• The path of a mosquito can be seen as a whole, or a journey subdivided
into an inﬁnite number of segments
When we have two viewpoints (the mosquito, and the walkers), we can pick
the one that’s easier to work with. In this case, the walker’s holistic viewpoint
is simpler. With the circle, it’s easier to think about the rings themselves. It’s
nice to have both options available.
Here’s another example: can you divide a cake into 3 equal portions, by
only cutting into quarters:
It’s a weird question. . . but possible! Cut a entire cake into quarters. Share
3 pieces and leave 1. Cut the remaining piece into quarters. Share 3 pieces,
leave 1. Keep repeating this process: at every step, everyone has received an
equal share, and the remaining cake will be split evenly as well. Wouldn’t this
plan maintain an even split among 3 people?
We’re seeing the intuition behind inﬁnite X-Ray and Time-lapse vision: zoom-
ing in to turn a whole into an inﬁnite sequence. At ﬁrst, we might think divid-
ing something into inﬁnite parts requires each part to be nothing. But, that’s
not right: the number line can be subdivided inﬁnitely, yet there’s a ﬁnite gap
between 1.0 and 2.0.
Two Fingers Pointing At The Same Moon
Why can we understand variations of the letter A, even when pixelated?

CHAPTER 9. WORKING WITH INFINITY
42
Even though the rendering is different, we see the idea being pointed to.
All three versions, from perfectly smooth to jagged, create the same letter A in
our heads (or, are you unable to read words when written out with rectangular
pixels?). An inﬁnite sequence can point to the same result we’d ﬁnd if we took
it all at once.
In calculus, there are detailed rules about how to ﬁnd what result an inﬁnite
set of steps points to. And, there are certain sequences that cannot be worked
out. But, for this primer, we’ll deal with functions that behave nicely.
We’re used to jumping between ﬁnite representations of the same idea (5
= V = |||||). Now we’re seeing we can convert between a ﬁnite and inﬁnite
representation of an idea, similar to 1
3 = .333... = .3 + .03 + .003 + ....
When we turned a circle into a ring-triangle, we said “The inﬁnitely-many
rings in our circle can be turned into the inﬁnitely-many boards that make up
a triangle. And the resulting triangle is easy to measure.”
Today’s goal isn’t to become experts with inﬁnity. It’s to intuitively appre-
ciate a practical conclusion: a sequence of inﬁnitely many parts can still be
measured, and reach the same conclusions as analyzing the whole. They’re just
two different descriptions of the same idea.

C H A P T E R
10
THE THEORY OF DERIVATIVES
The last lesson showed that an inﬁnite sequence of steps could lead to a ﬁ-
nite conclusion. Let’s put it into practice, and see how breaking change into
inﬁnitely small parts can point to the the true amount.
Analogy: Measuring Heart Rates
Imagine you’re a doctor trying to measure a patient’s heart rate while exercis-
ing. You put a guy on a treadmill, strap on the electrodes, and get him running.
The machine spit out 180 beats per minute. That must be his heart rate, right?
Nope. That’s his heart rate when observed by doctors and covered in elec-
trodes. Wouldn’t that scenario be stressful? And what if your Nixon-era elec-
trodes get tangled on themselves, and tug on his legs while running?
Ah. We need the electrodes to get some measurement. But, right after-
wards, we need to remove the effect of the electrodes themselves. For exam-
ple, if we measure 180 bpm, and knew the electrodes added 5 bpm of stress,
we’d know the true heart rate was 175.
The key is making the knowingly-ﬂawed measurement, to get a reading,
then correcting it as if the instrument wasn’t there.
Measuring the Derivative
Measuring the derivative is just like putting electrodes on a function and mak-
ing it run. For f (x) = x2, we stick an electrode of +1 onto it, to see how it
reacted:
43

CHAPTER 10. THE THEORY OF DERIVATIVES
44
The horizontal stripe is the result of our change applied along the top of
the shape. The vertical stripe is our change moving along the side. And what’s
the corner?
It’s part of the horizontal change interacting with the vertical one! This
is an electrode getting tangled in its own wires, a measurement artifact that
needs to go.
Throwing Away The Artiﬁcial Results
The founders of calculus intuitively recognized which components of change
were “artiﬁcial” and just threw them away. They saw that the corner piece
was the result of our test measurement interacting with itself, and shouldn’t be
included.
In modern times, we created ofﬁcial theories about how this is done:
• Limits: We let the measurement artifacts get smaller and smaller until
they effectively disappear (cannot be distinguished from zero).
• Inﬁnitesimals: Create a new type of number that lets us try inﬁnitely-
small change on a separate, tiny number system. When we bring the
result back to our regular number system, the artiﬁcial elements are re-
moved.
There are entire classes dedicated to exploring these theories. The practical
upshot is realizing how to take a measurement and throw away the parts we
don’t need.
Here’s how the derivative is deﬁned using limits:
Step
Example
Prereq: Start with a function to study
f (x) = x2
1: Change the input by dx, our test change
f (x +dx) = (x +dx)2 = x2 +2x ·dx +(dx)2
2: Find the resulting change in output, d f
f (x +dx)−f (x) = 2x ·dx +(dx)2
3: Find d f
dx
2x·dx+(dx)2
dx
= 2x +dx
4: Throw away the measurement artifacts
2x +dx
dx = 0
=⇒2x

CHAPTER 10. THE THEORY OF DERIVATIVES
45
Wow! We found the ofﬁcial derivative for
d
dx x2 on our own:
Now, a few questions:
• Why do we measure d f
dx , and not the actual change df? Think of df as
the raw change that happened as we made a step. The ratio is helpful
because it normalizes comparisons, showing us how much the output
reacts to the input. Now, sometimes it can be helpful to isolate the actual
change that happened in an interval, and rewrite d f
dx = 2x as d f = 2x ·dx.
• How do we set dx to 0? I see dx as the size of the instrument used to
measure the change in a function. After we have the measurement with
a real instrument (2x +dx), we ﬁgure out what the measurement would
be if the instrument wasn’t there to interfere (2x).
• But isn’t the 2x + 1 pattern correct? The integers have the squares 0,
1, 4, 9, 16, 25 which has the difference pattern 1, 3, 5, 7, 9. Because
the integers must use a ﬁxed interval of 1, using dx = 1 and keeping it
around is a perfectly accurate way to measure how they change. How-
ever, decimals don’t have a ﬁxed gap, so 2x is the best result for how fast
the change between 22 and (2.0000001)2 is happening. (Except, replace
2.0000001 with the number immediately following 2.0, whatever that is).
• If there’s no ‘+1’, when does the corner get ﬁlled in? The diagram
shows how area grows in the presence of a crude instrument, dx. It isn’t
a decree on how more area is added. The actual change of 2x is the
horizontal and vertical strip. The corner represents a change from the
vertical strip interfering with the horizontal one. It’s area, sure, but it
won’t be added on this step.I imagine a square that grows by two strips,
melts to absorb the area (forming a larger square), then grows again,
then melts, and so on. The square isn’t “staying still” long enough to
have the horizontal and vertical extensions interact.
Practical conclusion: We’ve can start with a knowingly-ﬂawed measure-
ment (f ′(x) ∼2x + dx), and deduce the result it points to (f ′(x) = 2x). The
theories of exactly *how* we throw away dx aren’t necessary to master today.
The key is realizing there are measurement artifacts that can be removed when
modeling how pattern changes.

CHAPTER 10. THE THEORY OF DERIVATIVES
46
(Still shaky about exactly how dx can appear and disappear? Good. This
question took mathematicians decades to ﬁgure out. Here’s a deeper discussion of
how the theory works, but remember this: When measuring, ignore the effect of
the instrument.)

C H A P T E R
11
THE FUNDAMENTAL THEOREM OF CALCULUS
(FTOC)
The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus is the big aha! moment, and something
you might have noticed all along:
• X-Ray and Time-Lapse vision let us see an existing pattern as an accumu-
lated sequence of changes
• The two viewpoints are opposites: X-Rays break things apart, Time-
Lapses put them together
This might seem “obvious”, but it’s only because we’ve explored several
examples. Is it truly obvious that we can separate a circle into rings to ﬁnd the
area? The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus gently reminds us we have a few
ways to look at a pattern. (“Might I suggest the ring-by-ring viewpoint? Makes
things easier to measure, I think.”)
Part 1: Shortcuts For Deﬁnite Integrals
If derivatives and integrals are opposites, we can “shortcut” the manual accu-
mulation process involved in deﬁnite integrals.
For example, what is 1 + 3 + 5 + 7 + 9? (Let’s accumulate discrete steps
because they’re simpler to visualize.)
The hard way, using the deﬁnite integral, is to start cranking through the
addition. The easy way is to realize that pattern came from a growing square.
We know the last change (+9) happened at x=4, so we’ve built up to a 5×5
square. Therefore, the sum of the entire sequence is 25:
47

CHAPTER 11. THE FUNDAMENTAL THEOREM OF CALCULUS (FTOC)
48
Neat! If we have the original pattern, we have a shortcut to measure the
size of the steps.
How about a partial sequence like 5 + 7 + 9? Well, just take the total
accumulation and subtract the part we’re missing (in this case, the missing 1
+ 3 represents a missing 2×2 square).
And yep, the sum of the partial sequence is: 5×5 - 2×2 = 25 - 4 = 21.
I hope the strategy clicks for you: we avoid manually computing the deﬁnite
integral by ﬁnding the original pattern.
Here’s the ﬁrst part of the FTOC in fancy language. If we have pattern of
steps and the original pattern, the shortcut for the deﬁnite integral is:
Z b
a
steps(x)dx = Or iginal(b)−Or iginal(a)
Intuitively, I read this as “Adding up all the changes from a to b is the same
as getting the difference between a and b”. Formally, you’ll see f (x) = steps(x)
and F(x) = Or iginal(x), which I think is confusing. Label the steps as steps,
and the original as the original.
Why is this cool? The deﬁnite integral is a gritty mechanical computation,
and the indeﬁnite integral is a nice, clean formula. Just take the difference
between the endpoints to know the net result of what happened in the middle!
(That makes sense, right?)
Part 2: Finding The Indeﬁnite Integral
Ok. Part 1 said that if we have the original function, we can skip the manual
computation of the steps. But how do we ﬁnd the original?
FTOC Part Deux to the rescue!
Let’s pretend there’s some original function (currently unknown) that tracks
the accumulation:
Accumulation(x) =
Z b
a
steps(x)dx
The FTOC says the derivative of that magic function will be the steps we
have:
Accumulation′(x) = steps(x)
www.ebook3000.com

CHAPTER 11. THE FUNDAMENTAL THEOREM OF CALCULUS (FTOC)
49
Now we can work backwards. If we can ﬁnd some random function, take its
derivative, notice that it matches the steps we have, we can use that function
as our original!
Skip the painful process of thinking about what function could make the
steps we have. Just take a bunch of them, break them, and see which matches
up. It’s our vase analogy, remember? The FTOC gives us “ofﬁcial permission”
to work backwards. In my head, I think “The next step in the total accumuation
is our current amount! That’s why the derivative of the accumulation matches
the steps we have.”
Technically, a function whose derivative is equal to the current steps is
called an anti-derivative (One anti-derivative of 2 is 2x; another is 2x + 10).
The FTOC tells us any anti-derivative will be the original pattern (+C of course).
This is surprising – it’s like saying everyone who behaves like Bill Cosby is
Bill Cosby. But in calculus, if a function has steps that match the ones we’re
looking at, it’s the original source.
The practical conclusion is integration and differentiation are opposites.
Have a pattern of steps?
Integrate to get the original.
Have the original?
Differentiate to get the pattern of steps. Jump back and forth as many times as
you like.
Next Steps
Phew! This was a theory-heavy set of lessons. It was hopefully enough to
make the connections click. I’m most interested in developer metaphorical un-
derstanding, and leave the detailed proofs to a follow-up. No need to recite
the recipe before tasting the meal.
The key insights from:
• Inﬁnity: A ﬁnite result can be viewed with a sequence of inﬁnite steps
• Derivatives: We can take a knowingly-ﬂawed measurement and morph
it into the ideal one
• Fundamental Theorem Of Calculus: We can use the original function
as a shortcut to track the intermediate steps
In the upcoming lessons, we’ll work through a few famous calculus rules
and applications. The ultimate goal will be to work out, for ourselves, how to
make this happen:

CHAPTER 11. THE FUNDAMENTAL THEOREM OF CALCULUS (FTOC)
50
We have an intuitive understanding the sequence above is possible. By the
end, you’ll be able to play the music on your own.

C H A P T E R
12
THE BASIC ARITHMETIC OF CALCULUS
Remember learning arithmetic? After seeing how to multiply small numbers,
we learned how to multiply numbers with several digits:
13×15 = (10+3)(10+5) = 100+30+50+15
We can’t just combine the ﬁrst digits (10×10) and the second (3×5) and
call it done. We have to walk through the cross-multiplication.
Calculus is similar.
If we have the whole function, we can blithely say
that f (x) has derivative f ′(x). But that isn’t illuminating, or explaining what
happens behind the scenes.
If we can describe our function in terms of a building block x (such as
f (x) = 3x2 + x), then we should be able to ﬁnd the derivative, the pattern of
changes, in terms of that same building block. If we have two types of building
blocks (f = a ·b), we’ll get the derivative in terms of those two building blocks.
Here’s the general strategy:
• Imagine a scenario with a few building blocks (area = leng th · width)
• Let every component change
• Measure the change in the overall system
• Remove the measurement artifacts (our instruments interfering with each
other)
Once we know how systems break apart, we can reverse-engineer them into
the integral (yay for the FTOC!).
Addition
Let’s start off easy: how does a system with two added components behave?
In the real world, this could be sending two friends (Frank and George) to
build a fence. Let’s say Frank gets the wood, and George gets the paint. What’s
the total cost?
Total = Frank’s cost+George’s cost
t(x) = f (x)+ g(x)
51

CHAPTER 12. THE BASIC ARITHMETIC OF CALCULUS
52
The derivative of the entire system, dt
dx , is the cost per additional foot. In-
tuitively, we suspect the total increase is the sum of the increases in the parts:
dt
dx = d f
dx + dg
dx
That relationship makes sense, right? Let’s say Frank’s cost is $3/foot for
the wood, and George adds $0.50/foot for the paint. If we ask for another foot,
the total cost will increase by $3.50.
Here’s the math for that result:
• Original: f + g
• New: (f +d f )+(g +dg)
• Change: (f +d f )+(g +dg)−(f + g) = d f +dg
In my head, I imagine x, the amount you requested, changing silently in a
corner. This creates a visible change in f (size d f ) and g (size dg), and we see
the total change as d f +dg.
It seems we should just combine the total up front, writing total = 3.5x not
total = f (x)+g(x) = 3x+0.5x. Normally, we would simplify an equation, but it’s
sometimes helpful to list every contribution (total = base + shipping + tax).
In our case, we see most of the increase is due to the Frank (the cost of wood).
Remembering the derivative is the “per dx” rate, we write:
d
dx
¡
f (x)+ g(x)
¢
= d f
dx + dg
dx
But ugh, look at all that notation! Let’s trim it down:
• Write f instead of f (x). We’ll assume a single letter is an entire function,
and by the Third Edict of The Grand Math Poombahs, our functions will
use a parameter x.
• We’ll express the derivative using a single quote (f ′), not with a ratio
( d f
dx ). We’re most interested in the relationship between the parts (addi-
tion), not the gritty details of the parts themselves.
So now the addition rule becomes:
(f + g)′ = f ′ + g ′
Much better! Here’s how I read it: Take a system made of several parts:
(f + g). The change in the overall system, (f + g)′, can be found by adding the
change from each part.
Multiplication
Let’s try a tricker scenario. Instead of inputs that are added (almost oblivious
to each other), what if they are multiplied?
Suppose Frank and George are making a rectangular garden for you. Frank
handles the width and George takes care of the height. Whenever you clap,
they move. . . but by different amounts!

CHAPTER 12. THE BASIC ARITHMETIC OF CALCULUS
53
Frank’s steps are 3-feet long, but George’s are only 2-feet long (zookeeping
accident, don’t ask). How can we describe the system?
area = width ·height = f (x)· g(x)
f (x) = 3x
g(x) = 2x
We have linear parts, so the derivatives are simple: f ′(x) = 3 and g ′(x) = 2.
What happens on the next clap?
Looks familiar! We have a horizontal strip, a vertical strip, and a corner
piece. We can work out the amounts with algebra:
• Original: f · g
• New: (f +d f )·(g +dg) = (f · g)+(f ·dg)+(g ·d f )+(d f ·dg)

CHAPTER 12. THE BASIC ARITHMETIC OF CALCULUS
54
• Change: f ·dg + g ·d f +d f ·dg
Let’s see this change more closely:
• The horizontal strip happened when f changed (by d f ), and g was the
same value
• The vertical strip was made when g changed (by dg), and f was the
same value
• The corner piece (d f ·dg) happened when the change in one component
(d f ) interacted with the change in the other (dg)
The corner piece is our sample measurement getting tangled on itself, and
should be removed. (If we’re forced to move in whole units, then the corner
is ﬁne. But most real-world systems can change continuously, by any decimal
number, and we want the measurement artifacts removed.)
To ﬁnd the total change, we drop the d f · dg term (interference between
the changes) and get:
f ·dg + g ·d f
I won’t let you forget the derivative is on a “per dx” basis, so we write:
total change
dx
= f dg
dx + g d f
dx
(f · g)′ = f · g ′ + g · f ′
There is an implicit “x” changing off in the distance, which makes f and g
move. We hide these details to make the notation simpler.
In English: Take a scenario with multiplied parts. As they change, and
continue to be multiplied, add up the new horizontal and vertical strips that
are formed.
Let’s try out the rule: if we have a 12×8 garden and increment by a whole
step, what change will we see?
In this case, we’ll use the discrete version of the rule since we’re forced to
move as a whole step:
• Vertical strip: f ·dg = 12·2 = 24
• Horizontal strip g ·d f = 8·3 = 24
• Corner piece: d f ·dg = 3·2 = 6
• Total change: 24+24+6 = 54
Let’s test it. We go from 12×8 (96 square feet) to 15×10 (150 square feet).
And yep, the area increase was 150 - 96 = 54 square feet!
Simple Division (Inverses)
Inverses can be tough to visualize: as x gets bigger, 1
x gets smaller. Let’s take it
slow.

CHAPTER 12. THE BASIC ARITHMETIC OF CALCULUS
55
Suppose you’re sharing a cake with Frank. You’ve just cut it in half, about
to take a bite and. . . George shufﬂes in. He looks upset, and you’re not about
to mention the fresh set of claw marks.
But you’ve just the cake in half, what can you do?
Cut it again. You and Frank can cut your existing portion in thirds, and give
George a piece:
Neat! Now everyone has 1/3 of the total. You gave up 1/3 of your amount
(1/2), that is, you each gave George 1/6 of the total.
Time to eat! But just as you’re about to bite in. . .
the veggie godfather
walks in. Oh, he’ll deﬁnitely want a piece. What do you do?
Cut it again. Everyone smooshes together their portion, cuts it in fourths,
and hands one piece to the Don. The cake is split evenly again.
This is step-by-step thinking applied to division:
• Your original share is 1
x (when x=2, you have 1/2)
• Someone walks in
• Your new share becomes
1
x+1
How did your amount of cake change? Well, you took your original slice
( 1
x ), cut it into the new number of pieces (
1
x+1), and gave one away (the change
is negative):
1
x · −1
x +1 =
−1
x(x +1)
We can probably guess that the +1 is a measurement artifact because we
forced an integer change in x. If we call the test change dx, we can ﬁnd the
difference between the new amount (
1
x+1) and the original ( 1
x ):
1
x +dx −1
x =
x
x(x +dx) −
x +dx
x(x +dx) =
−dx
x(x +dx)
After ﬁnding the total change (and its annoying algebra), we divide by dx
to get the change on a “per dx” basis:
−1
x(x +dx)
Now we remove the leftover dx, the measurement artifact:
−1
x(x +0) = −1
x2
Phew! We’ve found how an 1/x split changes as more people are added.

CHAPTER 12. THE BASIC ARITHMETIC OF CALCULUS
56
Let’s try it out: You are splitting a $1000 bill among 5 people. A sixth
person enters, how much money do you save?
You’ll personally save 1/5 · 1/6 = 1/30 of the total cost (cut your share into
6 pieces, give the new guy one portion to pay). That’s about 3%, or 30. Not
bad for a quick calculation!
Let’s work it backwards: how large is our group when we’re saving about
$100 per person? Well, $100 is 1/10 of the total. Since
1
32 ∼1
10, we’ll hit that
savings rate around x=3 people.
And yep, going from 3 to 4 people means each person’s share goes from
$333.33 to $250 – about $100. Not bad! (If we added people fractionally, we
could hit the number exactly.)
Questions
We didn’t explicitly talk about scaling by a constant, such as ﬁnding the deriva-
tive of f (x) = 3x. Can you use the product rule to ﬁgure out how it changes?
(Hint: imagine a rectangle with a ﬁxed 3 for one side, and x for the other).
Now, how about the addition rule? How would f (x) = x + x + x behave?

C H A P T E R
13
PATTERNS IN THE RULES
We’ve uncovered the ﬁrst few rules of calculus:
(f + g)′ = f ′ + g ′
(f · g)′ = f · g ′ + g · f ′
µ 1
x
¶′
= −1
x2
Instead of blasting through more rules, step back. Is there a pattern here?
Combining Perspectives
Imagine a function as a business with interacting departments, or a machine
with interconnected parts. What happens when we make a change?
If our business has 4 departments, there are 4 perspectives to account for.
It sounds painfully simple when written out: count the changes coming from
each part!
No matter the speciﬁc interaction between parts F and G (addition, subtrac-
tion, multiplication, exponents. . . ), we just have two perspectives to consider:
57

CHAPTER 13. PATTERNS IN THE RULES
58
Aha! That’s why the rules for (f +g)′ and (f ·g)′ are two added perspectives.
The derivative of 1
X has a perspective because there’s just one “moving part”,
x. (If you like, there is a contribution from “1” about the change it experiences:
nothing. No matter how much you yell, 1 stays 1.)
The exact contribution from a perspective depends on the interaction:
• With addition, each part adds a direct change (d f +dg).
• With multiplication, and each part thinks it’ll add a rectangular strip (f ·
dg + g ·d f ). (I’m using d f instead of f ′ to help us think about the slice
being added.)
You might forget the exact form of the multiplication rule. But you can
think “The derivative of f · g must be something with d f + something with
dg.”
Let’s go further: what about the derivative of a · b + c? You guessed it, 3
perspectives that should be added: something involving da plus something
involving db plus something involving dc.
We can predict the shape of derivatives for gnarly equations. What’s the
derivative of:
xy · u
v
Wow. I can’t rattle that off, but I can say it’ll be something involving 4
additions (dx, d y, du and dv). Guess the shape of a derivative, even if you
don’t know the exact description.
Why does this work? Well, suppose we had a change that was inﬂuenced
by both da and db, such as 15 · da · db – that’d be our instrument interfering
with itself!
Only direct changes on a single variable’s are counted (such as 3da or
12db), and "changes on changes" like 15·da ·db are ignored.
Dimensional Intuition
Remember that derivatives are a fancier form of division. What happens when
we make a division like x3
x ? We divide volume by length, and get area (one
dimension down).
What happens when we do
d
dx x3? You might not know yet, but you can bet
we’ll be dropping a dimension.
Dimensions
Example
Description
3
x3
Volume (cubic growth)
2
x2
Area (square growth)
1
x
Length (linear growth)
0
c
Constant (no change)
-1
1
x
Inverse length (“per length”)

CHAPTER 13. PATTERNS IN THE RULES
59
-2
1
x2
Inverse area (“per area”)
-3
1
x3
Inverse volume (“per volume”)
When we divide or take a derivative, we drop a dimension and hop down
the table. Volume is built from area (slices dx thick), area is built from length
(dx wide).
A constant value, like 3, has no dimension in the following sense: it never
produces a set of slices. There will never be a jump to the next value. Once
we have a constant value, we get “stuck” on the table because the 0 pattern
always produces another 0 pattern (volume to area to lines to constant to zero
to zero. . . ).
We can have negative dimensions as well: “per length”, “per area”, “per
volume”, etc. Derivatives still decrease the dimension, so when seeing 1
x , we
know the derivative will resemble
1
x2 as the dimension drops a level.
An important caveat: Calculus only cares about quantities, not their dimen-
sion. The equations will happily combine x and x2, even though we know you
can’t mix length with area. Units add a level of meaning from outside the equa-
tion, that help keep things organized and warn us if we’ve gone awry (if you
differentiate area and get volume, you know something went wrong).
Thinking With Dimensions
You can think about the dimension of a derivative without digging into a spe-
ciﬁc formula. Imagine the following scenario:
• Take a string and wrap it tight around a quarter. Take another string and
wrap it tight around the Earth.
• Lengthen both strings, adding more to the end, so there’s a 1-inch gap all
the way around around the quarter, and a 1-inch gap all the way around
the Earth (like having a ring ﬂoating around Saturn).
• Quiz: Which scenario needed more extra string to create? Is it more
string to put a 1-inch gap around the quarter, or a 1-inch gap around the
Earth?
We can crunch through the formula, but think higher-level. Because circum-
ference is a 1-d line, its reaction to change (the derivative) will be a constant.
No matter the current size, the circumference will change the same amount
with every push. So, the extra string needed is the same for both! (About 6.28
inches per inch of radius increase).
Now, suppose we were painting the sphere instead of putting a string around
it. Ah, well, area is squared, therefore the derivative is a dimension lower (lin-
ear). If we have a 5-inch and 10-inch sphere, and make them 1-inch bigger
each, the larger sphere will require double the extra paint.

CHAPTER 13. PATTERNS IN THE RULES
60
Questions
Let’s think about the derivative of x3, a growing cube.
1) What dimension should the derivative of x3 have?
2) How many viewpoints should x3 = x · x · x involve?
3) Have a guess for the derivative? Does it match with how you’d imagine
a cube to grow?

C H A P T E R
14
THE FANCY ARITHMETIC OF CALCULUS
Here’s the rules we have so far:
(f + g)′ = f ′ + g ′
(f · g)′ = f · g ′ + g · f ′
µ 1
x
¶′
= −1
x2
Let’s add a few more to our collection.
Power Rule
We’ve worked out that
d
dx x2 = 2x:
We can visualize the change, and ignore the artiﬁcial corner piece. Now,
how about visualizing x3?
61

CHAPTER 14. THE FANCY ARITHMETIC OF CALCULUS
62
The process is similar. We can glue a plate to each side to expand the cube.
The “missing gutters” represent artifacts, where our new plates would interact
with each other.
I have to keep reminding myself: the gutters aren’t real! They represent
growth that doesn’t happen at this step. After our growth, we “melt” the cube
into its new, total area, and grow again. Counting the gutters would over-
estimate the growth that happened in this step. (Now, if we’re forced to take
integer-sized steps, then the gutters are needed – but with inﬁnitely-divisible
decimals, we can change smoothly.)
From the diagram, we might guess:
d
dx x3 = 3x2
And that’s right! But we had to visualize the result. Abstractions like al-
gebra let us handle scenarios we can’t visualize, like a 10-dimensional shape.
Geometric shapes are a nice, visual starting point, but we need to move beyond
them.
We might begin analyzing a cube with using algebra like this:
(x +dx)3 = (x +dx)(x +dx)(x +dx) = (x2 +2x ·dx +(dx)2)(x +dx) = ...
Yikes. The number of terms is getting scary, fast. What if we wanted the
10th power? Sure, there are algebra shortcuts, but let’s think about the prob-
lem holistically.
Our cube x3 = x · x · x has 3 components: the sides. Call them a, b and c
to keep ’em straight. Intuitively, we know the total change has a contribution
from each side:

CHAPTER 14. THE FANCY ARITHMETIC OF CALCULUS
63
Now what change does each side think it’s contributing?
• a thinks: My change (da) is combined with the other, unmoving, sides
(b ·c) to get da ·b ·c
• b thinks: My change (db) is combined with the other sides to get db·a·c
• c thinks: My change (dc) is combined with the other sides to get dc ·a·b
Each change happens separately, and there’s no “crosstalk” between da, db
and dc (such crosstalk leads to gutters, which we want to ignore). The total
change is:
A′s changes +B′s changes +C ′s changes = (da ·b ·c)+(db · a ·c)+(dc · a ·b)
Let’s write this in terms of x, the original side.
Every side is identical,
(a = b = c = x) and the changes are the same (da = db = dc = dx), so we get:
(dx · x · x)+(dx · x · x)+(dx · x · x) = x2 ·dx + x2 ·dx + x2 ·dx = 3x2 ·dx
Converting this to a “per dx” rate we have:
d
dx x3 = 3x2
Neat! Now, the brain-dead memorization strategy is to think “Pull down
the exponent and decrease it by one”. That isn’t learning!
Think like this:
• x3 has 3 identical perspectives.
• When the system changes, all 3 perspectives contribute identically. There-
fore, the derivative will be 3· something.
• The “something” is the change in one side (dx) multiplied by the remain-
ing sides (x · x). The changing side goes from x to dx and the exponent
lowers by one.
We can reason through the rule! For example, what’s the derivative of x5?
Well, it’s 5 identical perspectives (5 · something). Each perspective is me
changing (dx) and the 4 other guys staying the same (x · x · x · x = x4). So the
combined perspective is just 5x4.
The general Power Rule:
d
dx xn = nxn−1
Now we can memorize the shortcut “bring down the exponent and sub-
tract”, just like we know that putting a 0 after a number multiplies by 10.
Shortcuts are ﬁne once you know why they work!

CHAPTER 14. THE FANCY ARITHMETIC OF CALCULUS
64
Integrals of Powers
Let’s try integrating a power, reverse engineering a set of changes into the
original pattern.
Imagine a construction site. Day 1, they order three 1×1 wooden planks.
The next day, they order three 2×2 wooden planks. Then three 3×3 planks.
Then three 4×4 planks. What are they building?
My guess is a cube. They are building a shell, layer by layer, and perhaps
putting grout between the gutters to glue them together.
Similarly, if we see a series of changes like 3x2, we can visualize the plates
being assembled to build a cube:
Z
3x2 = x3
Ok – we took the previous result and worked backward. But what about
the integral of plain old x2? Well, just imagine that incoming change is being
split 3 ways:
x2 = x2
3 + x2
3 + x2
3 = 1
33x2
Ah!
Now we have 3 plates (each 1/3 of the original size) and we can
integrate a smaller cube. Imagine the “incoming material” being split into 3
piles to build up the sides:
Z
x2 =
Z 1
3 ·3x2 = 1
3
Z
3x2 = 1
3 x3
If we have 3 piles of size x2, we can make a full-sized cube. Otherwise, we
build a mini-cube, 1/3 as large.
The general integration rule is:
Z
xn =
1
n +1 xn+1
After some practice, you’ll do the division automatically. But now you know
why it’s needed: we have to split the incoming “change material” among sev-
eral sides. (Building a square? Share changes among 2 sides. Building a cube?
Share among 3 sides. Building a 4d hypercube? Call me.)
The Quotient Rule
We’ve seen the derivative of an inverse (a “simple division”):
d
dx
1
x = −1
x2
Remember the cake metaphor? We cut our existing portion ( 1
x ) into x slices,
and give one away.
Now, how can we ﬁnd the derivative of f
g ? One component in the system is
trying to grow us, while the other divides us up. Which wins?

CHAPTER 14. THE FANCY ARITHMETIC OF CALCULUS
65
Abstraction to the rescue. When ﬁnding the derivative of x3, we imagined
it as x3 = a ·b ·c, which helped simplify the interactions. Instead of a mishmash
of x’s being multiplied, it was just 3 distinct perspectives to consider.
Similarly, we can rewrite f
g as two perspectives:
f
g = a ·b
We know a = f and b = 1
g .
From this zoomed-out view, it looks like a
normal, rectangular, product-rule scenario:
(a ·b)′ = da ·b +db · a
It’s our little secret that b is really 1
g , which behaves like a division. We just
want to think about the big picture of how the rectangle changes.
Now, since a is just a rename of f , we can swap in da = d f . But how do we
swap out b? Well, we have:
b = 1
g
db
dg = −1
g 2
db = −1
g 2 dg
Ah! This is our cake cutting. As g grows, we lose db = −1
g 2 ˙dg from the b
side. The total impact is:
(a ·b)′ = (da ·b)+(db · a) =
µ
d f · 1
g
¶
+
µ−1
g 2 dg · f
¶
This formula started with the product rule, and we plugged in their real
values. Might as well put f and g back into (a · b)′, to get the Quotient Rule
(aka the Division Rule):
µ f
g
¶′
=
µ
d f · 1
g
¶
+
µ−1
g 2 dg · f
¶
Many textbooks re-arrange this relationship, like so:
µ
d f · 1
g
¶
+
µ−1
g 2 dg · f
¶
= g ·d f
g 2
−f ·dg
g 2
= g ·d f −f ·dg
g 2
And I don’t like it, no ma’am, not one bit! This version no longer resembles
its ancestor, the product rule.
In practice, the Quotient Rule is a torture device designed to test your mem-
orization skills; I rarely remember it. Just think of
f
g as f · 1
g , and use the
product rule like we’ve done.

CHAPTER 14. THE FANCY ARITHMETIC OF CALCULUS
66
Questions
Let’s do a few warm-ups to test our skills. Can you solve these bad boys?
d
dx x4 = ?
d
dx 3x5 = ?
(You can check your answers with Wolfram Alpha, such as d/dx xˆ4.)
Again, don’t get lost in the symbols. Think “I have x4 – what pattern of
changes will I see as I make x larger?”.
Ok! How about working backwards, and doing some integrals?
Z
2x2 = ?
Z
x3 = ?
Ask yourself, “What original pattern would create steps in the pattern 2x2?”
Trial-and-error is ok! Try a formula, test it, and adjust it. Personally, I like
to move aside the 2 and just worry about the integral of x2:
Z
2x2 = 2
Z
x2 = ?
How do you know if you’re right? Take the derivative – you are the antiques
dealer! I brought you a pattern of shards (2x2) and you need to tell me the vase
they came from. Once you have your guess, just break it in the back room, and
make sure you get 2x2 back out. Then you’ll be conﬁdent in your answer.
We’re getting ready to work through the circle equations ourselves, and
recreate results found by Archimedes, likely the greatest mathematician of all
time.

C H A P T E R
15
DISCOVERING ARCHIMEDES’ FORMULAS
In the preceding lessons we uncovered a few calculus relationships, the “arith-
metic” of how systems change:
How do these rules help us?
• If we have an existing equation, the rules are a shortcut to ﬁnd the step-
by-step pattern. Instead of visualizing a growing square, or cube, the
Power Rule lets us crank through the derivatives of x2 and x3. Whether
x2 is from a literal square or multiplied elements isn’t important – we’ll
get the pattern of changes.
• If we have a set of changes, the rules help us reverse-engineer the original
pattern. Getting changes like 2x or 14x is a hint that something · x2 was
the original pattern.
Learning to “think with calculus” means we can use X-Ray and Time-lapse
vision to imagine changes taking place, and use the rules to work out the
speciﬁcs. Eventually, we might not visualize anything, and just work with the
symbols directly (as you likely do with arithmetic today).
In the start of the course, we morphed a ring into a circle, then a sphere,
then a shell:
67

CHAPTER 15. DISCOVERING ARCHIMEDES’ FORMULAS
68
With the ofﬁcial rules in hand, we can blast through the calculations and
ﬁnd the circle/sphere formulas on our own. It may sound strange, but the
formulas feel different to me – almost alive – when you see them morphing in
front of you. Let’s jump in.
Changing Circumference To Area
Our ﬁrst example of “step-by-step” thinking was gluing a sequence of rings to
make a circle:
When we started, we needed a lot of visualization. We had to unroll the
rings, line them up, realize they made a triangle, then use 1
2base·height to get
the area. Visual, tedious. . . and necessary. We need to feel what’s happening
before working with raw equations.
Here’s the symbolic approach:

CHAPTER 15. DISCOVERING ARCHIMEDES’ FORMULAS
69
Let’s walk through it. The notion of a “ring-by-ring timelapse” sharpens into
“integrate the rings, from nothing to the full radius” and ultimately:
area =
Z r
0
2πr dr
Each ring has height 2πr and width dr, and we want to accumulate that
area to make our disc.
How can we solve this equation? By working backwards. We can move the
2π part outside the integral (remember the scaling property?) and focus on the
integral of r:
2·π
Z r
0
r dr =?
What pattern makes steps of size r? Well, we know that r 2 creates steps of
size 2r, which is double what we need. Half that should be perfect. Let’s try it
out:
d
dr
1
2r 2 = 1
2
d
dr r 2 = 1
22r = r
Yep, 1
2r 2 gives us the steps we need! Now we can plug in the solution to the
integral:
area = 2·π
Z r
0
r dr = 2·π· 1
2r 2 = πr 2
This is the same result as making the ring-triangle in the ﬁrst lesson, but
we manipulated equations, not diagrams. Not bad! It’ll help even more once
we get to 3d. . .
Changing Area To Volume
Let’s get fancier. We can take our discs, thicken them into plates, and build a
sphere:

CHAPTER 15. DISCOVERING ARCHIMEDES’ FORMULAS
70
Let’s walk slowly. We have several plates, each at a different “x-coordinate”.
What’s the size of a single plate?
The plate has a thickness (dx), and its own radius. The *radius of the plate*
is some off the x-axis, which we can call y.
It’s a little confusing at ﬁrst: r is the radius of the entire sphere, but y is the
(usually smaller) radius of an individual plate under examination. In fact, only
the center plate (x = 0) will have its radius the same as the entire sphere. The
“end plates” don’t have a height at all.
And by the Pythagorean theorem, we have a connection between the x-
position of the plate, and its height (y):
x2 + y2 = r 2
Ok. We have size of each plate, and can integrate to ﬁnd the volume, right?
Not so fast. Instead of starting on the left side, with a negative x-coordinate,
moving to 0, and then up to the max, let’s just think about a sphere as two
halves:
To ﬁnd the total volume, get the volume of one half, and double it. This is
a common trick: if a shape is symmetrical, get the size of one part and scale
it up. Often, it’s easier to work out “0 to max” than “min to max”, especially
when “min” is negative.
Ok. Now let’s solve it:

CHAPTER 15. DISCOVERING ARCHIMEDES’ FORMULAS
71
Whoa! Quite an equation, there. It seems like a lot, but we’ll work through
it:
First off: 3 variables is too many to have ﬂying around. We’ll write the
height of each plate (y), in terms of the others:
height = y =
p
r 2 −x2
The square root looks intimidating at ﬁrst, but it’s being plugged into y2
and the exponent will cancel it out. After plugging in y, we have the much
nicer:
Volume = 2π
Z r
0
r 2 −x2 dx
The parentheses are often dropped because it’s “known” that dx is multi-
plied by the entire size of the step. We know the step is (r 2 −x2) · dx and not
r 2 −(x2 ·dx).
Let’s talk about r and x for a minute. r is the radius of the entire sphere,
such as “15 inches”. You can imagine asking “I want the volume of a sphere
with a radius of 15 inches”. Fine.
To ﬁgure this out, we’ll create plates at each x-coordinate, from x = 0 up to
x = 15 (and double it). x is the bookkeeping entry that remembers which plate
we’re on. We could work out the volume from x = 0 to x = 7.5, let’s say, and
we’d build a partial sphere (maybe useful, maybe not). But we want the whole
shebang, so we let x go from 0 to the full r.
Time to solve this bad boy. What equation has steps like r 2 −x2?
First, let’s use the addition rule: steps like a−b are made from two patterns
(one making a, the other making b).
Let’s look at the ﬁrst pattern, the steps of size r 2. We’re moving along the
x-axis, and r is a number that never changes: it’s 15 inches, the size of our
sphere. This max radius never depends on x, the position of the current plate.

CHAPTER 15. DISCOVERING ARCHIMEDES’ FORMULAS
72
When a scaling factor doesn’t change during the integral (r, π, etc.), it can
be moved outside and scaled up at the end. So we get:
Z
r 2 dx = r 2
Z
dx = r 2x
In other words, r 2 · x is a linear trajectory that contributes a constant r 2 at
each step.
Cool. How about the integral of −x2? First, we can move out the negative
sign and take the integral of x2:
−
Z
x2 dx =?
We’ve seen this before. Since x3 has steps of 3x2, taking 1/3 of that amount
( x3
3 ) should be just right. And we can check that our integral is correct:
d
dx
µ
−1
3 x3
¶
= −1
3
d
dx x3 = −1
33x2 = −x2
It works out! Over time, you’ll learn to trust the integrals you reverse-
engineer, but when starting out, it’s good to check the derivative. With the
integrals solved, we plug them in:
2π
Z
r 2 −x2 dx = 2π(r 2x −1
3 x3)
What’s left? Well, our formula still has x inside, which measures the volume
from 0 to some ﬁnal value of x. In this case, we want the full radius, so we set
x = r:
2π(r 2x −1
3 x3) −−−−−→
set x=r 2π
µ
(r 2)r −1
3r 3
¶
= 2π
µ
r 3 −1
3r 3
¶
= 2π2
3r 3 = 4
3πr 3
Tada! You’ve found the volume of a sphere (or another portion of a sphere,
if you use a different range for x).
Think that was hard work? You have no idea. That one-line computation
took Archimedes, one of the greatest geniuses of all time, tremendous effort
to ﬁgure out.
He had to imagine some spheres, and a cylinder, and some
cones, and a fulcrum, and imagine them balancing and. . . let’s just say when
he found the formula, he had it written on his grave. Your current calculus
intuition would have saved him incredible effort (see this video).
Changing Volume To Surface Area
Now that we have volume, ﬁnding surface area is much easier. We can take a
thin “peel” of the sphere with a shell-by-shell X-Ray:

CHAPTER 15. DISCOVERING ARCHIMEDES’ FORMULAS
73
I imagine the entire shell as “powder” on the surface of the existing sphere.
How much powder is there? It’s dV , the change in volume. Ok, what is the
area the powder covers?
Hrm. Think of a similar question: how much area will a bag of mulch cover?
Get the volume, divide by the desired thickness, and you have the area covered.
If I give you 300 cubic inches of dirt, and spread it in a pile 2 inches thick, the
pile will cover 150 square inches. After all, if area · thickness = volume then
area =
volume
thickness .
In our case, dV is the volume of the shell, and dr is its thickness. We can
spread dV along the thickness we’re considering (dr) and see how much area
we added: dV
dr , the derivative.
This is where the right notation comes in handy. We can think of the deriva-
tive as an abstract, instantaneous rate of change (V ′), or as a speciﬁc ratio
( dV
dr ). In this case, we want to consider the individual elements, and how they
interact (volume of shell / thickness of shell).
So, given the relation,
area of shell = volume of shell
depth of shell = dV
dr
we ﬁgure out:
d
dr Volume = d
dr
4
3πr 3 = 4
3π d
dr r 3 = 4
3π(3r 2) = 4πr 2
Wow, that was fast! The order of our morph (circumference / area / volume
/ surface area) made the last step simple. We could try to spin a circumference
into surface area directly, but it’s more complex.
As we cranked through this formula, we “dropped the exponent” on r 3 to
get 3r 2. Remember this change comes from 3 perspectives (dimensions) that
contributed an equal share.
2000 Years Of Math In An Afternoon
The steps we worked through took 2000 years of thought to discover, by the
greatest geniuses no less. Calculus is such a broad and breathtaking viewpoint
that it’s difﬁcult to imagine where it doesn’t apply. It’s just about using X-Ray
and Time-Lapse vision:

CHAPTER 15. DISCOVERING ARCHIMEDES’ FORMULAS
74
• Break things down. In your current situation, what’s the next thing that
will happen? And after that? Is there a pattern here? (Getting bigger,
smaller, staying the same.) Is that knowledge useful to you?
• Find the source. You’re seeing a bunch of changes – what caused them?
If you know the source, can you predict the end-result of all the changes?
Is that prediction helpful?
We’re used to analyzing equations, but I hope it doesn’t stop there. Numbers
can describe mood, spiciness, and customer satisfaction; step-by-step thinking
can describe battle plans and psychological treatment. Equations and geometry
are just nice starting points to analyze. Math isn’t about equations, and music
isn’t about sheet music – they point to the idea inside the notation.
While there are more details for other derivatives, integration techniques,
and how inﬁnity works, you don’t need them to start thinking with Calculus.
What you discovered today would have made Archimedes tear up, and that’s a
good enough start for me.
Happy math.
www.ebook3000.com

