
CANNABIS 
ACTIVIST'S 
HANDBOOK
by Vince McLeod
© VJM Publishing 2012

Also by VJM Publishing:
The Verity Key
Learn Spanish Vocabulary With 
Mnemonics
Stop Smoking Cigarettes with the 
Token Economy Method

Table of Contents
INTRODUCTION.......................................................................
PART ONE: THE FOUR STEPS.................................................
1. CORE VALUES..................................................................
2. MEMBERSHIP...................................................................
3. FUNDRAISING..................................................................
4. MEDIA................................................................................
PART TWO: A DISCUSSION OF CANNABIS LAW 
REFORM RELATED ARGUMENTS.........................................
1. ARGUMENTS FOR CANNABIS LAW REFORM...........
2. COUNTERING ARGUMENTS AGAINST CANNABIS 
LAW REFORM.......................................................................
PART THREE: TAKING IT TO THE TRENCHES....................
1. AN EXAMPLE PARTY POLICY.......................................
2. RUNNING A CAMPAIGN.................................................
3. MISCELLANEOUS...........................................................

INTRODUCTION
Like many people, my favourite cannabis story comes from 
Amsterdam. One summer afternoon I sat on the grass of the 
Rembrantplein, a two-skin joint in hand, merrily partaking with a 
couple of friends. I noticed, approaching our group along the side of 
the square, a uniformed policeman. He came closer. Our eyes met. 
Under his piercing gaze I exhaled a billowing cloud of White Widow 
smoke.
And that's it. That's the whole story. The policeman walked on, I took 
another toke and passed the joint to my friend.
For anyone familiar with Amsterdam this is neither a surprising nor 
an uncommon story. But for almost every other cannabis user in 
almost every other part of the world it is remarkable. The actions I 
carried out, although they harmed no-one, would have resulted in at 
least arrest and probably a trial and a criminal conviction had I 
performed them in countless other places supposedly ruled by justice 
and human dignity.
This handbook is for any individual interested in working towards 
cannabis law reform. It is for anyone who believes that the freedom I 
experienced that day in a tiny corner of Northern Europe was not the 
result of a legal aberration but an inviolable human right. The truth 
of life as a citizen in any political system is that you have only those 
rights that you fight for. The Dutch have fought for theirs; we can 
fight for ours.
There are three parts to this handbook. The first is a detailed 
examination of the necessary steps and considerations in founding 
and aiding a cannabis law reform movement. The second is a 
discussion of the arguments for and against cannabis prohibition 
from the perspective of a cannabis law reform activist seeking to 
increase support for repealing prohibition. The third looks at how to 
take the fight to the public, including a list of example policy points 

that a cannabis law reform movement or party might promote 
(movement and party are usually used interchangeably in this book).
Because the practical reality of working towards cannabis law reform 
is that any efforts will be dependent on individual personalities and 
local conditions, the information in this handbook is not presented as 
a set of rules to follow. It is merely an invitation to consider the 
issues, problems and hurdles that will be faced so that any activist 
can decide which action is most appropriate for them and for the 
movement in that time and place.
The freedoms of Amsterdam are not the result of a fluke of legal and 
cultural coincidence. They represent the vanguard of a movement 
towards higher principles of justice, a movement that is fated to 
succeed as humanity continues to defeat the inertia inherited from 
the barbarism of the past. Cannabis prohibition will be repealed 
across the world, and it will take its place amongst apartheid, child 
labour, racial segregation and the criminalisation of homosexuality as 
an idiocy that must never be repeated. All that stands between us and 
that point is action taken by cannabis law reform activists.

PART ONE: THE FOUR STEPS
There are four steps to creating a cannabis law reform movement that 
has a chance of making a difference. The first part of this handbook 
is divided into four sections, each of which examines one of these 
steps.
The first of these is for the founding members of the movement to 
decide what they wish the core values of it to be. There are many 
considerations that must be weighed before a set of core values can 
be established, and the first section of this part deals with those.
The second step is for the movement to create a membership and to 
organise this into some kind of structure. There are a lot of tasks 
here, and as a consequence the section discussing them is fairly 
lengthy. It covers everything from the recruitment of new members 
to the different levels of organisation that a national movement must 
have.
The third step is to raise funds so that the movement can fight more 
effectively. Fundraising is mostly a mix of merchandising and 
soliciting donations, and both of these are discussed in detail, as is 
the effect of money on party operations.
The fourth step is to learn to fight in the media. The description of 
how to do this overlaps to some degree with the second part of this 
handbook, because media coverage is ultimately nothing more than 
an opportunity to put forward arguments for cannabis law reform.

1. CORE VALUES
Before a cannabis law reform movement can even attract other 
members, a core of potential members must at least formulate a set 
of values that they agree on and which can be used as a platform for 
determining future strategy. The most obvious first value is to 
facilitate the legalisation of cannabis within a certain legal territory.
Even with this minimal value established, there are likely to be 
ideological disagreements if the group is sufficiently large. The 
tendency of ideological disagreements is to factionalise, which can 
be dangerous for the overall effectiveness of the movement. A set of 
core values must be strong enough to inspire solidarity between 
members. If a member is confident that other members hold the same 
values they will be more inclined to work towards the goals of the 
movement.
The core values that a cannabis law reform movement adopts will 
depend on a wide range of factors, from the personalities of the 
individuals involved to the realities of the political system in which 
the movement operates. The purpose of this section is to describe the 
disagreements that will likely arise in this regard and some 
considerations that must be acknowledged.
The Legalisation Spectrum
One of the first arguments that will occur within a cannabis law 
reform movement is how far the process of legalisation should go, 
and how far the movement ought to suggest that it go. Firstly, people 
might disagree on, for example, whether decriminalisation or 
outright legalisation is the best solution according to their own 
values. Secondly, some might calculate that although a certain 
position is morally desirable it is not practical for the movement to 
publicly agitate for it. For example, some might personally believe 
that outright legalisation is the best possibility, but calculate that it 
would be hard to get the necessary political support for this position 

to influence law.
Starting from the status quo (assuming this is cannabis prohibition) 
and moving out towards greater freedom, one passes through 
deprioritisation, depenalisation, decriminalisation, partial legalisation 
(of which there are many forms) and total legalisation.
Deprioritisation involves no change in either the legal status of 
cannabis or the penalties associated with it. It relies on a promise by 
the police that certain cannabis offences will be given the lowest 
level of importance, should a police officer have multiple tasks in 
one time period. It is hard to say if this is necessarily a move away 
from the status quo, because many police jurisdictions have de facto 
deprioritisation for simple logistical reasons. This is a very small 
change and most supporters of cannabis law reform will sneer at it 
for that reason.
Depenalisation involves no change in the legal status of cannabis, but 
a decrease in the penalties associated with it. If cannabis possession 
is punishable with a penal sentence, the maximum severity of the 
sentence might be reduced. The major advantage with depenalisation 
is that it involves the smallest move away from the status quo, and 
could therefore be expected to encounter the least resistance. The 
major disadvantage is that it offers little or no improvement for those 
affected by cannabis prohibition, and for this reason it does little to 
inspire activists.
Decriminalisation involves a change in the legal status for some or 
all cannabis crimes. Crimes that are currently punished with criminal 
convictions become civil offences punishable by fines. Under this 
system, cannabis offences would occupy roughly the same legal 
status as parking offences. This position has a lot of advantages, the 
major one being that it offers a significant change in legal 
consequences for a relatively small change in the status quo.
It should be noted here that many experienced cannabis law reform 
activists are virulently against the previous three options for the 
reason that achieving either of them may make it far more difficult to 

go any further. Firstly, the establishment may believe it has 
acquiesced on the cannabis issue and that no further negotiation need 
be entertained. Secondly, many cannabis law reform activists might 
leave the movement at this point in the false belief that cannabis 
freedom has been achieved.
Partial legalisation and partial prohibition are the same thing, but an 
activist might use either term depending on the perspective they are 
coming from. This might refer to complete freedom to possess and 
use cannabis, and some freedoms regarding its sale and cultivation. A 
person might have the freedom to grow a limited number of plants 
and to deal socially to their friends, but may not have the freedom to 
set up commercial operations. The major advantages and 
disadvantages of this system depend on how involved people are 
with cannabis culture. 
Total legalisation is almost, but not quite, a free-for-all. People 
would be free to possess, use, grow and sell cannabis in whatever 
manner they wanted (except in special cases, such as sale to minors). 
Even within this position there is room for movement: some might 
advocate for cannabis to be completely legal save for laws that relate 
to general commercial practice, such as the levying of goods and 
services taxes. Some might wish for even more freedom than this. 
The advantage of total legalisation is that it maximises freedom; the 
major disadvantage is that a position this extreme will meet 
considerable resistance from both within and outside of the 
movement.
Ultimately the movement needs to decide what it will be fighting for, 
who it will be fighting for and what (if anything) could be 
negotiated. In practice it is extremely unlikely that the movement 
will ever be in a position to dictate the legislation. Some negotiation 
will inevitably be involved when legislation is changed.
Experience shows that the balance of opinion within the movement 
usually falls somewhere around the partial legalisation area of the 
spectrum, although this will of course depend on local conditions.

Cannabis Taxation
Another early argument will be what level of taxation, if any, should 
be levied on cannabis if a change in its legal status was made. On 
this question people will form an opinion on a spectrum from no 
taxation to high taxation, such as a “vice tax.” Again, some people 
will have a personal preference that differs from what they believe 
the party should promote. In every cannabis law reform movement 
there will be those who are hardline ideologues and those who are 
more interested in finding a compromise with the wider public. A 
popular compromise is to say that cannabis products will be subject 
to goods and services or sales taxes.
It might seem silly for the party to argue over what is really a victory 
condition, but people will argue, and as long as they do it is hard to 
make forward progress. Ultimately the party must find a balance. 
The lower the levels of taxation, the more freedom people will have 
regarding the purchase and use of cannabis. The higher the levels of 
taxation, the stronger the argument will be for cannabis law reform 
improving society.
Harm Reduction
Adopting the value of harm reduction is an excellent way of gaining 
support for the movement. Cannabis prohibitionists have a number 
of reasons for resisting cannabis law reform, and one of the most 
significant of these is the belief that cannabis legalisation will cause 
more harm to both individuals and society. If harm reduction is 
adopted as a core value, it can help to organise the movement, 
because future policy and arguments for cannabis law reform can be 
made with a view to achieving this. It also puts the onus on the 
opponents of cannabis law reform to prove their case that cannabis 
prohibition is less harmful than legalisation.
The best thing about putting forward the argument for cannabis law 
reform under an umbrella of harm reduction is that few people will 
admit to wanting a policy that leads to more harm. This means that if 
you can demonstrate conclusively that a certain policy is less 

harmful, even the prohibitionists will have to concede that it has 
merit.
The reality is that most discussions on the subject of cannabis law 
reform ultimately come down to harm reduction, whether the harm in 
question is inflicted on individuals or on society. To persuade a 
person to become a supporter of cannabis law reform they must be 
persuaded that reform would be less harmful to them than the status 
quo, or would be less harmful to society than the status quo, or both. 
This point is expanded upon in Part Two.
The Single Issue Question
Few debates have more potential to tear a cannabis law reform 
movement apart than the question of whether it is to be a “single 
issue” movement or one that agitates in a number of areas. The 
potential for danger lies in the fact that there are strong arguments for 
each side.
In favour of the movement contesting the single issue of cannabis 
there are the arguments of simplicity and believability. Fighting for 
cannabis law reform and nothing else means that the movement will 
attract people for whom reform is the highest priority. It will 
minimise factionalisation because there will be no reason for 
members to argue over other issues and the relative importance of 
those issues. It will ensure that the message is not watered down and 
that members promoting it are not sidetracked by other issues. A 
cannabis law reform party that only focuses on cannabis also has the 
advantage of being more credible. Its members need not claim to 
have expert knowledge on other policy areas, and will avoid the 
possibility of looking foolish if challenged on party policy in these 
areas.
In favour of the movement contesting other issues there are two 
major arguments. Firstly, if another party is also offering cannabis 
law reform there is little room in the political system for a cannabis-
only party; a voter could get what they wanted, plus more, by voting 
for someone else. Secondly, even if voters have no other option for 

cannabis law reform they might easily decide that, on balance, the 
cannabis issue alone does not weigh heavier than the other issues. 
Related to this point is the fact that if an activist's argument for 
cannabis law reform does not sway a voter there is little else that 
could entice them.
From a pragmatic point of view, it might be a good idea to start the 
movement around a single issue and then expand into other areas 
once it has attracted sufficient personnel. This will have the benefit 
of first establishing party authority on the cannabis issue and then 
attracting voters who might still be on the fence.
Whether or not the movement adopts one issue or several, it should 
always be kept in mind that changing position on this question will, 
at least initially, cost the movement support and will require some 
restructuring. For this reason it is important for the movement to 
change position rarely and only if benefits to doing so are clear.
Identification With Cannabis Culture
The movement might have to decide to what extent, if any, it will 
identify with wider cannabis culture. Although it does not have to 
make a hard decision on questions such as support for 
Rastafarianism, it will, to some extent and at least informally, act as 
an important institution of the cannabis culture in the territory it 
represents.
Probably the only important decision that needs to be made in this 
regard is the choice of the party colours. Although red, green and 
yellow appear to many to be the obvious and logical choice for the 
colours of a cannabis law reform movement, some will prefer to 
disassociate themselves from this and will argue for something more 
“neutral.” In practice, one of the greatest challenges the movement 
will face is recruiting people to the cause, and because red, green and 
yellow in combination is so widespread in cannabis culture, most 
cannabis users will recognise it immediately.
Other decisions are not necessarily as important but must be 

considered. Some may wish to choose Bob Marley as the 
background music for the party's electoral videos. This will have the 
benefit of unambiguously declaring what the party stands for but 
may result in it not being taken as seriously as its members wish it to 
be.
Even if it declares itself a champion of the wider cannabis culture, 
the movement ought to avoid adopting elements of the culture that 
might alienate others. Littering party policy documents with 
Jamaican patois will turn away far more people than it will attract.
Drugs Other than Cannabis
Many people who have an interest in cannabis law reform will also 
have an interest in the legal status of other drugs, in particular the 
psychedelics such as LSD and psilocybin. While many of the 
humanitarian arguments put forward in favour of cannabis law 
reform are equally applicable to psychedelics, the nature of the battle 
to legalise psychedelics is very different.
In particular, there are far more people who use and who have used 
cannabis than who use and have used psychedelics, and these people 
have generally used cannabis on a much higher number of occasions 
and over a longer period. A cannabis law reform activist can count on 
the fact that there are large numbers of people whose personal 
experience with cannabis suggests that it should be legal; this cannot 
be done with the psychedelics. There is also the fact that cannabis 
has considerable economic potential in hemp form, and no such 
parallel exists for the psychedelics.
A final, more cynical point is that an examination of the legal 
penalties for possessing and distributing psychedelics, in comparison 
to the penalties for cannabis, suggests that anyone attempting to 
legalise them will meet massive resistance. In some jurisdictions the 
maximum penalty for supplying psychedelics is on the same scale as 
for murder.
To agitate for the legalisation of drugs other than cannabis will 

almost certainly weaken the position of a cannabis law reform 
activist. They will become vulnerable to the accusation that they 
wish to legalise drugs that have horrific social consequences, and 
will be painted as irresponsible and foolish for this reason.
Ancillary Values
A cannabis law reform movement may find common ground with 
regard to cannabis law reform, but the individual members of the 
movement will come to it with different perspectives and with 
different values. The beauty - and the danger - of cannabis law 
reform is that it crosses most of the political spectrum, from those 
solely concerned with what is best for society and those solely 
concerned with what is best for themselves. For this reason, the 
greater the number of core values the movement adopts the easier it 
will become to both attract support and attract opposition. Cannabis 
law reform activists are of any age, either gender, and of any race 
and class, and because of this it is both possible and desirable to 
build a movement that spans these divisions.
Adopting the right values from the start is vital because this will 
form the basis of all future attempts to attract members and to 
encourage support.
Many activists will approach the issue from the perspective of what 
is best for society. If they do, chances are good that they have 
personal values that reflect a centre-left approach. Other activists 
will be more concerned with what is best for the individual. If they 
do, they might have personal values that reflect a centre-right 
approach.
Because cannabis law reform attracts support from across the 
political spectrum, each potential core value has to be examined with 
a view to who it will attract and who it will reject. Proclaiming a 
commitment to truth, freedom and justice is a good idea because few 
will openly disagree with such values. Equality is trickier, because it 
might not appeal to people on the right. Personal responsibility is 
also tricky because it might not appeal to people on the left.

Some values will appeal to those on a certain position on the political 
spectrum, but will not turn others away. A commitment to reducing 
unnecessary government interference and waste will appeal more 
strongly to those on the right, but few on the left will object 
(although they might then become suspicious that the cannabis law 
reform movement is a trojan horse for other right-wing values).
Because everyone has their own agenda it might be simpler to 
decide, from the very beginning, that the movement will only be 
concerned with cannabis law reform. Doing this will bring the 
benefit of reducing bickering and factionalisation.
Left-Wing, Right-Wing or Centre?
Many of the potential ancillary values that a cannabis law reform 
movement could adopt would have the effect of pinning it to a point 
on the political spectrum. Because this is so important in the minds 
of so many people, it might be simpler for the movement to decide 
whether it is left-wing, right-wing or centrist, so each of these 
options will be looked at in turn. If the movement does make this 
decision and commits to a position, the choice to reject or accept 
most values will be obvious.
First, if a party decides it is left-wing, it would focus on taking votes 
from social democrats and from environmentalist parties. A left-wing 
policy might be easier to sell to potential supporters because 
cannabis users tend to be young and poor, and cannabis users who 
are neither are much more likely to escape the effects of prohibition 
anyway (and will, therefore, not consider the issue to be important to 
them). If the party intends to argue that the savings from the repeal of 
prohibition would allow more funding for social programs, this 
might be the best choice. This might also be the best choice if the 
party decides to focus its efforts on the social harm done by cannabis 
prohibition.
Second, if a party decides it is right-wing, it would focus on taking 
votes from libertarians. There is potential to take votes from 

conservatives, but given that conservative parties have historically 
fought the hardest against cannabis law reform and that conservative 
individuals are much less likely to support reform, this might be 
unlikely. If the party intends to argue that the savings from the repeal 
of prohibition could be passed back to people in the form of tax cuts, 
this might be the best choice. This might also be the best choice if 
the party focuses its efforts on the economic harm done by 
prohibition.
Third, if a party decides it is centrist, it would take votes from 
wherever it could get them. Social democrats, environmentalists and 
libertarians could all find something agreeable in party policy. 
Regarding the savings from the repeal of prohibition, a centrist party 
would offer the choice between social programs or tax cuts. 
Likewise, it could credibly argue against both the social and 
economic disadvantages of cannabis prohibition.
The choice to target the centre of the political spectrum offers three 
major advantages. First, agreement on a centrist position will make it 
easier for the party to counter extremist elements within its ranks, 
whether these extremists be left-wing or right-wing. Second, a 
centrist position also gives the party more room for manoeuvrability 
should political or cultural conditions change. Third, a centrist party 
is much more likely to find itself in a strong negotiating position 
post-election. It can play the centre-left and centre-right off against 
each other and agree to support whichever of the two can offer it the 
most.
The Nature of a Representative Democracy
This handbook is a guide for cannabis law reform activism, but it is 
specific to representative democracies. The defining characteristic of 
representative democracies is that a limited number of elected 
officials speak for and determine legislation on behalf of the people 
they represent (at least in theory).
For a cannabis law reform movement to decide how its efforts are 
best spent, it must first determine who it claims to represent. The 

obvious answer is that it represents people adversely affected by 
cannabis prohibition, but because an argument can be made that 
cannabis prohibition harms everyone, this is not useful. At a 
minimum, the movement represents cannabis users. In some 
countries cannabis users will be so numerous that a party could get 
into power from votes from them alone.
The movement might also decide that it represents people who might 
directly benefit from cannabis law reform, whether these people are 
current users or not. Because cannabis has considerable medicinal 
potential, the movement can claim to also represent sick or elderly 
people who could benefit from using cannabis but do not for fear of 
legal repercussions.
If a movement defines who it represents it will be able to target these 
people much more effectively. A pragmatic solution might be to 
decide that the movement represents those who would benefit the 
most from cannabis law reform. The movement must be wary against 
moves to target other groups of voters due to frustration with trying 
to gain support from cannabis users. A cannabis law reform 
movement must always be aware that cannabis users, regardless of 
their voting habits, are the core constituency. Focusing efforts on 
getting supporters to vote is far better than attempting to turn neutrals 
into supporters and then getting them to vote.
Alliances
A cannabis law reform party probably will not exist for long before 
the question of potential alliances is brought up. The more difficult it 
is to get enough votes to achieve representation, the stronger people 
will argue the case of forming an alliance with one or more other 
parties. If the cannabis law reform party is large it may not need to 
consider an alliance, and if it is small there are two different kinds of 
alliance that may be proposed.
The first type is an alliance with a party that already has 
representation, or is expected to after the next election. The 
advantage of this is that the cannabis law reform party would 

theoretically gain immediate representation in the legislative body, or 
at least a stake in it. The disadvantage is, of course, that after an 
alliance is formed the cannabis law reform party is dependent on the 
goodwill of their alliance partner. If the alliance partner chose to 
ignore or deprioritise cannabis law reform, the cannabis law reform 
party would have little recourse beyond cancelling the alliance and 
reforming.
The second type is an alliance with one or several parties that do not 
have representation, with the plan being that their combined 
resources would be enough to get it. The advantage here is that the 
cannabis law reform party has a much better chance at getting 
representation, and will be able to do so on much better terms if the 
alliance partners are roughly the same size. The disadvantages are 
that cobbling together an alliance with a number of smaller parties 
might be more complicated, and that if any of the alliance parties are 
extremists who turn voters away, the reputation of the cannabis law 
reform party could be damaged.
There is a third type, which is more of a pseudo-alliance. It occurs 
when the cannabis law reform party comes to believe that another 
party offers a better bet for cannabis law reform than the cannabis 
law reform party itself, and effectively disbands or does not contest 
the election. Doing this has the potential to cripple the entire 
cannabis law reform movement. The most obvious reason for this is 
that there is little or nothing that forces the second party to agitate for 
cannabis law reform after it achieves representation. 
A Party is a Subset of the Movement
This handbook is for cannabis law reform activism. Much of it is 
devoted to building a cannabis law reform party for the simple 
reason that this is an extremely effective way to achieve the 
objectives of the movement. With enough representation a cannabis 
law reform party could simply enact legislation that removed 
cannabis prohibition. With less representation a party could negotiate 
with a larger party; they could promise to support a larger party on 
all issues in exchange for the support of that party on cannabis law 

reform.
The reality is that many people who are interested in cannabis law 
reform have no interest in party politics. They may believe that a 
party has no chance of achieving power, or they may have no 
confidence in the honesty and ability of the people in the party, or 
they may have extreme distaste for the political system, or they may 
believe that other methods of enacting cannabis law reform are more 
effective.
To the extent that non-party activities such as political lobbying are 
useful, they are strengthened dramatically by any success that a 
cannabis law reform party achieves. An attempt to lobby a politician 
is, to some extent, an attempt to persuade them that they could get 
more votes if they supported a certain policy. If very few people vote 
for a cannabis law reform party, lobbyists have little ability to 
persuade politicians.
The cold truth is that without influence over at least some of the 
legislative body, a cannabis law reform movement is very limited. It 
can attempt to persuade representatives from other parties that 
cannabis law reform is a good idea, and without breaking the law 
there is little else it can do. In practice, a major party that accepts 
donations from any business threatened by cannabis law reform will 
never pay more than lip service to the movement. If major parties on 
both sides of the centre are accepting money from these businesses, 
the chance of reform is very close to zero.
It may be desirable for a cannabis law reform movement to divide 
into a party that contests elections and an arm that uses other means. 
This division naturally suggests itself once the question of civil 
disobedience is raised.
The Danger of Splitting Support
At an absolute minimum, a cannabis law reform party must aim to 
get votes from everyone in the cannabis law reform movement. 
Experience has shown that a large number of people within the 

movement may choose to not vote for the cannabis law reform party, 
and usually for two reasons. The first is that they have little 
confidence in the ability of the party or the people in it, and the 
second is that they are afraid the party will fail to achieve 
representation and as a consequence their vote will be wasted.
Regarding the first reason, the cannabis law reform party must 
realise that it cannot take any votes for granted. Merely claiming to 
agitate for cannabis law reform does not give the party the right to 
expect votes from anyone; they must still prove themselves to be 
effective and competent. If the members of the national executive do 
not take their roles seriously, people will vote for others who will.
Regarding the second reason, the party must make people understand 
that even if it does not achieve representation there are still good 
reasons to vote for it. The first reason is that there may be something 
of a herd mentality around voting decisions. No-one likes to back a 
loser, but the converse of this is that people are much more likely to 
vote for the party if they think it can win. If a party gets two percent 
of the popular vote, it may fail to achieve representation, but it has a 
much better chance in the next election than if it had only half a 
percent. The second reason is that, the better the party does, the more 
seriously it (and its policies) will be taken by the other parties. This 
is crucial for influencing those other parties. An excellent election 
result might persuade one of the major parties to prioritise cannabis 
law reform, which means the party can achieve its objectives without 
representation.
The Question of Civil Disobedience
There is a natural and pragmatic division in any cannabis law reform 
movement: some people will be interested in civil disobedience as a 
method of protest and others will not. Those who are not might be 
more attracted to a cannabis law reform party.
From the beginning, both a cannabis law reform party and a 
movement must decide if it will officially support civil disobedience, 
if it will unofficially support civil disobedience, or if will not support 

civil disobedience.
A cannabis law reform party might openly support and engage in 
civil disobedience. This has the advantage of strengthening solidarity 
and resolve amongst those in the movement. It does, however, have 
some disadvantages. One is the potential for scaring away supporters 
who are afraid of the legal consequences of civil disobedience. 
Another is the fact that a party that engages in civil disobedience 
provides the justice system with weapons that can be used against 
people in the party or potentially the party itself. If a member of the 
party engages in civil disobedience near to an election, they leave the 
party open to the consequences of having that member arrested. That 
member may then be imprisoned at the time they are most needed on 
the outside to fight the election.
A party might openly declare that it does not support civil 
disobedience. This will have the advantage of deflecting legal attacks 
away from the party, although it has the disadvantage of making the 
party look weak, as if it is afraid to support the others in the 
movement who do engage in it. The crucial determinant is that no 
matter how hard the justice system cracks down on civil 
disobedience, they cannot touch the party if it is not involved.
A pragmatic compromise is to try and get the best of both worlds by 
not openly supporting and engaging in civil disobedience but still 
helping to facilitate and organise it. In reality, many members of any 
cannabis law reform party will be members of other organisations 
within the movement, and these organisations may well engage in 
civil disobedience. It is highly likely that any cannabis law reform 
party will at least be aware of any major acts of civil disobedience, 
and anyone who partakes in them could have become aware of them 
through contacts in the party.
The movement, or at least the people in the party, must find a 
balance between the benefits and the drawbacks of civil disobedience 
to the cause.
The Objectives and Opportunities of a Cannabis Law Reform 

Party
With a set of core values and a target demographic established, a 
cannabis law reform party can begin to determine its objectives. 
Although the ultimate objective is to enact cannabis law reform, a 
large number of other objectives must be achieved before this is 
possible.
At a bare minimum, it intends to get its leader into the legislative 
body. In a mixed member proportional system such as New Zealand, 
there may be a threshold of support that must be crossed for the party 
to get any seats. For example, if the Aotearoa Legalise Cannabis 
Party does not win an electorate seat, it must gain at least 5% of the 
votes in a general election, which would result in a minimum of six 
seats. If this was achieved it could take the Leader, the Deputy 
Leader, the Treasurer, the President, the Secretary and the 
Membership Secretary into Parliament.
The party could potentially achieve cannabis law reform without 
representation in the legislative body. This could happen when 
politicians of other parties take note of a rapidly expanding cannabis 
law reform movement. It could happen purely by coincidence. 
Regardless of these possibilities, the party should set representation 
as its ultimate objective.
The Opportunities of a Cannabis Law Reform Movement 
Outside Those Offered to a Party
Although this handbook focuses heavily on the construction and 
operation of a cannabis law reform party, the movement itself is 
bigger than this. Some of the activity of members of the movement 
may be focused around lobbying the other parties, or increasing 
support for cannabis law reform amongst voters with no reference to 
the party itself.
Lobbying is an art in itself and this handbook does not have the 
scope to investigate it. It is enough to say that a large part of 
lobbying lies in persuading politicians that they could increase their 

share of the vote if certain policies were adopted. Obviously, 
therefore, the position of any lobbyist will be far stronger if they can 
point to electoral success on the part of the cannabis law reform 
party.
It is always possible for a member of the movement to increase the 
chances of cannabis law reform by promoting a party, other than the 
cannabis law reform party, who can nonetheless be expected to take 
action on behalf of reform. An example of this might be efforts to 
persuade social democrat voters to vote for an environmentalist party 
that has cannabis law reform as one of its policies. The chief danger 
of this is that, in doing so, a voter is supporting a number of policies 
that may take precedence over cannabis law reform.
It is absolutely crucial that the party has the support of the wider 
movement. Experience has shown that even environmentalist parties 
who profess a strong belief in social justice will abandon cannabis 
law reform if they decide it is too difficult (of course, they will not 
admit to this). If cannabis law reform is seen as a fringe issue - and it 
often is, even in cases where a majority of the population is for it - 
then parties will quickly abandon it if they decide to make a move 
towards the centre.
Law Reform or Advocacy?
Another decision that will have to made is the extent to which the 
cannabis law reform movement will seek to advance the cause of 
cannabis users beyond changing the cannabis laws. The movement 
can limit itself to law reform, or it can branch into fighting for the 
rights of cannabis users across society as a whole.
The latter is called cannabis advocacy, and it involves making sure 
that cannabis users are aware of their rights. It may also involve 
giving free legal advice (make sure it is good), or campaigning to 
break down prejudices that the mainstream may hold against 
cannabis users.
Giving legal advice is difficult if there is no-one in the movement 

who is a qualified lawyer specialising in cannabis issues. If the 
movement knows someone who is, that person could benefit 
considerably from having clients referred to them, and may be 
willing to reciprocate in the form of free legal advice in other areas.
It is hard to be effective with anti-prejudice action because of the 
vast numbers of people holding inaccurate views of cannabis, its use 
or its users. Nevertheless, there are numerous opportunities for 
action. If a newspaper article paints some cannabis users as stupid, 
there is an opportunity for an angry letter pointing out the use of 
stereotype.
Creating a Party Constitution
When the embryonic movement has agreed to fight for cannabis law 
reform, and when it has agreed on its core values, the final step 
before recruiting members is the creation of a party constitution. In 
some territories this is a legal requirement for the party to be 
recognised as a party, but even if it is not a constitution is vital for 
the party.
If a cannabis law reform party has a constitution to which any 
member can refer, it will have a method of guiding action at all times 
and at all levels. At a minimum the party constitution ought to 
declare the purpose and goals of the party and how it intends to 
achieve them. A well-written constitution will prevent any rogue 
element within the party from illegally taking power, and will 
simplify and harmonise the action of all of its members. In cases 
where there is a dispute over powers, the constitution is the final 
arbiter.
The constitution ought to declare the structure of the party executive 
and how these roles are to be filled. It ought to declare what must be 
done in any situation in which the party finds itself. It ought to 
declare what the roles of every member of the executive is, how a 
citizen becomes a legal member of the party, and what the rights and 
responsibilities of all members are. It ought to declare how party 
officials are to conduct themselves and how official party meetings 

are run.
Care must be taken to ensure that the constitution is not unduly 
restrictive. It must make provision for changing circumstances and 
political environments so that the party can most effectively grow 
and adapt. It must also make provision for how it is to be altered 
should it become necessary, although, for obvious reasons, this must 
not be made too easy.

2. MEMBERSHIP
The Purpose and Goals of a Membership System
The objective of a party membership system is to increase the 
effectiveness of the party to the point that it can enact cannabis law 
reform. To this end the party will require enough members so that it 
can carry out the necessities of survival, so that it can attract 
membership fees to help run and promote the party, and so that it can 
campaign on behalf of the party policy and win enough electoral 
support to take some power in the political system.
Regarding the necessities of survival, the party must do the things it 
needs to do to be legally recognised as a political party and to legally 
contest elections. If electoral law in the territory the party is in 
requires that the party maintain a certain number of members, this 
number must be maintained. If electoral law demands that the party 
must complete certain paperwork, this must be done. Usually there 
will be paperwork relating to the registration of the party and 
registration of the party's intent to contest an election.
Membership fees are discussed at length in “Cost of Membership” 
below. To simplify, membership fees must cover the cost of the 
Membership Office, with enough left over to allow the Fundraising 
Officer to assume operation.
The Motives for Joining a Cannabis Law Reform Party
Every individual who joins the cannabis law reform movement does 
so for their own reasons. Although some of these reasons may be the 
same as for other members, the degree of importance attached to 
each reason might not be the same. Although the reasons for an 
individual to join are not as important as the fact that they do join, 
these reasons need to be understood by the party executive if the 
members are to be retained in the party and used most effectively.

Some might join the movement for social reasons. They might get a 
sense of camaraderie out of fighting the system, and they might be 
more concerned with gatherings and events than they are with 
fundraising. People like this are great for increasing the membership 
base of the movement and for making sure that protests and 
gatherings are well attended. Some of them might have a huge 
number of like-minded friends on Facebook and can send them all a 
message at short notice.
Some might join the movement for ideological reasons. They are 
usually people who have a considerable understanding of the 
political system and who have strong opinions about liberty or social 
justice. People like this are great for developing party policy and for 
ensuring that the movement works as efficiently as possible. The 
danger with this sort of person is that the more ideologically inclined 
they are, the more fanatical they are likely to be. It is great if they are 
fanatical about cannabis law reform only, but in practice they will 
have other agendas. 
Some might join the movement for financial reasons, although these 
people are relatively few. Many of these people will be motivated by 
the potential profits in large-scale hemp farming or in running 
cannabis cafés. These people are great for putting forward the 
economic arguments for cannabis law reform, and in special cases 
they may be able to influence someone with money to make a 
considerable donation to the movement.
Some might join the movement as an expression of rebellion. These 
people are often unified in opposition to the police or the courts, or 
even any kind of authority itself. Their contribution to the movement 
is often a double-edged sword. While they might be excellent at 
increasing support and action for the movement, they might not 
listen to party officials who tell them that some of their behaviour is 
counterproductive. They might be very charismatic but have 
extensive criminal records and a criminal mentality.
Some might join the movement simply because they are cannabis 
users and prefer to associate with other cannabis users. Given that, 

under a system of prohibition, confessing to cannabis use is also 
confessing that one is a criminal, a large proportion of people in the 
cannabis law reform movement will be like this. This category of 
person will have a large influence on the solidarity of the movement, 
and if the movement can successfully portray itself as a haven for 
stoners it will do very well.
As can be seen from this limited overview, people will come to the 
movement for a vast number of reasons and combinations of reasons. 
The challenge for the national executive is to bring this diversity 
together into an effective political force, and the better it understands 
the needs and wants of its members the more effective it will be. It is 
vital for the party executive to keep in mind that anyone who comes 
to the movement can be of use in repealing cannabis prohibition.
The Cost of Membership
Regarding membership fees, this might initially form a large part of 
the necessary funding to get the party off the ground and carrying out 
the necessities of survival. The party (or at least its Membership 
Secretary) must decide what the financial cost of membership should 
be, whether there should be differing tiers of membership and how 
much these must cost.
At a minimum the cost of membership should cover the physical 
costs of receiving and processing membership applications. This 
would therefore cover postbox rental, compensation (if any) of the 
persons tasked with processing the applications, and cost of any 
correspondence (if any). Regarding the cost of correspondence, one 
might expect at least a letter containing a membership card, a 
welcome letter, some policy information and instructions on who to 
contact should further correspondence be desired. This entails 
printing costs, and the cost of envelopes and stamps. These costs are 
unlikely to be major.
Regarding the actual cost of standard membership, the party might 
wish to choose a price that maximised the amount of money that 
could be collected in membership fees. This raises an immediate 

point: some people are able or willing to pay more than others.
Having a tiered membership system has several advantages. The 
most obvious one is the case of having unwaged discounts for 
membership. The optimal price for standard membership might be 
based on an amount an employed person could pay. An unwaged 
discount saves the party from missing out on money and members 
because the price of standard membership is too high.
The opposite of the discount membership is the “enthusiast” 
membership. At the very least, such a membership would allow a 
member to feel that they had made a greater than average 
contribution to the financial success of the party. The member will 
feel that their contribution is appreciated if they receive some 
merchandise, even if this is just a pen or a policy booklet that the 
standard members don't get.
Over and above the financial benefits of having a tiered system of 
membership, it allows the party to organise more effectively. 
Unwaged members may be too poor to have time to offer the party, 
or they could be on a benefit that gave them money to live and 
significant spare time to spend on the party. Unwaged members are 
also the least likely to support the party with donations, so can 
potentially be excluded from future fundraising correspondence.
Standard members might have money to spend on membership, but 
less time to devote to party issues (because of work). Also because of 
employment issues they may be unwilling to attract publicity for the 
movement in case of reprisal. 
Enthusiast members are the best bet for both fundraising and for 
volunteer work. The party Fundraising Officer might wish to send 
out regular merchandise offers to these people, perhaps at discount 
rates in appreciation of the member paying the enthusiast cost. They 
are also good to target when an election approaches, for at this time 
they will be most enthusiastic about donating money.
Methods of Recruiting Members

Once a membership system is in place, consideration can be given to 
the various methods of recruiting members. Traditionally members 
were recruited when activists persuaded people they met face-to-face 
to join the movement. Usually this involved getting a filled out 
membership form that would then be passed on the Membership 
Secretary along with some cash. The essential requirement here is 
that the Membership Secretary is able to process these applications.
In a modern context it can also be effective to attract members 
through the party website, although for legal reasons they may not be 
allowed to join by simply filling out an electronic form. If much of 
the merchandise sold contains the party website address this will in 
turn attract people who might join the party. A major advantage of 
this method is that it makes handling income of membership fees 
much easier, for the main reason that money must go through the 
hands of fewer people.
If the website is used as a main recruitment tool it becomes 
necessary for the Webmaster and the Membership Secretary to have 
close co-operation. The party Treasurer might oversee the monies 
collected, and might be in charge of the system of payment that 
online applications use.
It is far easier to attract members if the recruiting agent can explain 
not only the personal benefits of joining the movement but also party 
policy and the potential personal benefits of enacting legislation that 
the party is proposing. For these reasons any party member tasked 
with recruitment should be familiar with Parts Two and Three of this 
book. Also for these reasons, the party needs an Information Officer 
who can provide recruitment agents with documents that can be 
handed out to anyone interested.
The Movement Can Win Through Air or Ground Power
With a membership system in place, anyone whose attention can be 
brought to the party could join it and starting agitating on its behalf. 
There are two different strategies for starting a law reform 

movement, and they approximate the use of air power and ground 
power in conventional warfare.
Using air power means to hit the media. To some extent this requires 
money, but social media (as discussed below) offers great returns for 
the expense. Before spending any large sum of money on a media 
campaign, it's vital that the party understands which demographic it 
is targeting.
Another way of looking at air power is that it operates on the 
national level. The idea is to get the national Executive into the 
legislative body, with the hope that they can negotiate their way to 
cannabis law reform once inside.
Using ground power means to start small and build into a force. It 
might mean that one person starts talking about cannabis law reform 
at their pub or workplace. They need not even agitate directly for the 
party (and in some cases that is preferable), but if they raise the issue 
of cannabis law reform, and anyone becomes interested, that person 
will find the party.
Another way of looking at ground power is that it operates on the 
local level. The wonder of it is that three guys at a pub who agree 
that something should be done about cannabis prohibition can be the 
first flicker of ground power. The next step is to agitate for cannabis 
law reform, then run a candidate for a local body election, then for a 
state election, and so on up.
The main difference between the two is that, just like in conventional 
warfare, air power is useless unless it is followed up with ground 
troops. If the party is flooded with support and volunteers after a 
mass media campaign, it is crucial that they become involved with 
the party structure enough so that they can become effective activists 
themselves.
It is crucial to emphasise that both of these approaches are necessary 
to success. It doesn't matter how much people talk about cannabis 
law reform if no-one is taking action, and it doesn't matter how much 

money is spent in the media if no-one is persuaded to take action.
Getting Maximum Value Out of Each New Member
Each time a new member joins the movement there is an opportunity 
to improve the party. For each individual this opportunity is the 
greatest the sooner it is to the act of joining, as this is when 
enthusiasm will be the highest. Because of this, an efficient party 
bureaucracy is essential.
There are three major objectives from the point of view of the 
Membership Office. It must gather as much money and information 
it can from the new member; it must deliver as much information 
about the party as it can to the new member; and it must do so as 
quickly as possible. It is worth looking at each of these points in turn.
An element of the first point (the maximisation of income from the 
new member) has already been discussed. A second element of the 
first point is information. The application process is an opportunity 
to find out what skills the new member might have, what resources 
they can offer to the party, and how much time they are willing to 
volunteer. With this information the Membership Secretary can direct 
the member's enthusiasm to where it is the most effective. Anyone 
with a wide social circle or advanced social skills might be tasked 
with recruitment of new members. If they have business skills they 
might be suited for work in the Merchandise Office. People with 
computer skills could assist the Webmaster.
The second point is giving the new member as much information as 
they can make use of. There are two areas of information that a new 
member might be especially interested in. The first is information 
about the structure of the party, so that the new member can decide 
where they would most like to help out. The second area is 
information about party policy, so that the new member can be as 
effective as possible in winning support in the form of new members, 
donations or votes.
Information regarding the first area could be tailored to the 

information given in the member's application form. At a minimum, 
the member should receive information about the representatives of 
the party at all levels relevant to that member. They should know 
who represents the local branch of the party, who represents the 
regional branch and who represents the national branch. This entails 
being given contact information about the executive of the branch 
and of the national party body.
Information regarding the second area would be aimed at educating 
the new member to become as effective as possible an agent for 
cannabis law reform. This would involve at least informing them of 
party policy. In order to become effective at persuading non-
members to support the movement, a member has to understand 
party policy on the issues relevant to its supporters. For this reason, 
new members should be sent material in the form of either a 
comprehensive party policy document  or smaller, more concise 
pamphlets that cover an area of special interest.
The third point is that these two steps must be carried out as quickly 
as possible. If there is a long turnaround time between applying for 
membership and receiving acknowledgement, the new member 
might come to think the party is inefficient or has even 
misappropriated the membership fee. The initial wave of enthusiasm 
must be ridden.
Motivating New and Old Members to Agitate for Cannabis Law 
Reform
Everyone in the cannabis law reform movement is ultimately 
motivated by the benefits of living in a society without prohibition. 
But if this alone was enough, the cannabis law reform movement 
would be much larger than it is. If the party President is tasked with 
motivating the members of the party to action, they should know the 
basics of the psychology of motivation.
Imagine that all people ask themselves, before taking any action 
whatsoever, “What's in it for me?” Motivation is a way of answering 
that question.

Money is always a major motivator, but a party has to be very 
cautious in using it. If someone is volunteering to do something, 
don't pay someone else to do it (unless quality is a concern). This is 
not only a waste of money but, more importantly, people who 
volunteered will feel like suckers and the pool of volunteer labour 
will diminish.
Status might be a bigger motivator in societies who do not want for 
money. The interesting thing about status is that it is to some degree 
awarded democratically and a person may have it and not know it (or 
not have it and not know it). Because one person's value of another's 
status depends on what the first has heard about the second, every 
time any cannabis law reform activist talks about another one they 
are giving their value of that person's status. If an activist's status 
increases, they need only become aware of which action they took 
that caused this, and they will be motivated to take more such action 
in the future.
A third major motivator is power, and this is especially true of the 
kind of person who will join a political party. A cannabis law reform 
party will not offer its members the kind of power craved by those 
who would be king, and this raises a couple of points. The first one is 
that the extreme unlikelihood of a cannabis law reform party 
achieving an absolute majority in a legislative body will lower the 
motivation of many people. The second one may be counterintuitive, 
but it is a fact that many people will be more vicious the lower the 
stakes are. The reason for this is, if a person desires a certain level of 
power, and the organisation they are in is small and weak, they must 
try and control it utterly in order to be satisfied.
The Structure at a National, Regional and Branch Level
Once the national executive is determined, the party can be built to 
maximise its reach. The national executive is not necessarily the first 
level of the structure that will be filled in - it is possible that 
independent groups committed to cannabis law reform will have 
formed at a local level and will only find out about each other once a 

move to establish a national body is made. Whatever comes first, the 
fact is that a national executive must be established before any 
meaningful progress can be made.
The nature of the regional level of organisation will depend on the 
territory in which cannabis is to be legalised. Regardless of the size 
of the territory, any party officers tasked with organisation on a 
regional level will initially be concerned with growing the party at a 
branch level. Their primary concern is that the branches within their 
region are capable of assisting the objectives of the national 
executive. The regional level is the least important of the three and, if 
resources are limited, it can survive and be effective with fewer 
people than at the other two levels.
The branch level is the lowest level of organisation. Ideally, the 
branch will represent one electorate. This means that it is the 
responsibility of the branch to elect a candidate from amongst its 
members to contest any election.
This three-level structure requires a considerable amount of co-
operation in order to function effectively. Even if the national body 
takes care of itself, the regions and branches may need to come under 
some degree of supervision. To this end, the regional officers have 
two core roles. They must ensure that every branch within their 
region operates as it should, and that the national executive receives 
as much information as they need about the branches.
Reaching Out Internationally
With a national structure established, the movement will have to 
decide on the degree to which it seeks out and maintains 
international links. There are several advantages to doing this.
The first is that it becomes possible to learn about how cannabis law 
reform movements have succeeded or failed in other places and what 
can be learned from these efforts. News of any success or failure can 
be communicated to the party membership in an effort to stimulate 
action or at least debate.

The second is that it becomes easier both to organise speaking tours 
and conferences, and to attract a higher profile of speaker to each. 
Many cannabis law reform activists around the world are happy to 
come and speak about the movement and its objectives, but money is 
often a problem. With established links it becomes easier to organise 
events that pay themselves off.
A final advantage is more pertinent to activists in small countries. 
The international cannabis law reform movement can benefit greatly 
from law reform anywhere in the world, because information from 
this can be used in support of the cannabis law reform argument. 
This means that large organisations in large countries could, at 
comparatively small expense, donate a game-changing amount of 
money to a sister organisation in a smaller country.
Organising Members into a National Party Structure
Initially, at least, the party must have defined roles for a number of 
positions, and members willing to carry out the roles and 
responsibilities of these positions. A lack of defined roles will 
maximise interference from other members and will minimise 
responsibility.
To have a national executive even charitably worthy of the name, 
there must be people willing to act as: Leader, President, Secretary 
and Treasurer. As members join the movement, new positions can be 
created to delegate responsibility and power and most effectively use 
the new members' time and energy. The obvious examples here are 
Deputy Leader, Membership Secretary, Fundraising Officer, Press 
Secretary, Webmaster and Information Officer.
The Leader should be the public face of the party. They are usually 
the top-ranked party member and usually have more influence than 
any other individual member. At important media events, the party 
will expect the Leader to represent the party. The Leader might not 
be expected to engage heavily with individual members for the 
reason that they could be more effective using their time in attempts 

to get media coverage. The party Leader needs to have an 
immaculate grasp of party policy and the consequences of 
implementing it. 
The role of the Deputy Leader might be to complement the Leader or 
to act as a suitable replacement should that become necessary. At a 
minimum, the Deputy Leader must be able to adequately perform 
any and all of the roles demanded of the Leader.
Much of the actual leadership of the party is the responsibility of the 
President. At a minimum the President must ensure that the party 
Executive is functioning the way it should be. To achieve this they 
must be intimately familiar with the rights and responsibilities of 
each office. They must be able to charm, cajole and coerce office 
holders to do their jobs. If any member of the party has a dispute 
with another member that cannot be resolved, they ought to be able 
to turn to the President for mediation.
The role of the Secretary is to ensure that the party complies with the 
party's legal responsibilities so that the party can continue to exist 
and to fight elections. Because of this, the Party Secretary is often 
the one responsible for the most crucial work. Without an effective 
Secretary, the efficiency of the party will be crippled. The Secretary 
is responsible for filing the necessary paperwork so that the party 
legally registers as a political party and so that it can legally contest 
an election. The Secretary may also be responsible for applying for 
government funding for media expenses, in so far that it is 
applicable. If the party must make a yearly declaration that it has the 
members necessary to qualify as a political party, the Secretary will 
be responsible for this. In most cases, should the government wish to 
contact the party they will do so through the Secretary. For this 
reason, the Secretary must be a person who is contactable at any time 
and who can be relied upon to transmit any important information to 
the relevant office holder or the party membership.
The role of the Treasurer is to keep accurate records of and to 
safekeep the party's finances. At a minimum the Treasurer needs to 
be aware of the financial resources that the party can bring to bear, 

and to ensure that these resources are not wasted or misappropriated. 
The Treasurer must ensure both that the Membership Office is 
returning money to the party and that it has sufficient resources with 
which to operate. Both of these considerations also apply to the 
Treasurer's involvement with the Merchandise Office and the Media 
Team. The Treasurer is expected to be able to make competent 
decisions on what the party can and cannot afford, and how its 
resources are best utilised.
The role of the Membership Secretary is to keep accurate records of 
and to safekeep the party's membership records. At a minimum the 
Membership Secretary must have records of who is and who is not a 
legal member of the party. The Membership Secretary plays a crucial 
role in getting the maximum effectiveness out of each new member. 
They will usually be either the first or the second official contact 
person that a new member encounters within the party structure, for 
the reason that they are responsible for any new member receiving 
party correspondence. The Membership Secretary need not have 
close contact with new members after they have joined, but they are 
responsible for making sure that someone does. A more detailed 
discussion of this role is discussed below in the section “Special 
Considerations for the Membership Secretary.”
The role of the Fundraising Officer is to ensure that the party has 
access to as much money as it needs to fight elections effectively. In 
practice there is no upper limit to how much money a movement 
could use, and indeed a vast majority of elections are won by the 
parties that spend the most money. The party fundraising system is 
discussed in detail in section three of this part of the book 
(“Fundraising”), but to put it simply, the Fundraising Officer is 
concerned mostly with merchandise and with donations.
The role of the Press Secretary is to ensure that the party maximises 
its opportunities for media exposure. The art of doing so is discussed 
in detail in section four of this part of the book (“Media”), but the 
core of their role is to ensure that the media does its part in 
promoting the party message. At a minimum, the Press Secretary is 
responsible for passing official party press releases to the appropriate 

outlets and co-coordinating interviews between the media and party 
officials.
The role of the Webmaster is to ensure that the party has an Internet 
presence that can promote the party policy, provide contact details to 
party officials in case potential members or media representatives 
wish for more information, and, crucially, to organise a large part of 
the party's communication (which is discussed in the section “Special 
Considerations for the Webmaster”).
The role of the Information Officer (informally Propaganda Minister) 
is to collect party resources in the form of information, in much the 
same way that the Treasurer collects party resources in the form of 
money. A more detailed discussion of this role is discussed below in 
the section “Special Considerations for the Information Officer.”
Special Considerations for the Membership Secretary
The truth of running a cannabis law reform party is that its most 
valuable resource, even greater than the constitution and the website, 
is its membership records. There are two reasons for this.
The first reason is that the membership records are, in effect, a record 
of who the party is. If an individual has not applied to the 
Membership Secretary for membership, or if they have not met the 
criteria for membership (such as payment), or if their membership 
has expired, they are not a member of the party. Related to this is the 
fact that almost all of the organisation of the party must, even if only 
briefly, go through the Membership Secretary. For anyone to hold 
any role within the party structure, they must at least be able to show 
that they are a member, and only the Membership Secretary and the 
Secretary will be able to confirm this. 
The second reason is that the membership records are, in practice if 
not in theory, mostly a list of criminals, as well as contact details and 
physical addresses of those criminals. For this reason they are of 
considerable financial value to certain interests. Agents of the police 
force might be interested in such a record, as might people who wish 

to use it to sell cannabis. The Membership Secretary must absolutely 
ensure that the records do not fall into the wrong hands.
The Membership Secretary must not keep loose copies of the 
membership records lying around on data sticks or on shared 
computers, and must not email the records to anyone. The best 
practice is for the Membership Secretary to keep the records private 
and secret from all other entities, even those within the party, with 
the sole exception of the party Secretary, whose confidence the 
Membership Secretary needs in order to perform their role.
Having said this, elements of the membership records can be shared 
in limited circumstances, if the principle of compartmentalisation is 
adhered to. The Webmaster needs to know the names and email 
addresses of individual members so that they can email them their 
username and login details for the party website. If any regional or 
branch officers are tasked with personally welcoming new members 
to the party, they need to be given names and telephone numbers or 
email addresses. The Fundraising and Information Officers need the 
names and addresses of party members in order to send them 
merchandise or printed information.
Because of the criminal nature of cannabis, potential members must 
have confidence that their records will be kept private and secret. For 
this reason it is important that the membership forms declare, in a 
place where it will be read, that the member's full details are to be 
seen only by the Membership Secretary and the party Secretary.
If the Membership Secretary, for any reason, fields a request from a 
person who wants information about specific members of the party, 
and if requests for this information have not been previously granted 
by that member, the Membership Secretary should refer this to the 
party Secretary. The Membership Secretary must always be vigilant 
to any social engineering that may occur with a view to gaining 
unauthorised access to the records. Anyone claiming to represent the 
Police, the Electoral Commission, the Ministry of Justice etc. should 
be given no more than the contact details for the party Secretary.

Extraordinary Considerations for the Membership Secretary
The Membership Secretary should also maintain a number of lists. 
One group of these is of members and certain information about 
them, and the other is of non-members and their relationships to the 
party. It ought to be possible, if a spreadsheet is used to keep track of 
these groups, to sort the people in them according to their location. 
With several lists of people grouped by their use to the party and by 
location, the party Executive has a powerful tool with which to 
coordinate action.
Of the first group there are several different lists depending on what 
information is needed. 
The first of them is a list of members who have signed up a large 
number of other members. Because a core focus of the Membership 
Secretary's action is expanding the party, it is important to identify 
the human avenues through which this ought to be done. If it should 
be desirable to recruit new members in a certain area, the person 
most likely to achieve this can be identified and incentivised. 
The second is a list of people who have donated their labour. 
Because a cannabis law reform movement will always have a need 
for labour it is good to know who can be counted on. This is 
especially important as an election day draws near and it becomes 
necessary to have volunteer teams who deposit pamphlets in all of 
the letterboxes in a certain area. Counsel from the elders of the party 
also counts as labour, and it is important that the national Executive 
know who they can count on when advice is needed.
The third is a list of people who have helped with donations. This is 
really two sublists, one of those who have donated money and one of 
those who have solicited it. Although it is important that financial 
donors are not harassed to donate more, it is good to have a list 
because most people will want to donate again when an election 
approaches.
The fourth is a list of people who can provide accommodation for 

travelling party officials. Because these places will often be safe 
houses for cannabis consumption, organising a network of such 
places is like building an Underground Railroad. The first stage of 
such a network will arise naturally from the interactions between 
members of the Executive, but, as the party grows, more places will 
become available.
The fifth is a list of people and their areas of special policy interest. 
These could be any of the twenty-six points from the section “A 
Twenty-Six Point Plan” or they could be any others. If new member 
declares on their membership application that they have a special 
policy interest, these people can then be contacted should the party 
wish to make a submission on a certain area.
Finally there are lists of members for any other reason that it might 
be advantageous to keep a list. There could be any number of such 
lists, and reasons for them will increase as the party grows and as an 
election approaches.
Any member not on one of the above lists is a passive member. They 
are there to pay subs and for the chance that they might become 
active at some point in the future.
Of the second group there are also several lists.
The first of these is a list of supporters. These are people who will 
probably vote for the cannabis law reform party but are not members 
and do not wish to be active in party affairs. They might buy a lot of 
merchandise, especially at the group level. They might also be happy 
to receive pamphlets and other party propaganda, and may even be 
able to pass these on to other supporters. They may even be some of 
the party's biggest donors.
The second of these is a list of known politicians and their attitudes 
towards cannabis law reform. The reason for this is covered in the 
section “Letters to Representatives.”
The third of these is a list of private enterprises who have skills that 

the party could need in the future, and who will either volunteer 
these skills or trade them for cash. Although much of the labour 
needs of the party can be met through unskilled and volunteer labour, 
there will be occasions on which an expert hand is required. 
Screenprinting, advertising, merchandising and erecting billboards or 
posters are all examples of skills that the party may need come 
election time.
Special Considerations for the Webmaster
There are essentially three ways that party members can share 
information. They can speak to each other, they can write each other 
letters or they can communicate using the party website. While 
political parties have functioned for centuries using only the first two 
methods, using a website as a central basis for communication offers 
certain advantages that can vastly increase the party's effectiveness.
If the Webmaster builds a site using a modern content management 
system such as Drupal or Joomla it is possible for every member of 
the party to have a unique user account that can access areas of the 
site closed to the public. It is also possible for certain members (such 
as those on the executive) to have access to areas closed to regular 
members.
A core responsibility of the Webmaster is to build a forum into the 
website to facilitate communication. In this way, the party can use a 
large number of virtual messageboards on which members can post 
information. The website should also have a private messaging 
system that can be used for any member who does not wish to make 
their message public or semi-public.
There are essentially three levels of security that need to be built into 
the website in order for it to achieve its maximum effectiveness.
The first is the public level, accessible to anyone. The front page of 
the website, which shares party and cannabis-related news, should be 
readable by all. It is vital that the front page is updated often enough 
that people make a regular habit of coming back to it for updates. In 

this way a following can quickly be created. As long as it is not 
overrun by trolls or spam, there should be a public forum in which 
supporters who are not members, or neutrals who wish to find out 
more about the party, can put questions to party officials and have 
them answered.
The second is the member level, accessible only to party members. 
They can read anything that is available to the wider public, and have 
special access to certain subforums. If the party is to compete on a 
national level it is vital that the Webmaster set up a subforum for 
each branch of the party. Any party member should have the ability 
to post information in a branch's subforum so that members within 
that branch can organise themselves and share information. Branch 
officials can give notice of branch meetings through these subforums 
or they can use them to find out when and where a meeting should 
take place.
The third is the executive level, accessible only to party officials. 
They can read anything that is available to the wider public or to 
members, and have special access to an executive forum. With an 
executive forum it becomes much easier to plan, inform and discuss 
strategy. The Membership Secretary can make posts informing the 
executive of the party's reach and depth in any geographical area, the 
Treasurer can keep the executive aware of the party's finances, and 
the Fundraising Officer can let people know when there is new 
merchandise available for sale.
It is also important that each executive position has responsibility for 
a subforum named after their role, so that members of the party or of 
the public can put questions to them and get them answered.
When the party becomes big enough it will need to have chatrooms 
in which extensive discussions can take place in a short time period. 
Every level of security can have its own chatroom if desired.
Special Considerations for the Information Officer
The overall objective of the Information Officer is to make party 

policy available to members and to the public, so that they will be 
encouraged to intensify their support for cannabis law reform. To this 
end, information must be gathered, analysed and disseminated.
Regarding the gathering of information, the first task of the 
Information Officer is to build a library. Any Internet information 
pertaining to cannabis or to cannabis law reform ought to be 
collected into a folder. Copies of any court report from a cannabis 
case ought to be collected. Information about the different voting 
districts and their returns for the cannabis law reform party ought to 
be collated.
Regarding the analysis of information, any willing member of the 
party could spent hours crunching information, but the Information 
Officer ought to keep a record of all of the results. Most important is 
a record of voting demographics. If voting data is compared to 
Census data it is possible to determine which demographics within a 
certain area are most likely to favour cannabis law reform (and 
which areas are most likely to favour cannabis law reform based on 
their demographics).
Regarding the dissemination of information, the Information Officer 
must produce easily copyable documents that explain party policy in 
core areas. These can then be emailed to supporters or posted out so 
that they can be photocopied. To take a longer view, the Information 
Officer can produce merchandise, such as a policy booklet.
If information documents are produced in pamphlet form, there can 
be dozens of different ones. In principle, any area that cannabis law 
reform impacts on and about which three hundred words could be 
written could be a pamphlet, and less if space is taken up with a 
merchandise or membership panel. Any of the points from “A 
Twenty-Six Point Plan” in Part Three of this handbook, as well as 
many others, could be expanded to three hundred words.
Ultimately the Information Officer should seek to produce a policy 
booklet that can be sold without losing money. The best way to do 
this is to get every candidate to write a piece about their vision for 

the cannabis laws. If there are fifty candidates and each writes a three 
or four page article, the result will be a book that will allow anyone 
who reads it to be sure of what the party stands for.
Organising Members into Branches
When any new member joins the party, they should be assigned to a 
branch as part of their entry into the membership records. If there is 
one branch for every electorate, the membership application should 
ask the member to declare their electorate and therefore their branch. 
This process has the potential to become messy if information is not 
regularly shared between members and if the membership records 
are not updated. For example, a member might not live in the 
electorate in which they are enrolled to vote, or they might change 
their physical address or their electorate.
How the new member is handled will depend on whether their local 
branch is active. 
At the beginning there will be no local branches, although new 
members can be assigned a branch in expectation that one will soon 
be created. Two conditions must be met for the creation of a new 
branch to be approved by the national body. Firstly, it must have 
enough members so that a meaningful group can be created: this 
means that there are at least enough people willing to fill the roles of 
Branch President, Branch Secretary and Branch Treasurer. Secondly, 
at least one of these members must have the confidence of the 
national body to perform the required tasks of a branch founder.
Regarding the first condition, a branch must have at an absolute 
minimum three people, although the national body might like to set a 
minimum number of members to ensure that the branch can continue 
activity if one of those members should lose willingness or ability to 
perform their designated role. Ideally a branch would begin its active 
life with an election for the three roles, which implies that there are 
enough members to have competition for these roles and to vote for 
them.

Regarding the second condition, the national body might like to 
ensure that the member who takes the initiative in founding a branch 
is both capable of doing so and is of sufficient character that they 
will do so in a way that assists the party to achieve its objectives. For 
this reason it is useful to have a process of vetting the new members 
so that the national executive can decide if these conditions are met. 
Often a simple phonecall from either the Secretary or the President 
will be sufficient. Because the member tasked with branch formation 
will often have considerable influence within that branch, the 
national executive has an incentive to make sure that member is the 
right person.
If the new member's local branch is already active, things are much 
simpler. The Membership Secretary must, as part of the welcome 
letter sent to the new member, give that member contact details so 
that they can contact their local branch for more information. Usually 
these will be the contact details of the Branch Secretary. If the local 
branch has an officer tasked with welcoming and orientating new 
members, the Membership Secretary must inform that officer that 
their branch has a new member. If both the branch officer and the 
new member are given each other's contact details it is much more 
likely that the new member will be integrated into the party system 
in the most effective manner.
Organising Members into Chapters
The next level down from the branch is the chapter. If an electorate is 
so large that there are significant population centres in more than one 
place, and that travel between these centres is not desirable, then the 
party may have to organise its members into chapters. In practice, 
there is little difference between a branch and a chapter, but, because 
the branch operates on the level of the electorate, individual chapters 
will not elect candidates. The chapters must come together at the 
branch level to elect a candidate (this need not happen if there are 
local body elections that are best handled by one chapter).
In Some Regards, Action at a Branch Level is Better

No matter how effective the national executive is at framing the 
argument, at attracting money and at spreading propaganda, there are 
areas of cannabis law reform that the branch is better suited to. 
Whatever the qualities of the members of the national executive, 
there will never be more than a dozen or so of them and their ability 
to perform face-to-face functions will therefore be very limited.
With the obvious exception of that which occurs at national AGMs, 
most of the social functions of the party will occur at the branch 
level. It should not be forgotten that, although the purpose of the 
movement is to enact cannabis law reform, much of the motivation 
for individual members to join will be social. Related to this is the 
fact that much of the effectiveness of the movement will depend on 
the solidarity between its members. An active and healthy branch 
will be the best place for social gatherings, because it will put the 
least travel demands on people.
Because some information is best transmitted face-to-face, the 
branch offers the ideal location for this, both for individual members 
and for the party as a whole. 
Regarding individual members, the Branch Secretary or President 
might take responsibility for educating them about their rights before 
the law, whether this be at the point of arrest, interrogation or trial. 
They might be the people to go to if a deeper or broader education in 
the effects of cannabis prohibition or legalisation is desired. They 
might be the ones who can offer the best advice if the member 
wishes to advance cannabis law reform on their own initiative. 
Crucially, they ought to take on a major responsibility in ensuring 
that the member feels welcome and appreciated, and that their efforts 
are useful to the movement and that the movement can and will win.
Regarding the party as a whole, branch officials play an important 
role in getting to know members on a personal basis. This gives them 
the ability to vet these members and to pass their impressions of 
them up to the national executive. In this sense they can achieve two 
major objectives that are both crucial for the effectiveness of the 
party as a whole. Firstly, they can suggest to the national executive 

that certain members are competent and that the party would benefit 
from giving these members more responsibility. Secondly, they can 
suggest to the national executive that certain members are 
incompetent, dangerous or insane, and that the party ought to 
minimise interactions with these members.
The branch level is also better than the national level at selling 
merchandise. If there are seventy branches, each with a fundraising 
officer, then their combined efforts will be far greater than an 
impersonal website and some brochures.
In Some Regards, Action at a Regional Level is Better
Regional officers are more than a middle layer of bureaucracy. Their 
role in party function is vital, and it is twofold.
The first is making sure that all of the branches within the region are 
operating effectively. At a minimum, the regional officer should keep 
the contact details of all of the branch officers operating within their 
region. With this done, the regional officers can stay in touch with 
the branch officers, find out anything they need to know, and inform 
them of new opportunities to promote either propaganda or 
merchandise.
The second is making sure that the national Executive can use the 
branches as effectively as possible. If a new role is created within the 
party structure, it ought to be filled by someone from the 
membership, and the regional officers are best placed to recommend 
to the Executive who these people ought to be.
The Rights and Responsibilities of Office Holders
Office holders have both rights over decision making and 
responsibilities to the party, to other members and to the law. 
Without a clear, defined and detailed description of the rights and 
responsibilities of each role the movement will fall into bickering 
and arse-covering.

An office holder will have veto rights over action taken in the name 
of their office. In many cases, the office holder should be open to 
influence and suggestions from other members but the final say is in 
their hands. A Membership Secretary must be able to decide the 
composition of the welcome letters and should have the right to levy 
the correct membership fees. A Fundraising Officer should have the 
right to decide which prices will result in the optimal income.
Likewise, office holders will have certain responsibilities, in 
particular the responsibility to ensure that their role is carried out to 
the best of their ability. The party must have mechanisms in place so 
that pressure can be brought to bear on anyone who is not fulfilling 
their role, and to remove and replace them should that pressure be 
ineffective. Most of the responsibility for this falls on the Party 
President. Without clearly defined roles, therefore, the President's job 
is impossible.
Party Officials may be Elected or Appointed
In some cases, party officials will be elected and in other cases they 
will be appointed. Because it is best to have a transparent and 
meritocratic party, it is best if positions are elected whenever 
possible. Having said this, some positions cannot perform their role 
if they do not have the confidence of other office holders. The 
Membership Secretary must have the confidence of the party 
Secretary, the Fundraising Officer must have the confidence of the 
Treasurer, and the Webmaster must have the confidence of the Press 
Secretary. Should the Membership Secretary lose the confidence of 
the party Secretary, the Secretary must be able to put a process in 
motion by which the Membership Secretary is replaced.
Whether officials are elected or appointed, there must be a clear way 
of removing and replacing them in cases of dereliction of duty. 
Perhaps the best way is for the Executive to vote on whether they 
have confidence in the ability of that person, and declare them 
stripped of their office if not.
Unofficial Roles

In practice, a majority of members will not be party officials. Despite 
this, party officials can increase the effectiveness of their operations 
if they are able to co-ordinate help from regular members. The job of 
the Membership Secretary is much easier if they task others with 
recruiting new members in their area. Likewise, the Fundraising 
Officer can bring in much more money if they have other people 
selling merchandise to their friends.
The party itself must decide how many different roles its members 
can perform and which of them have the right to speak on behalf of 
the party and in what areas.
In practice, if the party is big enough, it could have a shadow 
government. Each of the policy areas could have its own 
spokesperson, who might be known as, for example, the Party 
Spokesman/woman for Housing. Each of these spokespeople would 
be responsible for understanding and promoting party policy in their 
area of expertise.
The advantage of the shadow government system is that a relatively 
large number of members can work for the party in a semi-official 
capacity and in defined roles. This makes it easier for them to target 
promotion of party policy to those who have the most interest in it. 
For example, the Party Spokesperson for Youth Affairs could liaise 
with a magazine targeted at young voters. This will also give the 
spokesperson a better opportunity to understand the concerns of 
supporters or voters who are most affected by that area of party 
policy, and is therefore in a good position to relay that information to 
whoever is tasked with co-coordinating official policy.
Something that must be approached with caution at all stages is the 
idea of prestige roles. Even if two members have no official roles, 
they may have different levels of status and influence within the 
movement. People who have been in the movement for a long time 
might demand special respect or deference, particularly if they 
believe they have influence over someone in a high role, or if they 
occupied a high role in the past.

An obvious example of a prestige role is Life Membership. Any 
party member that has contributed considerable time and/or expense 
towards party success might be declared a Life Member. It is not a 
good idea to give Life Membership to active members. In cases 
where it is desired, it is best to award it to a person who has retired 
from (or been ousted from) an important position. The party may 
wish to have a “Council of Elders” that consists of Life Members. 
This is a good way to retain expertise within the system.
What social status is afforded a particular member is a double-edged 
sword that must be handled with good judgement. Crucially, every 
member must feel that they and their efforts are respected, and they 
must understand that decision-making power lies in the hands of 
those who are tasked with it. If a new member is treated in a 
patronising or dismissive manner they could leave. If an old member 
feels that their prior effort is not respected they could also leave.
What needs to be countered, at all stages, is the tendency for people 
to demand more respect then they deserve. This will have a strongly 
corrosive effect on party discipline and morale. Anyone claiming to 
be a “granddaddy” or “guru” of the movement must be treated with 
suspicion. It needs to be emphasised at all levels of party structure 
and at all times that respect is granted according to how effectively 
that person advances the party objectives.
A Party Must Be Meritocratic
A fact of human nature is that most people will desire more influence 
than their level of competence suggests they ought to have. It is 
crucial for the success of the party that individuals who can most 
advance the party's objectives are given the most influence. For one 
thing, this prevents incompetent people rising to the top and 
damaging the party's image or its effectiveness in achieving its goals. 
For another, it prevents competent people from being placed in roles 
where they can do little to help the party.
Initially, a party might not have competition for certain roles. The 

membership of the party will expand faster than the number of 
official roles within it, so as it does it is logical that competition for 
some roles will increase. When this occurs, situations will arise in 
which a member believes themselves more capable of performing a 
certain role than the incumbent, or they might believe that another 
member is more competent at a certain role than the incumbent. 
A party must have a mechanism through which members can 
challenge for positions and to be granted them if they have enough 
support from other members. No member can become conflated with 
the role they play in the party. No matter how long a member has 
been in a role, that role is not that member: that member is, and only 
temporarily, that role.
There are two major advantages to a meritocratic system. The most 
obvious is that it ensures the effectiveness of members is matched to 
their influence. The second, more subtle reason has to do with party 
morale. If a member feels that their efforts will be recognised and 
rewarded they have a much greater incentive to help the movement.
The long term viability of any movement centres around its ability to 
get the right people into the right positions. Many a political 
movement was formed by people who were soon thrown out of the 
way as the movement gathered momentum.
Potential Inefficiencies That Must be Considered
As the movement increases in size, it will begin to attract elements 
that do not help it achieve its objectives, and may very well attract 
elements that make it less effective. There are two major ways that 
an individual within the party might be less than optimally effective. 
The first is if the individual is not competent enough to carry out a 
useful role within the party, and the second is if the individual has a 
disintegrative effect on party structure or on party solidarity. 
The most obvious of these, incompetent people occupying positions 
of authority, has been discussed above. The smaller the movement is 
the more likely this is to be a problem. If the movement is very 

small, people with a few committed allies can vote themselves into 
positions of power even if they are unqualified to be there. Also, the 
smaller the movement is, the more influence can be bought or 
expected in exchange for donations.
The second phenomenon, which becomes more noticeable later, is 
the disorganising effect of individual ego on the movement. This 
phenomenon is not wholly distinct to the first. A person intent on 
maintaining their position and status at all costs may go as far as to 
discourage new members joining the party. A person with an 
excessive ego can alienate other members and lower their enthusiasm 
for cannabis law reform. The nature of politics attracts egotistical 
people, and some of them might join the movement asking what the 
party can do for them, not what they can do for the party.
Both of these problems can be worked around by increasing the size 
of the movement and by increasing the amount of information that is 
shared between party members.
Increasing the size of the movement puts pressure on the incumbents. 
It increases the chance of finding someone who could do a better job 
than the incumbent, and it increases the outrage if a party role is not 
carried out in an effective manner.
Increasing the amount of information shared between party members 
makes it more likely that members will become aware of party 
inefficiencies and it will guide them as to how to circumvent these 
problems. For this reason is it vital to have regular meetings, whether 
these be national conferences, Skype calls or local branch gatherings.
Party Influence Flows Towards the Top
The Party Executive represents, at a minimum, the collective will of 
the members of the party. Each individual member has the right to 
expect that party officials will listen to and respect their ideas and 
suggestions, even if these are not implemented. If a member does not 
feel that they are respected by the party hierarchy they will lose 
interest and motivation, and could even become an enemy of the 

movement.
For this reason, it should be kept in mind at all times that the 
influence of the party leadership is a direct function of the size and 
organisation of its membership. The larger the movement is, the 
more votes, money and energy it will have. The better organised it is, 
the more effectively it can use those resources. These two factors are 
so crucial that any member of the movement, whatever their role in 
it, can work to help it achieve its objectives.
The understanding that party influence flows from the voters up 
towards the executive is important. It ensures that the correct attitude 
towards voters is taken. It also helps people resist the temptation to 
believe that the strength of the party is in the strength of its leader. 
The party is not a structure formed by activists that must then 
persuade, bribe, threaten and coerce voters; rather, the party has 
formed out of the will of the voters and represents them. If the party 
does not win representation in the legislative body it is not because 
stoners didn't turn out to vote but because the party failed to inspire 
them to do so. This distinction is subtle, but there are rewards for 
grasping it.
The Nature of Individuals Involved in Cannabis Law Reform
Anyone running a cannabis law reform movement will soon become 
aware that people who use cannabis and people who are interested in 
politics are subsets of the general population, and that members of 
the movement, at least in some ways, are not like people as a whole. 
This is not to say that all cannabis law reform activists are a certain 
way; there is far too much diversity in the movement for this claim to 
be made. Nevertheless, anyone who meets any number of cannabis 
law reform activists will come to observe certain patterns.
A common lament in the movement is that organising people is “like 
herding cats.” Central to the nature of any cannabis law reform 
movement is resistance against unwanted authority. If a person in the 
movement wishes to give direction to anyone else, they must 
consider this. No one who is angry about police oppression is going 

to submit to directions from someone with even less authority. Any 
cannabis law reform movement that is structured on people at the top 
giving orders to people at the bottom will fail. The people at the top 
need to put the case for action to everyone else (including each 
other) and let this lead where it must.
Because cannabis prohibition is enforced by the establishment, many 
people who come to the cannabis law reform movement will be anti-
establishment. Obviously, in order to affect the law, a person must at 
the very least disagree with the establishment position in that area. If 
a cannabis law reform movement is to be successful it might have to 
moderate the anti-establishment extremists within its ranks. Anyone 
calling for politicians to be killed, or for the state to be entirely 
dismantled, or claiming that the police force consists entirely of 
thugs, thieves and rapists, might not be suitable for a spokesperson's 
position. Whatever the arguments in favour of such positions, they 
will be considered by the vast majority of people to be extremist 
positions and promoting them will not help the movement achieve its 
objectives.
Another consideration is that members of a cannabis law reform 
movement might have higher than average levels of paranoia. This 
could be because of the nature of the psychoactive effects of 
cannabis, or it could be a completely rational response to prohibition, 
or it could be both. The practical consequences of this phenomenon 
are that it may be more difficult to convince any potential supporter 
to put themselves out there. Members might be unwilling to become 
candidates for fear of provoking police action. Supporters might be 
unwilling to become members for fear of government forces 
compromising the membership database and getting their records. 
Some cannabis users may be unwilling to come out of the cannabis 
closet for fear of social or work-related reprisals. Activists need to 
bear in mind that there will be higher than usual levels of paranoia 
and distrust within the movement and will need to take extra steps to 
built trust among its members.
Because cannabis possession and supply is (presumably) a crime in 
the territory in which a cannabis law reform movement operates, a 

vast majority of its members will be criminals. Although most of 
these people are only criminals because of cannabis prohibition, an 
activist in the cannabis law reform movement might well encounter 
people whose attitudes to welfare fraud, tax evasion, casual violence, 
and a host of other crimes are relaxed to say the least. This may or 
may not affect those people's effectiveness as a cannabis law reform 
campaigner, but the risk is there that the legal system could deal to 
them, and this may have consequences for the movement.
When these factors are combined, other risks present themselves. If 
the movement has a heavy criminal element it is entirely possible 
that activists who are not themselves criminals will not be trusted. 
They may be suspected of being police informers, undercover police 
agents or even representatives of the intelligence and security 
services. Although it is possible that the establishment would have an 
incentive to infiltrate the movement, excessive paranoia about this 
possibility could cripple the movement's effectiveness. As with many 
other considerations, a balance must be found.
Who to Keep an Eye On
Ideas are great, and they are necessary in order to have something to 
act towards. But the action is more important than the idea. Beware 
of the activist who comes up with fantastic ideas for other people to 
work on. They are often the same kind of activist who believes that 
anything they come up with is gold and the others should be grateful 
that someone with their vision is present. Sometimes a new member 
will come to you requesting fifty membership forms for the people 
he's persuaded to join, and sometimes they will come with what they 
believe is a game-changing idea that will win the battle straight 
away. Be cautious of the second type. If the idea also requires most 
of the movement's funding in order to work, be doubly cautious.
Egomaniacs are similar. Beware of anyone who appears to behave as 
if they have been sent by God to rid the world of cannabis 
prohibition. The difference between a movement and a cult is that a 
movement can continue even if its leaders retire. A cult has 
followers, a movement has a collective energy that pushes all of its 

members forwards. Likewise, beware the follower. If a person cannot 
evaluate the merit of an idea by themselves, they are of little use to 
the inner circles of the party where many decisions are made.
There are several degrees of egomaniac lower than the full 
psychopath, and all of them are potentially dangerous to the party. 
While it is necessary for an activist to have an ego healthy enough to 
withstand the opprobrium and stupidity of the prohibitionists, beware 
the activist who ignores the needs of the party to push their own 
agenda. People who encourage others to take risks that they do not 
themselves take, people who disrespect the feelings and opinions of 
others and people who do not seem to understand that it is not 
morally justified to shoot a police officer for searching your car must 
all be treated with suspicion. 
Be wary of anyone who tries to buy status with money, especially 
when the party is in its infancy. Depending on the size of its area, the 
movement may need to spend millions to win, and one person 
spending a few hundred on their own candidacy is not the next 
Caesar. It is fair that some status be given to people who aided the 
party on the financial front, but it has to be kept in proportion. The 
party never needs a pissing contest around who spent the most 
money, especially when most of the useful party work is unpaid.
Also be wary of anyone who appears to seek power for its own sake. 
They will make decisions based on what benefits them and not the 
movement. 
Who to Keep an Eye On II (Divided Loyalties)
Watch out for members of other parties. The fact is that votes are a 
scarce resource, and any one party could potentially steal votes from 
another. A consequence of this is that many parties will seek to insert 
moles within the cannabis law reform movement.
These moles may do nothing other than report back to a superior. 
They will pass on information relating to the size of the party 
membership, the financial resources it has, and specific information 

about people in the party leadership. They may do much more than 
this, including sabotaging the party's efforts or misleading its 
members.
The nature of politics is that many people who join a cannabis law 
reform party will have formerly been members of other parties. 
These members are valuable because they will pass on information 
about how the other parties function (or fail to function).
Because many members of the cannabis law reform party will have 
recently jumped ship, it is not easy to determine straight away who is 
a mole and who is not. At a minimum, if it comes to the attention of 
the Membership Secretary that a party member is active in a rival 
party, or holds a position of responsibility in a rival party, that 
membership should be revoked and the member expelled.
Another thing to watch out for is people loyal to prohibitionist 
values. If a person joins the cannabis law reform movement, but is 
indifferent to rights violations suffered in other areas, their motives 
will be seen by many as suspicious.
Members Can, and Should, be Recruited With a View to What 
They Bring to the Movement
This section will make more sense if the activist has read 
“Extraordinary Considerations of the Membership Secretary” above.
Most people have special skills and advantages, and if the 
Membership Secretary is grouping people into lists based on these 
skills they might as well recruit for them.
The most valuable member of all is the one that can bring in the most 
other members. This is because of the power of exponential growth. 
To give an example, Jeff Lye of the Waitakere branch of the Aotearoa 
Legalise Cannabis Party signed up over 200 members in one year in 
a self-funded campaign. If a hundred people like this could be found, 
the party would soon grow to a number equivalent to an Army 
division.

Build it Wide, Build it Deep
One excellent advantage when it comes to building a structure on the 
national level is that the Membership Secretary can discover the 
geographical areas where the party is weak and those where it is 
strong. The party can then funnel some resources from a strong area 
into a weak one, where they will likely yield better returns.
Even with a skeletal national system, it is possible to specifically 
target certain areas for recruitment. Any responsible member who 
intends to pass through the area in question could hit the streets with 
a clipboard and a couple of hundred membership forms. Because 
these new members are followed up with merchandise offers, the 
movement has the potential to go deep quickly.
If there is an election in which a cannabis candidate is standing, that 
area should be targeted for members and merchandise well in 
advance. If necessary, activists from neighbouring areas might be 
able to help.
With a good website, the party can put up a “Members wanted in: ” 
notice, perhaps with some bonus merchandise if they sign up while 
they live in that area. 
Building a Cannabis Law Reform Movement is Essentially a 
Question of Solidarity
Humans are selfish; this is a point understood by most people when 
they are children and the balance of information coming from the 
world does not argue otherwise. When a person becomes older and 
more sophisticated they realise that, although people are selfish, in 
many cases they do not behave in purely selfish ways. 
The reason for this is that if any one person wants to fuck over a 
second, the most important thing he can do is to curry favour with a 
third. If the second can bring a fourth and a fifth into the equation it 
changes again. And so on, up the chain of order, until one group 

becomes powerful enough to enforce its will on a certain area of 
territory with little expectation that this will be challenged. The 
smaller the opposition, the less likely the status quo will be upset.
This means that the path to victory is for members to fight alongside 
each other. The more intensely a member feels that the goals of the 
other members are his own goals, the most enthusiastically he will 
fight on behalf of the others.
Solidarity Through Brotherhood
A certain distance must be maintained between the membership and 
anyone not a member. This is not a suggestion to start a cult. It 
means that there must be something that stays exclusive to members. 
Of course, only members will have official membership cards, and 
only official members should attend party meetings. But if it is 
desirable to add another layer on top of this the Merchandise Officer 
might have to run some limited edition stock.
An ideal piece of merchandise that will remain exclusive is a 
cigarette lighter printed with a specific image, such as “Cannabis 
Party AGM 2012.” The Merchandise Officer might have a hundred 
of these made and hand them out to attendees at the Annual General 
Meeting.
Another idea is to do a once-yearly t-shirt print run where every 
participating member gets a t-shirt with their membership number on 
it, or title such as “Cannabis Party Treasurer 2012.” This is also a 
cheap and easy way of honouring the elders of the party, because 
their membership numbers will be lower and this will afford them 
some respect.
Inner Circles, Degrees and Ranking
Everyone who has ever been part of a group will have observed that, 
no matter the size of the group, there is an inner circle in which 
important decisions are made, even if this inner circle only consists 
of one person. The reasons for this are obvious to anyone who has 

ever considered why there are no national elections or referenda on 
the question of library fees and parking fines. The human tendency to 
form social hierarchies expresses itself in the form of political parties 
as well, and the two most noticeable ones are who knows the most 
about party operation and who makes the important decisions (and 
there is high overlap between the two). The natural pattern is that 
people are higher the more trusted and effective they are.
This handbook cannot cover all of the intrigues of intra-party 
shitfighting, but this section will outline three ways of minimising 
the impact of damaging elements within the party membership, once 
they are identified.
The first is for the party to have inner circles. It appears to be natural 
for any group to do this. Within the wider group of the membership 
is a circle of active members, which contains highly effective 
members, which contains the Executive, which contains the Leader. 
A member's opinion on party matters will be considered more 
generously the further the member is up this chain.
The second way is to have a system of degrees. One easy way is to 
use the forums. Anyone who makes a certain number of posts is 
asked about how they think they can contribute to the party, and if 
this appeals to the people already in the degree that new person is 
admitted.
The third, and most transparent way, is to have a ranking system. The 
major problem with a ranking system is that it is hard to set up, for 
the reason that so much as raising the idea divides the party. Having 
said that, most understand that some roles are more important than 
others. An example of a ranking system might look like this:
1. Leader
2. Deputy Leader
3. Secretary
4. Treasurer
5. President
6. Membership Secretary

7. Press Secretary
8. Fundraising Officer
9+. Regional Officers
It is best not to get carried away by talk like this. The cannabis law 
reform movement is a cultural phenomenon, not a criminal 
conspiracy, and the path to victory lies in understanding that forces 
have conspired against us, not the other way around. However, there 
may be times when the information in this passage is necessary for 
the movement, in particular if there is an organised attempt to 
infiltrate it.

3. FUNDRAISING
No cannabis law reform movement can be close to maximally 
effective without money. Although solidarity is free and 
fundamental, it can only go so far. With money, a cannabis law 
reform movement can reach far more people with its propaganda. It 
can cover expenses for party representatives who partake in media 
opportunities. It can pay people to do work that they would not have 
done for free.
The triple pillars of any fundraising effort are merchandise, 
donations and advertising. The major difference is that with 
merchandise, something physical is exchanged for the financial 
contribution. 
Merchandise
With outsourcing and print-on-demand services it is easy to start a 
basic Merchandise Office. A decent Merchandise Office will achieve 
at least two goals: fundraising and expanding membership. There are 
ways that both goals can be achieved with one action. Party officials 
in contact with members can persuade them to sell merchandise to 
like-minded friends and associates. Members can be encouraged with 
offers of a free t-shirt if they sell nine, for example. In this manner 
the member becomes used to taking action on behalf of the party, and 
will act as a node through which to pass communication to party 
members or supporters.
The Fundraising Officer, or whoever is tasked with the success of the 
Merchandise Office, must be aware of several things. They must be 
aware of the cost of producing merchandise at various quantities. 
They must be aware of the profit margins of the various items and 
how many of each could expect to be sold in a certain time frame. 
They must be aware of the stocks of merchandise held by either the 
party or by party officials. Most importantly, they must be aware of 
how much money the Merchandise Office expects to return to the 

party. They must also be able to respond to any request for 
information from the Treasurer regarding inventory, expenses and 
income.
Having produced merchandise, the remaining work involves storing 
it and delivering it to the buyers. Anyone with a spare room or a 
decent garage will have enough room for a merchandise office that 
will be suitable for at least the party's initial requirements. If that 
person also has a reason to make frequent trips to the post office they 
can also post any merchandise that has been ordered.
A Basic Merchandise Office
Pens can be printed in party colours and with the party logo and/or 
website address. If it is too expensive to get pens printed in red, gold 
and green bands, three separate runs can be made, one for each 
colour. People will pay two dollars for a fifty cent pen, so this affords 
one of the largest profit margins of most items. Because of this, it is 
possible to give large discounts for bulk purchases and still turn a 
good profit.
T-shirts can be printed in a variety of sizes, colours and designs. If 
ordering a big run of t-shirts, keep in mind that people are getting 
larger faster than sizes are, and so it might be easier to sell 2XL and 
even 3XL than S. As for colours, almost anything is possible but 
black or white printed with the party logo will be the cheapest. T-
shirts can easily be printed with a variety of designs, and someone in 
the movement will have some design talent. If five hundred t-shirts 
are to be printed, then five hundred dollars can be offered as a prize 
for the best design, and the cost of this will be a dollar per shirt.
Cigarette lighters are for obvious reasons a popular merchandise 
item, but as there are restrictions on posting them it might be best to 
focus on selling them at meetings and events. This postal restriction 
can be turned to the advantage of the movement. Print up a batch of 
lighters for every occasion that the party meets or performs any 
unified action. In this way they serve as a kind of memorabilia and 
carry a value that could not be achieved if they were sold to anyone.

If there is any musical talent in the movement, there is a very large 
profit margin on CDs and downloadable songs once the production 
costs have been recovered. Local artists might be willing to donate a 
track to the cause in exchange for publicity, and there are easily 
enough cannabis related songs out there to put together an album. A 
member with musical appreciation can order the songs in the way 
that sounds best, and copies can be made for a few dollars and sold 
for twenty.
Of course, anything that can have a logo slapped on it can potentially 
be merchandise. The Merchandise Office can move keyrings, 
mousepads, hoodies, drinking mugs, backpacks, USB sticks and 
much more from a range of online suppliers, most of whom only 
need an image of the logo.
A final idea is for the party to sell its own propaganda. This will 
require co-operation between the Information and Merchandise 
Officers. All the Information Officer has to do is supply a number of 
print-ready files for the Merchandise Officer to print in bulk. If the 
Merchandise Officer handles at least some of the distribution of 
propaganda, they can send it out when they complete merchandise 
orders. 
Cannabonds
A cannabis law reform party, as a central node in the cannabis 
culture, can easily sell cannabonds to its supporters. A cannabond is a 
certificate that is bought with cash and can be exchanged for 
cannabis when it becomes legal to do so. Like other donations, it 
ought to be handled by the party Treasurer. It might even be 
worthwhile to make it known that cannabonds can only be purchased 
through the party Treasurer in order to prevent counterfeit.
If the party has contacts with a suitable artist (and this is very likely 
in a cannabis movement), they can be commissioned to produce an 
attractive certificate. The certificate ought to have a unique serial 
number in order to prevent counterfeit, and perhaps a seal, stamp, 

watermark or signature.
The beauty of cannabonds is that the party gets the cash immediately, 
and need only repay the bond once cannabis is legalised. When this 
happens, the party will be awash with cannabis anyway and will 
have no difficulty honouring the bonds.
Donations
Donations are almost pure profit. In many cases, nothing is expected 
in return for a donation, and when something is it is usually 
intangible, such as influence.
With a donation system, two elements are crucial. Firstly, the money 
must end up where it is best used. Secondly, the donation system 
must be as transparent as possible so that the maximum number of 
people are persuaded to donate the maximum amount of money.
Regarding the first element, a system must be in place so that the 
donation is overseen by the relevant Treasurer. If money is donated 
to a branch, the branch Treasurer must insure that it is accounted for 
and is spent wisely. The same is true for the party Treasurer. If the 
donation is made to a branch, it might be desirable for the national 
body to take a cut (unless the donation is made specifically for the 
operating expenses of that branch). Before any donations are taken 
in, the party should have a spending plan in place that ensures that 
the most important expenditures are accounted for first.
Regarding the second element, the donations process must be as 
transparent as possible. It is far easier to solicit a donation if the 
donor is told what the money will be used for and why having money 
to do this is necessary. If the donor wishes for some intangible return 
from their donation, it is essential that whoever takes in the donation 
has the authority to grant that request. For example, if someone 
wishes for a lunch with the party Leader in exchange for a sizeable 
donation, the Leader has to agree to this.
Targeting Groups or Individuals for Donations

One reason why it is important for the Membership Secretary to keep 
lists of supporters is because they are the same people who will 
provide much of the funding for the movement and must be 
contactable. The people who are most likely to make donations are 
those who have made donations in the past, provided it was not the 
recent past. The spare resources of the membership might not be 
enough to win anyway, so other avenues must be sought. The two 
obvious ones are individuals and corporations.
Individuals are often a good target for large donations because 
wealthy people are often more motivated by status than by more 
money. The historically successful model is that anyone with a good 
idea needs a patron in the form of someone with wealth. 
Corporations will not be interested in much other than the profit 
potential, but this serves to simplify matters greatly. If anyone in the 
movement is able to analyse a marketplace, they could show the 
results of such an analysis to a company who could benefit from it. A 
textile company finding itself squeezed by lower labour costs in 
other countries might be very interested to hear of a market for high-
end hemp clothing.
The next point involves who does the asking. Experience has shown 
that people are more likely to donate money if asked by the person 
who is running in the election than by someone working on behalf of 
that candidate.
Maximising Opportunities for Merchandising
In much the same way that people will not vote for the party if they 
are not aware of it, people will not buy party merchandise if they do 
not know it exists. There are many ways that a Fundraising Officer 
can bring attention to party merchandise, some of which require co-
operation with other office holders and some which do not.
Once the Fundraising Officer is aware of what opportunities exist for 
merchandising and what the best price for each item is, they ought to 

put together a brochure in both printed and digital formats.
With a printed brochure, the Fundraising Officer needs to liaise with 
the Membership Secretary and any other party official tasked with 
posting correspondence to the membership. Because the Membership 
Secretary must, at a minimum, post a letter with a membership card 
and a welcome letter to each new member, they can easily slip in a 
merchandise brochure. New members will be excited to receive a 
membership pack and if they receive a merchandise brochure at the 
same time they will be inclined to buy. If another party official is 
tasked with sending letters to the membership, whether they be 
regular newsletters or special letters from the Leader, they can also 
add a merchandise brochure.
With a digital brochure, the Fundraising Officer needs to liaise with 
the Webmaster. Because the Internet allows the Webmaster to 
replicate information at almost no cost this is an excellent way of 
raising awareness. If the party website prominently displays 
merchandise offers, these will be seen by not only party members 
seeking updates but also by supporters who might be willing to buy 
merchandise even if they are unwilling to join the party. The digital 
nature of the party website means that it is easy to add new items or 
to offer special deals on old ones.
Although it requires far more work than any other merchandise item, 
the Fundraising Officer ought to work towards putting together a 
policy handbook for sale. The ideal way to do this is to recruit input 
from the various spokespeople in every policy area.
Merchandise and Memberships
One of the best avenues for selling merchandise is to do it at the 
same time as taking a membership application. Anyone willing to 
join the party will be on a high of enthusiasm and at this time they 
are more likely to also buy merchandise. A standard sheet of paper 
folded into thirds will have six panels, and if four are used for 
propaganda, one for the membership and one for the merchandise, it 
is possible to persuade a person to both become active and to buy 

things.
A more elegant method of achieving the same thing is to offer a 
range of premium memberships that come with discounted 
merchandise. Twenty, fifty and a hundred dollars are round numbers 
that would all ensure that the member gets a discount and the party 
gets some money.
A positive feedback loop should arise from these two departments: 
with revenue from memberships the party can get merchandise 
which can be offered with better memberships, the revenue from 
which can make even better merchandise.
Advertising
As soon as any communications channel has been opened up, it 
becomes possible for the operators of it to raise money by selling 
advertising. Although care has to be taken that the audience is not 
driven away by aggressive ads, people are so used to seeing 
advertising that small amounts of it will not raise any ire.
There are many ways of selling advertising, but the basic rules are 
the same. A company selling a good or a service pays the movement 
money to display ads on their communications channel. Whether the 
channel is a website, a newspaper or a magazine, it will have space 
that can be filled with an ad.
If the channel is well-known, advertisers might contact the party, 
otherwise the party (or its Fundraising Officer) will have to contact 
them. Any store that makes a considerable income from selling 
hydroponic equipment is a good bet, as are Internet headshops and 
bookstores. Take care not to advertise anything illegal - the 
prohibitionists will fall over themselves to shut a channel down if 
they have any justification at all.
Take caution with ad display programs such as Google AdSense. 
Some of them prohibit display on cannabis related websites and there 
is no sense in using ad space in this manner if the account gets 

banned upon the first human review.
A final point on advertising is that any properly equipped 
Merchandise Office ought to be able to advertise its wares through 
the party website. This means that the party can still make money 
even without selling its advertising space to a second party.
Money Raises the Stakes
The nature of cannabis law reform efforts changes considerably once 
money is added to the equation. No one in the party has the right to 
decide over how volunteer resources are used, but everyone will 
want a say in how money is spent, especially when an election is 
close.
It is absolutely crucial that money is prioritised. The party might 
have to pay a certain fee in order to contest an election and to run 
candidates in particular areas. The party will also have to pay the 
expenses of the Membership Office. These two areas, as well as any 
other area necessary for the survival of the party and its ability to 
contest elections, must receive funding before any other allocation is 
even considered.
Extra monies can be used in two ways. They can be saved for 
election expenses or they can be used to build the party. If the party 
is small and disorganised, the tendency will be to save everything for 
the election. The problem with this mentality is that, in the hands of a 
competent Fundraising Officer, extra money can be used to make 
more money. A run of a sufficient quantity of t-shirts, for example, 
can easily double the initial capital in a few months.
What is crucial is that the executive of the party agrees on how 
money is spent. Bickering over money can be time-consuming and 
wasteful. Usually the best time to come to an agreement is before the 
money is even made. A pragmatic solution might to be earmark a 
defined amount of future money for certain projects with the final 
decision on anything extra being made by the Treasurer. Another way 
is to agree that spending priority goes to whatever project will return 

the most money. In practice, this means that merchandising trumps 
media.

4. MEDIA
The purpose of media interaction is to inspire support for the 
movement. Media interaction has the advantage that a message can 
be given to a massive number of people, and it has the disadvantage 
that this message is relatively impersonal and usually unidirectional. 
Media interactions can be divided into events such as gatherings and 
protests, and media opportunities such as interviews, with the 
issuance of press releases falling somewhere in between.
Use An Events Calendar
The movement's website should have an events calendar. Many of 
the media opportunities outlined in this section will be events that 
will be planned months in advance. The most obvious date to put on 
the calendar is the date of the next election. Also important are dates 
of party events such as AGMs, or any other national, regional, 
branch or chapter meeting.
The rest of the calendar can be filled with any event that is of interest 
to people in cannabis law reform. If a prominent activist has a court 
hearing at a known date in the future, this should be in the calendar. 
If a roadshow, protest, gathering or speaking tour is planned, every 
date should be in the calendar. Any time a cannabis related bill is 
voted on, this should be in the calendar.
With this done, the events calendar itself becomes a crucial tool for 
building enthusiasm and momentum. If an important date is added, 
this can be followed up with an email to all members informing them 
of the date and its place in the events calendar. If the events calendar 
works as it should, an event need only be posted there and the party 
machine will ensure that it is a success.
It is also important that any person tasked with organising an event 
has their contact details available as part of the event entry.

Gatherings, Protests and Events
With a movement structure in place, gatherings such as protests and 
events can be held. An event such as a J Day serves several crucial 
purposes. It allows members to network by meeting a large number 
of like-minded people. It gives members a sense of legitimacy to see 
so many others who are inspired by the same cause. It gives the 
movement an excellent opportunity to attract new members and to 
fundraise. It gives both members and the wider public an opportunity 
to see the movement in action. It provides media opportunities. 
Perhaps most important of all, it inspires those who take part to do 
what it takes to achieve cannabis law reform. Each of these points 
are worth looking at in turn.
Because cannabis is illegal, it restricts social opportunities for those 
who use it. Holding a gathering allows people from a wide area to 
travel and to share and discuss ideas. It gives activists a chance to get 
to know higher-ups in the movement, and to challenge and develop 
trust with them. Activists can meet people from their area, which is 
crucial to developing and strengthening the branch structure of the 
movement. Gatherings allow people to learn, discuss and improve 
party policy.
Again because cannabis is illegal, a gathering imparts a sense of 
legitimacy to the cause. To have a hundred people meet in the same 
place will persuade those involved that the issue is large enough to 
be worth fighting for and to have a chance of success. With enough 
people, activists can assert their right to use cannabis even if this is 
in a public place.
Gatherings are the best times to sign up new members and to 
fundraise, and ideally the movement would ensure a table devoted to 
each. They attract large numbers of people who are not formally part 
of the movement, and many of these people might be inspired to join 
when they see the support of others. Activists often bring along 
sceptical friends who can be turned onto the cause when they hear 
about it from other activists. It is essential that a party official tasked 
with recruitment be present at gatherings. For social reasons, 

gatherings are the best time to sell merchandise. If an activist wears a 
t-shirt promoting the movement at a gathering, others will see it and 
will want one. Gatherings give party officials tasked with selling 
merchandise access to their ideal market. Also for social reasons, 
gatherings are the best time to solicit donations. Simply keeping a 
donations jar at either the membership or merchandise tables can 
bring in considerable money.
If the gathering is public, both members and the general populace 
will get a chance to see the movement in action. Members will see 
that the party infrastructure is capable of meaningful action, and 
people not affiliated with the movement might be surprised at the 
level of support displayed. A large proportion of voters consider 
cannabis law reform a fringe issue, and to see several thousand 
activists gathering in support of it will make them reconsider this 
opinion.
Gatherings are excellent media opportunities. At the very least, 
websites that support the movement must be able to generate or take 
possession of images and reports. The movement infrastructure must 
ensure that someone is responsible for taking photos of the gathering 
and for writing a report on how it went. No matter where in the 
country a supporter is, to see photos of thousands of people smoking 
cannabis in a public park will inspire them. The party Media Team 
should work to ensure coverage from local or national newspapers, 
television or radio stations. In many cases journalists will wish to 
speak to party officials - the Media Team must ensure that this is 
facilitated and that the journalist receives as much information as 
they need.
Any and all of these factors serve to inspire people to work towards 
cannabis law reform. Party leaders can take the opportunity to 
deliver a speech to a receptive audience.
Cannabis Tours and Roadshows
If the movement has sufficient funds, it can organise a cannabis 
roadshow to take the message across the country. A cannabis 

roadshow is a great way of building support, for some party officials 
to make themselves known to supporters and to the media, and to 
fundraise.
Before a roadshow can begin to be planned, it must be made clear 
how much money is available for expenses. Although donations can 
and should be solicited along the way, it is good to know how much 
of a lump sum is available so that the roadshow does not start out 
desperate for cash.
Once this is determined, the organisers can plan the number of stops, 
how much time shall be spent at each stop, where the roadshow staff 
will set up, what information they will display and how it will be 
displayed.
The number of stops and the amount of time spent at each stop is 
primarily a function of how much support the roadshow staff can 
expect at each location. For this reason it is crucial that one of the 
roadshow organisers is the Membership Secretary. The Membership 
Secretary will know how many members of the movement are 
present in each location, how active they are, and how or whether 
they can be contacted to inform them of the roadshow. The idea is 
that the roadshow staff will be met at each stop by members of the 
movement, by anyone these members can bring along as well as by 
any member of the public that might be interested. Ideally, the 
roadshow ought to make as many stops as possible and spend a 
couple of days at each stop if there is sufficient possibility of support 
there. Many members of the movement will be happy to provide 
accommodation for the roadshow staff, especially if the staff are 
party officials who are known to those members.
The next step is to determine where the roadshow will set up in each 
location. This might depend on the logistical capacity of the 
roadshow team. Although it is best, if numbers permit, to hire a hall 
of some kind, there may not be enough support or money to do this. 
The roadshow can always set up at the side of a busy thoroughfare 
for foot traffic if permission can be secured. Outside a shopping mall 
or at a square in the centre of the city are good targets. It is best to 

have a backup location as well, should rain or hostile forces prevent 
the roadshow from setting up in the most desirable location. It is a 
good idea here to draw on the knowledge of local members for 
advice on where to set up.
The decision as to what information to display and how it shall be 
displayed is a decision that the roadshow organisers should come to 
in consultation with the Information Officer. The main consideration 
is to assemble a dozen or so freestanding boards to which A0-sized 
posters can be stapled. Each of these posters should cover one major 
area of cannabis law reform, with a striking title and font large 
enough so that a person walking past could read it. The purpose of 
these information boards is that, when there are too many people for 
the staff to speak to individually, interested parties can still get 
information.
Related to this is the choice of what information to hand out. This is 
one area in which the roadshow format excels. If the roadshow has a 
decent sized vehicle it can carry boxes of photocopied pamphlets on 
any number of cannabis related topics. These can then be handed out 
at the slightest expression of interest.
Two other crucial elements of a successful roadshow are a 
merchandise table and a recruitment desk. If space or staffing does 
not permit two, they can be combined into a single table. Many of 
the people who come to a roadshow stop will not have heard the 
argument for cannabis law reform before, or at least will not have 
heard it put so persuasively. For this reason it is important that the 
opportunity is offered to join the movement, or at least to take away 
one or several membership forms. Because many of the people 
present will be supporters or even members, a roadshow offers an 
excellent opportunity to buy merchandise without paying for 
postage. Having a donations jar at the desk is important as well.
The Press Secretary can also get involved in a roadshow by 
contacting media outlets in advance and alerting them to its presence. 
Even better would be to organise interviews at as many stops as 
possible.

On the subject of who should go on a roadshow, the movement needs 
to decide who will best achieve its objectives. At a minimum it is 
desirable to have one person who is comfortable speaking to crowds 
and one person who is articulate, inspiring and persuasive on a 
person-to-person level. The roadshow need not have the same people 
throughout, although if it does it will be easier to organise.
Concerts
Another good idea to raise the profile of the movement is to throw a 
concert. Most cannabis users are also music lovers and many of them 
are skilled musicians themselves. Organising a concert is simpler 
than organising a roadshow and more exciting.
The first thing that needs to be done is to line up a venue. With a 
venue sorted, the organisers can try and find some bands. The right 
band is one whose lyrics or sound carries the cannabis law reform 
message. Then the organiser can work on promotion.
Just as with roadshows, it is important that the concert organiser 
offers a chance for concertgoers to join the party and to buy 
merchandise. People are already used to the idea of buying t-shirts at 
concerts so any merchandise table should be stocked with a good 
supply of those. If a party official can be tasked with recruitment 
they can join the table for that reason.
Press Releases
The issuance of press releases is a core activity and responsibility of 
the Press Secretary at every stage of the electoral cycle. Because of 
this it is crucial that the Press Secretary has an excellent grasp of 
English and of party policy.
There is almost no limit to the range of subjects that a press release 
could cover. The most important consideration is that the press 
release points out a problem or inefficiency in the current political 
system that the cannabis law reform party could improve upon if it 

was voted into power.
If there is a news report that demonstrates that police resources are 
insufficient (such as if an investigation was bungled or if a crime was 
reported and no police officer could get to the scene in time), then 
the cannabis law reform party could issue a press release pointing out 
how much money a repeal of cannabis prohibition could save, and 
how these savings could be used to make the police force more 
effective.
Whenever a person is penalised harshly because of cannabis 
prohibition (if they receive a lengthy prison sentence or if their assets 
are seized), a press release can point this out. Any time that an 
elderly citizen or a young adult with a family is arrested, a press 
release can summon support and outrage.
When the party becomes larger and there are individuals who can fill 
the roles of spokespeople for particular policy areas, it becomes 
possible to generate a large number of press releases in a short time. 
Any news report that mentions a certain policy area could potentially 
inspire a press release.
Press releases need not be solely reactive. If the party achieves a 
certain number of members, or if there is a change in a senior 
leadership position, then a press release can be issued.
In order to get the press release out to where it could be picked up by 
a media outlet, the Press Secretary needs to have a list that includes a 
contact person at as many different outlets as possible, both national 
and local, and for all different media. It is a good idea to ensure that 
the Press Secretary is the one tasked with doing this, because then 
they can check the accuracy and quality of the press release before it 
is issued. It is essential for the party image that the text of the press 
release contains no spelling or grammatical errors, or factual 
inaccuracies.
Letters to Representatives

Letters to politicians are a form of media, because they do get the 
message of the movement out to a person who can potentially do 
something about it. Cynics might believe that such letters are of little 
use if they are not sent in an envelope that contains a thick wad of 
cash. Indeed, there are no examples of politicians receiving 
correspondence from cannabis law reform activists and launching a 
campaign to end prohibition.
Nonetheless, there is still reason to send letters to politicians, 
especially if any kind of response can be elicited. The reason for this 
is because once the position of any politician on the legalisation 
spectrum is known, that politician can be influenced to vote for 
legislation that promotes cannabis law reform.
If the politician is strongly against cannabis law reform, and has 
gone on the record as such, then they can be publicly blamed for the 
negative effects of prohibition. If there is a family who has lost a 
provider, or a patient who cannot get the right medicine, and if these 
victims wish to appear in front of the media, they can damage the 
image of the politician as long as that politician continues to espouse 
prohibition.
Likewise, if the politician is in favour of law reform, create a channel 
through which this can be known to people in the movement. If the 
movement has a newsletter, it can be mentioned that certain 
politicians are, to some degree at least, behind the cause. Care must 
be taken not to give these politicians so much publicity that they take 
support away from the candidates of the cannabis law reform party.
With the positions of politicians established, cannabis law reform 
activists can write further letters in an ongoing attempt to make the 
case. Activists can tell the politicians directly that the activist puts 
heavy weight on the politician's position on cannabis law reform 
when deciding who to vote for. This is a classic example of an action 
which is exponentially effective when large numbers of people take 
part.
The Party Website

Over and above the opportunities for organising the movement, the 
website of any cannabis law reform party is one of the best ways to 
get content out to people for little cost in either time or money. 
Although the Webmaster ought to build forums that are mostly 
accessible only to members, a website can transmit information to a 
large number of people who are not formally part of the movement. 
Any supporter who is concerned about their name getting out in 
connection to cannabis (and there will be large numbers of these) can 
still go to the website as often as it is updated. This section looks at 
what should go on the party website.
The most obvious way to use the website's front page is to draw 
attention to exposure in other media forms. If a party member is 
interviewed or featured in a blog, put a link up on the website. 
Likewise with radio, television (where possible) or any form of 
social media. Executive members can write posts on new 
merchandise or new policy announcements, and other members can 
draw attention to what is happening in their area.
There is always something happening with cannabis law reform 
somewhere in the world, so if the Webmaster keeps aware of events 
they can notify people in their area through the website. Because 
many countries are currently experimenting with some relaxation of 
the cannabis laws there are a large number of posts on other blogs 
with announcements of law changes and reports of the effects of 
these changes.
If there is a party member who keeps up with recent psychological or 
medical research they will read a number of cannabis related stories 
in trade publications. If these are online they can be linked to from 
the front page and even if they are not they can be summarised with 
a reference to the printed work given.
It is also easy, if the website is built with the right content 
management system, to download and install a plugin that displays a 
news feed of cannabis related topics. If this is customised to the area 
in which the party operates then people can get a stream of cannabis 

news with almost no effort on the part of the Webmaster.
Media Opportunities
Media opportunities are high stakes events, and for this reason it is 
crucial that they are handled correctly. Seeing a party official on 
television or reading about an activist in a newspaper might be the 
first impression that many people have of the movement, and if a 
sufficient impression is made the media consumer might choose to 
vote for the party or to take their interest further.
The court of public opinion has fewer rules than an ordinary 
courtroom. In many cases, the cannabis law reform movement has 
already been tried in the court of public opinion. Cannabis users are 
frequently seen as stupid, lazy, dishonest, arrogant and naive, if not 
outright vicious criminals. Any media opportunity will give party 
officials a chance to counter these stereotypes as well as put forward 
the argument for cannabis law reform.
The remainder of this section examines the various media 
opportunities that a cannabis law reform movement can take 
advantage of and the considerations that are involved.
Print Media 
There are two basic ways to gain attention for cannabis law reform 
through print media: interviews and letters to the opinion pages of 
newspapers.
Arranging an interview can occur in one of two ways. Either a 
journalist contacts the party because they wish to feature a party 
official or the party Press Secretary contacts a journalist to inform 
them of an interesting event. A journalist might contact the party at 
any time, especially if there is an election looming. The higher the 
profile of the movement the more likely it is that a journalist will 
contact the party; if the party has established itself as an authority on 
the cannabis issue, this may occur whenever cannabis law reform is 
raised in the public consciousness or when there is a noteworthy 

cannabis related trial. The other option is for the party Press 
Secretary to contact a journalist, which could happen in conjunction 
with a roadshow, a protest, a concert or at any other time when the 
cannabis issue gains attention. 
Letters to the opinion pages are excellent because they reach a wide 
range of people and many of those who do read them are politically 
active. Because people who read newspapers almost always vote 
there is high potential for return on investment. The top prize for the 
movement is to get an editorial arguing the case for cannabis law 
reform in a major newspaper. If this is achieved the chances are good 
that letters in response to this will be prominent over coming weeks, 
which will keep the cannabis issue in the public mind. Letters to the 
editor are not as good but they are nonetheless very effective. 
Anyone who chooses to write one should be aware that there will be 
a word limit and exceeding it may ensure the letter does not get 
printed or becomes abridged in a way that limits or even damages the 
message.
On the choice of topic for a letter, any argument given in Part Two of 
this handbook (“A Discussion of Cannabis Law Reform Related 
Arguments”) can be rewritten and submitted. It is best if the letter is 
sent in response to a cannabis-related item that was published in the 
newspaper in recent days. For example, if it is reported that local 
police spent $2,000,000 on a large cannabis bust, it can be pointed 
out that this money would have been much better spent on policing 
crimes of sex or violence.
An excellent example of a sustained letter-writing campaign is that 
carried out by Steven Wilkinson of the Aotearoa Legalise Cannabis 
Party. Any activist looking for tips can visit the ALCP website at 
www.alcp.org.nz and find the Letters to Editor subforum, where 
hundreds of Steven's letters have been reposted.
Letters to the editor do not have to go through the party Press 
Secretary. Because they are not official party statements the Press 
Secretary cannot enforce them anyway, but if people in the 
movement intend to write them it is a good idea for them to do it 

correctly. Correct spelling and grammar is vital, as is stating only 
correct facts and not using fallacious reasoning. The idea is to put the 
argument for cannabis law reform across in a polite, intelligent, 
respectful and civil way.
If the party is organised, a group of members can work to support 
each other. A letter to the editor is far more likely to raise public 
awareness if it is followed up with another letter by another person, 
who can either support the original letter, provide rebuttal to its 
detractors or develop points independently.
Although it is tempting, the movement must not provide template 
letters with the intent of individual activists signing them and 
sending these to their local newspaper. The same company might 
own many newspapers and that company might keep track of the 
content of letters to all of their outlets. If they believe that they are 
being spammed by cannabis activists they could blacklist the 
movement or even provide unhelpful coverage. Modifying the 
message is not difficult and if the letter is unique to the time and 
place it is published in it will be far more effective.
Radio
Although radio has, to a large extent, been replaced by television, it 
is still an effective way of getting a message to many people at once. 
Radio is like television and not like print media in the sense that time 
is far more limited. A print journalist can perform a lengthy interview 
and choose the best parts of it for a story; on the radio, the listeners 
hear whatever the interviewee says (and how they say it).
Because time is at a premium, the message will have to be concise 
and clear, and this means that the activist will have to consider their 
audience and tailor their message to suit. Student listeners might be 
excited to hear an activist talk about resisting oppressive and 
unjustified authority whereas a farmer listening to a broadcast as he 
fixes a fence might be more interested in the potential for hemp 
farming. Because a large number of elderly people prefer the radio to 
any other medium it is a good idea to target them with arguments for 

medical marijuana. It is also an advantage to know in advance how 
much time is allocated for the interview. If there is a specific point 
that the listeners ought to take away, this can be repeated or stated 
with special emphasis.
How the message is put across is just as important as what the 
message is. Radio might be an auditory medium, but the listener will 
often form a visual image of what is being said as they hear it. Part 
of this image will involve the speaker's personality and body 
language. The activist should speak warmly and with passion, as if 
they are giving a wedding speech. They should take care to be sitting 
upright when speaking or even standing if possible, as this will allow 
the voice to carry in a more relaxed and resonant manner. They 
should also speak slowly, not so slowly that they appear to think 
they're speaking to idiots but not much quicker than that.
One advantage that radio has is that there are thousands of radio 
shows with different themes. Any of them dedicated to reggae, to 
politics or, ideally, to cannabis culture, might be willing to let a 
cannabis law reform activist speak at length about their mission. 
Student radio also reaches out to an audience likely to be 
sympathetic to cannabis law reform.
A final point is that radio is unlike both print and television media in 
that listeners are most likely to be doing something else as they 
listen. They might be in their car, doing yardwork or on the shop 
floor. If the listener's attention is divided the activist will have to 
speak in a more arresting fashion if they want to make an impression.
Talkback Radio
Talkback radio is sometimes one of the best democratic platforms. 
Even without a scheduled interview, a cannabis law reform activist 
can bring a message to thousands of people in a few seconds. The 
activist need not make a call with the intent of specifically arguing 
for cannabis law reform, and talkback radio hosts are not fond of 
political fanatics ranting over their airwaves (unless it is them).

There are two ways of subtly raising the issue. One is to talk about a 
related issue and the other is to raise a problem and then offer 
cannabis law reform as a solution. Both methods will work better if 
the issue is framed in economic terms, because this will appeal to a 
large number of people and the economy is usually one of the 
foremost issues on any given day.
An example of the first method is to call in and complain about the 
cost of incarcerating non-violent offenders, and hoping for the issue 
of cannabis law reform to be raised indirectly. An example of the 
second is to call in and mention the ease with which teenagers are 
buying cannabis, with a view to later offering regulation as a 
solution.
Another advantage of talkback radio is that it offers excellent 
practice for the media pressures any candidate will face during a 
campaign. The activist must sit in silence until they are suddenly on 
air and speaking to an audience, and then they are moderated by an 
easily bored and often rude host who might have a reputation for 
abusing his guests.
Television
For a cannabis law reform movement in most modern Western 
nations, a slot on television is the ultimate prize. No other medium 
will give the movement a greater opportunity to impart information. 
Unlike the other media, television gives potential voters and 
supporters an opportunity to measure the appearance and body 
language of party officials.
If the membership is fighting a ground war and the media is the air 
force, the television is the nuke. It is the gamebreaker. Many a 
politician has been rescued from electoral oblivion thanks to a ten 
second comment at the right place and time, and many a frontrunner 
has been destroyed by the converse.
It is unlikely that a cannabis law reform movement will get anyone 
other than its leader onto the national stage at one time. It is not 

necessary to. 
What is crucial with any television appearance is that the 
representative is visually presentable, and that their message comes 
across clearly and with confidence. To succeed in this second regard 
means that the party representative must have spent considerable 
time practising their approach. Mock interviews conducted in front 
of other party members or in front of the mirror will make sure that 
the representative appears calm and collected.
Online Media
In much the same way that the party can be organised far more 
effectively if it uses the Internet, the party can promote itself far 
more effectively using this medium. Online media replicates all the 
advantages of print, radio and television media as well as offering 
promotion through social media. This section will look at all four in 
turn.
A static blog is the online equivalent of a newspaper. It is easier to 
feature in a blog for the reason that it is usually smaller than a 
newspaper and more desperate for content. The best course of action 
is to find a blog that solicits guest posts and offer to write one for 
them on the subject of cannabis law reform. This offers most of the 
advantages of a newspaper editorial, with a significant bonus: 
viewers can leave comments, which often gets a good discussion 
going. As with letters to the editor, an activist can rewrite one or 
several of the arguments from Part Two of this handbook, with their 
own spin to make it relevant to the time and place.
Streaming audio and podcasts are the equivalent of radio. Many 
radio stations will stream part or all of their radio broadcast, and if an 
activist or party official can get an interview they have the 
opportunity to reach a large number of people. Other websites might 
offer podcasts to their visitors. A podcast is nothing more than a large 
audio file that represents an “episode” of the broadcast. Some 
cannabis related websites will make podcasts of interviews with 
cannabis law reform activists and post them for free. The movement 

does not have to wait to be interviewed, however: it can use its own 
website to disseminate podcasts that its members have recorded 
themselves.
Television media is replicated by video sharing sites, of which the 
best known is YouTube. These sites are a fantastic way to get a 
message across to people who are used to watching television. With 
any modern digital camera, an activist can record themselves 
speaking on a cannabis related subject and post it to YouTube. If they 
have some video editing software, it can be a good idea to edit the 
video to show a still screen with text that asks a particular question 
about cannabis law reform, which the activist then answers. If an 
election is approaching, it is a good idea for every candidate and 
member of the party executive to post a video in which they discuss 
their plans and hopes for their constituency and for the nation. Apart 
from monologues, videos of cannabis action such as public speeches 
or gatherings can inspire people to take up and support the message. 
Links to all of these videos can be posted to the party website.
No complete examination of online media is possible without a 
discussion of social media, such as Facebook or Twitter. Any media 
event, whether it be a protest, gathering, roadshow, concert or 
interview, can be shared on any activist's Facebook page. If a decent 
proportion of activists use Facebook to promote the party message, 
thousands or even tens of thousands of people can become aware of 
any cannabis action within hours.
The Party Newsletter or Magazine
For any party to succeed, it has to develop a culture, and one way of 
developing a party culture is to have a newsletter that is exclusive to 
members. It may not be economical to post a regular newsletter out 
to all members, but in this age most members will volunteer an email 
address. A basic Word or Open Office document can export a .pdf 
which can then be sent as an attachment to the emails of the party 
membership.
The newsletter should inform the membership of any possibility they 

might have to get involved with the success of the movement, 
whether they realise it or not. It can also contain communication to 
them by members of the Executive, reminders of their rights and 
even recipes.
If the party elects a Newsletter Editor then they have a media 
position on the same order as the Webmaster. The degree to which 
this is feasible is a direct function of the size of the party. With a big 
enough party, the Newsletter Editor can solicit enough quality 
contributions to produce an engaging document. The greater the 
membership, the more pages can be produced, which means more 
advertising revenue can be gathered.
As with the party website, the most important element of the 
newsletter is the content. The main difference is that, because the 
newsletter only goes out to members, it can be a bit more intimate. 
This makes it the best place to tell the personal story of any of the 
members who may wish this be done.
The personal stories of activists are always interesting. When did an 
activist realise that prohibition was bullshit? What was their first 
action? What do they think is the best way to win? Telling the story 
of an activist both inspires members to become more active and 
builds solidarity as members realise that they have more in common 
with the people fighting for their cause.
The personal stories of people whose lives have been ruined by 
prohibition are also interesting. While care has to be taken not to turn 
the party newsletter into a platform for hand-wringing, the 
occasional case study of a true victim of prohibition will easily find a 
readership. Truly inhumane cases might generate enough outrage to 
become active movements in their own right. 
Martyrs
Every rights movement will have its martyrs. Sooner or later there 
will be a peaceful cannabis smoker who is brutalised by the police, 
or a heavily sick person who is sentenced to prison because they 

used cannabis as a medicine. If this person wishes to use their own 
experience to expose the cruelty of cannabis prohibition, then the 
movement must recognise this as a win/win situation.
The party Press Secretary needs to take the initiative if a case like 
this comes to their attention. If the Press Secretary knows a 
sympathetic journalist in the same region as the martyr, an 
introduction could be made that leads to the story becoming public. 
In any case, the Press Secretary can at least arrange for the martyr's 
story to be told on the party website or YouTube channel.
Should the movement wish to create a small buzz, they can run a 
competition where victims of cannabis prohibition tell their story, 
whether in text or on video. Stories can be published in the party 
newsletter, and videos can be added to the party YouTube channel. 
Whoever has the best story or video can win a sum of money, or 
goods equal to this value.
The Media Does Not Hate You
A cognitive bias that often afflicts people who believe strongly in a 
political cause is the hostile media effect. Sometimes this is because 
the media is reinforcing a worldview that is hostile to supporters of a 
certain cause, and sometimes it is because the moral values of the 
supporters are so far away from the average person's that a perfectly 
objective publication will still be seen as disagreeable.
The truth is that the national political media is usually concerned 
with the social democrats, with the conservatives and with foreign 
affairs. It has not been common for a cannabis law reform movement 
to get onto the national agenda in the past. This is not because the 
media is hostile but because the cannabis issue will never trump 
issues of war and peace in the national consciousness. A cannabis 
law reform activist might get on the primetime news, but they would 
be lucky to get more than a few seconds of exposure.
For this reason, local media is often a better target. Unless the 
cannabis law reform movement can get a hundred thousand people 

into the streets, the local media is likely to provide a more realistic 
avenue for mass attention. This can sometimes happen if the local 
media find out about a human interest story that might be of interest 
to their audience.
What must be avoided is for any member to take on an antagonistic 
approach to the media. If the media ignores a candidate or does not 
print a letter, this is probably because they have decided that there is 
something more interesting on. It is not past of a vast conspiracy 
intended to deny the cannabis law reform movement their time in the 
sun. If the media can be given a reason to care, they will start caring, 
and they will care most about what will help them sell the 
advertising that is their main revenue stream. If an activist comes out 
and accuses the media of corruption and bias, that candidate will be 
suffocated with silence.
Some Notes on Viral Marketing
The idea of viral marketing is that awareness of a subject or product 
increases exponentially and achieves saturation within a short period 
of time. The fact that there are far more avenues available to the 
modern marketer means that there is a much better chance of 
something going viral in the public consciousness. Someone might 
read about a story on the party website, tell their friends at work the 
next day, who all link to the story on their Facebook pages, where all 
their friends read it. If a story is deemed interesting enough it can 
spread very fast in this manner.
There are really two marketing approaches: to go wide or to go deep. 
To go wide means to reach out to as many people as possible, and to 
go deep means to heavily influence those people that are reached. 
Ideally a marketer would like to do both, and anyone putting together 
a cannabis law reform movement must believe that they will succeed 
if only they could get enough people on board.
If a message goes wide on a medium such as Facebook or Twitter, 
and if it includes an avenue through which people can come back to 
the party webpage, it can also go deep. The party website should be 

comprehensive enough so that anyone who is interested in cannabis 
law reform can read about an area of it that they find interesting 
enough to share with someone else. Unless the party controls a 
media machine it is hard to know in advance which issue has the best 
chance of making an impact; it is best, therefore, to develop the 
website as far as possible.
Use Media in Synergy
If an activist uses a form of media to get the attention of even one 
person, it is important that that person be told where they can access 
further media should they wish to. The easiest way to do this is to 
make a reference to the party website, because if a person knows the 
party URL they can find out almost anything else they need to know 
about party organisation or policy.
The other way to do this is to ensure that, wherever possible, media 
created by the party for informational purposes offers merchandise 
for sale. If it costs ten cents to print a pamphlet, and that pamphlet 
offers information and propaganda as well as the opportunity to buy 
a t-shirt for twenty dollars of which ten is profit, then a purchase rate 
of one percent or better will allow all of the pamphlets to be funded 
by t-shirt sales.
Cannabis Terminology and Etiquette
No matter which medium is used, when arguing for cannabis law 
reform it is important to be precise, to be clearly understood and to 
be persuasive. In achieving any of these things it is necessary to use 
the correct terminology. Cannabis terminology is often vague and 
inaccurate for the reason that prohibitionists have appropriated words 
and have framed the cannabis debate in certain terms. Being correct 
in this regard will make the message clearer and will open people's 
minds to be more receptive of it.
Never use the phrase “alcohol and drugs.” Not only is this phrase 
redundant (alcohol is, of course, a drug), but it is a stock phrase of 
the establishment when it wishes to paint cannabis as if it belongs in 

in a different, more dangerous, class to alcohol. If this phrase is used 
by a second party in conversation, an activist should point out that it 
is inaccurate and even stupid.
Likewise, try not to use the term “marijuana.” Although many 
activists use it as part of the phrase “medical marijuana”, this is only 
for the alliteration effect and it is otherwise generally avoided. This 
is because, in the early days of prohibition, cannabis opponents 
focused the public attention on “marijuana” so as to associate it with 
the Mexican manual labourers who were feared and despised by 
much of the population (or, at least, the elements of it receptive to 
arguments for cannabis prohibition). “Cannabis” is the scientific 
term for the plant and as such carries much less in the way of 
connotation.
Having said this, it is foolish to get too hung up on what words may 
be used and which may not. In any cannabis law reform movement 
there will be people who identify with certain terms and other who 
see them as pejorative. The best rule is to let it slide: we are fighting 
a civil rights war and telling people how to speak their own language 
will not help. The prohibitionists would love to see cannabis law 
reform activists argue over whether cannabis users should be called 
“stoners” or not, and every hour spent arguing about it is an hour less 
spent on recruitment and fundraising.
Likewise, no-one wins from rigidly enforced rules of etiquette that 
go beyond conventional social norms such as no stealing, killing etc. 
Many a chapter has been destroyed by some blowhard getting on 
their high horse about whether joints are passed to the left or to the 
right. Let it slide. Always keep in mind that every argument within 
the cannabis law reform movement is paid for in solidarity.

PART TWO: A DISCUSSION OF 
CANNABIS LAW REFORM RELATED 
ARGUMENTS
The art of winning votes is nothing more than applied psychology. 
There is enough material about psychology to fill several libraries, 
but some of it is more crucial than others and will be discussed here. 
This part of the book describes how action continues once the 
structure of the movement has been created.
The focus of this part of the book is on the multitudes of one-on-one 
contact sessions that activists will inevitably have with neutrals or 
supporters in order to get them to become more active. The 
movement can only be a success if it uses the infrastructure 
described in the first part of this book to persuade individuals to vote 
for cannabis law reform. As other political movements have shown, 
elections are won person by person, much as wars are won yard by 
yard.
This part of the book discusses what activists need to consider once 
they have made the decision to raise the profile and support of the 
party to the point where it is rewarded by voters. A thorough 
understanding of this section also has the potential to make any 
action taken in the media much more effective.
The Purpose of Arguing in Favour of Cannabis Law Reform
In accordance with the objectives of any cannabis law reform 
movement, the purpose of making a case for cannabis law reform is 
to gain support for it. This might have the intended effect of making 
a member into an activist, a supporter into a member, or a neutral 
party into a supporter. The core principle here is that any action that 
raises support for the movement will gradually move the party into a 
place where it can win (or at least achieve its objectives in) an 
election.

Because humans think, and because much of this thought occurs 
below a conscious level, there are essentially three ways that support 
can be raised. A person can be informed of something they didn't 
know, or they can be informed that something they thought they 
knew is false, or they can be so impressed by the activist that they 
elect to support them without necessarily being intellectually 
persuaded.
If an election is far away, it is relatively more important to convert 
members to activists. The earlier this is done the more time the 
activist will have to put systems into place, and because work done 
by activists tends to have an exponential effect, it will become more 
effective the earlier it is started. If an election is close, it is relatively 
more important to convert neutrals to supporters (assuming that 
supporters will vote). This is because little can be done to make 
people into effective activists if an election is close and a vote is still 
much better than nothing.
The simple rule is: persuade people to be as active as possible, and 
do this as early as possible.
The Basics of the Psychology of Persuasion
Activists must never forget that, when arguing the case for cannabis 
law reform, their objective is to attract votes. It is not to defeat the 
case of the prohibitionists. It is not to espouse the wonders of 
cannabis. It is not to abuse the politicians, police or business 
interests. It may not even be necessary to tell the truth (this is 
discussed in detail below).
The truth is that a person's decision on whom to vote for is dependent 
on a far broader range of factors than the intellectual arguments 
behind that party and its policies. Ultimately, in order to persuade 
someone to vote for the cannabis law reform party they must be 
convinced that it is in their personal benefit to do so. Even in cases 
where an argument for improving society through cannabis law 
reform is made, if society would not be improved in a way that 

accords with that person's own values they will not support it. It is 
important to remember that, as voting populations become wealthier, 
they vote less on their wallet and more on their values.
No matter how much a person can be convinced that it is their best 
interest to vote for cannabis law reform, casting a vote depends on 
more than this. It is taken for granted that readers of this handbook 
live in some kind of representative democracy. This means that 
people will vote for people like them, or at least people who they 
believe will care about them. This is the point at which image 
becomes crucial. If an activist destroys the case of the 
prohibitionists, but does so in a sneering and arrogant manner, they 
might lose votes. A person insecure about their educational level will 
not be impressed by a lengthy dissection of his government's 
behaviour as it relates to international law and the United Nations.
If an activist can present an argument that appeals to a person's better 
nature, and at the same time appear to be someone that that person 
would like to have a beer (or maybe a joint) with, then they will have 
an excellent chance of success. Even if these methods fail, most 
people can see the raw self-interest in some kind of cannabis law 
reform.
Intellectual versus Emotional Persuasion
People can be persuaded to support cannabis law reform through one 
of two means. They can be persuaded intellectually, with reference to 
research, facts and figures, or they can be persuaded emotionally. 
Each method has advantages and disadvantages, and a time and 
place.
The advantage with intellectual persuasion is that if you have a better 
case than the opposition, you will win. Compared to emotional 
persuasion, intellectual persuasion also has the advantage of being 
permanent. The major disadvantage is that intellectual persuasion is 
not very motivating. An activist can convince someone that there is a 
case for cannabis law reform - but so what? If the person being 
persuaded is not at least motivated to vote, the efforts are wasted. 

The other major disadvantage is that intellectual persuasion is slow. 
Someone might want to take time to consider the points an activist 
has made or to research them further, and this could take weeks, 
months or longer.
The advantage with emotional persuasion is that it is fast, and that it 
is motivating. A person subject to this will pay much closer attention 
to how the argument is made, rather than what the argument is. The 
crucial disadvantage is that it is volatile. If a person only agrees with 
the case for cannabis law reform if they are feeling a certain emotion, 
persuasion will only be effective as long as that emotion is 
maintained. Another disadvantage is that not all emotions can be 
manipulated. If a person is against cannabis law reform because they 
absolutely despise cannabis users, little can be done to turn them into 
a voter for cannabis law reform.
The general rule is, the further away an election, the greater the 
advantage in focusing on intellectual arguments. Someone persuaded 
by the intellectual arguments for reform is more likely to become a 
dependable, long-term agitator for change than someone who just 
gets fired up with no way of directing their anger (other than voting).
In practice, a concerted effort to persuade someone to support 
cannabis law reform will involve both intellectual and emotional 
arguments. In many cases, an activist must first win the intellectual 
argument and then appeal to emotions; there is little point in 
motivating someone to vote if they do not vote for you.
The Spectrum of Support and Persuasion Style
Arguing in favour of cannabis law reform will have objectives that 
are dependent on where the target already is on the spectrum of 
activists < members < supporters < neutrals.
Someone who is already an activist does not need to hear intellectual 
arguments for cannabis law reform (unless the idea is to suggest 
arguments that they can use themselves). They are already 
committed. Intellectual arguments will not shift them. What is crucial 

is that they are motivated to take action on behalf of the movement. 
To this end they should be targeted with emotional arguments.
Members and supporters of the movement are in similar categories, 
but are open to both forms of persuasion. They might not be activists 
because they are not completely convinced of the intellectual 
argument for reform. They might not be activists because they are 
insufficiently motivated.
Neutrals are in a different category. Arguments to their emotions 
might be seen as manipulative or dishonest. Emotional appeals to the 
damage caused to cannabis users might be ineffective for the simple 
reason that the neutral might not care about cannabis users. The 
range of neutrals is very broad. Some of them may be cannabis users 
who did not intend to vote for the party because they did not know 
that it existed. Some of them may actually despise cannabis users.
Once a person makes the decision to support the cannabis law reform 
movement, a watershed is crossed. At this point, arguments to 
emotions will elicit more support than intellectual ones. The activist 
will have to judge when this point is reached, but it generally occurs 
when the person declares that they will vote for the party.
The Message Must be Tailored
What is central to any effort to gather support for cannabis law 
reform is that the arguments put forward for it are tailored to the 
audience. A struggling family of four might be very interested to hear 
that the savings from enacting cannabis law reform could be used to 
reduce taxes, especially if they are consumption taxes. Someone 
young and middle-class might be more interested in hearing that 
cannabis law reform is a good way of reducing government 
interference in people's lives, and a bikie might just want to give the 
middle finger to The Man.
Generally, the more individualistic a person is the more receptive 
they will be to arguments from economics, and the more social a 
person is the more receptive they will be to arguments from 

humanitarianism. Having said this, when it comes to cannabis law 
reform most people are receptive to both or neither. The latter two 
sections of this part of the book discuss individual arguments and the 
type of people who might be most influenced by them.
The Image Must be Tailored
Equally as important as the message is the image. Subconsciously, 
every voter is aware that they live in a representative democracy and 
most will not choose to be represented by a hippie with a massive, 
unkempt beard and soup-stained clothing, no matter how eloquently 
he puts an argument forward. Although cannabis users are frequently 
negatively stereotyped, this can actually work to the activist's 
advantage if they can display an image that counters this, because 
once a person accepts that their stereotypes are not accurate they will 
naturally wonder where else they could have been wrong - and the 
activist is right there to tell them.
It is vital that party officers in the public eye appear unobjectionable 
to a majority of people. This does not mean that they must be cookie-
cutter corporate clones with no personality, but if an activist presents 
themselves so that a neutral might have little concern about inviting 
the activist into their home, much of the battle is won in an instant. 
To this end it can be an advantage for party officials to appear in 
suits, with a formal shirt and a tie, and tidy shoes. It is also good to 
avoid obvious signs of a failure or disinclination to fit into society, 
like facial tattoos, missing front teeth or scraggly dirty hair. There 
will always be an element of “fuck the system” in any cannabis law 
reform movement but it should be remembered that promoting such 
an attitude aggressively will turn many people away.
If an activist is seeking representation in the legislative body, then 
they are effectively auditioning for a job. The basic rule here is to 
present themselves as they would for a job interview. 
The Perception of Honesty
For a potential voter to be open to persuasion from a cannabis law 

reform activist, the voter has to trust the activist. If the voter believes 
or suspects that the activist is lying, whether directly or by omission, 
no argument can be successful. To achieve this, two ends must be 
met.
The first and most obvious is that the activist must not lie, at least not 
if there is any chance that the voter knows it's a lie. If the voter 
knows the activist is not telling the truth then this will send the 
movement backwards. It must be emphasised here that it is the 
perception of honesty which is important. The activist should avoid 
making claims that sound untrue if these cannot be proven - even if 
they are absolutely true. Claiming that cannabis instantly cures 
cancer, that it is the most wonderful plant of them all, that it is only 
illegal due to a multigenerational conspiracy of government, bankers, 
media, mental health workers, industrialists and communists: none of 
this will persuade the average voter to support cannabis law reform. 
At all times it is best to stick to documented facts, and to give any 
sceptics a source that they can research themselves.
The second and more difficult of the two is that the party must get its 
facts straight before it can try to persuade people. The party must at 
least agree on how many cannabis users there are and how much 
money it costs for the justice system to attack them. It does the 
movement no good for one member to claim that there are a hundred 
thousand cannabis users in a certain area and for another to claim 
there are a million. In many cases the government itself will have 
commissioned a recent drug survey that attempted to establish how 
many cannabis users there are in the country. If this is the case, data 
from this survey should be used.
The party's Information Officer should keep records of any statistic 
or fact that the party believes will be frequently used. They ought to 
find the most authoritative source they can, as long as this is not 
biased against the objectives of the movement, and make sure that all 
activists are aware of and reference this source. If the Ministry of 
Justice publishes official figures on how much it costs to incarcerate 
one prisoner for a year, make sure everyone knows it. If there are 
official figures on how many cannabis prisoners there are, make sure 

everyone knows that.
The Basics of Building a Rapport
Very few people form political opinions based on cold reason. If you 
can make a person think that you genuinely like them and care about 
them they will be far more receptive to your message. Crucial to 
achieving either is to make sure that the activist treats every person 
with respect. The younger the activist is, the more important it is that 
they do this, because people will be more sensitive to disrespect if 
they speak with someone younger than themselves.
If a person is voicing their misgivings with cannabis law reform or 
what they believe the effects of it will be, do not interrupt them. 
Even if they say their piece and walk off, this is preferable to 
escalating an argument into a dominance contest. Hear them out, and 
then respond in a way that makes it clear that you heard them: “It 
sounds like you have misgivings about X” is a great way to show 
that you have listened and that you have understood. If they then 
think their position is respected they will be far more likely to listen 
to and respect your counterargument.
When making a counterargument it is important to make clear that 
the listener is not made to feel that they formed their opinion because 
they were too stupid, ignorant, misguided or brainwashed to properly 
grasp the issue. If you make a claim based on figures, use recent 
figures so as to imply that most people are not aware of the truth. If 
you want to refer to the effects of some cannabis law reform policy 
elsewhere in the world, say “Many people don't know that X.” If 
someone comes up with a bad idea, say “That has been suggested in 
the past, and the problem with it is X.”
Even if your attempt to persuade them to support the cause fails, 
many people will remember their impression of you even if they 
forget everything you actually said. If a person mentions to a friend 
that they met a nice, polite and thoughtful person from the Cannabis 
Party that day, this can be just as good for achieving party objectives 
as defeating a prohibitionist in verbal combat.

How not to Win and Still Lose
Some of the situations that a cannabis law reform activist will find 
themselves in are like koans. The correct answer or response to a 
question may not actually answer the question at all. If a grieving 
mother tells a story of a lost child and asks how cannabis law reform 
would have helped, it might be best to suggest the tragedy not 
become politicised. If a dignified senior citizen wants to win the 
argument, it might be best to let him. He will never tell his friends 
that he was bested in argument by a Cannabis Party candidate but he 
might tell them that he met one and found them polite and respectful, 
unlike the other politicians.
It has to be kept in mind that the mentality the cannabis law reform 
activist is fighting against is probably insane. This means that anyone 
undecided about whether cannabis should be legal or not is at least 
occasionally insane. The practical application of this point is that you 
can beat your opposition in an argument and still lose support if you 
send out the wrong emotional message. Many voters will vote for a 
guy who they would like to have a beer with, which is something to 
be considered if you like to quote studies and figures. On the flipside 
of that, many voters will not vote for a candidate if they consider that 
candidate of a lower social class, which is something to be 
considered if you like to use words not in the Queen's public 
vocabulary. It is possible that the best image is one of a person who 
fluked their way to the top, but every culture will have its own idea 
of a hero.
The Bush Doctrine in Cannabis Law Reform
Sometimes the most decisive way to demolish an opponent in an 
argument is to counter their arguments before they are made. 
Cannabis law reform activists snigger when a character in The 
Simpsons screams “Won't somebody think of the children?”, because 
a form of this question is asked many times. Likewise, many a hippie 
is tired of hearing people singing “Get a Haircut and Get a Real Job.”

There are two main ways that prohibitionists will try and destroy the 
image of a cannabis law reform activist. The first is to paint the 
activist as a danger to children and young people, and the second is 
to paint them as a useless bludger.
A good pre-emptive strike, therefore, will establish to the audience 
that the activist is a responsible and hard-working person. The ideal 
would be to lead with a story about how they were on a morning run 
and saw a twelve-year old push money through the wall of a gang 
house and get cannabis in return. Having established that the activist 
is responsible and hard-working, all that remains is to convince the 
audience that cannabis prohibition does not work.
Another application of the Bush Doctrine is to promote a “with us or 
against us” mentality that abhors all subtlety and shades of grey in 
the cannabis issue. An example of this is to accuse everyone who 
does not vote for a cannabis law reform party to be happy to see 
people go to prison for cannabis offences. Doing this is really 
playing with fire and, as such, care needs to be taken that it is the 
correct move.
How to Explain the Status Quo
Usually, the first question that neutrals will put to cannabis law 
reform activists is: “If cannabis is as harmless as you say it is, why is 
it illegal?” This is a difficult question to answer because it could be 
asked for a lot of reasons and the answer to this question involves a 
number of factors, many of which sound preposterous. The truth is 
that the power elites might wish to keep cannabis illegal for a wide 
variety of reasons that themselves have differing motivations. With a 
view to winning support for cannabis law reform, it is a good idea, at 
least initially, to give reasons that suggest the least amount of 
conspiracy.
Probably the most suitable answer is to say that cannabis was made 
illegal due to an overreaction by conservative forces which saw it as 
a mentally destructive drug that drove people criminally insane. 
Cannabis users were supposedly linked to a number of crimes of 

violence and property and it has taken until now for science to 
establish that such behaviour is not caused, or even facilitated by, 
cannabis. Absurdities such as the propaganda film Reefer Madness 
have been responsible for cannabis acquiring the reputation it has.
Another relatively uncontroversial answer is to say that, because 
cannabis use first made an impression on the cultural consciousness 
of the West due to its use by ethnic minorities (in particular Mexican 
farm workers and blacks in the Southern American states) it was 
associated with them, and existing racial prejudice conspired to ban 
it in an effort to give police an excuse to victimise non-white people. 
The belief that supplying cannabis was a tactic used by ethnic 
minority males to drug white women into a state where they could 
not resist a sexual attack has been given as an argument for cannabis 
prohibition.
To move a little further in the direction of conspiracy, it has been 
shown that much of the opposition to cannabis initially came in the 
form of forestry and farming interests who saw cannabis, in 
particular the hemp form of it, as a threat to their capital investment. 
Because hemp can produce an incredible array of products from a 
given land area in a limited time, it had the potential to upset the 
market in many industries and was made illegal by politicians in 
collusion with business interests. Evidence supporting this theory 
includes the fact that hemp is not psychoactive (at least not if it is 
smoked) and that farmers were encouraged to grow hemp to aid the 
Allied war effort in World War II. Related to this is the idea that 
cannabis prohibition, however it began, is maintained in deference to 
the alcohol and tobacco lobbies, who stand to lose tremendously if 
an alternative to their products became legal.
Even more conspiratorial is the suggestion that cannabis, given the 
breadth of its use, has been made illegal to give police an excuse to 
unjustifiably search, detain and seize the assets of anyone they do not 
like, under the pretext that the arresting officer smelt cannabis. 
Related to this is the idea that cannabis is illegal so that government 
intelligence agencies can sell it in order to build up a “black budget” 
which can then be used to fund illegal actions away from the 

oversight of any auditor.
Perhaps the ultimate conspiracy theory is that cannabis is illegal 
because it strips away the psychological conditioning that all citizens 
are exposed to through the education system and through commercial 
advertising. This view maintains that much of government action is 
taken to brainwash people into being highly productive, consumerist 
wage slaves, and that smoking cannabis enables a person to see 
through the lies and stand up for themselves. Essentially this view 
suggests that cannabis is illegal because its use makes people harder 
to control.
There is probably some truth behind all of these explanations, and it 
requires a thorough reading of Jack Herer's The Emperor Wears No 
Clothes to get an adequate grasp on them. The important thing for 
the activist is to exercise their discretion as to which one of them best 
suits their efforts, given the person they are talking to. Any neutral 
person will likely have certain prejudices about cannabis users that 
must be defeated, and if an activist mentions the more extreme 
conspiracy theories - even if they are absolutely correct - they might 
appear to confirm these prejudices.
Countering Disinformation
What makes arguing for cannabis law reform difficult is that 
cannabis is a subject that everyone knows a lot about, but most of 
what they know is wrong. Because of the taboo nature of drugs, there 
is a vacuum of information that inevitably gets filled by myth and 
prejudice. Because the cannabis prohibition machine is the classic 
example of a government policy that has failed to achieve its stated 
objectives but which continues nonetheless, and which at every stage 
must justify its continuation, the amount of bullshit it spews out must 
be countered before any progress can be made.
The single biggest problem that cannabis law reform activists face 
when discussing cannabis prohibition with members of the public is 
that people hate the idea that someone has deceived them, and will 
become angry if this suggestion is made. Many, if not most, people 

genuinely believe that the government is a servant of the people and 
therefore everything it says about the harmful effects of cannabis are 
true: “they couldn't say it if it wasn't true.”
Because of this mentality, it is often a poor idea to lead with a 
suggestion that the government is lying, or that prohibitionists have 
been suckered (even though this is exactly how it is). The 
government may or may not be a servant of the people, but in any 
case, most people are at least aware of a situation in which the 
government has lied. A cannabis law reform activist can mention 
Watergate, or the leadup to the Iraq War, and use this to test how 
naive the person they are speaking to is. If that person concedes that 
the government is not a dispenser of iron-cast truths, this will form 
an intellectual beachhead from which an attack on prohibition can be 
made.
The cannabis law reform activist should at all times speak as if they 
are in the same boat as the person they are talking to, i.e. “it's us 
against the system.” They should avoid statements such as “the 
government has lied to you”, and should instead use “the government 
has lied to us.” Likewise it's best to emphasise that the government is 
wasting “our” tax money on prohibition. It can be very effective, if 
someone makes an argument for prohibition, to begin rebuttal with 
“yes, that's what I used to think as well, until I discovered that the 
government was lying to us. Then I found out that the truth is...” It 
will make the subject of the discussion feel like less of a sucker if the 
cannabis law reform activist makes clear that they too fell for the 
same lie when it was first presented.
With this achieved, it becomes possible for the cannabis law reform 
activist, once they have told someone the truth, to massage that 
person's self-esteem by suggesting that that person, having been 
intelligent enough to also see through the lies, is now one of the 
enlightened ones and is therefore in a better position than the rest of 
the population. This is true, and if a person can be persuaded that it is 
the truth they will become far more likely to spread the message of 
cannabis law reform to others that they know.

When to Push On, and When to Give Up
It is important to take things as far as they will go until resistance is 
met. Because time and money are limited, maximum advantage has 
to be sought from every face-to-face encounter. 
What this means in practice is that the cannabis law reform activist 
ought to realise that anyone who agrees with the cannabis law reform 
argument is a potential voter, and every voter is a potential member 
or activist. 
Although it is easy to believe that, because of the numbers of people 
affected, cannabis law reform is one of the modern world's foremost 
human rights issues, many people will never have considered it and 
some of those will not be receptive to it under any circumstances. 
The activist must be able to understand where their efforts to gather 
support are best utilised. Part of this is knowing when they are 
putting the argument to a person who will never be persuaded.
If a neutral appears to have formed their opinion on cannabis law on 
an assumption that rests on emotion and not reason, it might not be 
worth trying to persuade them otherwise. The fact is that many 
people are simply terrified of cannabis law reform and would expect 
to see the streets descend into anarchy if it ever came about. If a 
person appears to believe that the social fabric would disintegrate if 
cannabis prohibition was lifted, or if they go into a rant about lazy, 
bludging hippies, or if they use the phrase “devil's weed”, it's time to 
just walk away. Likewise, if a person appears to simply not like you 
from the instant you initiate contact then don't waste your time. 
Thank them politely for listening and wish them a good day, without 
any snide or sarcastic remark. You can't win 'em all, and you don't 
have to.

1. ARGUMENTS FOR CANNABIS LAW 
REFORM
Prohibition Doesn't Work
Essentially, all arguments for cannabis law reform are a form of this 
argument. Even if an activist cannot conclusively demonstrate that a 
certain position on the legalisation spectrum is superior (and, to be 
fair, it is hard to use real-world examples), it can always be claimed 
that cannabis prohibition has failed to achieve any sensible objective.
The key tactic to use here is to examine the claims that 
prohibitionists make and to demolish them one after the other. 
Usually, a person in favour of prohibition will claim that it is 
intended to help one or more particular groups of people, and 
because of this the best counterargument is to show that it does not.
Cannabis prohibitionists make a myriad of claims as to the supposed 
benefits of their policy. Although this attack from a hundred 
directions has shown itself to be historically effective at swaying the 
balance of public support, it does provide the activist with 
considerable ammunition with which to destroy their case. It means 
that the activist can attack where the prohibitionists are weakest. 
Despite this, it is advisable for the activist to go for full spectrum 
dominance of the cannabis issue. The truth is that there isn't a single 
argument that can be made for cannabis prohibition that cannot be 
countered to some degree.
It is important to note here that a majority of the arguments put 
forward in favour of cannabis prohibition will, paradoxically, point 
to harms only caused by cannabis use under a system of prohibition.
The Market Needs to be Regulated
Cannabis prohibitionists spin an image of the cannabis industry 
being kept in check by the benevolent and omnipresent eye of law 

enforcement. The truth is that the cannabis industry is closer to 
anarchy than most other industries of its size (some arguments below 
will expand on this point). There is no quality control, there is no tax 
revenue, and there is no way of knowing what the actual effects of 
cannabis use are. 
Once the public becomes aware of the level of chaos within the 
cannabis industry, few of them will disagree that the market needs to 
be regulated. Should a cannabis law reform activist decide that the 
words “legalise” or “decriminalise” carry too much stigma, they can 
use the word “regulate.”
People are naturally afraid of chaos and for this reason the word 
“regulate” will appeal strongly to them. The converse is also true. 
Sometimes a problem can be blamed on cannabis prohibition, but 
other times it is better to blame it on an “unregulated cannabis 
market.” Using phrases like this will also legitimise the cannabis law 
reform effort by framing the problem in a mainstream vocabulary.
Calling for a regulated cannabis market also pre-empts one of the 
prohibitionists' most emotive arguments: that cannabis users are 
irresponsible and enacting cannabis law reform would be negligence 
on the part of the government. If the problem is the unregulated 
cannabis market, then the government has the responsibility to 
introduce regulation.
This point is actually so good that it can be used to recover from 
almost any position, and will work on almost anyone no matter how 
closed-minded. No matter how extreme the social effects cannabis is 
accused of having, a case can be made for regulation being a better 
approach.
Freedom
Probably the biggest of all the arguments to self interest in favour of 
cannabis law reform is that of individual freedom. Ultimately, any 
discussion about where the actions of a state infringe on the rights of 
the individual is about this. A person does not have to be a libertarian 

to agree that an individual should be the ultimate arbiter of what 
chemicals go into their body.
Using this argument requires that a person can be persuaded that they 
have the right to use cannabis. Because establishing this is 
complicated and involves a number of assumptions, it is often better 
to argue that the government does not have the right to prevent 
individuals from using cannabis, and let that person draw the obvious 
conclusion.
A very large proportion of neutrals will be receptive to the message 
that the government is far too intrusive and when they are they will 
often agree that cannabis prohibition is an example of this. This can 
be a way of broaching the subject of cannabis law reform in a 
conversation about something else. If someone makes a disparaging 
comment about the nanny state or socialism there is a good chance 
that they will agree that cannabis prohibition is none of the 
government's business.
The difficulty with using freedom as an argument for cannabis law 
reform is that it is a very vague concept that cannot be quantified. No 
one can put a dollar value on a given amount of freedom, and some 
people want it more than others. A prohibitionist might claim that 
cannabis prohibition saves a certain amount of money each year, but 
no one can say if the loss of freedom is worth more than the 
supposed economic gains. In a given situation and for a given 
person, the dollar value of freedom could be anywhere from zero to 
infinite.
The advantage with using freedom as an argument is that almost 
everyone can identify with it. Almost every child has had the 
experience of being told by a parent that they were not allowed to  do 
something because “I said so.” If an adult can recall feeling angry 
upon hearing this as a child, they might become angry again if a 
parallel was drawn between that and the government's current 
attitude towards cannabis.
Because the freedom argument is almost entirely an emotional one, it 

will be effective if it causes the listener to feel angry at the 
government. For this reason, the activist ought to use it on people 
who are already angry, suspicious or dissatisfied with the 
government. Because it is an emotional argument it is hard to 
persuade people that they should value freedom more, so if they 
appear not to it is probably a good idea to try a different tack.
Libertarians, the self-employed, anyone who appears rebellious 
(bikers, punks etc.), young adults, atheists or any other freethinker 
will generally find this argument persuasive. Nanny statists, the 
religious, social democrats, parents of teenagers and the elderly 
generally will not.
God Put Cannabis Here
Any cannabis law reform activist will quickly learn that one of the 
strongest forces behind prohibition is organised religion. In almost 
every society in the world, it is the religious who most aggressively 
force others to think along certain lines, and who advocate the most 
vicious penalties for what they see as misbehaviour. Because the 
religious are aware that smoking cannabis allows people to see 
through the lies accepted by society, and because the religious are 
one of the biggest groups of liars, cannabis is a natural enemy to 
them.
Despite this unfortunate reality, the holy book of the Christians states 
that cannabis prohibition goes against the will of God. Genesis 1:29 
reads: “And God said, Behold, I have given you every herb bearing 
seed, which is upon the face of all the earth, and every tree, in which 
is the fruit of a tree yielding seed; to you it shall be for meat.” Given 
that Christian belief is based on the Bible, it is hard for any Christian 
to argue for cannabis prohibition and to also stay consistent with 
scripture. 
However, the ability of Christians to believe two contradictory things 
simultaneously is legendary, and for this reason many will reject 
arguments for cannabis law reform even though such arguments are 
supported by the Bible. If an activist finds themselves in this 

situation it might be best to withdraw and fight somewhere else. 
Cannabis is a Religious and Spiritual Sacrament
This argument will appear blasphemous to the more aggressive and 
established religious traditions in the Western world. It is clear, 
however, that a number of other religious traditions derive 
considerable value from cannabis use.
For a Western audience the most obvious example of this is 
Rastafarianism, who consider cannabis to be the “Tree of Life” 
mentioned in the Bible. Many of the religions of India also have a 
place for the effects of the cannabis plant.
Even people who are not steeped in the mindset of a particular 
religion have found a spiritual value in using cannabis. Many feel 
that the cannabis high awakens a part of the mind that is not 
materialistic, and as a consequence they come to understand the 
interrelatedness of all things, which leads to a greater connection to 
the Earth and the things in it. Perhaps this reveals a clue as to why 
cannabis is illegal in the first place, but nonetheless it is considered a 
basic human right in Western society that people have freedom of 
religion, and therefore there should be no legal restrictions on how a 
person's religious sentiments are discovered and expressed.
It's hard to know who would be persuaded by this argument. 
Followers of most traditional religious practices will generally resist 
the idea that truth can be found through smoking cannabis, for the 
obvious reason that doing so will reveal their own truth as lies. This 
argument might carry the most weight amongst those of a New Age 
persuasion.
Cannabis is an Established Crop I
Many people who are not part of the cannabis culture do not 
understand how big the cannabis industry is, even in places where it 
is illegal. The image in the popular consciousness seems to be of 
shady gang members who grow a few plants in a mountain park 

somewhere and, through a convoluted procedure designed to avoid 
the police, sell it to the occasional trembling, wretched drug addict. 
The truth is, of course, that cannabis is churned out by the pound and 
only a very small percentage of the market ever comes to the 
attention of law enforcement.
In fact, the cannabis industry is already so large that cannabis is the 
number one cash crop in over a dozen states of the USA and in many 
other places. Considering the volumes of other foodstuffs produced 
by these places, this means that there are massive amounts of 
cannabis already on the black market.
This argument essentially states that the cannabis industry is so large 
that it cannot be exterminated, and because of this it deserves its 
place at the table as a legitimate major industry. It is hard to estimate 
what the size of the industry would be in a system without 
prohibition, because there are not many real world examples to point 
to. It is fair to assume that the hemp industry alone has the potential 
to rival the largest of the others, to say nothing of the use of the 
psychoactive components of cannabis in medicines and recreation.
This argument may be of little use in garnering votes, but it will 
speak to the politicians and the business interests who are both on the 
lookout for new economic potential and have far more influence than 
the average cannabis law reform voter.
Cannabis is an Established Crop II
This is a variation of the “you'll never get rid of it anyway” argument 
described above. The difference is that this argument refers to the 
place of cannabis in the national culture, not in its economy.
Although the figures change with every new survey (and the 
cannabis law reform activist must always keep up to date), it cannot 
be denied that there are multitudes of people smoking cannabis in 
our societies. It is so established that Hollywood films are made in 
which the entire plot revolves around cannabis, and few are the 
adults who would not recognise the sight or smell of the cannabis 

plant.
Making this argument is the same as saying that the War on Drugs 
has been lost, or at least is going so badly that no victory is possible. 
This is true, but this point must always be followed with an argument 
that cannabis law reform is better, otherwise its effect is wasted.
This argument comes with a booster. Cannabis is already entrenched 
in the national consciousness, and it is even more so with the 
younger generation. Because they will themselves become older, and 
the next generation will likely be even more cannabis friendly, the 
tide of history is clearly in favour of cannabis law reform.
This argument will work best on people who are realistic and 
pragmatic. The main advantage of it is that it will appeal to people 
who are not cannabis users themselves.
Effectiveness of the Police
Cannabis prohibition ties up a large amount of police time and 
resources that could be better spent fighting serious crime. The 
beauty of this argument is that it can be used in reference to any 
situation in which the police have failed to respond to a call in time, 
or where a police investigation has failed due to lack of resources. If 
the activist has information about how many police hours are spent 
on a yearly basis enforcing prohibition, these can be given.
A consequence of cannabis prohibition is that cannabis users come to 
see the police as the enemy, and might not call them if they observe a 
crime being committed, for fear that any encounter with the police 
will lead to their own arrest. They are also far less likely to respond 
to a call for assistance that a police officer might make. If the police 
make a public request for information, anyone in possession of 
cannabis is much less likely to respond, even if they have 
information crucial to the investigation.
This argument could work on anyone, because most people have not 
considered the view of the police from the perspective of a cannabis 

user. Conservatives are usually happy to hear of any suggestion that 
increases the effectiveness of and respect for the police, and other 
people are likewise generally supportive of anything that makes it 
more difficult for actual criminals to get away with what they have 
done.
Effectiveness of the Prisons
Tied in very closely with the previous argument, cannabis 
prohibition costs every country considerable resources that are spent 
incarcerating cannabis offenders. Because prison sentences for 
cannabis offences are generally given to people who are not violent, 
considerable psychological damage is done by putting them in prison 
with those that are, which has related social costs. In many countries 
there is often a shortage of space in prisons. Because of this it can be 
suggested that repealing prohibition will allow the corrections 
system to avoid the necessity of releasing other prisoners early to 
make space for those convicted of cannabis offences
Related to the effectiveness of the prisons is that cannabis law reform 
would prevent cannabis users from being locked up in a place where 
they essentially are granted an education in how to commit crime. A 
person who is sent to prison for a cannabis offence may or may not 
be a criminal when they go in, but the chances are very high that they 
will be a criminal by the time they get out. While inside, not only 
will they develop a hatred for the justice system and those who work 
to enable it, but there is also a high chance that they will get recruited 
into a criminal gang, which makes it more likely that that person will 
turn to serious crime when they get out.
This argument will appeal to almost anyone, because both 
conservatives and social democrats will think less of cannabis 
prohibition if it can be argued that it makes people into criminals.
The Effect on Respect for the Law and for the Police
Many people are aware of the stupidity of cannabis prohibition. 
Unfortunately, because it is a law, any police officer who has sworn 

to uphold the law must act to enforce it. This has some sociological 
side-effects that do not help either citizens or the police. Anyone who 
does not believe that cannabis is a crime will experience three 
effects.
The first is a loss of respect for the police that enforce prohibition. To 
a cannabis user there is little difference between a police officer 
entering a home to arrest someone for possession of cannabis or for 
possession of a pack of cigarettes. Naturally this leads to outrage and 
eventually hatred towards law enforcement officers. In many other 
regards, the police are the citizen's first or second line of defence 
against criminal action, so for a person to lose faith in this is a 
tragedy. A consequence of this loss of respect is that upstanding 
citizens who would make excellent police officers might feel 
themselves unsuited for the profession because they cannot morally 
justify to themselves the need to arrest and imprison people who are 
only criminals because of a whim of the law. It should be noted here 
that police officers in the Netherlands do not have this problem and 
this is reflected in the much higher esteem in which they are held by 
the citizenry, especially the young.
The second is a loss of respect for the law itself. If all it takes for a 
police officer to enter someone's home and physically restrain them 
is for permission to be written in a law book, then a natural 
consequence is for people to question the validity of the law. If one 
law can be so blatantly unjust, why not others? Indeed, why not the 
legal system itself? Once a person has made the decision to violate 
laws relating to cannabis prohibition they have less reason to follow 
the others, because the justification for them will also fall under 
suspicion.
The third is a loss of respect for the entire political system. There are 
few words dirtier than “criminal”, because to commit crime is to 
behave so barbarically that one must be punished in order to 
maintain civil peace. In many Western countries this means that a 
majority of the population are criminals. Few of them, however, 
consider themselves criminals, because the vast majority are good 
people just trying to get through life.

This argument is best used on people of a conservative persuasion, 
because conservatives generally have more respect for the police and 
will be more unhappy to learn that others do not.
The Punishment Does Not Fit the Crime
A basic principle of any system of justice is that the severity of the 
punishment must be in proportion to the harm caused by the 
offending. Common assault is not punished as hard as doing grievous 
bodily harm to someone, which in turn is not punished as hard as 
murder. Without this principle in place, the citizenry lose faith in the 
justice system to deliver justice.
There is perhaps no other crime in which the punishment is more 
disproportionately severe than the range of cannabis offences (there 
cannot be if the net harm is nil), for the simple reason that cannabis 
is a crime without a victim. If a cannabis law reform activist 
monitors the newspapers in their area or country they will soon 
discover a case in which a crime of sex or violence resulted in a 
lesser punishment than was handed down in another case where only 
cannabis was involved. This is an excellent time to write a letter to 
the local paper pointing out the discrepancy. Cases are common in 
which a careless, dangerous or drunk driver kills a cyclist or a 
pedestrian and are given lighter sentences than the man in the 
previous court session was for growing a medicine.
A cannabis law reform activist in New Zealand, at being sentenced 
for growing a cannabis plant, told the judge “I would like to apply 
for restorative justice. I would like to apologise to the victim of my 
crime.” The courtroom tittered, but this simple statement laid bare 
the absurdity of the prohibition system. His punishment did not fit 
the crime; it could never have done because no crime had been 
committed.
This argument is best used on people who are already supporters of 
cannabis law reform, because the less of a crime someone considers 
cannabis use to be the more outrageous any penalty for it will appear. 

This will help to fire them up and make them more willing to take 
future action on behalf of cannabis law reform.
The Effect of Criminal Records is Disproportionate
This is related to the previous point, but deals not with the severity of 
a sentence but with the effects of a criminal conviction, even one that 
did not result in imprisonment. In most jurisdictions, a criminal 
conviction for a cannabis offence will stay on that individual's 
criminal record for the rest of their life. If they are arrested, tried and 
convicted of possession of cannabis at age 25, they will be forced to 
declare this, if asked, at age 55. This is despite the fact that many 
current politicians have admitted prior cannabis use, which, 
presumably, would have affected their political careers should it have 
resulted in a conviction.
There are a number of consequences to having a criminal record. A 
number of employers will not hire anyone with a criminal record no 
matter what that crime is. On top of this, many countries will not 
allow entry to anyone with a criminal record, which damages the 
potential of anyone self-employed. For young people, who make up 
the bulk of people charged with cannabis offences, a criminal 
conviction can result in massive loss of earning potential and 
productivity over the remainder of their life.
There is probably no mileage to be gained from further evidence that 
politicians are hypocrites, however there are many people who can 
be persuaded that a criminal conviction is an excessive punishment 
for possessing cannabis. The advantage of this argument is that it 
works on not only cannabis users, but anyone concerned with the 
welfare of a relation who is. The elderly (who vote in great 
numbers), if they have a grandchild who might be a cannabis user, 
can find a lot to agree with in this argument.
It is an Alternative to Booze
The basis of this argument is that, because people will take drugs in 
order to have a good time, it's best if they are able to take drugs that 

do less damage than others. Because alcohol has been shown to 
result in a considerable amount of violent crime, some of this could 
be avoided if people had access to cannabis instead. There are so 
many news reports of violent crime in which the police are quoted as 
saying “alcohol may have been involved” that it has become a cliché
The argument doesn't end at violent crime either; there are many 
work days lost because people are recovering from hangovers, and 
the physical effects of alcohol over time can be deadly due to causes 
such as liver and kidney disease (alcohol is a poison; cannabis is a 
medicine).
To some people this will be a very poor argument. As long as people 
see cannabis as a “hard drug” (a category that, for some reason, 
never includes alcohol) they will be appalled to hear an argument 
that people should be smoking it instead of drinking. In many cases, 
their line of reasoning will be “why should the government allow 
more dangerous substances instead of fewer?” If a person appears to 
think like this, it's probably best to write them off as a fascist and 
fight elsewhere.
Other Legal Drugs Have an Acceptable Level of Harm Which is 
Higher than that of Cannabis
The strength of this argument is in that it points out that our current 
drug laws are inconsistent. The main thrust of the prohibitionist 
argument is that cannabis is so dangerous that it must be made illegal 
as a disincentive, the logic being that the harms it causes are thereby 
reduced because of fewer people smoking it from fear of legal 
consequences.
Cannabis law reform activists can here point out that the harms done 
by alcohol and tobacco, not to mention pharmaceuticals, are 
considerably greater than those done by cannabis, and yet these 
harms are not considered enough to make those drugs illegal. It is 
estimated that tobacco alone kills over 400,000 Americans per year, 
and while it is harder to accurately measure the damage caused by 
alcohol it is certainly higher than that caused by cannabis.

Given that, in cases where cannabis prohibition has been relaxed, 
usage of cannabis has either stayed around the same or has gone 
down, it can be asked where the sense is in keeping cannabis illegal, 
at great cost, when society has already proven itself to be stable 
enough to absorb the damage done by other drugs?
An Ethnic Rights Perspective I
Many of the territories in which cannabis is illegal were conquered 
relatively recently by invaders from outside that territory. In most of 
these cases, the populations that previously dominated that territory 
still exist, and many of them do not accept the laws of the invaders.
Although the ethnic rights argument will appeal to few outside of the 
ethnicity in question, the basic thrust of this argument is that 
cannabis was not illegal according to the legal codes of many 
conquered peoples, and therefore anyone who follows these codes 
are not bound to observe cannabis prohibition.
In practice, it might be better to use this argument in a court of law 
than when agitating for cannabis law reform. Most native peoples of 
the New World can make an argument for the illegitimacy of the 
court, and in the likely event this fails can then go on to argue that 
the values of the culture in which they were raised and in which they 
live accepts cannabis use, the implication being that the court should 
respect this culture.
An argument that might have more traction amongst the majority 
population relates to the potential of the establishment to use 
cannabis prohibition as a weapon against minority populations. 
Although police officers generally do not have the right of discretion 
with regards to who they arrest and who they do not, in practice it is 
well known that it is common for police to let a white person off a 
cannabis charge when they would not do the same for a black person 
or a native. This explains why blacks and others make up a far higher 
proportion of cannabis arrests than their activity in cannabis culture 
would suggest. On top is this it is broadly known that white people 

get more lenient sentences than others when it comes to cannabis 
offences that do make it to court, partially because of fewer prior 
convictions and aggravating circumstances, but also because of 
institutional racism within the justice system.
For these reasons it can be argued that cannabis law reform would 
help enforce a state of racial equality before the law. This argument 
will appeal to ethnic minorities and social democrats more than 
anyone else. It also serves a probe argument: if an activist mentions 
this argument to a white person who dismisses it out of hand, 
implying through word or action that the fate of the underclass is of 
little importance to them, that person is very likely to give 
consideration to arguments about freedom and the economic cost of 
prohibition.
An Ethnic Rights Perspective II
This applies more to the native peoples of the New World than to 
anywhere else, although it could appeal to many ethnic groups across 
the world.
When the colonial empires of Europe attacked the peoples of the rest 
of the world, one of the first things they did was supply the natives 
with alcohol. It was known by the aggressors that alcohol would 
have a disintegrating effect on the cultures and peoples who were not 
used to it, and the natives who became addicted to it found 
themselves unable to resist further encroachment upon their 
territories.
The Europeans were, of course, used to alcohol: they had had access 
to it for thousands of years and the individuals amongst them who 
were most vulnerable to the worst effects of it had long since died 
out, leaving a population that was comparably resistant. It is known 
that people of European ancestry have enzymes within their bodies 
that make them less likely to succumb to alcoholism.
The natives of the New World have not had thousands of years to 
adapt to ingestion of alcohol, and a quick look at rates of alcoholism 

amongst the different ethnic groups of the New World shows this. 
Because most countries in the New World are dominated by white 
politicians, they are the ones who have decided that alcohol shall be 
legal and cannabis not, and this does not produce a level playing 
field for the individuals who can only access what is legal. 
Legalising cannabis would effectively be a truce in the chemical war 
that white people are conducting against the populations they have 
subjugated.
The difficulty with using this argument is that many people believe 
that the higher rates of alcoholism amongst native populations are 
because of a mental weakness or moral failing, and that these 
peoples therefore deserve what they get. Likewise, many leaders of 
native populations don't consider cannabis to be any better than 
alcohol, at least in part because they have also bought into the 
establishment propaganda. Still, it can be used when talking to 
members of native populations who are aware that white politicians 
are not to be trusted, which is all of them.
Cannabis Suits Some People Better than Alcohol Does
Anyone who has worked in a bar, or who has been to several parties 
amongst the same group of friends, will have become aware that a 
certain percentage of individuals cannot handle their liquor. Those 
who watch them get drunk are familiar with the feeling of dread that 
arises when they realise something stupid is about to be done. Some 
call it the 90/10 rule: 90 percent of drinkers are fine, but that last 10 
percent is responsible for 90 percent of the drunken crimes.
Some of the people in that 10 percent are simply idiots who will fly 
off the handle for any reason, drunk, stoned or sober, but many of 
them are people who would be better off smoking cannabis. The 
drunks who do the most damage are the bad-tempered, aggressive 
ones, and for them to have access to a drug that calmed them down 
and made them more passive would be a benefit to everyone. On top 
of this, there is a large number of people who would be fine on either 
alcohol or cannabis but, when given the choice, would prefer 
cannabis because it agrees with them more.

This argument works best on anyone who has been the victim of 
alcohol-related violence, whether directly or indirectly. Since there 
are very large numbers of such victims this argument has a lot of 
mileage.
A Youth Perspective
When looking at survey results on attitudes to cannabis, it becomes 
clear that there is a considerable generational divide. The generation 
of people who are now retired were brought up on Reefer Madness 
and still have the tendency to believe what they're told by the 
government. If they are white, chances are good that none of their 
friends were cannabis users when they were young, and that they 
have never tried cannabis themselves.
The generation of people who have recently come of voting age, 
their older siblings, and, to a lesser extent, their parents, tend to have 
different opinions. Older people stayed away from cannabis partly 
because their government told them it was bad, and partly because 
they were more influenced by a more Puritan mentality. The younger 
generation is increasingly turning away from alcohol and towards 
cannabis because, as time passes, it is becoming clearer that cannabis 
is more fun. For this reason, relatively fewer young people are 
supporters of cannabis prohibition.
It can, and should, be argued, that cannabis is now an accepted part 
of youth culture, and that its criminalisation is generational warfare 
committed by the old people who make up the vast majority of 
politicians. A look at over 2,000 years of Western history shows that, 
at any point in time, the elders of society were concerned about the 
moral degeneration of the young whereas the young were concerned 
with the restrictions placed on their behaviour by the old. For this 
reason, a vote for cannabis law reform can be sold as a vote against 
unreasonable restrictions being placed on the young by the old.
When making a cannabis law reform argument from a young 
person's perspective to someone who is middle-aged or older, the 

activist might well discover that the person they are talking to 
harbours concerns about the out of control nature of youth and the 
crimes of violence and property that they are believed to be 
committing in record numbers. The activist can take the approach of 
agreeing with them that things are out of hand, and then point out 
that almost all of the stupid things that young people do are done 
when they are drunk. If the subject of the conversation does not 
themselves suggest the obvious solution, the activist can: many of 
these crimes, especially not the violent ones, would not have 
occurred if the perpetrator had gone down to a cannabis café instead 
of a bottle store and got high instead of drunk.
Old people are not likely to put much stock in the feelings of the 
youth when they go to vote. However, the youth are their own worst 
enemy because they do not vote at anywhere near the same levels as 
the old. If a cannabis law reform activist is speaking to a group of 
young people, chances are good that they will already agree with the 
legalisation message, and what they can help do to repeal 
prohibition, so all the emphasis should go on persuading them that it 
is important to actually turn up on election day and cast their vote, as 
well as tell every friend they have that this is what they plan to do.
A Baby Boomer Perspective
The Baby Boomers are seen by some as the personification of all that 
is good and all that is bad in Western society. Born in the decades 
following the Second World War, many of them came to age in the 
Swinging Sixties, where, for a brief but indelible number of years, 
they formed a movement of creative, drug and sexual freedom that 
attacked the American establishment from within more successfully 
than the Third Reich and the Empire of Japan could do from without.
Hunter S Thompson's character in Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas, 
set in 1971, noted a point “where, with the right kind of eyes, you 
could just make out where the high water mark rose, crashed, and 
rolled back.” The practical consequence of this watershed was that 
the hippie movement largely abandoned the trappings of the culture 
they had built and got corporate jobs, homes in the suburbs, and 

families to fill them.
Now the first of the baby boomers have recently entered retirement. 
The entire cohort will follow in the next few decades, in numbers the 
Western pension system has never before seen. The perceptions of 
Generations X and Y is that the Boomers are the single greediest and 
self-obsessed generation that ever lived; a moral antithesis to the 
“Greatest Generation” who pulled America out of the Great 
Depression and whose blood and courage won the Second World 
War.
All this may or not be believed by the Boomers themselves or by the 
cannabis law reform activists trying to turn them on to our message. 
However, it is clear that arguments put to Baby Boomers must, first 
and last, explain how cannabis law reform will help them in their 
current situation.
As they age, they will come to demand more and more medicine and 
health care, and therefore a working knowledge of the benefits of 
medical marijuana will be crucial to winning support from this large 
and heavily voting cohort. They will also be especially interested to 
hear about how the nation can save money that could be used for the 
hole in pension liabilities, or which could even mitigate the expected 
increase in the retirement age.
The Economic Future Will be Based on Innovation and 
Creativity
It has long been known that cannabis is the favourite drug of creative 
people. It first became popular in the United States partially due to 
the fact that the jazz musicians of the Deep South liked to smoke it 
before gigs, finding that it aided their ability to improvise. As the 
comedian Bill Hicks pointed out, many of the musicians that have 
produced the music that people have loved since the sixties 
composed their work while high on cannabis.
Because the focus of economic advancement is moving away from 
manufacturing and monotonous repetition of facts learned by rote, 

and towards innovative practices, there is an economic incentive to 
legalise a drug that would facilitate innovation. In much the same 
way as modern industrial office culture is built around caffeine, the 
future might be built around cannabis. Cannabis makes it easier for 
people to look at things from new perspectives, and because of this 
people can see where improvements can be made on the old way of 
doing things.
This argument will appeal most strongly to the generation of young 
people who have discovered that the existing economic order expects 
them to slot in at the bottom of the hierarchy and to slowly work 
their way up over time, as well as to current business owners who 
intend to employ “knowledge workers” or creative types.
Prohibition Helps the Gangs and Other Criminals
Another problem with cannabis prohibition is that, because the 
demand for it is there, a market for it will always exist. Making 
cannabis illegal has done little or nothing to stop the prevalence of its 
use, and has merely driven its trade underground. There are several 
problems with having cannabis on the black market.
The first is the loss of tax revenue. For obvious reasons, sales of 
cannabis on the black market do not attract sales or income taxes for 
the central government. Given the size of the cannabis trade, this 
represents a considerable loss of revenue, and, given the ease with 
which the cannabis trade could be regulated, this income could easily 
be gathered.
The second is that it strengthens the gangs and other criminal 
organisations who always meet existing demand for goods and 
services that are illegal. Because they can easily sell cannabis to a 
large number of people, the gangs derive considerable income from 
cannabis prohibition. This can then be used to expand the gang's 
activity into financing the importation of other drugs, sex slaves or 
weapons and could also be used to pay off police or politicians.
The third is that making cannabis illegal is effectively the same as 

making the trade unregulated. This means that there are no 
restrictions on who cannabis can be sold to, nor to the purity or 
quality of the good. Criminal gangs could not care less if they sold 
cannabis to someone too young to deal with the psychological 
consequences of smoking it, and neither are they averse to lacing it 
with fly spray if they believe that this will make it look more 
appealing.
The fourth is that, because the production and sale of cannabis 
requires considerable physical resources, it is not especially 
economical, which means that there is an incentive for gangs to 
peddle harder, more profitable drugs to customers who initially only 
wanted cannabis. There are countless examples of people who 
wanted to buy cannabis being forced to approach a gang, whereupon 
they are offered methamphetamine or heroin and thereby become 
addicted to those.
Anyone who believes that cannabis should be illegal is effectively 
supporting these four things, and should be told in no uncertain terms 
that this is the effect of prohibition. The anti-gang argument appeals 
to a very broad section of the voting public and can be used on 
almost anyone (except, obviously, gang members).
Prohibition Creates and Protects Drug Cartels
This argument is similar to the one above it, and many of the points 
above are relevant here, but a drug cartel is an entirely higher level 
of operation to a street gang, and its operations involve far greater 
organisation, far more ruthless behaviour and far more money.
Enforcement of prohibition ruins the lives of huge numbers of 
people, but the drug cartels themselves continue to operate despite 
this. This is because the people at the top of them do not get arrested, 
and the members of the cartels who do are easily replaced. In cases 
where cannabis is confiscated, the cartels do lose some money, but 
this is factored into their equations as a cost of doing business.
When a drug cartel gets big enough it can use some of the profits it 

generates to bribe people in law enforcement to turn a blind eye to 
the activity of the cartel. Given the size of the cannabis market it is 
not surprising that this happens, and this is precisely what happened 
under alcohol prohibition.
Because of these reasons, cannabis prohibition, whatever its 
intention, has the effect of keeping cartels in business by striking at 
anyone else who could be a competitor. It increases the price and 
helps destroy the competitors who fight for the turf on which to sell 
their product. Cannabis law reform would do to these cartels what 
alcohol law reform did to Al Capone and his gangsters.
A lot of people will see the merit of the argument, especially if they 
have been victimised at the hands of the drug cartels.
Cannabis Prohibition Allows Terrorists to Fund Themselves
Because terrorist groups are, by definition, illegal, they have no way 
of making an income other than by breaking the law. A consequence 
of this is that they can, and will, make money through the black 
market. The larger the black market is, the more possibility there is 
for criminal groups to generate income and to expand and thrive.
To make an argument on this point, a cannabis law reform activist 
will first have to establish in the minds of their listeners that cannabis 
prohibition does not make cannabis disappear, but merely shifts it to 
the black market.
Cannabis law reform is an attack on the black market, because it 
regulates the production and sale of cannabis under the law. Any 
organisation that depends on cannabis prohibition in order to exist 
will consequently wither and die.
This argument will work on anyone who does not like terrorist 
groups, which is almost everyone. It is essentially the same argument 
as the one against criminal gangs.
Cannabis is a Medicine

Unfortunately, this is an argument that tends to bring derisive 
laughter from the prohibitionists. Mocking cries of “you just want an 
excuse to get high” is the typical response, which is cruel for those 
millions who have discovered that cannabis is a far more effective 
medicine, with considerably fewer side-effects, than those pushed by 
the pharmaceutical industry. Part of this response is a result of the 
suspicion that advocating medicinal marijuana is a trojan horse for 
the full legalisation of cannabis for all citizens. This suspicion might 
be correct, but it does not weaken the argument for cannabis as a 
medicine.
The medicinal properties of cannabis have been known for over 
3,500 years. Papyrus from ancient Egypt describes medicinal 
cannabis and its uses, as does a Chinese medical textbook dating 
from 100 B.C. Few Westerners know that cannabis was the primary 
medicinal source of pain relief in the 19th century and up until the 
invention of aspirin, with over 2,000 cannabis-based products 
manufactured by several hundred manufacturers. Cynics might point 
out here that the advent of a patented medicine that provided a means 
for drug companies to make a profit where none existed before 
narrowly preceded cannabis prohibition.
The growth of medical marijuana dispensaries in the USA shows that 
there is a large number of people who find cannabis an effective 
medicine for their ailments, in particular pain relief and appetite 
promotion. For people who are suffering from cancer or from the 
side-effects of treatments for cancer, both of these benefits have a 
considerable influence on their quality of life. The other uses of 
medicinal cannabis are too numerous to go into here, but even the 
most rudimentary research will reveal dozens of them.
Many people are surprised to learn than cannabis can be and is used 
as a medicine, because the image of cannabis that they are presented 
with is invariably one of young people destroying their lives in the 
manner depicted by Reefer Madness. The argument that cannabis is a 
medicine is especially strong for elderly citizens, who often find 
themselves taking medicines that are not especially effective. On top 

of this, the physical side effects of modern medicines are difficult for 
people with frail constitutions to deal with.
The argument for medicinal cannabis is a very strong one for 
cannabis law reform activists: not only would it allow an effective 
medicine to become available to those who most need it, but those 
who most need it belong to the demographic that invariably votes.
Cannabis is a Tool for Personal Growth
It is said that variety is the spice of life. The reason for this is that it 
is necessary to have new experiences in order to have any personal 
growth; without new experiences people will stagnate. Using 
cannabis, whether or not one has an enjoyable experience, is 
something new, and people who do it will learn things about 
themselves.
If a person smokes cannabis and becomes anxious and paranoid, they 
might learn that they are a person who needs a certain level of 
security in order to feel comfortable. If they get high and have a 
laugh and a good time, they might learn that there is light-hearted fun 
to be had in the world. If they fall deep into personal rumination they 
might learn that there are new ways of looking at their problems and 
that they need never be stuck in a rut. If they become inspired by a 
new idea or a new pattern of thought they might learn that there are 
many ways of looking at life and that some of those are better in 
some situations.
The problem with this argument is that those who buy it are likely to 
be supporters of cannabis law reform anyway. Those who are 
supporters of cannabis prohibition have little to gain from allowing 
other people to grow. For these reasons, this argument is probably 
best used to inspire those who are already supporters of cannabis law 
reform to become more active.
Quality Control
One point that needs to be continually made is that “banning” 

cannabis does not mean that the drug no longer exists. It simply 
means that its production, supply and sale falls under the control of 
the black market, i.e. criminals who operate with no oversight.
Although it is rarely true that criminal suppliers of cannabis lace the 
drug with other drugs (it is not economical to do so, amongst other 
reasons), there is little stopping them from lacing it with fly spray if 
they believe that this will make the product look more appealing to 
people who judge cannabis based on its stickiness and shine. This 
would not occur if cannabis was legalised, because companies who 
supplied it would not get away with it and people who grew cannabis 
in their own homes would not do it. 
A related point is that, with supply controlled by the black market, 
there is no reliable way to produce cannabis with a given level of 
THC. If a person is looking for a mild high to just relax, they could 
well end up with hydroponic cannabis that is far stronger than what 
they need. Imagine if the alcohol industry sold bottles of their 
product in which the alcohol content was anywhere between 2% and 
40%, and the customer had no way of knowing what it was until they 
sampled it. This is much like cannabis on the black market.
This argument has little impact on prohibitionists, because they will 
retort that “people shouldn't be smoking it anyway so they deserve 
what they get.” To use this argument effectively, a cannabis law 
reform activist must first persuade the listener that a change in the 
law is necessary for reasons of harm minimisation, and then use this 
point to explain how legalisation would reduce harm.
It is a Colossal Waste of Money
This is perhaps the strongest argument for cannabis law reform, not 
because it is moral but precisely because it is not. Because few 
people vote based on what they consider to be best for society but 
upon what is best for themselves, cannabis law reform will appear to 
be a low priority if they do not smoke it. The cannabis law reform 
activist's trump card is to inform them of how much money is spent 
on the Drug War, how much of it is wasted, and how much it costs 

every individual taxpayer.
Because the figures vary from country to country, the cost of 
prohibition must be calculated by activists based on their country's 
figures. This is not difficult, and is done in three steps. Firstly, it must 
be learned how many people are in prison for cannabis offences and 
how much it costs to keep each one of them in prison for a year. 
Multiplying these figures together gives the total expenditure for the 
corrections system in fighting the Drug War. Secondly, it is necessary 
to determine the number of hours spent every year in policing 
cannabis prohibition, and then the average cost in employing a police 
officer for one hour. Again these figures must be multiplied to give 
the total expenditure for the police force in fighting the Drug War. 
Thirdly, it must be determined how many court hours are devoted to 
prosecuting people for cannabis crimes per year, and the average cost 
in keeping a court in session for one hour. Multiplying these two 
figures gives the total expenditure for the court system in fighting the 
Drug War. Adding together the cost of prisons, police and the courts 
gives a figure for how much the criminal justice system must spend 
every year in its efforts to enforce cannabis prohibition.
Most people will be stunned by the final figure. Even in a tiny 
country such as New Zealand (pop. 4.5 million) this figure is close to 
half a billion dollars per year, all of it paid for by the taxpayer. It 
seems, therefore, that every citizen pays a hundred dollars a year to 
enforce cannabis prohibition alone. For a massive country such as 
the USA the figure might be around 30 billion dollars.
Furthermore, this figure does not even represent the full cost to a 
society of cannabis prohibition. Money spent on propaganda can be 
added to this, as can the lost earning potential of people who are in 
prison. So can the opportunity cost of economic practices that are 
made impossible by prohibition.
By far the largest, and most obvious, opportunity cost is lost taxation 
money. Under a system of prohibition, all of the money generated by 
the sale of cannabis goes straight into the hands of the criminal gangs 
that supply it. In California, medical marijuana dispensaries pay 

$100,000,000 in taxes to the federal government every year, and 
extrapolating this to the entire USA on a per capita basis suggests 
that close to a billion dollars would be paid, per year, in taxes from 
medical marijuana dispensaries alone. It is hard to estimate what the 
size of the national cannabis market is, for the obvious reason that it 
is hard to collect figures on black market activity, but it stands to 
reason that sales taxes and perhaps even vice taxes (following the 
alcohol and tobacco models) would generate several times this 
figure.
The Effect on Social Cohesion
This argument is that cannabis prohibition has a detrimental effect on 
social solidarity, which is a necessary component of any nation or 
community. Without solidarity, people do not care about the 
sufferings of others in their neighbourhood or country, and will do 
nothing to help should an opportunity arise. To understand the 
deleterious effect of cannabis prohibition on social cohesion, it is 
necessary to perform a thought experiment that puts a person in the 
place of a cannabis user. 
If you are walking the streets with cannabis in your pocket, you can 
be arrested and thrown in jail. Let's say you are on a walk, and you 
see a gang of thieves breaking into a shop. Do you call the police 
when you know that you yourself will be arrested when they come 
and ask you to make a statement? 
If, at home, you have just charfed back a cone and you look out your 
window and see that your neighbour's house is on fire, what do you 
do? Probably you ring them up or go next door to scream across the 
fence and, should there be no response, you call the fire department, 
but you don't want to be there when the police arrive – they will want 
a statement, so they will smell cannabis on you and arrest you.
If someone gets drunk and punches someone in the face in an 
unprovoked attack, and the aggressor knows that you possess a 
considerable amount of cannabis at home, and tells you that if you 
testify against him he will dob you in, what do you do?

There are dozens of examples like this, showing the effect that 
cannabis prohibition has on the effectiveness of the justice system. 
Someone possessing cannabis will do almost anything they can to 
avoid contact with the police, even if that contact would be necessary 
to ensure that an evil deed gets punished as it should. Because as 
many as one in every ten people are in possession of cannabis at any 
given time, this adds up to a lot of people who are forced to act in an 
asocial manner for fear of consequences to themselves.
Of course, these are only the obvious examples. Cannabis prohibition 
also has a subtle effect on social cohesion: cannabis users come to 
hate the people who they know are prohibitionists, for the simple 
reason that those people are supporting a system that would see the 
cannabis user locked in a cage and his possessions stolen. When a 
person knows that his fellow man could lift cannabis prohibition by a 
simple act of voting, and that man elects not to do so, it is natural and 
inevitable that the cannabis user come to hate him.
The War on Drugs is a War by Governments on Their Own 
People
The term “War on Drugs” is a deception, because in cases where a 
person is arrested in possession of a drug it is that person who suffers 
the punishment, not the drug. This might sound trivial, but it is 
crucial. It reflects the fact that governments of countries where 
cannabis prohibition exists have claimed the right to conduct warfare 
against their own citizens if those citizens do not behave in a way the 
government likes.
It can be argued that this is always the case; governments will 
respond to a failure to pay taxes with at least as much aggression as 
they enforce cannabis prohibition. This, however, is to miss the 
point. For a government to claim legitimacy for what it does, it must 
not conduct warfare against those it claims to represent.
The unappreciated side of the War on Drugs is that, because people 
have come to understand that it is based on lies, they have begun to 

make generalisations about other areas of government 
propagandising. When the government buys television ads that 
inform people of the dangers of smoking cigarettes, some people no 
longer trust them because of the lies about cannabis. This is a tragedy 
because truthful information about tobacco use has the potential to 
save millions of lives and prevent considerable health problems.
This argument will generally only work on people left of centre, 
because they tend to believe in the importance of having a big 
government and will therefore understand that the size of the 
government is a function of what the people allow, and that what 
they allow is a function of the trust they have in it.
Cannabis Prohibition Corrupts the Youth
The Western economic and social system is based on a set of 
obligations that every individual is intended to acknowledge. A child 
is born, they become educated and then they work. The better 
educated a person is, the higher the value of their work and the more 
they are paid. The system, therefore, provides economic and social 
incentives for individuals to better themselves and to better the 
situation of their fellows.
Cannabis prohibition corrupts this entire process, because it provides 
an avenue for people to get rich without having to be educated or to 
work. If a young person is too lazy, stupid or arrogant to get ahead in 
a conventional manner they can simply sell cannabis. Any of their 
peers who have tried to earn a living through increasing the value of 
their labour and by working hard will see this and feel like suckers. 
They might decide that crime is an easier way of getting ahead and 
turn to it. Given that the deck is already heavily stacked against 
young people, this temptation will at all times be very strong.
This is not to imply that the act of selling cannabis is immoral. 
Cannabis law reform would ensure that cannabis is sold by small 
businesses such as cannabis cafés who would be supplied by licensed 
growers. This system of regulation would ensure that the production 
and sale of cannabis was taxed appropriately and with sufficient 

oversight.
The beauty of this argument is that it will work on people of a more 
conservative persuasion. Conservatives will understand that people 
have to be correctly incentivised in order to contribute to society, and 
will understand that cannabis prohibition corrupts this process.
Cannabis Prohibition Destroys Families
One of the largest of the failures in understanding the damage done 
by cannabis prohibition comes when people fail to understand that 
individuals who are punished for cannabis offences are part of a 
network of other people, all of whom are weakened by the 
destruction wrought upon the offender. Although this damage is done 
to society as a whole, it is also done to every subunit within society, 
and the one that takes the most damage is always the family.
If a woman and the children she has borne are dependent on a man 
for the income they need to buy food and medicine, and if that man 
gains his income through selling cannabis, arresting him and putting 
him in prison removes the income that his family depended upon. 
The effect on his family is extreme. If the woman cannot replace this 
income, the children will suffer.
Children of families broken up by cannabis prohibition do not suffer 
only in terms of reduced income. They also miss the opportunity for 
love and learning that is provided by the parent who is now removed 
from their environment. It is accepted by all that a father who 
abandons his children leaves them at a massive disadvantage; it is 
accepted by few that imprisoning the father for a cannabis offence 
has precisely the same effect. A father who willingly abandons his 
children is viewed by many as the lowest kind of scum, but, 
amazingly, the people who enforce a system whereby that father is 
taken away are not.
Only the most stony-hearted psychopath could fail to be moved by 
the sight of a child asking their mother "When is Daddy coming 
home?" when no satisfactory answer can be given. Yet, in homes 

throughout any area in which cannabis prohibition is enforced, this 
phenomenon is commonplace.
In a way, the effect on the children from having a parent incarcerated 
is worse than the effect from them being abandoned. If a child is 
abandoned they will grow up to hate their father; if their father is 
taken away by the police they will grow up to hate society. Many 
conservatives are outraged when teenagers commit violent crimes, 
and they scream for heavier punishment, appearing oblivious to the 
fact that it is precisely the fact that people are punished unnecessarily 
that makes them violent.
It should be pointed out that the destruction of a family can occur 
whether it is the father or the mother who is punished for the 
cannabis offence, but in the vast majority of cases it will be the 
father. 
The argument that cannabis prohibition destroys families is very 
strong because almost anyone can be persuaded of the logic of it, and 
almost everyone agrees that, without a strong family unit, the 
chances of any children produced by one making a positive 
contribution to society is drastically reduced.
Certain Arguments Must be Used With Caution
Some arguments in favour of cannabis law reform are common but 
are not persuasive, and others are persuasive to some people but have 
counterarguments that make the cannabis law reform activist appear 
foolish and their position ill-considered.
The classic example of this is the argument that “cannabis is 
natural.” This is usually given in reference to the myriad of 
pharmaceutical drugs that are on offer for all manner of ailments, 
many of which have undesirable side effects. The argument goes that 
nature is good, and because cannabis is a part of nature it must also 
be good. The flaw in this argument is obvious: many things that are 
natural are definitely not good, such as nightshade.

Another poor argument is to say that, because so many people are 
using cannabis anyway, it should be legal. The flaw in this argument 
is that there are plenty of crimes that are committed by large numbers 
of people, and there is no reason to make any of these activities legal 
(traffic offences are the example usually given). Having said that, the 
numbers of people using cannabis suggest that there are 
comparatively few who see it as a crime, unlike traffic offences. 
Another common mistake is to attack alcohol and alcohol users. 
People who enjoy drinking alcohol are often the same sort of people 
who would enjoy using cannabis, and they will not support cannabis 
law reform if activists harp on about the damage done by alcohol. 
Most importantly, cannabis law reform activists are not arguing for 
alcohol prohibition, so there is little advantage in pointing out the 
damage caused by it (unless the activist is making the argument that 
the harms done by alcohol are considered acceptable by society and 
therefore cannabis ought to be accepted as well).
Whatever argument a cannabis law reform activist uses, it is 
important not to give the prohibitionist an avenue of attack. If the 
cannabis law reform activist demonstrates faulty logic even once, 
everything else they say will fall under suspicion. If in doubt it is 
best to stick to economic arguments, for the reason that, whatever 
moral values a person holds, few will object to having more money.

2. COUNTERING ARGUMENTS AGAINST 
CANNABIS LAW REFORM
Prohibition is the Common Thread
When arguing in favour of cannabis law reform, activists will hear 
many claims. Some of them have no basis in reality and can easily be 
dismissed with a reference to the facts of the situation. What is 
surprising is that a large number of the supposed problems that 
cannabis use causes are, in fact, problems caused by prohibition 
itself. Because the single strongest argument in favour of cannabis 
law reform is that prohibition simply doesn't work, it is best, 
whenever possible, to point out how the harms of cannabis use 
(when they actually exist) are caused by prohibition (and therefore 
would not be present if cannabis was regulated).
Cannabis law reform activists need to keep in mind that most of the 
arguments presented in favour of prohibition are so weak that, upon 
hearing them, the temptation is to burst out laughing. If you are 
debating cannabis law reform in front of a number of people it might 
be best to restrain these urges so as to not appear disrespectful. Of 
course these arguments are vicious, idiotic and in many cases 
obscene, but it is important to maintain an image that suggests the 
other side is not so much stupid as misinformed. Many people, even 
if they do not fully believe these arguments, will at least suspect that 
they might be true, and they will be more impressed by a calm but 
firm rebuttal than by sneering contempt.
Cannabis is a Gateway Drug
This argument is a staple of the drug warriors, and cannabis law 
reform activists will hear it time and time again, so it's important to 
be prepared for this one. The “gateway drug” theory claims that 
when people try cannabis they develop a desire to try other illegal 
drugs and soon become wretched slaves to heroin, krokodil and 
anything else they can get their hands on.

Like almost every other argument for prohibition, this is a total lie. 
Usage rates of cannabis far exceed those of heroin, 
methamphetamine or any other illicit drug, often by a factor of ten or 
more. If a recent drug use survey has been conducted in the activist's 
country, this would be an excellent time to mention it. Even if every 
single user of heroin or methamphetamine began to use those drugs 
after they first tried cannabis, the case for cannabis being a gateway 
drug would still be very weak. It could be pointed out here that the 
real gateway drugs are tobacco and alcohol.
If the activist does not have access to any hard data on the rates of 
heroin or methamphetamine use in their country, they could go on 
the counterattack. The fact is that in cases where cannabis use does 
lead to use of harder drugs, the only reason for this is that cannabis 
users must deal with the black market when trying to get hold of 
weed. Because cannabis is a poor choice of commodity for drug 
dealers (it smells and is worth relatively little if measured in either 
weight or volume), an incentive exists for them to get cannabis users 
hooked on something harder. This means that prohibition itself is 
responsible for many of the incidents of people becoming addicted to 
hard drugs.
Many people will not have looked at the issue from this perspective 
before and this approach will often cause them to reduce their 
opposition to cannabis law reform. If the activist detects that this is 
happening, the opportunity then exists to inform them about how the 
party policy will provide for the establishment of cannabis cafés 
where other drugs are banned (see Part Three of this book for a 
detailed discussion of this point).
People Would Use More Cannabis if it Was Legal
This argument is a tricky one from the perspective of a cannabis law 
reform activist, primarily because the activist is likely a cannabis 
user themselves and will see cannabis use as a good thing. This 
argument can only be made if coming from the perspective that 
cannabis use is harmful, and as a consequence there are two 

approaches that could be taken in response.
The first is to say, great! If people are smoking cannabis that keeps 
them off the booze and other hard drugs, and, considering the 
damage that those do, society wins by having a less dangerous 
alternative (see “It's an Alternative to Booze” in the previous 
section).
The second is to point out that the supposed wave of cannabis 
addicts that will result from law reform is a total myth. Most 
tellingly, this did not occur in the Netherlands after they relaxed 
cannabis prohibition. In fact, usage rates of both cannabis and a 
variety of other drugs went down: cannabis because it was no longer 
a “forbidden fruit” and the other drugs because people no longer had 
to go to criminal gangs who pushed them on people who only 
wanted to buy cannabis. Another blow to the myth is that rates of 
cannabis use are far higher in the USA, and in other prohibitionist 
countries, than they are in the Netherlands.
Legalisation Would Mean Young People Have Access to 
Cannabis
This argument, unlike most of the others for cannabis prohibition, is 
actually based on reasoning that appears logical. The current 
situation with alcohol is that someone who is underage, but who has 
a friend or older sibling who is not, can give that friend or relative 
some money and get that person to buy alcohol for them. The 
assumption made by prohibitionists is that, if cannabis is sold legally 
in coffee shops, people will buy it and give it to minors as they do 
with alcohol.
This may or may not happen if cannabis were legalised. But the truth 
of the matter is that the entire argument is a distraction from what 
happens under prohibition, which can be summed up in a simple 
phrase: gangs do not check for ID. The current unregulated market 
means that, in practice, minors need only to push a twenty dollar 
note through a hole in the wall of a tinny house and cannabis will 
come back in the other direction.

Like most of the other arguments in favour of cannabis prohibition, 
an activist who knows their material can go on the counterattack 
when this is made. If someone makes the claim that prohibition 
keeps cannabis out of the hands of the young, tell them and your 
audience that your opponent is, in fact, supporting a system in which 
anyone, regardless of vulnerability, can access it with no regulatory 
oversight whatsoever.
Prohibition Keeps Prices Higher, Thus Reducing Demand for 
Cannabis
This argument is based on basic economic principles. The price of 
cannabis is a function of its supply and its demand, and if prohibition 
can attack the supply side of the equation there will be less cannabis 
available, thereby driving up the price, which discourages its use.
Again, this argument affords an excellent chance to go on the 
counterattack. Even leaving aside the obvious counterpoint that a 
higher market price for cannabis will encourage people to produce it, 
the question has to be asked: where is the money going? It doesn't 
matter what the price of cannabis is if the money is all going into the 
hands of criminal gangs who do not even pay sales taxes on the 
product.
Legalisation of cannabis might reduce the price of the product, for 
the reason that large-scale cultivation would become possible and, as 
a consequence, economies of scale would drive down the price. It 
would also reduce the “risk premium” that is currently charged by 
cannabis dealers who must contend with the possibility that their 
inventory can be confiscated by the police. However, there is no 
reason why this increase in the profit margin could not be countered 
by taxation. The cannabis market in every country has settled on a 
standard price for the product; legalisation would create an 
opportunity for the government to raise revenue that could then be 
used on treatment for those users who were addicted, or on other 
social programs or tax cuts.

Cannabis Law Reform Would Invite Criminal Gangs to Operate 
in this Country
This is a classic bogeyman argument. Without the police force going 
into battle to win the War on Drugs, criminal gangs will flood here 
and bring cannabis with them, sucking money out of the country and 
destroying the people in it at the same time. If they don't enter from 
overseas, then the lower classes will form gangs to profit from the 
booming trade in cannabis sales.
The best response is to say that this is already happening, and that it 
would not be if the cannabis laws were reformed because people 
would be free to grow their own cannabis at home. If a person does 
not wish to grow their own, they would be able to buy it from a 
cannabis café At no point does the cannabis user need to come into 
contact with criminal gangs.
This argument can then be used to attack the prohibitionist position. 
It can be pointed out that the time in America's history most famous 
for gangs was when alcohol was prohibited, and the logical 
conclusion is that, as some gangs disappeared after alcohol law 
reform, so would other gangs disappear after cannabis law reform.
Cannabis Taxation Would Create a Huge Black Market for 
Cannabis
This argument is itself a counterargument, and to the idea that 
cannabis law reform would result in considerable tax revenues. It 
states that any taxation applied to the sale of cannabis would mean 
that criminal gangs would still be able to undercut the market and 
flourish, so cannabis law reform would strengthen the gangs.
The first response to this is to point out that this has not happened 
with alcohol and tobacco. Even though it is legal to produce both of 
these drugs, people rarely do so. If people would rather buy 
something at a shop than produce it themselves, it is fair to say that 
they would not be inclined to go to a criminal gang.

The second response is to point out that the argument doesn't make 
economic sense. Any system of cannabis law reform would lower the 
production costs because there would be no risk of police 
interference and large-scale operations could spread start-up costs 
across a vast production run. Because production costs are lower, the 
gap between this and the production costs under prohibition can be 
made up for through taxation. This means that taxing cannabis would 
not increase the sale price, and therefore there would be no new 
market niche for the gangs to expand into.
Cannabis Use is Harmful
In most discussions on cannabis law reform this point is not even 
made as an argument; rather, it is an assumption that many people 
have. The government has made cannabis illegal, so the story goes, 
for our own good; people need to be protected from themselves.
Leaving aside the issue of how caging people helps them or anyone 
else, and the issue of how naive a person would have to be to believe 
that the government acts in its people's interests, the fact is that much 
of this harm is the direct result of prohibition.
No one can deny that smoking cannabis is bad for the lungs. This is a 
quality that cannabis shares with tobacco and any other organic 
substance that could be dried and smoked. However, there are other 
ways to consume cannabis that do not involve smoking bud, such as 
baking, or by using a water bong, an ice spottle or a vaporiser.
The problem with all of these methods of harm reduction is that they 
are usually illegal, and in most cases, more illegal than cannabis in 
dried flower form. Making cannabis oil and then putting it into a 
chocolate brownie is, in some jurisdictions, a higher grade of offence 
than possession of regular cannabis, and brings with it heavier 
penalties. Likewise, equipment that can be used to minimise the 
harm done by smoking is classed as “paraphernalia” and possession 
of it is itself a criminal offence. 
The cannabis law reform activist can point out that it is the height of 

hypocrisy to declare something harmful at the same time as making 
measures to reduce that harm illegal.
A High Proportion of People With Substance Abuse Disorders 
Smoke Cannabis
If you examine the numbers of people who have been diagnosed with 
substance abuse disorders, cannabis frequently ranks at or near the 
top of the list of drugs that some people are addicted to. This 
argument suggests that, because such a high proportion of substance 
abuse cases involve cannabis, cannabis must itself be an addictive 
and dangerous drug.
This argument is, of course, a total irrelevancy. All that matters is the 
total number of cannabis users who need help, not the proportion of 
cannabis users amongst the drug users who do seek help. The 
cannabis law reform activist can point this out, or they can retort that 
the high proportion of cannabis users reflects that failure of cannabis 
prohibition to keep the drug out of the hands of vulnerable people.
Cannabis Makes You Paranoid
Some people find that one of the effects of cannabis is to make them 
paranoid. This paranoia manifests itself in unwarranted suspicion of 
the people around them and fear that something terrible might 
happen. Because these feelings are unpleasant, the argument is made 
that cannabis ought to be made illegal in order to prevent them.
The truth is that people who smoke cannabis don't feel paranoid 
because of the nature of the drug, but because of prohibition itself. 
Anyone who smokes a joint, even in the privacy of their own home, 
knows that there is a possibility that the police can enter their house, 
drag them off and lock them in a cage. On top of this, there is the 
chance that any other person who is aware that someone else 
possesses cannabis can call the police and have them arrested.
More proof that it is not cannabis itself but rather prohibition that 
makes users paranoid comes from the experience that many people 

have had in the Netherlands, where they did not become paranoid 
even when smoking cannabis in full view of police officers in public. 
In the same way, people smoking cannabis miles from civilisation do 
not suffer from paranoia.
Cannabis is Addictive
This is another dishonest argument, because there are two different 
kinds of addiction and people making this argument never specify 
which applies to cannabis. To simplify: the first kind, physical 
addiction, is the sort that people get when coming off heroin or 
alcohol. It involves unpleasant physical sensations such as shaking 
and sometimes vomiting. The second, psychological addiction, is 
much harder to define. It is broad enough to cover such things as a 
person feeling unhappy when they cannot partake in an activity or 
substance that they enjoy.
Because of this, it is hard to say how the “addictive” properties of 
cannabis are any different to psychological addiction to chocolate, 
sex, sunrises or anything else. Certainly there are people who smoke 
a lot of cannabis and then feel bad when it runs out, but this is not a 
phenomenon that is limited to cannabis.
In any case, it is clear that cannabis is far less addictive than nicotine, 
the addictive properties of which are not viewed as serious enough to 
warrant its prohibition. Many cannabis users are or have been 
tobacco smokers as well, and any of them could tell you that of the 
two drugs, nicotine is by far the more difficult to give up.
Even if cannabis was dangerously addictive, prohibition is a very 
poor way to deal with it. There is no reason why addiction to alcohol 
or tobacco should result in admission to a government funded 
treatment program while addiction to cannabis should result in a 
prison sentence. One of the effects of prohibition is that those people 
who feel that they have an issue with cannabis dependency are much 
less likely to get help for it, because in order to do so they have to 
initiate contact with the health services and admit to being a 
criminal.

Cannabis is Cut With Other Drugs
This argument contends that cannabis, when purchased from dealers, 
is laced with other drugs such as LSD, heroin and methamphetamine 
in order to make it more powerful and addictive. 
There are numerous problems with this argument. The most obvious 
is that some of the other drugs that cannabis is supposedly laced with 
are not effective when smoked. The second, obvious after a few 
seconds thought, is that there is no economic incentive for any dealer 
to do this. For a given volume, cannabis is very cheap in comparison 
to the other drugs mentioned and to lace cannabis with them would 
result in an economic loss.
In any case, whether this occurs or not, it is a problem that is caused 
by prohibition. If cannabis were legal and treated like tobacco, it 
would be either manufactured by companies who would be 
prohibited from adding such drugs to the product or it would be 
grown at home by people who would not lace their own product.
Cannabis Causes Schizophrenia
Drug warriors are fond of referencing the infamous study of Swedish 
conscripts that appeared to suggest that young people who smoked 
cannabis in their youth were many times more likely to develop 
schizophrenia later in their life. Leaving aside the methodology of 
the study, and whether such a fanatically anti-cannabis country such 
as Sweden could be trusted to provide an honest investigation into 
such a matter, a simple examination of the reality shows that there is 
little, if any, connection between the two.
Cannabis usage rates have increased markedly since the 1950's, at 
which time the drug was little known to most people, and even then 
their opinions were mostly based on films such as Reefer Madness. 
In recent years, youth cannabis use in many countries is almost as 
high as it is for alcohol, and yet diagnosed rates of schizophrenia 
have not increased. If cannabis use caused schizophrenia there would 

not only be a documented increase in schizophrenia when cannabis 
use increased within a population, but also a higher rate of 
schizophrenia in countries that smoked more cannabis. Neither is the 
case.
In some cases, cannabis use has been connected to a number of 
emergency room visits because of people freaking out. Again, this is 
a problem with prohibition because it is impossible to get any 
truthful information about the effect of cannabis to high school 
students owing to the tsunami of propaganda coming in the other 
direction. If it is hammered into people's heads that they will freak 
out and go insane from smoking cannabis, this is indeed what will 
happen, regardless of the psychoactive effects of cannabis.
In any case, the causal link between cannabis and onset of 
schizophrenia is not the issue. The status quo involves people at risk 
of mental illness being arrested, thrown into a cage and then dragged 
in front of a judge, who will then usually impose further restrictions 
to that person's liberty and social standing. It is therefore not difficult 
to see how the system of prohibition is worse for people's mental 
health than the alternative.
We Don't Want to Send the Wrong Message to the Youth
This argument will come up again and again, for, although it is 
possibly the single most dishonest and vacuous argument ever given, 
it appears to be effective. It is hard to argue against this because it is 
not clear what the message is. Presumably the message is that, if a 
person wants to have a good time, they would be better off drinking 
alcohol, or taking no drugs at all.
If this argument is given in a debate on cannabis law reform, the 
activist ought to ask what the message actually is and go from there. 
This will force the prohibitionist to make a more concrete claim 
which can then be demolished in line with the counter arguments 
previously given in this section.
If you have read through this handbook up until this point, you might 

suspect what the message really is. It is “we own you”, and this 
mentality is at the core of all efforts to prohibit the use and sale of 
cannabis. What makes cannabis law reform difficult is that a large 
section of the voting age population does not have a problem with 
this. Cannabis prohibition is, of course, at its base, a philosophy of 
evil, and no arguments, however well researched or articulated, will 
overcome this.
Cannabis Makes People Impotent
It has to be conceded that this argument, as dishonest as it is, is very 
clever: a man may or may not care about health problems such as 
lung cancer or brain damage, but any kind of problem with his penis 
will command his full attention. It belongs in the same category as 
the claim that smoking cannabis will make you gay, which is to say 
that it is a total lie, but one that seeks to persuade on a purely 
emotional level.
Of course, anyone who has smoked cannabis and then had sex will 
attest that not only is this not true, but it is actually the reverse of the 
truth. Stoned sex is great and there really is nothing like it. Any male 
smoker can attest to the heightened penile sensitivity that follows 
smoking cannabis. The documentary Super High Me, in which the 
comedian Doug Benson smoked large amounts of cannabis for thirty 
days, revealed that Benson's sperm count actually increased after the 
thirty days of indulgence.
Perhaps the best counter to this argument is to point out that even if 
smoking cannabis did affect blood flow to the penis and thereby 
produced erectile dysfunction, it is not anywhere near as bad as the 
“whisky dick” that alcohol is famous for. 
Cannabis Turns People into Unemployed Losers
Part of winning the battle against cannabis prohibition is winning the 
war of perception. Like it or not, there will always be people who 
know someone who is both unemployed and a cannabis user, and in 
the minds of some people this is sufficient evidence for the dreaded 

“amotivational syndrome.” There are two ways to argue against this 
point.
The first is to point out that there is no obvious connection between 
smoking cannabis and losing one's job, or staying unemployed. 
People were unemployed and lazy long before cannabis came onto 
the scene, and most drug abusing welfare recipients are alcoholics, 
not cannabis users. Until the global financial crisis of 2008, usage 
rates for cannabis were often higher than the unemployment rates in 
certain countries, which means that, even if every single unemployed 
person was a cannabis user, there would still be cannabis users who 
were in full-time employment.
The second is less intellectual but probably more effective. Simply 
ask “what about Sir Richard Branson?” Branson, one of Britain's 
wealthiest men, is an avowed cannabis user and has spoken out 
against cannabis prohibition, citing, amongst other things, the fact 
that it is a gigantic waste of money that achieves nothing. It is not 
easy to make the case that smoking cannabis helped to make Branson 
as wealthy as he is, but it does not appear to have harmed him any. If 
smoking cannabis does not prevent a man from becoming a 
multibillionaire, it is difficult to argue that it would seriously harm 
the chances of anyone wishing to merely work full-time.
Once People Get into Cannabis, They Get into Crime
Many people will have observed the common pattern of a young 
person getting into cannabis and soon afterwards expanding into 
crime. The logical error is in assuming that it was the cannabis that 
caused that person to develop a criminal attitude, and therefore 
cannabis should stay illegal in order to keep crime down. There are 
several ways to argue against this point.
The first is, as ever, to point out that this is a problem with 
prohibition and not with cannabis. If cannabis is illegal, people must 
buy it from criminals. Through coming into contact with criminals 
people become tempted to commit crimes for money, especially if 
the gains from these crimes can be traded immediately for drugs. The 

cannabis law reform activist can point out that reform would destroy 
this chain of behaviour, because people would no longer have to 
solicit goods from criminals.
Another way is to point out that making cannabis illegal has the 
result that people who smoke it sometimes decide that laws are 
stupid and need not be respected or obeyed. If cannabis were legal, 
people would no longer think this.
Cannabis is Much Stronger Than It Used to Be, and Therefore 
More Dangerous
Often a cannabis law reform activist will read a newspaper report in 
which a police officer claims that modern cannabis is extra 
dangerous because artificial selection techniques have been used to 
breed a plant that has ten, twenty or even thirty times as much THC 
in it as it used to have. Cannabis growers have, so we're told, 
recklessly bred this “superskunk” in response to demand for a drug 
that can take people higher than ever before, and this serves as the 
background to the then predictable claim that the hospital emergency 
services are becoming overwhelmed with the resultant casualties.
Because the prohibitionist mentality believes that the THC in 
cannabis directly causes mental illness, it stands to (their) reason 
that, the higher the THC component, the more mental illness will be 
caused. For this reason, both police and the public need to be 
especially vigilant about any cannabis on the streets and a stance of 
zero tolerance should be adopted, invariably “for the children.” It is 
this author's contention that anyone who advocates to take freedoms 
away from adults while using the phrase “for the children” ought to 
be made to parade around the streets wearing a dunce cap, but 
because this is not realistic it is better to examine the scientific 
reality of this claim.
The botanical fact is that there is an upper limit to how much 
stronger cannabis could possibly be. The cannabis plant must grow 
from a seedling to a plant with a stem, and from there grow branches 
and leaves and finally flowers. Apart from the flowers, there is very 

little THC in the rest of the plant, and if the THC percentage of the 
flowers alone was at the maximum possible point beyond which the 
plant would no longer be viable, it might be at around 25%. A plant, 
however it is bred and grown, cannot go past the point where its 
THC level renders the rest of the plant unable to function. At the 
other end, cannabis with a THC level of 1% or lower is called hemp, 
because for all its farming and industrial uses, smoking it will only 
give you a headache. Even the weakest cannabis that is sold and 
smoked for pleasure has around 2.5% THC, and varieties of around 
8-10% THC provide the bulk of which is sold to recreational users. 
Knowing these figures, it becomes obvious that the supposed 
increase in THC behind the latest moral panic is impossible. Even if 
all weed “back in the day” was 3% THC, it would reach its upper 
bounds at 25% THC and therefore never be more than eight times 
stronger than its predecessors. This comparison is even after cherry-
picking the weakest of the older cannabis strains against the most 
psychoeffective modern ones.
People Shouldn't Have to Pay for Cannabis Users' Healthcare
This argument is a common one nowadays, and will probably 
become more common as time passes. It's essentially a selfish 
argument, and it runs like this: “I don't care what people do in their 
own homes, as long as I don't have to pay for the health costs of it. If 
cannabis was legalised, I'd have to pay for all the addicts and psych 
cases that it caused.”
The counter to this argument is simple: cannabis would be taxed at a 
rate that provided revenues equal to the health care costs caused by 
law reform. The truth is that cannabis users would love the chance to 
counter the perception that they are bludging, thieving parasites, and 
if they could pay taxes on legal weed, they would.
The argument can be extended to point out that many people would, 
if given the legal option, pursue courses of medical marijuana that 
might replace courses of more expensive medicines otherwise paid 
for by insurance or government money. The natural endpoint of this 
extension is that overall health care costs would actually be lower if 

cannabis was legalised, because this would allow a cheap medicine 
onto the market.
Cannabis Use Must Be Discouraged for the Good of Society
Because one of the most common arguments put forward in favour 
of cannabis law reform is that people should have ownership rights 
to their own bodies, and therefore the right to decide for themselves 
what goes in it, one of the most common prohibitionist replies is to 
say that people do not have the right to make society pay for the 
consequences of that person's cannabis use.
The counterargument to this is that society already is paying for the 
consequences of that person's drug use, and those expenses are far 
greater because of cannabis prohibition. All taxpayers lose out when 
cannabis users have to go through the court and the prison system, 
and all members of a family lose out when one of them is taken away 
for a cannabis offence. If it is important that society not be burdened 
by wasted tax money, why have cannabis prohibition when it costs so 
much?
It can also be pointed out that society benefits from the positive 
effects of cannabis use. People get to relax and have a good time and 
do it with far fewer financial, criminal or health problems than with 
alcohol.
The Majority Does Not Want Cannabis Law Reform
This argument is an appeal to the legitimacy of the herd. It states 
that, because there is not majority support for cannabis law reform, it 
is right to keep it illegal because this is how democracies operate. 
There are at least three counters to this argument.
The first is that it isn't necessarily true. Prohibitionists will claim that 
the majority is against cannabis even when there are polls suggesting 
a desire for reform - this, of course, leaves them wide open if proof 
of such a poll can be given. Although the cannabis law reform 
activist can find themselves working in an area where the majority 

do support prohibition, this does not mean that all groups within that 
population support it. The young, in particular, are almost always 
more cannabis friendly than their elders. No matter what the results 
of any poll are, the cannabis law reform activist can always point out 
that the tide has been moving towards reform for decades now, and 
that it is therefore sure to win after enough time passes.
The second is to point out that the majority may not oppress a 
minority in any democracy worthy of the name. Democracies 
(generally) do not exterminate minority groups within their borders, 
even if the majority of the population is bloodthirsty enough to 
support this. The cannabis law reform activist can ask any 
prohibitionist who makes the “majority rules” argument how old 
they are, and then ask if they'd be okay with everyone who is not that 
age voting to put people of that age in prison. No one would agree, 
although the argument is as logical as the argument that cannabis 
users can be oppressed merely because the majority wishes it to be 
so.
The third is to point out that many people have absolutely no 
experience of cannabis or of cannabis users and as a result they form 
their opinions on information from biased sources. Going all the way 
back to Reefer Madness, the official word on cannabis has been 
much harsher than the reality. Many old people will not have seen 
Reefer Madness but will have formed their opinions based on 
conversations with people who had. This counterargument is to say 
that, if people were told the truth about cannabis, a majority of them 
would support law reform.
I Know Someone Who Smoked Cannabis and Went Crazy
This argument might just sound silly, but it's amazing how many 
times it gets brought up. Every prohibitionist seems to know one 
person who was the pillar of their community but who was brought 
low by the demon weed. Invariably that person was bright, a bit 
sensitive and naive, and what is not said is that they possessed all of 
the classic signs of developing a psychotic illness before they 
smoked any cannabis. What is not mentioned is how many other 

cannabis smokers that person knows who aren't going crazy, nor the 
people going crazy who aren't smoking cannabis.
One way to counter this is to simply point out that knowing one 
person who smoked cannabis and went crazy says nothing of the 
overall situation in the world, and that a single datapoint is not 
evidence of any wider trend. If the prohibitionist insists that there are 
many others who have wound up in a similar situation, the cannabis 
law reform activist can express the hope that the fear of authority 
caused by prohibition did not discourage them from getting mental 
health care.
Perhaps the best way to depower this argument is to show concern 
for the person affected and the treatment they received. Ask if they 
got help for their breakdown, and whether this help got them back on 
their feet. The cannabis law reform activist could point out that 
others in this situation do not get the help they need to recover 
because to do so would require admitting that they have broken the 
law. 
If It Ain't Broke, Why Fix It?
This argument states that, as bad as cannabis prohibition may be, as 
there is even the slightest possibility that law reform could make 
some problems worse, we ought to stick to prohibition. It is really 
the argument of a person who is almost persuaded that cannabis law 
reform is a superior option to prohibition, because it has nearly 
conceded everything that must be conceded before someone can 
become a supporter.
The strangest thing about this argument is that it could more 
effectively be used by those arguing for cannabis law reform. There 
were no major problems with cannabis use in society before 
prohibition was brought in, and there are major problems now. 
Cannabis law reform would actually be a move back to the way 
things were, and even the way things had been for as many as 5,000 
years.

It has to be kept in mind that people who do not use cannabis may 
not see the system as broken because they are not at the sharp end of 
it. People like this are best persuaded by using economic arguments.
The Criminal Justice System is a Path to Treatment
This argument contends that cannabis prohibition is a good thing 
because it allows for mental health services to reach people who they 
should be helping, but who would have been ignored if not arrested 
for a cannabis offence. 
This argument only makes sense if there are cannabis users out there 
who walk a tightrope between being too mentally ill to function but 
mentally healthy enough to (so far) evade detection. The activist may 
wish to invite the audience to consider the moral aspects of using 
armed police to arrest and imprison mentally ill people, but it is not 
advisable to give any ground to the prohibitionists' attempts to label 
cannabis users as mentally ill.
If the audience believes that the criminal justice system is a good 
way to treat cannabis dependency issues, then they are probably 
right-wing, which means the cannabis law reform activist could 
attack from the far side of that right wing, and make a libertarian 
argument. Try telling the audience that people in this country should 
have the freedom to seek treatment should they decide that is has 
become necessary, and that this is only possible if the cannabis laws 
are reformed.
Cannabis Law Reform Would Weaken Efforts to Combat 
Drugged Driving
Prohibitionists are keen to point out that a large number of people are 
caught driving a motor vehicle with “cannabis in their system.” 
Statistics are thrown about showing that many of the drivers 
involved in fatal road accidents “tested positive” for cannabis. The 
implication is that, if cannabis law reform were to be enacted, there 
would be more people smoking cannabis and therefore more fatal car 
accidents and injuries.

The first counterargument is to say that cannabis use does not tend to 
rise when cannabis law reform is enacted. This is a strong response 
but many people simply do not believe this is true, because it goes 
against common sense. It cannot be repeated enough that the 
Netherlands has one of the lowest rates of cannabis use in Europe 
(and presumably, therefore, one of the lowest rates of car accidents 
caused solely by cannabis use) despite their relatively liberal 
cannabis policy.
The second counterargument is to mention that cannabis can show up 
in a test several weeks after it was taken, and because cannabis is 
only effective for a few hours, most of the people who test positive 
for cannabis were in no way under its psychoactive influence, let 
alone too impaired to drive.
Care must be taken if the activist comes up against this argument, 
because it's possible to counter it and still lose. This happens when 
the activist appears indifferent to those impacted by drugged driving.
We Don't Want People Coming to Work Stoned
This is a tricky argument, because it could be made to sow fear or it 
could be the result of an honest but inaccurate idea of what 
prohibition is about. It states that cannabis should be illegal because 
of the possibility that people will come to work stoned. For some 
reason, nurses are the example usually given, perhaps because they 
have the most responsibility for the least pay.
A good counter is to point out that irresponsible people are 
irresponsible people, and there is no-one who would come to work 
stoned that has not already done so drunk. No-one wants nurses 
coming to work stoned any more than drunk or drowsy on 
prescription medication. In any case, because cannabis is easily 
available to anyone with any determination, the hypothetical naughty 
nurse could well be coming to work stoned anyway. At least after 
law reform she'd know what strength THC she had smoked.

Perhaps a more reassuring counter is to say that, even though 
cannabis should be legal, businesses would still have the right to 
send anyone home if their state of mind could be dangerous to 
themselves or to their workmates.
Drugs Are Bad, Mmmmmkay?
One of the lows of any cannabis activist's career is listening to 
someone disagree so violently with you that they launch into a 
spittle-flecked rant about heroin, cocaine, crack, meth and any other 
drug but cannabis. Avoiding this is the main reason why it is a good 
idea to not use the phrase “alcohol and drugs.” Unfortunately, in the 
minds of many people there are two categories of psychoactive 
substances: alcohol and bad stuff. Trying to argue with people who 
think like this is futile, because it is “common sense” that drugs are 
bad and that is all there is to it. 
In some ways, being a cannabis law reform activist is like being an 
explorer trying to persuade some unsophisticated tribe that 
sacrificing virgins will not affect the whims of the thunder god. 
Given time, every cannabis law reform activist will hear arguments 
for prohibition that are so grossly irrational that even a monkey 
would laugh to hear them.
In a sense this is a very good thing, because it simplifies the strategy 
of the activist. Stupid people will not be convinced by reason, so 
when one is encountered it is time to use any and all emotional 
arguments whether they are known or made up on the spot.
On Balance, Prohibition is Better
This weasely way of arguing comes after the cannabis law reform 
activist has scored several points. A prohibitionist might use it in any 
situation where they are losing, and will usually cite “common 
sense” to back themselves up. The tactic is to concede some or all of 
the points made thus far, and then to claim that, because of some 
nebulous reason, prohibition is still better “on balance.” The reasons 
are inevitably things that cannot be quantified, such as moral decay.

Perhaps the best answer is to say “Things aren't balanced - it's 
costing us a billion dollars a year.” This is not an entirely logical 
counter but the original statement is fallacious anyway.
Refuse to let any prohibitionist cloud the issue with vagaries and 
doubt. If they try, bring the debate straight back to the facts.
The Moral Argument
This is one of the more difficult arguments to counter, because it 
appeals to a side of people that is not rational and will not be 
changed by an intellectual response. It contends that cannabis use is, 
in and of itself, immoral, and because it is immoral it should be 
prohibited by law. Usually nothing is said about using any other 
method to persuade people that cannabis use could be harmful to 
them - it is all about the punishment. Cannabis users are sinners, and 
must be purified by suffering.
The real difficulty with countering this argument is that those who 
have made it may have a very different set of moral values to those 
arguing for cannabis law reform, and the activist may not have the 
time to perform a detailed psychoanalysis on such matters. The best 
counterargument might be to declare that cannabis prohibition is 
actually more immoral, and hope that the audience agrees.
The audience might believe that locking someone up for an act that 
harmed no-one is immoral because it is cruel, or that spending all 
this money on a losing battle is wasteful, or that having a crusade 
against cannabis when there are far greater concerns in the world is 
rash and foolish. The activist might have to consider their audience 
before declaring that there are worse examples of moral failure than 
cannabis law reform.
The Ultimate Counterargument
This is a very simple one, but it is effective. In all of the jurisdictions 
where cannabis prohibition has been relaxed, none of the predictions 

of doom have come to pass. The best way to make this 
counterargument as effective as possible is to stay informed. You can 
counter many of the predictions of societal collapse by simply saying 
“It didn't happen in the Netherlands.” Other places in the world are 
experimenting with cannabis law reform, and these examples can 
also be used.
The prohibitionist will appeal to the “common sense” of the 
audience, which is putting a nice spin on what is actually a collection 
of received wisdom that is yet to be corrected. Common sense will 
tell people a lot of things, but the facts, less common though they be, 
do not support them. Cannabis law reform would mean all the young 
people will smoke it? Didn't happen in the Netherlands. Cannabis 
law reform would mean our streets are flooded with heroin addicts? 
Didn't happen in Portugal. Limited home grow would lead to people 
selling cannabis to schoolkids on their way home? Didn't happen in 
the Australian Capital Territory.
This argument will need to be made often, because if the 
prohibitionist feels they are losing an argument they will try and 
introduce as much uncertainty into it as possible. Sometimes this line 
of argumentation will surprise people, as a lot of people do not know 
that cannabis law reform has succeeded in some places. If this 
occurs, it is a good time to press on and elaborate on the other ways 
these examples of cannabis law reform have made life better.

PART THREE: TAKING IT TO THE 
TRENCHES
With a movement assembled and the ability to win on financial, 
logistical and intellectual fronts established, all that remains is 
getting to the front lines. There is more than one way to fight for 
cannabis law reform. The first part of this handbook focused on 
building a movement, the second on training it and this third part will 
focus on the actual fighting.
In this sense it is best to think of an election as a great battle, where 
warlords, kings and statesmen come to do battle for the mantle and 
the mace. In a democratic system, their power is represented in the 
vote count. This means that every election is, for its candidates, an 
attempt to summon the power of the voters into a force capable of 
exerting its will on the national stage.
The fun part about electioneering is that the country goes into 
election mode. It is never easier to get free media attention for the 
cannabis cause, or to get people to pay attention to the argument for 
law reform, than at election time. People will stop and listen to a 
candidate speak when they would ignore them for a lunatic at any 
other time. 
A cannabis law reform movement can fight in the courts as well as it 
can at the ballot box. It is difficult to give legal advice in this 
handbook because the cannabis law reform movement covers so 
many different jurisdictions. Instead, some general strategic 
principles are outlined.
Basic Debating Strategy
At all times you must ensure that you frame the debate. Your rights 
are under debate, so you frame the debate in your terms. The 
prohibitionists will try and get you bogged down in trivial detail so 

that your core message is weakened. Do not fall for this. The core 
message is that people have the right to use cannabis, and this 
message can be asserted at any time.
The most basic strategy is the one two punch. Declare that the best 
legal approach would be one of harm reduction, and then argue that 
cannabis law reform is less harmful. This is important because many 
of the arguments put forward in favour of cannabis prohibition are 
blatant sophistry. With a frame of “harm reduction,” you rule out of 
the debate moral arguments, appeals to common sense, appeals to 
tradition, and many other irrationalities that may still persuade a 
naive audience.
Part of this is not allowing a prohibitionist to weasel away when they 
are on the losing side of a point. If they do not tell the truth, hammer 
them on it. Let the audience know that their other points must be 
under a cloud of suspicion owing to previous lies.
If You Have an Open Goal, Kick the Ball In
The prohibitionist machine may be large, well-funded, aggressive 
and loud, but it is also clumsy, stupid and full of weak points. As it 
lurches through the media landscape it reveals, to anyone watching, 
vulnerabilities at which it can be struck. Never let an opportunity go 
to waste. Any weak point might be discovered and reinforced before 
it can be attacked.
For example, if there is a report in a local newspaper about a 
fourteen-year old getting suspended from school because cannabis 
was discovered in their backpack, the cannabis law reform 
movement must take the points on offer. The local branch President 
should contact everyone in the branch and suggest to write a letter to 
the editor pointing out the flaws in the prohibitionist model, and the 
superiority of the law reform model. Inform the public that gangs 
happily sell cannabis to fourteen-year olds, and cannabis cafés do 
not.
It is true that it is better to campaign actively rather than reactively, 

but it is also true that reactive force is easier to organise. If a 
cannabis law reform movement cannot generate at least a few 
hundred letters whenever it is attacked then it will appear very weak 
to anyone considering voting for it. 
Keep Your Information Fresh
One of the good things about fighting for cannabis law reform is that 
public opinion is slowly but inexorably moving in its favour. A 
consequence is that it is easy to find reports in the media of a new 
study, or an opinion from a former judge or law enforcement officer 
in favour of reform. For example, a month before this handbook was 
published, Judge Richard A. Posner of the Seventh Circuit U.S. 
Court of Appeals stated that he saw little difference between 
cannabis and tobacco and that it was “absurd to be criminalizing 
possession or use or distribution of marijuana.”
There are often reports like this in the media, and if a cannabis law 
reform activist can reference the most recent one it will create the 
impression that public opinion is turning in favour of reform (which 
it is). This will also give the cannabis law reform activist an 
advantage if one of their opponents references an old study that has 
since been debunked.

1. AN EXAMPLE PARTY POLICY
If an activist or party official succeeds in making a person receptive 
to the cannabis law reform message, that person will inevitably ask 
“What would you do if you were in power?” Essentially the second 
part of this handbook is all about persuading someone that cannabis 
prohibition is a failure; this part is about persuading them that the 
policy of the cannabis law reform party would be an improvement. 
This part of the handbook does not describe the official policy of any 
cannabis law reform party, although its core points are based on the 
policy of the Aotearoa Legalise Cannabis Party, which has fought for 
cannabis law reform in New Zealand since 1996. Copying an 
existing party's policy would be impractical owing to the different 
and changing local conditions that various cannabis law reform 
movements will encounter. It is also impossible because different 
cannabis law reform parties will have different core values and 
therefore an unique emphasis on their choice of policy.
It is, however, an example of a comprehensive party policy that 
covers all the areas that cannabis law reform might impact on. No 
matter how strongly a person agrees that cannabis prohibition is a 
monstrous failure, they will only vote for a cannabis law reform 
party if that party can clearly present a better way of doing things, 
and if that party can explain how this way of doing things is better 
for that particular voter.
When presenting a party policy there are two major considerations. 
The first is how aggressive the language should be. Politics is cut-
throat and for this reason the language in this part is more 
inflammatory than in the previous two, but activists elsewhere might 
choose to tone it down or even make it sharper, depending on their 
objectives. The second is that the party policy ought to be presented 
in a fashion so that the least objectionable policies come first.
In this part of the handbook, the hypothetical cannabis law reform 

party is called the Cannabis Party, which may, of course, be changed 
to suit local conditions.
The Twenty-Six Point Plan
One way of presenting a policy document for a cannabis law reform 
party is to produce a plan. The policy in this section is presented as if 
it were a twenty-six point plan; one point for every letter of the 
alphabet. Depending on local conditions, a cannabis law reform 
movement could use all or some of the following points.
The way to use them is to present them as a list of demands. There is 
no argument here, and these points only have counterpoints in the 
context of negotiation. The idea is to present the most aggressive 
written document short of a declaration of violent intent, with the 
implied demand that the establishment will make concessions to the 
cannabis culture for every point not granted.
If the plan is presented correctly, anyone reading it will understand 
that cannabis users are aware of the degree to which their rights are 
being violated, and that we intend to restore every single one of 
them.
A. An Immediate Ceasefire
Cannabis Party policy demands an immediate moratorium on arrests 
for any cannabis related activity apart from supplying cannabis to 
minors. From the date of the moratorium onward, police will no 
longer have the right to arrest or detain people for cannabis related 
offences, nor to search them or their property on the pretext of 
having smelt cannabis. 
B. Throw Out All Cases in Progress
Cannabis Party policy demands that all procedures for cannabis 
offences currently in progress in the court system, apart from 
supplying cannabis to minors, are to be thrown out. 

C. Release the Prisoners
Cannabis Party policy demands that any person currently serving a 
custodial sentence for a cannabis offence, apart from supplying 
cannabis to minors, is to be released without delay.
D. Victims to be Compensated
Cannabis Party policy demands that, because the only crime with 
cannabis is prohibition, those who have been affected by it must be 
compensated for the violation of their human rights that they 
experienced. Anyone who was forced to pay a fine for a cannabis 
offence is to be reimbursed at interest. Anyone who was imprisoned 
as a result of being charged with a cannabis offence is to receive 
$1,000 for every day that they spent imprisoned. Any assets that have 
been seized by government officials as a result of a cannabis offence 
are to be returned. 
E. Criminal Records to be Expunged
Cannabis Party policy demands that any existing criminal record 
relating to a cannabis offence is to be expunged. No official record 
will be retained of that person having committed that offence. People 
who previously had cannabis convictions on their criminal record 
will be under no legal obligation to declare this to anyone.
F. Provision to be Made for Industrial Hemp
Cannabis Party policy demands that all legal restrictions on the 
cultivation and sale of hemp products be removed. Provision must be 
made for the establishment of a nationwide, full-scale hemp industry.
G. Market for Personal Use of Cannabis to be Regulated
Cannabis Party policy demands that the personal use of cannabis be 
regulated in a manner similar to tobacco and alcohol. 
H. Research into Cannabis Issues to be Funded

Cannabis Party policy demands that funds be directed to the study of 
cannabis issues in our society. The Cannabis Party will devote some 
of our billion dollar windfall to sponsoring university research, 
keeping our best brains in the country and working on improving the 
lives of our own citizens.
I. Cannabis Cafés to be Established
Cannabis Party policy demands that provision be made to establish 
cannabis cafés in this country. The cannabis cafés will operate on the 
same model that has succeeded in the Netherlands. Cannabis cafés 
will operate under certain restrictions to ensure that their impact on 
society is minimised.
J. Truthful Cannabis Education to be Given at Schools
Cannabis Party policy demands an end to the propaganda spewed at 
high school students about the supposed dangers of cannabis use. 
Any drug education that is given to high school students must 
emphasise that the overwhelming majority of drug deaths are caused 
by alcohol and tobacco. 
K. Rehabilitation Centres to be Funded
Cannabis Party policy demands that some of the revenue from the 
taxation of cannabis be used for the rehabilitation of people with 
substance abuse disorders. Because many people who need help have 
been deterred by prohibition, it is essential that we make provision 
for those who have been neglected.
L. The Phrase “Alcohol and Drugs” to be Removed from the 
Government's Vocabulary
Cannabis Party policy demands that the Government be honest to the 
people, and stop using the phrase “alcohol and drugs” as if alcohol 
was not a drug. No official Government publication may use the 
phrase.

M. Limited Home Grow to be Legalised
Cannabis Party policy demands that every adult have the right to 
grow cannabis for personal use in their own home. Every adult 
would be allowed to grow up to six cannabis plants for personal use.
N. Cannabis Advocacy Agency to be Established to Deprogram 
People from Propaganda
Cannabis Party policy demands that some of the revenue from the 
taxation of cannabis be used for a national truth campaign that seeks 
to overturn the stereotypes of cannabis users that the Government 
has established over recent decades.
O. Cannabis Use to be Added to Bill of Rights Act
Cannabis Party policy demands that a person's choice to use cannabis 
be exempt from discrimination. If a person's cannabis use does not 
affect their job performance, it may not be used to refuse a person a 
job or to fire a person from a job they have.
P. Adults to Have the Right to Gift Cannabis
Cannabis Party policy demands that adults have the right to gift 
cannabis to other adults for their personal use without being charged 
with supplying an illegal substance.
Q. People Have the Right to Medicinal Cannabis
Cannabis Party policy demands that people have the right to use 
cannabis or cannabis products for medicinal aims. Whatever a 
person's belief on the recreational or industrial uses of cannabis, 
denying its use as a medicine is an inhumanity that must stop 
immediately.
R. Uses of Medicinal Cannabis to be Researched

Cannabis Party policy demands that the neglect of the therapeutic 
potential of cannabis be immediately addressed. To this end, some of 
the revenue from the taxation of cannabis must be used to sponsor 
research into medical uses of cannabis.
S. The Environmental Benefits of Cannabis to be Assessed
Cannabis Party policy demands that an environmental impact 
assessment be made comparing the crops of the status quo with 
hemp.
T. Job Training for those Displaced by Law Reform
Cannabis Party policy demands that no-one suffer from the change to 
cannabis regulation. This means that some of the revenue generated 
by cannabis taxation must be used to retrain police officers, gang 
members and others who earned a living from cannabis prohibition. 
Some police officers previously tasked with cannabis prohibition can 
be assigned to aggressively police the sale of cannabis to minors.
U. Drug Dogs To Be Humanely Retired
Cannabis Party policy demands that all drug dogs trained to bark 
upon detection of cannabis be retired from the police force. If homes 
for them cannot be found, they are to be looked after until the end of 
their natural lives from revenue generated by cannabis taxation.
V. Seized Assets to be Returned
Cannabis Party policy demands that any asset seized in relation to 
the prosecution of a cannabis law be returned to its rightful owner, or 
compensation be paid equal to the value of the stolen assets.
W. (Optional) Open a Ministry of Cannabis Affairs
Cannabis Party policy demands that some of the revenue from 
cannabis taxation be used to establish a Ministry of Cannabis Affairs. 
The purpose of this Ministry is to establish who made cannabis 

illegal, who kept it illegal, and who wants to make it illegal in the 
future.
X. (Optional) Rescind the Single Convention on Narcotics
Cannabis Party policy demands that our nation withdraw from the 
Single Convention on Narcotics on the grounds that its provisions 
are against human rights.
Y. (Optional) Legalise Other Drugs
Cannabis Party policy demands that provision be made for other 
illegal drugs to follow a similar path to law reform as cannabis.
Z. Your Issue Here
If the party has decided to at least flirt with issues not directly related 
to cannabis, one or more of these could be added to the plan. To do 
so may be a concession that the party is not a single-issue one, but it 
might not. If the pamphlet is produced for a small market, Issue Z 
could be a community project that has stalled through lack of 
funding and could be paid for with revenue from cannabis taxation. 
If it can be determined how much money cannabis prohibition costs 
each person a year, this figure can be multiplied by how many people 
are in an area. Anything less than that total cost has the potential to 
be a pet project that is sponsored by the cannabis law reform 
movement.
A quick scan of the recent letters to the editor of the local newspaper 
will tell you what the issues on the minds of the people there are, and 
usually one of these issues will be a lack of funding for something. If 
the something lacking funding is a public good or service, then you 
have an issue that few will disagree upon (and a solution that no-one 
else is offering).
It is probably best if the issue to be taken up relates to health, 
housing, education, infrastructure, or some other public good or 
service, and not any other political cause. The reason for this is that 

taking up another political cause will alienate some of your voters. 
The cannabis issue is controversial enough as it is, and it does not 
need to be associated with another “radical” policy.

2. RUNNING A CAMPAIGN
This section is much smaller than it deserves to be, but only because 
much of what belongs in it is covered in the first part of this book. 
The most important thing to remember is that an election campaign 
grows with every member signed up, even if this happens years 
before election day. Therefore, membership, fundraising and media 
work done at any time since the last election counts as effort towards 
the next campaign. 
Having said this, there are some considerations that apply to a 
campaign only in the final weeks. These will be covered in this 
section of the handbook.
It's a Marathon, Not a Sprint
Although the minute-by-minute pressures of an election campaign 
can be intense at times, the drama lasts for weeks and the most 
effective time to put effort in is right at the end. For these reasons it 
is best to view an election campaign as a long march through 
unfamiliar territory.
Ego depletion theory tells us that the brain behaves as if it has a 
reserve of energy that can be depleted after too much thought. If a 
person has faced a number of intellectually challenging tasks in a 
short time period, their brain may lose some of its ability to deal with 
what is going on.
Like sporting events, the winners of political campaigns are the ones 
who did their preparation in advance. If the party has powerful 
systems in place, if these systems do not break down, if all necessary 
information is readily accessible, and if party communication is 
good, activists will be able to use their minds more efficiently and 
will be fresher at the end.
The beginning of the election campaign is when the party starts 

expending resources instead of gathering them. The election 
campaign is the part of the marathon where the runners enter the 
stadium and do one lap. This reveals the secret: the winner is already 
decided, and it is whoever has prepared the best.
World War I or World War II?
Although World Wars One and Two were fought relatively close 
together, the tactics were often very different, and reflect two 
different strategies for victory. World War I was characterised by 
attacks along a line, with the attacker seeking to overwhelm the 
enemy. World War II was characterised by the Blitzkrieg concept of 
the schwerpunkt, in which one point in the line was hit with as much 
force as possible until it broke, at which point the attack would pile 
through.
A World War I style election campaign would involve running 
candidates in every possible seat, and a World War II style campaign 
would involve piling all resources into winning one seat and building 
from there.
In practice, a party might have to find a balance between these 
extremes, which might mean running candidates in every seat but 
only seriously funding a handful of them. It is good to run high-
profile campaigns, because winning any electoral seat would be a 
triumph, and running a large number of low-profile campaigns 
allows the party to see which electorates have potential.
Selecting a Campaign Manager
For a cannabis law reform party to run an effective electoral 
campaign, it needs to task one person with overall authority for 
planning and executing that campaign. This can be a person from the 
Executive (the Press Secretary might be a good choice), or the 
membership, or even from outside.
The advantage with using a person from the outside is that they will 
not be involved in all of the petty squabbles that regularly afflict 

political parties. They have not been party to the backstabbing and 
the alliance building, and they might not even care who is in control 
of the party. Their objective is simply to help the party win the 
election. The disadvantage with using a person from the outside is 
that it is very difficult to gauge their loyalty to the movement. People 
take money from others to sabotage election campaigns, and it is 
wise to be wary of this possibility. There is also the possibility that a 
manager from the outside will not have the necessary status to 
properly inspire action.
The advantage with using a person from the Executive is that they 
will know a lot about how the movement works and who is in it. This 
will mean that they can more effectively bring resources to bear and 
use them. The disadvantage is that Executive members generally 
have a lot to do anyway, and because it is crucial that the party 
survive the election in order to fight the next one, they cannot easily 
take on an entire extra and new role.
For the above reasons it is possibly best that the Campaign Manager 
comes from the non-Executive body of the membership. This will 
make it possible for the Executive to choose someone who knows 
enough about how the party functions to direct it, and for a regular 
member to take an active and important role in the success of the 
party.
Special Considerations of a Campaign Manager
If the Campaign Manager is not appointed from the Executive, they 
may find that they are not aware of many party traditions, 
conventions and practices. This means that they have to get involved 
with a certain degree of caution. Election time or not, the other 
members of the Executive may not let a Campaign Manager assume 
any authority that isn't theirs.
The lists kept by the Membership Secretary (see “Extraordinary 
Considerations of the Membership Secretary”) are of extreme value 
to the Campaign Manager at election time. Should the Campaign 
Manager need to encourage some volunteer action in a certain place 

and time, the lists will tell them who is active in that area, what skills 
they have and how helpful they have been in the past.
The Campaign Manager has one considerable advantage when it 
comes to motivating people to volunteer at election time. Because 
there is usually no position of Campaign Manager, any member 
getting communication from one will understand that it is a special 
situation that might require special action. Related to this, the 
Campaign Manager will need to project a sense of urgency at all 
times. This is important to inspire other members to take action. 
Given the pressures of the election, this should come naturally.
Selecting a Candidate
There are two ways of selecting a candidate: they can be chosen by 
the party Executive or they can be elected by the membership of the 
branch or chapter. In most cases there will be no conflict between the 
two, because the Executive will understand that the will of the 
members of a branch must be respected.
The party membership has little need for advice on who they should 
select as a candidate. Their collective will and intelligence ought to 
be enough to ensure that they put forward as a leader a person who 
can skilfully represent both them and the movement.
The national body may wish to have veto rights over a candidate in 
case there is a rogue element or in case the election of that candidate 
was somehow improperly conducted. The party should not allow a 
candidate to run if their candidacy makes the party less likely to win.
Special Considerations of a Candidate
Any candidate for a cannabis law reform party must be aware that 
running for public office invites a lot of attention. All manner of 
people will call and many of them will be referred to the candidate 
by an officer within the party. This entails an unusual lack of privacy, 
which is normal for people in the public eye but may not have been 
for the candidate.

The candidate must not only get used to this attention but revel in it. 
Every passer-by affords an opportunity to snare a vote. Any eye 
contact can lead to a wellwishing or an argument. The pressure of all 
this will be much easier to bear if the candidate is an extroverted 
person. If a person likes to “recharge their batteries” by spending 
time alone, they may find the experience of being a candidate 
draining.
It should be kept in mind that the candidate and the message are 
inseparable. Any candidate for a cannabis law reform party must 
expect that people who do not know them well will refer to them as 
“the cannabis guy” or similar. A consequence is that the candidate 
will become a lightning rod for any prejudices about cannabis or 
about cannabis users. This must be seen as a good thing, because the 
stronger a person's prejudices against cannabis, the greater the 
potential to shift them towards a more enlightened position.
Attending Public Debates
If a cannabis law reform activist runs in an election, chances are 
good that they will be invited to a public debate with the other 
candidates. The activist must not let organisers of the debate restrict 
the candidates to those of the “established” parties. If this is 
attempted, the activist must fight to ensure that their voice is heard.
Any candidate from a cannabis law reform party will have a great 
chance of getting attention. The advantage with a multi-party debate 
is that it is less likely that a cannabis law reform activist will be 
attacked specifically on the cannabis issue, for the reason that the 
other parties will be arguing about the economy, education, defence 
and health. This means that a cannabis law reform candidate can 
practice a spiel that they can give in two or three minutes, and 
deliver it with little need for modification.
Because people have considerable prejudice against cannabis users, 
and because most people present already know what the 
conservatives, the social democrats and the greens are going to say, it 

is easy to come away victorious as a candidate for a cannabis law 
reform party. If an activist looks presentable, speaks coherently and 
presents an argument that appears, even on the face of it, to make 
sense, they will be the most surprising and therefore most memorable 
of all the options.
If you are nervous speaking in front of a crowd, the old 
psychologist's trick of imagining the audience naked really does 
work. Whether the activist is nervous or not, it can help to keep in 
mind that speaking in favour of a political platform in front of a 
crowd is something that few experience, so it ought to be savoured.
Get Your Story Straight
If a candidate uses a fact to support their argument, it is necessary 
that the fact be correct. There are two kinds of way that a fact can be 
correct, and they relate to the intellectual and the emotional methods 
of persuasion.
The intellectual side of the argument will be won if the facts 
accurately describe the reality of cannabis law reform. How much 
does it cost to keep a person in prison for a year and who supplied 
these figures? If the candidate can answer both of these questions 
without pause they will demonstrate that they have an excellent 
grasp of the topic.
In some cases the candidate can share their reasoning with the 
audience (“one thousand cannabis prisoners at an hundred thousand 
dollars a year equals a hundred million dollars”). This is a great 
tactic because the audience are more likely to be persuaded if they 
feel that they arrived at the conclusions themselves rather than 
having been told.
The emotional side of the argument will be won if the candidates use 
the same facts. Little makes a party look less professional and 
trustworthy than contradictions in its own message or policy. It is 
best for the party to agree on the relevant facts before any serious 
media campaign - especially an election - is launched. This is where 

the role of the Information Officer becomes crucial - they are the one 
who must do the research, who must understand the facts and who 
must ensure that the rest of the party understands these facts.
Mailbombing
The closer the election is, the more justification the party has on 
spending money on media such as propaganda pamphlets. If the 
party has volunteer labour in a certain geographical area they can hit 
it with a mailbomb. This means that thousands of pamphlets are 
printed up and posted into every letterbox in a target area.
The best way to do this is to have three people and one car. One 
person drives the car full of pamphlets and the other two canvass 
either side of the street. If the campaign is large, care has to be taken 
not to hit the same letterboxes twice, and this will require a master 
map on which covered streets are marked with a highlighter.
One of the great things about mailbombing is that it is a logistical 
exercise that can be carried out at the branch level. Assuming that the 
party Information Officer has made propaganda pamphlets freely 
available on the party website, the branch representatives can 
download it, do a print run of it and then mail it. Because 
mailbombing requires three people it will give some activists an idea 
of the kind of cooperation that is necessary to succeed at any level.
Getting Out the Vote
Disappointingly, the supporters of cannabis law reform parties are 
amongst the least likely to actually vote. Surveys of disenchanted 
voters often reveal that a high proportion of them would have voted 
for cannabis law reform-friendly parties. Because it is also true that 
people who are not happy with the establishment as a whole (at least 
enough to question the value of voting) are more likely to be 
cannabis-friendly, a Get Out The Vote strategy is essential.
Several months out from an election, it might take hours of 
recruitment time to secure one new vote for the party. The day before 

the election, a twenty cent bulk text message might attract hundreds.
A rule of thumb that appears to hold true in multiparty democracies 
is that a party gets fifty votes for every member it has. Another way 
of looking at this is that each member must seek to persuade fifty 
people to vote for the party. This is the calculus of the ground power 
half of the equation. Of course, air power will do some of the job, but 
it is best for activists to approach their work from the perspective 
that they need to persuade fifty people.
One way to ensure that a member draws fifty votes for the party is 
for them to make up a list of supporters and drive them to the polls. 
Many supporters of cannabis law reform will be too poor to have a 
car and will appreciate any help in getting to cast their vote. This is 
much easier to organise at the branch level, although the party 
website could help to arrange contact between those who can provide 
a lift and those who need one.
Another way is to enlist volunteers to call known members and 
supporters and cajole them into actually voting for the party on 
election day. If they have a problem getting to the poll booth, a 
message can be passed to whoever is responsible for driving people 
to the polls in that area.
Ideally, everyone who ever thought that voting for the Cannabis 
Party was a good idea should be reminded of this the day before the 
election itself. The party Membership Secretary can use their own 
membership lists to send messages as the election date approaches. 
These can be sent by email initially, although it is a good idea to send 
a bulk text message the day before the election with a very short call 
to arms.
That Final Moment
When people vote, sometimes they go into the booth knowing who 
their choice is and they go in and tick the box. If you can get 
supporters of cannabis law reform into this category, this is great. If 
not, it has to be hoped that the logo persuades them.

Whether a party logo attracts a vote is partially a function of how 
recognisable it is to the voter. This is why it is crucial to plaster it all 
over the party merchandise. Also for this reason it is a considerable 
gamble to use anything other than a cannabis leaf as a logo.

3. MISCELLANEOUS
Live As If It Were Legal
One of the best ways to fight for cannabis law reform is to live as if 
cannabis were legal. Ultimately, the choice to care about the legal 
status of cannabis is up to the individual. Cannabis can be smoked in 
the street if a person is willing to suffer the legal consequences of 
this.
The goal of this strategy is to normalise cannabis use in the public 
perception. Because cannabis is illegal, non-stoners do not encounter 
it often. For this reason, they will be impressed to see a person 
smoking cannabis in the street. If they see several dozen they might 
get a real shock, which might help them to understand just how many 
cannabis users there are out there (and how much it must be costing 
to conduct war against them all).
Key to this strategy is for the activist to behave as if smoking 
cannabis is no big deal. Explaining calmly and rationally that you do 
not consider cannabis use to be wrong will make a better impression 
than launching into a Martin Luther King style speech at someone 
who is just on their way to return some videos.
The Cannabis Closet
Like other lifestyles, an individual's openness to their own cannabis 
use can be described in terms of how far they are into the closet. The 
deeper, or more “in the closet” a person is, the less they admit to 
their cannabis use.
Deepest in the closet are the people who admit their cannabis use to 
no-one. Then come those who admit it to their closest confidantes, 
then those who admit it to their family, then those who admit it to 
anyone who asks (with the occasional strategic exception for police 
officers and the like). “Closet stoner” is a term given to a person who 

appears to be a stoner but does not admit to it.
Out of the closet is anyone who freely admits their cannabis use. 
Such people might even bristle at the use of the word “admit” for the 
reason that, because one admits to crime, it implies that cannabis use 
is a crime. Anyone making this argument is almost certainly out of 
the closet.
It is possible to come a long way out of the cannabis closet. Some 
cannabis users come so far out that their lifestyle is best described as 
“flamboyant.” It is not difficult to understand the temptation to do 
this: it is a natural result of having been oppressed for so long. What 
is most important, from the perspective of a cannabis law reform 
activist, is what is best for the movement.
The Executive of the Party can and must use this as a measure of a 
member's loyalty and commitment to the cause. Writing a signed 
letter to a newspaper or standing for an election are two ways that a 
person can declare publicly, and therefore to anyone who knows 
them, that they are a supporter of cannabis law reform. Of course, 
neither of these is quite the same as a public declaration that a person 
is a cannabis user, but most people will make this assumption.
Any cannabis law reform activist must understand from the 
beginning that their status in the movement is heavily dependent on 
their relationship with the cannabis closet.
Displays of Solidarity
To get a proper cannabis law reform movement going, it is vital that 
the membership build up a sense of solidarity with each other. A 
gesture of solidarity will motivate everyone who partakes in it to do 
more for the cause. Sometimes the displays of solidarity are centred 
around an individual, and other times they are centred around the 
movement.
An example of the former case occurs when an activist is arrested 
and charged with a cannabis crime. Should that activist need to 

appear in court, the movement can create an impression by stacking 
the gallery with activists all wearing cannabis law reform t-shirts. If 
an activist gets let off a charge, those present will remember if it was 
cheered. 
An example of the latter case is a spontaneous counterattack that is 
launched whenever the cannabis law reform movement is attacked in 
the media. If a politician comes out and speaks in favour of 
prohibition, they should be attacked along every line an attack can be 
made. Let the membership write letters to the editor of their local 
newspaper pointing out the reasoning errors or lies in the politician's 
statement (there will be some).
The core of solidarity is that if one of your members is abused, the 
abuser is attacked by all the other members. Actually doing this will 
take some time to practice, but once it becomes instinctual, the 
movement will be preparing for victory.
The best example of the power of solidarity is the story of Spartacus. 
A slave mutiny was put down in Ancient Rome, and the Romans 
asked the slaves which of them was the Spartacus, the leader. It was 
clear that Spartacus was to be executed. All of the slaves claimed to 
be Spartacus themselves, and so shared his fate, whatever that should 
be. The cannabis law reform movement could achieve anything with 
this level of solidarity. It would mean that if one cannabis user got 
arrested in an area, thousands of other cannabis users would descend 
upon the police station and demand to all be arrested themselves.
Fighting in Court
Every dog has his day. The day of any given cannabis law reform 
activist could come when they are dragged to court for a cannabis 
offence. If a person does not believe in cannabis prohibition then the 
act of arresting and trying them is, to them, the true criminal offence. 
The ultimate rejection of prohibition is to do a Roaring Lion. Refuse 
to acknowledge the authority of the court. Refuse to acknowledge the 
legality of cannabis prohibition. Refuse to acknowledge the sentence.

It is theoretically possible that if every person tried with a cannabis 
offence tried to drag the procedure out in the most costly manner, the 
court system would be overwhelmed by this and would be forced to 
throw the cases out owing to their low priority. This will remain a 
theory until everyone does it, but it is hard to take the opinion of 
anyone not in the court system seriously.
There is not enough space to give detailed instructions on how to 
beat a cannabis charge, but if an activist is aware of their rights and 
has access to a lawyer they will be better off than most.
Using Volunteer Labour
As the movement expands, the pool of volunteer labour hours 
available to the party will increase. 
If there is no election on, the best use of volunteer labour hours is in 
increasing the pool of volunteer labour hours. This means signing up 
new members, and motivating current members to be more active.
If there is an election on, the best use of volunteer hours could be 
many different things, but helping candidates with their campaigns 
will be important at every stage. As election day draws near, all focus 
should be on the get out the vote campaign, which includes 
mailbombing and erecting billboards.
Community Outreach
There is no reason to limit the activity of a cannabis law reform 
movement to direct agitation for law reform. At all times the 
movement has a positive image to maintain, and a negative image to 
counter. 
It should be kept in mind that a membership of a thousand people is 
a considerable labour force if it were to be put to work. Even if a call 
for volunteers is put out and only five percent show up, if all of them 
are wearing a cannabis t-shirt this will create an impression.

Many people in the cannabis law reform movement will be skilled 
gardeners or landscapers, and if enough volunteers can be found this 
sort of work can be done as part of a fundraising effort. Failing this, a 
team of fifty workers doing even unskilled labour can raise hundreds 
of dollars an hour.
Public Submissions
In some cases, government or lawmakers will solicit public opinion 
before making a decision on a law. Of course, this never goes as far 
as necessarily doing what the people want, but it is still an 
opportunity for anyone to have their say on an issue.
If the government does ask for public submissions on a cannabis 
related issue, this is almost as exciting for a cannabis law reform 
movement as an election. It means the entire logistical machine can 
be thrown into action. For this reason it is an excellent idea to take 
public submissions seriously, as well as anything else that allows the 
party to work together. The election campaign will be much easier if 
the party has practised.
There is no need to limit the act of making a submission to the party. 
The party can make its submission, and every other member or 
supporter who also wishes to make one can do so. This lets people 
put the argument in their own words.
Slogans
These slogans are all short statements that can be written on a 
placard to take to marches or to protests. They are also valuable as 
signatures on internet forums. There are hundreds of possible 
slogans; here are only a few.
“Vote for us or go to prison.”
Many cannabis users are blasé about who to vote for, reasoning that 
because all parties are made of politicians they must be equally 

crooked. Whether or not this is true, all but one of them wants to see 
cannabis users in prison.
“Cannabis use is not a crime.”
This is an affirmation and a declaration of the rights of cannabis 
users. 
“Good people do not recognise bad laws.”
This explains why cannabis law reform activists continue to use 
cannabis despite it being against the law. The slogan is a retort to the 
idea that the law is the law and must be followed because it is the 
law.
“Grow the economy.”
This slogan references the economic devastation wrought by 
cannabis prohibition, both on money wasted and potential earnings 
that are denied.
“Who am I hurting?”
This is to declare two things: cannabis use is a victimless crime and 
if an activity hurts no-one then no-one has the right to make it illegal.
“Dealers don't check for ID.”
This refers to the fact that cannabis prohibition is worse for children 
than any kind of law reform, because the current system does little to 
keep cannabis out of the hands of youths.
“It didn't work for alcohol.”
This points out that there is a historical precedent for law reform of 
drugs: alcohol prohibition was a failure, so we got rid of it.
The Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs

Even if a cannabis law reform movement can win the argument in 
both the media sphere and the ballot box, one ultimate problem 
remains. It is that almost every nation is a signatory to the United 
Nations Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs. This has had the 
effect of signing away the nation's sovereignty to the United Nations 
in the area of drug law reform.
Although it is theoretically possible for any nation to simply 
withdraw from the treaty, the prohibitionists will raise the spectre of 
international sanctions should this be suggested. There are, however, 
ways for cannabis law reform to succeed within the framework of the 
Single Convention.
One way is to keep cannabis illegal, as it is now, but ensure that both 
police and cannabis users are operating under an “understanding” 
that, as long as cannabis is used under certain conditions, police will 
not interfere. Which usually means: don't make a dick of yourself 
and it's all good. This is essentially the Dutch solution and will likely 
be close to the optimal solution short of withdrawing from the 
Convention.
Another is to restructure the police so that all drug enforcement 
activity must be funded from one specific account, which never has 
any money in it. This is an extreme form of deprioritisation - 
cannabis is still illegal but because there is no money to pay police to 
do anything about it the law cannot be enforced.
A third is to introduce a system of “strikes” under which people 
arrested for cannabis offences are given a number of warnings before 
any prosecution is made. The practical effect of this is similar to the 
first, because police are unwilling to do an hour of paperwork just to 
warn someone that if they do it several more times they might get a 
small fine.
Of course, the best way is to scrap the Single Convention altogether, 
which means that pressure must continue to be exerted upon 
politicians who may have some influence in this area. If a large 

number of countries voted cannabis law reform parties into power, 
even the most obstinate UN mandarin would have to concede that 
times have changed.
A Final Note I
At all times, the cannabis law reform movement must resist any and 
all efforts to divide it. There are not enough cannabis law reform 
activists to survive any kind of factionalisation, and prohibitionists 
are well aware of this.
The classic way of doing this is to set cannabis users who have 
different goals against each other. This has been used by 
prohibitionists in the USA to great effect. An example is when 
medical marijuana users achieve some rights, and then a proposal is 
made to grant rights to other cannabis users at the expense of 
medical marijuana patients. Do not fall for this - the division and 
infighting caused by such proposals do incalculable damage to the 
movement.
Another way of achieving this is to set cannabis users off against 
their natural allies. Alcohol was once prohibited, and many of the 
same wowsers responsible for that are responsible for cannabis 
prohibition. Likewise, many of the same people who believe that 
people should be free to drink alcohol believe that people should be 
free to use cannabis. For these reasons, the cannabis law reform 
activist should resist the temptation to attack alcohol and alcohol 
users, even if the evidence is clear that it does more damage to 
individuals and society than cannabis does or ever could. It is a 
strong argument to point out that if society can deal with alcohol it 
can deal with cannabis, but it is best to leave it at that.
Cannabis prohibitionists have been winning for close to a hundred 
years now, and this is because they are well funded and cunning. To 
turn the tide will, above all else, require that the cannabis law reform 
movement be at least as clever.
Never forget that you are fighting a human rights issue. As long as 

this is remembered you will have the enthusiasm to win.
A Final Note II
Do not compare prohibitionists to Hitler.

