www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids and the Brain

www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids and the Brain
Linda A. Parker
The MIT Press
Cambridge, Massachusetts
London, England

© 2017 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form by any electronic 
or mechanical means (including photocopying, recording, or information storage and 
retrieval) without permission in writing from the publisher.
Set in Sabon LT Std by Toppan Best-set Premedia Limited. Printed and bound in the 
United States of America.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Parker, Linda (Linda A.), author.
Title: Cannabinoids and the brain / Linda Parker.
Description: Cambridge, MA : The MIT Press, [2017] | Includes bibliographical references 
and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2016030736 | ISBN 9780262035798 (hardcover : alk. paper)
Subjects: LCSH: Nervous system--Degeneration--Treatment. | Cannabis--Therapeutic use. | 
Marijuana--Therapeutic use.
Classification: LCC RM666.C266 P37 2017 | DDC 615.7/827--dc23 LC record available 
at https://lccn.loc.gov/2016030736
10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1
www.ebook3000.com

for Ernie

www.ebook3000.com

Contents
Preface 
ix
1	
An Introduction to Cannabis 
1
2	
The Endocannabinoid System 
19
3	
Cannabinoids and Emotional Regulation 
35
4	
Cannabinoids and Psychosis 
55
5	
Cannabinoids, Learning, and Memory 
67
6	
Cannabinoids, Reward, and Addiction 
79
7	
Cannabinoids, Body Weight, Feeding, and Appetite 
97
8	
Cannabinoids and Nausea 
107
9	
Cannabinoids and Pain 
123
10	 Cannabinoids and Epilepsy 
139
11	 Cannabinoids and Neurodegenerative Disorders 
149
12	 Where Do We Go from Here? 
163
References 
177
Index 
233

www.ebook3000.com

My keen interest in the endocannabinoid system began with an airmail 
envelope from Israel that arrived in my faculty mailbox in the year 2001. 
In late 1999, Cheryl Limebeer and I published a paper showing that  
THC reduced nausea in a rat model that we had had a role in developing. 
Shortly after the paper was published, I received a letter from Professor 
Raphael Mechoulam suggesting that we test non-psychotropic cannabi-
diol in that model. I was thrilled! The letter began a very exciting and 
fruitful collaboration that brought me into the exciting world of endo-
cannabinoids. In 2002, at Professor Mechoulam’s kind invitation, I 
attended my first meeting of the International Cannabinoid Research 
Society, in Monterey, California, at which I met Professor Mechoulam 
and several other outstanding researchers who would later become 
collaborators.
In addition to Professor Mechoulam, our group has had the good  
fortune of collaborating with such leaders in their field as Roger Pertwee 
(University of Aberdeen), Keith Sharkey (University of Calgary), Daniele 
Piomelli (University of California at Irvine), Aron Lichtman (Virginia 
Commonwealth University), Benjamin Cravatt (Scripps Research Insti-
tute), Loren Parsons (Scripps Research Institute), Alexandros Makriyan-
nis (Northeastern University), Paul Fletcher (Center for Addiction and 
Mental Health), Bryan Kolb (University of Lethbridge), Klaus-Peter 
Ossenkopp (University of Western Ontario), John Salamone (University 
of Connecticut), Ganesh Thames (Northeastern University), and Matias 
Lopez (University of Oviedo), and with my wonderful colleagues at the 
University of Guelph, Elena Choleris, Francesco Leri, Boyer Winters, Bet-
tina Kalisch, and Craig Bailey. Over the past ten years these collabora-
tions have provided outstanding training opportunities for members of 
my laboratory, including Cheryl Limebeer, Erin Rock, Martin Sticht, Kiri 
Wills, Lesley O’Brien, Shadna Rana, Katherine Tuerke, and Gavin Petrie. 
Preface

x    Preface
It is these hard-working, enthusiastic, highly skilled people who keep the 
process of discovery going in the laboratory. Nothing would happen 
without them.
This book is an expansion and update of a review paper, which 
Raphael Mechoulam kindly invited me to co-author, that appeared in the 
Annual Review of Psychology (Mechoulam and Parker 2013). Our col-
laborations over the past 15 years have always taken my research to new 
vistas. Astute and careful editing by Paul Bethge at the MIT Press has 
made the book a much better read.  I thank him for his contributions to 
the clarity of my prose.
I draw the reader’s attention to four outstanding edited volumes on 
cannabinoids and endocannabinoids that have been published in the  
past few years: Handbook of Cannabis, edited by R. G. Pertwee (Oxford 
University Press, 2014), Handbook of Experimental Pharmacology, vol-
ume 231: Endocannabinoids, edited by R. G. Pertwee (Springer, 2015), 
International Review of Neurobiology, volume 125: Endocannabinoids, 
edited by L. Parsons and M. Hill (Elsevier, 2015), and Cannabinoids, ed. 
V. Di Marzo (Wiley-Blackwell, 2014). For more information, see the 
Information for Health Care Professionals on the Health Canada website 
at http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/dhp-mps/marihuana/med/infoprof-eng.php.
The National Institutes of Health recently prepared a videocast of a 
two-day conference (Marijuana and Cannabinoids: A Neuroscience 
Research Summit) held in March of 2016 and featuring presentations by 
some of the foremost NIH-funded researchers. I encourage readers of this 
book to find a free evening, open the link (http://videocast.nih.gov), and 
hear about the current state of the research in this exciting field. I also 
recommend The Scientist, a video documentary (produced by Fundación 
CANNA and available on YouTube) that provides an glimpse into the 
scientific and personal life of Raphael Mechoulam, “the father of the 
endocannabinoid system,” a humble, brilliant, generous, and truly 
delightful human being. I have had the great fortune of being able to call 
Professor Mechoulam my friend.
www.ebook3000.com

The cannabis plant has been used for recreational and medicinal  
purposes for more than 4,000 years, but only recently has scientific  
investigation of its effects begun to be fruitful. In 1964, at the Hebrew 
University of Jerusalem, the chemists Yehiel Gaoni and Raphael 
Mechoulam discovered the principal psychoactive ingredient in cannabis, 
Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol (often referred to as THC) (Gaoni and 
Mechoulam 1964a). This discovery finally provided the scientific com-
munity with the tools needed to investigate the properties of this plant. 
Although it was clear that the psychoactive effects of THC were pro-
duced by its action on the brain, exactly how that happened was not 
discovered until 20 years later, when Allyn Howlett’s group at the St. 
Louis University Medical School discovered the cannabinoid-1 (CB1) 
receptors (Devane et al. 1988; Howlett et al. 1986). The brain distribu-
tion of these newly discovered receptors was found to be consistent with 
the known pharmacological effects of THC. This discovery raised a ques-
tion: Why would the brain have receptors for a material derived from a 
plant? Obviously, the brain must produce chemicals similar to THC. 
Shortly thereafter, Mechoulam’s group discovered anandamide (AEA) 
(Devane et al. 1992) and 2-arachidonyl glycerol (2-AG) (Mechoulam et 
al. 1995; Sugiura et al. 1995), which are called endocannabinoids because 
they act on the same receptors as THC. And a second cannabinoid recep-
tor was discovered: CB2, found primarily in the immune system (Munro, 
Thomas, and Abu-Shaar 1993). The discovery of the site of action of 
THC has uncovered a new brain chemical system that is intimately 
involved in all aspects of brain functioning.
Since the aforementioned discoveries, a large number of investigators 
have provided considerable scientific knowledge about the metabolism, 
biochemistry, and pharmacology of THC, mostly in animal models. In  
a recent comprehensive review, Pacher and Kunos (2013) state that 
1
An Introduction to Cannabis

2    Chapter 1
“modulating endocannabinoid activity may have therapeutic potential  
in almost all diseases affecting humans, including obesity/metabolic  
syndrome, diabetes and diabetic complications, neurodegenerative, 
inflammatory, cardiovascular, liver, gastrointestinal, skin diseases, pain, 
psychiatric disorders, cachexia, cancer, chemotherapy induced nausea 
and vomiting, among others.” This bold statement is based on consider-
able pre-clinical scientific evidence in each of these fields. This newly dis-
covered system is of great importance and can explain many of the 
medicinal claims that have been made for medical marijuana. However, 
because of legal constraints, very little clinical work has been done in 
humans (Mechoulam et al. 2014).
In modern medicine there are few approved conditions for the use of 
cannabis and cannabinoid-derived medicines. This is due to the rather 
limited high-quality human clinical trials with cannabinoids. To be 
approved for use in a patient population, a drug must undergo clinical 
trials. Clinical trials have three phases to assess a new medicine for safety 
and effectiveness. Phase I tests for safety. A small number of people, are 
given a small dose of the drug under careful supervision. This is not done 
to test whether the drug works for the condition under review; it is done 
to test for side effects. In phase II the drug is given to people who have a 
medical condition to determine whether or not it helps them. Phase III 
trials are conducted only for medicines that have already passed the first 
two phases. In phase III, the drug is compared against existing treatments 
and/or placebo, using randomized assignment to treatment groups (ran-
domized control trials, abbreviated RCT) and double-blind procedures 
(neither participant nor the researcher knows to which group a partici-
pant was assigned). These clinical trials often last a year or longer, involv-
ing several thousand patients and often millions of dollars.
According to a recent systematic review and meta-analysis (Whiting et 
al. 2015) of evidence (a total of 79 RCTs) of cannabinoids as medicine for 
nausea/vomiting, appetite stimulation, chronic pain, spasticity in multiple 
sclerosis (MS), depression, anxiety disorder, sleep disorder, psychosis, 
glaucoma, or Tourette syndrome, most studies suggested that cannabi-
noids were associated with improvements in symptoms. However, when 
the quality of each study was assessed using the Cochrane risk-of-bias 
tool, which grades the rigor of the design of a clinical trial, there was 
moderate-quality evidence to support the use of cannabinoids in the 
treatment of chronic neuropathic or cancer pain and spasticity due  
to MS. There was low-quality evidence suggesting that cannabinoids 
were associated with improvements in nausea and vomiting due to 
www.ebook3000.com

An Introduction to Cannabis    3
chemotherapy, weight gain in HIV infection, sleep disorders, and Tourette 
syndrome, and very low-quality evidence for an improvement in anxiety. 
A number of methodological weaknesses were identified in these studies, 
including failure to appropriately handle participants who withdrew 
from the trial, selective outcome reporting, inadequate description of 
methods, inadequate randomization, and inadequate blinding. An addi-
tional limitation was the very small sample size of most of the RCTs, 
which means that they lacked the power to detect any difference in the 
treatments. Multiple different cannabinoids and routes of administration 
also were evaluated in various studies. In view of these limitations, Whit-
ing et al. urged that large, robust RCTs be conducted to confirm the 
potential medicinal effects of cannabinoids. However, such trials are 
expensive and are difficult to perform with substances that are highly 
regulated. Therefore, most of the evidence of the potential medicinal 
promise of cannabinoids is based on experimental pre-clinical studies 
with animals, in which greater scientific rigor can be applied to the design 
of a study. The numbers of such studies have increased exponentially 
since the discovery of the endocannabinoid system and the mechanism of 
action of cannabinoids in the 1990s. Results clearly demonstrate the 
promise of cannabinoids for treatment of several disorders of the nervous 
system, including anxiety, post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), chronic 
pain, spasticity in MS, epilepsy, obesity, nausea, and vomiting.
A Brief History of Cannabis Use
Early in agricultural history, more than 10,000 years ago, cannabis was 
grown along the rich banks of great rivers, including the Hwang-Ho in 
China, the Indus in India, the Tigris and the Euphrates in Mesopotamia, 
and the Nile in Egypt, for the purpose of producing hemp fibers. The  
oldest known written record of cannabis use comes from the Chinese 
emperor Shen Nung, who in 2,727 BC investigated botanical compounds 
for the potential medicinal properties, using himself as a test subject (Abel 
1980). As the “father of Chinese Medicine,” Shen Nung is said to have 
written the original Pen Ts’ao, listing hundreds of drugs derived from 
vegetable, animal, and mineral sources; however, no original text exists. 
The oldest Pen Ts’ao was compiled in the first century AD by an unknown 
author who claimed to have incorporated the original compendium into 
his book, which contains a reference to ma, the Chinese word for can-
nabis. In the second century AD, the Chinese surgeon Hua T’o used a 
mixture of cannabis resin and wine as an anesthetic to perform painless 

4    Chapter 1
surgery. The Chinese were also the first people to report the use of recre-
ational cannabis (Abel 1980).
India was the first culture to use cannabis for religious and social pur-
poses. In the four holy books known as the Vedas, the god Siva became 
angry after a family squabble and takes refuge in the cool shade of a can-
nabis plant. He eats some of the plant, and it becomes his favorite food. 
Siva became known as the Lord of Bhang (Abel 1980). Bhang is not 
merely the plant, but also a liquid refreshment made with its leaves. 
Ganja and charas, too, were made from cannabis in India. Ganja, made 
from the flowers, is more potent than bhang. Charas is made from the 
resin of the flowers and is much more potent than ganja; it is similar to 
hashish. Bhang is used in a manner similar to alcohol in the West—often 
in conjunction with weddings and special festivities. According to Indian 
folk songs dating back to the twelfth century, bhang was also consumed 
by soldiers before they went into battle. At the turn of the twentieth cen-
tury, the Indian Hemp Drug Commission, summoned to investigate the 
use of cannabis in India, concluded that the plant was an integral part of 
the culture and religion of the country. Indeed, the commission concluded 
that “besides a cure for fever, bhang has many medicinal virtues. It cures 
dysentery and sunstroke, clears phlegm, quickens digestion, sharpens 
appetite, makes the tongue of the lisper plain, freshens the intellect, and 
gives alertness to the body and gaiety to the mind.”
Cannabis was introduced into Western medicine in the 1839 by  
William Brooke O’Shaughnessy (1839), a surgeon who learned of its 
medicinal benefits while working for the British East Indies Company. It 
was promoted for analgesic, sedative, anti-inflammatory, anti-spasmodic, 
and anti-convulsant properties (properties for which pre-clinical animal 
models provide considerable support). In fact, cannabis was said to be 
the treatment of choice for Queen Victoria’s menstrual pain (Abrams and 
Guzman 2015). However, in the 1900s specific medicines were developed 
for each of the above-mentioned indications, and medicinal use of can-
nabis declined in Western countries.
In the middle of the nineteenth century, Charles Baudelaire,  
Théophile Gautier, and Jacques-Joseph Moreau—all members of the 
Parisian Club des Hachichins—wrote about the psychological effects of 
cannabis (Mechoulam and Hanus 2000). In 1845, Moreau, a psychia-
trist, published a book, titled Hashish and Mental Illness, in which he 
described psychological phenomena he had observed in experimental 
participants, including happiness, excitement, dissociation of ideas, dis-
tortion of time and space, sensory enhancement, delusions, emotional 
www.ebook3000.com

An Introduction to Cannabis    5
fluctuations, illusions, and hallucinations. It is presumed that Moreau’s 
participants consumed large amounts of hashish orally (Mechoulam 
and Parker 2013).
In the United States, the history of the use and the prohibition of can-
nabis have been clearly described many times (Brecher 1972; Iversen 
2008). Early in the twentieth century, marijuana was used for its psycho-
active properties mostly by Mexicans and by African American jazz 
musicians in a few large cities. In fact, the wave of immigrants who 
entered the southern US from Mexico in that period first brought the 
drug under suspicion by authorities and eventually led to its prohibition. 
Its recreational use first became widespread in New Orleans, then gradu-
ally spread to other cities. In a campaign to outlaw the drug waged by the 
head of the Federal Bureau of Narcotics, Harry Anslinger, it was alleged 
that marijuana use led to violent crimes. In the late 1930s, newspaper 
stories in large cities were filled with stories about “killer weed.” In 1937 
the US Congress passed the Marijuana Tax Act, which effectively banned 
the use of the drug in medicine and outlawed it as a dangerous narcotic, 
effectively terminating research on it for about 25 years.
International Control of Cannabis
Late in the nineteenth century, the British Parliament required the colo-
nial Government of India to establish a Royal Commission on Opium 
and an Indian Hemp Drugs Commission. The latter concluded that mod-
erate use of cannabis had no appreciable physical effects on the body, no 
harmful effects on the brain, and no adverse effects on morality (Abel 
1980; Mills 2003). It recommended a system of taxation, control, and 
restriction, but not prohibition (Mead 2014; Mills 2003). Despite the 
reports, use of cannabis as a medicine faded as improved technology 
facilitated the study of pharmacology and organic chemistry, the isola-
tion of active ingredients from natural products, and the synthesis of new 
molecules (Anderson 2005). Morphine was identified and isolated in 
1805 by Friedrich Sertürner, and the subsequent development of the 
hypodermic needle provided a means of administering it for rapid pain 
relief. Later in the nineteenth century, aspirin and other medications 
(among them barbiturates) were developed. Complex, unrefined herbal 
medicines became of less interest to mainstream medicine. When efforts 
to control the use of cannabis arose in Europe and North America in the 
middle of the twentieth century, the medical community did not defend 
its use as a medicine (Mead 2014).

6    Chapter 1
Early in the twentieth century there was a growing interest in interna-
tional cooperation in the control of opium. During the Second Opium 
Conference, held in Geneva in 1925, cannabis and the resin used to pro-
duce hashish also were discussed (Mead 2014). In 1954, the World Health 
Organization reported that cannabis had few medical benefits. In 1961, 
an international treaty called the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs 
established limits on the production, manufacture, and extraction of raw 
materials from what were determined to be narcotic drugs. Psychoactive 
substances (drugs) were placed in four schedules, the most restrictive of 
which contained drugs viewed to be particularly dangerous for abuse 
liability and to have little therapeutic value. The cannabis plant, its resin, 
its extracts, and its tinctures were placed in this most restrictive schedule. 
Subsequently, at the 1971 UN Convention on Psychotropic Substances, 
THC and its isomers were placed in Schedule I, which prohibited all use 
except for scientific purposes and very limited medical purposes by duly 
authorized persons specifically approved by a governmental body. Other 
cannabinoids (among them cannabidiol) were not controlled under the 
1971 UN Psychotropic Convention. Those non-psychoactive cannabi-
noids are still not controlled by many countries (e.g., Great Britain), but 
the United States and Canada have chosen to include them in the same 
restrictive schedule as THC. (For an excellent discussion of how various 
nations around the world have interpreted and implemented the UN 
treaty and have devised regulatory tools to distinguish between medical 
and non-medical use, see Mead 2014.)
Constituents of Cannabis
Although more than 100 plant cannabinoids (phytocannabinoids) have 
been identified in the cannabis plant, there is essentially only one com-
pound that causes the typical “marijuana” effects: THC. However, other 
compounds (including cannabidiol, abbreviated CBD) can modify the 
effects of THC. The sought-after euphoria produced by smoking mari-
juana is entirely attributable to THC and not at all attributable to the 
other cannabinoids found in the plant (Mechoulam et al. 2014).
THC is not evenly distributed throughout the plant. It is absent from 
the roots and the seeds and is found only at very low concentrations in 
the stems. The lower leaves contain less THC than the upper leaves (typi-
cally 2–3 percent). However, unpollinated, all-female floral material—
called sinsemilla, meaning “without seeds” in Spanish—is a primary 
source of THC (with concentrations as high as 25 percent) and 
www.ebook3000.com

An Introduction to Cannabis    7
other cannabinoids. However, the concentration of cannabinoids within 
individual plants and tissues is due mainly to the presence or absence of 
glandular or capitate trichomes—small structures in which cannabinoids 
are synthesized and sequestered (Potter 2014).
Varieties of cannabis plants differ in their cannabinoid contents. The 
concentration of THC in industrial hemp is less than 0.3 percent. In hash-
ish in the 1960s it was about 5 percent, whereas in marijuana it was 
about 2–3 percent. In the twenty-first century, strains of marijuana have 
been developed that contain up to 25 percent THC.
Because all its types are able to interbreed, many academic botanists 
argue that cannabis is one polymorphic species (Piomelli and Russo 
2016; Russo 2014), and that the biochemical cannabinoid and terpenoid 
profiles of different strains cannabis account for their differing effects. 
On the other hand, there is recent genetic evidence indicating that hemp 
is genetically more similar to Cannabis indica than to Cannabis sativa 
(Sawler et al. 2015).
The cannabinoids identified from cannabis are of eleven types (ElSohly 
and Gul 2014; Mechoulam 2005): Δ9-THC, Δ8-THC, cannabidiol (CBD), 
cannabigerol (CBG), cannabichromene (CBC), cannabinodiol (CBND), 
cannabielsoin (CBE), cannabicyclol (CBL), cannabinol (CBN), canna­
bitriol (CBT), and miscellaneous cannabinoids. In addition to cannabi-
noids, the cannabis plant contains hundreds of non-cannabinoid 
constituents, including terpenoids, which give the plant its characteristic 
smell (and which are also found in hops, a close relative to cannabis). In 
vitro and in vivo, some terpenoids have been found to have anti-
inflammatory, anti-bacterial, and anti-anxiety effects (Piomelli and Russo 
2016); however, no clinical trials support those claims. Various combina-
tions of cannabinoid constituents and their interaction with terpenoids 
could provide diverse therapeutic results, accounting for why people 
claim different symptomatic relief from using different strains. However, 
all the evidence is anecdotal. Human clinical trials will be needed to har-
vest the “treasure trove” (Mechoulam 2005) of compounds found in the 
cannabis plant.
THC-type cannabinoids
Of the various components, THC types have received the most scientific 
investigation. The effects of Δ9-THC (commonly called simply THC) will 
be highlighted throughout this book, because it is the primary psychoac-
tive cannabinoid found in cannabis. Very small quantities of Δ8-THC 
also are found in cannabis. Mechoulam et al. (2014) isolated numerous 

8    Chapter 1
cannabinoids from Lebanese hashish that had been confiscated by Israeli 
police in Jerusalem in the 1960s and elucidated their structures. Those 
compounds were then tested for cannabinoid activity in monkeys, and 
only Δ9-THC was found to produce the typical psychoactive effects of 
marijuana. Once Δ9-THC had been isolated, Roger Pertwee (1972) 
developed the ring test, a quantitative in vivo assay for psychotropic can-
nabinoids based on how long a mouse placed across a horizontal ring 
remains immobile or cataleptic. Later, Billy Martin et al. (1991) used the 
ring test and three other bioassays in what came to be known as the 
mouse tetrad assay; it included, catalepsy, hypokinesia (inactivity), hypo-
thermia (reduced body temperature), and anti-nociception (pain relief). 
The mouse tetrad assay is used to screen for psychotropic cannabinoids, 
all of which, in contrast to many other classes of drugs, generally show 
similar potency in all four of these behavioral measures (Mechoulam et 
al. 2014).
After the identification of THC, several investigations on humans 
showed that, when THC was taken orally or intravenously or when it 
was inhaled in smoke, it showed substantial potency similar to that 
reported by recreational cannabis users. At present, two analogues of 
THC that have been approved by the US Food and Drug Administration 
are available in the United States in capsules that may be prescribed  
for chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting: nabilone (Cesamet, 
Valeant Pharmaceuticals North America) and dronabinol (Marinol;  
Solvay Pharmaceuticals). More recently, the cannabis-based medicine 
nabiximols (Sativex, GW Pharmaceuticals), which contains approxi-
mately equal amounts of THC and CBD and is administered as a  
sub-lingual spray, was first licensed as a medicine in Canada for relief of 
pain in adult patients suffering from multiple sclerosis (MS) or cancer 
and subsequently to reduce spasticity in MS patients (Mechoulam et al. 
2014).
Other Δ9-THC-type compounds in the plant are not psychoactive but 
may have medical uses. The carboxylic acidic precursor of THC is Δ9-
THC-acid (THCA) (Gaoni and Mechoulam 1964b). In the fresh plant, 
THCA is decarboxylated to THC by heating or burning. Interestingly, no 
psychomimetic activity was observed when THCA was administered to 
rhesus monkeys at doses up to 5 milligrams per kilogram (intravenously, 
abbreviated iv), to mice at doses up to 20 mg/kg (intraperitoneally, abbre-
viated ip), and to dogs at doses up to 7 mg/kg (Grunfeld and Edery 1969). 
THCA has recently been reported to inhibit the pro-inflammatory cyto-
kine tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α) in vitro (Verhoeckx et al. 2006). 
www.ebook3000.com

An Introduction to Cannabis    9
THCA also serves as an anti-emetic and anti-nausea agent in animal 
models, which suggests that it may have therapeutic potential (Rock, 
Kopstick, Limebeer, and Parker 2013).
Tetrahydrocannabivarin (THCV), identified in the 1970s (Gill 1971; 
Merkus 1971), was initially described as sharing with Δ9-THC the ability 
to produce catalepsy in the mouse ring mobility test and as able to  
produce mild Δ9-THC-like effects in humans (Hollister 1974). These 
effects have been shown to be limited to very high doses, with low doses 
acting as an antagonist at the CB1 receptor (Pertwee et al. 2007). Indeed, 
at low doses THCV suppresses food intake and reduces body weight, as 
does the CB1 receptor antagonist/inverse agonist rimonabant (a drug 
previously approved for weight control in humans). However, unlike 
rimonabant, THCV produces neither nausea (Rock, Sticht, Duncan, 
Stott, and Parker 2013) nor anxiety (O’Brien, Limebeer, Rock, Bottegoni, 
Piomelli, and Parker 2013), two side effects produced by inverse agonism 
of the CB1 receptor that limit the usefulness of rimonabant as a drug. 
Therefore, THCV may be a useful drug for weight loss.
Cannabidiol-type cannabinoids
The primary non-psychoactive cannabinoid of cannabis (particularly  
in hemp) is cannabidiol (CBD), first isolated from Mexican marijuana  
by Roger Adams (1941) and from Indian Charas by Alexander Todd 
(1946). Mechoulam and Shvo (1963) later isolated CBD from Lebanese 
hashish and established its structure. Unlike THC, CBD lacks psychotro-
pic activity; however, research from pre-clinical animal models suggests 
that it has therapeutic potential for management of inflammation, anxi-
ety, emesis, nausea, inflammatory pain, and epilepsy. In addition, as will 
be discussed in later chapters, CBD may reduce the psychoactive and 
memory-impairing effects of THC. CBD also produces neuroprotective 
and anti-oxidant effects (Mechoulam, Parker, and Gallily 2002; Pertwee 
2008).
In the past twenty years, the THC content of street cannabis has  
risen dramatically, whereas the CBD content has remained the same or 
decreased to negligible levels. For instance, in the United States the THC 
content of street cannabis rose from 4 percent in 1995 to 12 percent  
in 2014 (ElSohly et al. 2016). Thus, the cannabis sold today differs  
considerably from the cannabis that was available years ago in its  
effects on mental health and cognitive function. In the United States,  
the cannabis that the National Institute of Drug Abuse supplies to 
researchers for experiments generally has contained less than 4 percent  

10    Chapter 1
THC (although various strains are now becoming available to research-
ers), and thus findings from their experiments may have limited implica-
tions for users of present-day street cannabis. As we will see throughout 
this book, the ratio of THC to CBD in cannabis can dramatically affect 
the drug’s effect on cognitive functions, its abuse potential, its psychotic 
side effects, and some of its medicinal properties.
Together with Δ9-THC, CBD is a major constituent of nabiximols 
(Sativex 2.7 mg THC: 2.5 mg CBD), a medicine developed by GW Phar-
maceuticals that is approved in Canada for treatment of cancer pain  
and for relief of neuropathic pain and spasticity in multiple sclerosis.  
GW Pharmaceuticals has also developed a CBD sub-lingual spray (called 
Epidiolex); it is undergoing phase III clinical trials for childhood 
epilepsy.
Cannabidiolic acid (CBDA) is the non-psychoactive precursor of CBD 
that is present in the fresh cannabis plant (particularly in its industrial 
hemp forms). It slowly decarboxylases (that is, loses its acidic function) 
in response to heating (e.g., when marijuana is smoked). Recent evidence 
indicates that CBDA is 100–1,000 times as potent as CBD in reducing 
toxin-induced vomiting and nausea in animal models of chemotherapy 
treatment. It may be particularly effective in treating the side effect of 
anticipatory nausea (for which no selective treatment is currently avail-
able) in chemotherapy patients (Bolognini et al. 2013; Rock, Limebeer, 
and Parker 2014; Rock, Sticht, and Parker 2014)
In the chapters that follow, the effects of THC and/or CBD on various 
brain functions will be described. Other cannabinoid constituents may 
also be found to have therapeutic potential as more investigators access 
these compounds for scientific investigation.
Methods of Use
Cannabis can be self-administered by smoking, by vaporization, by eat-
ing, by oral application of a tinctures, and by topical application of a 
salve. Evidence suggests that vaporization (heating until volatile active 
cannabinoids are vaporized) reduces combustion products in the inhalant 
and may therefore be a safer method than smoking, though some toxins 
or carcinogens may be present in vapor (Savage et al. 2016). Smoking or 
vaporization produces more rapid onset of psychoactive effects—within 
minutes—than other routes of administration; this allows the user to 
regulate the desired effect by taking more or fewer puffs (called titration). 
“Edibles” (foods and drinks laced with cannabinoids) are increasingly 
www.ebook3000.com

An Introduction to Cannabis    11
used but are slower in onset (up to 90 minutes) and entail the risk of 
unpredictable side effects because controlling doses is difficult. Another 
concern is that children may mistake edibles for non-cannabis-containing 
treats. Since cannabinoids are highly lipophilic, they can be topically 
applied in a salve. Applied in that fashion, they have a local or systemic 
effect; however, it appears that no studies have been done to evaluate the 
efficacy of this route of administration. Smoking remains the most com-
mon route of administration.
The Pharmacokinetics of THC
Most of what we know about the pharmacokinetics of cannabis constitu-
ents has been determined by investigation of THC. Pharmacokinetics 
assesses the absorption of THC after its administration by a variety of 
routes; its distribution throughout the body; its metabolism by tissues 
and organs; its elimination in feces, urine, sweat, and hair; and how these 
processes change over time.
Bioavailability
The term bioavailability refers to the fraction of an administered dose of 
unchanged drug that reaches the systemic circulation. By definition, when 
a drug is administered intravenously, its bioavailability is 100 percent. 
When the drug is administered by smoking or orally, its bioavailability 
decreases (owing to incomplete absorption or by first pass metabolism by 
enzymes in the liver); it also may vary from person to person. The phar-
macokinetics of THC varies with the route of administration.
Smoking—the most common route of cannabis administration—
provides rapid and efficient delivery from the lungs to the brain. The 
bioavailability of smoked THC is approximately 25 percent (with large 
variability due to many factors, including the experience of the smoker). 
Smoked THC reaches peak plasma concentration (Cmax) in about 6–10 
minutes. The mean concentration is approximately 60 percent of the 
peak concentrations 15 minutes after initiation of smoking and approxi-
mately 20 percent 30 minutes after initiation of smoking. Smoking allows 
the user to titrate the dose. THC metabolizes to an equipotent 11-hydroxy-
THC metabolite (11-OH-THC) and an inactive 11-nor-9-carboxy-THC 
(THCCOOH) metabolite during cannabis smoking (Huestis and Smith 
2014).
When cannabinoids are ingested, absorption is slower and peak con-
centrations are delayed and are lower than when they are smoked. Earlier 

12    Chapter 1
studies of THC bioavailability found that bioavailability was lower 
(about 6 percent) after oral ingestion than after smoking (about 25 per-
cent), but administering THC in sesame oil improves bioavailability 
(Huestis 2005). Time to plasma THC Cmax is about 2–6 hours after 
oral administration and about 6–10 minutes after smoking. After a 
20-milligram (mg) dose in food (chocolate cookies), peak plasma THC 
concentrations are 0.004-0.011 mg per liter 1–5 hours after ingestion. 
Similar concentrations occur after administration of 10 mg of Marinol 
(dronabinol) in a capsule (Huestis and Smith 2014).
Nabiximols (Sativex; GW Pharmaceuticals, Salisbury, England) was 
developed for treatment of pain and spasticity due to multiple sclerosis. 
Nabiximols consists of an approximately 50/50 mixture of Δ9-THC/CBD 
(2.7 mg THC: 2.5 mg CBD/spray) and is administered sub-lingually as a 
spray. A randomized, controlled, double-blind study compared the levels 
of THC, CBD, 11-hydroxy-THC, and THCCOOH in the plasma from 0 
to 10½ hours among occasional marijuana smokers given low (5.4 mg 
THC and 5.0 mg CBD) and high (16.2 mg THC and 15 mg CBD) doses 
of oromucosal nabiximols with 5 and 15 mg of synthetic oral THC 
(Karschner, Darwin, Goodwin, Wright, and Huestis 2011; Karschner, 
Darwin, McMahon, et al. 2011). Similar bioavailabilities of nabiximols 
and oral THC were observed, and the addition of CBD to the nabiximols 
did not modify the bioavailability of THC.
Distribution
The concentration of THC in the blood decreases rapidly after smoking 
as a result of tissue distribution, hepatic metabolism, and urinary and 
fecal excretion. Because THC is highly lipophilic, it is rapidly taken up by 
tissues with high blood flow, including the heart, the lungs, the brain, and 
the liver. The minimum dose of THC necessary to produce pharmacologi-
cal effects in humans is between 2 and 22 mg (Huestis 2005). With a 
bioavailability of 10–25 percent, this means that between 0.2 and 4.4 mg 
of THC is the actual smoked dose received, with about 1 percent (0.002–
0.044 mg) in the brain at peak concentration. Tissues with less blood 
flow accumulate THC more slowly and release it over a longer period of 
time; indeed, THC stored in fat in chronic frequent cannabis smokers can 
be released into the blood for days (Huestis and Smith 2014). It is not 
entirely certain if THC persists in the brain in the long term, but the pres-
ence of residual cognitive deficits in heavy cannabis users raises the pos-
sibility that THC may be retained in the brain, at least in the short term 
(Pope 2002). In an evaluation of THC elimination from the blood in 30 
www.ebook3000.com

An Introduction to Cannabis    13
male daily cannabis users who abstained for 33 days and were main-
tained in a closed residence, both THC and its inactive metabolite, THC-
COOH, were detected in blood as long as a month after smoking—four 
times as long as was previously reported (Bergamaschi et al. 2013).
Metabolism
Most THC metabolism occurs in the liver, and different metabolites are 
predominant depending upon the route of administration. THC is metab-
olized in the liver by hepatic cytochrome P450, oxidases 2C9, 2C19  
and 3A4 enzymes primarily producing the metabolites 11-OH-THC, 
THC-COOH and glucuronide conjugates. Plasma concentrations of 
11-OH-THC (which has psychoactive properties equal to or greater than 
those of THC) after smoking are about 10 percent those of THC and peak 
about 15 minutes after the start of smoking. After oral ingestion, they are 
about three times as high as after smoking, and they peak after 2–4 hours. 
The inactive metabolite THC-COOH does not have psychoactive proper-
ties. There is a large degree of intra-individual and inter-individual vari-
ability in the concentration profiles of plasma THC and metabolites, and 
there are no significant differences between men and women (Huestis and 
Smith 2014). CYP isozyme polymorphisms may affect the pharmacoki-
netics of THC; people homozygous for the CYP2C9*3 allelic variant dis-
play significantly higher plasma maximum plasma concentrations of THC 
and significantly decreased clearance relative to people with the CYP2C9*1 
homozygote (Sachse-Seeboth et al. 2009).
Elimination
Within five days, 80–90 percent of a THC dose is excreted, primarily as 
metabolites, more than 65 percent it in feces and 25 percent of it in urine. 
Detection times in urine after smoking a 3.55 percent THC cigarette 
range from two to five days for occasional cannabis smokers but  
can extend to weeks in chronic daily cannabis smokers (Huestis and 
Smith 2014). The estimates of the terminal half-life of THC in humans 
have increased progressively as analytical methods have become more 
sensitive.
Tolerance
Tolerance is a state of adaptation in which exposure to a drug causes 
changes that result in a diminution of one or more of the drug’s effects 
over time. Tolerance results from pharmacodynamics or pharmacokinetic 

14    Chapter 1
mechanisms. Pharmacokinetic (metabolic) tolerance occurs because a 
decreased quantity of the substance reaches its site of action, which may 
be caused by an increase in the degradation of the drug by enzymes in the 
liver. Pharmacodynamic tolerance occurs when the cellular response to a 
drug is reduced with repeated use, which may be caused by a reduced 
receptor response (receptor desensitization) or by a reduced density of 
receptors (receptor downregulation). Pharmacodynamic tolerance to a 
receptor antagonist produces the opposite: increased receptor density 
(receptor upregulation) or sensitivity (receptor sensitization). In addition, 
considerable evidence indicates that tolerance may develop to the effect 
of a drug by means of a Pavlovian association between the contextual 
cues in which the drug is taken and the effects of the drug (Siegel 2016); 
however, there have been no investigations of the role of conditioning in 
the tolerance to the effects of cannabis.
Tolerance to the effects of THC appears to result primarily from phar-
macodynamics rather than from pharmacokinetic mechanisms (Gonza-
lez, Cebeira, and Fernandez-Ruiz 2005). Such tolerance results when 
chronic activation of the CB1 receptor produces either receptor desensiti-
zation (uncoupling of the receptor from intra-cellular downstream signal 
transduction events) or receptor downregulation (resulting from internal-
ization or degradation of the receptor) (Lazenka, Selley, and Sim-Selley 
2013). This may explain why tolerance develops to some effects of  
cannabis but not to others.
Dosing
Cannabis does not fit well with the typical medical model for prescribing 
drugs. The complex pharmacology of cannabinoids, human genetic dif-
ferences in metabolism affecting cannabinoid bioavailability, previous 
experience with recreational cannabis, tolerance, variable potency of the 
cannabis plant material, and different routes of administration all con-
tribute to the difficulty of reporting precise doses for various conditions. 
Besides smoking and vaporization, cannabis is consumed in baked goods 
such as cookies or brownies, or is drunk as teas. Absorption of these 
products by the oral route is slow, the onset of effects is delayed, and the 
effects last much longer than with smoking. Dosages for oral administra-
tion are even less well established than for smoking or vaporizing (Wach-
tel, ElSohly, Ross, Ambre, and de Wit 2002). In general, dosing remains 
highly individualized and relies to a great extent on self-titration. Patients 
not experienced with cannabis who are undergoing cannabis therapy for 
www.ebook3000.com

An Introduction to Cannabis    15
the first time are cautioned to begin at a very low dose and to stop ther-
apy if undesirable or unacceptable side effects occur. Consumption of 
smoked, inhaled, or orally administered cannabis should begin slowly, 
within a minimum of 10–20 minutes between puffs or inhalations and a 
minimum of 30 minutes (but preferably 3 hours) between bites of 
cannabis-based oral products to determine the strength of the effects and 
whether overdosing has occurred. (For more on dosing, see the Mari-
huana for Medical Purposes Regulations Daily Amount Fact Sheet on 
Dosage at the Health Canada website: hc-sc.gc.ca.)
A number of surveys have suggested that most people using smoked or 
orally ingested cannabis for medical purposes reported using between 10 
and 20 grams of cannabis per week. (See, e.g., Ware and Tawfik 2005.) 
An international Web-based cross-sectional survey of about 950 self-
selected participants from a wide variety of countries indicated that the 
vast majority preferred inhalation over other forms of administration for 
symptoms such as chronic pain, anxiety, loss of appetite, depression, and 
sleep disorders. Median daily doses were 2 g of smoked cannabis and 1.5 
g of vaporized cannabis (Hazekamp, Ware, Muller-Vahl, Abrams, and 
Grotenhermen 2013). With orally administered cannabinoids in foods 
the median daily dose was 1.5 g; with teas the median daily dose was 1.5 
g. However, information on cannabis potencies (THC/CBD levels) was 
not available in this study. The average frequency of use was six times per 
day for smoking, five times per day for vaporizing, and twice per day for 
cannabinoids in teas or food. First onset of effects occurred 7 minutes 
after smoking, 6½ minutes after vaporizing, 29 minutes after ingestion of 
tea, and 46 minutes after ingestion of food. Satisfaction ratings for ease 
of finding the correct dose and for lack of side effects were reported to be 
higher for smoking and vaporizing than for foods or teas. The majority 
of the survey participants reported having used cannabis before onset of 
their medical conditions (Hazekamp et al. 2013).
A typical marijuana cigarette contains between 0.5 and 1 g of canna-
bis plant material, which may vary in THC content between 7.5 and 225 
mg (between 7 percent and 30 percent) and in CBD content between 0 
and 180 mg (between 0 and 24 percent). The actual amount of THC 
delivered in the smoke varies, the estimates ranging from 20 percent to 70 
percent (Carter, Weydt, Kyashna-Tocha, and Abrams 2004). The actual 
dose of THC absorbed has been estimated to be about 25 percent of the 
total amount available in the cigarette. Although cannabis smokers titrate 
their doses of THC by inhaling lower volumes of high-THC-content ciga-
rettes, doing so may not completely compensate for the higher THC 

16    Chapter 1
doses per cigarette when using very strong cannabis, resulting in greater 
exposure to THC (van der Pol et al. 2014).
There has been no documented evidence of a death that can be exclu-
sively attributed to overdosing with cannabis probably because of the 
sparsity of CB1 receptors in the brainstem region that controls respiratory 
and cardiovascular systems (Herkenham et al. 1990). The rare acute 
complications (e.g., panic attacks, severe anxiety, psychosis, paranoia, 
convulsions, hyperemesis) that are seen in hospitals’ emergency depart-
ments are an extension of the psychoactive effects of potent THC or syn-
thetic cannabinoids. As was noted above, inhalation is associated with a 
large and rapid increase in blood cannabinoid levels, but a short duration 
of action. On the other hand, oral ingestion results in a delayed onset of 
action and a longer duration of action. The sudden increase in blood 
levels of THC or synthetic cannabinoids due to inhalation may produce 
these adverse side effects if self-titration is not properly employed. There 
is some evidence that participants do not fully compensate for higher 
THC doses per cigarette when using strong cannabis (van der Pol et al. 
2014). The slow onset of edibles can lead some users to eat more, believ-
ing that they have not consumed enough, which also can lead to a dose 
that produces the adverse effects.
Estimating equivalent human doses on the basis of findings from pre-
clinical animal studies is challenging, because most pre-clinical studies 
administer cannabis constituents (e.g., THC or CBD) by injection or by 
oral gavage in isolation rather than the composite cannabinoids that 
humans take when they smoke or eat cannabis. One method that has 
been used to compare equivalent doses is to administer THC orally by 
giving marinol to humans and by gavaging rats or mice. The maximal 
dose of marinol administered to humans is 20 mg/day. This dose taken by 
a 60-kg human translates to 0.3 mg/kg/day. However, the extrapolation 
of the human dose to an animal dose cannot be done by a simple conver-
sion based on body weight. In translating human to animal doses, a 
method of normalizing the surface area of the body is used (Reagan-
Shaw et al. 2007); indeed, that is the standard method for converting 
doses of new drugs discovered in pre-clinical research to doses to be 
tested in phase I and phase II clinical trials with humans. With such a 
conversion, the dose equivalent for a 0.02-kg mouse is 12 times higher 
(e.g., 3.6 mg/kg/day oral marinol), that for a 0.15-kg rat is 6 times  
higher (1.8 mg/kg/day oral marinol), that for a 3-kg monkey is 3 times 
higher (0.9 mg/kg/day oral marinol), and that for a 20-kg child is 1.5 
times higher (0.6 mg/kg/day oral marinol) than that for an adult human. 
www.ebook3000.com

An Introduction to Cannabis    17
This method correlates well across several mammalian species for several 
biological parameters, including oxygen utilization, caloric expenditure, 
basal metabolism, blood volume, circulating plasma proteins, and renal 
function, all of which can effect the activity of drugs. 
Conclusion
Although cannabis is one of the oldest known drugs and has been used 
for many purposes throughout history, not until the early 1990s did we 
begin to understand how it acts on the brain and the body. The scientific 
investigation of this endocannabinoid system will lead to a much richer 
understanding of the effects of this drug and of the medicinal opportuni-
ties provided by the constituents of the cannabis plant.
In the twentieth century, laws against possession of cannabis made 
research on its effects very difficult, particularly in academic institutions. 
However, since the discovery of the active ingredient in the plant in 
1964 (Gaoni and Mechoulam 1964a), the subsequent discovery of the 
mechanism of action of THC (Devane et al. 1988) and the discovery of 
the natural ligands that act on cannabinoid receptors (Devane et al. 
1992; Mechoulam et al. 1995), there has been a surge of basic in vitro 
and in vivo pre-clinical research with animal models on plant cannabi-
noids and the endogenous cannabinoids. Indeed, the burst of recre-
ational marijuana use in the 1960s in the United States and in Europe 
coincided with the increase in research on cannabis in academic institu-
tions (Mechoulam and Parker 2013). Some of these new findings will be 
presented below.

www.ebook3000.com

For nearly a hundred years, investigators attempted to isolate the active 
constituents of marijuana and to describe their structure, but most of the 
attempts were unsuccessful (Mechoulam and Hanus 2000). At the end of 
the nineteenth century, a group at Cambridge (Wood, Spivey, and Easter-
field 1896) distilled from Indian charas a red oil extract that produced 
marijuana-like effects in a research assistant who consumed it (Marshall 
1897). Wood’s group isolated from the red oil a crystalline compound 
which they named cannabinol. The structure of cannabinol was eluci-
dated by Cahn and Todd in the 1930s in the United Kingdom and by 
Adams in the United States; Adams also isolated cannabidiol (CBD) from 
the cannabis plant (Mechoulam et al. 2014). Thus, cannabinol was the 
first natural cannabinoid to be extracted from cannabis in pure form; 
however, in the first half of the twentieth century, investigation of can-
nabinol revealed that it was not the primary active ingredient in cannabis. 
The search continued for the compound in the cannabis plant that pro-
duced the known psychoactive effects of marijuana. Most of these inves-
tigations were unsuccessful. As we now know, cannabis has more than 
100 constituents, with closely related structures and physical properties. 
However, in the 1960s the development of modern chromatography sep-
aration techniques allowed Gaoni and Mechoulam (1964a) to isolate and 
identify the active constituent, Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). This 
allowed THC to be synthesized (Mechoulam and Gaoni 1967), which 
made it widely available for research. Since then, several thousand papers 
describing its effects have been published.
After the discovery of THC, it was assumed, because of its lipid chem-
istry, that it acted through a non-specific membrane-associated mecha-
nism. However, some of the synthetic cannabinoids that were developed 
had very high stereospecificity, which suggested a specific mechanism of 
action (Mechoulam et al. 1988). For instance, one very potent synthetic 
2
The Endocannabinoid System

20    Chapter 2
cannabinoid, HU-210, was several thousand times as potent in tests 
with animals as its synthetic mirror image, HU-211. These results 
prompted Allyn Howlett’s research group in St. Louis to look for a spe-
cific cannabinoid receptor in the rat brain. After they found it, they 
called it a cannabinoid-1 (CB1) receptor (Devane et al. 1988). Their data 
also demonstrated that cannabinoids inhibit adenylate cyclase forma-
tion, suggesting that the CB1 receptor was a G-protein-coupled receptor 
(GPCR) and that the pharmacological action of cannabinoids varied as 
a function of their potency (Herkenham et al. 1990). Later, a second, 
peripheral receptor, CB2, was identified in the spleen (Howlett et al. 
2002; Munro et al. 1993). Both CB1 and CB2 receptors belong to the 
superfamily of GPCRs. Both receptor types are coupled through G pro-
teins to adenylyl cyclase and mitogen-activated protein kinase. (For a 
detailed review of the pharmacology of cannabinoids, see Mechoulam et 
al. 2014. For a glossary of pharmacological terms used in the present 
chapter, see table 2.1.)
The CB1 Receptor
The CB1 receptor was initially believed to be expressed mainly in the 
central nervous system (CNS), and hence it was considered a brain can-
nabinoid receptor. However, it is now clear that it is also present in some 
peripheral organs (e.g., heart, liver, fat tissue, stomach, testes) at a lower 
expression level than in the brain. In the brain, CB1 receptors are among 
the most abundant GPCRs. The highest densities of CB1 receptors in the 
rodent brain are found in the basal ganglia, in the substantia nigra, in 
the globus pallidus, in the cerebellum, and in the hippocampus, not in 
the brainstem. (See figure 2.1.) Since the brainstem regulates basic auto-
nomic functions necessary for survival (e.g., breathing), the paucity of 
CB1 receptors in it explains the low toxicity of Δ9-THC. The high con-
centration of CB1 receptors in the sensory and motor regions is consis-
tent with the importance of CB1 receptors to motivation and cognition. 
CB1 receptors appear to be involved in γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) 
and glutamate neurotransmission, as they are found on GABAergic and 
glutamatergic neurons (Howlett et al. 2002). CB1 receptors are also 
found in the peripheral nervous system on sensory neurons, on postgan-
glionic sympathetic neurons, and on neurons of the parasympathetic 
nervous system. The gut (enteric) nervous system is also rich in CB1 
receptors (Sharkey, Darmani, and Parker 2014).
www.ebook3000.com

The Endocannabinoid System    21
Table 2.1
Glossary of pharmacological terms.
Affinity
The potency with which a compound binds to a 
particular receptor. The higher the affinity, the lower the 
concentration at which it achieves a specified level of 
receptor occupancy.
Agonist
A compound that activates a receptor. A full agonist 
is more potent than a partial agonist and produces a 
greater maximal functional response at the receptor.
Allosteric 
modulator
A substance that acts on an allosteric site of a receptor 
to increase or decrease the ability of the natural ligand 
to induce a functional response when it binds to the 
orthosteric site on the same receptor.
Antagonist
A compound that binds to a receptor by targeting its 
orthosteric site but does not activate the receptor. An 
antagonist can prevent both drug-induced and natural-
ligand-induced agonism of the receptor.
Efficacy (Emax)
The maximum response achievable from a drug or a 
natural ligand for the receptor
Functional 
selectivity
Different agonists can activate different suites of 
signaling pathways at the same receptor. Functional 
selectivity is also called agonist trafficking or biased 
agonism.
G-protein-coupled 
receptor (GPCR)
A seven-transmembrane domain receptor that induces 
G-protein-mediated activation of intracellular signal 
transduction pathways when occupied by an agonist.
Inverse agonist
A compound that binds to a receptor in a manner that 
induces a pharmacological response opposite to the 
response induced by an agonist for the same receptor.
Receptor 
desensitization
Chronic exposure to receptor agonists decreases the 
signaling response of the receptor.
Receptor 
downregulation
Chronic exposure to receptor agonists temporarily 
decrease the number of receptors.
Receptor 
upregulation
Chronic exposure to receptor antagonists temporarily 
increase the number of receptors.
Relative intrinsic 
activity
The ability of drug-receptor complexes to produce 
maximum functional responses. A full agonist needs to 
occupy fewer receptors than a partial agonist to produce 
a maximal response.
Retrograde synaptic 
messenger
A compound that is released by a post-synaptic dendrite 
or cell body, but that acts pre-synaptically.

22    Chapter 2
The CB1 receptors are found primarily on central and peripheral 
neurons in the pre-synapse, as shown in figure 2.2. The most frequently 
reported neuronal effect of CB1-receptor agonists is inhibition of synaptic 
transmission. These locations facilitate their inhibition of neurotransmit-
ter release, which is one of the major functions of the endocannabinoid 
system. Neurons release their neurotransmitter substance when an action 
potential arrives at their pre-synaptic terminal ending. The action poten-
tial results in an influx of Calcium (Ca2+) which stimulates the release of 
the neurotransmitter. (In figure 2.2, the neurotransmitter is glutamate, the 
primary excitatory neurotransmitter in the brain.) However, activation  
of the pre-synaptic CB1 receptor leads to a decrease in cyclic adenosine 
monophosphate (cAMP) accumulation, which inhibits the influx of Ca2+ 
in the firing neuron and hence inhibits neurotransmitter release.
Endogenous Cannabinoid Agonists
The discovery of the cannabinoid receptors suggested that endogenous 
molecules, which may stimulate (or inhibit) the receptors, might be pres-
ent in the mammalian body. Earlier in the 1970s the discovery of the 
opiate receptor in the brain prompted an intense search for the naturally 
occurring brain chemicals that act on this receptor; that search revealed 
the family of peptides known as endorphins (endogenous morphines). 
Figure 2.1
Distribution of brain CB1 receptors shown by autoradiography of CP 55,940 (potent CB1 
agonist) binding in the rat brain. Gray levels represent relative levels of receptor densities. 
Saggital section of rat brain. Br Stem indicates brainstem; Cer indicates cerebellum; CP in-
dicates caudate-putamen; Cx indicates cerebral cortex; Ep indicates entopeduncular nucle-
us; GP indicates globus pallidus; Hipp indicates hippocampus; SNr indicates substantia 
nigra. Based on Herkenham 1991. 
Cer
Br Stem
Hipp
Hipp
EP
GP
CPu
CPu
SNr
www.ebook3000.com

The Endocannabinoid System    23
Figure 2.2
A synaptic junction. Upon an action potential arriving at the pre-synaptic terminal ending, 
glutamate is released into the synapse. Glutamate acts on AMPA receptors on the adjacent 
dendrite resulting in depolarization of the post-synaptic membrane. The subsequent influx 
of Ca++ results in the production of 2-AG, which is released into the synapse and serves as 
a retrograde messenger acting on inhibitory pre-synaptic CB1 receptors on the glutamate-
containing neuron to turn off subsequent glutamate release. The action of 2-AG is termi-
nated by its degrading enzyme, monoacylglycerol lipase (MAGL), located in the pre-synaptic 
neuron. 

24    Chapter 2
Similarly, the discovery of cannabinoid receptors prompted a search for 
naturally occurring cannabinoids. The plant constituent THC, which just 
happens to bind to these receptors, is a lipid compound; hence it was 
assumed that any possible endogenous cannabinoid molecules (endocan-
nabinoids) would also be lipids. Mechoulam and his colleagues isolated 
and identified two such compounds—one from brain tissue (anandamide, 
abbreviated AEA, its name derived from the Sanskrit word ananda, 
meaning “supreme joy”; see Devane et al. 1992) and one from peripheral 
tissues (2-arachidonoyl glycerol, abbreviated 2-AG; see Mechoulam et al. 
1995). The latter was also isolated from brain tissue (Sugiura et al. 1995) 
and is therefore found in both the periphery and in central systems. Thou-
sands of articles on these two compounds have been published; for a 
review, see Mechoulam et al. 2014. Their discovery has revealed a new, 
unique biological system of control: the endocannabinoid system. Addi-
tional endogenous molecules that bind to the cannabinoid receptors 
(virodhamine and noladin ether) have been identified, but much less 
research has been done with them.
In contrast with most neurotransmitters (e.g., glutamate, GABA, ace-
tylcholine, dopamine, and serotonin), AEA and 2-AG are not stored in 
vesicles but rather are synthesized on demand when and where they are 
needed. The action of both AEA and 2-AG on the CB1 receptor is 
Figure 2.3
Molecular structures of THC, CBD, AEA, and 2-AG.
www.ebook3000.com

The Endocannabinoid System    25
primarily pre-synaptic, not post-synaptic, and their main function is to 
reduce the neuronal release of other transmitters (e.g., glutamate). It is 
clear that 2-AG, in particular, acts as a fast retrograde synaptic messen-
ger (Wilson and Nichol 2001) to regulate neurotransmission in the 
brain. (See figure 2.2.) The synthesis of 2-AG is triggered by the increase 
in the concentration of intracellular calcium when the post-synaptic 
neuron becomes depolarized by the action of a neurotransmitter (e.g., 
glutamate) on excitatory post-synaptic receptors. Therefore, it is  pro-
duced only in regions that are activated. The resulting influx of calcium 
induces post-synaptic biosynthesis and a release of 2-AG into the  
synapse. 2-AG is formed from diacylglycerol (DAG) in a process that  
is catalyzed by sn1-specific DAG lipase-α. The main biosynthetic 
pathway for AEA involves the formation of N-arachidonlyl phosphati-
dylethanolamine (NAPE) from phosphatidylethanolamine and phospha-
tidylcholine. NAPE is then converted to AEA by the action of the 
enzyme NAPE selective phospholipase D. However, the on-demand eCB 
synthesis of AEA is not as well understood as that of 2-AG (Mechoulam 
et al. 2014). 
Whereas THC is metabolized over several hours and excreted (or 
stored as one of its metabolites), endocannabinoids are rapidly removed 
by a membrane transport process yet to be fully characterized (Fu et al. 
2012; O’Brien et al. 2013; Leung et al. 2013). Once AEA crosses the post-
synaptic membrane, fatty-acid binding proteins (Kaczocha, Glaser, and 
Deutsch 2009) transport AEA to intracellular fatty-acid amide hydrolase 
(FAAH) for inactivation. FAAH hydrolyzes AEA to arachidonic acid and 
ethanolamine (Cravatt et al. 1996). In the pre-synaptic cell, 2-AG is also 
hydrolyzed enzymatically, by monoacylglycerol lipase (MAGL) (Dinh, 
Kathuria, and Piomelli 2004). Suppression of these enzymes prolongs  
the activity of the endocannabinoids. In addition to these two primary  
metabolic enzymes, AEA and 2-AG, are also oxygenated by cyclooxygen-
ase 2 (COX-2) to form bioactive prostaglandin derivatives (Hermanson 
et al. 2013). And a small proportion of 2-AG is also metabolized by 
alpha-beta hydrolase AβHD class of enzymes, specifically AβHD6 and 
AβHD12 (Blankman, Simon, and Cravatt 2007; Marrs et al. 2010). The 
endocannabinoid receptors, the endocannabinoids, and their biosynthetic 
and biodegrading enzymes constitute what is known as the endocannabi-
noid system.
In general, activation of the endocannabinoid system at the synapse 
leads to a short or sustained suppression of neurotransmitter release from 

26    Chapter 2
the pre-synaptic terminal afferent. Although 2-AG and AEA probably act 
in a similar manner to regulate transmitter release, it is believed that AEA 
acts to regulate tonic basal synaptic transmission, whereas 2-AG acts as 
the phasic signal triggered during sustained neuronal depolarization and 
mediates many forms of synaptic plasticity (Ahn et al. 2009; Katona and 
Freund 2012). In addition, 2-AG is a full agonist (i.e., produces a greater 
maximal effect) of both the CB1 and CB2 receptors, whereas AEA is a 
partial agonist, as is THC. The concentration of 2-AG in the brain is 
higher, and 2-AG is more broadly expressed than AEA; indeed, 2-AG acts 
as the primary working endocannabinoid in the brain (Katona and 
Freund 2012). AEA appears to be activated when the physiological sys-
tems are stressed (Hill et al. 2010).
Although it is clearly understood that activation of pre-synaptic  
CB1 receptors can lead to inhibition of the release of a number of differ-
ent excitatory or inhibitory neurotransmitters both in the brain and in 
the peripheral nervous system, there is also in vivo evidence that CB1-
receptor agonists (Nunez et al. 2004) can stimulate dopamine release in 
the nucleus accumbens (Gardner 2005). This effect apparently stems 
from a cannabinoid-receptor-mediated inhibition of GABA release that 
indirectly elevates dopamine release. (See figure 6.3.) Many of the actions 
of cannabinoid-receptor agonists (including endocannabinoids) are dose-
dependently biphasic (Sulcova, Mechoulam, and Fride 1998). (For a 
review of the multiple functions of endocannabinoid signaling in the 
brain, see Katona and Freund 2012.)
The CB2 Receptor
It had been assumed that CB2 receptors were present only in cells of the 
immune system (such as β-lymphocytes, monocytes, macrophages, mast 
cells, and microglial cells); however, they have now been identified in the 
CNS (Onaivi et al. 2008; Van Sickle et al. 2005), particularly in microg-
lial cells (Nunez et al. 2004; Stella 2004), though at lower levels than 
those of the CB1 receptors. Under some pathological conditions, CB2-
receptor expression is enhanced in the CNS as well as in other tissues. 
However, whether CB2 receptors are present in a non-injured brain is a 
matter of debate. It has been suggested that the CB2 receptor is part of a 
general protective system. (For a review, see Pacher and Mechoulam 
2011.) “The mammalian body,” Pacher and Mechoulam speculated, “has 
a highly developed immune system which guards against continuous 
invading protein attacks and aims at preventing, attenuating or repairing 
www.ebook3000.com

The Endocannabinoid System    27
the inflicted damage. It is conceivable that analogous biological systems 
that protect against non-protein attacks have evolved. Evidence is emerg-
ing that lipid endocannabinoid signaling through CB2 receptors may 
represent an example/part of such a protective system” (ibid., p. 194). 
Several synthetic CB2-specific receptor agonists (e.g., HU-308; see Hanus 
et al. 1999) have been synthesized to determine their neuroprotective 
potential. Since they do not cause the psychoactive effects associated  
with CB1 agonists, CB2-receptor agonists might be expected to become 
drugs in various fields, including pain, cardiovascular disease, and  
liver disease.
Development of Drugs That Inhibit FAAH or MAGL
Systemic administration of FAAH inhibitors that penetrate the brain pro-
duces increases in central AEA (and other fatty acids) without affecting 
2-AG levels, and the opposite is seen for selective MAGL inhibitors (Ahn 
et al. 2009; Ahn et al. 2011; Kathuria et al. 2003). The rationale behind 
this approach to drug development is based on the mechanism of AEA or 
2-AG formation and release, which is known to take place when and 
where needed (on demand). As has been noted, AEA and 2-AG are not 
stored in synaptic vesicles but rather are synthesized and released in the 
synaptic cleft after neuronal activation. Therefore, inhibition of AEA or 
2-AG metabolism would enhance CB1 activation mainly where AEA or 
2-AG levels are highest, but not globally throughout the brain/body. Such 
an approach produces elevated levels of endocannabinoids in these 
regions for as long as 24 hours.
One advantage of the using treatments that boost the natural endo-
cannabinoid system is that these treatments do not produce the same 
psychoactive effects of global CB1 agonists. FAAH inhibitors do not pro-
duce the typical psychoactive effects of THC, as assessed in the “mouse 
tetrad” assay. They do not produce hypokinesis (sedation), catalepsy, or 
hypothermia (Ahn et al. 2011; Kathuria et al. 2003); although they do 
produce analgesia effects. In humans, FAAH inhibitors did not show any 
effects on cognitive function, psychomotor function, attention and learn-
ing after 1, 8 or 14 days of treatment (Li, Winter, et al. 2012). MAGL 
inhibitors also do not produce catalepsy or hypothermia, unlike THC; 
however, they have been reported to produce a reduction in locomotor 
activity and similar degree of analgesia effect as FAAH inhibition (Long, 
Nomura, and Cravatt 2009). On the other hand, the more selective com-
pounds KML29 and MJN110 have been reported to lack the sedative 

28    Chapter 2
properties of earlier MAGL inhibitors (Ignatowska-Jankowska et al. 
2014; Niphakis et al. 2013; Parker, Niphakis, et al. 2015). FAAH and 
MAGL inhibitors are being developed and tested for a number of condi-
tions, including pain, inflammation, and cannabis withdrawal disorder. 
However, considerable pre-clinical animal evidence indicates their poten-
tial in the treatment of anxiety, depression, post-traumatic stress disorder, 
appetite enhancement, addiction, epilepsy, neurodegenerative disorders, 
and nausea.
Transient Receptor Potential Cation Channel Subfamily V Member 1 
(TRPV1)
AEA not only acts on CB1 and CB2 receptors; it also acts on TRPV1 
receptors. When AEA is produced post-synaptically at the metabotropic 
glutamate receptor 5 (mGLU5), it also activates post-synaptic intracellu-
lar TRPV1 receptors (Alger 2012), which are activated by capsaicin (the 
hot stuff in chili peppers) and can suppress pain sensitivity (Gregg et al. 
2012). AEA interacts with TRPV1 at the same intracellular binding site 
as capsaicin. The binding site is located on the inner face of the plasma 
membrane, which suggests that when AEA is biosynthesized by cells that 
express TRPV1 it will activate that receptor before being released into the 
synapse, thereby regulating Ca2+ homeostasis as an intracellular messen-
ger (van der Stelt and Di Marzo 2005). Consistent with the hypothesis 
that it is involved in pain, nociception, and temperature sensitivity, 
TRPV1 is predominantly expressed in sensory neurons of the dorsal root 
of the spinal cord and the trigeminal ganglion, where it can become 
upregulated during nerve injury and diabetic neuropathy (Pertwee 2009). 
Evidence has also accumulated that TRPV1 is found in brain neurons 
and in non-neural cells. TRPV1 colocalizes with CB1 receptors in sensory 
and brain neurons and with CB2 receptors in sensory neurons. This colo-
calization makes possible several types of intracellular cross talk between 
ligands that activate both types of receptors. It is now known that AEA, 
but not 2-AG, binds to both human and rat TRPV1, upon which it acts 
as a full agonist. The affinity of AEA to TRPV1 is slightly lower than that 
of capsaicin to TRPV1 (Di Marzo, Blumberg, and Szallasi 2002), but the 
activity on these receptors depends upon the assay being used to assess 
their pharmacological activity. In addition, the affinity of AEA to the CB1 
receptor is higher than its affinity to the TRPV1 receptor; this accounts 
for the findings that exogenous AEA, by boosting the endogenous AEA 
signal, can exert effects at TRPV1 more effectively in the presence of an 
FAAH inhibitor.
www.ebook3000.com

The Endocannabinoid System    29
THC and synthetic CB1 and/or CB2 agonists interact with TRPV1, but 
usually with a lower relative intrinsic activity and potency than is exhib-
ited by AEA, but N-arachidonoyl dopamine displays a much greater 
potency than AEA as a TRPV1 agonist. In contrast, CBD and CBG both 
act as full agonists at TRPV1 receptors (Ligresti et al. 2006). CBD is 
almost as potent as capsaicin at the human TRPV1 receptor, but is less 
potent at the rat TRPV1 receptor (Qin et al. 2008). Oleoyl ethanolamide 
(OEA) is also a potent TRPV1-receptor agonist, but has little or no activ-
ity at CB1/CB2 receptors
G Protein Receptor 55 (GPR55)
Because some effects of compounds thought to be specific for CB1 or CB2 
receptors appeared to also act independently of these receptors, a third 
cannabinoid receptor was suggested to exist (Derocq et al. 1998). That 
receptor, now known as GPR55, was cloned in 1999 and was identified 
as a G-protein coupled receptor highly expressed in the human brain 
(Sawzdargo et al. 1999). There was considerable controversy in the early 
literature after this receptor was discovered regarding whether AEA or 
2-AG activates GPR55 (Liu, Song, Jones, and Persaud 2015). More 
recently it has become clear that a bioactive lipid, lysophosphatidylinosi-
tol (LPI), acts as an agonist on the GPR55 receptor (Oka, Nakajima, 
Yamashita, Kishimoto, and Sugiura 2007). CBD acts at multiple targets, 
including acting as an antagonist on the GPR55 receptor. Finally, the CB1 
inverse antagonist, rimonabant, acts as an agonist at the GPR55 receptor, 
although it requires a higher concentration than is required to antagonize 
the CB1 receptor (Pertwee, Thomas, Stevenson, Maor, and Mechoulam 
2005; Ryberg et al. 2007). One site of action of GPR55 receptors is on 
excitatory axon terminals, where they facilitate glutamate release when 
the neuron fires. Because CBD effectively blocks GPR55 activation, it 
would be an ideal candidate as an anticonvulsant agent. Thus CBD may 
reduce excess presynaptic glutamate release from the hyperactive excit-
atory neurons during epileptic seizures (Sylantyev et al 2013; Katona 
2015).
There is compelling evidence suggesting a role for GPR55 in weight 
gain. Moreno-Navarrete et al. (2012) found that circulating LPI levels 
were elevated in obese patients and that they correlated positively with 
body weight, body mass index, and fat percentage in female subjects. 
Furthermore, GPR55 has been implicated in anorexia nervosa, an eating 
disorder characterized by excessive food restriction. Ishiguro et al. (2011) 
found a genetic association between increased vulnerability to anorexia 

30    Chapter 2
nervosa and dysfunctional alteration of the GPR55 gene at the Val195 
allele. The observation that the Val195 allele of GPR55 (which had a 
reduced signaling capacity) was linked to an increased risk of anorexia 
nervosa is consistent with inactive GPR55-receptor activity being associ-
ated with reductions in food intake. New evidence suggests that the 
action of LPI on GPR55 facilitates cancer cell proliferation and migra-
tion. Indeed, clinical data initially identified LPI as a biomarker for poor 
prognosis in cancer patients, which is consistent with in vitro studies 
demonstrating elevated levels of LPI in highly proliferative cancer cells.
Peroxisome Proliferator-Activated Receptors (PPARs)
PPARs are ligand activated transcription factors that constitute part of 
the nuclear receptor family (Pertwee et al. 2010). Classical agonists of 
PPARs are fatty acids and their derivatives, including oleic acid, arachi-
donic acid, leukotriene β4, and prostaglandin J2. It is a widespread view 
that PPARs are not activated by a single endogenous ligand but rather are 
generalized lipid sensors, monitoring local changes in metabolism. There 
are three PPAR isoforms: PPARα, PPARβ, and PPARγ. PPARα is a thera-
peutic target for type 2 diabetes. Oleoyl ethanolamide (OEA) and palmi-
toyl ethanolamide (PEA), two fatty-acid ethanolamides that are inactive 
at CB1/CB2 receptors, are potent agonists of PPARα. Interestingly, FAAH 
metabolizes not only AEA but also OEA and PEA; therefore, administra-
tion of FAAH inhibitors elevates AEA, OEA, and PEA. A necessary step 
in determining the mechanism of action of administration of FAAH 
inhibitors, therefore, is to block the effects with a CB1 antagonist (then 
attributing effect to AEA) or with a PPARα antagonist (then attributing 
effect to OEA and or PEA) (Pertwee et al. 2010).
Allosteric Binding Sites of the CB1 Receptor
The CB1 receptor has two binding sites: the main pocket (called the 
orthosteric site) and a secondary one (called the allosteric site). A mole-
cule that binds to the allosteric site changes the shape of the main recep-
tor. This change in shape alters the intensity of the effect of any molecule 
that binds to the orthosteric site (Price et al. 2005). However, allosteric 
modulators that bind to these allosteric sites have no physiological effect 
in the absence of the agonism of the orthosteric site. Since the discovery 
of the allosteric binding site on the CB1 receptor, compounds have been 
synthesized that act either as agonists at the allosteric site (they are called 
www.ebook3000.com

The Endocannabinoid System    31
positive allosteric modulators) or as antagonists at the allosteric site (neg-
ative allosteric modulators). Positive allosteric modulators enhance CB1-
receptor activity, whereas negative allosteric modulators act to antagonize 
CB1-receptor activity, both without effects on their own.
An exciting new finding has revealed that the body makes both posi-
tive (lypoxin A4 [Pamplona et al. 2012] and negative (pepcan-12 [Bauer 
et al. 2012] and pregnenolone [Vallee et al. 2014]) endogenous allosteric 
modulators that may serve to fine-tune the effects of AEA and 2-AG 
when released. It is particularly interesting that, although the neuros-
teroid hormone pregnenolone is normally undetectable in the brains of 
rat and mice, THC substantially increases the synthesis of pregnenolone 
in the brain (particularly in the nucleus accumbens, prefrontal cortex, 
striatum, and thalamus) via activation of the CB1 receptor. Pregnenolone 
then acts as a negative allosteric modulator of the CB1 receptor to reduce 
several effects of THC in a negative feedback loop, protecting the brain 
from CB1 over-activation (Vallee et al. 2014). This exciting finding sug-
gests that pregnenolone may be an effective treatment for cannabis intox-
ication and addiction. However, there have been some inconsistent 
findings about the potential of lypoxin A4 and pregnenolone to modulate 
2-AG mediated synaptic transmission (Stricker et al. 2015). There clearly 
is a need for further research to identify the physiological outcomes of 
allosteric modulation by endogenously released pepcan-12, lypoxin A4, 
and pregnanolone (Pertwee 2015).
Endogenous allosteric compounds may fine-tune the effects of phyto-
cannabinoid drugs, potentially reducing or enhancing unwanted side 
effects. Indeed, cannabis itself may contain compounds that act as allo-
steric modulators of the CB1 receptor or the CB2 receptor. Recent evi-
dence suggests that CBD behaves as a negative allosteric modulator of 
the effects of THC and 2-AG (Laprarie et al. 2015). Allosteric modula-
tion at the CB1 receptor offers new opportunities for therapeutic applica-
tions that may fine-tune the signaling pathways of the CB1 receptor 
(Morales et al. 2016).
The Role of the Endocannabinoid System in the Development of the 
Nervous System
The CB1 receptor is highly expressed in the developing mouse brain (Gaf-
furi 2012) as early as embryo day 1.5 and into late fetal stages (embryo 
day 21—the day before birth), with high expression in white matter 
within a number of different structures including the hippocampus, 

32    Chapter 2
cerebellum, caudate-putamen, and cerebral cortex. Expression in these 
regions continues to increase after birth and into adulthood, whereas 
after birth there is tapering of CB1 expression in the corpus 
callosum, fornix, stria terminalis, and fasciculus retroflexus (ibid.). Fur-
thermore, in the adult brain the CB1 receptor appears to be localized on 
the axonal plasma membrane and in somatodendritic endosomes, 
whereas in the fetal brain the CB1 receptor is mostly localized to endo-
somes in axons and in the somatodendritic region (ibid.). The evidence 
suggests that the endocannabinoid system is critical for neuronal devel-
opment survival, proliferation, migration, and differentiation of neuronal 
progenitors (ibid.). CB1-receptor activation in response to stimulation by 
endocannabinoids, such as 2-AG and AEA, promotes these functions by 
pruning the proliferation of synapses, contributing to a more settled and 
better differentiated post-mitotic neuronal phenotype (Zhou 2014; Gaf-
furi 2012). In vitro studies examining the effects of CB1-receptor activa-
tion in primary neuronal cultures suggest that the CB1 receptor is mainly 
a negative regulator of neurite growth, since activation of the CB1 recep-
tor results in arrest, repulsion, or collapse of the growth cone, and that in 
doing so it influences the ability of axons to reach their targets (Gaffuri 
2012). Furthermore, the CB1 receptor appears to also act as a negative 
regulator of synaptogenesis and, in doing so, perhaps to affect the fate of 
neuronal communication (ibid.). Exposure during pregnancy to cannabi-
noids (such as THC) that activate the CB1 receptor may alter the course 
of normal neuronal development in offspring and negatively affect nor-
mal brain function, potentially causing long-lasting impairment in a 
number of cognitive functions and behaviors (Zhou 2014).
Conclusion
The endocannabinoid system, discovered only 20 years ago, is now 
known to be a major modulator of synaptic activity throughout the 
brain. CB1 receptors are most prominently located on the pre-synaptic 
terminals of neurons that release other neurotransmitters, including 
excitatory glutamate and inhibitory GABA, as well as acetylcholine 
(ACh), 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT, serotonin), and norepinephrine 
(NE). At these sites, CB1 agonists, as well as 2-AG and AEA, act to reduce 
neurotransmitter release. THC administered through smoking or inges-
tion of marijuana activates all of the CB1 receptors to which it binds, 
producing global activation. On the other hand, endogenously released 
2-AG and AEA are produced only where and when they are needed and 
www.ebook3000.com

The Endocannabinoid System    33
act to feed back on the pre-synaptic neuron to “turn off” neurotransmit-
ter release. Fine-tuned regulation of synaptic activity is the primary func-
tion of this ubiquitous neuromodulatory system that plays a major role 
in protecting neurons.
The duration of action of these “on-demand” endocannabinoids is 
brief because they are hydrolyzed enzymatically by FAAH (AEA) and 
MAGL (2-AG) and removed from the synapse by a re-uptake process 
that has not yet been characterized. However, the newly developed selec-
tive FAAH and MAGL inhibitors provide a therapeutic opportunity to 
boost the action of AEA and that of 2-AG (respectively) for as long as 24 
hours. Results from pre-clinical animal studies have suggested several 
therapeutic options—including the relief of pain, anxiety, depression,  
and nausea—for these exciting new medications, which boost the action 
of endocannabinoids when and where they are needed without the psy-
choactive side effects of global action of systemically administered CB1 
agonists.

www.ebook3000.com

Among the most prominent effects of cannabis exposure in humans are 
its effects on emotional behavior, mood, and anxiety; marijuana is often 
used for relaxation. Therefore, once THC was discovered to be the psy-
choactive ingredient in cannabis, the earliest experimental investigation 
of this phytocannabinoid focused on its effects on mood and anxiety. 
Since the early investigations in the 1970s, our understanding of the 
mechanism by which THC and other CB1 agonists affect processes 
involved in neural regulation of mood and anxiety has advanced consid-
erably. Simply put, activation of the CB1 receptor is critical for the regula-
tion of the body’s systems for signaling stress responses (Hill, McLaughlin, 
et al. 2010; Hill, Patel, et al. 2010). Recent evidence suggests that treat-
ments that enhance endocannabinoid signaling may be a promising treat-
ment post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
Cannabis and Anxiety
Patients with anxiety disorders report a high incidence of cannabis use, 
especially in times of stress. This suggests that they are using cannabis to 
reduce their anxiety symptoms. Although initial use of cannabis can 
reduce anxiety symptoms, long-term use can worsen anxiety and pro-
mote panic attacks. Whether cannabis is used to self-medicate anxiety or 
whether chronic cannabis use contributes to the disorder is difficult to 
discern in humans (Patel, Hill, and Hilliard 2014).
THC and anxiety
Laboratory studies with animals support tension reduction with low 
doses of THC (anxiolytic effects), but chronic administration of high 
doses of THC produces anxiogenic effects and neuroendocrine responses 
to acute stress in rats. Even acute administration of higher doses of THC 
3
Cannabinoids and Emotional Regulation

36    Chapter 3
under conditions of high stress increases anxiety in animals by increasing 
neuronal activity in the limbic system, particularly the amygdala. The 
higher concentrations of THC found in cannabis in recent years may be 
related to the increased reports of panic attacks in humans. (See Patel et 
al. 2014 for an excellent review.)
In pre-clinical studies using new sophisticated genetic tools, advances 
are being made in understanding the well-known biphasic influence of 
THC on anxiety-like behavior. The conditional deletion of the gene 
encoding the CB1 receptor can be imposed on excitatory glutamate neu-
rons and/or on the inhibitory GABA neurons. The loss of CB1 receptors 
in forebrain glutamatergic neurons (which are connected to several 
regions mediating anxiety behaviors) enhances anxiety-like behaviors in 
some animal models and is accompanied by elevated glutamate levels  
in these regions. Conversely, the loss of CB1 receptors in forebrain 
GABAergic neurons reduces anxiety-like behaviors and is accompanied 
by elevated GABA levels in these regions. This opposing control of 
anxiety-like behaviors by CB1 receptors on cortical glutamatergic and 
GABAergic neurons occurs only when the environmental aversiveness 
exceeds a certain threshold—that is, the endocannabinoid system appears 
to buffer neuronal activity in specific circuits only in times of stress. By 
selectively knocking down CB1 receptors in either GABA or glutamate 
neurons, investigators have demonstrated that the anxiolytic effect of 
cannabinoids at low doses depends on CB1-receptor activation of cortical 
glutamatergic neurons (thereby decreasing the release of this excitatory 
neurotransmitter), whereas the anxiogenic effect at high doses is medi-
ated by CB1-receptor activation of forebrain GABAergic neurons (thereby 
decreasing the release of this inhibitory neurotransmitter). (See Lutz, 
Marsicano, Maldonado, and Hillard 2015.)
Cannabidiol and anxiety
Cannabidiol (CBD) is a non-psychoactive cannabinoid that is well  
tolerated by humans across a wide dose range—up to 1,500 milligrams  
per day (oral)—with no psychomotor slowing, negative mood effects, or 
abnormalities in of vital signs (Bergamaschi et al. 2013). It also has a 
broad pharmacological profile, including interactions with several recep-
tors known to regulate fear and anxiety-related behaviors, including CB1, 
5-HT1A, and TRPV1 (Mechoulam, Peters, Murillo-Rodriguez, and Hanus 
2007; Pertwee 2009). CBD has been studied in a wide range of animal 
models of general anxiety. Initial studies of CBD in these models showed 
that low doses (10 mg/kg) were anxiolytic, but high doses (100 mg/kg) 
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids and Emotional Regulation    37
were ineffective (Zuardi, Finkelfarb, Bueno, Musty, and Karniol 1981). 
Subsequent studies revealed a bell-shaped curve, with anxiolytic effects at 
moderate doses but not at higher doses (Guimaraes, Chiaretti, Graeff, 
and Zuardi 1990). There have been no reports of anxiogenic effects of 
CBD from systemic studies—it is either anxiolytic or without effect at 
higher doses. Chronic exposure to CBD maintains this anxiolytic effect in 
these models of anxiety-like behavior.
There is evidence that these anxiolytic effects of CBD are mediated  
by its action on 5-HT1A receptors in the midbrain dorsal periaqueductal 
gray (DPAG), a region integral to anxiety that controls autonomic and 
behavioral responses to threat (Campos and Guimaraes 2008). DPAG 
stimulation in humans produces feelings of intense distress and dread 
(Nashold, Wilson, and Slaughter 1969). The bell-shaped dose-response 
curve of CBD may reflect activation of TRPV1 receptors at the higher 
dose, as blockade of TRPV1 receptors in the DPAG rendered an ineffec-
tive high dose of CBD to be anxiolytic (Campos and Guimaraes 2009). 
Since activation of TRPV1 receptors has anxiogenic effects, this may 
indicate that at higher doses, CBD interacts with TRPV1 receptors to 
prevent the anxiolytic effect, perhaps by acting to elevate endogenous 
AEA by acting as an FAAH inhibitor. (See, e.g., Mechoulam et al. 2007.) 
In addition, the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (BNST) receives input 
from the central nucleus of the amygdala, and both structures are involved 
in the expression of anxiety. Infusions of CBD into the BNST and the 
central amygdala also produce anxiolytic effects, also by a 5-HT1A mech-
anism of action. CBD has also been shown to reduce the behavioral  
and cardiac expression of classically conditioned fear elicited by a shock-
paired context when injected systemically or directly into the BNST 
(Gomes et al. 2013; Resstel, Joca, Moreira, Correa, and Guimaraes 2006). 
As with its effect on natural anxiety, this effect was mediated by its action 
on the 5-HT1A receptor. As with THC, CBD has been reported to enhance 
the extinction of contextually conditioned fear responses, which sug-
gested that it may be an effective treatment for PTSD, without the psy-
choactive side effects of THC. Overall, the existing pre-clinical evidence 
supports the potential of CBD to serve as an effective treatment for anxi-
ety disorders and PTSD. CBD has a broad range of actions, reducing 
anxiety, panic, compulsive actions, autonomic arousal, and fear expres-
sion. Most of these anti-anxiety effects of CBD can be reversed by block-
ade of the 5-HT1A receptor, which suggests that this is the mechanism by 
which CBD produces its anti-anxiety effects.

38    Chapter 3
Human studies confirm the anxiolytic effects of CBD revealed in pre-
clinical animal studies. The anxiolytic effects of CBD were first revealed 
by studies suggesting that it reversed the anxiogenic effects of THC;  
CBD (300–600 mg) reduced THC-induced anxiety, but had no effect by 
itself (Karniol, Shirakawa, Kasinski, Pfeferman, and Carlini 1974; Zuardi, 
Cosme, Graeff, and Guimaraes 1993). However, CBD potently reduced 
experimentally induced anxiety (Hindocha et al. 2015; Martin-Santos et 
al. 2012), including anxiety associated with simulated public speaking in 
healthy human participants (Zuardi, Shirakawa, Finkelfarb, and Karniol 
1982) and in participants with seasonal affective disorder (Bergamaschi, 
Queiroz, Chagas, et al. 2011). A thorough review of the safety profile 
(Bergamaschi, Queiroz, Zuardi, and Crippa 2011) verified that cannabi-
diol is safe and well tolerated in humans.
The potential of THC and CBD as treatments for PTSD
Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is characterized by re-experiencing 
a severe traumatic event that causes avoidance of trauma-related cues 
and hypervigilance. Characteristic symptoms include persistent, intrusive 
recollections, re-experiencing of the original traumatic events (through 
dreams, nightmares, and dissociative flashbacks), numbing, avoidance, 
and increased arousal (Fraser 2009). Sleep disturbance occurs in up to 90 
percent of the cases (Jetly, Heber, Fraser, and Boisvert 2015). This disor-
der is associated with higher use of cannabis than of stimulants, and rates 
of PTSD are higher in patients with cannabis-use disorder. PTSD patients 
appear to use cannabis to reduce tension, because lack of improvement 
after treatment in a residency program for veterans predicts more fre-
quent use of cannabis in the next four months (Bonn-Miller, Vujanovic, 
and Drescher 2011). Interestingly, the synthetic THC nabilone was shown 
to reduce the frequency of nightmares and to reduce daytime flashbacks 
in a subset of veterans, which suggested that cannabis just before sleeping 
may be a beneficial treatment for PTSD patients (Fraser 2009). More 
recently, research by Roitman, Mechoulam, Cooper-Kazaz, and Shalev 
(2014) showed that 5 mg/kg of THC twice a day in addition to the 
patient’s other drugs led to significant improvements in sleep quality,  
frequency of nightmares, and severity of symptoms overall. However, the 
sample size was rather small, and there was no placebo control.
A preliminary, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled cross-
over clinical study of ten Canadian male military personnel with PTSD 
who were not responsive to conventional treatment was recently reported 
(Jetly et al. 2015). The participants received 0.5 mg nabilone or placebo 
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids and Emotional Regulation    39
and titrated to an effective dose (up to a maximum of 3 mg nabilone), 
with the average dose achieved for nabilone at about 2 mg/day. Seven 
weeks of treatment were followed by a two-week washout period and 
seven weeks of alternative treatment. Nabilone not only significantly 
reduced clinical signs of PTSD (as measured on the Clinical Global 
Impression scale) and improved well-being (as measured by a well-being 
questionnaire), but also improved sleep and reduced the number of night-
mares. No dropouts from the study and no severe adverse effects were 
reported. The findings are promising, although the sample was very small. 
These findings support use of cannabis by PTSD patients to treat their 
symptoms. However, it is not known whether long-term use of cannabis 
or THC improves symptoms of PTSD in such patients or worsens it. 
There is a lack of large-scale, controlled clinical trials that would make a 
firm conclusion regarding the efficacy or safety of cannabis for the treat-
ment of PTSD possible (Yarnell 2015).
Of most relevance to the treatment of PTSD are the findings that CBD 
enhanced extinction of fear memories in healthy volunteers (Das et al. 
2013). When participants inhaled CBD before or after extinction training 
in a contextual fear conditioning paradigm, they showed a reduced  
skin conductance response during reinstatement-enhanced extinction. 
However, further evidence is required to determine the effect of chronic 
exposure to CBD on anxiety and /or PTSD in humans. In short, human 
experimental findings support pre-clinical evidence that CBD has anxio-
lytic effects with minimal sedative effects and has an excellent safety pro-
file. However, there have been no human clinical trials with CBD as a 
treatment for PTSD.
Cannabis, Mood, and Depression
Cannabis use has commonly been reported not only to reduce anxiety 
but also to enhance mood and cause euphoria. Indeed, pre-clinical animal 
data suggest that THC (at lower doses) and CBD both produce anti-
depressant effects. This suggests that cannabis use might be effective  
in reducing depression; however, the reports of cannabis as an anti-
depressant are contradictory (Patel et al. 2014). Self-report question-
naires examining reasons for cannabis use found that 22 percent of their 
sample used cannabis to reduce depression (Ware, Adams, and Guy 
2005). Indeed, a questionnaire on depressive symptoms in a survey of 
nearly 4,500 people revealed fewer depressive symptoms in cannabis 
users than in non-users (Denson and Earleywine 2006). Case reports of 

40    Chapter 3
five people suffering from depression revealed that depression preceded 
cannabis use and that the effects of cannabis had some anti-depressant 
effects (Gruber, Pope, and Brown 1996). In addition, cannabis use is asso-
ciated with elevated mood and decreased depression in patients with 
chronic diseases (Patel et al. 2014). On the other hand, oral THC admin-
istration to depressed individuals can also result in dysphoria in some 
patients, especially those who are naive to the psychoactive effects of  
cannabis. Furthermore, pure THC has been reported to increase anxiety 
when given alone, whereas co-administration of CBD can counter its 
effect (Zuardi et al. 1982). As was discussed in chapter 1 without the 
benefit of the additional cannabinoid compounds (especially CBD) pure 
THC often does not have the same effect as cannabis consumption.
Endocannabinoids and Anxiety
Long-distance runners describe a “runner’s high”—a feeling of euphoria 
and anxiolysis. It has been generally accepted that endogenous endor-
phins produce these effects; however. both endorphins and AEA levels are 
elevated in the blood following running. It is now understood that the 
anxiolysis after running depends on intact CB1 receptors in forebrain 
GABAergic neurons (Fuss et al. 2015).
Surprisingly, since the discovery of the endocannabinoids AEA  
and 2-AG by Mechoulam’s group in the 1990s (Devane et al. 1992; 
Mechoulam et al. 1995; Sugiura et al. 1995) no study has investigated the 
effect of systemic administration of these compounds or of inhibitors of 
the enzymes (FAAH or MAGL) that degrade AEA or 2-AG on anxiety in 
humans (Mechoulam and Parker 2013). In a pre-clinical animal study, a 
longer-lasting stable analogue of anandamide (methanadamide) delivered 
to the prefrontal cortex of rats reduced anxiety-like responses (Rubino 
and Parolaro 2008).
Because AEA and 2-AG degrade rapidly once released, blocking their 
enzymatic metabolism (by inhibiting FAAH or MAGL) elevates their 
endogenous levels for several hours. In contrast with the classical neu-
rotransmitters (as has already been noted), AEA and 2-AG are not stored 
in synaptic vesicles but rather are synthesized and released in the synaptic 
cleft after neuronal activation. Presumably, their levels in anxiety and 
depression, and those of FAAH or MAGL, will be highest in the brain 
areas involved in the regulation of mood and emotions. Therefore, inhibi-
tion of AEA or 2-AG metabolism should enhance CB1 activation mainly 
where AEA or 2-AG levels are highest. Such an approach produces 
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids and Emotional Regulation    41
elevated levels of endocannabinoids in these regions for as long as 24 
hours. Several researchers are currently investigating the effects of FAAH 
and/or MAGL inhibitors on pre-clinical animal models of anxiety.
Pre-clinical research with animals indicates that inhibition of FAAH, 
which elevates AEA, reduces anxiety-like and depression-like behavior  
in animal models as well as reducing isolation-induced vocalizations 
(Kathuria et al. 2003). This reduction in anxiety-like behavior by FAAH 
inhibitors occurs only under stressful conditions (Haller et al. 2009). It  
is also clear that CB1 antagonists promote anxiety in animal models—
probably by blocking the action of AEA, because the anxiety-like behav-
ior is produced only in stressful conditions (Haller et al. 2009; Patel and 
Hillard 2006). Mice genetically engineered to lack FAAH do not show 
increased anxiety-like behavior in times of chronic stress, whereas wild-
type mice do (Hill, Kumar, et al. 2013). Therefore, FAAH inhibitors, 
which elevate AEA specifically, clearly have the potential to reduce anxi-
ety in these animal models.
Recent work in Sachel Patel’s laboratory (Bluett et al. 2014) has  
demonstrated an inverse relationship between whole-brain levels of AEA 
and anxiety-like behaviors in mice exposed to a foot-shock stressor 24 
hours earlier. Anxiety levels were enhanced and whole-brain AEA levels 
were suppressed 24 hours after exposure to foot shock. Pre-treatment 
with an FAAH inhibitor prevented both the drop in AEA produced by 
acute stress and the enhancement of the anxiety-like behavior; these 
effects were mediated by the action of AEA at the CB1 receptor. A poly-
morphism in the gene for FAAH that leads to a destabilized FAAH 
enzyme resulting in increased AEA signaling has been identified (Dincheva 
et al. 2015). Both humans and mice homozygous in this allele (FAAHA/A) 
show decreased anxiety-like behavior and increased fear-extinction  
learning. In a human population with this genetic variation, a functional 
magnetic-resonance imaging (fMRI) investigation revealed increased 
functional connectivity between the ventromedial prefrontal cortex and 
the amygdala (brain regions that are involved in emotional behavior) in 
response to threat, increased fear extinction learning, and decreased anxi-
ety (Dincheva et al. 2015). Together these findings suggest that agents 
that augment the AEA may be useful in the treatment of stress-related 
neuropsychiatric disorders. However, there have been no clinical trials 
with FAAH inhibitors in the treatment of anxiety disorders. There is 
clearly a need for such studies.
Inhibition of MAGL, which elevates 2-AG, also reduces anxiety in  
animal models (Kinsey, O’Neal, Long, Cravatt, and Lichtman 2011; 

42    Chapter 3
Sciolino, Zhou, and Hohmann 2011; Sumislawski, Ramikie, and Patel 
2011). With regard to 2-AG signaling, it has also been reported that defi-
ciency of the 2-AG synthesizing enzyme diacylglycerol lipase-α (DAGL) 
leads to markedly decreased 2-AG brain levels and to an increase in 
anxiety-like behavior. The increase in anxiety is rescued by MAGL inhibi-
tors. However, MAGL inhibitors that elevate 2-AG (which, unlike AEA, 
acts as a full agonist at the CB1 receptor) have also been shown to pro-
duce receptor desensitization (Lutz et al. 2015). Since cannabinoid sys-
tems are prominently involved in the modulation of anxiety-related 
behaviors, these FAAH inhibitors and possibly MAGL inhibitors may 
provide a novel and beneficial treatment for anxiety.
Stress Coping and the Endocannabinoid System
Stress can be defined as a reaction of the body to a challenge in prepara-
tion for possible dangers or injuries. Both physical and psychological 
stress induce a pattern of responses that allow for coping with the imme-
diate threat. These responses are then followed by recovery to homeosta-
sis. The neural responses to stress are immediate, occurring within 
seconds. But the hormonal responses mediated by the activation of the 
hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, with the ultimate release of 
adrenal glucocorticoids, occur minutes to hours after the stressor. Endo-
cannabinoid signaling in stress-related brain regions is altered by stress.
HPA-axis stress response
The HPA axis provides the body’s major neuroendocrine response to 
stress exposure. (See figure 3.1.) HPA activity promotes a number of pro-
cesses that meet the energy demands to deal with imminent or perceived 
threat. In the short term, the HPA-axis stress response is adaptive; how-
ever, chronic exposure to stress produces prolonged exposure to stress 
hormones associated with a number of detrimental consequences, rang-
ing from cardiac diseases to depression (Chrousos 2009).
The typical neuroendocrine HPA-axis response to acute stress that 
originates in the brain involves activation of corticotropin-releasing hor-
mone (CRH) neurosecretory cells in the paraventricular nucleus (PVN) 
of the hypothalamus. The resultant release of CRH stimulates the adja-
cent anterior pituitary gland to secrete adrenocorticotropin-releasing 
hormone (ACTH) into the circulatory system of the body as a whole. 
The adrenal glands are endocrine glands located just above the kidneys. 
The adrenal cortex detects circulating ACTH, which stimulates the 
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids and Emotional Regulation    43
release of glucocorticoid stress hormones—cortisol in humans, corticos-
terone in rodents. This stress response is regulated by negative feedback 
from the brain. Cessation of this neuroendocrine stress response occurs 
when glucocorticoids cross the blood-brain barrier and bind with gluco-
corticoid receptors found in the PVN of the hypothalamus, in the amyg-
dala, in the prefrontal cortex (PFC), and in the hippocampus. These 
regions, called the corticolimbic regions, regulate emotional behavior. 
Therefore, the brain controls the termination of the stress response  
by promoting feedback inhibition of the HPA axis and restoring 
Figure 3.1
The hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis. The typical neuroendocrine HPA-axis re-
sponse to acute stress that originates in the brain involves activation of corticotropin-
releasing hormone (CRH) neurosecretory cells in the paraventricular nucleus (PVN) of the 
hypothalamus. CRH stimulates the adjacent anterior pituitary gland to secrete 
adrenocorticotropin-releasing hormone (ACTH) into the circulatory system of the body as 
a whole. The adrenal glands are endocrine glands located just above the kidneys. The adre-
nal cortex detects circulating ACTH, which stimulates the release of glucocorticoid stress 
hormones (cortisol in humans, corticosterone in rodents). Cessation of this neuroendocrine 
stress response occurs when glucocorticoids cross the blood-brain barrier and terminate the 
further release of CRH and ACTH. Source: Brian M. Sweis, CC BY-SA 3.0, https://
commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=23363130
CRH
ACTH
Negative Feedback
CORT
Corticotropin
Releasing
Hormone
Adrenocorticotropic
Hormone
Cortisol

44    Chapter 3
homeostasis. Although short-term activation of the stress response can 
be adaptive and beneficial, chronically elevated levels of glucocorticoid 
hormones from either impaired negative feedback or chronic exposure 
to stress can lead to many long-term harmful consequences (Chrousos 
2009; McEwen 2007). Anxiety and mood disorders are associated with 
a dysfunctional biological stress response by the HPA axis. Cortisol is 
elevated in two thirds of depressed individuals. Furthermore, the inabil-
ity of patients to suppress cortisol after a challenge dose of the steroid 
dexamethasone is used as a diagnostic tool to determine the presence  
of depression. Anti-depressant therapies attenuate this hyperactive  
HPA-axis activity.
Endocannabinoid regulation of the HPA axis
The endocannabinoid system has been shown to regulate the HPA axis in 
the maintenance of both basal and stress-induced responses (Hill, Patel, 
et al. 2010). Endocannabinoid signaling inhibits HPA-axis activity, con-
tributing to maintenance of low glucocorticoid levels during basal condi-
tions and restricting HPA-axis activity in acute stress. Mice that have 
been genetically modified to be deficient in CB1 receptors have increased 
basal levels of glucocorticoids and elevated corticosterone secretion. In 
addition, CB1 antagonists elevate corticosterone levels in rats. Acute stress 
reduces the level of AEA in the amygdala and PFC (areas with regulate 
emotionality) and these changes are accompanied by an elevation of 
AEA’s degrading enzyme, FAAH, mediated by the action of CRH. These 
reduced AEA levels in the amygdala enable the activation of HPA axis. 
Treatments that inhibit FAAH (thereby increasing AEA levels) in that 
region reduce the glucocorticoid response to stress. Indeed, chronic stress 
results in increase in FAAH and a concomitant reduction in AEA in the 
amygdala, but these effects are absent in mice genetically engineered to be 
deficient in FAAH (Hill, Kumar, et al. 2013) Current evidence indicates 
that AEA contributes to a “tonic like” mechanism, whereas 2-AG pro-
motes a burst-like mechanism in CB1-receptor activation (Hill and Tasker 
2012). That is, AEA is a ‘gatekeeper’ maintaining basal levels of stress 
hormones (corticosterone in rodents and cortisol in humans) in the 
organism, but removal of this AEA-induced tone facilitates activation of 
the HPA axis and increases emotional and anxiety-like behavior. In 
essence, the endocannabinoid system facilitates activation of “resilience 
factors” during or after stressor exposure.
In contrast to AEA, the majority of studies show that acute stress  
acts to increase 2-AG levels in brain regions relevant to stress. The 
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids and Emotional Regulation    45
elevation of 2-AG, however, shows a delay after the stressor. The time lag 
is consistent with observations that corticosterone levels (which take sev-
eral minutes to elevate after stressors) mediate the increase in 2-AG after 
acute stress, by some yet unknown mechanism (Morena, Patel, Bains, and 
Hill 2016). In addition to acute stress, chronic stress produces enhanced 
levels of 2-AG and reduced levels of MAGL in the amygdala, which  
suggested that reduced hydrolysis may account for increased 2-AG  
(Sumislawski et al. 2011).
Therefore, taken together, the research suggests a bidirectional  
effect of stress on the endocannabinoid system, with stress exposure first 
reducing AEA and then increasing 2-AG throughout most brain regions 
examined. The primary importance of the increase in 2-AG signaling in 
response to stress seems to be to buffer and constrain the effects of stress 
on the brain and facilitate termination of the stress response (Morena  
et al. 2016).
Cannabis and HPA Activity
In contrast to the mood elevating properties of cannabis, studies consis-
tently report that acute cannabis or THC elevates cortisol release in can-
nabis naive individuals; this effect is blunted in chronic cannabis users. 
However, chronic cannabis users exhibit elevated basal cortisol levels, 
which suggests dysregulation of the HPA-axis activity. (See Patel et al. 
2014.) Pre-clinical animal studies support the reports in human studies. 
THC given to rats produces elevated levels of circulating corticosterone 
(the rat equivalent of cortisol in humans).
The developmental period of adolescence is one of heightened preva-
lence of emotional and anxiety-related disorders. More than 75 percent 
of adults with disorders related to fear or anxiety met diagnostic criteria 
as children or adolescents (Kim-Cohen et al. 2003). Childhood and ado-
lescence also are particularly important in brain development of regions 
involved in emotional behavior, including maturation of the HPA axis 
(Crews, He, and Hodge 2007; Guerry and Hastings 2011). The highly 
plastic adolescent brain may be especially vulnerable to stressors produc-
ing impairments to the HPA-axis stress reactivity system that can affect 
emotionality in adulthood. Pre-clinical animal studies suggest a relation-
ship between high doses of THC during adolescence and the development 
of depression-like behavior in adulthood. In rats, administration of  
escalating doses of THC during adolescence results in increased rates of 
depressive-like symptoms in adulthood (Rubino and Parolaro 2008). 

46    Chapter 3
Escalating doses of THC result in downregulation of CB1 receptors (and 
thereby reduced endocannabinoid functioning) throughout the limbic 
regions of the brain involved in emotionality. Indeed, in rats, administra-
tion of drugs that elevate endocannabinoid activation of CB1 receptors 
can reverse the depressive-like effect induced by adolescent exposure to 
THC (Realini et al. 2011). However, caution must be taken in applying 
these findings to humans, insofar as the animals were treated with high 
doses of pure THC; human cannabis users may be exposed to high con-
centrations of THC, but they are also exposed to other cannabinoids 
(e.g., CBD), which may interfere with the effects of THC on the brain. In 
addition, more recent pre-clinical evidence has revealed that exposure to 
the CB1 agonist WIN 55,212,2 during exposure to stressors in adoles-
cence may, surprisingly, reverse the detrimental effects of early-life stress 
on neurocognitive performance and on enhanced anxiety in adulthood 
(Alteba et al. 2016). 
A number of human studies have suggested a link between heavy can-
nabis use during adolescence and the development of depression later in 
life (Bovasso 2001; Patton et al. 2002; Rey, Sawyer, Raphael, Patton, 
and Lynskey 2002). However, a more recent large (more than 12,000 
participants) longitudinal study did not find past cannabis use to be a 
significant predictor of depression in adults when baseline differences 
between users and non-users were carefully controlled (Harder, Morral, 
and Arkes 2006). For instance, individuals who have experienced adver-
sity early in life exhibit an increased risk of developing depression in 
adulthood and an increased propensity to use cannabis (Hayatbakhsh, 
Williams, Bor, and Najman 2013). Harder, Morral, and Arkes (2006) 
suggested, on the basis of their longitudinal results, that a shared genetic 
predisposition could underlie the association of depression and cannabis 
use. In support of this hypothesis, among pairs of twins sharing identical 
genetic and similar environmental conditions, the cannabis-dependent 
twin exhibits a risk of suicidal ideation or attempts 2.5–3 times that of 
the non-dependent twin; this risk is even greater if cannabis use began 
before age 17 (Lynskey et al. 2004). Therefore, genetic factors for can-
nabis dependence and depression may be moderately correlated. A large 
meta-analysis of longitudinal and population based studies on cannabis 
use and risk of affective mental health outcomes concluded that the  
evidence that cannabis causes depression in humans is not convincing 
(Moore et al. 2007).
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids and Emotional Regulation    47
Endocannabinoid Modulation of Extinction of Aversive Memories in 
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
Considerable recent evidence suggests that manipulations of the endo-
cannabinoid system have therapeutic utility in promoting extinction of 
aversive memories such as those that occur in post-traumatic stress disor-
der (PTSD). Avoidance of aversive stimuli is crucial for survival of all 
animals and is highly resistant to extinction. Yet at times aversive memo-
ries become haunting, as in PTSD. The endogenous cannabinoid system 
is specifically involved in extinction learning of aversively motivated 
learned behaviors. (For a review see Lutz et al. 2015.)
In pre-clinical animal studies of extinction of conditioned fear behav-
ior, classical conditioning techniques are often used. A neutral stimulus (a 
conditioned stimulus, usually visual or acoustic) is paired with a fear-
inducing unconditioned stimulus (e.g., foot shock). After one or more 
pairings of the conditioned stimulus (CS) with the unconditioned stimu-
lus (US), the presentation of the CS alone evokes a fear response. The 
association of the two stimuli is consolidated within 6–8 hours of the 
learning experience and thereby forms a long-term memory. The most 
thoroughly studied fear response is freezing in rodents. Re-exposure to 
the CS elicits freezing as the expression of the learning, called the condi-
tioned response (CR). However, re-exposure to the CS in the absence of 
the US also elicits two opposing neuronal processes: re-consolidation and 
extinction. Thus, short re-exposure to the CS triggers another round of 
memory consolidation (re-consolidation) in which new information can 
be integrated into the original memory. On the other hand, prolonged or 
repeated exposure to the CS in the absence of the US triggers extinction, 
resulting in a reduction in the expression of fear. Extinction is believed to 
be impaired in patients suffering from specific fear-related disorders such 
as phobias or PTSD. Therefore, any manipulations that can enhance 
extinction will have profound clinical relevance.
Marsicano et al. (2002) reported that CB1 knockout mice and wild-
type mice administered the CB1 inverse agonist/antagonist rimonabant 
showed impaired extinction in classical auditory fear-conditioning  
tests, with unaffected memory acquisition and consolidation. That effect  
was mediated by blockade of elevated AEA in the basolateral amygdala 
(BLA) during extinction. Indeed, recent evidence (Kamprath et al. 2011) 
indicates that infusion of CB1 antagonists into the BLA impairs long-
term extinction memory. In addition, Varvel and Lichtman (2002) 
reported that CB1 knockout mice and wild-type mice exhibited identical 

48    Chapter 3
acquisition rates in learning to swim to a fixed platform in a Morris 
water maze; however, the CB1-deficient mice demonstrated impaired 
extinction of the originally learned task when the location of the hidden 
platform was moved to the opposite side of the tank. Because animals 
deficient in CB1-receptor activity show impairments in suppressing previ-
ously learned behaviors, CB1 agonists would be expected to facilitate 
extinction of learned behaviors in non-deficient animals—something that 
has been reported repeatedly (Mechoulam and Parker 2013).
Since CB1 agonists facilitate extinction of aversive memories, it might 
be expected that treatments that enhance endogenous levels of AEA and/
or 2-AG would also be potential treatments for PTSD. Chhatwal et al. 
(2005) reported that the re-uptake blocker (and FAAH inhibitor) AM404 
selectively facilitated extinction of fear-potentiated startle in rats— 
an effect that was reversed by rimonabant pre-treatment (Chhatwal, 
Davis, Maguschak, and Ressler 2005). These effects appear to be specific 
to extinction of aversively motivated behavior, because neither CB1-
deficient mice (Holter et al. 2005) nor wild-type mice treated with 
rimonabant (Niyuhire, Varvel, Thorpe, et al. 2007) displayed a deficit in 
extinction of operant responding reinforced with food. FAAH inhibition 
also promoted extinction of a conditioned place aversion produced by 
naloxone-precipitated morphine withdrawal, but did not promote extinc-
tion of a morphine-induced or amphetamine-induced conditioned place 
preference (Manwell et al. 2009). Thus, elevation of AEA selectively facil-
itates extinction of aversive memories. These effects may be mediated by 
enhanced AEA signaling in the BLA (Lutz et al. 2015).
The literature regarding the effect that 2-AG may have on fear extinc-
tion is controversial. Recently it was shown that mice deficient in DAGLα, 
the precursor to 2-AG,showed no impairments in fear acquisition, but 
showed impaired fear extinction (Jenniches et al. 2016), suggesting that 
2-AG is required for fear extinction. On the other hand, treatment of 
mice with the MAGL inhibitor JZL184 (which elevates 2-AG) was also 
shown to promote fear expression and to impair fear extinction, by the 
action of 2-AG on CB1 receptors in forebrain GABAergic neurons 
(Llorente-Berzal et al. 2015). Future research may reconcile these contra-
dictory effects of 2-AG and extinction of conditioned fear; however, one 
possibility is that increased AEA levels mediate acute fear relief but 
increased 2-AG levels promote the expression of conditioned fear by 
blocking GABA release. In view of the dual effects of 2-AG on glutamate 
and GABA, it is possible that optimal 2-AG signaling is required for pro-
cessing of fear responses (Lutz et al. 2015).
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids and Emotional Regulation    49
It has been well established that extinction is not unlearning but 
instead is new inhibitory learning that interferes with the originally 
learned response (Bouton 2002). The new learning responsible for extinc-
tion of aversive learning appears to be facilitated by AEA and to be pre-
vented by inhibition of the endocannabinoid system. Some suggest that 
the apparent effects of manipulation of the endocannabinoids on extinc-
tion may actually reflect their effects on re-consolidation of the memory 
that requires its re-activation (Lin et al. 2006; Suzuki, Mukawa, Tsuka-
goshi, Frankland, and Kida 2008). Whenever a consolidated memory is 
recalled, it switches to a labile state and undergoes re-consolidation if its 
processing is not disrupted. Depending on the conditions of retrieval and 
the strength of the original trace, these re-activated memories can undergo 
two opposing processes: re-consolidation (when the conditions favor the 
permanence of the trace) and extinction (when the conditions indicate 
that the memory has no reason to persist). Suzuki et al. (2008) have pro-
posed that the endocannabinoid system is important for the destabiliza-
tion of re-activated fear memories; that is, that fear memory cannot be 
altered during re-stabilization if it was not previously destabilized via 
activation of the CB1 receptor. Whatever the actual mechanism for facili-
tated extinction with activation of the endocannabinoid system and 
inhibited extinction with inhibition of the endocannabinoid system,  
these results have considerable implications for the treatment of PTSD. 
Progress in the development of drugs that enhance AEA signaling will be 
of great benefit in the treatment of this distressing disorder. However, 
there have been no human clinical trials of treatment of PTSD with FAAH 
inhibitors.
The promise of cannabinoid treatment of PTSD was recently tested 
experimentally in humans (Rabinak et al. 2014). The participants were 
conditioned to fear two conditioned visual stimuli (CS+) on a computer 
screen that were paired with an aversive burst of white noise. Another 
visual stimulus (CS-) was not paired with the white noise. On the next 
day, the participants underwent an extinction session during which one 
of the CS+ stimuli was extinguished and the other CS+ was not presented. 
Two hours before that extinction session, participants ingested a 7.5-mg/
kg THC capsule or a placebo capsule. To assess extinction retention, a 
test of memory recall was administered 24 hours after the extinction ses-
sion (day 3). The participants receiving the THC capsule had better reten-
tion of the extinction memory, although they did not differ in recall of the 
non-extinguished CS+. This suggests that THC may selectively enhance 
memory of fear extinction in humans, as was suggested by the pre-clinical 

50    Chapter 3
animal work. A similar effect was been reported with CBD given to 
healthy volunteers after extinction learning—that is, CBD also enhanced 
extinction consolidation (Das et al. 2013). Rabinak et al. (2014) reported 
that THC enhanced the activity of the ventromedial prefrontal cortex 
and the hippocampus (two regions involved in fear extinction in humans) 
during extinction of fear conditioning in an fMRI study, using a random-
ized, double-blind, placebo-controlled design to test their hypothesis. 
This is the first evidence that THC modulates prefrontal-limbic circuits 
during fear extinction in humans. It suggests that cannabinoid agonists 
may correct the impaired behavioral and neural function during extinc-
tion recall in patients with PTSD and other fear-learning-related disor-
ders (Rabinak et al. 2014). Treatments that selectively facilitate fear 
extinction may have great benefit in aiding patients with PTSD to live 
more normal lives devoid of the distressing emotional memories of 
trauma.
Cannabis and Sleep Disorders
Intoxication from cannabis is most commonly described as a feeling of 
relaxation, and many users report smoking marijuana to help them sleep; 
however, few studies have focused specifically on the relationship between 
cannabis use and sleep (Gates, Albertella, and Copeland 2014). Disorders 
of sleep are generally treated with sedatives such as benzodiazepines-
receptor agonists and non-benzodiazepine hypnotic agents. However, 
side effects, including dependence and tolerance, occur with those drugs 
(Murillo-Rodriguez, Aguilar-Turton, Mijangos-Moreno, Sarro-Rimirez, 
and Arias-Carrion 2014).
Some evidence suggests that the endocannabinoid system plays a role 
in sleep. Participants deprived of sleep for 24 hours had increased levels 
of OEA (a natural analogue of AEA) in their cerebrospinal fluid, but not 
in serum, whereas levels of AEA were not changed (Koethe, Schreiber, et 
al. 2009). In rats, both acute and sub-chronic administration of AEA 
induce sleep (Herrera-Solis, Vasquez, and Prospero-Garcia 2010).
Early investigations of cannabis use and sleep were conducted in the 
1970s. It has been demonstrated that daily doses of 70–210 mg of THC 
induce sleep in humans (Feinberg, Jones, Walker, Cavness, and Floyd 
1976; Feinberg, Jones, Walker, Cavness, and March 1975). As for the 
effects on sleep architecture, the most consistent finding from these early 
studies using polysomnograph technology was a reduction in rapid-eye-
movement (REM) sleep, the stage in which dreaming occurs. However, 
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids and Emotional Regulation    51
the interpretation of these findings was limited because the samples were 
small (Schierenbeck, Riemann, Berger, and Hornyak 2008). More recently, 
human clinical trials in which sleep was a secondary measure of positive 
treatment outcomes of medical cannabis have contributed to our under-
standing of the effects of cannabis on sleep. Several such trials found that 
nabiximols (Sativex 2.7 mg THC: 2.5 mg CBD/spray) to reduce spasticity 
and pain was likely to improve subjective sleep parameters but was 
unlikely to change sleep stage architecture.
The current understanding of cannabis use and sleep is somewhat 
inconsistent and often lacks statistical control for confounding factors. 
For instance, in one set of findings medicinal users report that cannabis 
use alleviates sleep problems, whereas cannabis use is also reported as a 
risk factor for sleep disorders (Gates et al. 2014). A recent systematic 
review of the literature indicated that a total of eleven studies (with of 
203 participants in all) investigated the effect of recreational cannabis 
use on sleep. The risk of bias in these studies was high, most commonly 
because of confounding factors such as pre-existing sleep problems, gen-
der, and age. Cannabis dose (and strain) and dosing duration varied in 
these studies. Six of these studies used objective EEG measures. Only 
one of these studies was conducted in the past decade, and the results 
were inconsistent. A study by Nicholson, Turner, Stone, and Robson 
(2004) was rated as having the highest quality. Four male and four 
female occasional cannabis users participated in a double-blind, placebo 
controlled cross-over trial. The cannabinoids were delivered by sub-
lingual spray. In a within-subject design, each participant received a 
single dose of 15 mg THC, 5 mg THC+5 mg CBD, 15 mg THC +15 mg 
CBD, and placebo 22½ hours before the lights were turned out. The 
participants abstained from alcohol and caffeine. Two of them contin-
ued to smoke tobacco. Nicholson et al. found that THC was sedating 
but CBD was alerting. This finding is consistent with the pre-clinical 
animal literature, with CBD as a wake-promoting factor. Intracerebro-
ventricular administration of CBD (10 micrograms) to rats at the begin-
ning of the lights-on period increased wakefulness and decreased REM 
sleep (Murillo-Rodriguez, Millan-Aldaco, Palomero-Rivero, Mechoulam, 
and Drucker-Colin 2006).
A total of 28 studies included a measure of sleep as a treatment out-
come for various illnesses assessed, including pain, multiple sclerosis, 
anorexia, cancer, and HIV (Gates et al. 2014). These studies included 
assessments of Marinol, nabilone, and Sativex. Although the majority of 
the studies did not include validated measures of sleep, 22 of them 

52    Chapter 3
reported a significant and positive effect on sleep in the clinical trial. 
However, it is not clear whether this was a result of the mediating 
improvement of the underlying condition being treated (e.g., pain) that 
interfered with sleep as a pre-existing condition. Patients diagnosed with 
PTSD displayed significant improvements in sleep time and quality of 
sleep when treated with nabilone (Fraser 2009). Patients with fibromyal-
gia (a disease characterized by chronic pain and insomnia) who were 
treated with nabilone (0.5–1 mg before bedtime) showed significant 
improvement in sleep (Ware, Fitzcharles, Joseph, and Shir 2010). How-
ever, the mechanism by which CB1 agonists improve sleep is unknown. As 
Gates et al. (2014) suggest, there is clearly a need for large-scale, longitu-
dinal, well-controlled studies of the specific effects of cannabinoids  
on sleep.
Conclusion
The psychoactive cannabinoid THC exerts a biphasic effect on anxiety 
and mood. Low doses reduce anxiety and elevate mood, but chronic 
exposure to high doses increase anxiety and can result in depressive 
symptomology. Treatment of healthy individuals with a CB1-receptor 
antagonist increases indices of anxiety, depression, and suicidal ideation 
(Nissen et al. 2008; Hill and Gorzalka 2009). Individuals with major 
depression or PTSD after the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001 
have reduced levels of endocannabinoids in their circulating blood sup-
ply, and there is a high negative correlation between endocannabinoid 
levels and anxiety measures in humans (Hill, Bierer, et al. 2013; Hill, 
Miller, Ho, Gorzalka, and Hillard 2008). Thus, a compromised endocan-
nabinoid system may be unable to restore homeostatic balance, and the 
result may be symptoms of anxiety or depression.
Extinction learning, most relevant for preventing recall of memories  
of traumatic events, is particularly sensitive to actions of CB1 agonists 
and FAAH inhibitors. The rich and consistent pre-clinical literature dem-
onstrates that those agents strengthen extinction learning for aversive 
events, which interferes with subsequent recall of the originally learned 
memory. Human research is beginning to yield results consistent with 
animal research. Therefore, the evidence clearly points to the use of can-
nabinoid treatments to promote the extinction of traumatic memories  
in human patients with PTSD. The potential of THC to facilitate  
sleep and reduce nightmares in PTSD patients is also promising (Fraser 
2009). Considerable pre-clinical evidence indicates that treatments which 
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids and Emotional Regulation    53
elevate AEA by inhibiting its degradation by FAAH may be highly  
effective in reducing anxiety and in promoting extinction of aversive 
memories in PTSD. However, there has not been a single published report 
of a human clinical trial with these promising compounds for these 
disorders.
The pre-clinical data argue strongly for human clinical trials of the  
use of FAAH inhibitors for anxiety/depression. The recent human work 
showing the CBD also facilitates extinction learning in humans provides 
support for the use of nabiximols (Sativex) as well, although there is as 
yet no pre-clinical evidence of combined THC and CBD facilitation of 
extinction learning.

www.ebook3000.com

Probably the greatest health concern about the use of cannabis is the 
putative link to later development of psychotic disorders. Several 
population-based studies and a few longitudinal studies show that regu-
lar cannabis use in adolescence is associated with about a twofold increase 
in the risk of psychosis (Moore et al. 2007), and regular cannabis use in 
adolescence has been linked to an earlier age of onset of psychosis (Large 
et al. 2007). However, there is considerable controversy about whether 
these associations are causal. Clearly, the overwhelming majority of peo-
ple who have used cannabis do not develop a psychotic disorder, and 
most people who develop a psychotic disorder may never have used can-
nabis. Cannabis use is neither necessary nor sufficient to “cause” schizo-
phrenia. However, it may contribute to the risk of the development of a 
psychotic disorder in vulnerable individuals.
Schizophrenia is a poorly understood condition with no clearly known 
modifiable risk factors. It has a worldwide incidence of approximately  
1 percent, and its onset occurs most commonly in late adolescence or 
early adulthood. It is clear that THC can produce transient, acute, but 
usually mild psychotic experiences in an intoxicated user (D’Souza et al. 
2004) and can worsen the symptoms in people with schizophrenia (Di 
Forti, Morrison, Butt, and Murray 2007). On the other hand, a recent a 
meta-analysis showed that people diagnosed with schizophrenia who use 
cannabis function better cognitively than individuals with schizophrenia 
who do not use cannabis (Yucel et al. 2012). The big question is whether 
cannabis use (especially in adolescence) increases the risk of later devel-
opment of schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders. If it does, then 
cannabis use may be one of the few modifiable risk factors for schizo-
phrenia (Gage, Munafo, MacLeod, Hickman, and Smith 2015).
4
Cannabinoids and Psychosis

56    Chapter 4
Acute Psychosis Associated with Cannabis Intoxication
It has long been known that, cannabis intoxication (more specifically, 
THC intoxication) can elicit paranoid psychosis in some users (Murray, 
Morrison, Henquet, and Di Forti 2007). This effect of cannabis has been 
known for thousands of years, and has been described in relatively recent 
reports of laboratory experiments (D’Souza et al. 2005). Jacques-Joseph 
Moreau reported in 1845 that hashish could induce “acute psychotic 
reactions, generally lasting but a few hours, but occasionally as long as a 
week; the reaction seemed dose-related and its main features included 
paranoid ideation, illusions, hallucinations, delusions, depersonalization, 
confusion, restlessness and excitement” (Radhakrishnan, Wilkinson, and 
D’Souza 2014). Indeed, a number of reports suggest that heavy cannabis 
use can produce psychotic reactions in healthy people and may worsen a 
pre-existing chronic psychotic disorder (Di Forti et al. 2007).
Experimental studies using a randomized-control paradigm with 
human participants provide opportunities to control a number of vari-
ables that are not controlled in anecdotal case reports. D’Souza et al. 
(2004) characterized the positive psychoactive symptoms, negative symp-
toms, and cognitive effects of intravenous THC in healthy individuals. In 
a double-blind randomized placebo-controlled study, they administered 
THC intravenously at 2.5 and 5 mg/kg to 22 healthy adults. Participants 
were screened to rule out psychiatric or family history of psychotic disor-
ders. When assessed by the positive and negative syndrome scale for 
schizophrenics (Kay, Opler, and Lindenmayer 1988), THC produced 
transient (up to 60 minutes) positive psychotic symptoms (hallucinations, 
delusions, formal thought disorder, bizarre disorganized behavior) and 
negative symptoms (e.g., affective flattening, an attentional impairment 
involving volition-apathy and anhedonia ) as well as perceptual altera-
tions. However, since THC also produces known sedative and cataleptic 
effects in animal studies, it is not clear if some of the negative symptoms 
are independent of THC-induced sedation. It is interesting to note that 
the positive psychomimetic effects of THC were not alleviated by anti-
psychotic treatment (dopamine D2-receptor antagonists) and other  
studies showed that chronic anti-psychotic treatment failed to protect 
schizophrenia patients from the symptom-exacerbating effects of THC 
(D’Souza 2007). More recently, an fMRI study (Fusar-Poli et al. 2009) 
found that, whereas ingestion of 10 mg THC resulted in increased skin 
conductance responses during processing of fearful faces, ingestion  
of 600 mg CBD led to a reduction in anxiety and a decrease in skin 
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids and Psychosis    57
conductance response. In addition, THC and CBD have been found to 
have opposite effects on blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) responses 
in tasks of verbal recall, in response inhibition, and in the processing of 
fearful expressions (Bhattacharyya et al. 2010). Therefore, CBD may 
actually reduce the acute psychotic effect of THC.
The likelihood of experiencing the psychotic effects of acutely admin-
istered THC is also modulated by personality and genetic factors. 
Catechol-O-methyl transferase (COMT) is an enzyme that metabolizes 
dopamine in the prefrontal cortex. Individuals with the Val/Val genotype 
for COMT have a higher metabolic activity of that enzyme (and thus a 
lower level of prefrontal cortical dopamine) than individuals with the 
Met/Met polymorphism. Cécile Henquet and colleagues evaluated the 
effects of the interaction of COMT polymorphism and a trait index of 
psychosis liability of smoked THC (0.3 mg/kg) on cognitive performance 
and psychosis in 30 healthy individuals. (Henquet, Di Forti, Morrison, 
Kuepper, and Murray 2008; Henquet et al. 2006). Individuals with the 
Val/Val polymorphism and high scores on psychosis liability had higher 
THC-induced psychotic symptoms than individuals with the Met/Met 
polymorphism.
THC has also been shown to induce abnormalities in electrophysio-
logical indices of brain function known to be present in schizophrenia.  
In animal studies THC has been shown to disrupt synchronized neural 
oscillations in the hippocampus, an effect that can be reversed by CBD 
(Wilkinson, Radhakrishnan, and D’Souza 2014). The pattern of brain 
activity in schizophrenic patients shows elevated random neural activity, 
which has also been produced by THC in a dose-dependent manner in 
normal healthy participants (Skosnik, Cortes-Briones, and Hajos 2016). 
These increases in neural noise were related to the positive symptoms, not 
the negative symptoms of psychosis. Drugs that induce psychosis may, 
therefore, do so by increasing the level of task-irrelevant random neural 
activity (neural noise).
Schizophrenia involves dysregulation of dopamine transmission. Evi-
dence regarding the effects of THC on central dopamine transmission has 
been equivocal. In their report of the first human study using positron-
emission tomography (PET), Bossong et al. (2009) noted that THC pro-
duced a slight increase in striatal dopamine. However, others failed to 
replicate that finding (Barkus et al. 2011; Stokes, Mehta, Curran, Breen, 
and Grasby 2009). Bloomfield et al. (2014) reported a reduction in dopa-
mine release in cannabis users, which is inconsistent with the higher levels 
of dopamine release observed in people with psychosis.

58    Chapter 4
In summary, THC intoxication can occasionally produce several symp-
toms of schizophrenia. These effects are dose-related and are specific to 
THC but not to other cannabinoid constituents. CBD may actually coun-
teract these effects. However, these effects do not last beyond the period 
of intoxication; indeed, in laboratory studies these effects can be resolved 
in 2–4 hours (D’Souza et al. 2004).
Cannabis and Persistent Psychotic Disorders
A lingering and most important question is whether cannabis exposure 
(especially in adolescents) can increase the risk of later developing psy-
chotic disorders, including schizophrenia. Several epidemiological studies 
and meta-analyses have shown an association between cannabis use in 
adolescence and development of schizophrenia, the risk increasing with 
higher frequency of cannabis use (Andreasson, Allebeck, Engstrom, and 
Rydberg 1987; Arseneault, Cannon, Witton, and Murray 2004; Zammit, 
Allebeck, Andreasson, Lundberg, and Lewis 2002). One of the first stud-
ies demonstrating a link between frequency of cannabis use and psychotic 
diagnosis was a longitudinal 15-year cohort study of Swedish military 
conscripts. A dose-response relationship was observed between self-
reported cannabis use by age 18 and psychiatric hospitalization for 
schizophrenia by age 45, with a threefold increase in risk in those who 
used cannabis more than 50 times by age 18 (Andreasson et al. 1987; 
Zammit et al. 2002). It is important to note, however, that among the 
more than 50,000 conscripts in this initially very large sample only 362 
(0.72%) were later hospitalized for schizophrenia. The probable reason 
that the percentage was lower than the typical 1 percent was earlier 
screening for mental illness by the military. Of the men who later devel-
oped schizophrenia, only 18 had used cannabis and no other drugs. Of 
these 18 cannabis-only users, only four reported having used cannabis 
more than 50 times before being conscripted (Zammit et al. 2002). One 
might also predict that young military men may be likely to under-report 
their use of cannabis.
Since the initial Swedish conscript study, a number of other large, 
long-term, cross-sectional epidemiological studies have reported a link 
between cannabis use in adolescence and subsequent hospitalization for 
schizophrenia. A meta-analysis based on a thorough review of the exist-
ing literature and published by Theresa Moore and colleagues (2007) 
reported a modest but consistent 40 percent increase in the risk of any 
psychotic outcome in cannabis users compared with nonusers and a 100 
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids and Psychosis    59
percent (or twofold) increase among more frequent cannabis users 
(Moore et al. 2007). In addition, early cannabis use (before age 15) con-
fers greater risk for schizophrenia outcomes than later cannabis use (by 
age 18), which may also be a result of more prolonged exposure to can-
nabis during adolescent years (Arseneault et al. 2004). However, the 
extent to which cannabis is causative in this association is hotly debated. 
There is more agreement with the findings that heavy use of cannabis 
(and other illicit substances) may result in a psychotic episode occurring 
earlier (by 2.7 years) in young people who are vulnerable to psychosis for 
various genetic and environmental reasons (Large, Sharma, Compton, 
Slade, and Nielssen 2011). 
The demonstration of an association between cannabis use and  
schizophrenia does not necessarily mean that cannabis use causes schizo-
phrenia. Such observational data are correlational and are subject to 
alternative interpretations, including reverse causality (people with an 
existing psychosis are more likely to use cannabis), bias (where problems 
with measurement or sample selection lead to incorrect estimates), and 
confounding (where other variables that increase risk of both cannabis 
use and psychosis lead to spurious associations) (Gage et al. 2015). Most 
of the longitudinal follow-up studies that have been conducted to date 
have tried to account for reverse causation by excluding individuals with 
baseline psychotic symptoms or by adjusting for baseline symptoms 
(Castle 2013; Fergusson, Horwood, and Ridder 2005; Zammit et al. 
2002), thus weakening the reverse causality argument. However, pin-
pointing the onset of illness and thus establishing the temporal relation-
ship between cannabis exposure and schizophrenia can be difficult 
(Wilkinson et. al. 2014). In fact, an earlier prospective study of a large 
population of Dutch teenagers noted a bidirectional association such  
that vulnerability to psychosis at ages 13 and 16 predicted cannabis use 
at ages 16 and 19 respectively (Linszen, Dingemans, and Lenior 1994). 
Residual confounding beyond that accounted for in the studies probably 
would lead to an overestimate of the causal association, insofar as indi-
viduals who use cannabis regularly and those at higher risk of developing 
mental illness share similar characteristics (Gage et al. 2015). In addition, 
sample-selection bias (which is difficult to control when cannabis use is 
determined by self-reporting) is a source of potential measurement error. 
Furthermore, cannabis comes in a variety of strains that have different 
ratios of THC to CBD, which may result in measurement error when the 
ratio in the sample is not known. And in view of the long half-life of 
THC, heavy users of cannabis may be rarely unintoxicated; that might 

60    Chapter 4
lead to misclassification of psychotic episodes, which may actually reflect 
acute effects of THC when participant samples are not limited to former 
users (Gage et al. 2015).
Cannabis use and risk factors for psychosis
In determining the potential of cannabis use as a risk factor for schizo-
phrenia, it is important to identify additional factors that may interact 
with cannabis use and promote mental illness. There is evidence of an 
additive interaction of environmental risk (e.g., maltreatment as a child) 
and cannabis use in the development of schizophrenia (van Os and 
Kapur 2009), but no evidence of a synergistic effect. Why do only a 
minority of cannabis users develop psychosis? One factor could be par-
ticular genetic variants that may modify the risk of cannabis’ promoting 
psychosis. Initial investigations implicated an interaction between can-
nabis and a functional polymorphism in the gene for COMT. Caspi et al. 
(2005) reported that adolescent cannabis users (but not individuals who 
began using cannabis as adults) with the Val/Val COMT genotype were 
10 times as likely to develop psychosis as those with the Met/Met geno-
type. This probably was not a case of reverse causality, because there was 
no increase in risk of psychosis in the Val/Val COMT genotype partici-
pant who did not use cannabis, nor were the Val allele carriers more 
likely to use cannabis. Although initial laboratory and community-based 
experimental studies supported this link (Henquet et al. 2009; Henquet 
et al. 2006), more recent epidemiological studies (Zammit, Owen, Evans, 
Heron, and Lewis 2011; Zammit et al. 2007) have not supported it. 
Interestingly Costas et al. (2011) showed that schizophrenic patients 
who were Met homozygotes had higher rates of lifetime cannabis use 
than Val homozygotes. These data are at odds with the earliest report 
(Caspi et al. 2005) that the Val/Val genotype may serve as a genetic 
marker of a proclivity to develop schizophrenia after cannabis use in 
adolescence.
Recently another potential genetic marker has been identified: poly-
morphic variation in the gene for the intracellular enzyme AKT1, which 
codes for a phosphorylating enzyme that has been shown to be activated 
by CB1 (Sanchez, Ruiz-Llorente, Sanchez, and Diaz-Laviada 2003). Daily 
cannabis users who had the cytosine-cytosine (C/C) genotype were twice 
as likely as those with the thymine-thymine (T/T) genotype to develop a 
psychotic disorder (Di Forti et al. 2012; van Winkel et al. 2011). Also, 
individuals with the C/C genotype who used cannabis had a higher risk 
of psychotic disorder than individuals who did not use cannabis. Recent 
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids and Psychosis    61
studies have identified other genes that may moderate the association 
between cannabis use and psychosis, including the genes for brain derived 
neurotropic factor (BDNF) (Decoster et al. 2011) and the dopamine 
transporter DAT1 (Bhattacharyya et al. 2012), which removes synaptic 
dopamine in striatal regions; and polymorphisms of the gene for the CB1 
receptor CNR1 (Ho, Wassink, Ziebell, and Andreasen 2011). These find-
ings are particularly important: If a genetic marker exists for the poten-
tial of cannabis use to trigger a later psychosis, genetic screening can be 
done to identify individuals at high risk.
The results supporting the hypothesis that some gene variants may 
interact with cannabis use to promote the development of schizophrenia 
are tentative. An alternative explanation is that a shared genetic link 
makes individuals more likely to develop schizophrenia and use cannabis. 
A recent report from a large genome-wide study of 2,082 healthy indi-
viduals suggests that the association between schizophrenia and cannabis 
use may be due in part to shared genetic etiology across common vari-
ants. Power et al. (2014) found that individuals with an increased genetic 
predisposition to schizophrenia are both more likely to use cannabis and 
more likely to use it in greater quantities. Therefore, it remains unclear 
whether cannabis use directly increases the risk of psychosis or whether 
the same genes that increase psychosis risk may also increase the risk of 
cannabis use. That is, this gene-environment correlation allows individu-
als to “choose and shape their own environment based on their own 
innate preferences” (Power et al. 2014, p. 1202).
Adolescent cannabis use as a risk factor for psychosis
There is growing evidence that a greater risk of psychosis is evident  
when use begins during adolescence than when it begins in adulthood 
(Arseneault et al. 2004; McGrath et al. 2010; Schubart, van Gastel, et al. 
2011). Indeed, one study reported that the association between cannabis 
and psychotic disorders was significant only when cannabis use began 
before age 14 (Schimmelmann et al. 2012). Another indicated that daily 
cannabis use was associated with more psychotic experiences only among 
individuals who began using cannabis before the age of 17 (Ruiz-Veguilla 
et al. 2013). Insofar as some regions of the brain are still developing  
during adolescence, the effects of cannabis exposure during that period 
may affect the developing neural networks. Some animal studies (O’Shea, 
McGregor, and Mallet 2006) suggest that CB1 agonists produce greater 
effects on cognition and social interaction if the drug is administered  
during adolescence than when it is administered during adulthood  

62    Chapter 4
(Quinn et al. 2008; Rubino and Parolaro 2008; Schneider and Koch 
2003); however, it is difficult to model a complex disorder such as schizo-
phrenia with currently available animal models. Another interpretation 
of increased risk of psychosis among adolescent cannabis users is that 
cumulative exposure may be more relevant than age of onset of cannabis 
use, with earlier cannabis use resulting in greater cumulative exposure. 
Stefanis et al. (2013) found a consistent lag of 7–8 years between age of 
onset of cannabis use and age of onset of psychosis in a retrospective 
study of 997 individuals ages 12–19 years at the onset of cannabis use. 
Cannabis use is also linked with an earlier age of onset of psychosis—
earlier by 2.7 years (Large et al. 2011).
Cannabis strains and psychosis
Different types of cannabis contain different quantities of THC, the psy-
choactive ingredient that may be linked to risk factors in adolescents. A 
popular strain of cannabis used recreationally is the pungent “skunk,” 
which is specifically bred to have very high THC content and little or no 
CBD. The use of “skunk” may present a higher risk for psychosis than 
cannabis products that were available before there was intensive selec-
tive breeding for high THC content. A widely cited study conducted in 
London found that patients experiencing their first psychotic episode 
and healthy matched controls were equally likely to report ever having 
used cannabis. However, the probability of reporting a psychotic disor-
der was seven times as high in patients who used “skunk” cannabis as in 
those who used hashish resin that contained both THC and CBD (Di 
Forti et al. 2009). CBD has been shown to have anti-psychotic effects 
(Leweke et al. 2012) on its own and has also been shown to counteract 
some effects of THC. Therefore, it is not simply the higher THC content 
in “skunk” that is the potential risk factor, because users probably self-
titrate their intake (Freeman et al. 2014); rather, it is the lack of CBD in 
“skunk.” The marijuana used before selective breeding for high THC 
contained a higher ratio of CBD to THC. Indeed, recent epidemiological 
studies have shown that the lower ratio of CBD to THC in current com-
mercially grown cannabis products is associated with more positive psy-
chotic symptoms (Morgan and Curran 2008; Schubart, Sommer, et al. 
2011).
CBD as anti-psychotic
Recent research has identified CBD as a potential anti-psychotic agent.  
In pre-clinical animal models CBD has been shown to reduce 
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids and Psychosis    63
psychosis-like behavior in both dopamine-based and glutamate-based 
laboratory models of schizophrenia symptoms (Parolaro, Zamberletti, 
and Rubino 2014), and the prevalence of cannabis-linked psychosis is 
lower when street cannabis contains a higher proportion of CBD (Di 
Forti et al. 2009). In healthy humans, CBD reverses THC-induced psy-
chotic symptoms and ketamine-induced depersonalization (a human glu-
tamate model of psychosis). In a controlled clinical trial that compared 
CBD and the standard anti-psychotic amisulpride in 33 patients over 
four weeks (Leweke et al. 2012), both groups showed significant improve-
ments from baseline in the positive and negative syndrome scale (PANSS); 
however, CBD showed a superior safety profile, without extrapyramidal 
symptoms, weight gain, or elevated serum prolactin. CBD has also been 
demonstrated to be effective in treatment of psychotic symptoms in 
patients with Parkinson’s Disease. In addition to reducing psychosis, 
CBD ameliorated motor symptoms (Zuardi et al. 2009). These results 
suggest that CBD, which repeatedly has been shown to lack toxicity and 
to produce no adverse side effects in normal healthy participants (in con-
trast with the usual anti-psychotic drugs), may ameliorate psychotic 
symptoms in schizophrenic patients. There is an urgent need to explore 
more fully if and how CBD alleviates both the positive and negative 
symptoms of schizophrenia (Parolaro et al. 2014).
Endocannabinoids and schizophrenia
There is a link between the level of anandamide (AEA) in the cerebral 
spinal fluid and symptoms of schizophrenia in human patients. AEA lev-
els in the blood and in the cerebral spinal fluid (Koethe, Giuffrida, et al. 
2009) are higher in schizophrenic patients than in healthy volunteers, and 
remission is associated with a decrease in these levels (De Marchi et al. 
2003). In fact, AEA concentrations are higher by a factor of 8 in drug-
naive paranoid schizophrenics (Giuffrida et al. 2004; Hillard, Weinlander, 
and Stuhr 2012). The increase in AEA occurs very early in the course of 
the disease (the prodromal phase), and individuals with the lowest AEA 
concentrations are at highest risk of progressing to a psychotic state 
(Koethe, Giuffrida, et al. 2009). These data led to the hypothesis that 
elevated AEA concentrations are protective against the symptoms of 
schizophrenia. It is interesting to note that frequent cannabis users who 
were schizophrenics were found to have significantly lower AEA concen-
trations than schizophrenics who used cannabis infrequently (Leweke  
et al. 2007).

64    Chapter 4
Cannabis and Schizophrenia
The majority of people who use cannabis do not develop schizophrenia. 
It is clear however, that cannabis can elicit acute psychosis, can worsen 
the course of pre-existing schizophrenia, and may be a trigger in the 
development of schizophrenia in at-risk populations. Most of the longi-
tudinal, case-control, and cross-sectional studies conducted to date have 
found consistent evidence of an association between cannabis use and 
psychosis, even after adjustment for covariates. There also was evidence 
of such an association when dose-response relationships were assessed: 
Acute exposure to high doses of THC produced psychotic experiences 
that could progress to chronic cannabis disorders. Indeed, some studies 
found evidence that cannabis use specifically, and not use of other drugs, 
is associated with psychosis. On the other hand, insofar as cannabis use 
has increased greatly over the past 70 years in Western countries, an argu-
ment against a causal association between cannabis and schizophrenia  
is that a corresponding increase in schizophrenia diagnoses has not 
been observed (Frisher, Crome, Martino, and Croft 2009). In the United 
Kingdom, for instance, cannabis use has risen by a factor of 10–20 since 
the 1970s (Hickman et al. 2009); however, recent data have shown no 
increase in new admissions for schizophrenia; instead, there is a sugges-
tion of a decrease (Frisher et al. 2009). A similar pattern has been reported  
in Australia (Degenhardt, Hall, and Lynskey 2003). Such ecological  
studies have found little association between increased cannabis use in 
recent decades and incidence of psychotic disorder (Gage, Zammit, and 
Hickman 2013).
Overall, the evidence suggests that the association between cannabis 
exposure and schizophrenia is small but consistent (Wilkinson et al. 
2014). Given that the overall incidence of schizophrenia among the gen-
eral population is 1%, if this association is causal and the magnitude is 
the approximately 2 fold in regular cannabis users, as is commonly 
accepted in the literature, then 98 percent of regular cannabis users will 
not develop schizophrenia (Gage et al. 2015). Very large numbers of can-
nabis users would have to be prevented from using cannabis to change 
the incidence of schizophrenia significantly. The absolute number of can-
nabis users that would have to stop using cannabis to prevent one case of 
schizophrenia per year has been estimated at approximately 5,000 for 
heavy users among men and 10,000–15,000 among women (Hickman  
et al. 2009). However, those at higher genetic risk or those that use more 
potent strains of high-THC cannabis may be at greater risk. Cannabis use 
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids and Psychosis    65
may indeed be harmful, especially to adolescents vulnerable to develop-
ment of schizophrenia, but it is also important to avoid overstating its 
harmfulness, as was done in the days of the movie Reefer Madness. The 
message may be ignored when experience fails to match the warnings 
given to young people (Gage, Hickman, and Zammit 2016). Nonetheless, 
the bulk of the literature suggests that individuals with a family history 
of schizophrenia, individuals with prodromal symptoms, and individuals 
who have experienced discrete episodes of psychosis related to cannabis 
should be strongly discouraged from using THC-predominant cannabis 
and psychoactive cannabinoids (Wilkinson et al. 2014).

www.ebook3000.com

Cognition involves the ability to acquire, store, and later retrieve new 
information. It is clear that THC, the chief psychoactive component  
in cannabis, produces acute cognitive disturbances in humans and in ani-
mals, affecting short-term memory more profoundly than long-term 
memory. Deficits are seen in the ability to simply hold information for 
brief periods—for example, to remember a telephone number before dial-
ing it. However, the effect of acute exposure to THC on working memory 
is short-lived. A controlled study found no residual cognitive impairment 
24 hours after ingestion of THC (Curran, Brignell, Fletcher, Middleton, 
and Henry 2002). Whether chronic exposure to marijuana produces 
long-term cognitive deficits during abstinence is a matter of controversy 
in the literature.
Acute Effects of Cannabis on Cognition in Humans
Marijuana produces a transient impairment in short-term memory and in 
consolidation of short-term memories into long-term memory; however, 
it does not produce an impairment in retrieval of information once it has 
been previously encoded into long-term storage. These effects depend on 
the presence of substantial THC in marijuana. A recent naturalistic study 
revealed that cannabidiol prevented the memory-impairing effects of 
acute THC in humans (Morgan, Schafer, Freeman, and Curran 2010). 
Therefore, a change in the relative ratio of THC to cannabidiol in can-
nabis will profoundly alter the effects of cannabis on memory in human 
marijuana smokers.
Cannabis use has been associated with impaired cognition during 
acute intoxication; however, whether the impairment persists beyond the 
intoxicated state in long-term users is not as clear. Recently a systematic 
review of studies of the acute and chronic effects of cannabis and 
5
Cannabinoids, Learning, and Memory

68    Chapter 5
cannabinoids on neuropsychological task-based measures of cognition 
and on persistence or recovery after abstinence was conducted (Broyd, 
van Hell, Beale, Yucel, and Solowij 2016). Results from 105 studies that 
met the authors’ criteria for inclusion were reviewed. Broyd et al. (2016) 
concluded that verbal learning and memory and attention are most con-
sistently impaired by acute and chronic exposure to cannabis (intrave-
nous THC, vaporized cannabis, and oral nabilone). There were reports 
that pre-dosing with CBD or higher CBD content in cannabis might pro-
tect against some THC-induced deficits in verbal learning and memory. 
Verbal learning and memory were most often measured by means of 
word-list learning tasks, with several immediate and delayed recall trials 
and a recognition task. Attention was most often measured by means of 
tasks of divided attention, processing speed, rapid visual information 
processing, visual search, and tracking. Psychomotor function was often 
measured by means of tasks involving finger tapping, critical tracking, 
and choice reaction time. There were reports of impairments of verbal 
memory, of attention, and of some executive functions persisting after 
prolonged abstinence, but persistence or recovery across all cognitive 
domains remains under-researched. Psychomotor function was report-
edly most affected during acute intoxication, and there was some evi-
dence of the effect persisting in chronic users after they stopped using for 
a prolonged period. There was less consistent evidence for impairment of 
executive function (planning, reasoning, problem solving) in either occa-
sional, moderate, or heavy users.
On the basis of their extensive review, Broyd et al. suggest that the 
literature on the cognitive effects of cannabis exposure is unclear as to the 
amount of cannabis exposure in samples and the means by which cogni-
tive function is assessed. In studies with chronic users, it cannot be dis-
cerned whether the effects are attributable to chronic long-term exposure 
or to residual or cumulative acute affects resulting from the buildup of 
THC in tissue. Confounding factors that may affect attribution of impair-
ment to cannabis include pre-morbid functionality and other substance 
abuse. Only a few large-sample prospective studies have controlled for 
cognitive ability assessed before initiation of cannabis use in order to 
address pre-morbid functionality.
Whether chronic cannabis use produces long-term impairment of cog-
nitive abilities in individuals who are no longer using cannabis is contro-
versial, and the literature is fraught with contradictions. Polydrug abuse 
and pre-existing cognitive and emotional differences between cannabis 
users and non-users make interpretation of the literature on studies of 
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids, Learning, and Memory    69
humans problematic. Some investigators, among them Solowij and Bat-
tisti (2008), conclude that chronic exposure to marijuana is associated 
with dose-related cognitive impairments—most consistently, impair-
ments in attention and short-term working memory functions similar to 
the acute effects on memory. Others, including Dregan and Gulliford 
(2012), conclude that few if any cognitive impairments are produced by 
heavy cannabis use over several years. The results of two meta-analyses 
(Grant, Gonzalez, Carey, Natarajan, and Wolfson 2003; Schreiner and 
Dunn 2012) show that non-intoxicated cannabis users perform more 
poorly than non-users on measures of global neuropsychological func-
tion. But when the analyses were limited to thirteen studies of cannabis 
users with at least one month of abstinence, there was no discernible dif-
ference between cannabis users and non-users in performance on neuro-
logical tests (Schreiner and Dunn 2012). This suggests that cognitive 
functions may recover with prolonged abstinence.
A recent longitudinal study reported that heavy cannabis use in ado-
lescence was associated with a decline of approximately eight IQ points 
from childhood to early adulthood (Meier et al. 2012). The participants 
were members of the Dunedin Study, a prospective study of 1,037 indi-
viduals in New Zealand who were followed from birth (in 1972 or 1973) 
to the age of 38. Cannabis use was ascertained in interviews at ages 18, 
21, 26, 32, and 38. Neuropsychological testing was conducted at age 13, 
before the age of initiation of cannabis use, and again at age 38 years; 
therefore, a change from pre-cannabis-use to post-cannabis-use could be 
ascertained for each participant. Persistent heavy cannabis use (with a 
diagnosis of cannabis-use disorder in at least three sampling periods) was 
associated with broad neuropsychological decline across domains of 
functioning, even after controlling for years of education. This decline 
was most significant among those who were heavy users in adolescence 
and in early adulthood. Late-onset cannabis users among this sample did 
not show a persistent deficit after quitting, but early-onset heavy users 
maintained their deficit after abstinence in adulthood. More recently, 
however, Rogeberg (2013) argued that the apparent link between heavy 
cannabis use probably was an artifact attributable to important differ-
ences such as socioeconomic status between the relatively small group of 
heavy cannabis users (n = 38) and the 1,000 other participants in the 
study. A causal interpretation rests on the assumption that IQ trajectories 
are equal across the different cannabis-exposure groups in the absence of 
cannabis use. The risk of selection bias is reduced because of the use of 
each participant as his or her own control, with the result biased only if 

70    Chapter 5
a variable both correlates with adolescent-onset cannabis use and a time-
varying effect on IQ. One such variable is likely to be socioeconomic 
status. A simulation of this confounding interpretation reproduced the 
same reported associations reported by Meier et al. (2012), which sug-
gested that the causal effects attributed to cannabis use were likely to 
have been overestimated and that the true size of the effect may be zero. 
Therefore, further analysis of this sample is called for before a claim is 
made that heavy cannabis use produced the IQ decline. It should also be 
noted that in the study by Meier (2012) the heavy cannabis users showed 
impairments on every cognitive test, rather than differential effects on 
memory (as would be expected from earlier research).
Since the Meier study (reported in 2012), two additional large pro-
spective cohort studies have assessed the relationship between cannabis 
use and IQ, one in the United Kingdom (Mokrysz et al. 2016) and one in 
the United States (Jackson et al. 2016). In the UK birth-cohort study of 
2,235 adolescents (15–16 years old) it was found that cumulative can-
nabis use was not associated with a lower IQ relative to non-using con-
trols when IQ measures were compared against those taken before the 
teen years and when alcohol and tobacco use were removed as potential 
confounders (Mokrysz et al. 2016). In addition, the US birth-cohort study 
of 3,066 individuals between the ages of 17 and 20 found no difference 
in IQ from that measured at ages 9–12 between identical and non-
identical twins discordant for cannabis use (Jackson et al. 2016). Although 
these recent studies are limited by participants reporting fewer cannabis 
exposures than in the study by Meier et al. (2012), there does not appear 
to be support for a causal link between cannabis use and long-term 
change in IQ. Furthermore, all studies have relied on retrospective self-
reporting of cannabis use, have ignored potential residual effects of the 
drug on IQ test performance, and have not addressed the strain or 
potency of the cannabis used (Curran et al. 2016).
Before the study by Meier et al. (2012), there had been only one simi-
lar longitudinal study of the long-term effects of marijuana on cognition 
in participants who were exclusively cannabis users (Fried, Watkinson, 
and Gray 2005). Fried et al. (2005) conducted a longitudinal examina-
tion of young adults using neurocognitive tests that had been adminis-
tered before the first experience with marijuana smoke. Users were 
defined as light (fewer than five times a week), heavy (more than five 
times a week), current, or former (abstinent for at least three months) 
cannabis users. Only the current heavy users performed worse than non-
users in overall IQ, processing speed, and immediate and delayed 
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids, Learning, and Memory    71
memory tests. Former heavy marijuana smokers did not show any cogni-
tive impairment.
A number of studies of long-term effects after an individual stops 
using cannabis are converging to show that cognitive impairments do not 
persist beyond four to six weeks after abstinence. (See Curran et al. 
2016.) Chronic cannabis users showed downregulation of cortical CB1 
receptors that was correlated with years of use (Hirvonen et al. 2012), 
but after about four weeks of continuously monitored abstinence their 
CB1-receptor density returned to control levels. This may occur after only 
two days (D’Souza et al. 2016). Similar findings have been reported from 
pre-clinical animal studies (Sim-Selley 2003).
Drawing conclusions from the human literature is challenging. Inves-
tigators use widely differing methods with different tasks and often lack-
ing sufficient controls. Participant-selection strategies differ between 
studies. Across studies, cannabis is given by different routes of adminis-
tration and different doses of THC are used. Sample sizes are often very 
small, and use of multiple drugs is common. In addition, factors such as 
a predisposition to substance use in general may confer greater vulnera-
bility to cannabis-related cognitive effects. Larger-scale longitudinal stud-
ies currently underway may provide a better understanding of the effects 
of chronic exposure to marijuana on cognitive function independent of 
pre-existing differences or co-morbidity with alcohol. Therefore, our cur-
rent understanding of the effects of cannabinoids on various processes 
involved in learning and memory relies heavily on animal models, which 
provide insights into the role of the endocannabinoid system in the physi-
ology of learning and memory.
Effects of CB1 Agonists on Learning and Memory in Non-Humans
Considerable pre-clinical animal research has evaluated how CB1 
agonists affect learning and memory. Some of these studies involve 
administration of THC and other global CB1 agonists; others involve 
manipulations of the endocannabinoid system by administration of 
FAAH inhibitors (which elevate AEA and other fatty acids) and MAGL 
inhibitors (which elevate 2-AG when and where they are produced).
Effect of systemic administration of THC and other global CB1 agonists
Consistent with the human literature, the effect of CB1 agonists selec-
tively disrupts short-term or working memory but not long-term or refer-
ence memory. The direct effect of CB1 agonists also reduces the transfer 

72    Chapter 5
of short-term memories into long-term memory (called consolidation). 
Several animal models of short-term or working memory versus reference 
memory have been developed to evaluate these different aspects of mem-
ory. One common model is delayed matching (or non-matching) to a 
sample task in which the animal must first learn to perform an operant 
task (pressing a bar to receive food reward) that represents the reference 
memory or long-term memory aspect of the task. Once the animal has 
learned to perform that operant task, it must then indicate (usually by 
pressing a bar) which test sample matches (or does not match) the origi-
nal sample stimulus presented several seconds earlier (working memory 
or short-term memory). CB1 agonists disrupt only the working-memory 
task or the short-term memory task, with a greater disruption the longer 
the delay between the stimuli. (See Mechoulam and Parker 2013.) These 
effects are blocked by the CB1 antagonist rimonabant. It is important to 
note that these effects occur at low doses that do not interfere with the 
acquisition of the original reference memory of the task.
A simpler task for the assessment of short-term memory is called  
the object-recognition task. It relies on a rodent’s natural preference to 
explore novel objects. A rat or a mouse is allowed to spontaneously 
explore two identical novel objects. When it is exposed to the same object 
at a second encounter shortly after the first exposure, investigatory 
behavior is considerably reduced. In the object-recognition task, admin-
istration of CB1 agonists before the choice task impairs memory for the 
familiar object. Furthermore, chronic exposure to CB1 agonists for 21 
days produces a deficit in object-recognition memory even after a 28-day 
drug-free period (O’Shea et al. 2006), regardless of the age of pre-
exposure (perinatal, adolescent, or adult).
Accurate working or short-term memory is also required for spatial-
memory tasks, such as that involving an eight-arm radial maze. In that 
task, rats or mice must first learn which arms contain food rewards (ref-
erence memory) and must then remember which arms have already been 
visited in a test session (working memory) after an imposed delay. THC 
increases the number of working-memory errors (re-entries) at low doses, 
and these effects are blocked by rimonabant (Lichtman and Martin 
1996). Chronic (90 days) exposure to THC enhanced the memory impair-
ment in this task, but the impairment disappeared after 30 days of absti-
nence from the drug (Nakamura, da Silva, Concilio, Wilkinson, and 
Masur 1991). On the other hand, impairment in spatial working memory 
was seen in adolescent rats treated with very high escalating doses of 
THC (2.5–10 mg/kg) chronically for 10 days and left undisturbed for 30 
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids, Learning, and Memory    73
days until adulthood. The working-memory deficit was also accompa-
nied by a decrease in hippocampal dendritic spine density and length 
(Rubino and Parolaro 2008).
Another commonly employed task for assessing working or short-
term-memory deficits is the Morris water maze, which requires animals 
to locate a hidden platform in a pool of water using salient visual cues 
surrounding the pool. The water-maze task can be used to evaluate the 
effect of cannabinoid agonists on reference or long-term memory (loca-
tion of the platform remaining fixed across days and on trials within  
a day) or on working or short-term memory (location of platform is 
changed each day, but remains constant across trials within a day). In the 
water-maze task, THC disrupts working memory at doses much lower 
than those that disrupt reference memory. The doses that are sufficient to 
disrupt working memory are lower than those that produce other effects 
characteristic of CB1 agonism, including anti-nociception, hypothermia, 
catalepsy, and hypomotility (Varvel, Hamm, Martin, and Lichtman 
2001). Vaporized marijuana smoke produces a similar effect (Niyuhire, 
Varvel, Martin, and Lichtman 2007).
Effects of endocannabinoid manipulations on learning and memory
Exogenous administration of CB1 agonists affects CB1 receptors through-
out the brain. On the other hand, administration of inhibitors of the 
degrading enzymes FAAH (elevating AEA and other fatty acids, including 
OEA and PEA) and MAGL (elevating 2-AG) produce effects only in  
brain regions activated by the manipulation, and only the CB1 receptors 
within regions relevant for learning and memory are activated. Although 
exogenous CB1 agonists consistently suppress working memory in these 
models of short-term memory, manipulations that elevate endogenous 
cannabinoids “where and when they are needed” do not consistently pro-
duce such an impairment. On the one hand, elevation of AEA (by FAAH 
inhibition), but not 2-AG (by MAGL inhibition), interfered with the con-
solidation of contextual conditioned fear and object-recognition memory 
(Busquets-Garcia et al. 2011]. On the other hand, several studies (Cam-
polongo et al. 2009; Mazzola et al. 2009; Varvel, Wise, Niyuhire, Cravatt, 
and Lichtman 2007) have reported that FAAH inhibition facilitates 
rather than interferes with working memory. Varvel et al. (2007) reported 
that mice deficient in FAAH, either by genetic deletion or by pharmaco-
logical inhibition, displayed both faster acquisition and faster extinction 
of spatial memory tested in the Morris water maze; rimonabant reversed 
the effect of FAAH inhibition during both task phases. FAAH-deficient 

74    Chapter 5
mice (with tenfold increases in brain levels of AEA) also showed improved 
rather than impaired performance in these tasks. Therefore, the effects of 
exogenously administered CB1 agonists are not always consistent with 
the effects of manipulations that elevate the natural ligands for the recep-
tors. However, FAAH inhibition elevates not only AEA but also several 
other fatty acids (including OEA and PEA, which are ligands for PPAR-α). 
Mazzola et al. (2009) found that enhanced acquisition of a passive avoid-
ance task by the FAAH inhibitor URB597 was reversed not only by a CB1 
antagonist but also by the PPAR-α antagonist MK 886. The PPAR-α ago-
nist WAY1463 also enhanced passive avoidance performance, and its 
effect was blocked by a PPAR-α antagonist (Campolongo, Roozendaal, 
Trezza, Cuomo, et al. 2009). Therefore, FAAH inhibition may enhance 
memory not only by increasing AEA but also by elevating OEA and PEA. 
MAGL knockout mice, with elevated levels of 2-AG, also show improved 
learning in an object-recognition task and in a water-maze task (Pan et al. 
2011). Thus, there is evidence that both AEA and 2-AG may be cognitive 
enhancers under some conditions. However, simultaneous elevation  
of both AEA and 2-AG with a dual FAAH/MAGL inhibitor, JZL195, 
revealed that concomitant increases in AEA and 2-AG actually disrupt 
short-term spatial memory performance in a manner similar to that of 
THC (Wise et al. 2012).
Effects of CB1 Antagonists on Learning and Memory in Non-Humans
Since CB1 agonists produce deficits in short-term working memory, it 
may be expected that CB1 antagonists should show enhancement of 
short-term memory—that is, serve as cognitive enhancers. However, the 
literature is replete with mixed findings. CB1 antagonist administration 
produced memory enhancement in mice in an olfactory recognition task 
and a spatial-memory task in an eight-arm radial maze. In addition, mice 
genetically deficient in CB1 receptors are able to retain memory in an 
object-recognition test for at least 48 hours after the first trial, whereas 
wild-type controls lose their capacity to retain memory after 24 hours. In 
contrast, studies using other paradigms, particularly delayed matching to 
sample, have shown no benefits of rimonabant on learning or memory. 
(See Mechoulam and Parker 2013.) One explanation (Varvel, Wise, and 
Lichtman 2009) for the mixed findings is that the temporal requirements 
of the task determine whether the CB1 antagonist will facilitate perfor-
mance. Studies showing enhancement of memory generally require mem-
ory processes lasting minutes or hours (e.g., object recognition; social 
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids, Learning, and Memory    75
recognition), whereas studies showing that rimonabant is ineffective  
generally require retention of information lasting for only seconds (e.g., 
delayed matching to sample), which suggests that blockade of CB1 recep-
tors may prolong the duration of a memory rather than facilitate learn-
ing. (See Varvel et al. 2009 for a review.)
The Role of Endocannabinoids in the Hippocampus in Learning  
and Memory
The decrement in working or short-term memory caused by cannabi-
noids is mediated by their action at the hippocampus. The hippocampus 
has a high density of CB1 receptors. The detrimental effects of CB1 agonist 
on working memory, but not reference memory, parallel the effects of 
hippocampal lesions on those two forms of memory. Intracranial admin-
istration of the CB1 agonists directly into the hippocampus also disrupts 
the performance of working memory in an eight-arm radial maze, in 
water-maze spatial learning, and in object-recognition memory. In con-
trast, intrahippocampal administration of a CB1 antagonist has been 
shown to disrupt memory consolidation of an inhibitory avoidance  
task. (See Mechoulam and Parker 2013.) Cannabinoid and the choliner-
gic systems have been shown to interact in the hippocampus during  
performance of a short-term memory task in rats (Goonawardena,  
Robinson, Hampson, and Riedel 2010). These effects may be mediated 
by cannabinoid-induced decreases in acetylcholine release in the hippo-
campus. Acetylcholine is also implicated in the pathophysiology of 
Alzheimer’s Disease and other disorders associated with declined cogni-
tive function.
Overall, the literature implicates changes in hippocampal functioning 
as the source of working-memory deficits produced by THC, although 
other brain regions are being investigated. (For a review, see Marsicano 
and Lafenetre 2009.) Cannabinoid receptors localized to different brain 
regions modulate distinct learning and memory processes, and so the 
role of endocannabinoids in other regions may be different from their 
role in the hippocampus. For instance, infusion of a CB1 agonist into the 
basolateral amygdala enhanced consolidation of inhibitory avoidance 
learning by enhancing glucocorticoid action in that region (Campo-
longo, Roozendaal, Trezza, Hauer, et al. 2009), and infusion of a CB1 
antagonist into that region interfered with aversive learning. (See also 
Tan et al. 2011.) O’Brien et al. (2014) reported that infusion of a  
CB1 antagonist into the interoceptive insular cortex (a region also 

76    Chapter 5
implicated in addiction and nausea) or into the somatosensory area 
instead facilitated consolidation of object-recognition memory. The dif-
ferential effects of CB1 agonists and antagonists on different brain 
regions may account for the different findings reported after systemic 
and localized administration of cannabinoid agonists.
Memory formation in the hippocampus is believed to be mediated by 
long-term changes in synaptic plasticity, called long-term potentiation 
(LTP). One of the most interesting characteristics of LTP is that it causes 
long-term strengthening of the synapses between two neurons that  
are activated simultaneously. LTP relies on the activation of NMDA  
glutamate receptors. CB1 agonists may impair working memory by sup-
pressing release of glutamate in the hippocampus. The suppression of 
communication across two synapses, called long-term depression (LTD), 
is the opposite of LTP. Retrograde signaling by endocannabinoids results 
in suppression of neurotransmitter release at both excitatory (glutama-
tergic) and inhibitory (GABAergic) synapses in the hippocampus in a 
short-term manner and in a long-term manner, producing LTD,. (The lat-
ter is one of the best examples of pre-synaptic forms of long-term plastic-
ity.) Recent evidence indicates that pre-synaptic activity coincident with 
CB1-receptor activation and NMDA-receptor activation is required for 
some forms of endocannabinoid LTD. The long-lasting effects of LTD 
appear to be mediated by a CB1-receptor-induced reduction of cAMP/
PKA activity in the hippocampus (Heifets and Castillo 2009).
Results published in 2013 in the journal Cell showed that chronic 
exposure to THC reduced both hippocampal LTP and performance  
in hippocampus-dependent memory tasks in mice. These effects were 
accompanied by increased cyclooxygenase 2 (COX2) signaling and its 
product prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) in the hippocampus (Chen et al. 2013). 
Administration of a COX2 inhibitor prevented the detrimental effects  
of THC on LTP, on learning, and on production of PGE2. That deficits  
in LTP and memory were not seen in mice lacking COX2 suggests that 
COX2 inhibitors (e.g., ibuprofen) administered with THC may reduce 
the side effect of memory impairment. Recent pre-clinical findings sug-
gest that such combined treatments may be useful in Alzheimer’s Disease. 
Daily injection of THC for four weeks reduced both amyloid-β (a protein 
implicated in Alzheimer’s Disease) and neurodegeneration in 5XFAD 
APP transgenic mice (a model of Alzheimer’s Disease) whether or not the 
injections were accompanied by administration of a COX2 inhibitor. 
Therefore, adjunct COX2 inhibition did not affect this particular benefi-
cial effect of THC. These findings suggest that COX2 inhibitors (e.g., 
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids, Learning, and Memory    77
ibuprofen) may enhance the medical utility of marijuana by reducing the 
side effect of memory impairment (Chen et al. 2013).
Long-Term Effects of Marijuana on Brain Morphology and on 
Cognitive Processes
Marijuana use has increased over the past ten years, as has the potency of 
THC in the marijuana. Since it is known that THC produces at least 
acute effects on short-term memory processes, it is possible that long-
term chronic use of high-potency marijuana may produce neural changes 
affecting cognitive processes. However, whether brain changes result 
from long-term marijuana use is equivocal. Some studies report func-
tional changes in cognition in both adults and adolescents; others report 
no changes. Some studies report decreased volume of sub-cortical regions; 
others report increased volumes in the same or different regions in chronic 
marijuana users (Weiland et al. 2015). Indeed, when the sizes of effects 
are averaged across all studies, Weiland et al. (2015) report a mean cumu-
lative effect side of d = –0.011, which suggests no effect within the bounds 
of sampling error.
Filbey et al. (2014) collected a cross-sectional large group of chronic 
marijuana using adults with a wide age range, allowing for a measure of 
changes across lifespan. They found that chronic marijuana use was asso-
ciated with complex neuroadaptive processes and that age of onset and 
duration of use had unique effects on these processes. There was a high 
co-morbidity of marijuana use, alcohol use, and tobacco use, so they 
divided the groups into exclusive marijuana users. They found that heavy 
(at least four times per week over past six months) chronic users (either 
co-morbid or exclusively marijuana users) had lower orbitofrontal cortex 
gray-matter volumes relative to non-using controls. The orbitofrontal 
cortex is a region in the reward network and implicated in addiction and 
in decision making. There were no differences in other regions, but the 
effects in the orbitofrontal cortex were even greater in exclusively mari-
juana users than in co-morbid users. However, as Filbey et al. (2014) 
noted, the cross-sectional nature of their study cannot assess whether 
these reductions are the cause or the consequence of marijuana use—that 
is, there could be pre-existing differences that lead to marijuana use in the 
first place. Longitudinal studies in humans are needed to address the cau-
sality of these neural abnormalities. Indeed, the results of a four-year 
longitudinal study by Cheetham et al. (2012) showed that individuals 
with smaller orbitofrontal cortex volumes at age 12 were more likely to 

78    Chapter 5
initiate cannabis use (as well as tobacco and alcohol use) by age 16. 
Therefore, there is evidence that the structural abnormality in the orbito-
frontal cortex reported by Filbey et al. (2014) may have been present 
before cannabis use began. The orbitofrontal cortex underlies inhibitory 
and decision-making processes that might influence risk for early canna-
bis use. Further studies are needed to determine whether any potential 
changes in brain function or structure that may be present in cannabis 
users revert back to normal after protracted abstinence from marijuana 
use. The small literature suggests that cognitive alterations and CB1-
receptor downregulation in regular marijuana users may return to nor-
mal values as a result of a neuroadaptive phenomenon occurring after a 
period of abstinence.
Conclusion
Evidence suggests that the acute effects of cannabis on memory depend in 
part on the type of cannabis that is used. Smoking cannabis with higher 
levels of CBD protected users against the acute memory-impairing effects 
of THC (Morgan et al. 2010).
Global activation of CB1 receptors produces actions on the hippocam-
pal neurons that result in interference with short-term memory and in 
interference with consolidation of memories that are currently being pro-
cessed. However, such CB1-receptor activation does not impair recall of 
previously established memories. These effects on the formation of new 
memories would be particularly problematic for adolescent use of can-
nabis. It still isn’t clear whether any permanent changes in learning and 
memory processes result from early exposure to cannabis in now-
abstinent individuals. Insofar as most cannabis users also use alcohol, 
which is known to be a cognitively impairing drug (Curran et al. 2016), 
it is not clear how repeated use of cannabis causally affects the human 
adolescent and adult brain. The recent findings that administration  
of COX-2 inhibitors (e.g., ibuprofen) or CBD with THC may prevent 
memory-impairing effects of THC are promising avenues for further 
research.
www.ebook3000.com

The euphoric effects of cannabis became known to the Western  
world through the writings of Baudelaire, Gautier, and Moreau in the 
middle of the nineteenth century. During monthly meetings of the Club 
de Hachichins at the Hotel Lauzun in Paris’s Latin Quarter, Moreau 
dispensed dawamesk (a mixture of hashish, cinnamon, cloves, nutmeg,  
pistachio, sugar, orange juice, butter, and cantharides) to eminent  
people who had assembled to ingest the drug. “There are two modes of 
existence—two modes of life—given to man,” Moreau mused. “The  
first one results from our communication with the external world, with  
the universe. The second one is but the reflection of the self and is fed 
from its own distinct internal sources. The dream is an in-between land 
where the external life ends and the internal life begins.” With the aid  
of hashish, he felt that anyone could enter this in-between land at  
will (Abel 1980). As Moreau studied hashish, he noted a relationship 
between the amount of the drug taken and its effects. A small dose pro-
duced a sense of euphoria and calmness. As the dose increased, atten-
tion wandered, ideas appeared at random, minutes seemed like hours, 
thoughts rushed together, and sensory acuity increased. As the dose 
increased further, dreams began to flood the brain, like hallucinations of 
insanity (ibid.).
Can cannabis can be considered an abused drug? Is it addictive? How 
does it produce an effect on reward centers of the brain? Does it change 
the morphology of these centers of reward in regular users? How does it 
influence relapse to self-administration of other drugs of abuse? What are 
the interactions between cannabinoids and opiates? How does cannabis 
influence sexual motivation and desire?
6
Cannabinoids, Reward, and Addiction

80    Chapter 6
The Abuse Potential of Cannabinoids
Humans have an urge to alter their state of consciousness, and the use of 
psychoactive drugs is a means of achieving that goal. Understanding how 
such drugs act on the brain and how their use can turn to abuse and 
addiction is important for the health of individuals and for society at 
large. Methamphetamine, heroin, nicotine, and alcohol clearly have the 
potential to produce addiction in humans. Whether or not cannabis is 
addictive has been more controversial.
The term “addiction” generally refers to pathological drug taking that 
ranges from mild to severe. At first, intake of a drug gradually escalates 
from sporadic recreational use to more sustained and regular intake; 
later, discontinuing use of the drug becomes difficult. The later phase, 
generally referred to as “addiction,” is characterized by loss of control  
of drug use. The individual cannot control the amount of the drug  
taken, spends more time in drug-seeking and drug-taking activities, and 
cannot stop using the drug despite adverse consequences. When discuss-
ing addiction, the fifth edition of the American Psychiatric Association’s 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) uses the 
term “substance-related disorder” rather than “addiction,” partly because 
“addiction” is commonly used to refer to only the severe final stage of a 
substance-use disorder. This distinction recognizes that there is a contin-
uum in the severity of the disorders related to drug use. “Use disorder” is 
meant to indicate that a person can have a problem with substances that 
does not necessarily coincide with the extreme case in which behavior  
is the kind of uncontrolled compulsive drug seeking typically seen in 
“addiction.” The range of symptoms and consequences seen in the clinic 
is quite large, and effective markers across individuals are not necessarily 
clear, but the DSM’s fifth edition provides a means of designating severity 
level (mild, moderate, severe) by summing the number of diagnostic  
criteria displayed (Piomelli et al. 2016).
Cannabis-use disorder
Despite earlier beliefs that cannabis is not addictive, clinical and experi-
mental research conducted over the past twenty years has demonstrated 
that people may become dependent upon cannabis, in what is called can-
nabis use disorder. However, most agree that cannabis-use disorder does 
not result in the same extreme levels of behavior -apparent with addic-
tion to other drugs of abuse. One of the top clinical researchers in this 
field, Alan J. Budney, has described cannabis-use disorder as follows:
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids, Reward, and Addiction    81
The features of cannabis use disorder are the same as the features of all substance 
use disorders according to the DSM 5th edition. There is a list of 11 criteria, and 
they encompass the range of signs and symptoms that can be experienced, includ-
ing physiological signs like tolerance and withdrawal to cannabis, continuing to 
use cannabis despite the person knowing he or she has problems being caused by 
cannabis, and recurrent use in situations that might be hazardous or dangerous 
like driving a car while high on cannabis. Other signs include using to such excess 
that cannabis seems to take over one’s life, and healthy behaviors like work and 
recreation and positive relationships are harmed, ignored, or greatly reduced. 
Experiencing strong and frequent cravings to use, and using more cannabis than 
one plans to use or for a much longer time than was planned are also common 
features of the disorder. Last, people who develop problems with cannabis may 
have repeated desire to cut down or quit, but end up going back to using the same 
amount or more. Some scientists have tried to identify, statistically, hallmark signs 
or symptoms of cannabis use disorder that differentiate it from other substance 
use disorders, but they have not been successful. Essentially, cannabis use disorder 
manifests in the same way as other substance use disorders, but the difference 
may be in the magnitude of severity of each of the signs and symptoms that are 
expressed. One example of this is the difference in severity of withdrawal symp-
toms experienced by those who abruptly stop using opiates versus cannabis. 
Heavy cannabis users who stop experience withdrawal symptoms that may be 
somewhat similar to tobacco withdrawal symptoms, but they do not approach 
the severity nor have the clinical implications of the withdrawal experience by 
many opiate users. (Piomelli et al. 2016, p. 48)
Abstinence from marijuana after daily use can produce a withdrawal 
syndrome that appears within the first one or two days after discontinu-
ation; its effects reach their peak after 2–6 days, and most symptoms 
(e.g., irritability, anxiety, muscle pain, chills, nightmares, insomnia, head-
ache, decreased appetite) resolve within a week or two (Bonnet, Specka, 
Stratmann, Ochwadt, and Scherbaum 2014). Oral administration of 
THC reduces these withdrawal symptoms (Haney et al. 2004). Indeed, 
about 24 percent of patients now entering treatment for substance abuse 
have a diagnosis of cannabis-use disorder (Substance Abuse and Mental 
Health Services Administration 2013).
There are no approved pharmacotherapies for managing the symp-
toms of withdrawal from cannabis (Allsop et al. 2014). Anti-depressants 
and mood stabilizers have been used, but with only limited benefit. 
Agonist-substitution therapy may be more promising; indeed, dronabi-
nol and nabilone may be more promising. A placebo-controlled, within-
subject clinical study of daily cannabis smokers not seeking treatment 
reported that 6-mg and 8-mg daily doses of nabilone decreased cannabis 
relapse and reversed cannabis-related irritability and disruptions of sleep 
and food intake (Haney et al. 2013). Neither dose of nabilone increased 

82    Chapter 6
self ratings of drug “liking, an index of psychoactive euphoria effects, 
but the highest dose worsened psychomotor performance slightly. In 
addition there is evidence that nabiximols (Sativex 2.7 mg THC: 2.5 mg 
CBD/spray) may show promise as an agonist substitute treatment for 
cannabis-use disorder. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled 
inpatient clinical study found that nabiximols attenuated symptoms of 
cannabis withdrawal and improved patient retention in treatment; how-
ever, placebo was as effective as nabiximols in promoting long-term 
reductions in cannabis use at follow-up (Allsop 2014). Nabiximols treat-
ment reduced the overall severity of cannabis withdrawal symptoms 
relative to placebo, including effects on irritability, depression, and crav-
ing and more limited effects on sleep disturbance, anxiety, appetite loss, 
and restlessness (Allsop et al. 2014). A recent double-blind crossover 
study compared the abuse liability of nabiximols with oral THC 
(dronabinol) using standard measures of drug discrimination and drug 
liking (Schoedel et al. 2011). At moderate doses, nabiximols did not  
produce significant adverse cognitive or psychomotor side effects and 
showed lower abuse potential than dronabinol; however, at higher doses 
both medications exhibited abuse potential (defined as self-reported 
drug liking relative to placebo).
One reason cannabis was considered not addictive for many years was 
the inability of experimental animal-based research to demonstrate the 
rewarding effects of THC. That is, for a long time scientists had great dif-
ficulty demonstrating that animals in experiments would self-administer 
cannabis or THC-type compounds. Much of the hallmark work done in 
the early days of addiction research was done in animal labs. Thus, the 
difficulty of demonstrating cannabis self-administration or withdrawal in 
animals made it difficult to claim that cannabis was an addictive sub-
stance, as opioids and cocaine were said to be. In addition, the fact that 
many users of cannabis did not develop problems or experience symp-
toms of withdrawal led to the perception that cannabis is not addictive. 
Finally, the potency of THC in cannabis has been rising, which may 
account (partially, at least) for the fact that the number of individuals 
diagnosed with cannabis-use disorder has increased by 8–15 percent in 
the past 15 years (Piomelli et al. 2016; Substance Abuse and Mental 
Health Services Administration 2013). A very interesting recent finding 
indicated that, when intoxicated, human smokers of high-CBD:THC 
strains showed reduced attentional bias to drug and food stimuli relative 
to smokers of low CBD:THC strains. Those smoking high-CBD:THC 
strains also showed lower self-rated liking of cannabis stimuli (a measure 
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids, Reward, and Addiction    83
of abuse potential in humans). These findings suggest that CBD has 
potential as a treatment for cannabis-use disorder (Morgan, Freeman, 
Schafer, and Curran 2010).
Are cannabinoids rewarding drugs in animal models?
A wide range of drugs can be shown to act as reinforcers in rodents  
and monkeys, the relative reinforcement potential and pattern of drug 
taking closely resembling those seen in humans. In addition, anti-
psychotic drugs and other drugs not self-administered by animals lack 
reinforcing properties or may even be aversive to humans. The two best-
characterized animal models of the rewarding effects of drugs are the 
drug self-administration procedure (figure 6.1) and the conditioned place  
preference paradigm (figure 6.2). In the drug self-administration 
Figure 6.1
A self-administration apparatus. Rats implanted with intravenous catheters are trained to 
self-administer drugs by pressing a lever. The rat is first trained on an FR-1 schedule or an 
FR-5 Schedule (that is, one or five lever presses, respectively, are required for an infusion of 
the drug). Animals titrate the amount of the drug to maintain an optimal level if it is 
rewarding.
Computer programing
equipment
Syringe with
drug
Lever

84    Chapter 6
paradigm, an animal must learn to press a lever in order to receive an 
intravenous injection of a drug. The animal is usually trained on a Fixed 
Ratio-1 (FR-1) schedule or a Fixed Ratio-5 (FR-5) schedule of reinforce-
ment. In an FR-1 schedule, the animal receives an intravenous infusion of 
the test drug every time it presses the lever. An FR-5 schedule requires 
that the animal press the lever five times before it receives an infusion of 
the drug. Animals quickly learn to “titrate” the amount of the drug they 
receive to maintain an optimal level; that is, they learn to regulate the 
dose. If the dose of the drug infused is decreased below the training dose, 
the animal will self-administer more infusions; if the dose of the drug 
infused in increased above the training dose, it will self-administer fewer 
Figure 6.2
The procedure for place conditioning. Rats or mice are injected with the vehicle in which 
the drug is prepared on days 1, 3, 5, and 7 and placed in the chamber with the horizontal 
stripes. On days 2, 4, 6, and 8 the same rats or mice are injected with a drug and placed in 
the chamber with the vertical stripes. The chambers and the order of the conditioning trials 
are counterbalanced among the rats. On the test day, the barrier between the two chambers 
is removed and the drug-free rodents are given a choice between the drug-paired chamber 
and the vehicle-paired chamber. If they spend more time in the drug-paired chamber than in 
the vehicle-paired chamber, the drug is considered rewarding; if they spend less time in the 
drug-paired chamber than in the vehicle-paired chamber, the drug is considered aversive.
Days 2, 4, 6, 8
Drug Injection  
Days 1, 3, 5, 7
Vehicle Injection  
Day 9
Choice
?
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids, Reward, and Addiction    85
infusions. In addition, through a process of classical conditioning, stimuli 
(such as a light) that are paired with infusion of a drug acquire condi-
tioned reinforcing properties. These stimuli can be subsequently pre-
sented to the animal to elicit “drug-seeking” behavior, which means 
responding in anticipation of receiving the drug (craving). This paradigm 
is useful in evaluating putative medicines for controlling drug craving 
which promotes relapse to drug taking in humans.
Early research suggested that neither monkeys nor rodents self-
administered THC. However, the use of more sensitive techniques has 
resulted in more reliable evidence that very low doses of THC (but not 
high doses), as well as anandamide and 2-AG, are self-administered  
by monkeys (Justinova et al. 2011) with or without a history of cannabi-
noid self-administration. Although the FAAH inhibitor URB597 is  
not self-administered by monkeys (which suggests that it does not have 
abuse potential), it does make anandamide more rewarding in the self-
administration paradigm in monkeys (Justinova et al. 2008).
In the conditioned place preference paradigm (figure 6.2), a rodent is 
injected with a drug and placed in a distinctive chamber on one day and 
is injected with the vehicle in which the drug is prepared and placed in a 
different distinctive chamber on another day, with the order counterbal-
anced. This procedure is usually continued until the rat has experienced 
three or four pairings of the drug with the chamber. Then the animal, 
when drug free, is given a choice between the two chambers. If the drug 
is rewarding, the rat will return to the chamber previously paired with the 
drug. If the drug is aversive, the rat will avoid the chamber paired with 
the drug. Although abused drugs such as cocaine, amphetamine, mor-
phine, and heroin consistently produce a conditioned place preference, 
conflicting findings have been reported with THC in this model. It appears 
that THC produces a place preference in rodents at very low doses 
(Lepore, Vorel, Lowinson, and Gardiner 1995) and in rodents that have 
had experience with THC (Valjent and Maldonando 2000). Otherwise, 
at higher doses and in naive rodents, THC is aversive, probably as a result 
of its anxiogenic effects (Parker and Gillies 1995).
In contrast to exogenous cannabinoid agonists, pharmacological 
enhancement of endocannabinoid levels by FAAH inhibition or MAGL 
inhibition generally does not produce rewarding effects. In most animal 
studies reported to date, neither FAAH inhibitors nor MAGL inhibitors 
support operant self-administration or produce conditioned place  
preference in rats or mice. In addition, FAAH or MAGL inhibitors  
(or exogenously administered AEA or 2-AG) do not produce THC-like 

86    Chapter 6
discriminative stimulus effects in rats or mice. On the other hand, exog-
enous AEA and 2-AG are both self-administered by squirrel monkeys 
and produce rewarding effects in rats when co-administered with FAAH 
inhibition (Justinova et al 2008; Parsons and Hurd 2015). Concurrent 
FAAH and MAGL inhibition in mice produces THC-like discriminative 
and behavioral effects (Wise et al. 2012). These findings suggest that the 
endocannabinoid system has to be robustly activated in order to evoke 
rewarding effects.
The Action of Cannabinoid on the Reward System of the Brain
Drugs of abuse, including cocaine, amphetamine, opiates, and alcohol, 
engage the mesolimbic dopamine (DA) system (Wise 2004). (See figure 
6.3.) There is evidence that cannabinoids, too, activate this reward sys-
tem of the brain. The primary role of endocannabinoids is to regulate 
the release of other neurotransmitters, including GABA, glutamate, and 
dopamine. However, the effect on DA is not direct; it is indirectly regu-
lated by action on GABA and glutamate. As is illustrated in figure 6.3, 
DA afferent axons originate from the ventral tegmental area (VTA) and 
project to the nucleus accumbens (NAc). The NAc consists primarily of 
inhibitory GABA neurons, including local interneurons and medium 
spiny neurons that project to the VTA. The NAc receives excitatory glu-
tamatergic input from limbic regions, including the prefrontal cortex 
and the amygdala. This excitatory input results in release of GABA 
within the VTA, thereby inhibiting the release of DA in the NAc. Endo-
cannabinoids indirectly control the release of DA by their inhibitory 
action on the release of glutamate in the NAc (which reduces GABA 
release in the VTA), as well as by their direct inhibition of GABA release 
in the VTA. This results in disinhibition of DA transmission from the 
VTA to the NAc (Lupica, Riegel, and Hoffman 2004; Riegel and Lupica 
2004). Therefore, the final effect of endocannabinoids on the modula-
tion of DA activity depends on the functional balance between the inhib-
itory GABAergic and excitatory glutamatergic inputs to the VTA, the 
latter predominating (Maldonado, Valverde, and Berrendero 2006). 
Since all addictive drugs display the ability to increase DA in the NAc 
(e.g., Wise 2004), this probably is the mechanism underlying the reward-
ing effects of CB1 agonists.
Positron-emission tomography studies indicate a small increase in 
dopamine release in the striatum after administration of THC to humans 
(Bossong et al. 2015; Bossong et al. 2009), although the increase is much 
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids, Reward, and Addiction    87
Figure 6.3
Interaction between the endocannabinoid and dopaminergic systems in the mesolimbic 
reward circuit. The ventral tegmental area (VTA) produces dopamine (DA) and projects 
afferents to the nucleus accumbens (NAc). The release of DA in that region produces the 
rewarding effects of natural reinforcers and drugs of abuse. Treatments that reduce the 
amount of dopamine released interfere with reward. Endocannabinoid regulation of DA 
occurs in the NAc when glutamate (GLU) projections from the limbic regions of the 
prefrontal cortex and the amygdala trigger the production of endocannabinoids, which 
reduce further release. This reduction of glutamate release reduces the release of GABA from 
the NAc, which feeds back to the VTA, thereby disinhibiting (increasing) the release of DA 
from the VTA to the NAc. The activation of CB1 present on axon terminals of GABAergic 
neurons in the VTA, inhibits GABA transmission and removes this inhibitory input on DA 
neurons leads to an increasing in the firing of these cells (Riegel and Lupica 2004).
GABA
Dopamine
Glutamate
Ventral
Tegmental Area
(VTA)
Limbic
regions
GABA
Dopamine
Glutamate
Nucleus 
Accumbens
(NAc)
GABA

88    Chapter 6
smaller than those observed after administration of other recreational 
drugs (Curran et al. 2016). On the other hand, other studies have shown 
no change in dopamine transmission (Barkus et al. 2011; Stokes et al. 
2009). Furthermore, Urban et al. (2012) found that mild to moderate 
cannabis dependence was not associated with striatal DA alterations, 
which was consistent with an earlier report (Sevy 2008). More recently, 
cannabis users were reported to show a reduction in dopamine release 
(Bloomfield et al. 2014). The available human data provide only weak 
support for dopaminergic involvement in cannabis addiction in humans 
(Curran et al. 2016). In animal models, the conditions under which can-
nabinoid drugs have rewarding effects are much more restricted than 
those for other drugs of abuse, such as cocaine and heroin. However, 
when cannabinoid drugs produce reward-related behavior, similar brain 
structures are involved. (For an excellent recent review, see Parsons and 
Hurd 2015.)
Does THC Produce Changes in the Morphology of the Brain’s  
Reward Systems?
If THC activates the dopamine reward system, chronic exposure may be 
expected to produce changes in the morphology of structures activated 
by that system. Indeed, previous work from our laboratory (Kolb, Gorny, 
Limebeer, and Parker 2006) found structural changes (dendritic arboriza-
tion) in brain regions related to reward/aversion implicated in addiction, 
including the nucleus accumbens, after chronic exposure to THC in rats. 
However, how chronic cannabis use may modify brain morphometry in 
these regions in humans is not known. A recent report (Gilman et al. 
2014) suggests that adolescents using marijuana more than once a week 
have structural changes in the gray matter (cell bodies) of the NAc and 
the amygdala—regions implicated in reward. That is, as in the rat study 
by Kolb et al. (2012), recreational users had a larger left NAc and a larger 
amygdala than non-users.
However, the results reported by Gilman et al. (2014) may have been 
confounded by differences between the marijuana users and the non-
users in the use of alcohol. Indeed, a subsequent report (Weiland et al. 
2015) indicates that when this difference is carefully controlled with 
matched groups, no structural difference in white or gray matter are 
found between adolescent or adult daily users of marijuana and non-
users. Weiland et al. suggest that many previous studies have similar 
flaws. Unlike marijuana use, alcohol use has unequivocally been 
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids, Reward, and Addiction    89
associated with structural brain differences and with deficits in cognition 
in both adults and adolescents. (See, e.g., Sullivan 2007.)
Another difference between marijuana users and non-users may be 
that users are more willing than non-users to engage in high-risk illegal 
behavior. Weiland et al. (2015) controlled for this confounding variable 
by equating both users and non-users on prior engagement in illegal 
behaviors. Their adolescent participants were recruited through juvenile 
justice services in Albuquerque as part of a larger study of adolescent risk 
behavior. Both the users and the non-users had engaged in risky behav-
iors, which controlled for this potential pre-existing difference. Indeed, 
these two groups did not differ on measures of impulsivity or sensation 
seeking. Thus, any difference that might be found between the two groups 
would be attributable to marijuana use, not to personality traits. With 
these careful controls, daily marijuana users did not differ from non-
using controls in brain morphology. Carefully controlled longitudinal 
studies are necessary to ensure that the brain changes attributed to mari-
juana use are not confounded by alcohol co-administration or by pre-
existing differences between marijuana users and non-users.
Cannabinoids and Relapse
One of the major hindrances to treatment of addiction is the high rate of 
relapse after abstinence from the addicting drug due to drug craving (that 
is, intense desire for the drug). Exposure to drug-associated stimuli, expo-
sure to the drug itself (drug priming), and stress can precipitate drug 
craving and relapse in humans. The brain circuits involved in drug crav-
ing include projections from the ventral tegmental area to the nucleus 
accumbens and the prefrontal cortex. Repeated activation of this circuit 
results in the drug-associated stimuli, producing craving for the drug 
itself. In humans, fMRI studies have shown that cues associated with 
marijuana use activate the reward neurocircuitry associated with addic-
tion (Filbey, Schacht, Myers, Chavez, and Hutchison 2009), as well as 
activating self-reported craving. Furthermore, alterations in the CB1-
receptor gene and in the FAAH gene have been shown to enhance fMRI 
activity in reward-related areas of the brain during exposure to mari-
juana cues (Filbey et al. 2009).
That CB1-receptor antagonism (or inverse agonism) interferes with 
drug- and cue-induced relapse in animal models of self-administration 
and conditioned place preference learning (Serrano and Parsons 2011)  
is of considerable therapeutic importance. In the self-administration  

90    Chapter 6
paradigm, the animal is first trained to self-administer the drug in  
the presence of a light or some other distinctive cue. Then the self-
administration behavior is extinguished by allowing the animal to press 
the lever in the absence of infusion of the drug. After this extinction train-
ing, the potential of the drug itself (drug priming) or a cue associated with 
the drug to produce relapse or “drug-seeking behavior” is assessed. Such 
drug-seeking behavior contrasts with actual drug-taking behavior during 
the self-administration session. Administration of the CB1 antagonist 
rimonabant prevents drug-associated cues and drug primes from produc-
ing relapse in rats and mice. Recent evidence suggests that rimonabant is 
more effective in interfering with drug-seeking behavior (craving leading 
to relapse) than drug-taking behavior during the self-administration ses-
sion. Rimonabant has been shown to block drug seeking evoked by cues 
paired with cocaine, heroin, methamphetamine, and nicotine and drug 
seeking evoked by priming injections of each of these abused drugs. 
Therefore, blockade (or inverse agonism) of the CB1 receptor interferes 
generally with drug-seeking behavior produced by drug-paired cues or by 
the drug itself. (For a review see Parsons and Hurd 2015.)
Because CB1 antagonism interferes with drug-seeking behavior, 
considerable evidence also suggests that cannabinoid agonists reinstate 
heroin-seeking, cocaine-seeking, nicotine-seeking, and alcohol-seeking 
behavior, which suggests that cannabinoid signaling is involved in drug-
seeking behavior in general, regardless of the nature of the drug. (See 
Parsons and Hurd 2015.) Enhancement of 2-AG levels by treatment  
with the MAGL inhibitor JZL184 also has been reported to potentiate 
relapse elicited by presentation of a nicotine-associated cue (Trigo and  
Le Foll 2015). Indeed, JZL184 delivered to the VTA has been reported  
to enhance dopamine in the NAc when assessed during drug-reward-
directed behavior (Oleson et al. 2012).
Although considerable evidence indicates that agonism of the CB1 
receptor promotes cue-induced and drug-induced relapse, there is a grow-
ing literature suggesting that FAAH inhibition actually prevents nicotine 
reward and relapse to nicotine seeking in pre-clinical models (Forget, 
Coen, and Le Foll 2009; Forget, Guranda, Gamaleddin, Goldberg, and Le 
Foll 2016; Justinova et al. 2015; Scherma et al. 2008). Indeed, URB597, 
a selective FAAH inhibitor, has been shown to reverse nicotine-induced 
release of extracellular dopamine in the NAc shell (Scherma et al. 2008) 
and nicotine-induced excitation of dopamine cells in the VTA (Melis et al. 
2008), perhaps by reversing nicotine-induced inhibition of GABAergic 
medium spiny neurons in the NAc shell. Since FAAH inhibition not only 
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids, Reward, and Addiction    91
prevents the degradation of AEA (which acts on CB1 receptors) but also 
oleoylethanalamide (OEA) and palmitoylethanalamide (PEA) (which act 
on peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-α [PPAR-α] receptors), it is 
not clear which mechanism prevents nicotine reward and nicotine seek-
ing in these studies. There is some evidence for both mechanisms. Selec-
tive PPAR-α agonists also counteract the reinstatement of nicotine seeking 
in rats and monkeys (Mascia et al. 2011). Justinova et al. (2015) found 
that URB597-induced reduction of nicotine self-administration and 
nicotine-priming-induced reinstatement (but not cue-induced relapse) of 
nicotine seeking in monkeys were reversed by a PPAR-α antagonist; how-
ever, Forget et al. (2016) found that the reduction in cue-induced relapse 
to nicotine seeking induced by URB597 was selectively reversed by a  
CB1-receptor antagonist (at a low dose that did not affect reinstatement 
on its own). The role of 2-AG in relapse to self-administer nicotine had 
recently been reported to be the opposite of the role of AEA or other fatty 
acids. Indeed, it may actually potentiate relapse to nicotine triggered by 
re-exposure to nicotine-associated cues. Trigo and Le Foll (2015) found 
that the MAGL inhibitor JZL184, which selectively elevates 2-AG, has no 
effect on food taking, nicotine taking, or motivation for taking nicotine; 
instead, it selectively enhanced cue-induced relapse to nicotine without 
producing relapse in the absence of the nicotine-associated cue. This sug-
gests that AEA and 2-AG may oppose one another in the regulation of 
relapse. Because FAAH inhibition may be useful in treating addiction,  
it will be important to extend these findings to other FAAH inhibitors 
currently being developed.
Rimonabant showed great promise as an anti-relapse treatment; how-
ever, as will be described in more detail in chapter 7, it was removed from 
the European market as a treatment for obesity because of psychiatric 
side effects of anxiety and suicidal thoughts. The generality of the effects 
of cannabinoids on motivational processes may explain these undesirable 
side effects. Since rimonabant acts not only as a CB1 antagonist but also 
as a CB1 inverse agonist, the relapse-preventing properties, and poten-
tially the adverse side effects, may also be mediated by its inverse canna-
bimimetic effects, which are opposite in direction from those produced 
by cannabinoid-receptor agonists (Pertwee 2005). Recent evidence sug-
gests that at least some adverse side effects of CB1-receptor antagonists 
or inverse agonists seen in clinical trials involving nausea and anxiety 
may reflect their inverse-agonist properties (Bergman et al. 2008; Sink, 
Segovia, Collins, et al. 2010; Sink, Segovia, Sink, et al. 2010). It will be 
interesting to evaluate the potential of more recently developed 

92    Chapter 6
CB1-receptor neutral antagonists (without inverse agonist effects), such 
as AM4113, to prevent drug-seeking behavior.
Activation of the CB2 receptor, unlike activation of the CB1 receptor, 
does not produce a psychoactive effect. Therefore, there is interest in 
recent reports that selective CB2-receptor agonists were shown to inhibit 
intravenous self-administration of cocaine, cocaine-enhanced locomo-
tion, and cocaine-enhanced release of DA in the NAc in wild-type and 
CB1-receptor knockout mice but not in CB2 knockout mice; this effect 
was blocked by a selective CB2-receptor antagonist. These findings sug-
gest that brain CB2 receptors also modulate cocaine’s effects (Xi et al. 
2011) and provide further evidence that the CB2 receptor seems to have 
general protective properties (Pacher and Mechoulam 2011).
Cannabidiol, the primary non-psychoactive compound in marijuana, 
has also been reported to attenuate cue-induced reinstatement of heroin 
seeking and to reverse disturbances of glutamatergic and endocannabi-
noid systems in the NAc produced by heroin seeking (Ren, Whittard, 
Higuera-Matas, Morris, and Hurd 2009). Apparently, in addition to the 
many other ailments that cannabidiol ameliorates (Mechoulam, Parker, 
and Gallily 2002), it may also be a potential treatment for heroin craving 
and relapse.
Interactions between Cannabinoid and Opiates
Heroin is used by only a small percentage of the population. However, 
non-medical use of prescription opioids is now becoming more prevalent. 
For instance, a 2009 study in the US reported that 6.2 million individuals 
were recent non-medical users of prescription opioids (Scavone, Sterling, 
and Van Bockstaele 2013). As many as 10 percent of high school seniors 
used prescription opioids for non-medical purposes in 2009—nearly as 
many as used marijuana. Opioid-related deaths rose by more than 300 
percent between 1999 and 2006. Clearly opiate use is a major health 
problem in North America.
Considerable pre-clinical animal research demonstrates a clear inter-
action between cannabinoids and opiates at a number of levels within the 
cell, including direct receptor associations, alterations in endogenous opi-
ate release, and post-receptor interactions via shared signal-transduction 
pathways. Various studies have demonstrated cross-tolerance, mutual 
potentiation, and receptor cross-talk between the mu-opiate receptor and 
the CB1 receptor. Drugs that target the cannabinoid system often affect 
the opioid system in tandem. Synergistic effects of cannabinoid-opiate 
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids, Reward, and Addiction    93
drugs have been reported. (See Scavone et al. 2013 for a review.) For 
instance, sub-threshold doses of cannabinoids and morphine reduce pain 
in animals and humans. Furthermore, cannabinoids have been show to 
exert cross-antagonism within the opioid system; that is, rimonabant can 
substitute for the opiate antagonist, thereby precipitating morphine with-
drawal (Vigano et al. 2005). Inhibition of cannabinoid-receptor signaling 
by rimonabant during chronic opioid exposure reduces opioid with-
drawal signs (Rubino, Massi, Vigano, Fuzio, and Parolaro 2000), and 
CB1 antagonism also reduces a naloxone-precipitated morphine with-
drawal induce place aversion (Wills et al 2014) by its action on the cen-
tral nucleus of the amygdala (Wills et al. 2016; see also Wills and Parker 
2016).
The overlapping neuroanatomical distribution, convergent neuro-
chemical mechanisms, and comparable functional neurobiological prop-
erties of cannabinoid and opiate systems has led to the suggestion that 
cannabinoids could substitute for opioids to potentially alleviate with-
drawal symptoms with opioid abstinence (Deroches et al. 2010). Mari-
juana is commonly used by opiate addicts, and there is some suggestion 
that it may reduce the amount of opiates used (Scavonne et al. 2013). In 
an opiate-dependent population, cannabis users reported spending less 
on opiates (mean = $85/day) than non-cannabis users (mean = $126/day), 
which suggested that they used smaller quantities of opiates.
In the past twenty years, drug overdose has become the leading cause 
of injury death in the United States. In 2011, 55 percent of drug-overdose 
deaths were related to prescription medications, and 75 percent of  
those deaths involved opiate painkillers. However, opiate-related deaths 
decreased by approximately 25 percent in 13 states in the six years after 
medical marijuana was legalized in those states (Bachhuber, Saloner, 
Cunningham, and Barry 2014). In contrast, Bachhuber et al. did not find 
evidence that states that had passed laws legalizing medical cannabis had 
different overdose mortality rates in years before the laws were passed. 
The implication is that medical marijuana laws, when implemented, may 
represent a promising approach for reducing non-intentional deaths 
related to opioid analgesics.
Because of the clear evidence of cannabinoid-opiate interactions,  
several studies have focused on the impact of cannabis exposure during 
treatment for opiate dependence. Although effective treatments for opi-
ate dependence are available, the rate of dropout from treatment and  
the rate of relapse are high. Naltrexone is an opiate antagonist that has 
been used as a treatment for opiate dependence, but its effectiveness 

94    Chapter 6
has been severely limited by poor adherence. However, Raby et al. (2009) 
report that opioid-dependent patients who used cannabis intermittently 
during naltrexone treatment showed better retention than patients  
with either heavy cannabis use or no cannabis use. The beneficial effect  
of cannabinoid agonism early in the course of naltrexone treatment  
suggests that it may be alleviating the withdrawal effects produced by 
naltrexone.
Methadone maintenance treatment is a pharmacotherapy used to 
eliminate illicit opiate use and reduce associated risk behaviors. The ini-
tiation of this treatment requires slow titration to avoid risk of overmedi-
cation. The initial period of dose stabilization is particular vulnerable to 
relapse because the patient is undergoing some symptoms of opiate with-
drawal. Marijuana is commonly used in combination with heroin and 
continues to be used during treatment of opiate dependence (Scavone et 
al. 2013). Indeed, because of the interaction of cannabinoids and the opi-
oid system, a synergy occurs between cannabinoids and opiates when 
they are administered concurrently. Marijuana use was recently found  
to increase during the early phases of dose titration in methadone  
maintenance treatment, and to decrease significantly after dose stabiliza-
tion (Scavone et al. 2013). Ratings of opiate withdrawal decreased in 
methadone-maintenance patients who used marijuana during stabiliza-
tion. Despite the accumulation of pre-clinical data suggesting that the 
benefits of cannabinoids may outweigh the risks in certain severe medical 
conditions, political conflict over the legalization of medicinal marijuana 
continues to preclude a smooth transition of these pre-clinical studies 
into clinical trial testing.
Cannabinoids and Sexual Behavior
Throughout history cannabis has been anecdotally described as an aph-
rodisiac, yet other reports suggest that it interferes with sexual behavior. 
(See, e.g., Indian Hemp Drugs Commission 1894, cited in Gorzalka, Hill, 
and Chang 2010.) The distribution of CB1 receptors suggests that can-
nabinoids may affect sexual activity through direct effects within the 
hypothalamus regulating physiological and endocrinological underpin-
nings of sexual activity, or indirectly by modulating motor activity, anxi-
ety, or reward mechanisms. There have been very few scientific studies of 
the effects of cannabis on women’s sexual behavior, and most of those 
have been self-report studies. However, a review of these studies reveals 
that moderate cannabis consumption has a positive effect on female  
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids, Reward, and Addiction    95
sexuality in two areas: sexual desire and sexual functioning (sexual satis-
faction, pleasure, quality of orgasm).
Whereas the reports of the effects of cannabis on female sexuality are 
quite consistent, the reports of its effects on male sexuality are much less 
so. Collectively, the self-report studies with males suggest that cannabis 
use facilitates sexual desire while hindering erectile functioning (Gor-
zalka et al. 2010). The direct and indirect effects of marijuana on male 
and female sexual functioning are not fully understood.
Some have suggested that cannabis exerts its positive effect on sexual 
functioning by increasing tactile sensitivity; however, marijuana has no 
effect on touch sensitivity in non-sexual situations. Others have sug-
gested that the positive effects of cannabis on sexual pleasure are related 
to slowing of temporal perception or to enhancement of attention, or 
that it is simply a placebo effect. Cannabis may raise androgen levels in 
women (van Anders, Chernick, Chernick, Hampson, and Fisher 2005), 
and there is a body of research demonstrating a link between sexual 
arousal and androgens in women. In men, all studies that have docu-
mented a decrease in testosterone levels after cannabis use have also 
found that the measured testosterone level in the users were still within 
the normal range. Therefore, an effect of THC on testosterone levels is 
not likely to explain the effect of cannabis on sexual behavior (Gorzalka 
et al. 2010). At present there is not enough evidence to explain mari-
juana’s influence on sexual function in men or in women. To date, objec-
tive measurement of the effects of cannabis on human sexual functioning 
has not been reported.
Because of the inherent flaws of self-report data, it is important  
to evaluate the effect of cannabinoids on sexual behavior in non- 
human species. Data suggest that cannabinoids affect sexual behavior 
by acting centrally, specifically in the hypothalamus. There have been 
some reports of THC’s having detrimental effects and other reports of 
its having beneficial effects on sexual receptivity in females. In males, 
however, most studies have found an inhibitory effect on sexual motiva-
tion and on erectile functioning, and temporary reductions in testoster-
one levels.
The effects of cannabis intake on sexual behavior and arousal appear 
to depend on dose in both men and women. Overall, studies suggest that 
cannabis facilitates sexual desire while hindering erectile function in 
males. In contrast, in females, at low THC doses, cannabis consumption 
has positive effects on both sexual desire and sexual function (Gorzalka 
et al. 2010). Animal studies confirm the human reports; for example, the 

96    Chapter 6
dose-response curve for cannabinoids and sexual behavior in rats is 
bell-shaped.
Conclusion
Do CB1 agonists produce rewarding effects in human and non-human 
animals? Most of the evidence suggests that they do, but not to the same 
extent as opiates or stimulants. The effects of THC and exposure to other 
CB1 agonists in animal studies are to moderately elevate dopamine from 
afferent neurons originating in the VTA being released into the NAc. This 
is produced by its action on glutamate and GABA neurons, ultimately 
preventing the inhibition of the release of dopamine in the VTA. The cur-
rent evidence suggests that chronic activation of this dopamine-mediated 
action does not produce morphological changes in the brains of humans 
who use marijuana regularly. The pre-clinical rodent work on relapse 
suggests that exposure to CB1 agonists can produce relapse to self-
administration of other drugs of abuse and that CB1 antagonists can 
prevent both drug-priming-induced relapse and relapse triggered by 
re-exposure to drug-paired cues. It is not yet known whether this protec-
tion from relapse is attributable to antagonism of endogenous cannabi-
noid tone or to inverse agonism at the CB1 receptor. The relationship 
between cannabinoid reward and opiate reward is clear, and some recent 
work suggests that cannabis use may be useful during treatment for opi-
ate addiction. Finally, the effects of cannabis on the rewarding properties 
of sexual behavior may differ between men and women; low doses of 
THC may have positive effects on sexual desire and function in females, 
but may hinder erectile functioning in men.
www.ebook3000.com

One of the most famous effects of marijuana use is the stimulation  
of appetite, particularly for palatable foods. After the discovery that  
THC was the psychoactive compound in marijuana, Hollister (1971) 
verified that a single oral dose of marijuana (containing 0.35 mg/kg THC) 
increased the intake of milkshakes in healthy volunteers. Subsequently it 
was demonstrated that smoked marijuana (containing 1.8 percent THC) 
produced a marked increase in palatable food intake in humans (Foltin, 
Brady, and Fischman 1986; Foltin, Fischman, and Byrne 1988). Consid-
erable pre-clinical experimental work with rodents demonstrated that  
the THC and other CB1-receptor agonists act to enhance appetite both by 
amplifying the rewarding value of food and by reducing the satiety sig-
nals (e.g., leptin secretion) that regulate appetite (Cristino and Di Marzo 
2015).
The therapeutic effect of cannabis to stimulate appetite has been stud-
ied for decades in the treatment of cachexia, a chronic wasting disorder 
associated with loss of adipose tissue and lean body mass seen in patients 
with cancer, patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), 
and patients with anorexia nervosa. Synthetic THC (dronabinol) is used 
in the clinic to combat the reduction in appetite in such patients, with 
mixed results. Some studies have found that dronabinol (2.5 mg twice  
a day) enhanced appetite and body weight in AIDS patients suffering 
from anorexia (Beal et al. 1997); other studies with both AIDS patients 
and patients with cancer-related cachexia report no effect with a similar  
dose and regime (Cannabis-In-Cachexia-Study-Group et al. 2006). Orally 
administered pure THC may not be the optimal treatment for these dis-
orders. One alternative is the use of FAAH inhibitors (Fegley et al. 2005), 
which have been shown to enhance motivation for food and to promote 
energy storage in pre-clinical animal studies (Tourino, Oveisi, Lockney, 
Piomelli, and Maldonado 2010). As we learn more about the effects of 
7
Cannabinoids, Body Weight, Feeding, and 
Appetite

98    Chapter 7
cannabinoids and direct manipulations of the endocannabinoid system 
on appetite, better treatments may be developed.
Endocannabinoids and Regulation of Body Weight
The potential of the endocannabinoid system to maintain energy balance 
has been one of its most thoroughly studied effects since the synthetic  
CB1 antagonist/inverse agonist SR141716A (rimonabant, also known as 
Acomplia) was developed by Sanofi-Aventis to treat diet-induced obesity 
(Arnone et al. 1997). Unfortunately, unwanted psychiatric side effects of 
depression and suicidal ideation have prevented the use of rimonabant  
as an anti-obesity treatment. Rimonabant was shown to decrease food 
intake and body weight gain not only in animal models but also in 
humans. Pre-clinical work (see, e.g., Koch 2001) demonstrated that  
stimulation of CB1 receptors by THC, by synthetic CB1 agonists, or 
by endogenous cannabinoids stimulated eating in rats and mice. Geneti-
cally modified mice lacking CB1 receptors did not show this effect. There-
fore, the feeding stimulation by THC was dependent on an intact CB1 
system.
In the brain, the endocannabinoid system interacts with the mesolim-
bic dopamine system to engage with reward pathways and with the 
hypothalamus to regulate levels of hormones that mediate the enhance-
ment of feeding. Indeed, endocannabinoid levels in the hypothalamus 
and in reward pathways are highest during food deprivation, leading to 
food-seeking behaviors.
Endocannabinoid regulation of metabolic feeding-related hormones
Hormonal and nutritional signals in the hypothalamus inform the brain 
about the free and stored levels of fuel available for the organism. The 
neural circuitry of the hypothalamus uses this information to regulate 
caloric intake, energy consumption, and peripheral lipid and glucose 
metabolism. The actions of endocannabinoids in the hypothalamus serve 
to quickly fine-tune energy intake. Administration of anandamide (AEA) 
into the hypothalamus induces eating, and endocannabinoid levels in  
the hypothalamus vary as a function of nutritional status. The action of 
endocannabinoids in the hypothalamus regulates the levels of several bio-
chemical compounds that control feeding and body weight, including 
melanocortin (which reduces feeding) and neuropeptide Y (which stimu-
lates feeding). Within the hypothalamus, modulation of the expression of 
several pro-feeding and anti-feeding hormones by the endocannabinoid 
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids, Body Weight, Feeding, and Appetite    99
system is counterbalanced by the opposite actions mediated by the 
adipose-derived hormone leptin (Cristino and Di Marzo 2015).
Leptin originates in adipose tissue and affects a number of appetite-
related factors in the hypothalamus; it plays an important role in regulat-
ing appetite, hunger, and metabolism. Endocannabinoid levels in the 
hypothalamus correlate inversely with leptin plasma levels (Di Marzo et 
al. 2001). Thus, leptin administration (which exerts an anorectic action) 
suppresses hypothalamic endocannabinoid levels in healthy animals, but 
in the hypothalamus of obese and hyperphagic rodents lacking leptin—
such as ob/ob (obese/obese, leptin mutant) mice (see figure 7.1) and 
Zucker(fa/fa) (leptin-receptor mutant) rats—endocannabinoid levels are 
significantly increased (ibid.). Indeed, recent evidence indicates that func-
tional CB1-receptor signaling in the hypothalamus is required for leptin 
to exert its suppressive effects on food intake; selective genetic knockout 
of CB1 receptors in the hypothalamus of mice abolished the inhibition of 
food intake by leptin (Cardinal et al. 2012). This inverse relationship also 
affects the activity of the brain’s reward system; that is, obese rats with 
defective leptin signaling show increased CB1 expression and binding 
activity in the brain’s reward structures (D’Addario et al. 2014).
Besides the hypothalamus and reward system, the endocannabinoid 
system regulates food intake and energy balance in the vagus nerve, 
which carries information between the digestive system of the gut and  
the brainstem. Within the gut, cholesystokinin (CCK) acts to suppress  
feeding (a satiety signal) and ghrelin acts to stimulate feeding. 
Figure 7.1
An ob/ob (leptin-receptor mutant) mouse and a mouse with normal body weight.

100    Chapter 7
CB1-receptor expression in vagal afferents is increased in fasting and 
decreased after refeeding, under the control of CCK (Burdyga et al. 2004). 
The decrease in CB1-receptor expression after refeeding is prevented by 
administration of ghrelin. Thus ghrelin opposes the action of CCK on 
CB1-receptor expression on vagal afferents to the brainstem. In addition, 
the CB1-receptor antagonist rimonabant abolishes ghrelin-induced feed-
ing by decreasing levels of circulating ghrelin. Ghrelin has also been 
shown to elevate hypothalamic endocannabinoid content (D’Addario  
et al. 2014).
Endocannabinoids and the brain’s appetite reward mechanisms
Only one clinical study has investigated the regulation of endocannabi-
noid levels in humans eating food for pleasure (Monteleone et al. 2012). 
In normal-weight satiated healthy participants, plasma levels of 2-AG 
and ghrelin, but not AEA, OEA, and PEA, were elevated after hedonic 
eating. In addition, 2-AG levels in the hypothalamus increased in mice 
showing a preference for a high-fat diet (Higuchi et al. 2011). Highly 
palatable foods may evoke alterations in the central nervous system simi-
lar to those evoked by drugs of abuse through the regulation of common 
neurobiological substrates. Indeed, overconsumption of palatable foods 
is accompanied by the stimulation of the brain’s dopaminergic and opi-
oid reward systems (D’Addario et al. 2014).
As was noted and illustrated in figure 6.3, the mesolimbic dopamine 
system is the brain’s primary reward system. All drugs of abuse activate 
this system (Wise 2004). The regulation of reward-related appetite pro-
cesses may be controlled, in part, by endocannabinoid release in the 
VTA of the midbrain, which produces inhibition of the release of GABA, 
thus removing the inhibitory effect of GABA on dopaminergic neurons 
that project to the NAc (Maldonado et al. 2006). In the NAc, released 
endocannabinoids act on CB1 receptors on axon terminals of glutama-
tergic neurons. The resulting reduction in the release of glutamate on 
GABA neurons projecting to the VTA results in indirect activation of  
the VTA’s dopamine neurons. Microinjections of THC into the VTA and 
the NAc serve as rewards for both self-administration and conditioned 
place preference in rats (Zangen, Solinas, Ikemoto, Goldberg, and Wise 
2006).
In pre-clinical rodent studies, the CB1 inverse agonist/antagonist 
rimonabant reduces the rewarding effects of foods and drugs. Rimonabant 
leads to a reduction in a conditioned place preference for palatable  
food (Chaperon, Soubrie, Puech, and Thiebot 1998). It also reduces the  
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids, Body Weight, Feeding, and Appetite    101
motivation for self-administration of beer in rats (Gallate, Saharov, Mal-
let, and McGregor 1999). CB1 antagonism also counteracts the increase 
of extracellular DA release induced by highly palatable foods, whereas 
CB1 agonists do the opposite (Higgs, Barber, Cooper, and Terry 2005; 
Melis and Pistis 2007). THC increases hedonic reactivity to sucrose  
(Jarrett, Limebeer, and Parker 2005), and CB1 antagonism does the oppo-
site (Jarrett, Scantlebury, and Parker 2007). In addition, intra-NAc injec-
tions of AEA enhance sucrose hedonics (Mahler, Smith, and Berridge 
2007). Thus CB1 is an important component of the neural substrate that 
mediates the reinforcing and motivational properties of a highly palat-
able food. Indeed, CB1 mRNA expression is downregulated in areas of 
the limbic forebrain of rats fed a palatable diet (Harrold, Elliott, King, 
Widdowson, and Williams 2002). This reduction in CB1 expression rep-
resents a compensatory mechanism aimed at counteracting increased  
levels of endocannabinoids resulting from the consumption of fat-rich 
palatable food. On the other hand, fasting leads to an increase of limbic 
AEA and 2-AG levels, which return to normal after re-feeding. This effect 
occurs only in brain areas not involved in the regulation of feeding behav-
ior (Kirkham, Williams, Fezza, and Di Marzo 2002). This over-activation 
of the endocannabinoid systems during fasting may be part of a physio-
logical mechanism aimed at enhancing the motivation for food.
Endocannabinoids also have important functional relationships with 
the endogenous opioid system, which also mediates the rewarding value 
of food (Kirkham 1991). Interestingly, the facilitory effect of THC on 
food intake is not only reduced by a CB1 antagonist; it is also reduced by 
the μ-opioid antagonist naloxone (Gallate and McGregor 1999). Indeed, 
a synergistic effect of very low doses of drugs that block the CB1 receptor 
and the μ-opioid receptor (Kirkham and Williams 2001) may serve as a 
promising treatment for obesity.
The Endocannabinoid System, Eating Disorders, and Obesity
Because the endocannabinoid system is a modulator of both homeostatic 
and hedonic aspects of eating, dysfunctions of that system may lead to 
eating disorders. Anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa are characterized 
by abnormal eating behaviors resulting in severe food restriction, anorexia 
nervosa with a dramatic loss of body weight and bulimia nervosa with 
episodes of binge eating and vomiting without significant changes in 
body weight. The fifth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders includes binge-eating disorder, which is characterized 

102    Chapter 7
by binge eating but without compensatory vomiting resulting in obesity. 
Such eating disorders clearly involve both psychosocial and biological 
factors.
On the basis of the known role of the endocannabinoids in regulation 
of feeding and energy homeostasis, it is conceivable that dysfunctions  
in this regulatory system may be involved in the pathophysiology of  
eating disorders. Monteleone et al. (2005) compared the blood levels  
of AEA and 2-AG of women with one of these eating disorders with 
those of healthy controls. They also examined the relationship between 
the endogenous cannabinoids and circulating leptin (a peripheral  
fat hormone involved in long-term modulation of body weight and 
energy balance), nutritional variables, and psychopathological variables. 
Increased blood levels of AEA (but not of 2-AG) were found in patients 
with anorexia nervosa or binge-eating disorder, but not in women 
affected with bulimia nervosa. In addition, anorexic women also showed 
decreased circulating leptin levels, and binge-eating disorder women 
showed increased leptin levels relative to healthy controls. In both 
healthy controls and women with anorexia nervosa, the higher the blood 
AEA levels the lower were the plasma leptin concentrations. This sug-
gested that the decreased leptin signaling of underweight anorexia ner-
vosa patients could be involved in the increase of AEA levels (Monteleone 
et al. 2005). Higher blood levels of CB1 mRNA are detected in women 
suffering from both anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa (Frieling  
et al. 2009), but decreased peripheral CB1 mRNA is found in patients 
with more severe forms of the disorders. More recently, PET scans dem-
onstrated increased CB1-receptor levels in the insula (a cortical region 
regulating feeding) and in the inferior frontal and temporal cortex of 
underweight anorexia nervosa patients and in the insula of women with 
bulimia nervosa (Gerard, Pieters, Goffin, Bormans, and Van Laere 2011). 
It is possible that the dysregulated endocannabinoid tone of anorexia 
nervosa and bulimia nervosa patients may represent an adaptive response 
aimed at maintaining energy balance by potentiating internal food-
seeking signals and hence stimulating food ingestion (Monteleone  
and Maj 2013). However, most human studies using dronabinol (e.g., 
Andries, Frystyk, Flyvbjerg, and Stoving 2014; Gross et al. 1983) have 
reported no improvement of anorexia symptoms.
There appears to be a positive association between obesity and either 
overproduction of endocannabinoids or increased expression of the CB1-
receptor tissues (central and peripheral) involved in energy homeostasis 
in both animal and human studies. Genetically obese (ob/ob) mice (figure 
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids, Body Weight, Feeding, and Appetite    103
7.1) were found to have hypothalamic endocannabinoid levels higher 
than in lean animals. These effects were significantly reduced by the exog-
enous administration of leptin (Di Marzo et al. 2001). Subsequently, an 
elevated CB1 expression was observed in the white adipose tissue of mice 
defective in leptin signaling relative to lean controls. Hyperglycemia and 
insulinemia may cause an over-activation of the endocannabinoid system 
in obesity-related type-2 diabetes. Dysregulation of the endocannabinoid 
system has also been reported in overweight obese women with a binge-
eating disorder and in obese postmenopausal women. Obesity-related 
elevations of endocannabinoids were coupled to decreased activity of 
FAAH, and consistently specific polymorphisms of the FAAH gene were 
associated with overweight and obesity or with lower insulin sensitivity. 
Higher levels of 2-AG in adipose tissue were found in samples from 
patients with elevated abdominal fat distribution relative to patients with 
subcutaneous fat or lean controls. In addition, AEA levels are elevated in 
the saliva of obese subjects and directly correlate with Body Mass Index, 
waist circumference, and fasting insulin (Matias et al. 2012). In these 
participants, body-weight loss after a 12-week program decreased sali-
vary AEA levels. Therefore, salivary AEA may be a useful biomarker for 
obesity.
Manipulation of the Endocannabinoid System for Treatment of Obesity
Since there appears to be pathological over-activation of the endocan-
nabinoid system in overweight and obese subjects, current therapeutic 
targets for obesity are aimed at the restoration of a normal endocannabi-
noid tone by means of drugs that interfere with endocannabinoid 
signaling.
The rimonabant story
Initial pre-clinical studies conducted with rimonabant support the 
hypothesis that antagonism of the endocannabinoid system with the CB1 
inverse agonist/ antagonist rimonabant may be a promising therapy for 
obesity. Several clinical trials followed the initial experimental findings 
from the four Rimonabant in Obesity (RIO) studies (Despres, Golay, and 
Sjöström 2005; Pi-Sunyer et al. 2006; Scheen et al. 2006; Van Gaal et al. 
2005). Rimonabant was marketed as an anti-obesity agent in several 
European countries. In the United States, the Food and Drug Administra-
tion asked for further evidence regarding safety before approving its mar-
keting. A subsequent meta-analysis of the four RIO studies suggested that 

104    Chapter 7
patients treated with rimonabant were 2.5–3 times as likely to experience 
psychiatric adverse effects, such as anxiety and depression, as patients 
receiving placebo (Christensen, Kristensen, Bartels, Bliddal, and Astrup 
2007). The European Union Committee for Medicinal Products for 
Human Use concluded that rimonabant doubled the risk for psychiatric 
disorders, and the European Medicines Agency (EMA) suspended the 
license for the drug. Sanofi-Aventis withdrew rimonabant from the 
worldwide market, and clinical development not only of rimonabant but 
also of other CB1 antagonists being developed by other companies was 
halted.
New potential treatments for obesity exploiting the eCB system
Recent pre-clinical investigation has focused on the evaluation of CB1 
antagonists/inverse agonists that do not penetrate the brain as potential 
anti-obesity treatments. Such treatments may be devoid of the adverse 
psychiatric side effects produced by brain-penetrate CB1 antagonists/
inverse agonists, such as rimonabant. Human adipose tissue has been 
shown to possess a fully functional endocannabinoid system (Spoto et al. 
2006), and a high-fat diet induces an increase of AEA in the liver as a 
result of reduced degradation by FAAH (Osei-Hyiaman et al. 2005). In 
addition, 2-AG levels are elevated in the visceral fat of obese patients 
(Bluher et al. 2006). These findings suggest that the hypophagic effect of 
rimonabant may be mediated by its action on peripheral CB1 receptors 
rather than central receptors. (See also Gomez et al. 2002.) Therefore, the 
beneficial effects of blocking peripheral CB1 receptors to reduce appetite, 
body weight, hepatic steosis, and insulin resistance are being investigated 
(Tam et al. 2010; Tam et al. 2012). Tam et al. (2010) found that the CB1-
receptor antagonist (without inverse agonist properties) AM6545 was as 
effective as rimonabant in ameliorating the fatty liver and improving  
the lipid profile in mice with diet-induced obesity, but that it was less 
effective than rimonabant in reducing body weight, adiposity, insulin 
resistance, and hyperleptinemia and had minimal effect on food intake. 
Because rimonabant is both a brain penetrant and a CB1-receptor inverse 
agonist, its greater efficacy could be due either to its central action or to 
its inverse agonist properties. Tam et al. (2012) demonstrated that it is the 
latter property that makes rimonabant a better treatment for obesity and 
its related metabolic disorders. That is, with the use of a peripherally 
restricted CB1-receptor inverse agonist, JD5037, they demonstrated 
as much reduction in food intake, body weight, and adiposity as was 
obtained with rimonabant. These results are particularly exciting because 
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids, Body Weight, Feeding, and Appetite    105
they may lead to new treatments for obesity without the possibility  
of psychiatric side effects that prevented the use of rimonabant as a 
treatment.
Another approach to reducing the impact of endocannabinoids on 
feeding is to interfere with their metabolism. Indeed, decreasing 2-AG 
levels by systemic administration of DAGL inhibitor (the enzyme respon-
sible for the synthesis of 2-AG) reduced intake of palatable or high-fat 
foods by mice (Bisogno et al. 2009; Bisogno et al. 2013). In addition, mice 
genetically altered to overexpress MAGL (the enzyme that degrades 
2-AG) and put on a high-fat diet showed increased energy expenditure 
and decreased weight gain (Jung et al. 2012). Another strategy that is 
being explored is related to the allosteric modulation of the CB1 receptor 
by changing the binding of the endocannabinoid. PSNCBAM-1, a novel 
allosteric antagonist of the CB1 receptor, reduces that impact of AEA or 
that of 2-AG when it binds to the orthosteric receptor site. This allosteric 
antagonist inhibited appetite and produced weight loss in rats (Horswill 
et al. 2007). Furthermore, there is some evidence that CB2 antagonism 
has potential to manage obesity-associated metabolic disorders (Deveaux 
et al. 2009); this is important because CB2 agonists do not produce cen-
tral effects.
What About the Other Cannabinoids in Cannabis?
THC clearly has the potential to enhance appetite through its agonism  
of the CB1 receptor. However, its psychoactive side effects limit its useful-
ness as an appetite-stimulating agent in treating anorexia or cachexia. 
What about the other cannabinoids found in cannabis that are not 
psychoactive?
THCV
In view of the withdrawal from the market of rimonabant, taranabant, 
and other CB1 inverse agonists because of unwanted psychiatric side 
effects, safer alternatives are needed. THCV is a CB1 antagonist without 
inverse agonist effects that reduces food intake in rats (Pertwee 2007; 
Pertwee 2008; Thomas et al. 2005). The lack of inverse agonism of  
the CB1 receptor with THCV may render it more tolerable, because pre-
clinical research suggests that the psychiatric side effects of rimonabant 
were produced by its central inverse agonism (not antagonism) of the CB1 
receptor (Limebeer et al. 2010; Sink et al. 2008). In addition, CB1 antago-
nists, unlike inverse agonists, are devoid of potential anhedonic effects 

106    Chapter 7
(Meye, Trezza, Vanderschuren, Ramakers, and Adan 2013) and nausea-
producing effects (Limebeer et al. 2010; Sink et al. 2008). Therefore, it 
will be interesting to see whether THCV will be developed as a potential 
appetite-reducing anti-obesity drug.
CBD
Early work with CBD indicated that at a high dose (50 mg/kg, ip) it 
reduced consumption in rats trained to consume their daily food  
intake in 6 hours; when lab chow was replaced with sucrose, however, 
suppression of intake was greatly decreased (Scopinho, Guimaraes, Cor-
rea, and Resstel 2011; Sofia and Knobloch 1976; Wiley et al. 2005). More 
recent work has indicated that CBD (3–100 mg/kg, ip) does not modify 
food intake in mice (Wiley et al. 2005; Scopinho et al. 2011). However, 
when administered orally, relatively low doses of CBD have been shown 
to produce a short-term reduction in feeding (Farrimond, Whalley, and 
Williams 2012) by an unknown mechanism. Since CBD has been shown 
to ameliorate some unwanted effects of THC (e.g., anxiety and learning 
deficits), it may be worthwhile to evaluate combined doses of CBD and 
THC in treatment of anorexia nervosa or other eating disorders.
Conclusion
At the turn of the twenty-first century, new medications based on inverse 
agonism/antagonism of the CB1 receptor showed great promise in treating 
obesity. However, shortly after such medications were widely prescribed 
in several countries, patients reported suicidal thoughts and anxiety, prob-
ably attributable to inverse agonism of central CB1 receptors.
It is clear that the endocannabinoid system is an important regulator 
of appetite, food preference, and body weight. The endocannabinoid sys-
tem not only regulates metabolic feeding-related hormones in the brain 
and in the gut, but also regulates the brain reward circuitry involved in 
palatability-based feeding. One of the primary roles of the endocannabi-
noid system is in the homeostatic regulation of feeding behavior.
New treatments for obesity being developed by chemists and pharma-
ceutical companies attempt to harvest the anti-obesity effects of 
rimonabant, but are devoid of the psychiatric side effects that became 
clearly known only after rimonabant was widely prescribed.
www.ebook3000.com

Nausea and vomiting are important to ensure survival in hostile external 
environments that often contain contaminated or potentially harmful 
foods. Nausea and vomiting also are easily activated in various disease 
states, such as diabetes and labyrinthitis (Sharkey et al. 2014). Migraine 
headaches, concussions, and other conditions of the central nervous sys-
tem also can cause nausea and vomiting. Nausea and vomiting are often 
side effects of medications used to treat many conditions, most notably of 
agents used in chemotherapy for cancer.
Nausea and vomiting often occur shortly after chemotherapy treat-
ment. Current anti-emetic therapies are highly effective in reducing 
chemotherapy-induced vomiting, but they are only weakly effective in 
treating chemotherapy-induced nausea. Such nausea can be so severe that 
as many as 20 percent of patients discontinue chemotherapy, even when 
vomiting is pharmacologically controlled (Andrews and Horn 2006). 
Cancer patients receiving chemotherapy treatment also often experience 
delayed (24–48 hours) nausea and vomiting, which are not well con-
trolled by available anti-emetic treatments. When the initial acute emetic 
episode is not prevented, patients often experience anticipatory nausea 
and vomiting upon returning to the clinic. At present, the only available 
treatments for anticipatory nausea and/or vomiting are non-selective 
sedatives
Although the mechanisms of vomiting are well known (Hornby 2001), 
those of nausea remain poorly understood. For that reason, effective 
treatments are very limited. Yet nausea is reported to be one of the most 
debilitating human sensations, and thus new treatments are urgently 
needed.
8
Cannabinoids and Nausea

108    Chapter 8
THC and Chemotherapy-Induced Nausea and Vomiting in Humans
The treatment of nausea and vomiting was the first recognized 
medical use of THC in modern medical history. Ineffective treatment  
of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting prompted oncologists  
to investigate the anti-emetic properties of cannabinoids in the late  
1970s and the early 1980s, before the discovery of antagonists of 5- 
hydroxytryptamine-3 (5-HT3) receptors such as ondansetron (Costall, 
Domeney, Naylor, and Tattersall 1986; Miner and Sanger 1986). In 
1981 the cannabinoid agonist nabilone (Cesamet), a synthetic analogue 
of THC, was specifically licensed for the suppression of nausea and 
vomiting produced by chemotherapy treatment. Synthetic THC (dronabi-
nol) entered the clinic as Marinol in 1985 as an anti-emetic and in 1992 
as an appetite stimulant (Pertwee 2009). In the early studies, several 
clinical trials compared the effectiveness of THC with placebo or with 
other anti-emetic drugs that were available at the time, most commonly 
dopamine antagonists. Nabilone produced fewer vomiting episodes and 
reports of nausea than metoclopramide (D2 antagonist) in patients with 
moderately toxic chemotherapy treatments. However, as the severity of 
the nausea and vomiting increased with highly emetogenic treatments 
(cisplatinum), nabilone and metoclopramide showed equivalent efficacy 
in reducing nausea and vomiting. Marinol is prescribed as an anti-emetic 
agent and as an appetite stimulant. When some patients were given the 
D2-receptor antagonist prochlorperazine alone and others were given 
both prochlorperazine and dronabinol, patients receiving the combined 
treatment had less severe chemotherapy-induced nausea (with a moder-
ate emetic treatment) than those treated with either drug alone. (For 
reviews, see Rock, Limebeer, Sticht, and Parker 2014 and Tramer et al. 
2001.)
There is also evidence that cannabis-based medicines may be particu-
larly effective in treating the harder-to-control symptoms of nausea and 
delayed nausea and vomiting in children. Abrahamov et al. (1995) evalu-
ated the anti-emetic effectiveness of Δ8-THC, a close but less psychoactive 
relative of Δ9-THC, in children receiving chemotherapy treatment. Two 
hours before the start of each cancer treatment and every six hours there-
after for 24 hours, the children were given Δ8-THC as oil drops on the 
tongue or in a bite of food. After 480 treatments, the only side effects 
reported were slight irritability in two of the youngest children (one 3½ 
years old, the other 4). Yet both acute and delayed nausea were con-
trolled very well (Abrahamov, Abrahamov, and Mechoulam 1995).  
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids and Nausea    109
This small-scale study (without a placebo control) provides suggestive 
evidence that Δ8-THC may be particularly effective in alleviating 
chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting in children with cancer. It is 
surprising that there have been no follow-up clinical trials to the single 
study.
A major advance in the control of acute vomiting in chemotherapy 
treatment came in the late 1980s with the development of antagonists of 
5-hydroxytryptamine–3 (5-HT3) receptors, such as ondansetron. These 
agents were highly effective in suppressing vomiting in pre-clinical stud-
ies using ferrets and shrews. (Rats and mice are incapable of vomiting.) 
In clinical trials with humans, treatment with 5-HT3 antagonists (often in 
combination with the corticosteroid dexamethasone) during the first che-
motherapy treatment reduced the incidence of acute vomiting by approx-
imately 70 percent (Parker, Rock, and Limebeer 2011; Sharkey et al. 
2014). However, as the use of these 5-HT3 antagonists in the clinic pro-
gressed it became clear that they are much more effective in reducing 
acute vomiting than in suppressing acute nausea (Hickok et al. 2003). 
These compounds are also ineffective for treating delayed nausea and 
vomiting that occurs 24–48 hours after the treatment and for treating 
anticipatory nausea experienced as a conditioned response when the 
patient returns to the clinic in which the treatment occurred (Morrow 
and Dobkin 1987). More recently, NK1-receptor antagonists (e.g., Apre-
pitant) have been developed that not only decrease acute vomiting but 
also decrease delayed vomiting induced by cisplatin-based chemotherapy 
(Van Belle et al. 2002); however, these compounds alone and in combina-
tion with 5-HT3 antagonist/dexamethasone treatment are also much less 
effective in reducing nausea (Hickok et al. 2003), the symptom reported 
to be the most distressing to patients undergoing treatment with 5-HT3 
antagonists (de Boer-Dennert 1997). Considerable evidence suggests  
that another system that may be an effective target for treatment of 
chemotherapy-induced nausea, of delayed nausea/vomiting, and of antic-
ipatory nausea/vomiting is the endocannabinoid system. (For a review, 
see Sticht, Rock, Limebeer, and Parker 2015.)
Surprisingly, only one clinical trial (Meiri et al. 2007) has compared 
the anti-emetic and anti-nausea effects of cannabinoids with those of  
the more recently developed 5-HT3 antagonists, and none has compared 
cannabinoids with the NK1 antagonist aprepitant. Meiri et al. (ibid.) 
compared the efficacy and tolerability of dronabinol with ondansetron or 
the combination for delayed chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting 
in a five-day, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Patients receiving 

110    Chapter 8
moderately to highly emetogenic chemotherapy were all given both 
ondansetron and dexamethasone; in addition, half of them received pla-
cebo and the other half received dronabinol before chemotherapy on day 
1. On days 2–5, some received placebo, some dronabinol, some ondanse-
tron, and some both dronabinol and ondansetron. The results revealed 
that the efficacy of dronabinol alone was comparable with that of ondan-
setron in the treatment of delayed nausea and vomiting for the total 
response of no vomiting and nausea; however, the dronabinol group 
reported the lowest nausea intensity on a visual analog scale. The dose 
of dronabinol used in this study was at least 50 percent lower than in 
previous studies conducted in the 1980s, resulting in a low incidence of 
CNS-related adverse effects, which did not differ from the incidence in 
the ondansetron-treated group. The results of this study suggest that 
THC may be more effective than 5-HT3 antagonists in treating delayed 
nausea.
Recently an oromucosal cannabis-based medicine, Sativex (2.7 mg 
THC: 2.5 mg cannabidiol/spray) has been evaluated in phase II clinical 
trials for its potential to enhance the effectiveness of standard anti-emetic 
treatment for chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (Duran et al. 
2010). Sativex or placebo was administered to patients also receiving  
a 5-HT3 antagonist and a corticosteroid. Duran and colleagues found 
that Sativex facilitated relief of delayed nausea and vomiting among 
patients receiving moderately emetogenic cancer chemotherapy. In par-
ticular, 57 percent of the Sativex-treated patients experienced no delayed 
nausea and 71 percent experienced no delayed emesis. However, in view 
of the known anti-nausea and anti-emetic effects of CBD demonstrated 
in animal models (Parker, Mechoulam, and Schlievert 2002; Parker, 
Rock, Sticht, Wills, and Limebeer 2015; Rock, Limebeer, Mechoulam, 
Piomelli, and Parker 2008), it is not clear to what extent the anti-nausea/
anti-emetic effects of Sativex are attributable to either THC or CBD; 
nonetheless, this study demonstrates the therapeutic potential of com-
bining these cannabinoids in treating delayed nausea and vomiting.
Most of the reported clinical trials of the effectiveness of cannabinoid 
compounds in treating chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting have 
involved orally delivered cannabinoids, which may be less effective than 
inhaled cannabinoids. Many patients have a strong preference for smoked 
marijuana over orally delivered synthetic cannabinoids (Tramer et al. 
2001). Several reasons for this have been suggested, including the advan-
tages of self-titration of the dose, difficulty in swallowing the pills while 
experiencing emesis, faster onset with inhaling than with oral delivery, 
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids and Nausea    111
and the combined action of other cannabinoids (especially CBD) that are 
found in marijuana. Although many marijuana users have claimed that 
smoked marijuana is a more effective anti-emetic than oral THC, no con-
trolled studies have yet been published that specifically evaluate this 
possibility.
Despite the evidence for the anti-nausea potential of cannabinoids in 
humans, it is worthwhile to note that chronic marijuana use has also been 
reported to produce the sensation of nausea, and also to produce vomit-
ing. This paradoxical effect of marijuana, known as cannabinoid hyper-
emesis syndrome (Sullivan 2010) has been documented in numerous case 
reports in recent years (Allen, de Moore, Heddle, and Twartz 2004; Roca-
Pallin, Lopez-Pelayo, Sugranyes, and Balcells-Olivero 2013; Simonetto, 
Oxentenko, Herman, and Szostek 2012). Although the cause of hyper-
emesis is not known, changes in CB1-receptor expression and variations 
in concentrations of THC (and other marijuana constituents) may figure 
in this paradoxical effect. Further research is needed to fully understand 
the mechanism(s) underlying this peculiar effect of cannabinoids, which 
may lead to increases in nausea and in vomiting after chronic marijuana 
consumption. Nevertheless, these cases highlight the dynamic nature of 
the role of the endocannabinoid system in regulating nausea and suggest 
a possible consequence of endocannabinoid-system dysregulation, which 
may lead to undesirable results such as an increased sensation of nausea 
and emesis.
Phytocannabinoids and Vomiting and Nausea in Pre-Clinical  
Animal Models
Considerable experimental pre-clinical animal evidence accumulated 
since the discovery of the mechanism of action of THC indicates that 
THC not only reduces vomiting but also reduces both acute and anticipa-
tory nausea, two symptoms of chemotherapy treatment that are more 
difficult to treat than vomiting. And promising new research suggests that 
CBD and other components of cannabis may also reduce acute and antic-
ipatory nausea.
THC and vomiting and nausea in animal models
THC reduces toxin-induced vomiting in cats, dogs, ferrets (Van Sickle  
et al. 2001), and shrews (Darmani 2001a). Besides reducing acute vomit-
ing produced by cisplatin, THC attenuates delayed vomiting in shrews 
(Ray, Griggs, and Darmani 2009). The effects of THC on vomiting are 

112    Chapter 8
consistently reversed by CB1 antagonists, which verifies a CB1-mediated 
mechanism of action (Parker et al. 2011; Sharkey et al. 2014). Indeed,  
the CB1 inverse agonist/antagonist rimonabant produces vomiting in 
shrews, which is a function of its inverse agonist effects (Darmani 2001b). 
Interestingly, when sub-threshold doses of THC and ondansetron are 
combined, they produce a synergistic effect that completely suppresses 
cisplatin-induced vomiting in shrews (Kwiatkowska, Parker, Burton, and 
Mechoulam 2004). The anti-emetic properties of CB1 agonists are medi-
ated by their action on CB1 receptors in the emetic brainstem structures 
located in the dorsal vagal complex (DVC) (Parker 2014; Van Sickle et al. 
2001). Therefore, both the pre-clinical evidence and the human evidence 
indicate an anti-emetic role for CB1 agonists.
Nausea is much more difficult to control with the currently available 
anti-emetic medications than is vomiting. One reason for our lack of 
understanding of nausea is that until recently there were no validated 
animal models for pre-clinical evaluation of new treatments for nausea. 
Recent evidence based on the development of new rat models of nausea 
(Parker 2014) suggests that cannabinoids may have therapeutic potential 
for reducing both acute and anticipatory nausea. Although rats do not 
vomit, their brains receive the same physiological signals produced by 
emetic toxins in the gut and in the brainstem emetic regions as ferrets. 
Grill and Norgren (1978, 1981) identified a unique behavioral marker of 
nausea in rats that they called conditioned gaping. Conditioned gaping, 
defined as the wide opening of the mouth exposing the lower incisors 
(see figure 8.1), requires the same orofacial musculature as vomiting in 
Figure 8.1
Left: rat gape. Right: orofacial component of a shrew’s retch just before it vomits.
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids and Nausea    113
an emetic species and is topographically similar to the orofacial compo-
nents of retching in the shrew (Travers and Norgren 1986). Of course, 
no one can know if a rat experiences the same symptoms as a human 
who subjectively reports a sensation of nausea. However, considerable 
behavioral evidence confirms that only manipulations that produce vom-
iting in other species promote conditioned gaping in rats and that anti-
nausea drugs consistently prevent the establishment of conditioned 
gaping in rats (Parker 2014). Typically, conditioned gaping in rats is pro-
duced by pairing a flavor with an emetic treatment, but recently it has 
been shown that contextual stimuli can also elicit conditioned gaping 
when paired with an emetic treatment. (See Rock, Limebeer, and Parker 
2014 for a review.) This contextually elicited conditioned gaping in rats 
provides a model of anticipatory nausea seen in humans when they 
return to the clinic in which they received their chemotherapy treatment. 
In rats, as is seen in human cancer patients experiencing anticipatory 
nausea, contextually elicited conditioned gaping is not suppressed with  
conventional anti-emetic treatments, such as the 5-HT3 antagonist 
ondansetron; however, cannabinoid treatments are consistently effective 
in this model. These pre-clinical rat models of acute and contextually 
elicited anticipatory nausea have provided considerable evidence for the 
potential of cannabinoid treatments to reduce both acute and anticipa-
tory nausea.
THC and other CB1 agonists consistently interfere with acute nausea 
in the rat gaping model by acting at CB1 receptors (Rock, Limebeer, and 
Sticht 2014). The CB1 inverse agonist/antagonist rimonabant produces 
nausea in the rat gaping model (McLaughlin et al. 2005), but CB1 antago-
nists without inverse agonist properties (e.g., AM4113) do not produce 
nausea in that model (Sink et al. 2008). In fact, rimonabant has been 
shown to enhance the nauseating effects of toxins (Parker et al. 2003). 
The site of the anti-nausea effect of CB1 agonists appears to be the intero-
ceptive insular cortex, which receives afferents from the emetic circuitry 
of the brain (Limebeer, Rock, Mechoulam, and Parker 2012; Sticht, 
Limebeer, Rafla, Abdullah, et al. 2015).
Not only do rats display conditioned gaping reactions when re-exposed 
to a flavor previously paired with a nausea-inducing drug; they also dis-
play conditioned gaping reactions when re-exposed to a context previ-
ously paired with a nausea-inducing drug. (See Rock, Limebeer, and 
Parker 2014 for a review.) Contextually elicited conditioned gaping in 
rats is remarkably similar to anticipatory nausea experienced by chemo-
therapy patients when they return to the context in which they received 

114    Chapter 8
their chemotherapy. When anticipatory nausea develops in human  
chemotherapy patients, the classic anti-emetic drug ondansetron is inef-
fective in reducing the symptom (Hickok et al. 2003); likewise, rats 
treated with ondansetron do not show suppression of contextually elic-
ited conditioned gaping. On the other hand, THC and other CB1-receptor 
agonists effectively suppress anticipatory nausea in the rat anticipatory 
nausea model. (For reviews, see Rock, Limebeer, and Parker 2014 and 
Rock, Limebeer, Sticht, et al. 2014.)
CBD and nausea and vomiting
No study has evaluated the potential of CBD to reduce nausea and  
vomiting in human chemotherapy patients. However, the pre-clinical  
literature shows that CBD reduces toxin-induced vomiting in house  
musk shrews (Kwiatkowska et al. 2004), with a biphasic effect. Low 
doses (5–10 mg/kg, ip) suppress vomiting, but high doses (40 mg/kg,  
ip) increase it. In the rat gaping model, CBD is also effective in reducing 
both acute nausea (Parker et al. 2002) and anticipatory nausea (Rock  
et al. 2008). The effect of CBD on acute nausea appears to be mediated 
by its action on 5-HT1A receptors located in the dorsal raphe nucleus 
(Rock et al. 2012). Action of 5-HT1A agonists at that site reduces the 
release of forebrain serotonin by acting at somatodendritic autorecep-
tors. Since elevated forebrain serotonin may be a trigger for nausea,  
the reduction in its release by CBD may be the mechanism for its anti-
nausea effects.
Combined THC and CBD
Sativex taken in conjunction with ondansetron has been evaluated in a 
phase II clinical trial for its ability to control delayed chemotherapy-
induced nausea and vomiting (Duran et al. 2010). In addition, a combi-
nation of CBD and THC produces a synergistic effect in suppressing 
vomiting in shrews and acute nausea in rats; that is, combined sub-
threshold doses of CBD and THC completely blocked toxin-induced 
vomiting and nausea in the animal models (Rock, Limebeer, and Parker 
2015).
THCA and CBDA
THCA and CBDA, the non-psychoactive carboxylic precursors of THC 
and CBD, are present in fresh cannabis plant before it is heated. THCA is 
ten times as potent as THC in suppressing vomiting in shrews and acute 
nausea in rats (Rock, Kopstick, et al. 2013), with a CB1 mechanism of 
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids and Nausea    115
action. CBDA is 100–1,000 times as potent in reducing vomiting, acute 
nausea, and anticipatory nausea in these models (Bolognini et al. 2013; 
Rock and Parker 2013), with a 5-HT1A mechanism of action. Interest-
ingly, CBDA and ondansetron act synergistically in such a way that, when 
combined, sub-threshold (ineffective) doses of each completely abolish 
both vomiting and acute nausea in these models. In addition, a synergistic 
effect is seen with combined sub-threshold doses of CBDA and THC 
when delivered systemically or orally in both the rat model of acute nau-
sea and the rat model of anticipatory nausea (Rock, Limebeer, and Parker 
2015). CBDA alone and in combination with THC or ondansetron is 
extremely promising as a treatment for acute nausea. CBDA is especially 
promising as a treatment for anticipatory nausea, a symptom for which 
the only available treatment is anti-anxiety medication with sedative  
side effects.
THCV, CBDV, and CBG
THCV is a CB1 antagonist at lower doses, but can act as a CB1 agonist at 
higher doses. The action of THCV is not one of inverse agonism, but one 
of antagonism (Rock, Sticht, et al. 2013). Unlike rimonabant (an inverse 
agonist of CB1), THCV does not produce nausea on its own. In fact, 
it appears to act as an anti-nausea agent. Unlike rimonabant, which 
enhances LiCl-induced nausea, THCV reduces nausea at high doses 
(Rock, Sticht, et al. 2013). Although very little is understood about the 
actions of CBDV, it appears to reduce nausea at high doses. On the other 
hand, cannabigerol (CBG) prevented the anti-nausea effects of CBD by 
acting as a 5-HT1A antagonist (Rock et al. 2011). Thus, various com-
pounds found in the cannabis plant often seem to oppose one another 
(Pertwee 2009).
Endocannabinoids and Nausea and Vomiting
Systemic administration of cannabinoids (oral, smoking, or sub-lingual) 
produces global activation of the CB1 receptors. On the other hand, 
because endocannabinoids are synthesized on demand, manipulations 
that target endocannabinoid hydrolysis result in a much more localized 
increase in levels of 2-AG and AEA than systemic administration of 
cannabinoid-receptor agonists. Therefore, a localized increase in endo-
cannabinoid levels is less likely to produce unwanted side effects attribut-
able to a global effect and is, thus, preferable for selectively reducing 
nausea and vomiting.

116    Chapter 8
Endocannabinoids during the experience of nausea in humans
There have been no assessments of the potential of treatments that ele-
vate natural endocannabinoids, such as AEA or 2-AG, to reduce nausea 
and/or vomiting in humans. However, there is evidence that endocan-
nabinoid levels vary in response to nausea-inducing manipulations.  
General anesthesia often produces postoperative nausea and vomiting. 
Schelling et al. (2006) investigated the effects of general anesthesia  
on plasma AEA levels using the volatile inhalant sevoflurane and the 
intravenously administered anesthetic propofol. Although AEA levels 
remained unchanged in patients receiving propofol, sevoflurane resulted 
in a significant decrease in AEA blood levels from the time of induction 
until 40 minutes later (ibid.). This pattern of results is consistent with 
reports that propofol acts as an FAAH inhibitor and thus elevates AEA 
(Patel et al. 2003), which would counteract the effect of the anesthetic on 
AEA. Indeed, propofol has been reported to produce less postoperative 
nausea than sevoflurane (Kumar, Stendall, Mistry, Gurusamy, and Walker 
2014), perhaps as a result of enhanced AEA signaling. However, this con-
clusion must be tempered by the recent report (Jarzimski et al. 2012) that 
sevoflurane and propofol produced similar decreases in plasma AEA. 
Motion sickness associated with parabolic flight maneuvers has also been 
shown to reduce AEA and 2-AG levels, but only among participants 
experiencing nausea from the treatment (Chouker et al. 2010). The fact 
that participants not experiencing nausea actually had higher levels of 
AEA than before the manipulation suggests that AEA protected against 
experiencing nausea in these participants.
Manipulations of the endocannabinoid system and vomiting and nausea 
in pre-clinical animal models
There has been considerable pre-clinical evaluation of treatments that 
boost the endocannabinoid system to reduce nausea and vomiting in ani-
mal models. Much like the anti-emetic and anti-nausea properties of syn-
thetic and plant-based cannabinoids, treatments that elevate the natural 
endocannabinoids AEA and 2-AG also directly suppress acute and antici-
patory nausea in rat gaping models (Sticht, Rock, et al. 2015). The effects 
of the exogenous delivery of these endocannabinoids are short-lived, 
because AEA is rapidly degraded by FAAH and 2-AG is rapidly degraded 
by MAGL. The FAAH inhibitors URB597 and PF3845 (which elevate 
AEA for as long as 24 hours) suppress both acute and anticipatory nau-
sea in the rat gaping models, and the more recently developed MAGL 
inhibitor MJN110 (which elevates 2-AG for 24 hours) also suppresses 
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids and Nausea    117
acute and anticipatory nausea in a CB1-dependent manner (Cross-Mellor 
et al. 2007; Parker, Niphakis, et al. 2015; Rock et al. 2008; Rock, Lime-
beer, Ward, et al. 2015). These compounds also suppress toxin-induced 
vomiting in the shrew model of emesis (Parker et al. 2009; Parker,  
Niphakis, et al. 2015). More recently, dual FAAH/MAGL inhibitors (e.g., 
JZL195 and AM4302) have been shown to be highly effective in sup-
pressing anticipatory nausea in rats (Limebeer et al. 2014; Parker et al. 
2016). Since conventional anti-emetic treatments are completely ineffec-
tive in treating anticipatory nausea and relatively ineffective in treating 
acute nausea, there is a great need for effective treatments for this dis-
tressing side effect of chemotherapy treatment. The results mentioned 
above suggest that treatments that boost the endocannabinoid system by 
inhibiting FAAH or MAGL should be tested in human clinical trials for 
the treatment of acute and anticipatory nausea.
The Role of the Interoceptive Insular Cortex in Endocannabinoid 
Regulation of Nausea
Brainstem mechanisms clearly are necessary for the generation of a vom-
iting reflex in animals capable of vomiting, and CB1-receptor activation 
within that region reduces vomiting (Sharkey et al. 2014; Van Sickle et al. 
2001). However, Grill and Norgren (1978), using sub-collicular decere-
brate rats, demonstrated that brainstem regions were not necessary for 
the generation of nausea in rats. Figure 8.2 presents a hypothetical cen-
tral neural pathway for the generation of nausea. The regions of the brain 
that mediate nausea-induced conditioned gaping reactions in rats are 
likely to be the neural regions responsible for the sensation of nausea. 
Indeed, lesions of the area postrema, of the parabrachial nucleus, and of 
the insular cortex, but not lesions of the amygdala, interfere with nausea-
induced conditioned gaping in rats (Parker 2014), which suggests that 
these regions may figure in the generation of nausea. Recent research sug-
gests the insular cortex as the forebrain region that may be ultimately 
responsible for the sensation of nausea.
There is growing evidence that forebrain serotonin (5-HT) generates 
nausea. Manipulations that reduce forebrain 5-HT availability reduce 
nausea-induced gaping in rats. Depletion of forebrain 5-HT by selective 
5,7-dihydroxytryptamine (5,7-DHT) lesions of the dorsal raphe nucleus 
and the median raphe nucleus (which produces most of the central sero-
tonin that projects to higher forebrain regions) completely prevents  
nausea in the rat gaping model (Limebeer, Parker, and Fletcher 2004). In 

118    Chapter 8
Figure 8.2
Circuits and projections that control nausea. Stimuli that produce emesis activate 
components in the gut-brain axis to elicit nausea and vomiting (in species capable of the 
latter). Toxins are detected in the gastrointestinal tract and relay neural input to the brain 
through vagal afferents terminating in the nucleus of the solitary tract. In addition, blood-
borne toxins can gain access to the CNS via the area postrema. Input from the hindbrain is 
transmitted by afferents to the midbrain parabrachial nucleus by afferents to the 
ventroposterolateral parvicellular (VPLpc) thalamic nucleus before ultimately reaching the 
posterior granular layer of the insular cortex (the interoceptive insular cortex). Within  
the interoceptive insular cortex, we hypothesize that activation of post-synaptic 5-HT3 
receptors by serotonin results in the biosynthesis of the endocannabinoid 2-AG, which turns 
off nausea by reducing the release of nausea-inducing serotonin. When MAGL inhibitors 
are infused into the interoceptive insular cortex, the action of 2-AG is prolonged for 24 
hours, resulting in an effective anti-nausea treatment. (drawing by Martin A. Sticht)
Interoceptive insular 
cortex neuron
Postsynaptic
terminal
Presynaptic
terminal
2-AG
MAGL
5-HT and endocannabinoid signaling
in the interoceptive insular cortex
5-HT
5-HT3
receptor
CB1
receptor
10
Interoceptive
insular
cortex
Parabrachial
nucleus
Nucleus 
of the
solitary tract
Area
postrema
Vagal
afferent
ﬁbers
Nauseating stimulus
detection in GI tract
Ventro-
postero-
lateral 
thalamus
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids and Nausea    119
addition, somatodendritic 5-HT1A autoreceptor agonists (8-OH-DPAT, 
CBD and CBDA), which reduce the rate of firing of afferents that release 
5-HT in terminal forebrain regions, were found to suppress conditioned 
gaping reactions (Bolognini et al. 2013; Limebeer et al. 2004; Rock et al. 
2012). Therefore, it is likely that that elevated forebrain serotonin trig-
gers nausea and that reduced forebrain serotonin suppresses it.
Considerable evidence suggests that the insular cortex is the critical 
region for generating the sensations of nausea and disgust. Electrical 
stimulation of the insular cortex (IC) produces nausea in humans  
(Penfield and Faulk 1955). In rats, complete removal of the IC prevents 
conditioned gaping (Kiefer and Orr 1992). Electrophysiological and ana-
tomical studies have determined that in rats the IC is the cortical site of 
topographical input of visceral input (posterior granular IC, which is 
called the interoceptive or visceral IC) and gustatory input (anterior dys-
granular IC, which is referred to as the gustatory IC) and their conver-
gence (agranular IC) (Allen, Saper, Hurley, and Cechetto 1991; Cechetto 
and Saper 1987; Yasui, Breder, Saper, and Cechetto 1991). Although most 
gastrointestinal visceral sensory afferents to the insular cortex terminate 
in the interoceptive insular cortex, most efferent projections from the IC 
to autonomic structures (e.g., the nucleus of the solitary tract in the 
brainstem) originate in the more anterior agranular field. Inactivation of 
the interoceptive insular cortex attenuates toxin-induced malaise and 
toxin-induced Fos activation in this same region, which suggests that it 
may be responsible for sensing strong deviations from a “well-being 
state” (that is, normal state) (Contreras, Ceric, and Torrealba 2007). 
Indeed, recent evidence also implicates the interoceptive insular cortex  
as a region that mediates addiction as well as nausea (Naqvi, Gaznick, 
Tranel, and Bechara 2014).
The interoceptive insular cortex is also the site at which serotonin 
produces nausea-induced conditioned gaping reactions in rats. Tuerke  
et al. (2012) demonstrated that 76 percent reduction of 5-HT (by 
5,7-dihydroxytryptamine lesions) in the entire insular cortex dramati-
cally suppressed nausea in the rat gaping model. Furthermore, they found 
that intracranial administration of the 5-HT3-receptor antagonist ondan-
setron into the interoceptive insular cortex (but not the gustatory insular 
cortex) attenuated nausea-induced conditioned gaping reactions. The 
direct delivery of a 5-HT3-receptor agonist into that region produced the 
opposite effect (ibid.). These data provide strong evidence that serotoner-
gic input to the interoceptive insular cortex is necessary for the produc-
tion of acute nausea.

120    Chapter 8
CB1 receptors are also found in the insular cortex. Thus the intero-
ceptive insular cortex is a potential site of the anti-nausea effects of 
cannabinoids. There is evidence that CB1 receptors are localized on the 
pre-synaptic terminal endings of serotonin-releasing neurons in other 
regions of the brain (Hermann, Marsicano, and Lutz 2002). However,  
it has not been determined if such co-localization occurs in the intero-
ceptive insular cortex, although that seems likely in view of the recent 
finding that delivery of the potent cannabinoid agonist HU-210 into  
the interoceptive insular cortex (but not the gustatory insular cortex) 
reduced LiCl-induced nausea in rats (Limebeer et al. 2012). Further-
more, the aforementioned suppression of nausea-induced behavior was 
reversed by pre-treatment with the CB1 antagonist AM251, which indi-
cated that it was CB1 mediated. Therefore, cannabinoids may reduce 
nausea by acting on the CB1 receptors in the interoceptive insular cortex 
to suppress the nausea-inducing effects of serotonin release in that 
region.
Recently it has been determined that the endocannabinoid responsi-
ble for the regulation of nausea in the interoceptive insular cortex 
appears to be 2-AG rather than AEA (Sticht, Limebeer, Rafla, Abdullah, 
et al. 2015; Sticht, Limebeer, Rafla, and Parker 2015). Intracranial 
administration of 2-AG, but not of AEA, suppressed acute nausea in 
rats. Furthermore, intra-interoceptive insular cortex infusion of the 
MAGL inhibitor MJN110, which selectively elevated 2-AG, suppressed 
toxin-induced nausea, and that effect was reversed by pre-treatment 
with a CB1 antagonist. Neither the FAAH inhibitor URB597 nor the 
FAAH inhibitor PF3845 (which elevated AEA in that region) reduced 
nausea after infusion into the interoceptive insular cortex. Indeed, 
administration of the nausea-inducing toxin produced a selective eleva-
tion of 2-AG, but not of AEA, in the interoceptive insular cortex. There-
fore, at least in the interoceptive insular cortex, there is a differential 
effect of the two ligands for the CB1 receptor in the regulation of nau-
sea: 2-AG, but not AEA, suppressed acute nausea in that region. 
Strangely, however, elevations in 2-AG produced by MJN110 and eleva-
tions in AEA produced by URB597 and by PF3845 all interfered with 
the expression of anticipatory nausea in this model (Limebeer et al. 
2016). Future research is needed to understand the role of central AEA 
in the regulation of nausea and to understand the difference between its 
effect on acute nausea and its effect on anticipatory nausea in the intero-
ceptive insular cortex.
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids and Nausea    121
Conclusions 
The treatment of nausea has lagged behind the treatment of vomiting. 
There is an immediate and pressing need for new approaches to treat this 
distressing and debilitating symptom. The development of pre-clinical 
animal models of acute and anticipatory nausea provides an opportunity 
to gain greater insight into and greater understanding of the neuroana-
tomical and neurochemical basis of nausea, potentially leading to new 
treatments that will boost the endocannabinoid system and thereby 
reduce or even eliminate nausea.
Since the discovery of the endocannabinoid system, our understanding 
of the mechanisms by which cannabinoids reduce nausea and vomiting 
has improved greatly. Animal models demonstrate that CB1 agonists 
reduce both acute and anticipatory nausea. CBD and CBDA also show 
great promise as non-psychoactive treatments that may act by reducing 
serotonin release in the nausea-inducing regions of the brain. In addition, 
treatments that boost the endogenous cannabinoid system by inhibiting 
the degrading enzyme FAAH (thereby elevating AEA), inhibiting the 
degrading enzyme MAGL (thereby elevating 2-AG), or inhibiting both of 
those enzymes have shown great promise for treatment of nausea. Since 
chemotherapy-induced acute and anticipatory nausea are not well con-
trolled with conventional anti-emetic treatments, manipulations of the 
endocannabinoid system show great promise for reducing that distress-
ing side effect of cancer treatment.

www.ebook3000.com

The most common medical use of cannabis today and throughout human 
history is for the treatment of chronic pain, which is usually accompanied 
by some other disability or mood disorder. Estimates indicate that 
approximately 20 percent of the world’s population suffers from chronic 
pain (Vos et al. 2012). Chronic pain is defined as pain that persists for 
more than three months. Current pharmacotherapies for chronic pain are 
ineffective in many patients; approximately 40 percent of patients with 
chronic pain are not satisfied with their treatment (Corcoran, Roche, and 
Finn 2015). In the past twenty years, the effectiveness of cannabis in 
reducing chronic pain has provided increasing evidence that the endocan-
nabinoid system regulates the processing of pain.
Chronic pain can be broadly categorized as consisting of nociceptive 
pain and neuropathic pain (Beal and Wallace 2016). Nociceptive pain is 
produced by stimulation of specialized free nerve endings (nociceptors,  
or “pain receptors”) that respond to tissue damage caused by intense 
chemical (e.g., chili peppers), mechanical (e.g., pinching), or thermal 
stimulation. Nociceptive pain is pain resulting from actual tissue damage 
or potential tissue damage; examples include post-operative pain, 
osteoarthritis-related pain, and mechanical low back pain. Once stimu-
lated, the nociceptor sends a signal to the brain via the spinal cord, trig-
gering a variety of autonomic responses that result in the subjective 
experience of pain. Neuropathic pain is pain that results from damage  
to the nervous system itself—examples include diabetic peripheral  
neuropathy, post-stroke pain and post-therapeutic neuralgia such as 
chemotherapy-induced neuropathy (Beal and Wallace 2016). Histori-
cally, opiates have been the primary class of medications used to treat 
patients with both acute and chronic pain. Acute pain is well controlled 
by available therapies, but chronic pain is often resistant to conventional 
pharmacotherapies. In addition, multiple studies have revealed the 
9
Cannabinoids and Pain

124    Chapter 9
adverse consequences of chronic opiate therapy in people without cancer 
(Rosenblum, Marsch, Joseph, and Portenoy 2008). Therefore, there is an 
interest in alternative medications for the management of chronic pain. 
Cannabinoids may have a role in such treatment of chronic pathological 
pain, including neuropathic pain.
Pre-Clinical Evidence of Analgesic Effects
There is very good pre-clinical evidence that cannabinoids are highly 
effective in reducing pain in animal models. The tests used to determine 
the analgesic properties of cannabinoids include tests that model both 
acute and chronic pain. The simplest tests measure the effect of drugs on 
acute pain, with analgesic drugs increasing the threshold to detect painful 
stimuli. In the tail-flick test, a beam of light is focused on a small segment 
of a rodent’s tail; the initial low intensity of the light beam is increased 
incrementally until the normal pain threshold is reached and the tail is 
reflexively flicked out of the beam. The hot plate test is equally reliable as 
an assessment for analgesic drugs using thermal heat. A metal plate at the 
base of a cylinder is maintained at a temperature between 52o C and 58o 
C. When a rodent is placed on the hot plate, the latency to respond (by 
licking a paw or jumping) is measured.
The especially imperative need for new treatments for chronic pain 
requires the use of pre-clinical models of inflammatory and neuropathic 
pain to evaluate the potential effectiveness of cannabinoids in relieving 
distress. Models of chronic pain include models of inflammatory pain 
and models of neuropathic pain. One model of inflammatory pain is the 
plantar test, in which an irritant (carrageen, capsaicin, formalin, or 
lypopolysaccharide) is injected into a rodent’s paw and results in a slowly 
developing inflammation. The paw becomes hypersensitive, and mechan-
ical, thermal, and cold stimuli that normally would not provoke pain 
become painful (called allodynia); the latency to withdraw the paw from 
the stimulus is then measured. Analgesic drugs increase the latency for 
paw movement, and anti-inflammatory drugs reduce edema in the paw. 
Neuropathic pain models include chemotherapy-induced neuropathy 
(which produces allodynia) and constriction of the sciatic nerve; analge-
sic drugs reduce allodynia, as is evidenced by increased latency to respond. 
Pre-clinical evidence suggests that use of phytocannabinoids may be one 
of the most promising therapies for chronic neuropathic pain. Not  
only is THC effective in treatment of chronic pain; pre-clinical evidence 
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids and Pain    125
suggests that CBD, and perhaps other constituents of cannabis, may also 
be effective.
THC
Pre-clinical animal models have demonstrated that THC is effective in 
reducing pain in animal models (Costa and Comelli 2014). Indeed, hyper-
algesia is one of the classical “mouse tetrad symptoms” used to classify a 
drug as acting like THC (Martin et al. 1991). THC has been tested in a 
wide range of anti-nociceptive assays and has been found to be effective 
in both acute (e.g., hotplate, tail flick) and chronic (e.g., inflammation, 
neuropathic pain) models. THC is effective when administered orally, 
systemically, or directly into the brain or the spinal cord (Costa and 
Comelli 2014). However, the psychoactive side effects of THC limit its 
usefulness in treating pain. One approach to overcoming that obstacle is 
the addition of CBD to THC. CBD has anti-nociceptive effects. Since 
THC is a mixed CB1/CB2-receptor agonist, another approach is the devel-
opment of CB2 agonists that only act on the non-psychoactive CB2 recep-
tors that are primarily located in the peripheral nervous system. Evaluation 
of THC in pathological pain (such as chronic inflammatory pain, in 
which the CB2 receptor plays a pivotal role) has shown it to be an effec-
tive anti-nociceptive agent. For instance, in a rat model of chronic arthritic 
pain, THC was equally potent and effective in non-arthritic rats and 
arthritic ones. However, in arthritic rats the anti-nociceptive effects of 
THC were produced via activation of both the CB1 receptor and the CB2 
receptor, whereas in non-arthritic rats the anti-nociceptive effect was 
mediated only by its action on the CB1 receptors (Cox et al. 2007). These 
data suggest that chronic pain experienced by arthritics involves both 
peripheral CB2 receptors and central CB1 receptors. Therefore, treatments 
aimed at stimulating peripheral CB2 receptors may reduce chronic 
arthritic pain. Another way to reduce the psychoactive side effects of cen-
tral stimulation of CB1 receptors is to develop peripherally restricted 
cannabinoid-receptor agonists that do not cross the blood-brain barrier. 
Ajulemic acid, a peripherally restrictive analogue of a metabolite of THC, 
binds to CB1 receptors and to CB2 receptors and reduces pain in chronic 
neuropathic and inflammatory animal models mediated by action at CB1 
receptors only (Dyson et al. 2005; Costa and Comelli 2014).
Because of interactions between the endocannabinoid system and the 
opiate system, synergistic effects have been reported between THC and 
opiates in the regulation of pain. Low doses of THC have been found  
to significantly enhance morphine-induced analgesia when THC and 

126    Chapter 9
opiates are co-administered systemically into the spinal cord or directly 
into the ventricles of the brain in animal models. In results from studies 
in which they are co-administered systemically by injection or orally, a 
clear synergy has been reported: THC enhanced the anti-nociceptive 
effects of both morphine and codeine. Therefore, pre-clinical findings 
suggest that combined treatment with cannabinoids and opioids may be 
able to produce long-term anti-nociceptive effects at doses that do not 
produce side effects, without tolerance to each effect (Costa and Comelli 
2014).
CBD
Initial investigations of the analgesic effects of CBD in several animal 
models of acute pain (e.g., hot plate) revealed no evidence for an effect of 
CBD on pain (Sofia, Vassar, and Knobloch 1975). On the other hand, 
CBD was subsequently found to be effective in a model of chronic pain 
when given orally (Formukong, Evans, and Evans 1988). These conflict-
ing results suggested that CBD was not effective against acute pain but 
was effective against chronic pain. Subsequently, the analgesic properties 
of CBD were tested specifically in models of persistent and inflammatory 
pain. Costa et al. (2004) have since found that giving very low oral doses 
of CBD (15 mg/kg) one hour before carrageenan reduced paw edema 
within three hours. Even lower doses of CBD (5–7.5 mg/kg, oral) admin-
istered two hours after carrageenan-induced inflammation reduced the 
pain behavior, and higher doses (10–40 mg/kg) eliminated pain behavior 
and edema. These effects were found to be mediated by the action  
of TRPV1 receptors as the TRPV1-receptor antagonist (capsazepine) 
reversed CBD’s attenuation of pain (Costa, Giagnoni, Franke, Trovato, 
and Colleoni 2004). In addition, CBD has been shown to be effective in 
relieving neuropathic chemotherapy-induced pain in rats, and in diabetic 
mice (Ward et al. 2014), without the development of tolerance. An addi-
tional benefit of CBD is that it has been shown to block the progression 
of arthritis in a mouse model of collagen-type-II-induced arthritis  
(Malfait et al. 2000); the synovial (joint) cells from mice treated with an 
optimal dose of CBD (5 mg/kg, ip, for ten days) released significantly less 
TNFα, which suggested that the therapeutic effect of CBD on arthritis 
may be suppression of TNFα, a pro-inflammatory cytokine known to be 
a major mediator of arthritis.
The molecular targets of CBD that could be responsible for the anal-
gesic effects are numerous, including not only TRPV1 agonism but also 
agonism of 5-HT1A, antagonism of GPR55 receptors, weak antagonism at 
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids and Pain    127
CB1 and CB2 receptors, and positive allosteric modulation of glycine 
receptors. (See Pertwee 2009.) There is evidence for a role of each of these 
mechanisms in the analgesic effects of CBD. For instance, a recent report 
suggests that CBD suppresses neuropathic pain in rats with ligation of 
the spinal nerve by targeting the α3 glycine receptor (Xiong et al. 2012)—
mice lacking the α3 glycine receptor, but not CB1 or CB2 receptors, were 
resistant to the analgesic effect of CBD. More recently, the CBD-induced 
antagonism of the GPR55 receptor has been shown to play a role in noci-
ceptive signaling. That receptor is highly expressed by mouse primary 
sensory neurons, and GPR55 knockout mice do not develop hyperalgesia 
in response to inflammatory or neuropathic stimuli. CBD may also desen-
sitize TRPA1, TRPV1, and TRPV2 channels, resulting in a reduction in 
hypersensitivity to thermal, chemical, and mechanical stimuli associated 
with neuropathies (Costa and Comelli 2014). Clearly, there is pre-clinical 
evidence that CBD attenuates chronic pain through several mechanisms. 
Because CBD is not psychotropic, it is a strong candidate for treatment of 
chronic inflammatory and neuropathic pain.
Other cannabis constituents
In addition to THC and CBD, other cannabinoids extracted from can-
nabis have been shown to have promise as potential analgesic treatments. 
For example, THCV behaves as a CB2 partial receptor agonist in vitro 
and as an antagonist of the CB1 receptor in vitro and in vivo (Pertwee 
2008). The profile is of interest to pain researchers because there is evi-
dence that CB1 antagonists can reduce pain hypersensitivity by blocking 
the constitutive activity of the CB1 receptor that maintains sensitized 
TRVP1 receptors and because CB2 agonists are analgesics without psy-
choactive effects. Cannabigerol, which has not been well studied, may 
reduce pain by acting as a α2-adrenergic agonist. And there is evidence 
that cannabichromene may potentiate the analgesic effect of THC, per-
haps by inhibiting re-uptake of AEA. (See Costa and Comelli 2014 for a 
review.) There have been no clinical studies of the use of CBD alone to 
treat pain in humans.
GW Pharmaceuticals pioneered the development of nabiximols (whole 
extracts of cannabis) for therapeutic purposes, most notably for pain in 
patients with multiple sclerosis. They developed Sativex, which contains 
THC/CBD ins a ratio of approximately 1 to 1. Recent clinical trials 
revealed that Sativex is effective (with few side effects at low to moderate 
doses) in treating pain associated with multiple sclerosis, advanced can-
cer pain in opiate-resistant patients (Portenoy et al. 2012), and peripheral 

128    Chapter 9
neuropathic pain accompanied with alloynia (Serpell et al. 2014). Indeed, 
in Canada Sativex is approved for prescription for pain in MS and cancer 
and for spasticity in MS.
Such whole-plant extracts contain a mixture of natural cannabinoids 
and other non-cannabinoid compounds that may interact synergistically 
to reduce pain. Recent evidence that a high dose of CBD potentiated the 
ability of a sub-threshold dose of THC to reduce acute pain in the mouse 
tail-flick test (Varvel et al. 2006) suggests a synergistic effect of CBD and 
THC in pain reduction. More recently, Comelli et al. (2008) reported that 
a CBD and THC extract produced a greater analgesic effect than equiva-
lent respective doses of each compound separately in an animal model of 
neuropathic pain. To determine whether the improved effect was due 
entirely to THC and CBD or whether it may have been modulated by the 
other compounds in the extracts, the effectiveness of a combination of 
the pure compounds was compared against that of the extracts. The pure 
compounds produced a weaker effect than the plant extracts at the  
same doses of THC and CBD (Comelli, Giagnoni, Bettoni, Colleoni, and 
Costa 2008). Therefore, it is necessary to characterize these constituents 
more fully. Indeed, there is recent evidence that terpenoids present in the 
plant may facilitate the analgesic effects of the extracts. The terpenoid 
β-caryophyllene, the most common terpenoid in cannabis, displays anti-
inflammatory and analgesic effects by acting as a CB2 agonist (Gertsch 
et al. 2008).
Manipulations of the Endocannabinoid System: Pre-Clinical Evidence
Systemic administration of THC and synthetic CB1-receptor agonists is 
well known to produce analgesia in animal models of acute and chronic 
pain. However, concerns about dependence, tolerance, and the cognitive 
side effects produced by global agonism of the CB1 receptor and 
medicinal marijuana remain. Therefore, pre-clinical research has focused  
on potential manipulations of the endocannabinoid system that do not 
produce the side effects produced by CB1 activation. These potential 
treatments include CB1 allosteric modulators, FAAH inhibitors, MAGL 
inhibitors, and CB2 agonists.
CB1 allosteric modulators
Endocannabinoids inhibit pain transmission by acting on CB1 receptors 
at central, spinal, and peripheral synapses. The use of THC and other 
CB1 agonists as analgesics is limited by the psychoactive side effects 
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids and Pain    129
produced by their action on the orothosteric pocket on the CB1 recep-
tors throughout the brain. Although endocannabinoids also bind to the 
orthosteric sites of the CB1 receptor, both AEA and 2-AG are released 
on demand where and when they are needed and are quickly metabo-
lized. Therefore, their action is more transient and selective with highly 
specific temporal and spatial regulation. Allosteric modulators of the 
CB1 receptor bind to a distinct site apart from the orthosteric site and 
produce conformational changes in the receptor, thereby altering the 
potency of the ligand when it binds to the receptor (Kenakin 2013). 
However, allosteric modulators have no physiological effect in the 
absence of ligand binding. Therefore, CB1-positive allosteric modulators 
would be expected to enhance the pain-relieving effects of endocannabi-
noids, but with limited side effects. Indeed, a recent study found that the 
CB1 positive allosteric modulator ZCZO11 reduced neuropathic pain 
and inflammatory pain in pre-clinical animal models without develop-
ment of tolerance or occurrence of psychoactive side effects (Ignatowska-
Jankowska et al. 2015).
FAAH and MAGL inhibitors
Exogenous administration of AEA or 2-AG systemically is unsuitable as 
a treatment for pain because they are rapidly degraded. However, treat-
ment with inhibitors of the enzymes that degrade these endocannabinoids—
MAGL (which degrades 2-AG) and FAAH (which degrades AEA and 
other fatty acids)—is promising. Because of their “on-demand” produc-
tion and release, endocannabinoids are specifically generated at sites of 
nociceptive activity, which prevents unwanted effects of global CB1-
receptor agonism. This strategy also has the potential to improve our 
current understanding of the functional roles of endogenous AEA and 
2-AG in regulating pathological pain. The beneficial effects of activating 
the endocannabinoid system in different neuropathic pain models were 
reviewed by Guindon and Hohmann (2009).
Animals genetically engineered to lack FAAH have abnormally  
high levels of AEA. Although FAAH knockout mice act relatively normal, 
they are less responsive to pain (Lichtman, Shelton, Advani, and Cravatt 
2004). Systemic administration of MAGL inhibitors (Ignatowska-
Jankowska et al. 2014; Kinsey et al. 2009; Kinsey et al. 2013; Long, Li, et 
al. 2009) or of FAAH inhibitors (Fegley et al. 2005; Jayamanne et al. 
2006; Kathuria et al. 2003; Lichtman et al. 2004) has been shown to be 
anti-nociceptive in models of acute and chronic pain, including inflam-
matory pain and neuropathic pain. Both FAAH inhibition and MAGL 

130    Chapter 9
inhibition prevent chemotherapy-induced mechanical and cold allodynia 
(Guindon, Lai, Takacs, Bradshaw, and Hohmann 2013). Both a CB1 
antagonist and a CB2 antagonist blocked the effects of elevated AEA and 
2-AG, but a TRPV1 antagonist blocked only the effect of elevated AEA. 
In addition, local peripheral (intra-plantar) injection of MAGL inhibitors 
into the paw of a rat increased local 2-AG levels and blocked pain behav-
ior produced by intra-plantar injections of capsaicin or formalin  
by a CB1 and CB2 mechanism of action of 2-AG (Desroches, Guindon, 
Lambert, and Beaulieu 2008; Guindon, Guijarro, Piomelli, and  
Hohmann 2011).
Although FAAH and MAGL inhibitors consistently attenuate neuro-
pathic and inflammatory pain in pre-clinical models, they often lack full 
efficacy in such models, and thus their clinical development is limited. On 
the other hand, the dual FAAH-MAGL inhibitor JZL195 produced 
enhanced anti-nociceptive effects in several pre-clinical pain models 
(Anderson, Gould, Torres, Mitchell, Vaughn, et al. 2014; Long, Li, et al. 
2009); however, JZL195 also produced hypomotility, catalepsy, and 
THC-like subjective effects in a drug-discrimination assay, and impaired 
spatial memory in the Morris water-maze task in mice (Anderson et al. 
2014; Long, Li, et al. 2009; Wise et al. 2012). Although these THC-like 
psychoactive effects present limitations in the use of dual inhibitors for 
the treatment of pain, JZL195 was about three times as potent in reduc-
ing pain behaviors as it was in producing the psychoactive effects (Ander-
son et al. 2014). In addition, tolerance is a concern in the development of 
new analgesics. Tolerance to the analgesic effects of sustained complete 
FAAH inhibition did not occur (Schlosburg et al. 2010), but tolerance 
(and physical dependence) did develop to the analgesic effects of sus-
tained complete MAGL inhibition (Ignatowska-Jankowska et al. 2014; 
Schlosburg et al. 2010). However, full inhibition of FAAH (with a high 
dose of the FAAH inhibitor PF3845) and partial inhibition of MAGL 
(with a low dose of the MAGL inhibitor JZL184—4 mg/kg) were recently 
reported to produce sustained reduction of pain in models of inflamma-
tory and neuropathic pain, with minimal cannabimimetic side effects and 
no tolerance (Ghosh et al. 2015). Therefore, full FAAH inhibition com-
bined with partial MAGL inhibition may be a preferred treatment for 
neuropathic and/or inflammatory pain.
URB937, a new peripherally restrictive FAAH inhibitor that does not 
cross the blood-brain-barrier and therefore cannot produce unwanted 
psychoactive side effects, has been shown to block neuropathic and 
inflammatory pain via action of AEA on peripheral CB1 receptors; 
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids and Pain    131
however, unlike actions of 2-AG, peripheral effects of AEA may not 
involve CB2 receptors (Clapper et al. 2010). Both brain-penetrant FAAH 
inhibitors (Naidu, Booker, Cravatt, and Lichtman 2009) and non-brain- 
penetrant FAAH inhibitors (Sasso et al. 2012) act in a synergistic manner 
with COX inhibitors (non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs) to attenu-
ate inflammatory pain in mice. Therefore, treatments that boost the activ-
ity of either AEA or 2-AG when and where they are needed have potential 
as therapeutic agents for pain relief.
CB2 agonists
There is evidence that the analgesic effects of THC and synthetic canna-
binoids (including the full agonist CP55,940) are mediated not only by 
their action at the CB1 receptor but also by their action at the CB2 recep-
tor (Deng, Cornett, Mackie, and Hohmann 2015). Since CB2 agonism 
does not produce the psychoactive side effects of CB1 agonism, consider-
able recent research is focused on the potential of selective CB2 agonists 
to reduce pain.
CB2-receptor expression may be confined to immune cells such as 
macrophages, lymphocytes, and mast cells in the periphery and astro-
cytes and microglia in the CNS. However, recent studies have demon-
strated CB2-receptor activity on neurons, but whether such activity is 
present in the absence of inflammation is controversial. Activation of 
CB2 receptors mediates the anti-inflammatory effects of endocannabi-
noids as well as having a role in the anti-hyperalgesia in inflammatory 
pain states (Pacher and Mechoulam 2011). The CB2 receptor plays an 
important role in pain signaling and may be of particular importance in 
the development of chronic pain states. It is not involved in acute pain, 
such as that measured in hotplate tests and tail-flick tests; instead CB2 
mechanisms are detected in animal models of persistent or chronic pain 
(Guindon and Hohmann 2009). Since activation of CB2 receptors does 
not produce the psychoactive side effects of activation of CB1 receptors, 
recent findings that CB2-receptor agonists are effective analgesic treat-
ments have great promise for the development of novel treatments for 
chronic pain. Indeed, recent evidence indicates that chronic CB2 activa-
tion reversed neuropathic pain without the development of tolerance 
(Deng et al. 2015). Repeated systemic administration of the selective CB2 
agonist AM1710 suppressed peripheral neuropathy produced by admin-
istration of the chemotherapeutic agent paclitaxel in a mouse model by 
reducing the pro-inflammatory cytokine tumor necrosis factor α. Since 
tolerance develops after prolonged chronic dosing with CB1 agonists 

132    Chapter 9
(Bass and Martin 2000), it is noteworthy that tolerance to the analgesic 
effects of the CB2 agonist does not develop. There is considerable pre-
clinical evidence that targeting CB2 receptors to bypass unwanted central 
effects associated with CB1-receptor activation is promising as a therapy 
for neuropathic pain in which the development of effectiveness-reducing 
tolerance might not occur.
Endocannabinoid Regulation of Pain in the Central Nervous System
Since cannabis and manipulations of the endocannabinoid system reduce 
acute and chronic pain, it is clear that the endocannabinoid system regu-
lates pain signaling in the central nervous system. The dorsal horn of the 
spinal cord plays a major role in the processing of pain. It receives and 
encodes sensory input from the periphery and integrates the descending 
signals from the brain. When administered into the spinal cord intrathe-
cally (that is, into the spinal theca), cannabinoids reduce acute pain, an 
effect mediated by CB1 receptors. However, in sustained painful stimula-
tion, spinal 2-AG levels gradually increase. The increase corresponds to 
an increase in activation of glial cells and an upregulation of CB1 recep-
tors, which accompany resolution of a pain state (Alkaitis et al. 2010). 
Therefore, it is believed that spinal 2-AG signaling initiated by excessive 
nociceptive activity negatively modulates the acute pain signal, inhibiting 
the release of pro-nociceptive neurotransmitters (Woodhams, Sagar, and 
Chapman 2015).
In chronic pain, such as neuropathic pain resulting from peripheral 
nerve damage, the spinal nociceptive circuitry becomes sensitized, which 
results in hyperalgesia (excessive pain after a nociceptive stimulus) and 
allodynia (perception of a normally innocuous stimulus as painful). 
Treatments that boost the endocannabinoid system have great potential 
for alleviating these chronic pain states, whereas current analgesics are 
ineffective (Woodhams et al. 2015). In animal models of neuropathic 
pain, both CB1 receptors and CB2 receptors are upregulated, as are levels 
of AEA and 2-AG in the spinal cord. However, in view of the role of 2-AG 
signaling at CB2 receptors in resolving pain (Alkaitis et al. 2010), a novel 
area of ongoing research involves intrathecal injections of CB2-receptor 
agonists to treat chronic pain states (Burston et al. 2013). Spinal CB2 
expression is elevated and CB2 agonism alters spinal nociceptive activity 
in a model of osteoarthritic pain, without effect on control animals. The 
CB2 receptor is primarily expressed on glial cells of the CNS; therefore 
these cells are most likely to mediate the effects of CB2 agonists in models 
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids and Pain    133
of persistent pain. Activation of CB2 receptors can reduce the release of 
pro-inflammatory cytokines from glial cells, which is important in the 
analgesic mechanism.
In the brain, the endocannabinoid system influences ascending pain 
signals in the thalamus, influences descending modulatory signals in  
the brainstem, and influences the affective/emotional aspects of pain  
sensation through actions in the higher cortico-limbic circuits. Direct 
infusion of cannabinoid agonists into the brainstem regions of the peri-
aqueductal gray (PAG) and the rostral ventromedial medulla produces 
anti-nociceptive effects that can be blocked by CB1 antagonists. The 
involvement of endocannabinoids at these sites is mediated by the release 
of AEA after electrical stimulation of the PAG or after peripheral inflam-
matory insult. PAG levels of AEA and 2-AG are also elevated in animal 
models of neuropathic pain. FAAH inhibition in the PAG is anti-
nociceptive in acute pain tests, but at very high levels AEA produces pro-
nociceptive effects by action at TRPV1 receptors. The PAG is also the site 
of action of endocannabinoids mediating stress-induced analgesia in 
rodents (Hohmann et al. 2005). In the region of the rostral ventromedial 
medulla of the brainstem, “on” cells facilitate nociceptive activity, whereas 
“off” cells inhibit nociceptive activity; the action of endocannabinoids in 
that region inhibits the “on” cells and promotes the firing of the “off” 
cells (Woodhams et al. 2015).
Higher brain regions in the limbic system (in particular the amygdala) 
and cortical regions mediate the emotional components of pain. Indeed, 
pre-clinical studies demonstrate that lesions of the amygdala (which reg-
ulates emotional behavior) reduce the analgesia produced by THC. A 
recent fMRI study of healthy humans (Lee et al. 2013) investigated the 
effects of THC on brain activity produced by ongoing cutaneous burning 
pain induced by topical administration of capsaicin (an alkaloid derived 
from chili peppers). Lee et al. (ibid.) found that THC reduced the reported 
unpleasantness, but not the intensity, of pain. The reduced unpleasant-
ness of pain was accompanied by reduced activity in the anterior cingu-
late cortex (a cortical region involved in the perception of pain) and  
by reduced functional connectivity between the amygdala and primary 
sensorimotor areas during the pain state. Interestingly, the reduction in 
connectivity was positively correlated with the reductions in ratings of 
unpleasantness of pain. These findings suggest that the amygdala activity 
may be related to inter-individual differences in response to cannabinoid 
analgesia.

134    Chapter 9
Clinical Trials in Humans
There are few effective therapeutic options for patients living with chronic 
pain. It has been reported that only 40–60 percent of patients obtain even 
partial relief of their pain with current medications (Wilsey et al. 2008). 
There is very good evidence that cannabinoids, including marijuana, can 
be effective in relieving pain as assessed on a visual analog scale, even at 
low doses (1.29 percent THC) that do not produce psychoactive or cog-
nitive side effects (Wilsey et al. 2013). There have been no clinical trials 
with humans of the efficacy of CBD alone for chronic pain.
Mary Lynch and colleagues (Lynch and Campbell 2011; Lynch and 
Ware 2015) conducted systematic reviews of randomized controlled tri-
als conducted since 2003 examining cannabinoids in the treatment of 
chronic non-cancer pain. The cannabinoids included in the reviews were 
smoked cannabis, oromucosal extracts of cannabis-based medicines, 
nabiximols, nabilone, dronabinol, and a novel THC analogue of the 
metabolite THC-11-oic acid (ajulemic acid). The chronic pain conditions 
included neuropathic pain, fibromyalgia, rheumatoid arthritis, and  
mixed chronic pain. Among the 29 trials included in the reviews, 22 
found significant analgesic effects of the cannabinoid as compared with 
either placebos or active control compounds, and several reported signifi-
cant improvements in sleep. No serious adverse effects were reported; the 
adverse effects that were reported were mild to moderate and led to only 
a few participants withdrawing from the studies. The reviews concluded 
that there is evidence that cannabinoids are safe and moderately effective 
in treating neuropathic pain, and that there is some evidence of efficacy 
in fibromyalgia and rheumatoid arthritis. Of particular importance, two 
of the trials examining smoked cannabis (Abrams et al. 2007; Ellis et al. 
2009) demonstrated a significant analgesic effect in HIV neuropathy,  
a type of pain highly resistant to any available treatment for neuropathic 
pain. In addition, Abrams et al. (2011) have shown that vaporized can-
nabis can augment the analgesic effects of opioids, an effect also demon-
strated in the pre-clinical animal literature; it will be interesting to 
determine if this important finding can be replicated using a double-blind 
placebo control procedure. It was noteworthy that in a trial of the  
effect of Sativex in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis a significant 
reduction in disease activity was also noted (Blake et al. 2006), which  
is consistent with pre-clinical work showing that cannabinoids are 
anti-inflammatory. 
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids and Pain    135
High doses of THC may not be necessary to control neuropathic pain. 
A recent double-blind, placebo-controlled crossover study (Wilsey et al. 
2013) evaluated the potential of vaporized cannabis (placebo, medium-
dose THC [3.53 percent], or low-dose THC [1.29 percent]) to reduce 
neuropathic pain in humans who were resistant to traditional treatment. 
Both the high and the low dose were equally effective in reducing pain, 
yet the psychoactive effects of the low dose were minimal and were well 
tolerated.
The first cohort study of the long-term safety of medical cannabis use 
was recently reported by Mark Ware and colleagues; it involved patients 
being treated for non-cancer chronic pain in seven clinics in Canada over 
the course of a year (Ware, Wang, Shapiro, Collet, et al. 2015). The pri-
mary outcome measures were severe adverse events and non-severe 
adverse events as defined by the International Conference on Harmoniza-
tion (http://www.ich.org/cache/compo/276-254-1.html). The comparison 
groups included 215 individuals with chronic pain who were given can-
nabis (12.5 percent THC) and 216 individuals with chronic pain who 
were not given cannabis. The cannabis users were advised to use the 
delivery method with which they were most comfortable and to titrate 
their dose to the level they tolerated best. The median intake was 2.5 
grams per day, and no relationship was found between increasing the 
daily dose and the development of adverse effects. This suggests that the 
patients titrated their dose to control adverse effects. Over the year of 
treatment the cannabis group, but not the control group, showed a sig-
nificant reduction in pain intensity. In addition, there was no difference 
among the groups in the risk of severe adverse events (cannabis group 13 
percent, non-cannabis group 19 percent). Most patients in the cannabis 
group (88.4 percent) and most in the control group (85.2 percent) 
reported at least one non-severe adverse event, with a mean of three 
events per participant in the cannabis group and a mean of two events 
per participant in the control group. The overall incidence of non-severe 
adverse events in the cannabis group (818) was significantly higher than 
that in the control group (581). The specific events associated with can-
nabis included headache, dizziness, nausea, and somnolence.
As a secondary measure, Ware et al. (2015) administered neurocogni-
tive tests at the start of the study, at 6 months, and at 12 months, using 
two sub-tests of the third edition of the Wechsler Memory Scale (Verbal 
Paired Associates I, including recall, and Verbal Paired Associates II, 
including recall and recognition) and two sub-tests of the third edition of 
the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (Digit Symbol-Coding and Picture 

136    Chapter 9
Arrangement). Significant improvements were observed in all neurocog-
nitive sub-tests after 6 months and after 12 months in both the cannabis 
group and the controls. No differences in neurocognitive function were 
seen between the two groups. Measures of pulmonary function did not 
differ between the groups after adjusting for tobacco smoking. The can-
nabis users did not show changes in liver, kidney, or endocrine function-
ing as assessed by blood tests. Therefore, this first follow-up study of 
medical cannabis users suggests that its adverse effects are small and are 
comparable both quantitatively and qualitatively to those of prescription 
cannabinoids, such as naboline. The average dose of 2.5 g/day of 12.5 
percent THC cannabis may be safe as a part of a carefully monitored 
pain-management program (Ware et al. 2015).
Using a conservative criterion of risk of bias of results, Whiting et al. 
(2015) conducted an extensive systematic review of 79 randomized con-
trolled trials that examined the benefits and adverse effects associated 
with medical cannabis across a broad range of conditions, the majority of 
the trials evaluating nausea and vomiting due to chemotherapy or chronic 
pain and spasticity due to MS and paraplegia. In determining the quality 
of a trial, Whiting et al. used the Cochrane Collaboration’s tool for assess-
ing risk of bias in randomized trials, which covers six domains of bias: 
selection bias, performance bias, detection bias, attrition bias, reporting 
bias, and other bias. If at least one domain was rated high, a trial was 
considered at high risk of bias. The review concluded that most studies 
suggested that cannabinoids were associated with improvements in 
symptoms. The evidence was strongest that smoked cannabis and oromu-
cosal THC:CBD mixtures may be beneficial for the treatment of chronic 
neuropathic or cancer pain and that nabiximols, naboline, THC/CBD 
capsules, and dronabinol may be beneficial for the treatment of spasticity 
due to multiple sclerosis, with moderate risk of bias for most of these 
studies. Although the cannabinoids also were effective for chemotherapy-
induced nausea and vomiting, the risk of bias among these studies was 
high. Interestingly there was no clear evidence for a difference in effec-
tiveness or in adverse effects based on the type of cannabinoid or the 
mode of administration.
Although the use of FAAH and MAGL inhibitors in pre-clinical stud-
ies has clearly supported the use of endocannabinoid-targeted compounds 
in clinical pain trials with humans, there has been only one published 
report of such a trial, and it was a failure. The pharmaceutical corpora-
tion Pfizer developed a highly selective FAAH inhibitor, PF-04457845,  
to produce analgesia in an osteoarthritic patient population (Huggins, 
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids and Pain    137
Smart, Langman, Taylor, and Young 2012). That compound reduced 
FAAH activity by 96 percent and increased AEA levels substantially, but 
was not differentiated from placebo in reduction of pain. However, it was 
well tolerated, with no evidence of cannabinoid-type adverse events. 
The pain targeted in the Pfizer clinical trial, osteoarthritis pain, may 
differ qualitatively from the pain typically measured in many pre-clinical 
models that have demonstrated analgesic effects of FAAH inhibition. 
Most pre-clinical models measure reflex responses to a mechanical or 
thermal stimulus, whereas the predominant symptom in neuropathic 
pain evident in osteoarthritis is not evoked pain but instead spontane-
ous pain, which is more difficult to model pre-clinically (Fowler 2015). 
In an attempt to model osteoarthritic pain in animals more closely, 
Bryden et al. (2106) injected monosodium iodoacetate into rats’ knees, 
producing histological changes representative of those seen in human 
osteoarthritic patients. The measure of pain was the likelihood that a 
rat would spontaneously burrow into bedding (an innate rodent behav-
ior indicative of well-being). Bryden et al. (2016) demonstrated deficits 
in burrowing in this model that were reversed by COX inhibitors (ibu-
profen and celecoxib), but were not reversed by the Pfizer FAAH inhibi-
tor, PF-04457845, which was also ineffective in human osteoarthritis 
patients (Bryden et al. 2015). The pre-clinical data thus mirror the 
human clinical data for this indication. In view of the considerable pre-
clinical evidence of the potential of FAAH inhibitors and MAGL inhibi-
tors to reduce pain in a variety of models, there is a clear need to 
continue to evaluate the potential benefits of these treatments in other 
human models of chronic pain.
Conclusion
A majority of the patients who use medical marijuana are prescribed 
marijuana for pain—particularly chronic neuropathic pain, which is 
resistant to current treatments. Since opiates are the most common treat-
ment for pain, it is interesting that considerable pre-clinical animal 
research demonstrates a clear interaction between cannabinoids and opi-
ates at a number of levels within the cell, including direct receptor asso-
ciations, alterations in endogenous opiate release, and post-receptor 
interactions via shared signal transduction pathways. Various studies 
have demonstrated cross-tolerance, mutual potentiation, and receptor 
cross-talk between the μ-opiate receptor and the CB1 receptor. Drugs that 
target the cannabinoid system often affect the opioid system in tandem. 

138    Chapter 9
Considerable evidence indicates a synergistic effect of cannabinoid-opiate 
drugs (Scavone et al. 2013). For instance, sub-threshold combined doses 
of cannabinoids and morphine reduce pain in animals and in humans. 
These findings suggest that the combined use of THC and opiates may 
provide an opportunity for better pain relief from lower doses of each 
drug. In addition, the use of nabiximols (Sativex) for chronic pain associ-
ated with multiple sclerosis and cancer has shown promise, with the  
additional benefit that CBD tempers the intoxicating effects of THC.
Although the first clinical trial of a FAAH inhibitor to produce analge-
sia in an osteoarthritic population failed, the pre-clinical evidence sug-
gests that continued investigation of both FAAH and MAGL inhibitors is 
warranted, especially for non-osteoarthritic chronic pain. Pre-clinical evi-
dence points to future development of effective CB2 agonists, devoid of 
the psychoactive side effects of CB1 agonists, to produce pain-relieving 
anti-inflammatory effects.
www.ebook3000.com

Epilepsy is a neurological disorder that manifests as recurrent, spontane-
ous seizures or convulsions with possible loss of consciousness due to 
disturbance of excitatory-inhibitory equilibrium of neuronal activity in 
the brain. It affects approximately 1 percent of the world’s population 
(Williams, Jones, and Whalley 2014). Two broad categories of seizures 
have been described: generalized and focal. Generalized seizures originate 
at a specific point within the brain but rapidly distribute across the brain 
to affect both hemispheres. Focal seizures are restricted to a specific 
region of the brain or a single hemisphere.
Conventional anti-epileptic drugs block sodium channels or calcium 
channels, or enhance GABA function to reduce the release of excitatory 
glutamate, thereby preventing the spread of the seizure within the brain. 
Current anti-epileptic drugs are effective in approximately 50 percent of 
patients. However, 30 percent of the epileptic population experience 
intractable seizures regardless of the anti-epileptic drug used, and 50 per-
cent of the population will eventually become resistant to currently avail-
able treatments. All existing anti-epileptic drugs are associated with 
numerous side effects (impairment of motor function, cognitive dysfunc-
tion, emotional lability). Therefore, there is a need for the development of 
better treatment options (Williams et al. 2014). Recent evidence shows 
promise for cannabinoids in the treatment of epilepsy.
Anti-Convulsant Effects of Cannabis
Before the discovery and development of modern anti-epilepsy drugs, 
cannabis was a drug of choice for treating seizures. In 1840, William 
O’Shaughnessy described the successful treatment of seizures in an infant 
by using cannabis tincture (O’Shaughnessy 1840). Queen Victoria’s per-
sonal physician, J. R. Reynolds, described cannabis as the most useful 
10
Cannabinoids and Epilepsy

140    Chapter 10
agent that he was acquainted with to treat violent convulsions (Reynolds 
1868). We now know that whole cannabis contains several cannabinoids 
with diverse pharmacology, so it is difficult to interpret the mechanisms 
of action of whole cannabis plants (Williams et al. 2014).
There have been no clinical trials of the effectiveness of whole canna-
bis or THC effects on seizures in epilepsy patients. However, there have 
been a few case studies of epilepsy patients who are also cannabis users. 
Caution must be exerted in interpreting these findings, because of posi-
tive bias (Williams et al. 2014). According to one report, 24-year-old epi-
leptic required two to five cannabis cigarettes (self-prescribed) in addition 
to prescribed doses of phenobarbital and phenytoin to remain seizure 
free (Consroe, Wood, and Buchsbaum 1975). In contrast, another report 
suggested a pro-convulsant effect of cannabis in which an epileptic 
patient receiving conventional anti-epilepsy medication was seizure free 
until engaging in a period of cannabis use (Keeler and Riefler 1967). 
Grinspoon and Bakalar (1997) reported that two patients who replaced 
traditional anti-epilepsy drugs with cannabis smoking showed improve-
ment in seizure frequency and severity. An interview-based survey of 295 
epilepsy patients treated in a tertiary care center revealed that 21 percent 
used cannabis and the majority reported beneficial effects on seizures 
(Gross, Hamm, Ashworth, and Quigley 2004). One pre-clinical animal 
study investigated the anti-convulsant effects of whole-plant cannabis 
injected in rats (Ghosh and Bhattacharya 1978), another the effects of 
whole-plant cannabis inhaled by dogs (Labrecque, Halle, Berthiaume, 
Morin, and Morin 1978); both of those studies supported an anti-
convulsant effect of cannabis. Overall, the evidence supports an anti-
convulsant effect of cannabis; however, there have been no well-controlled 
human studies, and a report by Williams et al. (2014) of potential pro-
convulsant effects warrants caution.
Anti-Convulsant Effects of CB1 Agonists
Most of the evidence that THC and other CB1 agonists may reduce sei-
zures is found in the pre-clinical animal literature (Chesher, Jackson, and 
Starmer 1974). When administered orally, doses of 160–200 mg/kg of 
THC protected against seizures in a mouse epilepsy model (Boggan, 
Steele, and Freedman 1973), which led Boggan et al. to suggest that the 
median effective dose for 50 percent of the population (ED50) of oral 
THC for seizure protection is about 200 mg/kg. At the lower dose of 50 
mg/kg, THC was pro-convulsant, but that effect could be reversed by 
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids and Epilepsy    141
co-administration of CBD (50 mg/kg). Later work showed that adminis-
tration of THC and the anti-epileptic drug phenobarbitone produced a 
synergistic anti-convulsant effect that was further enhanced by CBD 
(Chesher, Jackson, and Malor 1975). THC and a number of synthetic CB1 
agonists have consistently been shown to produce CB1-dependent anti-
convulsant activity in experimental models of seizure and epilepsy.  
(For a review see Williams et al. 2014.) In addition, experimental  
studies have demonstrated that antagonism of the CB1 receptor 
exacerbates seizure activity in animal models (Blair, Deshpande, and 
DeLorenzo 2015).
An important case report demonstrating the role of the endocannabi-
noid system in the regulation of synaptic transmission in controlling epi-
leptic seizures was reported in a patient who enrolled in a trial of the CB1 
antagonist rimonabant for treatment of obesity. The 52-year-old patient, 
who had a history of adolescent epilepsy, had been seizure free for several 
years. After administration of rimonabant, the patient experienced new 
onset of nocturnal partial seizures (Braakman, van Oostenbrugge, van 
Kranen-Mastenbroek, and de Krom 2009), which then subsided until the 
re-administration of rimonabant. Since a CB1 antagonist may be pro-
convulsant, this report provided evidence that CB1 agonism may be a 
potential anti-convulsant treatment for epilepsy. However, CB1 agonists 
produce psychoactive side effects, and prolonged CB1 activation may 
result in exacerbation of seizure activity—probably as a result of receptor 
adaptation (Blair et al. 2015).
Epilepsy and Dysregulation of the Endocannabinoid System
The effectiveness of CB1 agonists in reducing seizures in pre-clinical mod-
els of epilepsy suggests that the endocannabinoid system may be a homeo-
static regulator of that disorder. Indeed, CB1-expressing inhibitory and 
excitatory synapses act to regulate dynamically changing normal and 
pathological oscillatory neural-network activity. Endocannabinoids con-
trol the activity of these neural networks.
Increasing evidence suggests that epilepsy can modify the endocan-
nabinoid signaling system substantially. Temporal-lobe epilepsy, one of 
the most common forms seen in adults, is associated with changes in the 
hippocampus in which CB1 expression is downregulated during the acute 
phase, shortly after the precipitating event, but then upregulated in the 
chronic phase of the disorder (Soltesz et al. 2015). In the hippocampus, 
CB1 receptors are present on both inhibitory GABA-containing terminals 

142    Chapter 10
synapses and excitatory glutamate-containing terminals. As a conse-
quence, the activation of CB1 receptors on glutamatergic terminals 
should be anti-convulsive by reducing glutamate release, and the activa-
tion of CB1 receptors on GABA terminals should be pro-convulsive by 
reducing GABA release. The specific loss of CB1 receptors (receptor 
downregulation) on the glutamatergic terminal has been shown to lead 
to an increased excitability of glutamatergic neurons treated with the 
glutamate agonist kianic acid and to an increase in seizures induced by 
that acid (Marsicano et al. 2003). Taken together, evidence from both 
patients and animal models indicates that, as the disease progresses, con-
current upregulation of CB1 receptors on GABAergic terminals and 
downregulation of CB1 receptors on glutamatergic axons may mechanis-
tically contribute to seizures. However, the relative importance of the 
upregulation and downregulation of CB1 receptors at GABAergic versus 
glutamatergic terminals is not well understood (Soltesz et al. 2015). For 
example, data from cell-type-specific knockout mice indicates that the 
selective deletion of CB1 on excitatory glutamate cells, but not on inhibi-
tory GABAergic interneurons, worsens kainate-induced acute seizures 
(Monory et al. 2006).
Epilepsy is characterized by recurrent, unprovoked seizures. Temporal-
lobe epilepsy can be studied experimentally in rodents. Chemical convul-
sant agents (kianate and pilocarpine) produce intermittent or continuous 
acute seizures, which can last up to a few hours. These are followed by a 
latent period that can be interrupted days or weeks later by spontaneous 
chronic epileptic seizures. Data from such experimental models of epi-
lepsy suggest that excessive glutamate release from axon terminals dur-
ing seizures may trigger negative-feedback inhibition of further glutamate 
release through the endocannabinoid signaling system (Katona and 
Freund 2012). Action of the endocannabinoid system dampens overac-
tive circuits. Indeed, the level of endocannabinoids is increased in the 
brain shortly after it is subjected to acute insults (Hansen, Schmid, et al. 
2001; Wallace, Blair, Falenski, Martin, and DeLorenzo 2003). These 
transient surges in endocannabinoids in the otherwise normal (that is, 
not chronically epileptic) brain engage pre-synaptic CB1 signaling and 
exert an overall protective effect against over-excitation (Soltesz et al. 
2015). However, in individuals with chronic ongoing epilepsy this 
endocannabinoid-mediated negative-feedback control system seems to 
be functionally compromised, either because of alterations in synthesis 
pathways or because of decreased CB1 expression on glutamatergic ter-
minals, and is therefore unable to prevent the generation of seizures. 
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids and Epilepsy    143
Indeed, in the chronic phase of temporal-lobe epilepsy, the levels of AEA 
and the 2-AG synthesizing enzyme DAGL, without changes in the level 
of the 2-AG degrading enzyme MAGL, are reportedly decreased in the 
cerebrospinal fluid or in the brain of individuals with temporal-lobe  
epilepsy (Ludanyi et al. 2008; Romigi et al. 2010). Thus, diminished  
production of endocannabinoids may contribute to epileptic seizures. 
Thereby, CB1 agonists may serve as anti-convulsants by decreasing gluta-
matergic transmission. Even in chronically epileptic animals, CB1 antag-
onists increase the frequency and the duration of seizures (Soltesz et al. 
2015; Wallace et al. 2003).
Promising new treatments based on MAGL inhibition came to light in 
pre-clinical animal studies in which the kindling model of epilepsy was 
used. Kindling was induced by electrically stimulating the amygdala at a 
frequency and an amplitude known to induce seizure activity in mice. 
The highly selective MAGL inhibitor JZL184 raised seizure thresholds, 
delayed the development of generalized epileptic seizures, and decreased 
the number of seizures after discharge duration in the kindling model of 
temporal-lobe epilepsy. However, once mice were fully kindled, MAGL 
inhibition no longer had an anti-convulsant effect. This effect was medi-
ated by the action of 2-AG on CB1 receptors located on glutamatergic 
neurons, because JZL184 was ineffective in conditional CB1 knockout 
mice on glutamatergic forebrain neurons. A less selective MAGL inhibi-
tor, URB602, also was found to increase the latency of general seizures 
induced by pentylenetetrazole (PTZ) in rats (Naderi, Ahmad-Molaei, 
Aziz Ahari, and Motamedi 2011). Previous work had demonstrated that 
the CB1 agonist WIN 55212,2, but not the FAAH inhibitor URB597, also 
delayed the development of generalized seizures in the model, but not 
when mice were fully kindled (Wendt, Soerensen, Wotjak, and Potschka 
2011). These findings suggest that 2-AG, not AEA, is the endocannabi-
noid that modulates seizures, and that it does so by reducing glutamate 
release during the development of seizures in kindled mice. It is also 
known that CB1 receptors on glutamatergic neurons can mediate a pro-
tection against excitotoxic seizures (Bhaskaran and Smith 2010; Monory 
et al. 2006; Ruehle et al. 2013). This indirect activation of CB1 receptors 
for treatment of seizures offers a clear advantage over global CB1-receptor 
activation. Indeed, in vitro studies show that 2-AG reduces excitatory 
post-synaptic currents in hippocampal slices from mice with temporal-
lobe epilepsy (Bhaskaran and Smith 2010). However, caution must be 
exercised in interpreting the results, because Ma et al. (2014), using a 
much higher dose of JZL184 (20 mg/kg twice a day rather than 8 mg/kg 

144    Chapter 10
once a day), found that chronic JZL184 increased seizure frequency in a 
mouse model of temporal-lobe epilepsy. This could be a biphasic effect of 
cannabinoids with high doses producing an opposite effect than low 
doses, or it could be due to the development of tolerance mediated by 
downregulation and desensitization of CB1 receptors after chronic can-
nabinoid administration. Further studies in animal models with sponta-
neous recurrent seizures are needed to determine the generality of these 
effects.
Anti-Convulsant Effects of CBD
CBD, which does not act on CB1 receptors, is the only isolated phytocan-
nabinoid to have been investigated for anti-convulsant effects both  
pre-clinically in animals and clinically in humans. The first pre-clinical 
evidence for the anti-convulsant effects of CBD was published by Izqui-
erdo, Orsingher, and Berardi (1973). CBD (1.5–12 mg/kg, ip) given one 
hour before induction of seizures in a mouse model reduced the severity 
relative to controls. Ralph Karler and colleagues (Karler, Cely, and  
Turkanis 1973; Karler and Turkanis 1978) subsequently demonstrated 
the anti-convulsant effects of orally administered CBD (120 mg/kg) and 
THC (100 mg/kg) in mice. Karler and colleagues also showed that CBD 
(0.3–3 mg/kg, ip) increased the electrophysiologically recorded epileptic 
after-discharge threshold in electrically kindled limbic seizures in rats, as 
also did the anti-epileptic drug phenytoin. However, CBD went beyond 
phenytoin by also reducing the after-discharge amplitude, duration, and 
propagation (Turkanis, Smiley, Borys, Olsen, and Karler 1979); the 
authors suggested that CBD was the most efficacious of the drugs tested 
against limbic after discharges and convulsions.
CBD clearly shows anti-convulsant effects in acute pre-clinical models 
of epilepsy, but the mechanism of action is not well understood. It is pos-
sible that CBD may reduce neuronal excitability and neural transmission 
by modulation of intracellular calcium through interaction with TRPV1 
receptors or GPR55 receptors (Devinsky et al. 2014). Indeed, the latter 
mechanism is particularly interesting. GPR55 receptors are localized on 
excitatory axon terminals, where they facilitate glutamate release when 
the neuron fires. Because CBD effectively blocks GPR55 activation, it 
would be an ideal candidate as an anticonvulsant agent. Thus CBD may 
selectively dampen excess presynaptic glutamate release from only the 
hyperactive excitatory neurons during epileptic seizures (Sylantyev et al. 
2013; Katona 2015).
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids and Epilepsy    145
CBD may not be as effective in animal models of chronically epileptic 
animals. Colasanti, Lindamood, and Craig (1982) used cortical implanta-
tion of cobalt to model chronic seizures in humans and found that CBD 
(60 mg/kg, ip) was ineffective. On the other hand, recent work has veri-
fied that CBD shows significant anti-epileptiform and anti-convulsant 
activity in a wide variety of in vitro and in vivo models (Jones et al. 
2010). Cannabidivarin, the propyl variant of CBD, has recently been 
shown to have anti-convulsant properties in the same models (Hill,  
Mercier, Hill, Glyn Jones, Yamaksi, et al. 2012).
Human clinical trials with CBD are ongoing, and there is interest in its 
use in childhood epilepsy. The psychotropic effects of THC limit or pro-
hibit widespread therapeutic use—particularly in epilepsy, for which 
regular, repeated, lifelong dosing is necessary. However, not only do all 
licensed anti-epileptic drugs exert significant motor or cognitive side 
effects (Fisher 2012); because of side effects, poorly controlled seizures, 
or a combination of the two, many epilepsy patients cannot drive or 
maintain employment. In pre-clinical animal research, CBD has been 
reported to be a more reliable anti-convulsant than THC, and without 
THC’s psychoactive or motor side effects. Therefore, CBD may be a  
better therapeutic option for epilepsy than THC.
In the past five years there has been great public interest in the use of 
“medical marijuana” products for the treatment of pediatric epilepsy. 
Sanjay Gupta of the television channel CNN has produced two hour-long 
specials on the efficacy of CBD-rich cannabis in treating Dravet Syn-
drome, a severe form of childhood epilepsy that is usually resistant to 
standard anti-epilepsy drugs. Beginning in the second year of life, chil-
dren affected by Dravet Syndrome develop an epileptic encephalopathy 
that results in cognitive, behavioral, and motor impairment (Devinsky et 
al. 2014). Thus, early and effective therapy is necessary. The increase in 
public interest is attributable to reports that two young children with 
Dravet Syndrome stopped having seizures after taking CBD-rich mari-
juana preparations. These remarkable anecdotal stories have produced 
high expectations regarding the therapeutic potential of CBD for the 
treatment of epilepsy. Families have petitioned legislators for access to 
CBD-rich strains of marijuana, and some families have moved to states 
with more liberal marijuana policies in order to gain access to products 
for their affected children. Physicians may be caught in a quandary com-
plicated by insufficient scientific data.
Nearly 40 years ago, on the basis of pre-clinical animal research indi-
cating the effectiveness of CBD in reducing epileptic seizures, Raphael 

146    Chapter 10
Mechoulam and his colleagues provided the first scientific clinical trial of 
the potential of CBD to reduce epileptic seizures in a small group of 
patients. Mechoulam treated patients in Israel daily with 200 mg CBD  
(n = 4) or placebo (n = 5) (Mechoulam and Carlini 1978). While the 
placebo-treated patients showed no improvement during the three-
month trial, three of the four patients treated with CBD showed a major 
reduction in seizure frequency (ibid.). Subsequently, a research group in 
Brazil (Cunha et al. 1980), in collaboration with Mechoulam, used a 
double-blind procedure to randomly assign a total of 15 epilepsy patients 
to receive high doses (200–300 mg/day) of CBD (n = 8) or placebo (n = 
7) in capsules for 4.5 months, along with the anti-epilepsy drugs pre-
scribed before the experiment. Among the eight patients treated with 
CBD, only one showed no improvement. Four were nearly free of con-
vulsions throughout the experiment, and another three showed partial 
improvement. The patients reported no severe adverse effects from CBD. 
Despite these initial promising results, which were consistent with the 
pre-clinical animal literature, it is only very recently that subsequent clin-
ical trials have been conducted, largely in response to the large number 
of anecdotal reports of the positive effects of CBD-rich marijuana on 
children with pediatric epilepsy. As Mechoulam (2015) asks, why did we 
have to wait decades?
Even though the efficacy of CBD for treating epilepsy in humans was 
supported nearly 40 years ago, until recently the published data on the 
use of CBD for the treatment of epilepsy have come from fewer than 70 
participants, very few of them children (Ames and Cridland 1986; Trem-
bly and Sherman 1990). Few of the studies were rigorous, and few of 
them used high-quality evidence (Whiting et al. 2015). More recently, 
Porter and Jacobson (2013) published self-reports of the experiences of 
parents who had given their children (nineteen in all) some form of high-
CBD product for severe intractable epilepsy. The reported doses of CBD 
ranged from below 0.5 mg/kg/day to about 30 mg/kg/day. The majority 
of the families reported improvement, ten of them reporting greater than 
80 percent improvement and two reporting complete cessation of sei-
zures. Others reported having discontinued other medications (Porter 
and Jacobson 2013). Although this does not constitute a high-quality 
placebo-controlled experiment, it does provide some information that 
was missing until 2013.
In view of the current interest in CBD as a treatment for childhood 
epilepsy, pharmaceutical companies are developing CBD products  
for treating Dravet Syndrome and other forms of epilepsy and are 
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids and Epilepsy    147
evaluating their efficacy. GW Pharmaceuticals has developed a CBD-rich 
compound, called Epidiolex, that, like Sativex, is administered by sub-
lingual spray. Epidiolex has received both an Orphan Drug Designation 
and a Fast Track Designation from the US Food and Drug Administra-
tion for the treatment of Dravet Syndrome. Initial reports of several 
children treated with Epidiolex for intractable epilepsy were promising 
(Devinsky et al. 2016); however, the initial study lacked placebo con-
trols. Epidiolex reduced overall seizure frequency by 54 percent in all 
patients and by 63 percent in Dravet Syndrome patients. After 3 months 
of treatment, 9 percent of all patients and 16 percent of Dravet patients 
were seizure free. Adverse effects (somnolence, diarrhea, fatigue and 
decreased appetite) were not severe. Therefore, the limited data based  
on self-reported seizure frequencies are promising, although placebo 
controls were absent.
On March 14, 2016, GW Pharmaceuticals issued a press release 
announcing positive Phase 3 clinical trial results for Epidiolex (CBD) for 
the treatment of Dravet Syndrome. In the study, 120 patients were ran-
domly assigned to receive 20 mg/kg/day of Epidiolex (n = 61) or placebo 
(n = 59). Epidiolex was added to the current treatments the patients were 
receiving for epilepsy (which, because of failure to provide relief of sei-
zures, consisted of an average of three different drugs). The mean age of 
patients was 10 years, and 30 percent of the patients were under 6 years 
of age. The median baseline frequency of convulsive seizures was 13 per 
month. The primary endpoint compared Epidiolex and placebo on the 
percentage change in the monthly frequency of convulsive seizures during 
the 14-week treatment period, with a 4-week baseline observation period. 
The results, which were highly statistically significant (p = 0.01), showed 
that Epidiolex achieved a median reduction in monthly number of con-
vulsive seizures of 39 percent, versus 13 percent for placebo. The differ-
ence between Epidiolex and placebo was evident during the first month 
of treatment and was maintained for the entire treatment period. Epidio-
lex was generally tolerated well, the most common adverse events being 
somnolence, diarrhea, decreased appetite, fatigue, pyrexia, vomiting, 
lethargy, infection of the upper respiratory tract, and convulsion. Of the 
patients who reported an adverse event, 84 percent reported it to have 
been mild or moderate. Eight patients on Epidiolex discontinued treat-
ment because of adverse effects; only one patient on placebo did so. This 
is very promising placebo-controlled evidence in support of both the 
safety and the efficacy of CBD in treatment of a severe and difficult-to-
treat form of epilepsy that is devastating to very young children.

148    Chapter 10
A number of families in the United States and in Canada have gained 
access to various “hemp oil” preparations with high CBD and low THC 
content. Assessing the outcomes of the use of such preparation is difficult 
because of high variability between products, lack of consistency in  
dosing, variable quality control, and uncertainty about the presence of 
other potentially active cannabinoids. In a recent report from Colorado, 
although 57 percent of families using such products reported positive 
results, there was no evidence of improvement in EEG pattern in eight of 
the patients who reportedly responded to the drug. And there were sig-
nificant adverse effects, including increased seizures in 13 percent of the 
patients (Press, Knupp, and Chapman 2015). Interestingly, a higher rate 
of benefit was reported by families that had moved to Colorado specifi-
cally in order to gain access to “hemp oil” products than by families  
who had already been living there, which suggests a placebo effect in self-
reported outcomes.
Obtaining “evidence-based medicine” becomes complicated when  
the substance in question (e.g., CBD) is controlled by rigid and intimidat-
ing federal regulations and by rapidly changing state regulations. Accord-
ing to the US Controlled Substance Act of 1970, marijuana and THC  
are classed under the federal government’s Schedule I of controlled 
substances—a classification suggesting that they have a high potential for 
abuse, that they have no currently accepted medical use, and are not 
accepted as safe. The Controlled Substance Act of 1970 specifies that  
all species of plants and substances derived from marijuana fall under 
Schedule I. Therefore, CBD is subject to the same restrictive laws as THC, 
although “most experts and considerable evidence now suggest that this 
particular phytochemical in fact does not have abuse potential and is 
clearly of substantial medical interest” (Filloux 2015). Some states have 
enacted CBD-specific laws that allow families to administer CBD-rich, 
THC-poor marijuana products to children with intractable epilepsy, but 
the families must determine how to obtain the substances and must deter-
mine how large a dose to administer. Indeed, under federal law it is tech-
nically illegal for a physician to prescribe these substances. Because of  
the therapeutic potential of CBD for epilepsy, the American Academy of 
Pediatrics has recently published a position paper stating its position 
against legalization but favoring changing the status of marijuana from 
Schedule I to Schedule II to facilitate high-quality scientific research.
www.ebook3000.com

In a rigorous meta-analysis published in the Journal of the American 
Medical Association under the title “Cannabinoids for medical use,” 
Whiting et al. (2015) concluded that the best evidence in the clinical 
human literature for medical use of cannabinoids pertained to chronic 
pain and spasticity in multiple sclerosis (MS). Recently nabiximols 
(Sativex) has been approved for prescription for MS spasticity in Canada 
and in several other Western countries. There is evidence that cannabinoid-
based medicines may alleviate not only symptoms of spasticity in MS but 
also symptoms of other neurodegenerative disorders.
Numerous pre-clinical studies have addressed the ability of cannabi-
noids to protect not only neurons but also some glial cell sub-populations 
from various insults. This suggests that cannabinoids may delay or arrest 
disease progression in neurodegenerative disorders. It is known that  
cannabinoids reduce excitatory glutamate release, reduce intracellular  
calcium, produce anti-oxidant effects, and produce anti-inflammatory 
effects—all neuroprotective effects. Thus, cannabinoids have an advan-
tage of combining several neuroprotective mechanisms, something that is 
especially important in the treatment of neurodegenerative disorders in 
which neuronal damage is the consequence of a progressive consequence 
of different types of cytotoxic events (Fernandez-Ruiz et al. 2014).
The neuroprotective effects of THC are mediated by its action on both 
CB1 and CB2 receptors. Endogenous ligands for those receptors, endocan-
nabinoids, produce neuroprotection by opposing the effects of stimuli 
that damage the brain (Pacher and Mechoulam 2011). Activation of the 
endocannabinoid system has been observed in some neurodegenerative 
conditions, including brain trauma in neonatal and adult rats (Hansen, 
Schmid, et al. 2001; Panikashvili et al. 2001), experimental Parkinsonism 
in rats (Gubellini et al. 2002), and kainate-induced excitotoxicity in mice 
(Marsicano et al. 2003). The upregulation of CB1 receptors has been 
11
Cannabinoids and Neurodegenerative 
Disorders

150    Chapter 11
observed after experimental stroke (Jin, Mao, Goldsmith, and Greenberg 
2000), after excitotoxic stimuli in neonatal rats (Hansen, Ikonomidou, 
Bittigau, Hansen, and Hansen 2001), and in the postmortem basal  
ganglia of Parkinson’s Disease patients (Fernandez-Ruiz et al. 2014; 
Lastres-Becker et al. 2001). However, since CB1 receptors are primarily 
located in neurons within the CNS, the response of CB1 receptors is 
reduced in the neurons that degenerate in most neurodegenerative disor-
ders. In cases in which upregulation of CB1 receptors was found, the 
response appears to occur only on surviving neurons or in neurons other 
than those affected by the disease. CB2 receptors, on the other hand, dis-
play a marked upregulation in all neurodegenerative disorders, including 
Alzheimer’s Disease, Huntington’s Disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 
(ALS), and Parkinson’s Disease (Fernandez-Ruiz et al. 2014). In the nor-
mal healthy brain, CB2 receptors are located primarily on glial cells, 
including astrocytes and oligodendrocytes. Although there is some con-
troversy in the literature, it is generally understood that they are absent 
from non-activated microglial cells. These CB2 receptors upregulate in 
response to inflammatory, excitotoxic, infectious, traumatic, or oxidant 
insults occurring in most neurodegenerative disorders, and this upregula-
tion is extremely intense in reactive microglial cells recruited to lesioned 
sites (Fernandez-Ruiz, Garcia, Sagredo, Gomez-Ruiz, and de Lago 2010; 
Fernandez-Ruiz et al. 2007).
Neuroprotective effects of CB1 agonists
The most important neuroprotective property of CB1 agonists is the 
normalization of glutamate homeostasis (Fernandez-Ruiz et al. 2010). 
The excitotoxicity process of excessive glutamate activity results in  
intracellular accumulation of calcium, which activates numerous destruc-
tive pathways, leading to cell swelling and death. The activation of CB1 
receptors opposes glutamatergic cytotoxic events. It reduces the excessive 
glutamate release on pre-synaptic neurons and reduces the excessive 
intracellular levels of calcium on post-synaptic neurons located on  
neurons containing NMDA receptors (Abood, Rizvi, Sallapudi, and 
McAllister 2001; Shen and Thayer 1998).
CB1 agonists also increase the supply of blood to the injured brain, 
an effect particularly relevant to stroke. This effect is related to the reduc-
tion in the levels of some vasoconstrictor factors (Fernandez-Ruiz and 
Gonzales 2005). Brain damage during stroke or traumatic injuries is 
associated with release of endothelin-1. Endothelin-1 then produces 
vasoconstriction, thereby limiting the supply of blood to the injured area 
and aggravating damage to the brain. CB1 agonists modulate vascular 
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids and Neurodegenerative Disorders    151
tone and therefore may provide neuroprotection by decreasing 
endothelin-1, which restores blood supply to the tissue (Mechoulam 
2002). This effect is mediated by CB1 receptors in brain microvasculature 
(Hillard 2000), but CB2 receptors may also be involved.
Neuroprotective effects of CB2 agonists
The primary neuroprotective action of CB2 receptors is control of glial 
effects on neurons (Fernandez-Ruiz et al. 2010). Acute and chronic 
degenerative brain pathologies result in proliferation, recruitment, acti-
vation, and migration of both astrocytes and microglia, which can pro-
duce positive and negative effects, respectively. Astrogliosis has positive 
influences by generation of pro-survival and neurotropic factors (Alla-
man, Belanger, and Magistretti 2011), but activation of microglial cells 
into a reactive state has been associated with greater neuronal injury 
(Cunningham, Martinez-Cerdeno, and Noctor 2013). The classic detri-
mental effects of reactive microglial cells are exerted by generation of 
neurotoxic mediators, including tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α), inter-
leukin (IL)-1β, IL-6, eicosanoids, nitrous oxide, and reactive oxygen 
species that produce neuronal damage. Targeting CB2 receptors, alone 
or in concert with CB1 receptors, may improve neuronal homeostasis 
(Fernandez-Ruiz et al. 2014).
Cannabinoids as anti-oxidants
Cannabinoids also have neuroprotective effects that are not mediated by 
CB1 or CB2 receptors, among them the anti-oxidant properties of CBD 
and THC. CBD has a broad spectrum of potential therapeutic effects, 
including neuroprotective effects, but it does not bind well to CB1 recep-
tor or to CB2 receptors. CBD protects against the brain damage produced 
by alterations in glutamate homeostasis (El-Remessy et al. 2003; Hamp-
son et al. 2000), by oxidative stress, and by local inflammatory events, 
perhaps through its ability to inhibit endocannabinoid inactivation 
(Bisogno et al. 2001). CBD contains two hydroxyl groups that enable it 
to perform an important anti-oxidant activity: scavenging reactive oxy-
gen species (Fernandez-Ruiz et al. 2014).
Cannabinoids and Multiple Sclerosis
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an inflammatory disease of the brain and the 
spinal cord in which lymphocytic infiltration leads to damage of myelin 
and axons. Early in the course of the disease, inflammation is transient 
and remyelination occurs; therefore, patients usually recover from 

152    Chapter 11
symptoms of neurological dysfunction. Over time, widespread microglial 
activation associated with chronic neurodegeneration occurs, accompa-
nied by progressive disability. Currently available medications reduce the 
frequency of new episodes but do not reverse the course of the disease 
(Compston and Coles 2008). The number of cases of MS around the 
world has increased steadily, perhaps because of improved diagnosis; it 
now affects 2–3 million people (Kurtzke 1993). MS is three times as com-
mon in females as in males (Pryce and Baker 2014).
It is now known that axonal loss rather than myelin damage is the 
primary determinant of progressive disability in MS. In addition, dou-
bling in the levels of glutamate is seen in the cerebrospinal fluid of MS 
patients undergoing an inflammatory episode (Stover et al. 1997), which 
suggests a loss of homeostatic control of neurotransmission. This eleva-
tion of glutamate may result from excessive signaling of excitatory cir-
cuits due to loss of inhibitory circuits. Cannabinoids may control these 
symptoms.
Cannabinoids and management of MS symptoms
Among the symptoms of MS that patients claim cannabis alleviates are 
bladder incontinence, tremor, and limb spasticity (Consroe, Musty, Rein, 
Tillery, and Pertwee 1997). Spasticity, one of the most commonly reported 
symptoms, may affect approximately 50 percent of patients. Current 
therapies for spasticity include the baclofen, tinazidine, and benzodiaze-
pines (Paisley, Beard, Hunn, and Wight 2002). However, in a recent  
German study adverse negative side effects were reported in 92 percent of 
patients and poor efficacy in 88 percent of patients (Henze, Flachenecker, 
and Zettl 2013), and patients are seeking alternative medications. The 
pathophysiology of spasticity is not well understood, but it may reflect a 
loss of inhibitory circuitry in the spinal cord that allows excessive stimu-
lation, which can result in excessive contractions of the muscles, some-
times even when the patient is at rest (Pryce and Baker 2014).
In mouse models of multiple sclerosis, CB1 agonists inhibit spasticity 
and CB1 antagonists worsen it (Pryce and Baker 2007). This pattern of 
findings suggests that endocannabinoids modulate spasticity in multiple 
sclerosis (Baker et al. 2000). Sativex (2.7 mg THC: 2.5 mg CBD/spray) 
alleviated hind-limb spasticity in the mouse model of MS (Hilliard et al. 
2012). In addition, AEA levels are raised in the spinal cords and brains of 
mice showing hind-limb spasticity, but not in animals with equivalent 
neurodegeneration not displaying spasticity (Baker et al. 2001). Finally, 
administration of FAAH inhibitors (which elevate AEA) also reduces the 
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids and Neurodegenerative Disorders    153
level of spasticity in mice (Pryce and Baker 2014). Therefore, the pre-
clinical data provide clear evidence that cannabinoids have therapeutic 
potential for MS.
A thorough systematic review of the efficacy and safety of medical 
marijuana in selected neurological disorders titled Report of the Guide-
line Development Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurol-
ogy (Koppell et al. 2014) was recently published by the American 
Academy of Neurology. The review included studies conducted from 
1948 to November of 2013 to address treatment of symptoms of multi-
ple sclerosis, epilepsy, and other movement disorders. When the studies 
were graded according to the American Academy of Neurology’s classifi-
cation scheme for therapeutic articles, 34 of them met inclusion criteria 
and eight were rated as Class 1. The cannabinoid formulations used in 
those studies included oral cannabis extract, oral THC (Marinol and 
Cessamet), nabiximols (Sativex 2.7 mg THC: 2.5 mg CBD/spray) admin-
istered by oromucosal spray, and smoked marijuana. The review did not 
differentiate between CBD and mixtures of THC and CBD mixtures 
among the oral cannabis formulations. The oral cannabis extract formu-
lations included 100 mg CBD, 2.5 mg THC: 0.9 mg CBD, and 2.5 mg 
THC: 1.25 mg CBD (Cannador, IKF Berlin). The review concludes that 
oral cannabis extract is effective and that nabiximols and THC probably 
are effective for reducing patient-centered measures (self-reports of 
improvement) of MS spasticity, and both oral cannabis extract and THC 
may be effective for reducing both patient-centered and objective mea-
sures after a year. For central pain or painful spasms associated with MS 
(excluding neuropathic pain), oral cannabis extract is effective and THC 
and nabiximols probably are effective. For MS bladder dysfunction, 
nabiximols, THC, and oral cannabis extract probably are effective for 
reducing the frequency of bladder voiding. For tremors, both THC  
and oral cannabis probably are not effective in reducing tremors,  
but nabiximols probably is effective. The risk of severe adverse effects of 
oral cannabis extract was only 1 percent. The comparative effectiveness 
of medical marijuana and other therapies for these indications is  
not known.
Nabiximols (Sativex) has been used in Canada, the UK and Spain to 
treat spasticity associated with MS, and in Canada it also has been used 
to treat neuropathic pain in MS and as an add-on treatment to strong 
opioid therapy in patients with advanced cancer. No significant abuse or 
diversion of nabiximols has been observed thus far, and there is no evi-
dence of tolerance to the effects of nabiximols (Robson 2011). Over 

154    Chapter 11
many months of treatment in a long-term safety study, Wade, Makela, 
House, Bateman, and Robson (2006) reported that the mean dose of 
nabiximols actually tended to decrease. And in two clinical trials, nabixi-
mols treatment was abruptly stopped to assess potential withdrawal 
symptoms (Notcutt, Langford, Davies, Ratcliffe, and Potts 2012; Wade  
et al. 2006); neither group reported observing a withdrawal syndrome 
(Robson 2011).
A recent randomized double-blind crossover study compared the 
abuse liability of nabiximols with that of dronabinol in healthy male and 
female participants with a history of non-dependent but regular recre-
ational use of marijuana (Schoedel et al. 2011). The pharmacokinetics of 
nabiximols and oral THC were similar, with onset after 1–3 hours. Par-
ticipant received, in random order, single administrations (separated by a 
minimum of seven days) of placebo, nabiximols (2.7 mg THC: 2.5 mg 
CBD/spray—four sprays, eight sprays, and sixteen sprays), and dronabi-
nol (20 and 40 mg). Standard measures of drug discrimination and drug 
liking, subjective experiences, and cognitive function were recorded for 
each exposure. Nabiximols did not produce significant adverse cognitive 
or psychomotor side effects and showed lower abuse potential than 
dronabinol at lower doses. However, both medications at the highest 
doses exhibited some abuse potential, defined as self-reported liking for a 
drug compared with placebo. Therefore, careful monitoring of abuse and 
of aberrant medication-related behaviors during clinical treatment with 
nabiximols is warranted.
Cannabinoids as neuroprotective therapy in MS
There is increasing evidence that elevated levels of glutamate are seen not 
only in MS patients, but also in animal models exhibiting MS spasticity 
accompanied by an increased level of expression of Group 1 metabo-
tropic glutamate receptors and excitatory amino-acid transporters 
(Sulkowski, Dabrowska-Bouta, Kwiatkowska-Patzer, and Struzynska 
2009). Modulation of the effects of elevated CNS glutamate shows dis-
ease amelioration in experimental studies and clinical studies (Pryce and 
Baker 2014). Endocannabinoids may have neuroprotective properties in 
neuroinflammatory disease by downregulating the release of glutamate. 
In a model of MS with CB1 knockout mice, neuroinflammation resulted 
in accelerated accumulation of neurological deficits relative to wild-type 
mice (Jackson, Pryce, Diemel, and Baker 2005; Pryce et al. 2003). Like-
wise, administration of CB1 agonists in wild-type mice can inhibit neuro-
degeneration due to neuroinflammation both in models of acute disease 
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids and Neurodegenerative Disorders    155
and in models of chronic disease. These findings suggest that cannabinoid 
therapy may have potential to slow neurodegeneration from MS and may 
be considered as an adjunct therapy to current disease-modifying thera-
pies (Pryce and Baker 2014).
Only one clinical trial has investigated whether or not cannabinoid 
therapy may slow the neurodegeneration that causes the progression of 
MS (Zajicek et al. 2013). A total of 493 MS patients with primary or 
secondary progressive MS were recruited over a two-year period in the 
United Kingdom. A requirement for inclusion was that their walking was 
disrupted, but not prevented, by their MS. Participants were randomly 
assigned to receive THC capsules or placebo capsules over a period of 
three years. The first four weeks of the trial were used to establish the 
best-tolerated dose, which was then to be used in the remainder of the 
study period. The dose was gradually reduced to zero at the end of  
the treatment period. Despite the abundant pre-clinical experimental evi-
dence suggesting that THC has a neuroprotective role in neurological 
diseases, the study found no evidence that THC affected the progression 
of MS as assessed either by neurological assessments by physicians or by 
participants’ responses to questionnaire using a Multiple Sclerosis Impact 
Scale. There was some evidence, however, that in participants at the lower 
end of the disability scale THC had statistically significantly (p < 0.01) 
beneficial effects on the neurological assessments by physicians relative to 
participants given placebo. Since this represented a small percentage of 
the participants, further studies are necessary targeting patients at the 
lower end of the disability spectrum to determine if THC can protect 
against MS progression (Pryce and Baker 2014). 
Cannabinoids for chronic neuropathic pain in MS
As was discussed in chapter 9, there is considerable evidence from experi-
mental models of the efficacy of cannabinoids in reducing pain, and 
chronic pain is a frequent symptom of MS. Central neuropathic pain 
caused by a lesion or dysfunction of the CNS is a common symptom of 
MS, affecting between 17 percent and 52 percent of patients (Langford et 
al. 2013). Pain of this kind is difficult to treat. Nabiximols (Sativex, 2.7 
mg THC: 2.7 mg CBD/spray) administered via sublingual spray is one 
potential treatment. A recent study showed beneficial effects of nabixi-
mols relative to placebo (Rog, Nurmikko, Friede, and Young 2005). In 
phase II and phase III studies, nabiximols was found to have analgesic 
properties that were effective in relieving neuropathic pain. Those studies 
also showed that nabiximols was tolerated well and that it could improve 

156    Chapter 11
sleep and quality of life. A subsequent two-year open-label follow-up 
study showed continued effectiveness of nabiximols spray and no evi-
dence of tolerance in the 28 participants who completed the study (Rog, 
Nurmikko, and Young 2007). A meta-analysis (Iskedjian, Bereza, Gor-
don, Piwko, and Einarson 2007) of the effectiveness of nabiximols, 
dronabinol, and CBD in alleviating neuropathic and MS-related pain 
revealed statistically significant pain relief in these studies, concluding 
that some patients do not obtain relief but others respond very well.
 A recent phase III clinical trial (Langford et al. 2013) assessed the 
efficacy of nabiximols spray for alleviating central neuropathic pain spe-
cifically due to MS. MS patients who did not respond to conventional 
pain therapies were treated with nabiximols or placebo as an add-on 
treatment. Phase A was a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled 
14-week treatment period. Mean daily pain was scored by self-report. In 
phase B, all patients were treated with nabiximols for 14 weeks, followed 
by a 4-week randomized withdrawal phase during which patients received 
either nabiximols or placebo in a double-blind manner. The primary mea-
sure was the mean daily pain scores during the withdrawal period.
During the first 14 weeks (phase A), the self-reported pain did not dif-
fer significantly between the patients treated with nabiximols and the 
placebo controls. In phase B, during the randomized withdrawal period, 
the group that continued with the nabiximols treatment showed reduced 
pain scores, but the group changed to placebo did not. The results of this 
study were therefore equivocal with somewhat conflicting findings in the 
two phases, suggesting that further studies are warranted to evaluate the 
potential of nabiximols to treat chronic pain in MS patients. 
Cannabinoids in treatment of MS: Summary and conclusions
Cannabis and medications derived from it have been confirmed to allevi-
ate MS-related spasticity in both experimental and clinical settings, and 
nabiximols have been added to the list of medications in various coun-
tries. An issue that has not been resolved in many countries is the  
economic cost of the drug to a patient suffering from MS. As with all 
cannabis medications, efficacy will have to be balanced with the well-
known side effects of cannabis caused by global stimulation of cannabi-
noid receptors in the brain rather than stimulation only in the regions 
needed to subside the symptoms—effects that many patients find unde-
sirable. Pre-clinical experimental work with animal models has shown 
that boosting endocannabinoid levels by inactivation of FAAH or MAGL 
has some efficacy in treatment of spasticity (Baker et al. 2001; Baker, 
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids and Neurodegenerative Disorders    157
Pryce, Jackson, Bolton, and Giovannoni 2012). Future medications that 
harvest the potential to boost natural endocannabinoid levels only in the 
regions of the brain where elevation of endocannabinoid levels is neces-
sary to treat spasticity in MS may greatly improve the treatment of this 
disorder without the psychoactive side effects. These new experimental 
approaches may lead to the next generation of cannabinoid therapeutics 
for MS.
Cannabinoids and Alzheimer’s Disease
Profound cognitive impairment is evident in older individuals with late-
onset Alzheimer’s Disease (AD), for which there is a lack of effective 
treatments. Recently, cannabinoids have been proposed as a treatment 
for this disorder (Ahmed, van der Marck, van den Elsen, and Olde Rik-
kert 2015). AD is characterized by a decline in cognitive and intellectual 
functions that interferes with daily living. “Late-onset AD” refers to AD 
diagnosed after the age of 60. The brains of patients with AD show accu-
mulation of amyloid-β protein in extracellular senile plaques in various 
brain regions, but particularly in the hippocampus, in the cerebral pre-
frontal cortex, and in the amygdala. A second marker of AD is the  
presence of intracellular neurofibrillary tangles formed by hyperphos-
phorylated tau protein. These changes in brain function are believed to be 
produced by neuroinflammation and oxidated stress, but the actual cause 
is still unknown. The accumulation of senile plaques leads to chronic 
activation of microglial cells and astrocytes, which surround the plaques. 
This inflammatory response leads to the release of neurotoxic substances 
that produce neuronal death, ultimately resulting in cognitive deficits and 
behavioral changes.
Currently approved treatments for AD include the cholinesterase 
inhibitors donepezil, rivastigmine, and galantamine and the N-methyl-D-
aspartate-receptor antagonist mematine. Each of these treatments acts on 
symptoms but does not have a profound disease-modifying effect. Because 
the neuropathology of AD involves multiple mechanisms, a treatment 
strategy focusing on multiple targets may be more beneficial than one 
that focuses on one target. Almost all patients with late-onset AD also 
develop neuropsychiatric symptoms, such as depression, anxiety, aggres-
sion, sleep disorders, and eating disorders. The currently approved treat-
ments for AD have no effect on these neuropsychiatric symptoms (Ahmed 
et al. 2015).

158    Chapter 11
Targeting the endocannabinoid system has been proposed as an 
approach to the treatment of AD. Numerous in vitro and in vivo studies 
have demonstrated the protective effects of cannabinoids against 
amyloid-β peptide and tau phosphorylation, the markers of AD. (See 
Ahmed et al. 2015 for a review.) Both AEA and 2-AG have been shown 
to reduce amyloid-β neurotoxicity by a CB1-receptor mechanism (Milton 
2002). Ramírez et al. (2005) demonstrated that senile plaques in AD 
patients express cannabinoid receptors CB1 and CB2, together with mark-
ers of microglial activation, and that CB1 positive neurons are greatly 
reduced in areas of microglial activation. In addition, in a pre-clinical 
investigation they found that intracerebroventricular administration of a 
CB1 agonist to rats prevented amyloid-β-induced microglial activation, 
cognitive impairment, and loss of neuronal markers. In a subsequent in 
vitro study, both CB1 agonists and CB2 agonists blocked amyloid-β-
induced activation of cultured microglial cells and reduced neurotoxicity 
after amyloid-β addition to rat cortical cell cultures (Ramirez, Blazquez, 
Gomez del Pulgar, Guzman, and de Ceballos 2005). These results indicate 
that cannabinoid receptors are important in the pathology of AD and 
may be effective in preventing the neurogenerative process that occurs in 
Alzheimer’s Disease.
Although pre-clinical and in vitro research suggest that agonists of 
CB1 receptors may be promising treatments for reducing amyloid-β acti-
vation, the memory-impairing effects of such treatments discussed in 
chapter 5 may limit their usefulness. However, Chen et al. (2013) dem-
onstrated that administration of a COX2 inhibitor (e.g., ibuprofen) can 
prevent the memory-impairing effects of THC. Indeed, they show that 
daily injection of THC for four weeks reduced both amyloid-β and neu-
rodegeneration in 5XFAD APP transgenic mice (a model of Alzheimer’s 
Disease) whether or not the injections were accompanied by administra-
tion of a COX2 inhibitor. Therefore, adjunct COX2 inhibition did not 
affect this particular beneficial effect of THC. These findings are exciting 
because they suggest that COX2 inhibitors may enhance the medical util-
ity of marijuana by reducing the side effect of memory impairment (Chen 
et al. 2013).
The protective effects of cannabinoids have been shown not only with 
CB1 agonists similar to THC but also with CBD. CBD has been proposed 
as an anti-oxidant neuroprotective agent because it inhibits in vivo 
amyloid-β plaque formation and decreases reactive oxygen species pro-
duction. CBD also inhibits the hyperphosporylation of tau protein  
in vitro in a neuronal cell line. CBD actually reduces the formation of 
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids and Neurodegenerative Disorders    159
amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles. Recent work with a combi-
nation of equidoses (0.75 mg/kg daily for five weeks) of THC and CBD 
in a mouse model of AD resulted in reduced cognitive impairment and 
reduced amyloid plaques (Aso, Sanchez-Pla, Vegas-Lozano, Maldonado, 
and Ferrer 2015).
There have been very few human clinical studies with THC as a treat-
ment for symptoms of dementia, and none with CBD. Among four clini-
cal trials of treatment of dementia symptoms (with only 60 participants 
in all), all participants were treated with the synthetic THC dronabinol. 
The primary measure for each of these studies was not cognition; how-
ever, cognitive measures were taken as secondary measures, and in all but 
one dronabinol improved cognition (van den Elsen et al. 2015) without 
severe side effects or medication discontinuation (Ahmed et al. 2015). In 
a promising though limited recent study, Shelef et al. (2016) evaluated the 
efficacy and safety of medical cannabis oil containing THC (2.5 mg twice 
a day) as an add-on to pharmacotherapy (with eight anti-psychotic medi-
cines for neuropsychiatric symptoms and four acetycholinesterase inhibi-
tors) in relieving behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia in 
eleven AD patients. Ten of the eleven patients recruited to a four-week 
open-label prospective trial completed the trial. Those ten patients 
showed significant reductions in severity of clinical symptoms and in neu-
ropsychiatric symptoms (delusions, agitation/aggression, irritability, apa-
thy, sleep, caregiver distress). Therefore, adding medical cannabis oil to  
a patient’s pharmacotherapy may be a safe and promising treatment  
for AD.
Cannabinoids and Ischemia, Brain Trauma, and Spinal Injury
Acute neurodegeneration due to ischemic stroke, perinatal hypoxia-
ischemia, spinal-cord injury, and brain trauma can be a major cause of 
permanent disability. The primary injury leads to secondary damage, 
including neuroinflammation, glutamatergic excitotoxicity, calcium 
influx, caspase activation, vasoconstriction, and oxidative stress (Mos-
kowitz 2010). Because there are multiple pathways to secondary damage, 
cannabinoids have been studied in pre-clinical models over the past  
15 years. In vivo treatment with THC and with CBD reduced lesion 
expansion and neurological deficits in animal models of acute neurode-
generation, including local or global ischemia, contusive spinal-cord 
injury, closed head injury, and newborn hypoxia ischemia (Fernandez-
Ruiz et al. 2014). Both THC and CBD have effectively preserved neuro-

160    Chapter 11
nal survival in these studies. Most studies indicate that the effect  
of THC is mediated by CB1 receptors in these beneficial effects. Indeed, 
CB1 knockout mice showed increased mortality from permanent focal 
ischemia and larger infarcts after transient focal cerebral ischemia rela-
tive to wild-type mice (Parmentier-Batteur, Jin, Mao, Xie, and Greenberg 
2002). CBD’s effects appear to be mediated by its anti-oxidant properties 
(Fernandez-Ruiz et al. 2013). Although the pre-clinical evidence is prom-
ising, there have been no clinical trials. Novel clinical studies of THC, 
CBD, and Sativex with stroke patients and brain-trauma patients are 
warranted (Fernandez-Ruiz et al. 2014).
Cannabinoids and Huntington’s Disease
Huntington’s Disease (HD) is an inherited progressive neurodegenerative 
disease. A mutation in the huntingtin gene (IT15) affects) the medium 
spiny GABAergic striatal neurons associated with the characteristic “cho-
reic” movements that appear in the early stages of the disease and the 
glutamatergic neurons that project from the cortex to the striatum and 
are associated with the cognitive dysfunctions and the psychiatric symp-
toms that appear in HD.
The disease is typically treated with neuroleptic drugs. The only drug 
currently approved (tetrabenazine, an inhibitor of the monoamine vesicu-
lar transporter) has only small effects on symptoms in HD patients (Chen, 
Ondo, Dashtipour, and Swope 2012). There are no approved therapies 
for the progression of HD.
Cannabinoids have been proposed as candidates for a neuroprotective 
therapy in HD, which may involve CB1 and CB2 receptors as well as 
receptor-independent mechanisms (Sagredo, Ramos, Decio, Mechoulam, 
and Fernandez-Ruiz 2007). Blazquez et al. (2011) demonstrated that 
defects in CB1-receptor signaling in the basal ganglia may initiate excito-
toxicity, so early stimulation of these striatal receptors might reduce the 
progression of striatal degeneration (Blazquez et al. 2011). CB2 receptors 
are upregulated in astrocytes and reactive microglial cells activated by the 
lesioned striatum (Bouchard et al. 2012; Palazuelos et al. 2009); thus, CB2 
agonists protect striatal projection cells from death by reducing the toxic-
ity of reactive microglial cells and enhancing the trophic support by 
astrocytes (Fernandez-Ruiz et al. 2014). Aside from the CB1-mediated 
and CB2-mediated actions of phytocannabinoids on HD, there is also evi-
dence that CBD may be neuroprotective in this disease, by acting as an 
www.ebook3000.com

Cannabinoids and Neurodegenerative Disorders    161
anti-oxidant. CB1 activation reduces excitotoxicity, CB2 activation reduces 
inflammation, and CBD decreases oxidative injury in HD.
All the evidence to date for the potential of cannabinoids to protect 
against the progression and/or symptoms of HD is based on pre-clinical 
animal models. Early clinical trials with CBD were aimed at treating 
symptoms such as chorea, but were without success (Consroe et al. 1991). 
The results of clinical studies with nabilone have reported some improve-
ment in motor symptoms (Curtis, Mitchell, Patel, Ives, and Rickards 
2009; Curtis and Rickards 2006); however, nabilone was also reported  
to have worsened chorea in a single-patient case study (Muller-Vahl,  
Schneider, and Emrich 1999). More recently, the first clinical trial that 
actually monitored the progression of HD (rather than the effect on 
symptom relief) was conducted with Sativex (2.7 mg THC: 2.5 mg CBD/
spray). Unfortunately, there was no evidence of slower disease progres-
sion, but the clinical trial demonstrated that the medicine was safe and 
was well tolerated by HD patients (Fernandez-Ruiz et al. 2014).
Cannabinoids and Parkinson’s Disease
Parkinson’s Disease (PD) results from progressive degeneration of DA 
neurons of the substantia nigra, which may be triggered by genetic risk 
factors in combination with unknown environmental factors (Fernandez-
Ruiz et al. 2014). The symptoms of PD, which include bradykinesia,  
resting tremor, rigidity, and postural disturbances, can be treated with 
L-dopa, dopamine agonists and monoamine oxidase inhibitors (all aimed 
at replacing lost dopamine). Current treatments also include deep brain 
stimulation and replacement of degenerated neurons with dopamine-
producing cells.
Phytocannabinoids have been proposed as a promising therapy 
(Garcia-Arencibia, Garcia, and Fernandez-Ruiz 2009). In particular, 
CBD, THC, and tetrahydrocannabivarin (THCV) have been reported to 
be neuroprotective in rats lesioned with 6-hydroxydopamine (which 
selectively destroys DA neurons) by virtue of their non-cannabinoid  
anti-oxidative properties (Garcia-Arencibia et al. 2009; Lastres-Becker, 
Molina-Holgado, Ramos, Mechoulam, and Fernandez-Ruiz 2005). In 
addition, activation of CB1 receptors may be involved in the neuroprotec-
tive effects of THC; mice lacking this receptor were more sensitive to  
the DA-damaging effects of the dopamine neuron neurotoxin, 6- 
hydroxydopamine (Perez-Rial et al. 2011). Since THCV acts as a CB1 
antagonist, its anti-oxidant properties on PD may be a better alternative, 

162    Chapter 11
because other CB1 antagonists reduce bradykinesia in animal models 
of PD (Fernandez-Ruiz 2009). THC’s anti-inflammatory effects on CB2 
receptors may benefit PD; indeed, the selective CB2 agonist HU-308 pre-
served DA neurons in animal models of PD (Ternianov et al. 2012), and 
CB2-receptor-deficient mice were more vulnerable to DA damage than 
wild-type mice in these models (Garcia et al. 2011; Price et al. 2009). 
However, to date no clinical trials of cannabinoids have been reported in 
PD patients with either CB2 agonists or THCV.
Cannabinoids and Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), known as motor neuron disease, is a 
neurodegenerative disease involving selective injury and death of motor 
neurons in the spinal cord, the brainstem, and the motor cortex. The eti-
ology of ALS is currently not known, although it is known that about  
10 percent of cases are genetic (Ahmed and Wicklund 2011). The only 
treatment for ALS is Riluzol, an anti-glutamatergic agent that acts by 
blocking voltage-dependent sodium channels on motor neurons and 
thereby reducing their activity (Cheah, Vucic, Krishnan, and Kiernan 
2010). Recent work suggests that THC delayed motor impairment and 
increased survival in a mouse model of ALS (Raman et al. 2004). FAAH 
knockout mice with permanent elevation of AEA also showed a delayed 
onset of the disease (Bilsland et al. 2006). There have been no clinical tri-
als of cannabinoid drugs with human ALS patients.
Conclusion
The best evidence for the effectiveness of cannabis as a medicine comes 
from its use to treat painful spasticity in MS patients. Indeed, Sativex  
is currently available as a prescribed treatment for this condition in  
Canada. Evidence from human clinical trials in patients with other neu-
rodegenerative disorders, including AD, PD, HD, and ALS, is less clear; 
however, the in vivo and in vitro pre-clinical evidence has demonstrated 
that the endocannabinoid system is involved in symptomology. 
www.ebook3000.com

These are interesting times. As of this writing, many countries around the 
world, and 23 of the United States, have legalized medical marijuana, and 
four US states and the District of Columbia have legalized recreational 
marijuana. The premier of Canada, Justin Trudeau, has indicated his 
intention to legalize marijuana in that country. It seems that cannabis 
stands to become a legal drug, like alcohol and tobacco. For that reason, 
it is important to understand what consequences, both positive and nega-
tive, will occur if cannabis is legalized and more and more people are 
exposed to it.
In the US the estimated current yearly market for marijuana is $5.7 
billion; four years from now it is expected to increase to $24 billion as  
a consequence of legalization (source: N. Volkow, “Marijuana and  
Cannabinoids: A Neuroscience Research Summit—Day 1, March 22, 
2016,” videocast.nih.gov). What can we do to minimize adverse effects?
We are entering a new era in understanding the risks and benefits of 
marijuana. The benefits of marijuana to appetite, pain, anxiety, nausea, 
epilepsy, and disorders of the nervous system have been observed through-
out history, but now we are beginning to understand the mechanisms for 
these effects. Clearly, cannabinoids act on neural circuits, and dysfunc-
tion within these circuits is the basis of neurological disorders for which 
investigators are trying to find new treatments. Clinical observations  
are important, but in order to protect public health it is important to 
understand how and why such effects occur. For instance, CB1 agonists 
have been reported to be both anti-convulsant and pro-convulsant in epi-
lepsy. It is known that there are many kinds of epilepsy. Some epileptics 
might benefit, but others might experience harm. How can we predict the 
outcome?
The media have focused on the potential link between cannabis and 
psychosis, but dependence on cannabis use is a much more common 
12
Where Do We Go from Here?

164    Chapter 12
adverse effect. Concern has been raised about cognitive and brain struc-
tural changes produced by cannabis, but their causality and longevity 
have been greatly contested. Identifying why some individuals are more 
vulnerable than others to the adverse effects of cannabis is of utmost 
importance for public health (Curran et al. 2016).
We know that cannabinoids act on CB1 and CB2 receptors, but they 
also act on TRPV1 receptors and on GPR55 receptors and have non-
receptor effects on microglia, on cytokines, and on reactive oxygen spe-
cies. All these effects are dependent on dose; often a low dose produces 
the opposite effect of a high dose. Long-term and short-term effects must 
be delineated. There is good evidence that marijuana reduces painful 
spasms, both static ones and dynamic ones triggered by noise or anxiety, 
in patients with multiple sclerosis. In studies of such treatment, what 
outcome measure are we trying to obtain, and what measure is most 
important? For instance, in one important review (Koppell et al. 2014), 
MS patients’ perception of spasticity was decreased by the drug, but the 
objective measure made by the physician indicated no difference.
What Next for Medical Marijuana?
There is good, clear evidence that medical marijuana alleviates pain, 
especially chronic neuropathic pain. In view of the current rate of deaths 
due to overdoses of prescription opiates in the United States, there is a 
desperate need for alternatives to such opiates. The synergism evident in 
the literature on pre-clinical trials with opiates holds out hope that 
patients may be able to greatly reduce the doses of opiates they use to 
control pain, which may reduce the risk of addiction and that of death 
by overdose. One study (Abrams et al. 2011) demonstrated that vapor-
ized marijuana can augment the analgesic effects of opioids; however, 
that study did not include double-blind placebo controls. Combined low 
doses of opiates and marijuana may well advance the treatment of 
chronic pain.
Pain patients report anecdotally a preference for smoked or vaporized 
marijuana rather than orally administered THC (nabilone or marinol). 
This probably is a result of faster onset and shorter duration of action, 
allowing titration of the dose to obtain the desired effect. However, this 
relative effectiveness has not been directly assessed in a double-blind  
placebo comparison. Ben Wilsey is currently conducting such a trial.  
(See B. Wilsey, “Smoked and vaporized cannabis in neuropathic pain,” 
http://videocast.nih.gov Marijuana and Cannabinoids: A Neuroscience 
Research Summit—Day 1, March 22, 2016.) 
www.ebook3000.com

Where Do We Go from Here?    165
In view of the psychoactive effects of THC, it is difficult to run a truly 
double-blind study using an inactive placebo as a comparison. One pos-
sibility is the use of an active placebo, such as the benzodiazepine loraz-
epam, which may not be indicated for the condition under study, such as 
chronic pain. If medical marijuana actually relieves pain on the visual 
analog scale that is typically used, the marijuana group should report less 
pain than the lorazepam group without being able to guess group assign-
ment. Wilsey’s group is currently comparing the pain-reducing effective-
ness of active and inactive oral administration of THC against that of 
active and inactive vaporized administration.
It is important to understand the effects of the different cannabinoids 
in marijuana to understand potential therapeutic treatments. In particu-
lar, there is a desperate need for data on the most efficacious ratios of 
THC to CBD in the marijuana used to treat various conditions. To date, 
no clinical trials have looked at the efficacy of different ratios of THC to 
CBD in smoked or vaporized marijuana for treatment of pain or of any 
other condition, nor have any studies evaluated the potential of smoked 
or vaporized cannabis with high CBD to treat pain or any other condi-
tion. In fact, despite several small-scale studies, the only broad-based 
human clinical trials with CBD have been based on the use of sublingual 
spray (Epidiolex) to treat childhood epilepsy and on oral administration 
to treat psychosis (Leweke et al. 2012). The promising initial results using 
Epidiolex and perhaps high-CBD cannabis in treating Dravet Syndrome 
are encouraging. It will be also be necessary to understand how the ben-
eficial medicinal effects of cannabis may be achieved without causing 
harm. Surveys indicate that recreational use of marijuana is accompanied 
by use of alcohol (Midanik, Tam, and Weisner 2007), yet very little is 
understood about the co-morbidity consequences of their interaction in 
the system. Does one alter the metabolism or the neurobiological effects 
of the other? Almost all we know about these drugs is about the indi-
vidual drugs, but we know little about what happens when they are com-
bined. This is especially important in relation to driving.
What Next for Endocannabinoids?
Of course the science behind cannabis is based on the science behind our 
own endogenous cannabinoid system. The endocannabinoids AEA and 
2-AG are the first lipid-based neurotransmitters known to be produced 
on demand and then rapidly destroyed. They are functionally different, 
but in subtle ways. Future research will bring a better understanding of 

166    Chapter 12
the separate and distinct roles of 2-AG and AEA. It is known that 2-AG 
is more broadly expressed than AEA and that it is tonically released as a 
point-to-point retrograde messenger to regulate a variety of neural plas-
ticity processes. AEA, more of a modulatory transmitter, is involved in 
stress responsivity; it modulates stress in the central nervous system and 
pain in peripheral nervous system. Animals genetically modified to lack 
FAAH are relatively normal, because the resultant elevation in AEA is not 
revealed in their overall behavior, but they are less responsive to painful 
stimuli (Lichtman 2004). In order to see a change in their behavior, we 
must expose them to a stressful environment.
Instead of a single ligand acting at multiple receptors (as serotonin and 
dopamine do), the endocannabinoid system consists of different ligands 
acting at the same receptors. Although FAAH inhibitors and MAGL 
inhibitors produce few psychoactive effects, dual FAAH/MAGL inhibi-
tion has been shown to produce psychoactive behavioral effects more like 
those caused by delivery of a global CB1 agonist (Wise et al. 2012). Future 
research will determine how 2-AG and AEA interact differently at recep-
tors to produce differential effects. Do they compete for the same recep-
tor, or do they act differently at the receptor to stimulate different 
signaling pathways (e.g., β arrestin/ERK; see Laprairie, Bagher, Kelly, and 
Denovan-Wright 2016)? Are they primarily localized in different regions 
of the brain? How do these two lipids interact with other lipid signals in 
the brain, such as prostaglandins? Future work may identify the means 
by which these endocannabinoids are transported across the cell mem-
brane, and new therapies may be developed to prevent their re-uptake 
(Fu et al. 2012; O’Brien et al. 2013).
How do newly discovered negative endogenous allosteric modulators 
of the CB1 receptor (e.g., pregnenolone) modify the effects of endocan-
nabinoids and THC in cannabis to produce therapeutic effects? CBD has 
recently been reported to act in vivo as a negative allosteric modulator of 
the CB1 receptor (Laprairie, Kulkarni, et al. 2016); does this account for 
the potential of CBD to reverse some of the effects of THC? CB1 recep-
tors have been discovered to occur on astrocytes (Han et al. 2012) and 
mitochondria; what is their function at those sites? Are CB2 receptors 
found on neurons, not just on activated microglia at times of inflamma-
tion? We will learn more about the role of CB2 receptors when better 
probes are developed for these receptors.
How can we use endocannabinoid signals for therapy? If we block 
the biological transformation of endocannabinoids by FAAH inhibition 
or MAGL inhibition, we can enhance the system’s intrinsic regulatory 
www.ebook3000.com

Where Do We Go from Here?    167
functions with greater selectivity and safety than with global CB1 ago-
nists. Inhibition of FAAH is very promising in pre-clinical trials. It is 
clear that in animal models FAAH inhibition reduces anxiety, reduces 
depression, enhances social behavior, reduces nicotine addiction, and 
reduces nausea, all with very mild side effects. MAGL inhibition has 
been shown to reduce seizures, pain, nausea, anxiety, and withdrawal 
from morphine (Wills et al. 2016) or nicotine (Trigo and LeFoll 2015) 
in pre-clinical animal models, with relatively few side effects.
We know a lot about the safety of FAAH inhibitors in humans. Seven 
different FAAH inhibitors have been evaluated in eighteen phase I and 
phase II clinical trials involving more than 1,000 human subjects, with  
no severe side effects reported. (See D. Piomelli, “Therapeutic potential of 
the cannabinoid system,” Marijuana and Cannabinoids: A Neuroscience 
Research Summit—Day 1, March 22, 2016, videocast.nih.gov.) However, 
a recent clinical trial conducted in France with a putative FAAH inhibitor 
manufactured by the Portuguese company Bial resulted in one death and 
five hospitalizations of paid volunteers. The drug was designed to act on 
the human endocannabinoid system as a potential painkiller and treat-
ment for anxiety. Unfortunately, the details of the safety and efficacy of 
the compound have not been released. In a press release, Daniele Pio-
melli, editor-in chief of the new journal Cannabis and Cannabinoid 
Research, stated: “Several structurally different FAAH inhibitors have 
been previously tested for human safety in rigorous Phase 1 clinical trials. 
These include compounds from Sanofi, Pfizer, Merck, Johnson and  
Johnson, and others. All these FAAH inhibitors were shown to be safe.” 
(source: press release from Mary Ann Liebert, Inc., New Rochelle, New 
York, January 19, 2016) Insofar as multiple FAAH inhibitors have been 
shown to be safe in humans, it is not likely that the toxicity of the Bial 
compound is due to its interaction with FAAH. “It is more probable,” 
Piomelli continued, “that the Bial compound interacts with another as yet 
unknown protein that is responsible for the observed toxicity, or that a 
toxic impurity was present in the test drug. Of course, while we can ten-
tatively exclude a class effect at this point, we cannot pinpoint which 
other target might be responsible for the toxicity of the Bial compound.” 
It is unfortunate that the details of this study have not been released to 
the public, because this tragedy is likely to influence the acceptance of 
new FAAH inhibitors for testing in human clinical trials. Yet the pre-
clinical evidence provides clear evidence of their potential in treating 
anxiety, depression, PTSD, pain, and nausea.

168    Chapter 12
The value of pre-clinical animal data as a guide to the development of 
new treatments is evident in the story about rimonabant. Pre-clinical tri-
als not only demonstrated its value in treating obesity and metabolic dis-
orders but also revealed the psychiatric side effects of anxiety/depression, 
probably because of antagonism of AEA (stress responsivity regulator); 
therefore, we should trust these models when deciding how to proceed. 
One promising avenue for the treatment of obesity and metabolic disor-
ders is the development of new compounds that bypass the central effects 
of CB1 agonism or antagonism by not crossing the blood-brain barrier. 
Considerable pre-clinical research argues for the effectiveness of CB1 
antagonists in treating metabolic disorders without entering the brain. 
The development of selective CB2-receptor agonists without the psycho-
active effects of CB1-receptor agonists is also likely to have great benefits 
for the treatment of pain and inflammation.
The Special Case of Palliative Care
The goals of palliative care include relief of pain nausea and enhance-
ment of the quality of life (World Health Organization 2012). Medical 
use of cannabis is gaining some ground in palliative-care settings in which 
the focus is on individual choice, patient autonomy, empowerment, com-
fort, and quality of life. Careful assessment is required before administer-
ing cannabinoid drugs because certain patient populations may also be 
more sensitive to experiencing adverse psychotropic, cognitive, or psychi-
atric effects (Fine 2012); however, since the patients are near the end of 
life, it is important to ensure a high quality of life and to minimize pain 
and suffering.
Clearly, the evidence suggests that cannabis and cannabinoid drugs 
(dronabinol, nabilone, nabiximols) may be useful in alleviating a wide 
variety of symptoms often encountered in palliative-care settings, such as 
nausea and vomiting associated with chemotherapy, anorexia/cachexia, 
severe intractable pain, severe depressed mood, anxiety, and insomnia 
(Abrams and Guzman 2015). The use of cannabinoids for palliative care 
may make it possible to reduce the number of medications used by 
patients (Sutton and Daeninck 2006).
Recent observational studies conducted in palliative-care facilities in 
Israel have provided evidence for the potential of cannabis use to manage 
symptoms. More than 100 cannabis-using patients in a cancer palliative-
care setting reported significant improvement in a variety of symptoms 
related to cancer and to anti-cancer treatment, including nausea, 
www.ebook3000.com

Where Do We Go from Here?    169
vomiting, mood disorders, fatigue, weight loss, anorexia, constipation, 
sexual dysfunction, sleep disorders, itching, and pain (Bar-Sela et al. 
2013). Forty-three percent of the patients using pain medications and 33 
percent of those using anti-depressants reported reductions in doses.  
No significant side effects except for memory lessening in patients with 
prolonged cannabis use were reported. Another observational study 
(Waissengrin, Urban, Leshem, Garty, and Wolf 2015) of the patterns of 
cannabis use among adult Israeli advanced cancer patients revealed that, 
of 17,000 cancer patients, 279 were authorized to use cannabis for medi-
cal purposes. The median age of the 279 patients was 60 years. Some had 
lung cancer (18 percent), some ovarian cancer (12 percent), some breast 
cancer (10 percent), some colon cancer (9 percent), and some pancreatic 
cancer (7.5 percent), and 84 percent of them had metastatic disease. Pain 
(76 percent) was the most common indication for prescription; other 
common indications were anorexia (56 percent), general weakness (52 
percent), and nausea (41 percent). Improvement was reported for pain 
and general well-being (70 percent), appetite (60 percent), nausea and 
vomiting (50 percent), and anxiety (44 percent). Indeed, 83 percent rated 
the overall efficacy of cannabis as high. The most common route of 
administration was smoking (90 percent). Most patients (62 percent) 
reported no adverse effects, although 20 percent reported fatigue, 19 per-
cent reported dizziness, and 6 percent reported delusions (Waissengrin et 
al. 2015). Observational studies clearly support the use of cannabis in 
treating palliative-care patients at the end of their lives.
Cannabinoid Designer Drugs
Cannabinoid designer drugs are synthesized compounds that function as 
agonists at CB1 receptors and are used to produce intoxication similar to 
that produced by marijuana. Most of these drugs result from slight modi-
fications to previously described chemical structures that were initially 
synthesized for research purposes by John Huffman (e.g., JWH-018) and 
Raphael Mechoulam (HU-210). The first of these compounds appeared 
around 2004. By 2008 there were many more. 
Cannabinoid designer drugs now are sold under dozens of brand 
names, such as Spice and K2. They can be found on the Internet, in head 
shops, and in convenience stores. Legal controls are circumvented by 
rapid substitution of similar chemical structures not yet controlled.  
As one synthetic cannabinoid is banned, suppliers rapidly substitute  
an analogue to evade targeted detection. The popularity of synthetic 

170    Chapter 12
cannabinoids has grown rapidly. One reason for their popularity may be 
that they usually aren’t detected by standard urinary screening for drugs 
conducted in workplaces.
After cannabinol was chemically isolated (in the 1940s), a variety of 
novel analogues were synthesized and tested, and some extremely potent 
and long-acting dimethyheptylpryan (DMHP) analogues were discovered 
(Adams, Harfenist, and Loewe 1949). Those analogues turned out to be 
quite similar in structure to the yet-to-be-discovered principal psychoac-
tive compound in marijuana, THC (Gaoni and Mechoulam 1964a). 
Indeed, it was these scientific advancements that led to the development 
of nabilone, the first synthetic cannabinoid to be approved for oral 
administration by the FDA for the treatment of nausea and vomiting in 
chemotherapy patients (It was approved in the 1970s.) Scientists’ con-
tinuing development of synthetic variants of THC as research tools even-
tually led to the discovery that THC acts at G-protein-coupled receptors 
(GPCR)—that is, CB1 and CB2 receptors (Howlett, Johnson, Melvin, and 
Milne 1988). As these compounds were discovered, the information was 
made publicly available through publications or patents; it resulted in 
great advances in our understanding of the endocannabinoid system and 
in potential therapeutic options. However, the same information can also 
be used for clandestine purposes.
In 2004 cannabinoid designer drugs began to appear—first in Europe, 
where they were marketed as “herbal products” or “incense” to avoid 
detection by law enforcement. They quickly spread around the world. 
Analysis revealed that they were adulterated with synthetic cannabinoid 
agonists. By 2010 herbal products were sold openly in stores and on the 
Internet. The structures of the molecules most commonly found in these 
products were available in the published literature. Subsequent analysis 
of these compounds has revealed that they have excellent affinity for the 
CB1 receptor—in fact, better affinity than THC, which only acts as a par-
tial agonist (Thomas, Wiley, Pollard, and Grabenauer 2014). This may 
account for the anecdotal reports that the high they produce is more 
intense.
Systematic studies of the pharmacokinetics of the many synthetic can-
nabinoids have not been performed. However, it is known from existing 
data that they are lipophilic and therefore are absorbed very rapidly.  
Distribution to the brain of JWH-018 (a major constituent of synthetic 
cannabinoids) occurs within 60 minutes of inhalation and acts on CB1 
receptors. The majority of pharmacokinetic work has focused on urinary 
metabolites that can be used as forensic markers. Similar to THC, the  
www.ebook3000.com

Where Do We Go from Here?    171
first step in metabolism of synthetic cannabinoids is in the liver by cyto-
chrome P450. Whereas THC has one major metabolite (11-OH-THC), 
the metabolism of synthetic cannabinoids follow several pathways, 
resulting in several metabolites, some of which are psychoactive. Since 
the metabolites of the various compounds differ, they are difficult to 
detect with standard urine testing.
Smokers of the drug called Spice typically report a cannabis-like high. 
However, it must be remembered that synthetic cannabinoids produce an 
effect similar to that of THC (but often more potent), but without the 
mitigating effects of CBD (potentially reducing anxiety, psychotic reac-
tions, seizure potential, and memory deficits, as discussed in previous 
chapters). The side effects that have been reported—including agitation, 
anxiety, tachycardia, confusion, memory deficits, seizures, and psychotic 
reactions—may be reduced by co-administration of CBD. The most com-
mon complaint in surveys is tachycardia, cited in 40 percent of the 153 
single-agent exposures reported to the US National Poison Data System 
in the first nine months of 2010 (Hoyte et al. 2012). The incidence of 
psychotic symptoms (9.4 percent) is also a concern. There is little infor-
mation on long-term use of such drugs. There have been reports of deaths 
(of individuals from 15 to 35 years of age) linked to the use of synthetic 
cannabinoids in Australia (Gerostamoulos, Drummer, and Woodford 
2015) and in the United States (Behonick et al. 2014); however, in each of 
these cases the cause of death was not ascertained even after a full autopsy 
and ancillary investigations. Sudden cardiac deaths have been reported in 
patients with a history of coronary heart disease; the side effect of tachy-
cardia in one-third of users and that fact that most users of such drugs 
use alcohol with them may bear on this.
In sum, anecdotal data from hospital emergency rooms and poison 
centers suggest that synthetic cannabinoids are more dangerous than 
marijuana and might even be lethal in some cases. Legal controls, where 
they exist, are of limited effectiveness for three reasons: producers can 
replace banned chemical structures within weeks, Internet vendors are 
highly resourceful, and the demand is there. Detection is very difficult 
because the metabolites differ from THC (Thomas et al. 2014).
Other Potential Risks Associated with Recreational Marijuana
Throughout the book some of the potential risks of recreational mari-
juana have been discussed. They include neurocognitive dysfunction and 
increased risk of psychosis in vulnerable individuals, both effects being 

172    Chapter 12
most problematic in adolescence. In addition, there are potential effects 
on the fetus or the newborn child when cannabis is used by a pregnant or 
a nursing woman, potential effects on the respiratory tract when canna-
bis is smoked, and, of course, potential effects on driving.
Pre-natal effects
Pre-natal exposure to cannabis through maternal use has been associated 
with neurodevelopmental differences in neonates and subsequent devel-
opmental changes in children (Jaques et al. 2014). The endocannabinoid 
system is critical for brain development; therefore, pre-natal activation of 
CB1 receptors by cannabis may lead to neuroanatomical and behavioral 
changes in offspring (Alpar, Di Marzo, and Harkany 2016). Fetal growth 
may be affected by gestational cannabis exposure, but the dose-response 
relationship has not been identified (Jaques et al. 2014). There is pre-
clinical rodent evidence that the suckling reflex is shaped by CB1-receptor 
signaling pathways (Fride et al. 2001), and that disruption of those path-
ways by CB1 antagonists can produce death in rodents. There is no evi-
dence that pre-natal cannabis exposure increases the risk of subsequent 
development of schizophrenia or epilepsy (Alpar et al. 2016). However, 
in view of the currently available evidence of other effects, cannabis 
should not be used by pregnant or lactating women.
Lung cancer and respiratory disorders
Many of the potential carcinogens present in tobacco smoke are also 
present in cannabis smoke, yet a clear relationship between lung cancer 
and cannabis smoking has not been established when tobacco use has 
been controlled for (Joshi, Joshi, and Bartter 2014; Zhang et al. 2015). 
The evidence that cannabinoids may have anti-cancer activity through 
anti-metastatic and anti-angiogenic mechanisms (Cridge and Rosengren 
2013; Ramer and Hinz 2016) is beyond the scope of this book.
The respiratory symptoms produced by smoking cannabis may be 
reduced by the use of vaporizers. Gieringer et al. (2004) found that a 
Volcano vaporizer’s delivery of THC was similar to that of a cannabis 
cigarette but reduced the amount of carcinogens substantially. The rate of 
respiratory symptoms (bronchitis wheeze, breathlessness) among 150 
persons who used only vaporizers and not cannabis cigarettes was 40 
percent of that reported by cannabis smokers after controlling for ciga-
rette smoking, duration of use, and amount typically used (Gieringer, St 
Laurent, and Goodrich 2004). Subsequently, data from a large Internet 
sample confirmed that use of a vaporizer predicted fewer respiratory 
www.ebook3000.com

Where Do We Go from Here?    173
symptoms even when age, sex, cigarette smoking, and amount of canna-
bis used were taken into account; however, since this was not a randomly 
assigned variable, there is a potential that cannabis users who choose to 
use a vaporizer engage in other behaviors to reduce respiratory diseases 
(Earleywine and Barnwell 2007).
Driving
Driving while intoxicated either by cannabis alone or by cannabis and 
other intoxicants appears to increase the risk of being in a motor-vehicle 
accident (Asbridge, Hayden, and Cartwright 2012; Hartman and Huestis 
2013; Li et al. 2012). THC impairs perception, psychomotor perfor-
mance, cognitive functions, and affective functions, all of which may  
contribute to a driver’s increased risk of causing a traffic accident. After 
alcohol, cannabis and benzodiazepines are the drugs most often found in 
impaired drivers and in drivers involved in accidents. Experimental data 
show that people attempt to compensate by driving more slowly after 
smoking cannabis, but that control deteriorates with increasing task 
complexity. Cannabis smoking impairs cognitive function and increases 
lane weaving. Critical-tracking tests, reaction times, divided-attention 
tasks, and lane-position variability all show cannabis-induced impair-
ment (Hartman and Huestis 2013).
In a large controlled case study conducted in the United States, the 
presence of THC or its metabolites in blood or urine was associated with 
an increase in potentially unsafe driving actions that increased the likeli-
hood of contributing to an accident by approximately 30 percent (Bedard, 
Dubois, and Weaver 2007). Although initial reports indicated that can-
nabis use increased the risk of traffic accidents by 100 percent (Asbridge 
et al. 2012 ; Li et al. 2012), Rogeberg and Elvik (2016) reported in a more 
recent large meta-analysis of nine studies across five countries with an 
estimated sample count of 239,739 that cannabis use increased the risk 
of traffic accidents by 30 percent, bringing it into agreement with the 
ratio reported by Bedard et al. This later meta-analysis controlled for 
methodological shortcomings of previous studies, including better con-
trol for alcohol intoxication. Nevertheless, there remains a higher risk of 
accidents under the influence of cannabis, and the evidence indicates that 
recreational cannabis users should not drive while intoxicated. However, 
it is difficult to detect THC. Current detection screens require blood sam-
ples. THC concentrations in blood decrease rapidly after the end of 
smoking (within 30 minutes), yet typically blood samples are not taken 

174    Chapter 12
for 1–4 hours after an incident. At present there are no simple and accu-
rate roadside tests (Hartman and Huestis 2013).
How Does Variation among Strains of Cannabis Influence Desired and 
Undesired Effects?
One variable that recent research suggests may mediate the association 
between cannabis and addiction, psychosis, and cognitive impairment is 
the type and the level of cannabinoids in the cannabis that the individual 
smokes. (See Morgan et al. 2010.)
Connoisseurs of cannabis discuss the pros and cons of different vari-
eties much as wine connoisseurs discuss grapes. What differentiates 
these different types of cannabis biochemically is probably the combina-
tions and quantities of the more than 100 cannabinoids and consider-
able other compounds (e.g., terpenes) in any strain. We know the most 
about THC/CBD.
The ratio of THC to CBD in cannabis varies greatly. Levels of CBD 
vary from 0 to 40 percent. Higher levels of THC and negligible CBD have 
been found in varieties grown hydroponically; such strains are increas-
ingly dominating the market. Although data on the THC content of can-
nabis have become increasingly available in the recent years, the levels of 
other cannabinoids are seldom measured. In one study conducted in the 
United States, ElSohly et al. (2016) analyzed more than 30,000 samples 
confiscated between 1994 and 2004 and found that the THC content of 
cannabis had increased by a factor of 3 in the resin and by a factor of 2 
in the leaf, but that the CBD content remained the same in both leaf and 
resin during that period. Therefore, the ratio of THC to CBD increased 
during that period. However, we do not know how the increased THC 
content affects individual intake—that is, people probably titrate the 
dose. Freeman et al. (2014) measured concentrations of THC and CBD in 
cannabis provided by participants, then had each participant roll a joint 
and smoke it in front of the researcher. THC concentrations were found 
to be related negatively to the amount of cannabis used. When using their 
own cannabis in a naturalistic setting, people titrate the amount they roll 
in cigarettes according to the concentration of THC, but not according to 
the concentration of CBD (Freeman et al. 2014).
In the pre-clinical animal literature, CBD has been reported to enhance 
some of THC’s effects and to reduce others. In the case of nausea (Rock, 
Limebeer, and Parker 2015) and in the case of pain (Varvel et al. 2006), 
synergy between CBD and THC produces a dramatically improved 
www.ebook3000.com

Where Do We Go from Here?    175
therapeutic effect when sub-threshold doses are combined. On the other 
hand, CBD reduces THC’s memory-impairing effects (Morgan, Schafer, 
et al. 2010), its anxiety effects (Zuardi et al. 1981), its psychoactive 
effects, and its psychotic side effects (Bhattacharyya et al. 2010; Fusar-
Poli et al. 2009; Morgan and Curran 2008). Further research is needed to 
fully understand the interactions between THC and CBD and the impact 
of THC:CBD ratios on the beneficial and harmful effects of cannabis.
Marijuana as a Legal Drug
The current state of evidence about the risks and benefits of marijuana is 
far from optimal, owing to the lack of human clinical trials with a drug 
that has been illegal for many years. However, on the basis of what we 
know, cannabis is certainly no more harmful to individuals than many 
other legally available drugs. As Curran et al. (2016) stated in an impor-
tant review, “With hindsight, we can clearly see the enormous problems 
that have been caused to many individuals and to society by tobacco and 
alcohol. Unlike cannabis, these drugs are legal in most countries, despite 
the fact that, if asked to decide today which psychoactive drugs should be 
legal, cannabis (which rarely kills people) might well be judged as being 
comparatively benign.” The current restrictions on cannabis and canna-
bis products hinder researchers who are attempting to understand their 
risks and benefits. A carefully regulated market may increase control of 
the age of initiation of use, provide a more accurate description of dos-
age, and increase the availability of more balanced cannabis with higher 
levels of CBD that would reduce the incidence of harm (Curran et al. 
2016).

www.ebook3000.com

Abel, E. L. 1980. Marihuana: The First Twelve Thousand Years. Springer.
Abood, M. E., Rizvi, G., Sallapudi, N., and McAllister, S. D. 2001. Activation of 
the CB1 cannabinoid receptor protects cultured mouse spinal neurons against 
excitotoxicity. Neuroscience Letters 309 (3), 197–201.
Abrahamov, A., Abrahamov, A., and Mechoulam, R. 1995. An efficient new 
cannabinoid antiemetic in pediatric oncology. Life Sciences 56 (23–24), 2097–
2102.
Abrams, D. I., Couey, P., Shade, S. B., Kelly, M. E., and Benowitz, N. L. 2011. 
Cannabinoid-opioid interaction in chronic pain. Clinical Pharmacology and 
Therapeutics 90 (6), 844–851. doi: 10.1038/clpt.2011.188
Abrams, D. I., and Guzman, M. 2015. Cannabis in cancer care. Clinical 
Pharmacology and Therapeutics 97 (6), 575–586. doi: 10.1002/cpt.108
Abrams, D. I., Jay, C. A., Shade, S. B., Vizoso, H., Reda, H., Press, S., et al.  
2007. Cannabis in painful HIV-associated sensory neuropathy: A randomized 
placebo-controlled trial. Neurology 68 (7), 515–521. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl
.0000253187.66183.9c
Adams, R. 1941. Marihuana. Harvey Lectures 37, 168–197.
Adams, R., Harfenist, M., and Loewe, S. 1949. New analogs of tetrahydro­
cannabinol. XIX. Journal of the American Chemical Society 71, 1624–1628.
Ahmed, A., van der Marck, M. A., van den Elsen, G., and Olde Rikkert, M. 2015. 
Cannabinoids in late-onset Alzheimer’s disease. Clinical Pharmacology and 
Therapeutics 97 (6), 597–606. doi: 10.1002/cpt.117
Ahmed, A., and Wicklund, M. P. 2011. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: What role 
does environment play? Neurologic Clinics 29 (3), 689–711. doi: 10.1016/j.
ncl.2011.06.001
Ahn, K., Johnson, D. S., Mileni, M., Beidler, D., Long, J. Z., McKinney, M. K.,  
et al. 2009. Discovery and characterization of a highly selective FAAH inhibitor 
that reduces inflammatory pain. Chemistry & Biology 16 (4), 411–420.
Ahn, K., Smith, S. E., Liimatta, M. B., Beidler, D., Sadagopan, N., Dudley, D. T.,  
et al. 2011. Mechanistic and pharmacological characterization of PF-04457845: 
A highly potent and selective fatty acid amide hydrolase inhibitor that reduces 
References

178    References
inflammatory and noninflammatory pain. Journal of Pharmacology and 
Experimental Therapeutics 338 (1), 114–124. doi: 10.1124/jpet.111.180257
Alger, B. E. 2012. Endocannabinoids at the synapse a decade after the dies 
mirabilis (29 March 2001): What we still do not know. Journal of Physiology 590 
(10), 2203–2212. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2011.220855
Alkaitis, M. S., Solorzano, C., Landry, R. P., Piomelli, D., DeLeo, J. A., and 
Romero-Sandoval, E. A. 2010. Evidence for a role of endocannabinoids, astrocytes 
and p38 phosphorylation in the resolution of postoperative pain. PLoS One 5 (5), 
e10891. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010891
Allaman, I., Belanger, M., and Magistretti, P. J. 2011. Astrocyte-neuron metabolic 
relationships: For better and for worse. Trends in Neurosciences 34 (2), 76–87. 
doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2010.12.001
Allen, G. V., Saper, C. B., Hurley, K. M., and Cechetto, D. F. 1991. Organization 
of visceral and limbic connections in the insular cortex of the rat. Journal of 
Comparative Neurology 311 (1), 1–16.
Allen, J. H., de Moore, G. M., Heddle, R., and Twartz, J. C. 2004. Cannabinoid 
hyperemesis: Cyclical hyperemesis in association with chronic cannabis abuse. 
Gut 53 (11), 1566–1570. doi: 10.1136/gut.2003.036350
Allsop, D. J., Copeland, J., Lintzeris, N., Dunlop, A. J., Montebello, M., Sadler, C., 
et al. 2014. Nabiximols as an agonist replacement therapy during cannabis 
withdrawal: A randomized clinical trial. JAMA Psychiatry 71 (3), 281–291. 
doi: 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2013.3947
Alpar, A., Di Marzo, V., and Harkany, T. 2016. At the tip of an iceberg:  
Prenatal marijuana and its possible relation to neuropsychiatric outcome in the 
offspring. Biological Psychiatry 79 (7), e33–e45. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2015
.09.009
Alteba, S., Korem, N., & Akirav, I. (2016). Cannabinoids reverse the effects of 
early stress on neurocognitive performance in adulthood. Learning & Memory 
(Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y.), 23, 349–358.
Ames, F. R., and Cridland, S. 1986. Anticonvulsant effect of cannabidiol. South 
African Medical Journal 69 (1), 14.
 Anderson, S., ed. 2005. Making Medicines. Pharmaceutical Press.
Anderson, W. B., Gould, M. J., Torres, R. D., Mitchell, V. A., and Vaughan, C. W. 
2014). Actions of the dual FAAH/MAGL inhibitor JZL195 in a murine 
inflammatory pain model. Neuropharmacology 81, 224–230. doi: 10.1016/
j.neuropharm.2013.12.018
Andreasson, S., Allebeck, P., Engstrom, A., and Rydberg, U. 1987. Cannabis and 
schizophrenia: A longitudinal study of Swedish conscripts. Lancet 2 (8574), 
1483–1486.
Andrews, P. L., and Horn, C. C. 2006. Signals for nausea and emesis: Implications 
for models of upper gastrointestinal diseases. Autonomic Neuroscience 125 (1–
2), 100–115.
www.ebook3000.com

References    179
Andries, A., Frystyk, J., Flyvbjerg, A., and Stoving, R. K. 2014. Dronabinol in 
severe, enduring anorexia nervosa: A randomized controlled trial. International 
Journal of Eating Disorders 47 (1), 18–23. doi: 10.1002/eat.22173
Arnone, M., Maruani, J., Chaperon, F., Thiebot, M. H., Poncelet, M., Soubrie, P., 
et al. 1997. Selective inhibition of sucrose and ethanol intake by SR 141716, an 
antagonist of central cannabinoid (CB1) receptors. Psychopharmacology 132 (1), 
104–106.
Arseneault, L., Cannon, M., Witton, J., and Murray, R. M. 2004. Causal 
association between cannabis and psychosis: Examination of the evidence. British 
Journal of Psychiatry 184, 110–117.
Asbridge, M., Hayden, J. A., and Cartwright, J. L. 2012. Acute cannabis 
consumption and motor vehicle collision risk: Systematic review of observational 
studies and meta-analysis. BMJ 344, e536. doi: 10.1136/bmj.e536
Aso, E., Sanchez-Pla, A., Vegas-Lozano, E., Maldonado, R., and Ferrer, I. 2015. 
Cannabis-based medicine reduces multiple pathological processes in AbetaPP/
PS1 mice. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease 43 (3), 977–991. doi: 10.3233/JAD-
141014
Bachhuber, M. A., Saloner, B., Cunningham, C. O., and Barry, C. L. 2014. Medical 
cannabis laws and opioid analgesic overdose mortality in the United States, 
1999–2010. JAMA Internal Medicine 174 (10), 1668–1673. doi: 10.1001/
jamainternmed.2014.4005
Baker, D., Pryce, G., Croxford, J. L., Brown, P., Pertwee, R. G., Huffman, J. W., et 
al. 2000. Cannabinoids control spasticity and tremor in a multiple sclerosis 
model. Nature 404 (6773), 84–87. doi: 10.1038/35003583
Baker, D., Pryce, G., Croxford, J. L., Brown, P., Pertwee, R. G., Makriyannis, A., 
et al. 2001. Endocannabinoids control spasticity in a multiple sclerosis model. 
FASEB Journal 15 (2), 300–302. doi: 10.1096/fj.00-0399fje
Baker, D., Pryce, G., Jackson, S. J., Bolton, C., and Giovannoni, G. 2012. The 
biology that underpins the therapeutic potential of cannabis-based medicines for 
the control of spasticity in multiple sclerosis. Multiple Sclerosis and Related 
Disorders 1 (2), 64–75. doi: 10.1016/j.msard.2011.11.001
Barkus, E., Morrison, P. D., Vuletic, D., Dickson, J. C., Ell, P. J., Pilowsky, L. S.,  
et al. 2011. Does intravenous Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol increase dopamine 
release? A SPET study. Journal of Psychopharmacology 25 (11), 1462–1468. doi: 
10.1177/0269881110382465
Bar-Sela, G., Vorobeichik, M., Drawsheh, S., Omer, A., Goldberg, V., and  
Muller, E. 2013. The medical necessity for medicinal cannabis: Prospective, 
observational study evaluating the treatment in cancer patients on supportive  
or palliative care. Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine 
510392. doi: 10.1155/2013/510392
Bass, C. E., and Martin, B. R. 2000. Time course for the induction and maintenance 
of tolerance to Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol in mice. Drug and Alcohol Dependence 
60 (2), 113–119.

180    References
Bauer, M., Chicca, A., Tamborrini, M., Eisen, D., Lerner, R., Lutz, B., et al. 2012. 
Identification and quantification of a new family of peptide endocannabinoids 
(pepcans) showing negative allosteric modulation at CB1 receptors. Journal of 
Biological Chemistry 287 (44), 36944–36967. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.382481
Beal, B. R., and Wallace, M. S. 2016. An overview of pharmacologic management 
of chronic pain. Medical Clinics of North America 100 (1), 65–79. doi: 10.1016/j.
mcna.2015.08.006
Beal, J. E., Olson, R., Lefkowitz, L., Laubenstein, L., Bellman, P., Yangco, B.,  
et al. 1997. Long-term efficacy and safety of dronabinol for acquired 
immunodeficiency syndrome-associated anorexia. Journal of Pain and Symptom 
Management 14 (1), 7–14. doi: 10.1016/S0885-3924(97)00038-9
Bedard, M., Dubois, S., and Weaver, B. 2007. The impact of cannabis on driving. 
Canadian Journal of Public Health 98 (1), 6–11.
Behonick, G., Shanks, K. G., Firchau, D. J., Mathur, G., Lynch, C. F., Nashelsky, 
M., et al. 2014. Four postmortem case reports with quantitative detection of the 
synthetic cannabinoid, 5F-PB-22. Journal of Analytical Toxicology 38 (8), 559–
562. doi: 10.1093/jat/bku048
Bergamaschi, M. M., Karschner, E. L., Goodwin, R. S., Scheidweiler, K. B., 
Hirvonen, J., Queiroz, R. H., et al. 2013. Impact of prolonged cannabinoid 
excretion in chronic daily cannabis smokers’ blood on per se drugged driving 
laws. Clinical Chemistry 59 (3), 519–526. doi: 10.1373/clinchem.2012.
195503
Bergamaschi, M. M., Queiroz, R. H., Chagas, M. H., de Oliveira, D. C., De 
Martinis, B. S., Kapczinski, F., et al. 2011. Cannabidiol reduces the anxiety 
induced by simulated public speaking in treatment-naive social phobia patients. 
Neuropsychopharmacology 36 (6), 1219–1226. doi: 10.1038/npp.2011.6
Bergamaschi, M. M., Queiroz, R. H., Zuardi, A. W., and Crippa, J. A. 2011. Safety 
and side effects of cannabidiol, a Cannabis sativa constituent. Current Drug 
Safety 6 (4), 237–249.
Bergman, J., Delatte, M. S., Paronis, C. A., Vemuri, K., Thakur, G. A., and 
Makriyannis, A. 2008. Some effects of CB1 antagonists with inverse agonist and 
neutral biochemical properties. Physiology & Behavior 93 (4–5), 666–670. doi: 
10.1016/j.physbeh.2007.11.007
Bhaskaran, M. D., and Smith, B. N. 2010. Cannabinoid-mediated inhibition of 
recurrent excitatory circuitry in the dentate gyrus in a mouse model of temporal 
lobe epilepsy. PLoS One 5 (5), e10683. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010683
Bhattacharyya, S., Atakan, Z., Martin-Santos, R., Crippa, J. A., Kambeitz, J., 
Prata, D., et al. 2012. Preliminary report of biological basis of sensitivity to the 
effects of cannabis on psychosis: AKT1 and DAT1 genotype modulates the effects 
of δ-9-tetrahydrocannabinol on midbrain and striatal function. Molecular 
Psychiatry 17 (12), 1152–1155. doi: 10.1038/mp.2011.187
Bhattacharyya, S., Morrison, P. D., Fusar-Poli, P., Martin-Santos, R.,  
Borgwardt, S., Winton-Brown, T., et al. 2010. Opposite effects of delta-9-
tetrahydrocannabinol and cannabidiol on human brain function and 
www.ebook3000.com

References    181
psychopathology. Neuropsychopharmacology 35 (3), 764–774. doi: 10.1038/
npp.2009.184
Bilsland, L. G., Dick, J. R., Pryce, G., Petrosino, S., Di Marzo, V., Baker, D.,  
et al. 2006. Increasing cannabinoid levels by pharmacological and genetic 
manipulation delay disease progression in SOD1 mice. FASEB Journal 20 (7), 
1003–1005. doi: 10.1096/fj.05-4743fje
Bisogno, T., Burston, J. J., Rai, R., Allara, M., Saha, B., Mahadevan, A., et al. 
2009. Synthesis and pharmacological activity of a potent inhibitor of the 
biosynthesis of the endocannabinoid 2-arachidonoylglycerol. ChemMedChem 
4 (6), 946–950. doi: 10.1002/cmdc.200800442
Bisogno, T., Hanus, L., De Petrocellis, L., Tchilibon, S., Ponde, D. E., Brandi, I., et 
al. 2001. Molecular targets for cannabidiol and its synthetic analogues: Effect on 
vanilloid VR1 receptors and on the cellular uptake and enzymatic hydrolysis of 
anandamide. British Journal of Pharmacology 134 (4), 845–852. doi: 10.1038/
sj.bjp.0704327
Bisogno, T., Mahadevan, A., Coccurello, R., Chang, J. W., Allara, M., Chen, Y., et 
al. 2013. A novel fluorophosphonate inhibitor of the biosynthesis of the 
endocannabinoid 2-arachidonoylglycerol with potential anti-obesity effects. 
British Journal of Pharmacology 169 (4), 784–793. doi: 10.1111/bph.12013
Blair, R. E., Deshpande, L. S., and DeLorenzo, R. J. 2015. Cannabinoids: Is there 
a potential treatment role in epilepsy? Expert Opinion on Pharmacotherapy 16 
(13), 1911–1914.
Blake, D. R., Robson, P., Ho, M., Jubb, R. W., & McCabe, C. S. (2006). Preliminary 
assessment of the efficacy, tolerability and safety of a cannabis-based mediciene 
(Sativex) in the treatment of pain caused by rheumatoid arthritis. Rheumatology, 
45, 50–52.
Blankman, J. L., Simon, G. M., and Cravatt, B. F. 2007. A comprehensive profile 
of brain enzymes that hydrolyze the endocannabinoid 2-arachidonoylglycerol. 
Chemistry & Biology 14 (12), 1347–1356. doi: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2007.11.006
Blazquez, C., Chiarlone, A., Sagredo, O., Aguado, T., Pazos, M. R., Resel, E.,  
et al. 2011. Loss of striatal type 1 cannabinoid receptors is a key pathogenic 
factor in Huntington’s disease. Brain 134 (1), 119–136. doi: 10.1093/brain/
awq278
Bloomfield, M. A., Morgan, C. J., Egerton, A., Kapur, S., Curran, H. V., and 
Howes, O. D. 2014. Dopaminergic function in cannabis users and its relationship 
to cannabis-induced psychotic symptoms. Biological Psychiatry 75 (6), 470–478. 
doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2013.05.027
Bluett, R. J., Gamble-George, J. C., Hermanson, D. J., Hartley, N. D., Marnett, L. 
J., and Patel, S. 2014. Central anandamide deficiency predicts stress-induced 
anxiety: 
Behavioral 
reversal 
through 
endocannabinoid 
augmentation. 
Translational Psychiatry 4, e408. doi: 10.1038/tp.2014.53
Bluher, M., Engeli, S., Kloting, N., Berndt, J., Fasshauer, M., Batkai, S., et al. 2006. 
Dysregulation of the peripheral and adipose tissue endocannabinoid system in 

182    References
human abdominal obesity. Diabetes 55 (11), 3053–3060. doi: 10.2337/db06-
0812
Boggan, W. O., Steele, R. A., and Freedman, D. X. 1973. Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol 
effect on audiogenic seizure susceptibility. Psychopharmacology 29 (2), 101–106.
Bolognini, D., Rock, E. M., Cluny, N. L., Cascio, M. G., Limebeer, C. L., Duncan, 
M., et al. 2013. Cannabidiolic acid prevents vomiting in Suncus murinus and 
nausea-induced behaviour in rats by enhancing 5–HT1A receptor activation. 
British Journal of Pharmacology 168 (6), 1456–1470. doi: 10.1111/bph.12043
Bonnet, U., Specka, M., Stratmann, U., Ochwadt, R., and Scherbaum, N. 2014. 
Abstinence phenomena of chronic cannabis-addicts prospectively monitored 
during controlled inpatient detoxification: Cannabis withdrawal syndrome and 
its correlation with delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol and -metabolites in serum. 
Drug and Alcohol Dependence 143, 189–197. doi: 10.1016/j.drugalcdep
.2014.07.027
Bonn-Miller, M. O., Vujanovic, A. A., and Drescher, K. D. 2011. Cannabis use 
among military veterans after residential treatment for posttraumatic stress 
disorder. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors 25 (3), 485–491. doi: 10.1037/
a0021945
Bossong, M. G., Mehta, M. A., van Berckel, B. N., Howes, O. D., Kahn, R. S., and 
Stokes, P. R. 2015. Further human evidence for striatal dopamine release induced 
by administration of Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC): Selectivity to limbic 
striatum. Psychopharmacology 232 (15), 2723–2729. doi: 10.1007/s00213-015-
3915-0
Bossong, M. G., van Berckel, B. N., Boellaard, R., Zuurman, L., Schuit, R. C., 
Windhorst, A. D., et al. 2009. Delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol induces dopamine 
release in the human striatum. Neuropsychopharmacology 34 (3), 759–766. 
doi: 10.1038/npp.2008.138
Bouchard, J., Truong, J., Bouchard, K., Dunkelberger, D., Desrayaud, S., 
Moussaoui, S., et al. 2012. Cannabinoid receptor 2 signaling in peripheral 
immune cells modulates disease onset and severity in mouse models of 
Huntington’s disease. Journal of Neuroscience 32 (50), 18259–18268. 
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4008-12.2012
Bouton, M. E. 2002. Context, ambiguity, and unlearning: Sources of relapse after 
behavioral extinction. Biological Psychiatry 52 (10), 976–986.
Bovasso, G. B. 2001. Cannabis abuse as a risk factor for depressive symptoms. 
American Journal of Psychiatry 158 (12), 2033–2037. doi: 10.1176/appi.
ajp.158.12.2033
Braakman, H. M., van Oostenbrugge, R. J., van Kranen-Mastenbroek, V. H., and 
de Krom, M. C. 2009. Rimonabant induces partial seizures in a patient with a 
history of generalized epilepsy. Epilepsia 50 (9), 2171–2172. doi: 10.1111/
j.1528-1167.2009.02203.x
Brecher, E. M. 1972. Licit and Illicit Drugs. Little, Brown.
www.ebook3000.com

References    183
Broyd, S. J., van Hell, H. H., Beale, C., Yucel, M., and Solowij, N. 2016. Acute and 
chronic effects of cannabinoids on human cognition: A systematic review. 
Biological Psychiatry 79 (7), 557–567. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2015.12.002
Bryden, L., Nicholson, J., Doods, H., & Pekcec, A. (2015). Deficits in spontaneous 
burrowing behavior in the rat bilateral 66 monosodium iodoacetiate model of 
osteroarthritis: An objective measure of pain-related behavior and analgesic 
efficacy. Osteoarthritis and Cartilage, 23, 1605–1612.
Burdyga, G., Lal, S., Varro, A., Dimaline, R., Thompson, D. G., and Dockray, G. 
J. 2004. Expression of cannabinoid CB1 receptors by vagal afferent neurons  
is inhibited by cholecystokinin. Journal of Neuroscience 24 (11), 2708–2715. doi: 
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5404-03.2004
Burston, J. J., Sagar, D. R., Shao, P., Bai, M., King, E., Brailsford, L., et al. 2013. 
Cannabinoid CB2 receptors regulate central sensitization and pain responses 
associated with osteoarthritis of the knee joint. PLoS One 8 (11), e80440. 
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080440
Busquets-Garcia, A., Puighermanal, E., Pastor, A., de la Torre, R., Maldonado, R., 
and Ozaita, A. 2011. Differential role of anandamide and 2-arachidonoylglycerol 
in memory and anxiety-like responses. Biological Psychiatry 70 (5), 479–486. 
doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2011.04.022
Campolongo, P., Roozendaal, B., Trezza, V., Cuomo, V., Astarita, G., Fu, J.,  
et al. 2009. Fat-induced satiety factor oleoylethanolamide enhances memory 
consolidation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106 (19), 8027–
8031. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0903038106
Campolongo, P., Roozendaal, B., Trezza, V., Hauer, D., Schelling, G., McGaugh, J. 
L., et al. 2009. Endocannabinoids in the rat basolateral amygdala enhance 
memory consolidation and enable glucocorticoid modulation of memory. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106 (12), 4888–4893. 
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0900835106
Campos, A. C., and Guimaraes, F. S. 2008. Involvement of 5HT1A receptors in 
the anxiolytic-like effects of cannabidiol injected into the dorsolateral 
periaqueductal gray of rats. Psychopharmacology 199 (2), 223–230. doi: 10.1007/
s00213-008-1168-x
Campos, A. C., and Guimaraes, F. S. 2009. Evidence for a potential role for 
TRPV1 receptors in the dorsolateral periaqueductal gray in the attenuation of the 
anxiolytic effects of cannabinoids. Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & 
Biological Psychiatry 33 (8), 1517–1521. doi: 10.1016/j.pnpbp.2009.08.017
Cannabis-In-Cachexia-Study-Group, Strasser, F., Luftner, D., Possinger, K., Ernst, 
G., Ruhstaller, T., et al. (2006). Comparison of orally administered cannabis 
extract and delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol in treating patients with cancer-related 
anorexia-cachexia syndrome: A multicenter, phase III, randomized, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled clinical trial from the Cannabis-In-Cachexia-Study-Group. 
Journal of Clinical Oncology, 24(21), 3394–3400. doi:10.1200/JCO.2005
.05.1847.

184    References
Cardinal, P., Bellocchio, L., Clark, S., Cannich, A., Klugmann, M., Lutz, B., et al. 
2012. Hypothalamic CB1 cannabinoid receptors regulate energy balance in mice. 
Endocrinology 153 (9), 4136–4143. doi: 10.1210/en.2012-1405
Carter, G. T., Weydt, P., Kyashna-Tocha, M., and Abrams, D. I. 2004. Medicinal 
cannabis: Rational guidelines for dosing. IDrugs 7 (5), 464–470.
Caspi, A., Moffitt, T. E., Cannon, M., McClay, J., Murray, R., Harrington, H.,  
et al. 2005. Moderation of the effect of adolescent-onset cannabis use on adult 
psychosis by a functional polymorphism in the catechol-O-methyltransferase 
gene: Longitudinal evidence of a gene X environment interaction. Biological 
Psychiatry 57 (10), 1117–1127. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2005.01.026
Castle, D. J. 2013. Cannabis and psychosis: What causes what? F1000 Medicine 
Reports 5, 1. doi: 10.3410/M5-1
Cechetto, D. F., and Saper, C. B. 1987. Evidence for a viscerotopic sensory 
representation in the cortex and thalamus in the rat. Journal of Comparative 
Neurology 262 (1), 27–45.
Chaperon, F., Soubrie, P., Puech, A. J., and Thiebot, M. H. 1998. Involvement of 
central cannabinoid (CB1) receptors in the establishment of place conditioning in 
rats. Psychopharmacology 135 (4), 324–332.
Cheah, B. C., Vucic, S., Krishnan, A. V., and Kiernan, M. C. 2010. Riluzole, 
neuroprotection and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Current Medicinal Chemistry 
17 (18), 1942–1959.
Cheetham, A., Allen, N. B., Whittle, S., Simmons, J. G., Yucel, M., and Lubman, 
D. I. 2012. Orbitofrontal volumes in early adolescence predict initiation of 
cannabis use: A 4-year longitudinal and prospective study. Biological Psychiatry 
71 (8), 684–692. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2011.10.029
Chen, J. J., Ondo, W. G., Dashtipour, K., and Swope, D. M. 2012. Tetrabenazine 
for the treatment of hyperkinetic movement disorders: A review of the literature. 
Clinical Therapeutics 34 (7), 1487–1504. doi: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2012.06
.010
Chen, R., Zhang, J., Fan, N., Teng, Z. Q., Wu, Y., Yang, H., et al. 2013. Delta9-
THC-caused synaptic and memory impairments are mediated through COX-2 
signaling. Cell 155 (5), 1154–1165. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.10.042
Chesher, G. B., Jackson, D. M., and Malor, R. M. 1975. Interaction of delta9-
tetrahydrocannabinol and cannabidiol with phenobarbitone in protecting mice 
from electrically induced convulsions. Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology 
27 (8), 608–609.
Chesher, G. B., Jackson, D. M., and Starmer, G. A. 1974. Interaction of cannabis 
and general anaesthetic agents in mice. British Journal of Pharmacology 50 (4), 
593–599.
Chhatwal, J. P., Davis, M., Maguschak, K. A., and Ressler, K. J. 2005. Enhancing 
cannabinoid neurotransmission augments the extinction of conditioned fear. 
Neuropsychopharmacology 30 (3), 516–524. doi: 10.1038/sj.npp.1300655
www.ebook3000.com

References    185
Chouker, A., Kaufmann, I., Kreth, S., Hauer, D., Feuerecker, M., Thieme, D.,  
et al. 2010. Motion sickness, stress and the endocannabinoid system. PLoS One 
5 (5), e10752. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010752
Christensen, R., Kristensen, P. K., Bartels, E. M., Bliddal, H., and Astrup, A. 2007. 
Efficacy and safety of the weight-loss drug rimonabant: A meta-analysis of 
randomised trials. Lancet 370 (9600), 1706–1713. doi: 10.1016/S0140-
6736(07)61721-8
Chrousos, G. P. 2009. Stress and disorders of the stress system. Nature Reviews. 
Endocrinology 5 (7), 374–381. doi: 10.1038/nrendo.2009.106
Clapper, J. R., Moreno-Sanz, G., Russo, R., Guijarro, A., Vacondio, F., Duranti, 
A., et al. 2010. Anandamide suppresses pain initiation through a peripheral 
endocannabinoid mechanism. Nature Neuroscience 13 (10), 1265–1270. doi: 
10.1038/nn.2632
Colasanti, B. K., Lindamood, C., and Craig, C. R. 1982. Effects of marihuana 
cannabinoids on seizure activity in cobalt-epileptic rats. Pharmacology, 
Biochemistry, and Behavior 16 (4), 573–578.
Comelli, F., Giagnoni, G., Bettoni, I., Colleoni, M., and Costa, B. 2008. 
Antihyperalgesic effect of a Cannabis sativa extract in a rat model of neuropathic 
pain: Mechanisms involved. Phytotherapy Researc, 22 (8), 1017–1024. doi: 
10.1002/ptr.2401
Compston, A., and Coles, A. 2008. Multiple sclerosis. Lancet 372 (9648), 1502–
1517. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(08)61620-7
Consroe, P., Laguna, J., Allender, J., Snider, S., Stern, L., Sandyk, R., et al. 1991. 
Controlled clinical trial of cannabidiol in Huntington’s disease. Pharmacology, 
Biochemistry, and Behavior 40 (3), 701–708.
Consroe, P., Musty, R., Rein, J., Tillery, W., and Pertwee, R. 1997. The perceived 
effects of smoked cannabis on patients with multiple sclerosis. European 
Neurology 38 (1), 44–48.
Consroe, P. F., Wood, G. C., and Buchsbaum, H. 1975. Anticonvulsant nature of 
marihuana smoking. Journal of the American Medical Association 234 (3), 306–
307.
Contreras, M., Ceric, F., and Torrealba, F. 2007. Inactivation of the interoceptive 
insula disrupts drug craving and malaise induced by lithium. Science 318 (5850), 
655–658.
Corcoran, L., Roche, M., and Finn, D. P. 2015. The role of the brain’s 
endocannabinoid system in pain and its modulation by stress. International 
Review of Neurobiology 125, 203–255. doi: 10.1016/bs.irn.2015.10.003
Costa, B., and Comelli, F. 2014. Pain. In Handbook of Cannabis, ed. R. G. 
Pertwee. Oxford University Press.
Costa, B., Giagnoni, G., Franke, C., Trovato, A. E., and Colleoni, M. 2004. 
Vanilloid TRPV1 receptor mediates the antihyperalgesic effect of the 
nonpsychoactive cannabinoid, cannabidiol, in a rat model of acute inflammation. 
British Journal of Pharmacology 143 (2), 247–250. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjp.0705920

186    References
Costall, B., Domeney, A. M., Naylor, R. J., and Tattersall, F. D. 1986. 
5-Hydroxytryptamine M-receptor antagonism to prevent cisplatin-induced 
emesis. Neuropharmacology 25 (8), 959–961.
Costas, J., Sanjuan, J., Ramos-Rios, R., Paz, E., Agra, S., Tolosa, A., et al. 2011. 
Interaction between COMT haplotypes and cannabis in schizophrenia: A case-
only study in two samples from Spain. Schizophrenia Research 127 (1–3), 22–27. 
doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2011.01.014
Cox, M. L., Haller, V. L., and Welch, S. P. 2007. The antinociceptive effect of Delta 
9-tetrahydrocannabinol in the arthritic rat invovles the CB2 cannabinoid receptor. 
European Journal of Pharmacology 570 (1–3), 50–56.
Cravatt, B. F., Giang, D. K., Mayfield, S. P., Boger, D. L., Lerner, R. A., and Gilula, 
N. B. 1996. Molecular characterization of an enzyme that degrades 
neuromodulatory fatty-acid amides. Nature 384 (6604), 83–87.
Crews, F., He, J., and Hodge, C. 2007. Adolescent cortical development: A critical 
period of vulnerability for addiction. Pharmacology, Biochemistry, and Behavior 
86 (2), 189–199. doi: 10.1016/j.pbb.2006.12.001
Cridge, B. J., and Rosengren, R. J. 2013. Critical appraisal of the potential use of 
cannabinoids in cancer management. Cancer Management and Research 5, 301–
313. doi: 10.2147/CMAR.S36105
Cristino, L., and Di Marzo, V. 2015. Established and emerging conceptos of 
cannabinoid action on food intake and their potential application to the treatment 
of anorexia and cachexia. In Handbook of Cannabis, ed. R. G. Pertwee. Oxford 
University Press.
Cross-Mellor, S. K., Ossenkopp, K. P., Piomelli, D., and Parker, L. A. 2007. Effects 
of the FAAH inhibitor, URB597, and anandamide on lithium-induced taste 
reactivity responses: A measure of nausea in the rat. Psychopharmacology 190 
(2), 135–143.
Cunha, J. M., Carlini, E. A., Pereira, A. E., Ramos, O. L., Pimentel, C., Gagliardi, 
R., et al. 1980. Chronic administration of cannabidiol to healthy volunteers and 
epileptic patients. Pharmacology 21 (3), 175–185.
Cunningham, C. L., Martinez-Cerdeno, V., and Noctor, S. C. 2013. Microglia 
regulate the number of neural precursor cells in the developing cerebral cortex. 
Journal of Neuroscience 33 (10), 4216–4233. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI
.3441-12.2013
Curran, H. V., Brignell, C., Fletcher, S., Middleton, P., and Henry, J. 2002. 
Cognitive and subjective dose-response effects of acute oral Delta 9- 
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) in infrequent cannabis users. Psychopharmacology 
164 (1), 61–70. doi: 10.1007/s00213-002-1169-0
Curran, H. V., Freeman, T. P., Mokrysz, C., Lewis, D. A., Morgan, C. J., and 
Parsons, L. H. 2016. Keep off the grass? Cannabis, cognition and addiction. 
Nature Reviews Neuroscience 17 (5), 293–306. doi: 10.1038/nrn.2016.28
Curtis, A., Mitchell, I., Patel, S., Ives, N., and Rickards, H. 2009. A pilot study 
using nabilone for symptomatic treatment in Huntington’s disease. Movement 
Disorders 24 (15), 2254–2259. doi: 10.1002/mds.22809
www.ebook3000.com

References    187
Curtis, A., and Rickards, H. 2006. Nabilone could treat chorea and irritability in 
Huntington’s disease. Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences 18 
(4), 553–554. doi: 10.1176/jnp.2006.18.4.553
D’Addario, C., Micioni Di Bonaventura, M. V., Pucci, M., Romano, A., Gaetani, 
S., Ciccocioppo, R., et al. 2014. Endocannabinoid signaling and food addiction. 
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 47, 203–224. doi: 10.1016/j.
neubiorev.2014.08.008
Darmani, N. A. 2001a. Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol differentially suppresses 
cisplatin-induced emesis and indices of motor function via cannabinoid CB (1) 
receptors in the least shrew. Pharmacology, Biochemistry, and Behavior 69 (1–2), 
239–249.
Darmani, N. A. 2001b. Delta (9)-tetrahydrocannabinol and synthetic cannabinoids 
prevent emesis produced by the cannabinoid CB (1) receptor antagonist/inverse 
agonist SR 141716A. Neuropsychopharmacology 24 (2), 198–203. doi: 10.1016/
S0893-133X(00)00197-4
Das, R. K., Kamboj, S. K., Ramadas, M., Yogan, K., Gupta, V., Redman, E.,  
et al. 2013. Cannabidiol enhances consolidation of explicit fear extinction  
in humans. Psychopharmacology 226 (4), 781–792. doi: 10.1007/s00213
-012-2955-y
de Boer-Dennert, M., de Wit, R., Schmitz, P. I., Djontono, J., v Beurden, V., Stoter, 
G., et al. (1997). Patient perceptions of the side-effects of chemotherapy: The 
influence of 5HT3 antagonists. British Journal of Cancer, 76(8), 1055–1061.
Decoster, J., van Os, J., Kenis, G., Henquet, C., Peuskens, J., De Hert, M., et al. 
2011. Age at onset of psychotic disorder: Cannabis, BDNF Val66Met, and sex-
specific models of gene-environment interaction. American Journal of Medical 
Genetics. Part B, Neuropsychiatric Genetics 156B (3), 363–369. doi: 10.1002/
ajmg.b.31174
Degenhardt, L., Hall, W., and Lynskey, M. 2003. Testing hypotheses about  
the relationship between cannabis use and psychosis. Drug and Alcohol 
Dependence 71 (1), 37–48.
De Marchi, N., De Petrocellis, L., Orlando, P., Daniele, F., Fezza, F., and Di Marzo, 
V. 2003. Endocannabinoid signalling in the blood of patients with schizophrenia. 
Lipids in Health and Disease 2, 5. doi: 10.1186/1476-511X-2-5
Deng, L., Cornett, B. L., Mackie, K., and Hohmann, A. G. 2015. CB1 knockout 
mice unveil sustained CB2-mediated antiallodynic effects of the mixed CB1/CB2 
agonist CP55,940 in a mouse model of paclitaxel-induced neuropathic pain. 
Molecular Pharmacology 88 (1), 64–74. doi: 10.1124/mol.115.098483
Denson, T. F., and Earleywine, M. 2006. Decreased depression in marijuana users. 
Addictive Behaviors 31 (4), 738–742. doi: 10.1016/j.addbeh.2005.05.052
Derocq, J. M., Bouaboula, M., Marchand, J., Rinaldi-Carmona, M., Segui, M., 
and Casellas, P. 1998. The endogenous cannabinoid anandamide is a lipid 
messenger activating cell growth via a cannabinoid receptor-independent pathway 
in hematopoietic cell lines. FEBS Letters 425 (3), 419–425.

188    References
Despres, J. P., Golay, A., and Sjöström, L. 2005. Effects of rimonabant on 
metabolic risk factors in overweight patients with dyslipidemia. New England 
Journal of Medicine 353 (20), 2121–2134. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa044537
Desroches, J., Guindon, J., Lambert, C., and Beaulieu, P. 2008. Modulation  
of the anti-nociceptive effects of 2-arachidonoyl glycerol by peripherally 
administered FAAH and MGL inhibitors in a neuropathic pain model. British 
Journal of Pharmacology 155 (6), 913–924. doi: 10.1038/bjp.2008.322
Devane, W. A., Dysarz, F. A., Johnson, M. R., Melvin, L. S., and Howlett, A. C. 
1988. Determination and characterization of a cannabinoid receptor in rat brain. 
Molecular Pharmacology 34 (5), 605–613.
Devane, W. A., Hanus, L., Breuer, A., Pertwee, R. G., Stevenson, L. A., Griffin, G., 
et al. 1992. Isolation and structure of a brain constituent that binds to the 
cannabinoid receptor. Science 258 (5090), 1946–1949.
Deveaux, V., Cadoudal, T., Ichigotani, Y., Teixeira-Clerc, F., Louvet, A.,  
Manin, S., et al. 2009. Cannabinoid CB2 receptor potentiates obesity-associated 
inflammation, insulin resistance and hepatic steatosis. PLoS One 4 (6), e5844. 
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005844
Devinsky, O., Cilio, M. R., Cross, H., Fernandez-Ruiz, J., French, J., Hill, C.,  
et al. 2014. Cannabidiol: Pharmacology and potential therapeutic role in epilepsy 
and other neuropsychiatric disorders. Epilepsia 55 (6), 791–802. doi: 10.1111/
epi.12631
Devinsky, O., Marsh, E., Friedman, D., Thiele, E., Laux, L., Sullivan, J., et al. 
2016. Cannabidiol in patients with treatment-resistant epilepsy: An open-label 
interventional trial. Lancet Neurology 15 (3), 270–278. doi: 10.1016/S1474-
4422(15)00379-8
Di Forti, M., Iyegbe, C., Sallis, H., Kolliakou, A., Falcone, M. A., Paparelli, A.,  
et al. 2012. Confirmation that the AKT1 (rs2494732) genotype influences the risk 
of psychosis in cannabis users. Biological Psychiatry 72 (10), 811–816. 
doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2012.06.020
Di Forti, M., Morgan, C., Dazzan, P., Pariante, C., Mondelli, V., Marques, T. R., 
et al. 2009. High-potency cannabis and the risk of psychosis. British Journal of 
Psychiatry 195 (6), 488–491. doi: 10.1192/bjp.bp.109.064220
Di Forti, M., Morrison, P. D., Butt, A., and Murray, R. M. 2007. Cannabis use and 
psychiatric and cogitive disorders: The chicken or the egg? Current Opinion in 
Psychiatry 20 (3), 228–234. doi: 10.1097/YCO.0b013e3280fa838e
Di Marzo, V., Blumberg, P. M., and Szallasi, A. 2002. Endovanilloid signaling in 
pain. Current Opinion in Neurobiology 12 (4), 372–379.
Di Marzo, V., Goparaju, S. K., Wang, L., Liu, J., Batkai, S., Jarai, Z., et al. 2001. 
Leptin-regulated endocannabinoids are involved in maintaining food intake. 
Nature 410 (6830), 822–825. doi: 10.1038/35071088
Dincheva, I., Drysdale, A. T., Hartley, C. A., Johnson, D. C., Jing, D., King, E. C., 
et al. 2015. FAAH genetic variation enhances fronto-amygdala function in mouse 
and human. Nature Communications 6, 6395. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7395
www.ebook3000.com

References    189
Dinh, T. P., Kathuria, S., and Piomelli, D. 2004. RNA interference suggests  
a primary role for monoacylglycerol lipase in the degradation of the 
endocannabinoid 2-arachidonoylglycerol. Molecular Pharmacology 66 (5), 
1260–1264.
Dregan, A., and Gulliford, M. C. 2012. Is illicit drug use harmful to cognitive 
functioning in the midadult years? A cohort-based investigation. American 
Journal of Epidemiology 175 (3), 218–227. doi: 10.1093/aje/kwr315
D’Souza, D. C. 2007. Cannabinoids and psychosis. International Review of 
Neurobiology 78, 289–326. doi: 10.1016/S0074-7742(06)78010-2
D’Souza, D. C., Abi-Saab, W. M., Madonick, S., Forselius-Bielen, K.,  
Doersch, A., Braley, G., et al. 2005. Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol effects in 
schizophrenia: Implications for cognition, psychosis, and addiction. Biological 
Psychiatry 57 (6), 594–608. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2004.12.006
D’Souza, D. C., Cortes-Briones, J. A., Ranganathan, M., Thurnauer, H., Creatura, 
G., Surti, T., et al. 2016. Rapid changes in CB1 receptor availability in cannabis 
dependent males after abstinence from cannabis. Biol Psychiatry Cogn Neurosci 
Neuroimaging 1 (1), 60–67. doi: 10.1016/j.bpsc.2015.09.008
D’Souza, D. C., Perry, E., MacDougall, L., Ammerman, Y., Cooper, T.,  
Wu, Y. T., et al. 2004. The psychotomimetic effects of intravenous delta-9-
tetrahydrocannabinol in healthy individuals: Implications for psychosis. 
Neuropsychopharmacology 29 (8), 1558–1572. doi: 10.1038/sj.npp.1300496
Duran, M., Perez, E., Abanades, S., Vidal, X., Saura, C., Majem, M., et al. 2010. 
Preliminary efficacy and safety of an oromucosal standardized cannabis extract 
in chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting. British Journal of Clinical 
Pharmacology 70 (5), 656–663. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2125.2010.03743.x
Dyson, A., Peacock, M., Chen, A., et al. 2005. Antihyperalgesic properties of the 
cannabinoid CT-3 in chronic neuropathic and inflammatory pain states in the rat. 
Pain 116 (1–2), 129–137.
Earleywine, M., and Barnwell, S. S. 2007. Decreased respiratory symptoms in 
cannabis users who vaporize. Harm Reduction Journal 4, 11. doi: 10.1186/1477-
7517-4-11
Ellis, R. J., Toperoff, W., Vaida, F., van den Brande, G., Gonzales, J., Gouaux, B., 
et al. 2009. Smoked medicinal cannabis for neuropathic pain in HIV: A 
randomized, crossover clinical trial. Neuropsychopharmacology 34 (3), 672–680. 
doi: 10.1038/npp.2008.120
El-Remessy, A. B., Khalil, I. E., Matragoon, S., Abou-Mohamed, G., Tsai, N. J., 
Roon, P., et al. 2003. Neuroprotective effect of (-)Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol 
and cannabidiol in N-methyl-D-aspartate-induced retinal neurotoxicity: 
Involvement of peroxynitrite. American Journal of Pathology 163 (5), 1997–
2008.
ElSohly, M. A., Mehmedic, Z., Foster, S., Gon, C., Chandra, S., and Church, J. C. 
2016. Changes in cannabis potency over the last 2 decades (1995–2014): Analysis 

190    References
of current data in the United States. Biological Psychiatry 79 (7), 613–619. doi: 
10.1016/j.biopsych.2016.01.004
ElSohly, M., and Gul, W. 2014. Constituents of Cannabis sativa. In Handbook of 
Cannabis, ed. R. G. Pertwee. Oxford University Press.
Farrimond, J. A., Whalley, B. J., and Williams, C. M. 2012. Cannabinol and 
cannabidiol exert opposing effects on rat feeding patterns. Psychopharmacology 
223 (1), 117–129. doi: 10.1007/s00213-012-2697-x
Fegley, D., Gaetani, S., Duranti, A., Tontini, A., Mor, M., Tarzia, G., et al. 2005. 
Characterization of the fatty acid amide hydrolase inhibitor cyclohexyl carbamic 
acid 3′-carbamoyl-biphenyl-3-yl ester (URB597): Effects on anandamide and 
oleoylethanolamide deactivation. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental 
Therapeutics 313 (1), 352–358. doi: 10.1124/jpet.104.078980
Feinberg, I., Jones, R., Walker, J., Cavness, C., and Floyd, T. 1976. Effects of 
marijuana extract and tetrahydrocannabinol on electroencephalographic sleep 
patterns. Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics 19 (6), 782–794.
Feinberg, I., Jones, R., Walker, J. M., Cavness, C., and March, J. 1975. Effects of 
high dosage delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol on sleep patterns in man. Clinical 
Pharmacology and Therapeutics 17 (4), 458–466.
Fergusson, D. M., Horwood, L. J., and Ridder, E. M. 2005. Tests of causal linkages 
between cannabis use and psychotic symptoms. Addiction 100 (3), 354–366. doi: 
10.1111/j.1360-0443.2005.01001.x
Fernandez-Ruiz, J. 2009. The endocannabinoid system as a target for the 
treatment of motor dysfunction. British Journal of Pharmacology 156 (7), 1029–
1040. doi: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2008.00088.x
Fernandez-Ruiz, J., deLago, E., Gomez-Ruiz, M., Garcia, C., Sagredo, O., and 
Garcia-Arencibia, M. 2014. Neurodegenerative disorders other than multiple 
sclerosis. In Handbook of Cannabis, ed. R. G. Pertwee. Oxford University 
Press.
Fernandez-Ruiz, J., Garcia, C., Sagredo, O., Gomez-Ruiz, M., and de Lago, E. 
2010. The endocannabinoid system as a target for the treatment of neuronal 
damage. Expert Opinion on Therapeutic Targets 14 (4), 387–404. doi: 
10.1517/14728221003709792
Fernandez-Ruiz, J., & Gonzales, S. (2005). Cannabinoid control of motor 
function at the basal ganglia. Handbook of Experimental Pharmacology, 168, 
479–507.
Fernandez-Ruiz, J., Romero, J., Velasco, G., Tolon, R. M., Ramos, J. A., and 
Guzman, M. 2007. Cannabinoid CB2 receptor: A new target for controlling 
neural cell survival? Trends in Pharmacological Sciences 28 (1), 39–45. 
doi: 10.1016/j.tips.2006.11.001
Fernandez-Ruiz, J., Sagredo, O., Pazos, M. R., Garcia, C., Pertwee, R., Mechoulam, 
R., et al. 2013. Cannabidiol for neurodegenerative disorders: Important new 
clinical applications for this phytocannabinoid? British Journal of Clinical 
Pharmacology 75 (2), 323–333. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2125.2012.04341.x
www.ebook3000.com

References    191
Filbey, F. M., Aslan, S., Calhoun, V. D., Spence, J. S., Damaraju, E., Caprihan, A., 
et al. 2014. Long-term effects of marijuana use on the brain. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences 111 (47), 16913–16918. doi: 10.1073/
pnas.1415297111
Filbey, F. M., Schacht, J. P., Myers, U. S., Chavez, R. S., and Hutchison, K. E. 2009. 
Marijuana craving in the brain. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
106 (31), 13016–13021. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0903863106
Filloux, F. M. 2015. Cannabinoids for pediatric epilepsy? Up in smoke or real 
science? Translational Pediatrics 4 (4), 271–282. doi: 10.3978/j.issn.2224-
4336.2015.10.03
Fine, P. G. 2012. Treatment guidelines for the pharmacological management of 
pain in older persons. Pain Medicine 13 (supplement 2), S57–S66. doi: 10.1111/
j.1526-4637.2011.01307.x
Fisher, R. S. 2012. Therapeutic devices for epilepsy. Annals of Neurology 71 (2), 
157–168. doi: 10.1002/ana.22621
Foltin, R. W., Brady, J. V., and Fischman, M. W. 1986. Behavioral analysis of 
marijuana effects on food intake in humans. Pharmacology, Biochemistry, and 
Behavior 25 (3), 577–582.
Foltin, R. W., Fischman, M. W., and Byrne, M. F. 1988. Effects of smoked 
marijuana on food intake and body weight of humans living in a residential 
laboratory. Appetite 11 (1), 1–14.
Forget, B., Coen, K. M., and Le Foll, B. 2009. Inhibition of fatty acid amide 
hydrolase reduces reinstatement of nicotine seeking but not break point for 
nicotine self-administration: Comparison with CB (1) receptor blockade. 
Psychopharmacology 205 (4), 613–624. doi: 10.1007/s00213-009-1569-5
Forget, B., Guranda, M., Gamaleddin, I., Goldberg, S. R., and Le Foll, B. 2016. 
Attenuation of cue-induced reinstatement of nicotine seeking by URB597 through 
cannabinoid CB receptor in rats. Psychopharmacology. doi: 10.1007/s00213-
016-4232-y
Formukong, E. A., Evans, A. T., and Evans, F. J. 1988. Analgesic and 
antiinflammatory activity of constituents of Cannabis sativa L. Inflammation 12 
(4), 361–371.
Fowler, C. J. 2015. The potential of inhibitors of endocannabinoid metabolism 
for drug development: A critical review. In R. G. Pertwee (Ed.), Endocannabinoids. 
Springer.
Fraser, G. A. 2009. The use of a synthetic cannabinoid in the management of 
treatment-resistant nightmares in posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). CNS 
Neuroscience & Therapeutics 15 (1), 84–88. doi: 10.1111/j.1755-5949.2008
.00071.x
Freeman, T. P., Morgan, C. J., Hindocha, C., Schafer, G., Das, R. K., and Curran, 
H. V. 2014. Just say ‘know’: How do cannabinoid concentrations influence users’ 
estimates of cannabis potency and the amount they roll in joints? Addiction 109 
(10), 1686–1694. doi: 10.1111/add.12634

192    References
Fride, E., Ginzburg, Y., Breuer, A., Bisogno, T., Di Marzo, V., and Mechoulam, R. 
2001. Critical role of the endogenous cannabinoid system in mouse pup suckling 
and growth. European Journal of Pharmacology 419 (2–3), 207–214.
Fried, P. A., Watkinson, B., and Gray, R. 2005. Neurocognitive consequences of 
marihuana—a comparison with pre-drug performance. Neurotoxicology and 
Teratology 27 (2), 231–239. doi: 10.1016/j.ntt.2004.11.003
Frieling, H., Albrecht, H., Jedtberg, S., Gozner, A., Lenz, B., Wilhelm, J., et al. 
2009. Elevated cannabinoid 1 receptor mRNA is linked to eating disorder related 
behavior and attitudes in females with eating disorders. Psychoneuroendocrinology 
34 (4), 620–624. doi: 10.1016/j.psyneuen.2008.10.014
Frisher, M., Crome, I., Martino, O., and Croft, P. 2009. Assessing the impact of 
cannabis use on trends in diagnosed schizophrenia in the United Kingdom from 
1996 to 2005. Schizophrenia Research 113 (2–3), 123–128. doi: 10.1016/j.
schres.2009.05.031
Fu, J., Bottegoni, G., Sasso, O., Bertorelli, R., Rocchia, W., Masetti, M., et al. 
2012. A catalytically silent FAAH-1 variant drives anandamide transport in 
neurons. Nature Neuroscience 15 (1), 64–69.
Fusar-Poli, P., Crippa, J. A., Bhattacharyya, S., Borgwardt, S. J., Allen, P., Martin-
Santos, R., et al. 2009. Distinct effects of {delta}9-tetrahydrocannabinol and 
cannabidiol on neural activation during emotional processing. Archives of 
General Psychiatry 66 (1), 95–105. doi: 10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2008.519
Fuss, J., Steinle, J., Bindila, L., Auer, M. K., Kirchherr, H., Lutz, B., et al. (2015). A 
runner’s high depends on cannabinoid receptors in mice. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 112(42), 13105–
13108. doi:10.1073/pnas.151996112.
Gage, S. H., Hickman, M., and Zammit, S. 2016. Association between cannabis 
and psychosis: Epidemiologic evidence. Biological Psychiatry 79 (7), 549–556. 
doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2015.08.001
Gage, S. H., Munafo, M. R., MacLeod, J., Hickman, M., and Smith, G. D. 2015. 
Cannabis and psychosis. Lancet. Psychiatry 2 (5), 380. doi: 10.1016/S2215-
0366(15)00108-X
Gage, S. H., Zammit, S., and Hickman, M. 2013. Stronger evidence is  
needed before accepting that cannabis plays an important role in the aetiology  
of schizophrenia in the population. F1000 Medicine Reports 5, 2. doi: 10.3410/
M5-2
Gallate, J. E., and McGregor, I. S. 1999. The motivation for beer in rats: Effects of 
ritanserin, naloxone and SR 141716. Psychopharmacology 142 (3), 302–308.
Gallate, J. E., Saharov, T., Mallet, P. E., and McGregor, I. S. 1999. Increased 
motivation for beer in rats following administration of a cannabinoid CB1 
receptor agonist. European Journal of Pharmacology 370 (3), 233–240.
Gaoni, Y., and Mechoulam, R. 1964a. Isolation, structure, and partial synthesis 
of an active constituent of hashish. Journal of the American Chemical Society 86, 
1646–1647.
www.ebook3000.com

References    193
Gaoni, Y., & Mechoulam, R. 1964b. The structure and synthesis of cannabigerol, 
a new hashish constituent. Proceedings of the Chemical Society, 82.
Garcia, C., Palomo-Garo, C., Garcia-Arencibia, M., Ramos, J., Pertwee, R., and 
Fernandez-Ruiz, J. 2011. Symptom-relieving and neuroprotective effects of the 
phytocannabinoid Delta (9)-THCV in animal models of Parkinson’s disease. 
British Journal of Pharmacology 163 (7), 1495–1506. doi: 10.1111/j.1476
-5381.2011.01278.x
Garcia-Arencibia, M., Garcia, C., and Fernandez-Ruiz, J. 2009. Cannabinoids 
and Parkinson’s disease. CNS & Neurological Disorders—Drug Targets 8 (6), 
432–439.
Gardner, E. L. 2005. Endocannabinoid signaling system and brain reward: 
Emphasis on dopamine. Pharmacology, Biochemistry, and Behavior 81 (2), 263–
284. doi: 10.1016/j.pbb.2005.01.032
Gates, P. J., Albertella, L., and Copeland, J. 2014. The effects of cannabinoid 
administration on sleep: A systematic review of human studies. Sleep Medicine 
Reviews 18 (6), 477–487. doi: 10.1016/j.smrv.2014.02.005
Gerard, N., Pieters, G., Goffin, K., Bormans, G., and Van Laere, K. 2011. Brain 
type 1 cannabinoid receptor availability in patients with anorexia and bulimia 
nervosa. Biological Psychiatry 70 (8), 777–784. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2011
.05.010
Gerostamoulos, D., Drummer, O. H., and Woodford, N. W. 2015. Deaths linked 
to synthetic cannabinoids. Forensic Science, Medicine, and Pathology 11 (3), 478. 
doi: 10.1007/s12024-015-9669-5
Gertsch, J., Leonti, M., Raduner, S., Racz, I., Chen, J. Z., Xie, X. Q., et al. 2008. 
Beta-caryophyllene is a dietary cannabinoid. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences 105 (26), 9099–9104. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0803601105
Ghosh, P., and Bhattacharya, S. K. 1978. Anticonvulsant action of cannabis in the 
rat: Role of brain monoamines. Psychopharmacology 59 (3), 293–297.
Ghosh, S., Kinsey, S. G., Liu, Q. S., Hruba, L., McMahon, L. R., Grim, T. W.,  
et al. 2015. Full Fatty Acid Amide Hydrolase Inhibition Combined with Partial 
Monoacylglycerol Lipase Inhibition: Augmented and Sustained Antinociceptive 
Effects with Reduced Cannabimimetic Side Effects in Mice. Journal of 
Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics 354 (2), 111–120. doi: 10.1124/
jpet.115.222851
Gieringer, D., St Laurent, J., and Goodrich, S. 2004. Cannabis vaporizer combines 
efficent delivery of THC with effective suppression of pryolytic compounds. 
Journal of Cannabis Therapeutics 4, 7–27.
Gill, E. W. 1971. Propyl homologue of tetrahydrocannabinol: Its isolation from 
cannabis, properties, and synthesis. Journal of the Chemical Society, Section C: 
Organic, 579–582.
Gilman, J. M., Kuster, J. K., Lee, S., Lee, M. J., Kim, B. W., Makris, N., et al. 2014. 
Cannabis use is quantitatively associated with nucleus accumbens and amygdala 
abnormalities in young adult recreational users. Journal of Neuroscience 34 (16), 
5529–5538. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4745-13.2014

194    References
Giuffrida, A., Leweke, F. M., Gerth, C. W., Schreiber, D., Koethe, D., Faulhaber, J., 
et al. 2004. Cerebrospinal anandamide levels are elevated in acute schizophrenia 
and are inversely correlated with psychotic symptoms. Neuropsychopharmacology 
29 (11), 2108–2114. doi: 10.1038/sj.npp.1300558
Gomes, F. V., Alves, F. H., Guimaraes, F. S., Correa, F. M., Resstel, L. B., and 
Crestani, C. C. 2013. Cannabidiol administration into the bed nucleus of the stria 
terminalis alters cardiovascular responses induced by acute restraint stress 
through 5-HT (1)A receptor. European Neuropsychopharmacology 23 (9), 
1096–1104. doi: 10.1016/j.euroneuro.2012.09.007
Gomez, R., Navarro, M., Ferrer, B., Trigo, J. M., Bilbao, A., Del Arco, I., et al. 
2002. A peripheral mechanism for CB1 cannabinoid receptor-dependent 
modulation of feeding. Journal of Neuroscience 22 (21), 9612–9617.
Gonzalez, S., Cebeira, M., and Fernandez-Ruiz, J. 2005. Cannabinoid tolerance 
and dependence: A review of studies in laboratory animals. Pharmacology, 
Biochemistry, and Behavior 81 (2), 300–318. doi: 10.1016/j.pbb.2005.01.028
Goonawardena, A. V., Robinson, L., Hampson, R. E., and Riedel, G. 2010. 
Cannabinoid and cholinergic systems interact during performance of a  
short-term memory task in the rat. Learning & Memory 17 (10), 502–511. 
doi: 10.1101/lm.1893710
Gorzalka, B. B., Hill, M. N., and Chang, S. C. 2010. Male-female differences in 
the effects of cannabinoids on sexual behavior and gonadal hormone function. 
Hormones and Behavior 58 (1), 91–99. doi: 10.1016/j.yhbeh.2009.08.009
Grant, I., Gonzalez, R., Carey, C. L., Natarajan, L., and Wolfson, T. 2003. Non-
acute (residual) neurocognitive effects of cannabis use: A meta-analytic study. 
Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society 9 (5), 679–689. doi: 
10.1017/S1355617703950016
Gregg, L. C., Jung, K. M., Spradley, J. M., Nyilas, R., Suplita, R. L., II, Zimmer, 
A., et al. 2012. Activation of type 5 metabotropic glutamate receptors and 
diacylglycerol lipase-alpha initiates 2-arachidonoylglycerol formation and 
endocannabinoid-mediated analgesia. Journal of Neuroscience 32 (28), 9457–
9468. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0013-12.2012
Grill, H. J., and Norgren, R. 1978. The taste reactivity test. I. Mimetic responses 
to gustatory stimuli in neurologically normal rats. Brain Research 143 (2), 263–
279.
Grinspoon, L., and Bakalar, J. B. 1997. Marihuana, the Forbidden Medicine. Yale 
University Press.
Gross, D. W., Hamm, J., Ashworth, N. L., and Quigley, D. 2004. Marijuana use 
and epilepsy: Prevalence in patients of a tertiary care epilepsy center. Neurology 
62 (11), 2095–2097.
Gross, H., Ebert, M. H., Faden, V. B., Goldberg, S. C., Kaye, W. H., Caine, E. D., 
et al. 1983. A double-blind trial of delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol in primary 
anorexia nervosa. Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology 3 (3), 165–171.
www.ebook3000.com

References    195
Gruber, A. J., Pope, H. G., Jr., and Brown, M. E. 1996. Do patients use marijuana 
as an antidepressant? Depression 4 (2), 77–80. doi: 10.1002/(SICI)1522-
71621996)4:2<77:AID-DEPR7>3.0.CO;2-C
Grunfeld, Y., and Edery, H. 1969. Psychopharmacological activity of the active 
constituents of hashish and some related cannabinoids. Psychopharmacology 14 
(3), 200–210.
Gubellini, P., Picconi, B., Bari, M., Battista, N., Calabresi, P., Centonze, D.,  
et al. 2002. Experimental parkinsonism alters endocannabinoid degradation: 
Implications for striatal glutamatergic transmission. Journal of Neuroscience 22 
(16), 6900–6907. doi: 20026732
Guerry, J. D., and Hastings, P. D. 2011. In search of HPA axis dysregulation in 
child and adolescent depression. Clinical Child and Family Psychology Review 14 
(2), 135–160. doi: 10.1007/s10567-011-0084-5
Guimaraes, F. S., Chiaretti, T. M., Graeff, F. G., and Zuardi, A. W. 1990. 
Antianxiety effect of cannabidiol in the elevated plus-maze. Psychopharmacology 
100 (4), 558–559.
Guindon, J., Guijarro, A., Piomelli, D., and Hohmann, A. G. 2011. Peripheral 
antinociceptive effects of inhibitors of monoacylglycerol lipase in a rat model  
of inflammatory pain. British Journal of Pharmacology 163 (7), 1464–1478. doi: 
10.1111/j.1476-5381.2010.01192.x
Guindon, J., and Hohmann, A. G. 2009. The endocannabinoid system and pain. 
CNS & Neurological Disorders—Drug Targets 8 (6), 403–421.
Guindon, J., Lai, Y., Takacs, S. M., Bradshaw, H. B., and Hohmann, A. G. 2013. 
Alterations in endocannabinoid tone following chemotherapy-induced peripheral 
neuropathy: Effects of endocannabinoid deactivation inhibitors targeting fatty-
acid amide hydrolase and monoacylglycerol lipase in comparison to reference 
analgesics following cisplatin treatment. Pharmacological Research 67 (1), 94–
109. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2012.10.013
Haller, J., Barna, I., Barsvari, B., Gyimesi Pelczer, K., Yasar, S., Panlilio, L. V.,  
et al. 2009. Interactions between environmental aversiveness and the anxiolytic 
effects of enhanced cannabinoid signaling by FAAH inhibition in rats. 
Psychopharmacology 204 (4), 607–616. doi: 10.1007/s00213-009-1494-7
Hampson, A. J., Grimaldi, M., Lolic, M., Wink, D., Rosenthal, R., and Axelrod, J. 
2000. Neuroprotective antioxidants from marijuana. Annals of the New York 
Academy of Sciences 899, 274–282.
Han, J., Kesner, P., Metna-Laurent, M., Duan, T., Xu, L., Georges, F., et al. 2012. 
Acute cannabinoids impair working memory through astroglial CB1 receptor 
modulation of hippocampal LTD. Cell 148 (5), 1039–1050. doi: 10.1016/j.
cell.2012.01.037
Haney, M., Cooper, Z. D., Bedi, G., Vosburg, S. K., Comer, S. D., and Foltin, R. W. 
2013. Nabilone decreases marijuana withdrawal and a laboratory measure of 
marijuana relapse. Neuropsychopharmacology 38 (8), 1557–1565. doi: 10.1038/
npp.2013.54

196    References
Haney, M., Hart, C. L., Vosburg, S. K., Nasser, J., Bennett, A., Zubaran, C., et al. 
2004. Marijuana withdrawal in humans: Effects of oral THC or divalproex. 
Neuropsychopharmacology 29 (1), 158–170. doi: 10.1038/sj.npp.1300310
Hansen, H. H., Ikonomidou, C., Bittigau, P., Hansen, S. H., and Hansen, H. S. 
2001. Accumulation of the anandamide precursor and other N-acylethanolamine 
phospholipids in infant rat models of in vivo necrotic and apoptotic neuronal 
death. Journal of Neurochemistry 76 (1), 39–46.
Hansen, H. H., Schmid, P. C., Bittigau, P., Lastres-Becker, I., Berrendero, F., 
Manzanares, J., et al. 2001. Anandamide, but not 2-arachidonoylglycerol, 
accumulates during in vivo neurodegeneration. Journal of Neurochemistry 78 (6), 
1415–1427.
Hanus, L., Breuer, A., Tchilibon, S., Shiloah, S., Goldenberg, D., Horowitz, M., et 
al. 1999. HU-308: A specific agonist for CB (2), a peripheral cannabinoid receptor. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 96 (25), 14228–14233.
Harder, V. S., Morral, A. R., and Arkes, J. 2006. Marijuana use and depression 
among adults: Testing for causal associations. Addiction 101 (10), 1463–1472. 
doi: 10.1111/j.1360-0443.2006.01545.x
Harrold, J. A., Elliott, J. C., King, P. J., Widdowson, P. S., and Williams, G.  
2002. Down-regulation of cannabinoid-1 (CB-1) receptors in specific 
extrahypothalamic regions of rats with dietary obesity: A role for endogenous 
cannabinoids in driving appetite for palatable food? Brain Research 952 (2), 
232–238.
Hartman, R. L., and Huestis, M. A. 2013. Cannabis effects on driving skills. 
Clinical Chemistry 59 (3), 478–492. doi: 10.1373/clinchem.2012.194381
Hayatbakhsh, R., Williams, G. M., Bor, W., and Najman, J. M. 2013. Early 
childhood predictors of age of initiation to use of cannabis: A birth prospective 
study. Drug and Alcohol Review 32 (3), 232–240. doi: 10.1111/j.1465-3362
.2012.00520.x
Hazekamp, A., Ware, M. A., Muller-Vahl, K. R., Abrams, D., and Grotenhermen, 
F. 2013. The medicinal use of cannabis and cannabinoids—an international cross-
sectional survey on administration forms. Journal of Psychoactive Drugs 45 (3), 
199–210. doi: 10.1080/02791072.2013.805976
Heifets, B. D., and Castillo, P. E. 2009. Endocannabinoid signaling and  
long-term synaptic plasticity. Annual Review of Physiology 71, 283–306. 
doi: 10.1146/annurev.physiol.010908.163149
Henquet, C., Di Forti, M., Morrison, P., Kuepper, R., and Murray, R. M. 2008. 
Gene-environment interplay between cannabis and psychosis. Schizophrenia 
Bulletin 34 (6), 1111–1121. doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbn108
Henquet, C., Rosa, A., Delespaul, P., Papiol, S., Fananas, L., van Os, J., et al. 2009. 
COMT ValMet moderation of cannabis-induced psychosis: A momentary 
assessment study of ‘switching on’ hallucinations in the flow of daily life. Acta 
Psychiatrica Scandinavica 119 (2), 156–160. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0447.2008
.01265.x
www.ebook3000.com

References    197
Henquet, C., Rosa, A., Krabbendam, L., Papiol, S., Fananas, L., Drukker, M.,  
et al. 2006. An experimental study of catechol-o-methyltransferase Val158Met 
moderation of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol-induced effects on psychosis and 
cognition. Neuropsychopharmacology 31 (12), 2748–2757. doi: 10.1038/
sj.npp.1301197
Henquet, C., and van Os, J. 2008. The coherence of the evidence linking cannabis 
with psychosis. Psychological Medicine 38 (3), 461–462, author reply 462–464. 
doi: 10.1017/S0033291707002279
Henze, T., Flachenecker, P., and Zettl, U. K. 2013. Bedeutung und Behandlung der 
Spastik bei Multipler Sklerose: Ergebnisse der MOVE-1-Studie. Der Nervenarzt 
84 (2), 214–222. doi: 10.1007/s00115-012-3724-1
Herkenham, M., Lynn, A. B., Little, M. D., Johnson, M. R., Melvin, L. S.,  
de Costa, B. R., et al. 1990. Cannabinoid receptor localization in brain. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 87 (5), 1932–1936.
Hermann, H., Marsicano, G., and Lutz, B. 2002. Coexpression of the cannabinoid 
receptor type 1 with dopamine and serotonin receptors in distinct neuronal 
subpopulations of the adult mouse forebrain. Neuroscience 109 (3), 451–460.
Hermanson, D. J., Hartley, N. D., Gamble-George, J., Brown, N., Shonesy, B. C., 
Kingsley, P. J., et al. 2013. Substrate-selective COX-2 inhibition decreases anxiety 
via endocannabinoid activation. Nature Neuroscience 16 (9), 1291–1298. doi: 
10.1038/nn.3480
Herrera-Solis, A., Vasquez, K. G., and Prospero-Garcia, O. 2010. Acute and 
subchronic administration of anandamide or oleamide increases REM sleep in 
rats. Pharmacology, Biochemistry, and Behavior 95 (1), 106–112. doi: 10.1016/j.
pbb.2009.12.014
Hickman, M., Vickerman, P., Macleod, J., Lewis, G., Zammit, S., Kirkbride, J.,  
et al. 2009. If cannabis caused schizophrenia—how many cannabis users may 
need to be prevented in order to prevent one case of schizophrenia? England and 
Wales calculations. Addiction 104 (11), 1856–1861. doi: 10.1111/j.1360
-0443.2009.02736.x
Hickok, J. T., Roscoe, J. A., Morrow, G. R., King, D. K., Atkins, J. N., and Fitch, 
T. R. 2003. Nausea and emesis remain significant problems of chemotherapy 
despite prophylaxis with 5-hydroxytryptamine-3 antiemetics. Cancer 97 (11), 
2880–2886.
Higgs, S., Barber, D. J., Cooper, A. J., and Terry, P. 2005. Differential effects of two 
cannabinoid receptor agonists on progressive ratio responding for food and free-
feeding in rats. Behavioural Pharmacology 16 (5–6), 389–393.
Higuchi, S., Ohji, M., Araki, M., Furuta, R., Katsuki, M., Yamaguchi, R., et al. 
2011. Increment of hypothalamic 2-arachidonoylglycerol induces the preference 
for a high-fat diet via activation of cannabinoid 1 receptors. Behavioural Brain 
Research 216 (1), 477–480. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2010.08.042
Hill, A. J., Mercier, M. S., Hill, T. D., Glyn, S. E., Jones, N. A., Yamasaki, Y., et al. 
2012. Cannabidivarin is anticonvulsant in mouse and rat. British Journal of 
Pharmacology 167 (8), 1629–1642. doi: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2012.02207.x

198    References
Hill, M. N., Bierer, L. M., Makotkine, I., Golier, J. A., Galea, S., McEwen, B. S.,  
et al. 2013. Reductions in circulating endocannabinoid levels in individuals  
with post-traumatic stress disorder following exposure to the World Trade  
Center attacks. Psychoneuroendocrinology 38 (12), 2952–2961. doi: 10.1016/j.
psyneuen.2013.08.004
Hill, M. N., and Gorzalka, B. B. 2009. Impairments in endocannabinoid signaling 
and depressive illness. Journal of the American Medical Association 301 (11), 
1165–1166. doi: 10.1001/jama.2009.369
Hill, M. N., Kumar, S. A., Filipski, S. B., Iverson, M., Stuhr, K. L., Keith, J. M., et 
al. 2013. Disruption of fatty acid amide hydrolase activity prevents the effects of 
chronic stress on anxiety and amygdalar microstructure. Molecular Psychiatry 18 
(10), 1125–1135. doi: 10.1038/mp.2012.90
Hill, M. N., McLaughlin, R. J., Bingham, B., Shrestha, L., Lee, T. T., Gray, J. M., 
et al. 2010. Endogenous cannabinoid signaling is essential for stress adaptation. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107 (20), 9406–9411. 
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0914661107
Hill, M. N., Miller, G. E., Ho, W. S., Gorzalka, B. B., and Hillard, C. J. 2008. 
Serum endocannabinoid content is altered in females with depressive disorders: A 
preliminary report. Pharmacopsychiatry 41 (2), 48–53. doi: 10.1055/s-2007-993211
Hill, M. N., Patel, S., Campolongo, P., Tasker, J. G., Wotjak, C. T., and Bains, J. S. 
2010. Functional interactions between stress and the endocannabinoid system: 
From synaptic signaling to behavioral output. Journal of Neuroscience 30 (45), 
14980–14986. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4283-10.2010
Hill, M. N., and Tasker, J. G. 2012. Endocannabinoid signaling, glucocorticoid-
mediated negative feedback, and regulation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-
adrenal axis. Neuroscience 204, 5–16. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2011.12.030
Hillard, C. J. 2000. Endocannabinoids and vascular function. Journal of 
Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 294 (1), 27–32.
Hillard, C. J., Weinlander, K. M., and Stuhr, K. L. 2012. Contributions of 
endocannabinoid signaling to psychiatric disorders in humans: Genetic and 
biochemical evidence. Neuroscience 204, 207–229. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience
.2011.11.020
Hilliard, A., Stott, C., Wright, S., Guy, G., Pryce, G., and Al-Izki, S., et al. 2012. 
Evaluation of the effects of Sativex (THC BDS: CBD BDS) on inhibition  
of spasticity in a chronic relapsing experimental allergic autoimmune 
encephalomyelitis: A model of multiple sclerosis. ISRN Neurology 802649. 
doi: 10.5402/2012/802649
Hindocha, C., Freeman, T. P., Schafer, G., Gardener, C., Das, R. K., Morgan, C. J., 
et al. 2015. Acute effects of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol, cannabidiol and their 
combination on facial emotion recognition: A randomised, double-blind, placebo-
controlled study in cannabis users. European Neuropsychopharmacology 25 (3), 
325–334. doi: 10.1016/j.euroneuro.2014.11.014
Hirvonen, J., Goodwin, R. S., Li, C. T., Terry, G. E., Zoghbi, S. S., Morse, C.,  
et al. 2012. Reversible and regionally selective downregulation of brain 
www.ebook3000.com

References    199
cannabinoid CB1 receptors in chronic daily cannabis smokers. Molecular 
Psychiatry 17 (6), 642–649. doi: 10.1038/mp.2011.82
Ho, B. C., Wassink, T. H., Ziebell, S., and Andreasen, N. C. 2011. Cannabinoid 
receptor 1 gene polymorphisms and marijuana misuse interactions on white 
matter and cognitive deficits in schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Research 128 (1–3), 
66–75. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2011.02.021
Hohmann, A. G., Suplita, R. L., Bolton, N. M., Neely, M. H., Fegley, D., Mangieri, 
R., et al. 2005. An endocannabinoid mechanism for stress-induced analgesia. 
Nature 435 (7045), 1108–1112. doi: 10.1038/nature03658
Hollister, L. E. 1971. Actions of various marihuana derivatives in man. 
Pharmacological Reviews 23 (4), 349–357.
Hollister, L. E. 1974. Structure-activity relationships in man of cannabis 
constituents, and homologs and metabolites of delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol. 
Pharmacology 11 (1), 3–11.
Holter, S. M., Kallnik, M., Wurst, W., Marsicano, G., Lutz, B., and Wotjak, C. T. 
2005. Cannabinoid CB1 receptor is dispensable for memory extinction in an 
appetitively-motivated learning task. European Journal of Pharmacology 510 
(1–2), 69–74. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2005.01.008
Hornby, P. J. 2001. Central neurocircuitry associated with emesis. American 
Journal of Medicine 111 (supplement 8A), 106S–112S.
Horswill, J. G., Bali, U., Shaaban, S., Keily, J. F., Jeevaratnam, P., Babbs, A. J.,  
et al. 2007. PSNCBAM-1, a novel allosteric antagonist at cannabinoid CB1 
receptors with hypophagic effects in rats. British Journal of Pharmacology 152 
(5), 805–814. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjp.0707347
Howlett, A. C., Barth, F., Bonner, T. I., Cabral, G., Casellas, P., Devane, W. A.,  
et al. 2002. International Union of Pharmacology. XXVII. Classification of 
cannabinoid receptors. Pharmacological Reviews 54 (2), 161–202.
Howlett, A. C., Johnson, M. R., Melvin, L. S., and Milne, G. M. 1988. Nonclassical 
cannabinoid analgetics inhibit adenylate cyclase: Development of a cannabinoid 
receptor model. Molecular Pharmacology 33 (3), 297–302.
Howlett, A. C., Qualy, J. M., and Khachatrian, L. L. 1986. Involvement of Gi in 
the inhibition of adenylate cyclase by cannabimimetic drugs. Molecular 
Pharmacology 29 (3), 307–313.
Hoyte, C. O., Jacob, J., Monte, A. A., Al-Jumaan, M., Bronstein, A. C., and Heard, 
K. J. 2012. A characterization of synthetic cannabinoid exposures reported to the 
National Poison Data System in 2010. Annals of Emergency Medicine 60 (4), 
435–438. doi: 10.1016/j.annemergmed.2012.03.007
Huestis, M. A. (2005). Pharmacokinetics and metabolism of the plant 
cannabinoids, 
delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol, 
cannabidiol 
and 
cannabinol. 
Handbook of Experimental Pharmacology, 168, 657–690.
Huestis, M. A., and Smith, M. L. 2014. Cannabinoid pharmacokinetics and 
disposition in alternative matrices. In Handbook of Cannabis, ed. R. G. Pertwee. 
Oxford University Press.

200    References
Huggins, J. P., Smart, T. S., Langman, S., Taylor, L., and Young, T. 2012. An 
efficient randomised, placebo-controlled clinical trial with the irreversible  
fatty acid amide hydrolase-1 inhibitor PF-04457845, which modulates 
endocannabinoids but fails to induce effective analgesia in patients with pain due 
to osteoarthritis of the knee. Pain 153 (9), 1837–1846. doi: 10.1016/j.
pain.2012.04.020
Ignatowska-Jankowska, B. M., Baillie, G. L., Kinsey, S., Crowe, M., Ghosh, S., 
Owens, R. A., et al. 2015. A Cannabinoid CB1 Receptor-Positive Allosteric 
Modulator Reduces Neuropathic Pain in the Mouse with No Psychoactive 
Effects. Neuropsychopharmacology 40 (13), 2948–2959. doi: 10.1038/
npp.2015.148
Ignatowska-Jankowska, B. M., Ghosh, S., Crowe, M. S., Kinsey, S. G., Niphakis, 
M. J., Abdullah, R. A., et al. 2014. In vivo characterization of the highly selective 
monoacylglycerol lipase inhibitor KML29: Antinociceptive activity without 
cannabimimetic side effects. British Journal of Pharmacology 171 (6), 1392–
1407. doi: 10.1111/bph.12298
Ishiguro, H., Onaivi, E. S., Horiuchi, Y., Imai, K., Komaki, G., Ishikawa, T., et al. 
2011. Functional polymorphism in the GPR55 gene is associated with anorexia 
nervosa. Synapse 65 (2), 103–108. doi: 10.1002/syn.20821
Iskedjian, M., Bereza, B., Gordon, A., Piwko, C., and Einarson, T. R. 2007. Meta-
analysis of cannabis based treatments for neuropathic and multiple sclerosis-
related pain. Current Medical Research and Opinion 23 (1), 17–24. doi: 
10.1185/030079906X158066
Iversen, L. L. 2008. The Science of Marijuana. Oxford University Press.
Izquierdo, I., Orsingher, O. A., and Berardi, A. C. 1973. Effect of cannabidiol and 
of other cannabis sativa compounds on hippocampal seizure discharges. 
Psychopharmacology 28 (1), 95–102.
Jackson, N. J., Isen, J. D., Khoddam, R., Irons, D., Tuvblad, C., Iacono, W. G.,  
et al. 2016. Impact of adolescent marijuana use on intelligence: Results from two 
longitudinal twin studies. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 113 
(5), E500–E508. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1516648113
Jackson, S. L., Pryce, G., Diemel, D. T., and Baker, D. 2005. Cannabinoid receptor 
null mice are susceptible to neurofiliment damage and capsase 3 activation. 
Neuroscience 134, 261–268.
Jaques, S. C., Kingsbury, A., Henshcke, P., Chomchai, C., Clews, S., Falconer, J., et 
al. 2014. Cannabis, the pregnant woman and her child: Weeding out the myths. 
Journal of Perinatology 34 (6), 417–424. doi: 10.1038/jp.2013.180
Jarrett, M. M., Limebeer, C. L., and Parker, L. A. 2005. Effect of Delta9-
tetrahydrocannabinol on sucrose palatability as measured by the taste reactivity 
test. Physiology & Behavior 86 (4), 475–479.
Jarrett, M. M., Scantlebury, J., and Parker, L. A. 2007. Effect of Delta 
(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol on quinine palatability and AM251 on sucrose and 
quinine palatability using the taste reactivity test. Physiology & Behavior 90 (2–
3), 425–430. doi: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2006.10.003
www.ebook3000.com

References    201
Jarzimski, C., Karst, M., Zoerner, A. A., Rakers, C., May, M., Suchy, M. T., et al. 
2012. Changes of blood endocannabinoids during anaesthesia: A special case for 
fatty acid amide hydrolase inhibition by propofol? British Journal of Clinical 
Pharmacology 74 (1), 54–59. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2125.2012.04175.x
Jayamanne, A., Greenwood, R., Mitchell, V. A., Aslan, S., Piomelli, D., and 
Vaughan, C. W. 2006. Actions of the FAAH inhibitor URB597 in neuropathic and 
inflammatory chronic pain models. British Journal of Pharmacology 147 (3), 
281–288. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjp.0706510
Jenniches, I., Ternes, S., Albayram, O., Otte, D. M., Bach, K., Bindila, L., et al. 
2016. Anxiety, stress, and fear response in mice with reduced endocannabinoid 
levels. Biological Psychiatry 79 (10), 858–868. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych
.2015.03.033
Jetly, R., Heber, A., Fraser, G., and Boisvert, D. 2015. The efficacy of nabilone,  
a synthetic cannabinoid, in the treatment of PTSD-associated nightmares:  
A preliminary randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled cross-over design 
study. Psychoneuroendocrinology 51, 585–588. doi: 10.1016/j.psyneuen.2014
.11.002
Jin, K. L., Mao, X. O., Goldsmith, P. C., and Greenberg, D. A. 2000. CB1 
cannabinoid receptor induction in experimental stroke. Annals of Neurology 
48 (2), 257–261.
Jones, N. A., Hill, A. J., Smith, I., Bevan, S. A., Williams, C. M., Whalley, B. J.,  
et al. 2010. Cannabidiol displays antiepileptiform and antiseizure properties in 
vitro and in vivo. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics 332 
(2), 569–577. doi: 10.1124/jpet.109.159145
Joshi, M., Joshi, A., and Bartter, T. 2014. Marijuana and lung diseases. Current 
Opinion in Pulmonary Medicine 20 (2), 173–179. doi: 10.1097/MCP
.0000000000000026
Jung, K. M., Clapper, J. R., Fu, J., D’Agostino, G., Guijarro, A., Thongkham, D., 
et al. 2012. 2-arachidonoylglycerol signaling in forebrain regulates systemic 
energy metabolism. Cell Metabolism 15 (3), 299–310. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet
.2012.01.021
Justinova, Z., Ferre, S., Redhi, G. H., Mascia, P., Stroik, J., Quarta, D., et al. 2011. 
Reinforcing and neurochemical effects of cannabinoid CB1 receptor agonists, but 
not cocaine, are altered by an adenosine A2A receptor antagonist. Addiction 
Biology 16 (3), 405–415. doi: 10.1111/j.1369-1600.2010.00258.x
Justinova, Z., Mangieri, R. A., Bortolato, M., Chefer, S. I., Mukhin, A. G., Clapper, 
J. R., et al. 2008. Fatty acid amide hydrolase inhibition heightens anandamide 
signaling without producing reinforcing effects in primates. Biological Psychiatry 
64 (11), 930–937. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2008.08.008
Justinova, Z., Panlilio, L. V., Moreno-Sanz, G., Redhi, G. H., Auber, A., Secci, M. 
E., et al. 2015. Effects of Fatty Acid Amide Hydrolase (FAAH) Inhibitors  
in Non-Human Primate Models of Nicotine Reward and Relapse. 
Neuropsychopharmacology 40 (9), 2185–2197. doi: 10.1038/npp.2015.62

202    References
Kaczocha, M., Glaser, S. T., and Deutsch, D. G. 2009. Identification of intracellular 
carriers for the endocannabinoid anandamide. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences 106 (15), 6375–6380. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0901515106
Kamprath, K., Romo-Parra, H., Haring, M., Gaburro, S., Doengi, M., Lutz, B., et 
al. 2011. Short-term adaptation of conditioned fear responses through 
endocannabinoid signaling in the central amygdala. Neuropsychopharmacology 
36 (3), 652–663. doi: 10.1038/npp.2010.196
Karler, R., Cely, W., and Turkanis, S. A. 1973. The anticonvulsant activity of 
cannabidiol and cannabinol. Life Sciences 13 (11), 1527–1531.
Karler, R., and Turkanis, S. A. 1978. Cannabis and epilepsy. Advances in the 
Biosciences 22–23, 619–641.
Karniol, I. G., Shirakawa, I., Kasinski, N., Pfeferman, A., and Carlini, E. A. 1974. 
Cannabidiol interferes with the effects of delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol in man. 
European Journal of Pharmacology 28 (1), 172–177.
Karschner, E. L., Darwin, W. D., Goodwin, R. S., Wright, S., and Huestis, M. A. 
2011. Plasma cannabinoid pharmacokinetics following controlled oral delta9-
tetrahydrocannabinol and oromucosal cannabis extract administration. Clinical 
Chemistry 57 (1), 66–75. doi: 10.1373/clinchem.2010.152439
Karschner, E. L., Darwin, W. D., McMahon, R. P., Liu, F., Wright, S., Goodwin, R. 
S., et al. 2011. Subjective and physiological effects after controlled Sativex and 
oral THC administration. Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics 89 (3), 400–
407. doi: 10.1038/clpt.2010.318
Kathuria, S., Gaetani, S., Fegley, D., Valino, F., Duranti, A., Tontini, A., et al. 2003. 
Modulation of anxiety through blockade of anandamide hydrolysis. Nature 
Medicine 9 (1), 76–81. doi: 10.1038/nm803
Katona, I. 2015. Cannabis and endocannabinoid signaling in epilepsy. In  
R. G. Pertwee (Ed.), Endocannabinoids. Springer.
Katona, I., and Freund, T. F. 2012. Multiple functions of endocannabinoid 
signaling in the brain. Annual Review of Neuroscience 35, 529–558. 
doi: 10.1146/annurev-neuro-062111-150420
Kay, S. R., Opler, L. A., and Lindenmayer, J. P. 1988. Reliability and validity  
of the positive and negative syndrome scale for schizophrenics. Psychiatry 
Research 23 (1), 99–110.
Keeler, M. H., and Riefler, C. B. 1967. Grand mal convulsions subsequent to 
marijuana use. Diseases of the Nervous System 28, 474–475.
Kenakin, T. 2013. Allosteric drugs and seven transmembrane receptors. Current 
Topics in Medicinal Chemistry 13 (1), 5–13.
Kiefer, S. W., and Orr, M. R. 1992. Taste avoidance, but not aversion, learning in 
rats lacking gustatory cortex. Behavioral Neuroscience 106 (1), 140–146.
Kim-Cohen, J., Caspi, A., Moffitt, T. E., Harrington, H., Milne, B. J., and Poulton, 
R. 2003. Prior juvenile diagnoses in adults with mental disorder: Developmental 
www.ebook3000.com

References    203
follow-back of a prospective-longitudinal cohort. Archives of General Psychiatry 
60 (7), 709–717. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.60.7.709
Kinsey, S. G., Long, J. Z., O’Neal, S. T., Abdullah, R. A., Poklis, J. L., Boger, D. L., 
et al. 2009. Blockade of endocannabinoid-degrading enzymes attenuates 
neuropathic pain. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics 330 
(3), 902–910. doi: 10.1124/jpet.109.155465
Kinsey, S. G., O’Neal, S. T., Long, J. Z., Cravatt, B. F., and Lichtman, A. H. 2011. 
Inhibition of endocannabinoid catabolic enzymes elicits anxiolytic-like effects in 
the marble burying assay. Pharmacology, Biochemistry, and Behavior 98 (1), 21–
27. doi: 10.1016/j.pbb.2010.12.002
Kinsey, S. G., Wise, L. E., Ramesh, D., Abdullah, R., Selley, D. E., Cravatt, B. F., et 
al. 2013. Repeated low-dose administration of the monoacylglycerol lipase 
inhibitor JZL184 retains cannabinoid receptor type 1-mediated antinociceptive 
and gastroprotective effects. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental 
Therapeutics 345 (3), 492–501. doi: 10.1124/jpet.112.201426
Kirkham, T. C. 1991. Opioids and feeding reward. Appetite 17 (1), 74–75.
Kirkham, T. C., and Williams, C. M. 2001. Synergistic efects of opioid  
and cannabinoid antagonists on food intake. Psychopharmacology 153 (2), 267–
270.
Kirkham, T. C., Williams, C. M., Fezza, F., and Di Marzo, V. 2002. Endocannabinoid 
levels in rat limbic forebrain and hypothalamus in relation to fasting, feeding and 
satiation: Stimulation of eating by 2-arachidonoyl glycerol. British Journal of 
Pharmacology 136 (4), 550–557. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjp.0704767
Koch, J. E. 2001. Delta (9)-THC stimulates food intake in Lewis rats: Effects on 
chow, high-fat and sweet high-fat diets. Pharmacology, Biochemistry, and 
Behavior 68 (3), 539–543.
Koethe, D., Giuffrida, A., Schreiber, D., Hellmich, M., Schultze-Lutter, F., 
Ruhrmann, S., et al. 2009. Anandamide elevation in cerebrospinal fluid in initial 
prodromal states of psychosis. British Journal of Psychiatry 194 (4), 371–372. 
doi: 10.1192/bjp.bp.108.053843
Koethe, D., Schreiber, D., Giuffrida, A., Mauss, C., Faulhaber, J., Heydenreich, B., 
et al. 2009. Sleep deprivation increases oleoylethanolamide in human cerebrospinal 
fluid. Journal of Neural Transmission 116 (3), 301–305. doi: 10.1007/s00702-
008-0169-6
Kolb, B., Gorny, G., Limebeer, C. L., and Parker, L. A. 2006. Chronic treatment 
with Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol alters the structure of neurons in the nucleus 
accumbens shell and medial prefrontal cortex of rats. Synapse 60 (6), 429–436.
Koppell, B. S., Brust, J. C., Fife, T., Bronstein, J., Youssof, S., Gronseth, G., et al. 
2014. Sytematic review: efficacy and safety of medical marijuana in selected 
neurological disorders: report of the guideline development subcommittee of the 
american academy of neurology. Neurology 82 (17), 1556–1563.
Kumar, G., Stendall, C., Mistry, R., Gurusamy, K., and Walker, D. 2014. A 
comparison of total intravenous anaesthesia using propofol with sevoflurane or 

204    References
desflurane in ambulatory surgery: Systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Anaesthesia 69 (10), 1138–1150. doi: 10.1111/anae.12713
Kurtzke, J. F. 1993. Epidemiologic evidence for multiple sclerosis as an infection. 
Clinical Microbiology Reviews 6 (4), 382–427.
Kwiatkowska, M., Parker, L. A., Burton, P., and Mechoulam, R. 2004. A 
comparative analysis of the potential of cannabinoids and ondansetron to 
suppress cisplatin-induced emesis in the Suncus murinus (house musk shrew). 
Psychopharmacology 174 (2), 254–259.
Labrecque, G., Halle, S., Berthiaume, A., Morin, G., and Morin, P. J. 1978. 
Potentiation of the epileptogenic effect of penicillin G by marihuana smoking. 
Canadian Journal of Physiology and Pharmacology 56 (1), 87–96.
Langford, R. M., Mares, J., Novotna, A., Vachova, M., Novakova, I., Notcutt, W., 
et al. 2013. A double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled, parallel-group study 
of THC/CBD oromucosal spray in combination with the existing treatment 
regimen, in the relief of central neuropathic pain in patients with multiple 
sclerosis. Journal of Neurology 260 (4), 984–997. doi: 10.1007/s00415-012-
6739-4
Laprairie, R. B., Bagher, A. M., Kelly, M. E., and Denovan-Wright, E. M. 2016. 
Biased Type 1 cannabinoid receptor signaling influences neuronal viability in a 
cell culture model of Huntington Disease. Molecular Pharmacology 89 (3), 364–
375. doi: 10.1124/mol.115.101980
Laprairie, R. B., Kulkarni, A. R., Kulkarni, P. M., Hurst, D. P., Lynch, D., Reggio, 
P. H., et al. 2016. Mapping cannabinoid 1 receptor allosteric site(s): Critical 
molecular determinant and signaling profile of GAT100, a novel, potent, and 
irreversibly binding probe. ACS Chemical Neuroscience. doi: 10.1021/
acschemneuro.6b00041
Large, M., Sharma, S., Compton, M. T., Slade, T., and Nielssen, O. 2011. Cannabis 
use and earlier onset of psychosis: A systematic meta-analysis. Archives of General 
Psychiatry 68 (6), 555–561. doi: 10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2011.5
Lastres-Becker, I., Cebeira, M., de Ceballos, M. L., Zeng, B. Y., Jenner, P., Ramos, 
J. A., et al. 2001. Increased cannabinoid CB1 receptor binding and activation of 
GTP-binding proteins in the basal ganglia of patients with Parkinson’s syndrome 
and of MPTP-treated marmosets. European Journal of Neuroscience 14 (11), 
1827–1832.
Lastres-Becker, I., Molina-Holgado, F., Ramos, J. A., Mechoulam, R., and 
Fernandez-Ruiz, J. 2005. Cannabinoids provide neuroprotection against 
6-hydroxydopamine toxicity in vivo and in vitro: Relevance to Parkinson’s 
disease. Neurobiology of Disease 19 (1–2), 96–107. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2004
.11.009
Lazenka, M. F., Selley, D. E., and Sim-Selley, L. J. 2013. Brain regional differences 
in CB1 receptor adaptation and regulation of transcription. Life Sciences 92 (8–
9), 446–452. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2012.08.023
www.ebook3000.com

References    205
Lee, M. C., Ploner, M., Wiech, K., Bingel, U., Wanigasekera, V., Brooks, J., et al. 
2013. Amygdala activity contributes to the dissociative effect of cannabis on pain 
perception. Pain, 154 (1), 124–134. doi: 10.1016/j.pain.2012.09.017
Lepore, M., Vorel, S. R., Lowinson, J., and Gardiner, E. L. 1995. Conditioned 
place preference induced by delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol: Comparison with 
cocaine, morphine and food reward. Life Sciences 56, 2073–2080.
Leung, K., Elmes, M. W., Glaser, S. T., Deutsch, D. G., & Kaczocha, M. (2013). 
Role of FAAH-like anandamide transporter in anandamide inactivation. PLoS 
One, 8, e799355.
Leweke, F. M., Giuffrida, A., Koethe, D., Schreiber, D., Nolden, B. M., Kranaster, 
L., et al. 2007. Anandamide levels in cerebrospinal fluid of first-episode 
schizophrenic patients: Impact of cannabis use. Schizophrenia Research 94 (1–3), 
29–36. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2007.04.025
Leweke, F. M., Piomelli, D., Pahlisch, F., Muhl, D., Gerth, C. W., Hoyer, C., et al. 
2012. Cannabidiol enhances anandamide signaling and alleviates psychotic 
symptoms of schizophrenia. Translational Psychiatry 2, e94. doi: 10.1038/
tp.2012.15
Li, G. L., Winter, H., Arends, R., Jay, G. W., Le, V., Young, T., et al. 2012. 
Assessment of the pharmacology and tolerability of PF-04457845, an irreversible 
inhibitor of fatty acid amide hydrolase-1, in healthy subjects. British Journal of 
Clinical Pharmacology 73 (5), 706–716. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2125.2011.04137.x
Li, M. C., Brady, J. E., DiMaggio, C. J., Lusardi, A. R., Tzong, K. Y., and Li, G. 
2012. Marijuana use and motor vehicle crashes. Epidemiologic Reviews 34, 65–
72. doi: 10.1093/epirev/mxr017
Lichtman, A. H., Leung, D., Shelton, C. C., Saghatelian, A., Hardouin, C., Boger, 
D. L., et al. 2004. Reversible inhibitors of fatty acid amide hydrolase that promote 
analgesia: Evidence for an unprecedented combination of potency and selectivity. 
Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics 311 (2), 441–448. doi: 
10.1124/jpet.104.069401
Lichtman, A. H., and Martin, B. R. 1996. Delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol impairs 
spatial memory through a cannabinoid receptor mechanism. Psychopharmacology 
126 (2), 125–131.
Lichtman, A. H., Shelton, C. C., Advani, T., and Cravatt, B. F. 2004. Mice lacking 
fatty acid amide hydrolase exhibit a cannabinoid receptor-mediated phenotypic 
hypoalgesia. Pain 109 (3), 319–327. doi: 10.1016/j.pain.2004.01.022
Ligresti, A., Moriello, A. S., Starowicz, K., Matias, I., Pisanti, S., De Petrocellis, L., 
et al. 2006. Antitumor activity of plant cannabinoids with emphasis on the effect 
of cannabidiol on human breast carcinoma. Journal of Pharmacology and 
Experimental Therapeutics 318 (3), 1375–1387. doi: 10.1124/jpet.106.105247
Limebeer, C. L., Abdullah, R. A., Rock, E. M., Imhof, E., Wang, K.,  
Lichtman, A. H., et al. 2014. Attenuation of anticipatory nausea in a rat  
model of contextually elicited conditioned gaping by enhancement of the 
endocannabinoid system. Psychopharmacology 231 (3), 603–612.

206    References
Limebeer, C. L., Parker, L. A., and Fletcher, P. J. 2004. 5,7-dihydroxytryptamine 
lesions of the dorsal and median raphe nuclei interfere with lithium-induced 
conditioned gaping, but not conditioned taste avoidance, in rats. Behavioral 
Neuroscience 118 (6), 1391–1399.
Limebeer, C. L., Rock, E. M., Mechoulam, R., and Parker, L. A. 2012. The anti-
nausea effects of CB1 agonists are mediated by an action at the visceral insular 
cortex. British Journal of Pharmacology 167 (5), 1126–1136.
Limebeer, C. L., Rock, E. M., Puvanenthirarajah, N., Niphakis, M. J., Cravatt, B. 
F., and Parker, L. A. 2016. Elevation of 2-AG by monoacylglycerol lipase inhibition 
in the visceral insular cortex interferes with anticipatory nausea in a rat model. 
Behavioral Neuroscience 130 (2), 261–266. doi: 10.1037/bne0000132
Limebeer, C. L., Vemuri, V. K., Bedard, H., Lang, S. T., Ossenkopp, K. P., 
Makriyannis, A., et al. 2010. Inverse agonism of cannabinoid CB1 receptors 
potentiates LiCl-induced nausea in the conditioned gaping model in rats.  
British Journal of Pharmacology 161 (2), 336–349. doi: 10.1111/j.1476
-5381.2010.00885.x
Linszen, D. H., Dingemans, P. M., & Lenior, M. E. (1994). Cannabis use and the 
course of recent-onset schizophrenic disorders. Archives of General Psychiatry, 
51(4), 273–279.
Liu, B., Song, S., Jones, P. M., and Persaud, S. J. 2015. GPR55: From orphan to 
metabolic regulator? Pharmacology & Therapeutics 145, 35–42. doi: 10.1016/
j.pharmthera.2014.06.007
Llorente-Berzal, A., Terzian, A. L., di Marzo, V., Micale, V., Viveros, M. P., and 
Wotjak, C. T. 2015. 2-AG promotes the expression of conditioned fear via 
cannabinoid receptor type 1 on GABAergic neurons. Psychopharmacology 232 
(15), 2811–2825. doi: 10.1007/s00213-015-3917-y
Long, J. Z., Li, W., Booker, L., Burston, J. J., Kinsey, S. G., Schlosburg, J. E., et al. 
2009. Selective blockade of 2-arachidonoylglycerol hydrolysis produces 
cannabinoid behavioral effects. Nature Chemical Biology 5 (1), 37–44.
Long, J. Z., Nomura, D. K., and Cravatt, B. F. 2009. Characterization of 
monoacylglycerol lipase inhibition reveals differences in central and peripheral 
endocannabinoid metabolism. Chemistry & Biology 16 (7), 744–753.
Ludanyi, A., Eross, L., Czirjak, S., Vajda, J., Halasz, P., Watanabe, M., et al. 2008. 
Downregulation of the CB1 cannabinoid receptor and related molecular elements 
of the endocannabinoid system in epileptic human hippocampus. Journal of 
Neuroscience 28 (12), 2976–2990. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4465-07.2008
Lupica, C. R., Riegel, A. C., and Hoffman, A. F. 2004. Marijuana and cannabinoid 
regulation of brain reward circuits. British Journal of Pharmacology 143 (2), 
227–234. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjp.0705931
Lutz, B., Marsicano, G., Maldonado, R., and Hillard, C. J. 2015. The 
endocannabinoid system in guarding against fear, anxiety and stress. Nature 
Reviews Neuroscience 16 (12), 705–718. doi: 10.1038/nrn4036
www.ebook3000.com

References    207
Lynch, M. E., and Campbell, F. 2011. Cannabinoids for treatment of chronic non-
cancer pain: a systematic review of randomized trials. British Journal of Clinical 
Pharmacology 72 (5), 735–744. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2125.2011.03970.x
Lynch, M. E., & Ware, M. A. (2015). Cannabinoids for the treatment of chronic 
non-cancer pain: An updated systematic review of randomized controlled trials. 
Journal of Neuroimmune Pharmacology, 10, 293–301.
Lynskey, M. T., Glowinski, A. L., Todorov, A. A., Bucholz, K. K., Madden, P. A., 
Nelson, E. C., et al. 2004. Major depressive disorder, suicidal ideation, and suicide 
attempt in twins discordant for cannabis dependence and early-onset cannabis 
use. Archives of General Psychiatry 61 (10), 1026–1032. doi: 10.1001/
archpsyc.61.10.1026
Ma, L., Wang, L., Yang, F., Meng, X. D., Wu, C., Ma, H., et al. 2014. Disease-
modifying effects of RHC80267 and JZL184 in a pilocarpine mouse model of 
temporal lobe epilepsy. CNS Neuroscience & Therapeutics 20 (10), 905–915. doi: 
10.1111/cns.12302
Mahler, S. V., Smith, K. S., and Berridge, K. C. 2007. Endocannabinoid hedonic 
hotspot for sensory pleasure: Anandamide in nucleus accumbens shell enhances 
‘liking’ of a sweet reward. Neuropsychopharmacology 32 (11), 2267–2278.
Maldonado, R., Valverde, O., and Berrendero, F. 2006. Involvement of the 
endocannabinoid system in drug addiction. Trends in Neurosciences 29 (4), 225–
232. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2006.01.008
Malfait, A. M., Gallily, R., Sumariwalla, P. F., Malik, A. S., Andreakos, E., 
Mechoulam, R., et al. 2000. The nonpsychoactive cannabis constituent 
cannabidiol is an oral anti-arthritic therapeutic in murine collagen-induced 
arthritis. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 97 (17), 9561–9566. 
doi: 10.1073/pnas.160105897
Manwell, L. A., Satvat, E., Lang, S. T., Allen, C. P., Leri, F., and Parker, L. A. 2009. 
FAAH inhibitor, URB-597, promotes extinction and CB (1) antagonist, SR141716, 
inhibits extinction of conditioned aversion produced by naloxone-precipitated 
morphine withdrawal, but not extinction of conditioned preference produced by 
morphine in rats. Pharmacology, Biochemistry, and Behavior 94 (1), 154–162. 
doi: 10.1016/j.pbb.2009.08.002
Marrs, W. R., Blankman, J. L., Horne, E. A., Thomazeau, A., Lin, Y. H., Coy, J., et 
al. 2010. The serine hydrolase ABHD6 controls the accumulation and efficacy of 
2-AG at cannabinoid receptors. Nature Neuroscience 13 (8), 951–957. 
doi: 10.1038/nn.2601
Marshall, C. R. 1897. A contribution to the pharmacology of Cannabis indica. 
Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, 149–150.
Marsicano, G., Goodenough, S., Monory, K., Hermann, H., Eder, M., Cannich, 
A., et al. 2003. CB1 cannabinoid receptors and on-demand defense against 
excitotoxicity. Science 302 (5642), 84–88. doi: 10.1126/science.1088208
Marsicano, G., and Lafenetre, P. 2009. Roles of the endocannabinoid system in 
learning and memory. Current Topics in Behavioral Neurosciences 1, 201–230. 
doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-88955-7_8

208    References
Marsicano, G., Wotjak, C. T., Azad, S. C., Bisogno, T., Rammes, G., Cascio, M. G., 
et al. 2002. The endogenous cannabinoid system controls extinction of aversive 
memories. Nature 418 (6897), 530–534. doi: 10.1038/nature00839
Martin, B. R., Compton, D. R., Thomas, B. F., Prescott, W. R., Little, P. J., Razdan, 
R. K., et al. 1991. Behavioral, biochemical, and molecular modeling evaluations 
of cannabinoid analogs. Pharmacology, Biochemistry, and Behavior 40 (3), 471–
478.
Martin-Santos, R., Crippa, J. A., Batalla, A., Bhattacharyya, S., Atakan, Z., 
Borgwardt, S., et al. 2012. Acute effects of a single, oral dose of d9-
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and cannabidiol (CBD) administration in  
healthy volunteers. Current Pharmaceutical Design 18 (32), 4966–4979.
Mascia, P., Pistis, M., Justinova, Z., Panlilio, L. V., Luchicchi, A., Lecca, S., et al. 
2011. Blockade of nicotine reward and reinstatement by activation of alpha-type 
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors. Biological Psychiatry 69 (7), 633–
641. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2010.07.009
Matias, I., Gatta-Cherifi, B., Tabarin, A., Clark, S., Leste-Lasserre, T., Marsicano, 
G., et al. 2012. Endocannabinoids measurement in human saliva as potential 
biomarker of obesity. PLoS One 7 (7), e42399. doi: 10.1371/journal.
pone.0042399
Mazzola, C., Medalie, J., Scherma, M., Panlilio, L. V., Solinas, M., Tanda, G.,  
et al. 2009. Fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH) inhibition enhances memory 
acquisition through activation of PPAR-alpha nuclear receptors. Learning & 
Memory 16 (5), 332–337. doi: 10.1101/lm.1145209
McEwen, B. S. 2007. Physiology and neurobiology of stress and adaptation: 
Central role of the brain. Physiological Reviews 87 (3), 873–904. doi: 10.1152/
physrev.00041.2006
McGrath, J., Welham, J., Scott, J., Varghese, D., Degenhardt, L., Hayatbakhsh, M. 
R., et al. 2010. Association between cannabis use and psychosis-related outcomes 
using sibling pair analysis in a cohort of young adults. Archives of General 
Psychiatry 67 (5), 440–447. doi: 10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2010.6
McLaughlin, P. J., Winston, K. M., Limebeer, C. L., Parker, L. A., Makriyannis, A., 
and Salamone, J. D. 2005. The cannabinoid CB1 antagonist AM 251 produces 
food avoidance and behaviors associated with nausea but does not impair feeding 
efficiency in rats. Psychopharmacology 180 (2), 286–293.
Mead, A. P. 2014. International Control of Cannabis. In Handbook of Cannabis, 
ed. R. G. Pertwee. Oxford University Press.
Mechoulam, R. 2002. Discovery of endocannabinoids and some random thoughts 
on their possible roles in neuroprotection and aggression. Prostaglandins, 
Leukotrienes, and Essential Fatty Acids 66 (2–3), 93–99. doi: 10.1054/
plef.2001.0340
Mechoulam, R. 2005. Plant cannabinoids: A neglected pharmacological treasure 
trove. British Journal of Pharmacology 146 (7), 913–915. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjp
.0706415
www.ebook3000.com

References    209
Mechoulam, R., Ben-Shabat, S., Hanus, L., Ligumsky, M., Kaminski, N. E., 
Schatz, A. R., et al. 1995. Identification of an endogenous 2-monoglyceride, 
present in canine gut, that binds to cannabinoid receptors. Biochemical 
Pharmacology 50 (1), 83–90.
Mechoulam, R., & Carlini, E. A. (1978). Toward drugs derived from cannabis. 
Naturwissenschaften, 65(4), 174–179.
Mechoulam, R., Feigenbaum, J. J., Lander, N., Segal, M., Jarbe, T. U., Hiltunen, A. 
J., et al. 1988. Enantiomeric cannabinoids: Stereospecificity of psychotropic 
activity. Experientia 44 (9), 762–764.
Mechoulam, R., and Gaoni, Y. 1967. The absolute configuration of delta-1-
tetrahydrocannabinol, the major active constituent of hashish. Tetrahedron 
Letters 12, 1109–1111.
Mechoulam, R., and Hanus, L. 2000. A historical overview of chemical research 
on cannabinoids. Chemistry and Physics of Lipids 108 (1–2), 1–13.
Mechoulam, R., Hanus, L. O., Pertwee, R., and Howlett, A. C. 2014. Early 
phytocannabinoid chemistry to endocannabinoids and beyond. Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience 15 (11), 757–764. doi: 10.1038/nrn3811
Mechoulam, R., Parker, L., and Gallily, R. 2002. Cannabidiol: An overview of 
some pharmacological aspects. Journal of Clinical Pharmacology 42 (11), 11S–
19S. doi: 10.1177/0091270002238789
Mechoulam, R., and Parker, L. A. 2013. The endocannabinoid system and the 
brain. Annual Review of Psychology 64, 21–47.
Mechoulam, R., Parker, L. A., and Gallily, R. 2002. Cannabidiol: An overview of 
some pharmacological aspects. Journal of Clinical Pharmacology 42 (11 Suppl), 
11S–19S.
Mechoulam, R., Peters, M., Murillo-Rodriguez, E., and Hanus, L. O. 2007. 
Cannabidiol—recent advances. Chemistry & Biodiversity 4 (8), 1678–1692. doi: 
10.1002/cbdv.200790147
Mechoulam, R., and Shvo, Y. 1963. Hashish. I. The structure of cannabidiol. 
Tetrahedron 19 (12), 2073–2078.
Meier, M. H., Caspi, A., Ambler, A., Harrington, H., Houts, R., Keefe, R. S.,  
et al. 2012. Persistent cannabis users show neuropsychological decline from 
childhood to midlife. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109 (40), 
E2657–E2664. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1206820109
Meiri, E., Jhangiani, H., Vredenburgh, J. J., Barbato, L. M., Carter, F. J., Yang, H. 
M., et al. 2007. Efficacy of dronabinol alone and in combination with ondansetron 
versus ondansetron alone for delayed chemotherapy-induced nausea and 
vomiting. Current Medical Research and Opinion 23 (3), 533–543. doi: 
10.1185/030079907X167525
Melis, M., Pillolla, G., Luchicchi, A., Muntoni, A. L., Yasar, S., Goldberg, S. R., et 
al. 2008. Endogenous fatty acid ethanolamides suppress nicotine-induced 
activation of mesolimbic dopamine neurons through nuclear receptors. Journal of 
Neuroscience 28 (51), 13985–13994. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3221-08.2008

210    References
Melis, M., and Pistis, M. 2007. Endocannabinoid signaling in midbrain dopamine 
neurons: More than physiology? Current Neuropharmacology 5 (4), 268–277. 
doi: 10.2174/157015907782793612
Merkus, F. W. H. M. 1971. Cannabivarin and tetrahydrocannabivarin, two new 
constituents of hashish. Nature 232, 579–580.
Meye, F. J., Trezza, V., Vanderschuren, L. J., Ramakers, G. M., and Adan, R. A. 
2013. Neutral antagonism at the cannabinoid 1 receptor: A safer treatment for 
obesity. Molecular Psychiatry 18 (12), 1294–1301. doi: 10.1038/mp.2012.145
Midanik, L. T., Tam, T. W., and Weisner, C. 2007. Concurrent and simultaneous 
drug and alcohol use: Results of the 2000 National Alcohol Survey. Drug and 
Alcohol Dependence 90 (1), 72–80. doi: 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2007.02.024
Mills, J. H. 2003. Cannabis Britannica: Empire, Trade, and Prohibition. Oxford 
University Press.
Milton, N. G. 2002. Anandamide and noladin ether prevent neurotoxicity of the 
human amyloid-beta peptide. Neuroscience Letters 332 (2), 127–130.
Miner, W. D., and Sanger, G. J. 1986. Inhibition of cisplatin-induced vomiting  
by selective 5-hydroxytryptamine M-receptor antagonism. British Journal of 
Pharmacology 88 (3), 497–499.
Mokrysz, C., Landy, R., Gage, S. H., Munafo, M. R., Roiser, J. P., and Curran, H. 
V. 2016. Are IQ and educational outcomes in teenagers related to their cannabis 
use? A prospective cohort study. Journal of Psychopharmacology 30 (2), 159–
168. doi: 10.1177/0269881115622241
Monory, K., Massa, F., Egertova, M., Eder, M., Blaudzun, H., Westenbroek, R., et 
al. 2006. The endocannabinoid system controls key epileptogenic circuits  
in the hippocampus. Neuron 51 (4), 455–466. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2006
.07.006
Monteleone, P., and Maj, M. 2013. Dysfunctions of leptin, ghrelin, BDNF and 
endocannabinoids in eating disorders: Beyond the homeostatic control of food 
intake. Psychoneuroendocrinology 38 (3), 312–330. doi: 10.1016/j.psyneuen
.2012.10.021
Monteleone, P., Matias, I., Martiadis, V., De Petrocellis, L., Maj, M., and Di 
Marzo, V. 2005. Blood levels of the endocannabinoid anandamide are increased 
in anorexia nervosa and in binge-eating disorder, but not in bulimia nervosa. 
Neuropsychopharmacology 30 (6), 1216–1221. doi: 10.1038/sj.npp.1300695
Monteleone, P., Piscitelli, F., Scognamiglio, P., Monteleone, A. M., Canestrelli, B., 
Di Marzo, V., et al. 2012. Hedonic eating is associated with increased peripheral 
levels of ghrelin and the endocannabinoid 2-arachidonoyl-glycerol in healthy 
humans: A pilot study. Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism 97 (6), 
E917–E924. doi: 10.1210/jc.2011-3018
Moore, T. H., Zammit, S., Lingford-Hughes, A., Barnes, T. R., Jones, P. B., Burke, 
M., et al. 2007. Cannabis use and risk of psychotic or affective mental health 
outcomes: A systematic review. Lancet 370 (9584), 319–328. doi: 10.1016/
S0140-6736(07)61162-3
www.ebook3000.com

References    211
Morena, M., Patel, S., Bains, J. S., and Hill, M. N. 2016. Neurobiological 
Interactions 
Between 
Stress 
and 
the 
Endocannabinoid 
System. 
Neuropsychopharmacology 41 (1), 80–102. doi: 10.1038/npp.2015.166
Moreno-Navarrete, J. M., Catalan, V., Whyte, L., Diaz-Arteaga, A., Vazquez-
Martinez, R., Rotellar, F., et al. 2012. The L-alpha-lysophosphatidylinositol/
GPR55 system and its potential role in human obesity. Diabetes 61 (2), 
281–291. doi: 10.2337/db11-0649
Morgan, C. J., and Curran, H. V. 2008. Effects of cannabidiol on schizophrenia-
like symptoms in people who use cannabis. British Journal of Psychiatry 192 (4), 
306–307. doi: 10.1192/bjp.bp.107.046649
Morgan, C. J., Freeman, T. P., Schafer, G. L., and Curran, H. V. 2010. Cannabidiol 
attenuates the appetitive effects of Delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol in humans 
smoking their chosen cannabis. Neuropsychopharmacology 35 (9), 1879–1885. 
doi: 10.1038/npp.2010.58
Morgan, C. J., Schafer, G., Freeman, T. P., and Curran, H. V. 2010. Impact of 
cannabidiol on the acute memory and psychotomimetic effects of smoked 
cannabis: naturalistic study: naturalistic study [corrected]. British Journal of 
Psychiatry 197 (4), 285–290. doi: 10.1192/bjp.bp.110.077503
Morrow, G. R., and Dobkin, P. L. 1987. Behavioral approaches for the 
management of adversive side effects of cancer treatment. Psychiatric Medicine 5 
(4), 299–314.
Moskowitz, M. A. 2010. Brain protection: Maybe yes, maybe no. Stroke 41 (10 
Suppl), S85–S86. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.110.598458
Muller-Vahl, K. R., Schneider, U., and Emrich, H. M. 1999. Nabilone increases 
choreatic movements in Huntington’s disease. Movement Disorders 14 (6), 1038–
1040.
Munro, S., Thomas, K. L., and Abu-Shaar, M. 1993. Molecular characterization 
of a peripheral receptor for cannabinoids. Nature 365 (6441), 61–65. 
doi: 10.1038/365061a0
Murillo-Rodriguez, E., Aguilar-Turton, L., Mijangos-Moreno, S., Sarro-Rimirez, 
A., and Arias-Carrion, O. 2014. Phytocannabinoids as novel therapeutic agents 
for sleep. In Handbook of Cannabis, ed. R. G. Pertwee. Oxford University 
Press.
Murillo-Rodriguez, E., Millan-Aldaco, D., Palomero-Rivero, M., Mechoulam, R., 
and Drucker-Colin, R. 2006. Cannabidiol, a constituent of Cannabis sativa, 
modulates sleep in rats. FEBS Letters 580 (18), 4337–4345. doi: 10.1016/
j.febslet.2006.04.102
Murray, R. M., Morrison, P. D., Henquet, C., and Di Forti, M. 2007. Cannabis, 
the mind and society: The hash realities. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 8 (11), 
885–895. doi: 10.1038/nrn2253
Naderi, N., Ahmad-Molaei, L., Aziz Ahari, F., and Motamedi, F. 2011. Modulation 
of anticonvulsant effects of cannabinoid compounds by GABA-A receptor agonist 

212    References
in acute pentylenetetrazole model of seizure in rat. Neurochemical Research 36 
(8), 1520–1525. doi: 10.1007/s11064-011-0479-1
Naidu, P. S., Booker, L., Cravatt, B. F., and Lichtman, A. H. 2009. Synergy between 
enzyme inhibitors of fatty acid amide hydrolase and cyclooxygenase in visceral 
nociception. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics 329 (1), 
48–56. doi: 10.1124/jpet.108.143487
Nakamura, E. M., da Silva, E. A., Concilio, G. V., Wilkinson, D. A., and Masur, J. 
1991. Reversible effects of acute and long-term administration of delta-9-
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) on memory in the rat. Drug and Alcohol Dependence 
28 (2), 167–175.
Naqvi, N. H., Gaznick, N., Tranel, D., and Bechara, A. 2014. The insula: A critical 
neural substrate for craving and drug seeking under conflict and risk. Annals of 
the New York Academy of Sciences 1316, 53–70. doi: 10.1111/nyas.12415
Nashold, B. S., Wilson, W. P., and Slaughter, D. G. 1969. Sensations evoked by 
stimulation in the midbrain of man. Journal of Neurosurgery 30 (1), 14–24. 
doi: 10.3171/jns.1969.30.1.0014
Nicholson, A. N., Turner, C., Stone, B. M., and Robson, P. J. 2004. Effect of Delta-
9-tetrahydrocannabinol and cannabidiol on nocturnal sleep and early-morning 
behavior in young adults. Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology 24 (3), 305–
313.
Niphakis, M. J., Cognetta, A. B., III, Chang, J. W., Buczynski, M. W., Parsons, L. 
H., Byrne, F., et al. 2013. Evaluation of NHS Carbamates as a Potent and Selective 
Class of Endocannabinoid Hydrolase Inhibitors. ACS Chemical Neuroscience 4 
(9), 1322–1332.
Nissen, S. E., Nicholls, S. J., Wolski, K., Rodes-Cabau, J., Cannon, C. P., Deanfield, 
J. E., et al. 2008. Effect of rimonabant on progression of atherosclerosis in patients 
with abdominal obesity and coronary artery disease: The STRADIVARIUS 
randomized controlled trial. Journal of the American Medical Association 299 
(13), 1547–1560. doi: 10.1001/jama.299.13.1547
Niyuhire, F., Varvel, S. A., Martin, B. R., and Lichtman, A. H. 2007. Exposure to 
marijuana smoke impairs memory retrieval in mice. Journal of Pharmacology 
and Experimental Therapeutics 322 (3), 1067–1075. doi: 10.1124/jpet.107
.119594
Niyuhire, F., Varvel, S. A., Thorpe, A. J., Stokes, R. J., Wiley, J. L., and Lichtman, 
A. H. 2007. The disruptive effects of the CB1 receptor antagonist rimonabant on 
extinction learning in mice are task-specific. Psychopharmacology 191 (2), 223–
231. doi: 10.1007/s00213-006-0650-6
Notcutt, W., Langford, R., Davies, P., Ratcliffe, S., and Potts, R. 2012. A placebo-
controlled, parallel-group, randomized withdrawal study of subjects with 
symptoms of spasticity due to multiple sclerosis who are receiving long-term 
Sativex (R) (nabiximols). Multiple Sclerosis 18 (2), 219–228. doi: 10.1177/
1352458511419700
www.ebook3000.com

References    213
Nunez, E., Benito, C., Pazos, M. R., Barbachano, A., Fajardo, O., Gonzalez, S., et 
al. 2004. Cannabinoid CB2 receptors are expressed by perivascular microglial 
cells in the human brain: An immunohistochemical study. Synapse 53 (4), 208–
213. doi: 10.1002/syn.20050
O’Brien, L. D., Limebeer, C. L., Rock, E. M., Bottegoni, G., Piomelli, D., and 
Parker, L. A. 2013. Anandamide transport inhibition by ARN272 attenuates 
nausea-induced behaviour in rats, and vomiting in shrews (Suncus murinus). 
British Journal of Pharmacology 170 (5), 1130–1136. doi: 10.1111/bph.12360
O’Brien, L. D., Sticht, M. A., Mitchnick, K. A., Limebeer, C. L., Parker, L. A., and 
Winters, B. D. 2014. CB1 receptor antagonism in the granular insular cortex or 
somatosensory area facilitates consolidation of object recognition memory. 
Neuroscience Letters 578, 192–196. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2014.06.056
O’Brien, L. D., Wills, K. L., Segsworth, B., Dashney, B., Rock, E. M.,  
Limebeer, C. L., et al. 2013. Effect of chronic exposure to rimonabant and 
phytocannabinoids on anxiety-like behavior and saccharin palatability. 
Pharmacology, Biochemistry, and Behavior 103 (3), 597–602. doi: 10.1016/
j.pbb.2012.10.008
O’Brien, L. D., Limebeer, C. L., Rock, E. M., Bottegoni, G., Piomelli, D., & Parker, 
L. A. 2013. Anandamide transport inhibition by ARN272 attenuates nausea-
induced behavior in rats and vomiting in shrews (Suncus murinus). British Journal 
of Pharmacology, 170, 1130–1136.
Oka, S., Nakajima, K., Yamashita, A., Kishimoto, S., and Sugiura, T. 2007. 
Identification of GPR55 as a lysophosphatidylinositol receptor. Biochemical and 
Biophysical Research Communications 362 (4), 928–934. doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc
.2007.08.078
Oleson, E. B., Beckert, M. V., Morra, J. T., Lansink, C. S., Cachope, R., Abdullah, 
R. A., et al. 2012. Endocannabinoids shape accumbal encoding of cue-motivated 
behavior via CB1 receptor activation in the ventral tegmentum. Neuron 73 (2), 
360–373. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2011.11.018
Onaivi, E. S., Ishiguro, H., Gong, J. P., Patel, S., Meozzi, P. A., Myers, L., et al. 
2008. Functional expression of brain neuronal CB2 cannabinoid receptors are 
involved in the effects of drugs of abuse and in depression. Annals of the New 
York Academy of Sciences 1139, 434–449. doi: 10.1196/annals.1432.036
Osei-Hyiaman, D., DePetrillo, M., Pacher, P., Liu, J., Radaeva, S., Batkai, S.,  
et al. 2005. Endocannabinoid activation at hepatic CB1 receptors stimulates fatty 
acid synthesis and contributes to diet-induced obesity. Journal of Clinical 
Investigation 115 (5), 1298–1305. doi: 10.1172/JCI23057
O’Shaughnessy, W. B. 1839. On the preparations of Indian hemp, or gunja 
(Cannabis indica); their effects ont he animal system in health, and their utility in 
the treatment of tentanus and other convulsive diseases. Transactions of the 
Medical and Physical Society of Bengal, 421–461.
O’Shaughnessy, W. B. 1840. On the preparations of the Indian hemp, or gunja 
(Cannabis indica). Transactions of the Medical and Physical Society of Bengal, 
71–102.

214    References
O’Shea, M., McGregor, I. S., and Mallet, P. E. 2006. Repeated cannabinoid 
exposure during perinatal, adolescent or early adult ages produces similar 
longlasting deficits in object recognition and reduced social interaction in rats. 
Journal of Psychopharmacology 20 (5), 611–621. doi: 10.1177/0269881106065188
Pacher, P., and Kunos, G. 2013. Modulating the endocannabinoid system in 
human health and disease—successes and failures. FEBS Journal 280 (9), 1918–
1943. doi: 10.1111/febs.12260
Pacher, P., and Mechoulam, R. 2011. Is lipid signaling through cannabinoid 2 
receptors part of a protective system? Progress in Lipid Research 50 (2), 193–
211. doi: 10.1016/j.plipres.2011.01.001
Paisley, S., Beard, S., Hunn, A., and Wight, J. 2002. Clinical effectiveness of oral 
treatments for spasticity in multiple sclerosis: A systematic review. Multiple 
Sclerosis 8 (4), 319–329.
Palazuelos, J., Aguado, T., Pazos, M. R., Julien, B., Carrasco, C., Resel, E.,  
et al. 2009. Microglial CB2 cannabinoid receptors are neuroprotective in 
Huntington’s disease excitotoxicity. Brain 132 (11), 3152–3164. doi: 10.1093/
brain/awp239
Pamplona, F. A., Ferreira, J., Menezes de Lima, O., Jr., Duarte, F. S., Bento, A. F., 
Forner, S., et al. 2012. Anti-inflammatory lipoxin A4 is an endogenous allosteric 
enhancer of CB1 cannabinoid receptor. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences 109 (51), 21134–21139. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1202906109
Pan, B., Wang, W., Zhong, P., Blankman, J. L., Cravatt, B. F., and Liu, Q. S. 2011. 
Alterations of endocannabinoid signaling, synaptic plasticity, learning, and 
memory in monoacylglycerol lipase knock-out mice. Journal of Neuroscience 31 
(38), 13420–13430. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2075-11.2011
Panikashvili, D., Simeonidou, C., Ben-Shabat, S., Hanus, L., Breuer, A., 
Mechoulam, R., et al. 2001. An endogenous cannabinoid (2-AG) is neuroprotective 
after brain injury. Nature 413 (6855), 527–531. doi: 10.1038/35097089
Parker, L. A. 2014. Conditioned flavor avoidance and conditioned gaping: Rat 
models of conditioned nausea. European Journal of Pharmacology 722, 122–
133.
Parker, L. A., and Gillies, T. 1995. THC-induced place and taste aversions in 
Lewis and Sprague-Dawley rats. Behavioral Neuroscience 109 (1), 71–78. 
doi: 10.1037/0735-7044.109.1.71
Parker, L. A., Limebeer, C. L., Rock, E. M., Litt, D. L., Kwiatkowska, M., and 
Piomelli, D. 2009. The FAAH inhibitor URB-597 interferes with cisplatin- and 
nicotine-induced vomiting in the Suncus murinus (house musk shrew). Physiology 
& Behavior 97 (1), 121–124. doi: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2009.02.014
Parker, L. A., Limebeer, C. L., Rock, E. M., Sticht, M. A., Ward, J., Turvey, G., 
Makriyannis, A., et al. 2016. A comparison of novel, selective fatty acid amide 
hydrolase (FAAH), monoacyglycerol lipase (MAGL) or dual FAAH/MAGL 
inhibitors to suppress acute and anticipatory nausea in rat models. 
Psychopharmacology 233 (12), 2265–2275. doi: 10.1007/s00213-016-4277-y
www.ebook3000.com

References    215
Parker, L. A., Mechoulam, R., and Schlievert, C. 2002. Cannabidiol, a non-
psychoactive component of cannabis and its synthetic dimethylheptyl homolog 
suppress nausea in an experimental model with rats. Neuroreport 13 (5), 567–
570. doi: 10.1097/00001756-200204160-00006
Parker, L. A., Mechoulam, R., Schlievert, C., Abbott, L., Fudge, M. L., and Burton, 
P. 2003. Effects of cannabinoids on lithium-induced conditioned rejection 
reactions in a rat model of nausea. Psychopharmacology 166 (2), 156–162.
Parker, L. A., Niphakis, M. J., Downey, R., Limebeer, C. L., Rock, E. M., Sticht, 
M. A., et al. 2015. Effect of selective inhibition of monoacylglycerol lipase 
(MAGL) on acute nausea, anticipatory nausea, and vomiting in rats and Suncus 
murinus. Psychopharmacology 232 (3), 583–593. doi: 10.1007/s00213-014-
3696-x
Parker, L. A., Rock, E. M., and Limebeer, C. L. 2011. Regulation of nausea  
and vomiting by cannabinoids. British Journal of Pharmacology 163 (7), 1411–
1422. doi: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2010.01176.x
Parker, L. A., Rock, E. M., Sticht, M. A., Wills, K. L., and Limebeer, C. L.  
2015. Cannabinoids suppress acute and anticipatory nausea in preclinical rat 
models of conditioned gaping. Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics 97 (6), 
559–561. doi: 10.1002/cpt.98
Parmentier-Batteur, S., Jin, K., Mao, X. O., Xie, L., and Greenberg, D. A. 2002. 
Increased severity of stroke in CB1 cannabinoid receptor knock-out mice. Journal 
of Neuroscience 22 (22), 9771–9775.
Parolaro, 
D., 
Zamberletti, 
E., 
and 
Rubino, 
T. 
2014. 
Cannabidiol/
Phytocannabinoids: A new opportunity for schizophrenia treatment? In 
Handbook of Cannabis, ed. R. G. Pertwee. Oxford University Press.
Parsons, L. H., and Hurd, Y. L. 2015. Endocannabinoid signalling in reward and 
addiction. Nature Reviews. Neuroscience 16 (10), 579–594. doi: 10.1038/
nrn4004
Patel, S., Hill, M. N., & Hillard, C. J. 2014. Effects of phytocannabinoids on 
anxiety, mood, and the endocrine system. In R. G. Pertwee (Ed.), Handbook of 
Cannabis. Oxford University Press.
Patel, S., and Hillard, C. J. 2006. Pharmacological evaluation of cannabinoid 
receptor ligands in a mouse model of anxiety: Further evidence for an anxiolytic 
role for endogenous cannabinoid signaling. Journal of Pharmacology and 
Experimental Therapeutics 318 (1), 304–311. doi: 10.1124/jpet.106.101287
Patel, S., Wohlfeil, E. R., Rademacher, D. J., Carrier, E. J., Perry, L. J.,  
Kundu, A., et al. 2003. The general anesthetic propofol increases brain 
N-arachidonylethanolamine (anandamide) content and inhibits fatty acid amide 
hydrolase. British Journal of Pharmacology 139 (5), 1005–1013. doi: 10.1038/
sj.bjp.0705334
Patton, G. C., Coffey, C., Carlin, J. B., Degenhardt, L., Lynskey, M., and Hall, W. 
2002. Cannabis use and mental health in young people: Cohort study. BMJ 325 
(7374), 1195–1198.

216    References
Penfield, W., and Faulk, M. E. 1955. The insula; further observations on its 
function. Brain 78 (4), 445–470.
Perez-Rial, S., Garcia-Gutierrez, M. S., Molina, J. A., Perez-Nievas, B. G., Ledent, 
C., Leiva, C., et al. 2011. Increased vulnerability to 6-hydroxydopamine lesion 
and reduced development of dyskinesias in mice lacking CB1 cannabinoid 
receptors. Neurobiology of Aging 32 (4), 631–645. doi: 10.1016/j.
neurobiolaging.2009.03.017
Pertwee, R. G. 1972. The ring test: A quantitative method for assessing the 
‘cataleptic’ effect of cannabis in mice. British Journal of Pharmacology 46 (4), 
753–763.
Pertwee, R. G. 2005. The therapeutic potential of drugs that target cannabinoid 
receptors or modulate the tissue levels or actions of endocannabinoids. AAPS 
Journal 7 (3), E625–E654. doi: 10.1208/aapsj070364
Pertwee, R. G. 2008. The diverse CB1 and CB2 receptor pharmacology of three 
plant cannabinoids: delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol, cannabidiol and delta9-
tetrahydrocannabivarin. British Journal of Pharmacology 153 (2), 199–215. 
doi: 10.1038/sj.bjp.0707442
Pertwee, R. G. 2009. Emerging strategies for exploiting cannabinoid receptor 
agonists as medicines. British Journal of Pharmacology 156 (3), 397–411. 
doi: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2008.00048.x
Pertwee, R. G. 2015. Endocannabinoids and their pharmacological actions. 
Handbook of Experimental Pharmacology 231, 1–37.
Pertwee, R. G., Howlett, A. C., Abood, M. E., Alexander, S. P., Di Marzo, V., 
Elphick, M. R., et al. 2010. International Union of Basic and Clinical Pharmacology. 
LXXIX. Cannabinoid receptors and their ligands: Beyond CB (1) and CB (2). 
Pharmacological Reviews 62 (4), 588–631. doi: 10.1124/pr.110.003004
Pertwee, R. G., Thomas, A., Stevenson, L. A., Maor, Y., and Mechoulam, R. 2005. 
Evidence that (-)-7-hydroxy-4′-dimethylheptyl-cannabidiol activates a non-CB 
(1), non-CB (2), non-TRPV1 target in the mouse vas deferens. Neuropharmacology 
48 (8), 1139–1146. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2005.01.010
Pertwee, R. G., Thomas, A., Stevenson, L. A., Ross, R. A., Varvel, S. A.,  
Lichtman, A. H., et al. 2007. The psychoactive plant cannabinoid,  
Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol, 
is 
antagonized 
by 
Delta8- 
and 
Delta9-
tetrahydrocannabivarin in mice in vivo. British Journal of Pharmacology 150 (5), 
586–594. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjp.0707124
Piomelli, D., Haney, M., Budney, A. J., and Piazza, P. V. 2016. Legal or illegal, 
cannabis is still addictive. Cannabis and Cannabinoid Research 1 (1), 47–53.
Piomelli, D., & Russo, E. B. (2016). The Cannabis sativa versus Cannabis indica 
Debate: An Interview with Ethan Russo, MD. Cannabis and Cannabinoid 
Research, 1(1), 44–46. doi:10.1089/can.2015.29003.ebr.
Pi-Sunyer, F. X., Aronne, L. J., Heshmati, H. M., Devin, J., Rosenstock, J., et al. 
2006. Effect of rimonabant, a cannabinoid-1 receptor blocker, on weight and 
cardiometabolic risk factors in overweight or obese patients. Journal of the 
American Medical Association 295 (7), 761–775. doi: 10.1001/jama.295.7.761
www.ebook3000.com

References    217
Pope, H. G., Jr. 2002. Cannabis, cognition, and residual confounding. Journal of 
the American Medical Association 287 (9), 1172–1174.
Portenoy, R. K., Ganae-Motan, E. D., Allende, S., Yanagihara, R., Shaiova, L., 
Weinstein, S., et al. 2012. Nabiximols for opioid-treated cancer patients with 
poorly-controlled chronic pain: A randomized, placebo-controlled, graded-dose 
trial. Journal of Pain 13 (5), 438–449. doi: 10.1016/j.jpain.2012.01.003
Porter, B. E., and Jacobson, C. 2013. Report of a parent survey of cannabidiol-
enriched cannabis use in pediatric treatment-resistant epilepsy. Epilepsy & 
Behavior 29 (3), 574–577. doi: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2013.08.037
Potter, D. 2014. Cannabis horticulture. In Handbook of Cannabis, ed. R. G. 
Pertwee. Oxford University Press.
Power, R. A., Verweij, K. J., Zuhair, M., Montgomery, G. W., Henders, A. K., 
Heath, A. C., et al. 2014. Genetic predisposition to schizophrenia associated with 
increased use of cannabis. Molecular Psychiatry 19 (11), 1201–1204. doi: 
10.1038/mp.2014.51
Press, C. A., Knupp, K. G., and Chapman, K. E. 2015. Parental reporting of 
response to oral cannabis extracts for treatment of refractory epilepsy. Epilepsy 
& Behavior 45, 49–52. doi: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2015.02.043
Price, D. A., Martinez, A. A., Seillier, A., Koek, W., Acosta, Y., Fernandez, E.,  
et al. 2009. WIN55,212–2, a cannabinoid receptor agonist, protects against 
nigrostriatal cell loss in the 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine mouse 
model of Parkinson’s disease. European Journal of Neuroscience 29 (11), 2177–
2186. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2009.06764.x
Price, M. R., Baillie, G. L., Thomas, A., Stevenson, L. A., Easson, M., Goodwin, 
R., et al. 2005. Allosteric modulation of the cannabinoid CB1 receptor. Molecular 
Pharmacology 68 (5), 1484–1495. doi: 10.1124/mol.105.016162
Pryce, G., Ahmed, Z., Hankey, D. J., Jackson, S. J., Croxford, J. L., Pocock, J. M., 
et al. 2003. Cannabinoids inhibit neurodegeneration in models of multiple 
sclerosis. Brain 126 (10), 2191–2202. doi: 10.1093/brain/awg224
Pryce, G., and Baker, D. 2007. Control of spasticity in a multiple sclerosis  
model is mediated by CB1, not CB2, cannabinoid receptors. British Journal of 
Pharmacology 150 (4), 519–525. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjp.0707003
Pryce, G., and Baker, D. 2014. Cannabis and multiple sclerosis. In Handbook of 
Cannabis, ed. R. G. Pertwee. Oxford University Press.
Qin, N., Neeper, M. P., Liu, Y., Hutchinson, T. L., Lubin, M. L., and Flores, C. M. 
2008. TRPV2 is activated by cannabidiol and mediates CGRP release in cultured 
rat dorsal root ganglion neurons. Journal of Neuroscience 28 (24), 6231–6238. 
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0504-08.2008
Quinn, H. R., Matsumoto, I., Callaghan, P. D., Long, L. E., Arnold, J. C., 
Gunasekaran, N., et al. 2008. Adolescent rats find repeated Delta (9)-THC less 
aversive than adult rats but display greater residual cognitive deficits and changes 
in hippocampal protein expression following exposure. Neuropsychopharmacology 
33 (5), 1113–1126. doi: 10.1038/sj.npp.1301475

218    References
Rabinak, C. A., Angstadt, M., Lyons, M., Mori, S., Milad, M. R., Liberzon, I.,  
et al. 2014. Cannabinoid modulation of prefrontal-limbic activation during  
fear extinction learning and recall in humans. Neurobiology of Learning and 
Memory 113, 125–134. doi: 10.1016/j.nlm.2013.09.009
Raby, W. N., Carpenter, K. M., Rothenberg, J., Brooks, A. C., Jiang, H., Sullivan, 
M., et al. 2009. Intermittent marijuana use is associated with improved retention 
in naltrexone treatment for opiate-dependence. American Journal on Addictions 
18 (4), 301–308. doi: 10.1080/10550490902927785
Radhakrishnan, R., Wilkinson, S. T., and D’Souza, D. C. 2014. Gone to pot— 
A review of the association between cannabis and psychosis. Frontiers in 
Psychiatry 5, 54. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2014.00054
Raman, C., McAllister, S. D., Rizvi, G., Patel, S. G., Moore, D. H., and Abood, M. 
E. 2004. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: Delayed disease progression in mice by 
treatment with a cannabinoid. Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis and Other Motor 
Neuron Disorders 5 (1), 33–39. doi: 10.1080/14660820310016813
Ramer, R., and Hinz, B. 2016. Antitumorigenic targets of cannabinoids—current 
status and implications. Expert Opinion on Therapeutic Targets May 11, 1–17. 
doi: 10.1080/14728222.2016.1177512
Ramírez, B. G., Blazquez, C., Gomez del Pulgar, T., Guzman, M., and de Ceballos, 
M. L. 2005. Prevention of Alzheimer’s disease pathology by cannabinoids: 
Neuroprotection mediated by blockade of microglial activation. Journal of 
Neuroscience 25 (8), 1904–1913. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4540-04.2005
Ray, A. P., Griggs, L., and Darmani, N. A. 2009. Delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol 
suppresses vomiting behavior and Fos expression in both acute and delayed 
phases of cisplatin-induced emesis in the least shrew. Behavioural Brain Research 
196 (1), 30–36. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2008.07.028
Realini, N., Vigano, D., Guidali, C., Zamberletti, E., Rubino, T., and Parolaro, D. 
2011. Chronic URB597 treatment at adulthood reverted most depressive-like 
symptoms induced by adolescent exposure to THC in female rats. 
Neuropharmacology 60 (2–3), 235–243. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2010.09.003
Reidel, G., Fadda, P., McKillop-Smith, S., Pertwee, R. G., Platt, B., and Robinson, 
L. 2009. Synthetic and plant-derived cannabinoid receptor antagonists show 
hypophagic properties in fasted and non-fasted mice. British Journal of 
Pharmacology 156, 1154–1166.
Ren, Y., Whittard, J., Higuera-Matas, A., Morris, C. V., and Hurd, Y. L. 2009. 
Cannabidiol, a nonpsychotropic component of cannabis, inhibits cue-induced 
heroin seeking and normalizes discrete mesolimbic neuronal disturbances. Journal 
of Neuroscience 29 (47), 14764–14769. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4291-09.2009
Resstel, L. B., Joca, S. R., Moreira, F. A., Correa, F. M., and Guimaraes, F. S. 2006. 
Effects of cannabidiol and diazepam on behavioral and cardiovascular responses 
induced by contextual conditioned fear in rats. Behavioural Brain Research 172 
(2), 294–298. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2006.05.016
www.ebook3000.com

References    219
Rey, J. M., Sawyer, M. G., Raphael, B., Patton, G. C., and Lynskey, M. 2002. 
Mental health of teenagers who use cannabis. Results of an Australian survey. 
British Journal of Psychiatry 180, 216–221.
Reynolds, J. R. 1868. Therapetical uses and toxic effects of Cannabis indica. 
Lancet 1, 637–638.
Riegel, A. C., and Lupica, C. R. 2004. Independent presynaptic and postsynaptic 
mechanisms regulate endocannabinoid signaling at multiple synapses in the 
ventral tegmental area. Journal of Neuroscience 24 (49), 11070–11078. doi: 
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3695-04.2004
Robson, P. 2011. Abuse potential and psychoactive effects of delta-9-
tetrahydrocannabinol and cannabidiol oromucosal spray (Sativex), a new 
cannabinoid medicine. Expert Opinion on Drug Safety 10 (5), 675–685. doi: 
10.1517/14740338.2011.575778
Roca-Pallin, J. M., Lopez-Pelayo, H., Sugranyes, G., and Balcells-Olivero, M. M. 
2013. Cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome. CNS Neuroscience & Therapeutics 
19 (12), 994–995. doi: 10.1111/cns.12207
Rock, E. M., Bolognini, D., Limebeer, C. L., Cascio, M. G., Anavi-Goffer, S., 
Fletcher, P. J., et al. 2012. Cannabidiol, a non-psychotropic component of 
cannabis, attenuates vomiting and nausea-like behaviour via indirect agonism of 
5–HT1A somatodendritic autoreceptors in the dorsal raphe nucleus. British 
Journal of Pharmacology 165 (8), 2620–2634. doi: 10.1111/j.1476-5381
.2011.01621.x
Rock, E. M., Goodwin, J. M., Limebeer, C. L., Breuer, A., Pertwee, R. G., 
Mechoulam, R., et al. 2011. Interaction between non-psychotropic cannabinoids 
in marihuana: Effect of cannabigerol (CBG) on the anti-nausea or anti-emetic 
effects of cannabidiol (CBD) in rats and shrews. Psychopharmacology 215 (3), 
505–512. doi: 10.1007/s00213-010-2157-4
Rock, E. M., Kopstick, R., Limebeer, C., and Parker, L. A. 2013. 
Tetrahydrocannabinolic acid reduces nausea-induced conditioned gaping in rats 
and vomiting in Suncus murinus. British Journal of Pharmacology 170, 641–648.
Rock, E. M., Limebeer, C. L., Mechoulam, R., Piomelli, D., and Parker, L. A. 
2008. The effect of cannabidiol and URB597 on conditioned gaping (a model of 
nausea) elicited by a lithium-paired context in the rat. Psychopharmacology 196 
(3), 389–395. doi: 10.1007/s00213-007-0970-1
Rock, E. M., Limebeer, C. L., and Parker, L. A. 2014. Anticipatory nausea  
in animal models: A review of potential novel therapeutic treatments. Experimental 
Brain Research 232 (8), 2511–2534. doi: 10.1007/s00221-014-3942-9
Rock, E. M., Limebeer, C. L., and Parker, L. A. 2015. Effect of combined  
doses of Delta (9)-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and cannabidiolic acid (CBDA) 
on acute and anticipatory nausea using rat (Sprague- Dawley) models of 
conditioned gaping. Psychopharmacology 232 (24), 4445–4454. doi: 10.1007/
s00213-015-4080-.

220    References
Rock, E. M., Limebeer, C. L., Sticht, M. A., and Parker, L. A. 2014. Regulation of 
vomiting and nausea by phytocannabinoids. InHandbook of Cannabis, ed. 
R. G. Pertwee. Oxford University Press.
Rock, E. M., Limebeer, C. L., Ward, J. M., Cohen, A., Grove, K., Niphakis, M. J., 
Cravatt, B. F., and Parker, L. A. 2015. Interference with acute nausea and 
anticipatory nausea in rats by fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH) inhibition 
through a PPARα and CB1 receptor mechanism, respectively: a double 
dissociation. Psychopharmacology 232 (20), 3841–3848.
Rock, E. M., and Parker, L. A. 2013. Effect of low doses of cannabidiolic acid and 
ondansetron on LiCl-induced conditioned gaping (a model of nausea-induced 
behaviour) in rats. British Journal of Pharmacology 169 (3), 685–692.
Rock, E. M., Sticht, M. A., Duncan, M., Stott, C., and Parker, L. A. 2013. 
Evaluation of the potential of the phytocannabinoids, cannabidivarin (CBDV) 
and Delta-tetrahydrocannabivarin (THCV), to produce CB receptor inverse 
agonism symptoms of nausea in rats. British Journal of Pharmacology 170 (3), 
671–678.
Rock, E. M., Sticht, M. A., and Parker, L. A. 2014. Effect of phytocannabinoids 
on nausea and vomiting. In Handbook of Cannabis, ed. R. G. Pertwee. Oxford 
University Presss.
Rog, D. J., Nurmikko, T. J., Friede, T., and Young, C. A. 2005. Randomized, 
controlled trial of cannabis-based medicine in central pain in multiple sclerosis. 
Neurology 65 (6), 812–819. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000176753.45410.8b
Rog, D. J., Nurmikko, T. J., and Young, C. A. 2007. Oromucosal delta9-
tetrahydrocannabinol/cannabidiol for neuropathic pain associated with multiple 
sclerosis: An uncontrolled, open-label, 2-year extension trial. Clinical Therapeutics 
29 (9), 2068–2079. doi: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2007.09.013
Rogeberg, O., and Elvik, R. 2016. The effects of cannabis intoxication on motor 
vehicle collision revisited and revised. Addiction 111 (8), 1348–1359.
Roitman, P., Mechoulam, R., Cooper-Kazaz, R., and Shalev, A. 2014. Preliminary, 
open-label, pilot study of add-on oral Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol in chronic 
post-traumatic stress disorder. Clinical Drug Investigation 34 (8), 587–591. doi: 
10.1007/s40261-014-0212-3
Romigi, A., Bari, M., Placidi, F., Marciani, M. G., Malaponti, M., Torelli, F.,  
et al. 2010. Cerebrospinal fluid levels of the endocannabinoid anandamide are 
reduced in patients with untreated newly diagnosed temporal lobe epilepsy. 
Epilepsia 51 (5), 768–772. doi: 10.1111/j.1528-1167.2009.02334.x
Rosenblum, A., Marsch, L. A., Joseph, H., and Portenoy, R. K. 2008. Opioids and 
the treatment of chronic pain: Controversies, current status, and future directions. 
Experimental and Clinical Psychopharmacology 16 (5), 405–416. doi: 10.1037/
a0013628
Rubino, T., Massi, P., Vigano, D., Fuzio, D., and Parolaro, D. 2000. Long-term 
treatment with SR141716A, the CB1 receptor antagonist, influences morphine 
withdrawal syndrome. Life Sciences 66 (22), 2213–2219.
www.ebook3000.com

References    221
Rubino, T., and Parolaro, D. 2008. Long lasting consequences of cannabis 
exposure in adolescence. Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology 286 (1–2 Suppl 
1), S108–S113. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2008.02.003
Ruehle, S., Remmers, F., Romo-Parra, H., Massa, F., Wickert, M., Wortge, S.,  
et al. 2013. Cannabinoid CB1 receptor in dorsal telencephalic glutamatergic 
neurons: Distinctive sufficiency for hippocampus-dependent and amygdala-
dependent synaptic and behavioral functions. Journal of Neuroscience 33 (25), 
10264–10277. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4171-12.2013
Ruiz-Veguilla, M., Barrigon, M. L., Hernandez, L., Rubio, J. L., Gurpegui, M., 
Sarramea, F., et al. 2013. Dose-response effect between cannabis use and psychosis 
liability in a non-clinical population: Evidence from a snowball sample. Journal 
of Psychiatric Research 47 (8), 1036–1043. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2013.03.003
Russo, E. B. 2014. The pharmacological history of cannabis. In Handbook of 
Cannabis, ed. R. G. Pertwee. Oxford University Press.
Ryberg, E., Larsson, N., Sjogren, S., Hjorth, S., Hermansson, N. O., Leonova, J., 
et al. 2007. The orphan receptor GPR55 is a novel cannabinoid receptor. British 
Journal of Pharmacology 152 (7), 1092–1101. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjp.0707460
Sachse-Seeboth, C., Pfeil, J., Sehrt, D., Meineke, I., Tzvetkov, M., Bruns, E.,  
et al. 2009. Interindividual variation in the pharmacokinetics of Delta9-
tetrahydrocannabinol as related to genetic polymorphisms in CYP2C9. Clinical 
Pharmacology and Therapeutics 85 (3), 273–276. doi: 10.1038/clpt.2008.213
Sagredo, O., Ramos, J. A., Decio, A., Mechoulam, R., and Fernandez-Ruiz, J. 
2007) Cannabidiol reduced the striatal atrophy caused 3-nitropropionic acid in 
vivo by mechanisms independent of the activation of cannabinoid, vanilloid 
TRPV1 and adenosine A2A receptors. European Journal of Neuroscience 26 (4), 
843–851. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2007.05717.x
Sanchez, M. G., Ruiz-Llorente, L., Sanchez, A. M., and Diaz-Laviada, I. 2003. 
Activation of phosphoinositide 3-kinase/PKB pathway by CB (1) and CB (2) 
cannabinoid receptors expressed in prostate PC-3 cells. Involvement in Raf-1 
stimulation and NGF induction. Cellular Signalling 15 (9), 851–859.
Sasso, O., Bertorelli, R., Bandiera, T., Scarpelli, R., Colombano, G., Armirotti, A., 
et al. 2012. Peripheral FAAH inhibition causes profound antinociception and 
protects against indomethacin-induced gastric lesions. Pharmacological Research, 
65 (5), 553–563. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2012.02.012
Savage, S. R., Romero-Sandoval, A., Schatman, M., Wallace, M., Fanciullo, G., 
McCarberg, B., et al. 2016. Cannabis in pain treatment: Clinical and research 
considerations. Journal of Pain 17 (6), 654–668.
Sawler, J., Stout, J. M., Gardner, K. M., Hudson, D., Vidmar, J., Butler, L., et al. 
2015. The genetic structure of marijuana and hemp. PLoS One 10 (8), e0133292. 
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0133292
Sawzdargo, M., Nguyen, T., Lee, D. K., Lynch, K. R., Cheng, R., Heng, H. H.,  
et al. 1999. Identification and cloning of three novel human G protein-coupled 
receptor genes GPR52, PsiGPR53 and GPR55: GPR55 is extensively expressed in 
human brain. Brain Research. Molecular Brain Research 64 (2), 193–198.

222    References
Scavone, J. L., Sterling, R. C., and Van Bockstaele, E. J. 2013. Cannabinoid and 
opioid interactions: Implications for opiate dependence and withdrawal. 
Neuroscience 248, 637–654. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2013.04.034
Scheen, A. J., Finer, N., Hollander, P., Jensen, M. D., Van Gaal, L. F., et al. 2006. 
Efficacy and tolerability of rimonabant in overweight or obese patients with type 
2 diabetes: A randomised controlled study. Lancet 368 (9548), 1660–1672. doi: 
10.1016/S0140-6736(06)69571-8
Schelling, G., Hauer, D., Azad, S. C., Schmoelz, M., Chouker, A., Schmidt, M.,  
et al. 2006. Effects of general anesthesia on anandamide blood levels in humans. 
Anesthesiology 104 (2), 273–277.
Scherma, M., Panlilio, L. V., Fadda, P., Fattore, L., Gamaleddin, I., Le Foll, B.,  
et al. 2008. Inhibition of anandamide hydrolysis by cyclohexyl carbamic acid 
3′-carbamoyl-3-yl ester (URB597) reverses abuse-related behavioral and 
neurochemical effects of nicotine in rats. Journal of Pharmacology and 
Experimental Therapeutics 327 (2), 482–490. doi: 10.1124/jpet.108.142224
Schierenbeck, T., Riemann, D., Berger, M., and Hornyak, M. 2008. Effect of illicit 
recreational drugs upon sleep: Cocaine, ecstasy and marijuana. Sleep Medicine 
Reviews 12 (5), 381–389. doi: 10.1016/j.smrv.2007.12.004
Schimmelmann, B. G., Conus, P., Cotton, S., Kupferschmid, S., McGorry, P. D., 
and Lambert, M. 2012. Prevalence and impact of cannabis use disorders in 
adolescents with early onset first episode psychosis. European Psychiatry 27 (6), 
463–469. doi: 10.1016/j.eurpsy.2011.03.001
Schlosburg, J. E., Blankman, J. L., Long, J. Z., Nomura, D. K., Pan, B., Kinsey, S. 
G., et al. 2010. Chronic monoacylglycerol lipase blockade causes functional 
antagonism of the endocannabinoid system. Nature Neuroscience 13 (9), 1113–
1119. doi: 10.1038/nn.2616
Schneider, M., and Koch, M. 2003. Chronic pubertal, but not adult chronic 
cannabinoid treatment impairs sensorimotor gating, recognition memory, and the 
performance in a progressive ratio task in adult rats. Neuropsychopharmacology 
28 (10), 1760–1769. doi: 10.1038/sj.npp.1300225
Schoedel, K. A., Chen, N., Hilliard, A., White, L., Stott, C., Russo, E., et al. 2011. 
A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study to evaluate the 
subjective abuse potential and cognitive effects of nabiximols oromucosal spray 
in subjects with a history of recreational cannabis use. Human Psychopharmacology 
26 (3), 224–236. doi: 10.1002/hup.1196
Schreiner, A. M., and Dunn, M. E. 2012. Residual effects of cannabis use on 
neurocognitive performance after prolonged abstinence: A meta-analysis. 
Experimental and Clinical Psychopharmacology 20 (5), 420–429. doi: 10.1037/
a0029117
Schubart, C. D., Sommer, I. E., van Gastel, W. A., Goetgebuer, R. L., Kahn, R. S., 
and Boks, M. P. 2011. Cannabis with high cannabidiol content is associated with 
fewer psychotic experiences. Schizophrenia Research 130 (1–3), 216–221. doi: 
10.1016/j.schres.2011.04.017
www.ebook3000.com

References    223
Schubart, C. D., van Gastel, W. A., Breetvelt, E. J., Beetz, S. L., Ophoff, R. A., 
Sommer, I. E., et al. 2011. Cannabis use at a young age is associated with psychotic 
experiences. Psychological Medicine 41 (6), 1301–1310. doi: 10.1017/
S003329171000187X
Sciolino, N. R., Zhou, W., and Hohmann, A. G. 2011. Enhancement of 
endocannabinoid signaling with JZL184, an inhibitor of the 2-arachidonoylglycerol 
hydrolyzing enzyme monoacylglycerol lipase, produces anxiolytic effects under 
conditions of high environmental aversiveness in rats. Pharmacological Research 
64 (3), 226–234. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2011.04.010
Scopinho, A. A., Guimaraes, F. S., Correa, F. M., and Resstel, L. B. 2011. 
Cannabidiol inhibits the hyperphagia induced by cannabinoid-1 or serotonin-1A 
receptor agonists. Pharmacology, Biochemistry, and Behavior 98 (2), 268–272. 
doi: 10.1016/j.pbb.2011.01.007
Serpell, M., Ratcliffe, S., Hovorka, J., Schofield, M., Taylor, L., Lauder, H., et al. 
2014. A double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled, parallel group study of 
THC/CBD spray in peripheral neuropathic pain treatment. European Journal of 
Pain 18 (7), 999–1012. doi: 10.1002/j.1532-2149.2013.00445.x
Serrano, A., and Parsons, L. H. 2011. Endocannabinoid influence in drug 
reinforcement, dependence and addiction-related behaviors. Pharmacology & 
Therapeutics 132 (3), 215–241. doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2011.06.005
Sharkey, K. A., Darmani, N. A., and Parker, L. A. 2014. Regulation of nausea and 
vomiting by cannabinoids and the endocannabinoid system. European Journal of 
Pharmacology 722, 134–146.
Shelef, A., Barak, Y., Berger, U., Paleacu, D., Tadger, S., Plopsky, I., et al. 2016. 
Safety and efficacy of medical cannabis oil for behavioral and psychological 
symptoms of dementia: An open label, add-on, pilot study. Journal of Alzheimer’s 
Disease 51 (1), 15–19. doi: 10.3233/JAD-150915
Shen, M., and Thayer, S. A. 1998. Cannabinoid receptor agonists protect cultured 
rat hippocampal neurons from excitotoxicity. Molecular Pharmacology 54 (3), 
459–462.
Siegel, S. (in press). The heroin overdose mystery. Current Directions in 
Psychological Science.
Simonetto, D. A., Oxentenko, A. S., Herman, M. L., and Szostek, J. H. 2012. 
Cannabinoid hyperemesis: A case series of 98 patients. Mayo Clinic Proceedings 
87 (2), 114–119. doi: 10.1016/j.mayocp.2011.10.005
Sim-Selley, L. J. 2003. Regulation of cannabinoid CB1 receptors in the central 
nervous system by chronic cannabinoids. Critical Reviews in Neurobiology 15 
(2), 91–119.
Sink, K. S., McLaughlin, P. J., Wood, J. T., Brown, C., Fan, P., Vemuri, V. K.,  
et al. 2008. The novel cannabinoid CB1 receptor neutral antagonist AM4113 
suppresses food intake and food-reinforced behavior but does not induce signs of 
nausea in rats. Neuropsychopharmacology 33 (4), 946–955. doi: 10.1038/sj.
npp.1301476

224    References
Sink, K. S., Segovia, K. N., Collins, L. E., Markus, E. J., Vemuri, V. K., Makriyannis, 
A., et al. 2010. The CB1 inverse agonist AM251, but not the CB1 antagonist 
AM4113, enhances retention of contextual fear conditioning in rats. 
Pharmacology, Biochemistry, and Behavior 95 (4), 479–484. doi: 10.1016/
j.pbb.2010.03.011
Sink, K. S., Segovia, K. N., Sink, J., Randall, P. A., Collins, L. E., Correa, M., et al. 
2010. Potential anxiogenic effects of cannabinoid CB1 receptor antagonists/
inverse agonists in rats: Comparisons between AM4113, AM251, and the 
benzodiazepine inverse agonist FG-7142. European Neuropsychopharmacology 
20 (2), 112–122. doi: 10.1016/j.euroneuro.2009.11.00.
Skosnik, P. D., Cortes-Briones, J. A., and Hajos, M. 2016. It’s all in the rhythm: 
The role of cannabinoids in neural oscillations and psychosis. Biological 
Psychiatry 79 (7), 568–577. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2015.12.011
Sofia, R. D., and Knobloch, L. C. 1976. Comparative effects of various naturally 
occurring cannabinoids on food, sucrose and water consumption by rats. 
Pharmacology, Biochemistry, and Behavior 4 (5), 591–599.
Sofia, R. D., Vassar, H. B., and Knobloch, L. C. 1975. Comparative analgesic 
activity of various naturally occurring cannabinoids in mice and rats. 
Psychopharmacology 40 (4), 285–295.
Solowij, N., and Battisti, R. 2008. The chronic effects of cannabis on memory in 
humans: A review. Current Drug Abuse Reviews 1 (1), 81–98.
Soltesz, I., Alger, B. E., Kano, M., Lee, S. H., Lovinger, D. M., Ohno-Shosaku, T., 
et al. 2015. Weeding out bad waves: Towards selective cannabinoid circuit control 
in epilepsy. Nature Reviews. Neuroscience 16 (5), 264–277. doi: 10.1038/
nrn3937
Spoto, B., Fezza, F., Parlongo, G., Battista, N., Sgro, E., Gasperi, V., et al. 2006. 
Human adipose tissue binds and metabolizes the endocannabinoids anandamide 
and 2-arachidonoylglycerol. Biochimie 88 (12), 1889–1897. doi: 10.1016/
j.biochi.2006.07.019
Stefanis, N. C., Dragovic, M., Power, B. D., Jablensky, A., Castle, D., and Morgan, 
V. A. 2013. Age at initiation of cannabis use predicts age at onset of psychosis: 
The 7- to 8-year trend. Schizophrenia Bulletin 39 (2), 251–254. doi: 10.1093/
schbul/sbs188
Stella, N. 2004. Cannabinoid signaling in glial cells. Glia 48 (4), 267–277. doi: 
10.1002/glia.20084
Sticht, M. A., Limebeer, C. L., Rafla, B. R., Abdullah, R. A., Poklis, J. L.,  
Ho, W., et al. 2015. Endocannabinoid regulation of nausea is mediated  
by 2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG) in the rat visceral insular cortex. 
Neuropharmacology 102, 92–102.
Sticht, M. A., Limebeer, C. L., Rafla, B. R., and Parker, L. A. 2015. Intra-visceral 
insular cortex 2-arachidonoylglycerol, but not N-arachidonoylethanolamide, 
suppresses acute nausea-induced conditioned gaping in rats. Neuroscience 286, 
338–344. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2014.11.058
www.ebook3000.com

References    225
Sticht, M. A., Rock, E. M., Limebeer, C. L., & Parker, L. A. (2015). Endocannabinoid 
mechanisms influencing nausea. International Review of Neurobiology, 125, 
127–162.
Stokes, P. R., Mehta, M. A., Curran, H. V., Breen, G., and Grasby, P. M. 2009. Can 
recreational doses of THC produce significant dopamine release in the human 
striatum? NeuroImage 48 (1), 186–190. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.06.029
Stover, J. F., Pleines, U. E., Morganti-Kossmann, M. C., Kossmann, T., Lowitzsch, 
K., and Kempski, O. S. 1997. Neurotransmitters in cerebrospinal fluid reflect 
pathological activity. European Journal of Clinical Investigation 27 (12), 1038–
1043.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. 2013. Results from 
the 2013 national surevey on drug use and health: Summary of national findings. 
http://store.samhsa.gov/product/Results-from-the-2013-National-Survey-on-
Drug-Use-and-Health-Summary-of-National-Findings/SMA144863.
Sugiura, T., Kondo, S., Sukagawa, A., Nakane, S., Shinoda, A., Itoh, K., et al. 
1995. 2-Arachidonoylglycerol: A possible endogenous cannabinoid receptor 
ligand in brain. Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 215 (1), 
89–97.
Sulcova, E., Mechoulam, R., and Fride, E. 1998. Biphasic effects of anandamide. 
Pharmacology, Biochemistry, and Behavior 59 (2), 347–352.
Sulkowski, G., Dabrowska-Bouta, B., Kwiatkowska-Patzer, B., and Struzynska, L. 
2009. Alterations in glutamate transport and group I metabotropic glutamate 
receptors in the rat brain during acute phase of experimental autoimmune 
encephalomyelitis. Folia Neuropathologica 47 (4), 329–337.
Sullivan, E. V. 2007. Alcohol and drug dependence: Brain mechanisms and 
behavioral impact. Neuropsychology Review 17 (3), 235–238. doi: 10.1007/
s11065-007-9039-5
Sullivan, S. 2010. Cannabinoid hyperemesis. Canadian Journal of Gastroenterology 
24 (5), 284–285.
Sumislawski, J. J., Ramikie, T. S., and Patel, S. 2011. Reversible gating of 
endocannabinoid plasticity in the amygdala by chronic stress: A potential role for 
monoacylglycerol lipase inhibition in the prevention of stress-induced behavioral 
adaptation. Neuropsychopharmacology 36 (13), 2750–2761. doi: 10.1038/
npp.2011.166
Sutton, I. R., and Daeninck, P. 2006. Cannabinoids in the management of 
intractable chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting and cancer-related pain. 
Journal of Supportive Oncology 4 (10), 531–535.
Suzuki, A., Mukawa, T., Tsukagoshi, A., Frankland, P. W., and Kida, S. 2008. 
Activation of LVGCCs and CB1 receptors required for destabilization of 
reactivated contextual fear memories. Learning & Memory 15 (6), 426–433. doi: 
10.1101/lm.888808
Sylantyev, S., Jensen, T. P., Ross, R. A., & Rusakov, D. A. (2013). Cannabinoid- 
and lysophosphatidylinositol-sensitive receptor GPR55 boost neurotransmitter 

226    References
release at central synapses. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of 
the United States of America, 110(13), 5193–5198.
Tam, J., Cinar, R., Liu, J., Godlewski, G., Wesley, D., Jourdan, T., et al. 2012. 
Peripheral cannabinoid-1 receptor inverse agonism reduces obesity by reversing 
leptin resistance. Cell Metabolism 16 (2), 167–179. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet
.2012.07.002
Tam, J., Vemuri, V. K., Liu, J., Batkai, S., Mukhopadhyay, B., Godlewski, G.,  
et al. 2010. Peripheral CB1 cannabinoid receptor blockade improves 
cardiometabolic risk in mouse models of obesity. Journal of Clinical Investigation 
120 (8), 2953–2966. doi: 10.1172/JCI42551
Tan, H., Lauzon, N. M., Bishop, S. F., Chi, N., Bechard, M., and Laviolette, S. R. 
2011. Cannabinoid transmission in the basolateral amygdala modulates fear 
memory formation via functional inputs to the prelimbic cortex. Journal of 
Neuroscience 31 (14), 5300–5312. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4718-10.2011
Ternianov, A., Perez-Ortiz, J. M., Solesio, M. E., Garcia-Gutierrez, M. S., Ortega-
Alvaro, A., Navarrete, F., et al. (2012). Overexpression of CB2 cannabinoid 
receptors results in neuroprotection against behavioral and neurochemical 
alterations induced by intracaudate administration of 6-hydroxydopamine. 
Neurobiology of Aging, 33(2), 421.e1–421.e16. doi:10.1016/j.neurobiolaging
.2010.09.012.
Thomas, A., Stevenson, L. A., Wease, K. N., Price, M. R., Baillie, G., Ross, R. A., 
et al. 2005. Evidence that the plant cannabinoid Delta9-tetrahydrocannabivarin 
is a cannabinoid CB1 and CB2 receptor antagonist. British Journal of 
Pharmacology 146 (7), 917–926. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjp.0706414
Thomas, B. F., Wiley, J. L., Pollard, G. T., and Grabenauer, M. 2014. Cannabinoid 
Designer Drugs: Effects and Forensics. In Handbook of Cannabis, ed. R. G. 
Pertwee. Oxford University Press.
Todd, A. R. 1946. Hashish. Experientia 2, 55–60.
Tourino, C., Oveisi, F., Lockney, J., Piomelli, D., and Maldonado, R. 2010. FAAH 
deficiency promotes energy storage and enhances the motivation for food. 
International Journal of Obesity 34 (3), 557–568. doi: 10.1038/ijo.2009.262
Tramer, M. R., Carroll, D., Campbell, F. A., Reynolds, D. J., Moore, R. A., and 
McQuay, H. J. 2001. Cannabinoids for control of chemotherapy induced nausea 
and vomiting: Quantitative systematic review. BMJ  323 (7303), 16–21.
Travers, J. B., and Norgren, R. 1986. Electromyographic analysis of the ingestion 
and rejection of sapid stimuli in the rat. Behavioral Neuroscience 100 (4), 544–
555.
Trigo, J. M., and Le Foll, B. 2015. Inhibition of monoacylglycerol lipase (MAGL) 
enhances cue-induced reinstatement of nicotine-seeking behavior in mice. 
Psychopharmacology 233 (10), 1815–1822. doi: 10.1007/s00213-015-4117-5
Tuerke, K. J., Limebeer, C. L., Fletcher, P. J., and Parker, L. A. 2012. Double 
dissociation between regulation of conditioned disgust and taste avoidance by 
www.ebook3000.com

References    227
serotonin availability at the 5-HT (3) receptor in the posterior and anterior 
insular cortex. Journal of Neuroscience 32 (40), 13709–13717.
Turkanis, S. A., Smiley, K. A., Borys, H. K., Olsen, D. M., and Karler, R. 1979. An 
electrophysiological analysis of the anticonvulsant action of cannabidiol on 
limbic seizures in conscious rats. Epilepsia 20 (4), 351–363.
Valjent, E., and Maldonando, R. 2000. A behavioral model to reveal pace 
preference to delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol in mice. Psychopharmacology 147 
(4), 436–438.
Vallee, M., Vitiello, S., Bellocchio, L., Hebert-Chatelain, E., Monlezun, S., Martin-
Garcia, E., et al. 2014. Pregnenolone can protect the brain from cannabis 
intoxication. Science 343 (6166), 94–98. doi: 10.1126/science.1243985
van Anders, S. M., Chernick, A. B., Chernick, B. A., Hampson, E., and Fisher, W. 
A. 2005. Preliminary clinical experience with androgen administration for pre- 
and postmenopausal women with hypoactive sexual desire. Journal of Sex & 
Marital Therapy 31 (3), 173–185. doi: 10.1080/00926230590513384
Van Belle, S., Lichinitser, M. R., Navari, R. M., Garin, A. M., Decramer, M. L., 
Riviere, A., et al. 2002. Prevention of cisplatin-induced acute and delayed emesis 
by the selective neurokinin-1 antagonists, L-758,298 and MK-869. Cancer 
94 (11), 3032–3041. doi: 10.1002/cncr.10516
van den Elsen, G. A., Ahmed, A. I., Verkes, R. J., Kramers, C., Feuth, T., Rosenberg, 
P. B., et al. 2015. Tetrahydrocannabinol for neuropsychiatric symptoms in 
dementia: A randomized controlled trial. Neurology 84 (23), 2338–2346. doi: 
10.1212/WNL.0000000000001675
van der Pol, P., Liebregts, N., Brunt, T., van Amsterdam, J., de Graaf, R., Korf, D. 
J., et al. 2014. Cross-sectional and prospective relation of cannabis potency, 
dosing and smoking behaviour with cannabis dependence: An ecological study. 
Addiction 109 (7), 1101–1109. doi: 10.1111/add.12508
van der Stelt, M., and Di Marzo, V. 2005. Anandamide as an intracellular 
messenger regulating ion channel activity. Prostaglandins & Other Lipid 
Mediators 77 (1–4), 111–122. doi: 10.1016/j.prostaglandins.2004.09.007
Van Gaal, L. F., Rissanen, A. M., Scheen, A. J., Ziegler, O., Rossner, S., et al. 2005. 
Effects of the cannabinoid-1 receptor blocker rimonabant on weight reduction 
and cardiovascular risk factors in overweight patients: 1-year experience from 
the RIO-Europe study. Lancet 365 (9468), 1389–1397. doi: 10.1016/S0140-
6736(05)66374-X
Van Sickle, M. D., Duncan, M., Kingsley, P. J., Mouihate, A., Urbani, P., Mackie, 
K., et al. 2005. Identification and functional characterization of brainstem 
cannabinoid CB2 receptors. Science 310 (5746), 329–332.
van Os, J., and Kapur, S. 2009. Schizophrenia. Lancet, 374 (9690), 635–645. doi: 
10.1016/S0140-6736(09)60995-8
Van Sickle, M. D., Oland, L. D., Ho, W., Hillard, C. J., Mackie, K., Davison, J. S., 
et al. 2001. Cannabinoids inhibit emesis through CB1 receptors in the brainstem 
of the ferret. Gastroenterology 121 (4), 767–774.

228    References
van Winkel, R., van Beveren, N. J., Simons, C., Genetic Risk and Outcome of 
Psychosis (GROUP) Investigators, and Genetic Risk and Outcome of Psychosis 
(GROUP) Investigators. 2011. AKT1 moderation of cannabis-induced cognitive 
alterations in psychotic disorder. Neuropsychopharmacology 36 (12), 2529–
2537. doi: 10.1038/npp.2011.141
Varvel, S. A., Hamm, R. J., Martin, B. R., and Lichtman, A. H. 2001. Differential 
effects of delta 9-THC on spatial reference and working memory in mice. 
Psychopharmacology 157 (2), 142–150.
Varvel, S. A., and Lichtman, A. H. 2002. Evaluation of CB1 receptor knockout 
mice in the Morris water maze. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental 
Therapeutics 301 (3), 915–924.
Varvel, S. A., Wiley, J. L., Yang, R., Bridgen, D. T., Long, K., Lichtman, A. H.,  
et al. 2006. Interactions between THC and cannabidiol in mouse models of 
cannabinoid activity. Psychopharmacology 186 (2), 226–234. doi: 10.1007/
s00213-006-0356-9
Varvel, S. A., Wise, L. E., and Lichtman, A. H. 2009. Are CB (1) receptor 
antagonists nootropic or cognitive impairing agents? Drug Development Research 
70 (8), 555–565. doi: 10.1002/ddr.20334
Varvel, S. A., Wise, L. E., Niyuhire, F., Cravatt, B. F., and Lichtman, A. H. 2007. 
Inhibition of fatty-acid amide hydrolase accelerates acquisition and extinction 
rates in a spatial memory task. Neuropsychopharmacology 32 (5), 1032–1041. 
doi: 10.1038/sj.npp.1301224
Verhoeckx, K. C., Korthout, H. A., van Meeteren-Kreikamp, A. P., Ehlert, K. A., 
Wang, M., van der Greef, J., et al. 2006. Unheated Cannabis sativa extracts and 
its major compound THC-acid have potential immuno-modulating properties 
not mediated by CB1 and CB2 receptor coupled pathways. International 
Immunopharmacology 6 (4), 656–665. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2005.10.002
Vigano, D., Rubino, T., Vaccani, A., Bianchessi, S., Marmorato, P., Castiglioni, C., 
et al. 2005. Molecular mechanisms involved in the asymmetric interaction 
between cannabinoid and opioid systems. Psychopharmacology 182 (4), 527–
536. doi: 10.1007/s00213-005-0114-4
Vos, T., Flaxman, A. D., Naghavi, M., Lozano, R., Michaud, C., Ezzati, M.,  
et al. 2012. Years lived with disability (YLDs) for 1160 sequelae of 289 diseases 
and injuries 1990–2010: A systematic analysis for the Global Burden of  
Disease Study 2010. Lancet 380 (9859), 2163–2196. doi: 10.1016/
S0140-6736(12)61729-2
Wachtel, S. R., ElSohly, M. A., Ross, S. A., Ambre, J., and de Wit, H. 2002. 
Comparison of the subjective effects of Delta (9)-tetrahydrocannabinol and 
marijuana in humans. Psychopharmacology 161 (4), 331–339. doi: 10.1007/
s00213-002-1033-2
Wade, D. T., Makela, P. M., House, H., Bateman, C., and Robson, P. 2006. Long-
term use of a cannabis-based medicine in the treatment of spasticity and other 
symptoms in multiple sclerosis. Multiple Sclerosis 12 (5), 639–645.
www.ebook3000.com

References    229
Waissengrin, B., Urban, D., Leshem, Y., Garty, M., and Wolf, I. 2015. Patterns  
of use of medical cannabis among Israeli cancer patients: A single institution 
experience. Journal of Pain and Symptom Management 49 (2), 223–230. 
doi: 10.1016/j.jpainsymman.2014.05.018
Wallace, M. J., Blair, R. E., Falenski, K. W., Martin, B. R., and DeLorenzo, R. J. 
2003. The endogenous cannabinoid system regulates seizure frequency and 
duration in a model of temporal lobe epilepsy. Journal of Pharmacology and 
Experimental Therapeutics 307 (1), 129–137. doi: 10.1124/jpet.103.051920
Ward, S. J., McAllister, S. D., Kawamura, R., Murase, R., Neelakantan, H., and 
Walker, E. A. 2014. Cannabidiol inhibits paclitaxel-induced neuropathic pain 
through 5-HT (1A) receptors without diminishing nervous system function  
or chemotherapy efficacy. British Journal of Pharmacology 171 (3), 636–645. 
doi: 10.1111/bph.12439
Ware, M. A., Adams, H., and Guy, G. W. 2005. The medicinal use of cannabis  
in the UK: Results of a nationwide survey. International Journal of Clinical 
Practice 59 (3), 291–295. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-1241.2004.00271.x
Ware, M. A., Fitzcharles, M. A., Joseph, L., and Shir, Y. 2010. The effects of 
nabilone on sleep in fibromyalgia: Results of a randomized controlled trial. 
Anesthesia and Analgesia 110 (2), 604–610. doi: 10.1213/ANE.0b013e3181c76f70
Ware, M. A., and Tawfik, V. L. 2005. Safety issues concerning the medical use of 
cannabis and cannabinoids. Pain Res Manag, 10 Suppl A, 31A–37A.
Ware, M. A., Wang, T., Shapiro, S., Collet, J. P., et al. 2015. Cannabis for the 
Management of Pain: Assessment of Safety Study (COMPASS). Journal of Pain 16 
(12), 1233–1242. doi: 10.1016/j.jpain.2015.07.014
Weiland, B. J., Thayer, R. E., Depue, B. E., Sabbineni, A., Bryan, A. D., and 
Hutchison, K. E. 2015. Daily marijuana use is not associated with brain 
morphometric measures in adolescents or adults. Journal of Neuroscience 35 (4), 
1505–1512. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2946-14.2015
Wendt, H., Soerensen, J., Wotjak, C. T., and Potschka, H. 2011. Targeting the 
endocannabinoid system in the amygdala kindling model of temporal lobe 
epilepsy in mice. Epilepsia 52 (7), e62–e65. doi: 10.1111/j.1528-1167.2011.03079.x
Whiting, P. F., Wolff, R. F., Deshpande, S., Di Nisio, M., Duffy, S., Hernandez, A. 
V., et al. 2015. Cannabinoids for medical use: A systematic review and  
meta-analysis. Journal of the American Medical Association 313 (24), 2456–
2473. doi: 10.1001/jama.2015.6358
Wiley, J. L., Burston, J. J., Leggett, D. C., Alekseeva, O. O., Razdan, R. K., 
Mahadevan, A., et al. 2005. CB1 cannabinoid receptor-mediated modulation 
of food intake in mice. British Journal of Pharmacology 145 (3), 293–300. 
doi: 10.1038/sj.bjp.0706157
Wilkinson, S. T., Radhakrishnan, R., and D’Souza, D. C. 2014. Impact of cannabis 
use on the development of psychotic disorders. Current Addiction Reports 1 (2), 
115–128. doi: 10.1007/s40429-014-0018-7
Williams, C. M., Jones, N. A., and Whalley, B. J. 2014. Cannabis and epilepsy.  
In Handbook of Cannabis, ed. R. G. Pertwee. Oxford University Press.

230    References
Wills, K. L., Vemuri, K., Kalmar, A., Lee, A., Limebeer, C. L., Makriyannis, A., and 
Parker, L. A. 2014. CB1 antagonists interfere with the establishment of a one 
trial naloxone-precipitated morphine withdrawal induced place aversion. 
Psychopharmacology 231, 4291–4300.
Wills, K. L., Limebeer, C. L., Rock, E. M., Niphakis, M. J., Cravatt, B. F., and 
Parker, L. A. 2016. Double dissociation of monoacylglycerol lipase inhibition and 
CB1 antagonism in the basolateral amygdala, central amygdala and the 
interoceptive insular cortex on the affective properties of acute naloxone-
precipitated morphine withdrawal in rats. Neuropsychopharmacology 41, 1865–
1873.
Wills, K. L., and Parker, L. A. 2016. Effect of pharmacological modulation of the 
endocannabinoid system on opiate withdrawal: A review of the preclinical animal 
literature. Frontiers in Pharmacology 28 (7), 187. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2016.00187.
Wilsey, B., Marcotte, T., Deutsch, R., Gouaux, B., Sakai, S., and Donaghe, H. 
2013. Low-dose vaporized cannabis significantly improves neuropathic pain. 
Journal of Pain 14 (2), 136–148. doi: 10.1016/j.jpain.2012.10.009
Wilsey, B., Marcotte, T., Tsodikov, A., Millman, J., Bentley, H., Gouaux, B., et al. 
2008. A randomized, placebo-controlled, crossover trial of cannabis cigarettes in 
neuropathic pain. Journal of Pain 9 (6), 506–521. doi: 10.1016/j.jpain.2007
.12.010
Wilson, R. I., and Nichol, R. A. 2001. Endogenous cannabinoids mediate 
retrograde signaling at hippocampal synapses. Nature, 410, 588–592.
Wise, L. E., Long, K. A., Abdullah, R. A., Long, J. Z., Cravatt, B. F., and Lichtman, 
A. H. 2012. Dual fatty acid amide hydrolase and monoacylglycerol lipase 
blockade produces THC-like Morris water maze deficits in mice. ACS Chemical 
Neuroscience 3 (5), 369–378. doi: 10.1021/cn200130s
Wise, R. A. 2004. Dopamine, learning and motivation. Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience 5 (6), 483–494. doi: 10.1038/nrn1406
Wood, T. B., Spivey, W. T. N., and Easterfield, T. H. 1896. Charas, the resin of 
Indian hemp. Journal of the Chemical Society 69, 539–546.
Woodhams, S. G., Sagar, D. R., & Chapman, V. (2015). The role of the 
endocannabinoid system in pain. Handbook of Experimental Pharmacology, 
227, 119–143.
Xi, Z. X., Peng, X. Q., Li, X., Song, R., Zhang, H. Y., Liu, Q. R., et al. 2011. Brain 
cannabinoid CB (2) receptors modulate cocaine’s actions in mice. Nature 
Neuroscience 14 (9), 1160–1166. doi: 10.1038/nn.2874
Xiong, W., Cui, T., Cheng, K., Yang, F., Chen, S. R., Willenbring, D., et al. 2012. 
Cannabinoids suppress inflammatory and neuropathic pain by targeting alpha3 
glycine receptors. Journal of Experimental Medicine 209 (6), 1121–1134. 
doi: 10.1084/jem.20120242
Yarnell, S. 2015. The use of medicinal marijuana for posttraumatic stress disorder: 
A review of the current literature. Primary Care Companion for CNS Disorders 
17 (3). doi: 10.4088/PCC.15r01786
www.ebook3000.com

References    231
Yasui, Y., Breder, C. D., Saper, C. B., and Cechetto, D. F. 1991. Autonomic 
responses and efferent pathways from the insular cortex in the rat. Journal of 
Comparative Neurology 303 (3), 355–374.
Yucel, M., Bora, E., Lubman, D. I., Solowij, N., Brewer, W. J., Cotton, S. M.,  
et al. 2012. The impact of cannabis use on cognitive functioning in patients  
with schizophrenia: A meta-analysis of existing findings and new data in a first-
episode sample. Schizophrenia Bulletin 38 (2), 316–330. doi: 10.1093/schbul/
sbq079
Zajicek, J., Ball, S., Wright, D., Vickery, J., Nunn, A., Miller, D., et al. 2013. Effect 
of dronabinol on progression in progressive multiple sclerosis (CUPID):  
A randomised, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet Neurology 12 (9), 857–865. 
doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(13)70159-5
Zammit, S., Allebeck, P., Andreasson, S., Lundberg, I., and Lewis, G. 2002. Self 
reported cannabis use as a risk factor for schizophrenia in Swedish conscripts of 
1969: Historical cohort study. BMJ 325 (7374), 1199.
Zammit, S., Owen, M. J., Evans, J., Heron, J., and Lewis, G. 2011. Cannabis, 
COMT and psychotic experiences. British Journal of Psychiatry 199 (5), 380–
385. doi: 10.1192/bjp.bp.111.091421
Zammit, S., Spurlock, G., Williams, H., Norton, N., Williams, N., O’Donovan, 
M. C., et al. 2007. Genotype effects of CHRNA7, CNR1 and COMT in 
schizophrenia: Interactions with tobacco and cannabis use. British Journal of 
Psychiatry 191, 402–407. doi: 10.1192/bjp.bp.107.036129
Zangen, A., Solinas, M., Ikemoto, S., Goldberg, S. R., and Wise, R. A. 2006. Two 
brain sites for cannabinoid reward. Journal of Neuroscience 26 (18), 4901–4907. 
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3554-05.2006
Zhang, L. R., Morgenstern, H., Greenland, S., Chang, S. C., Lazarus, P., Teare, M. 
D., et al. 2015. Cannabis smoking and lung cancer risk: Pooled analysis in the 
International Lung Cancer Consortium. International Journal of Cancer 136 (4), 
894–903. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29036
Zuardi, A. W., Cosme, R. A., Graeff, F. G., and Guimaraes, F. S. 1993. Effects  
of ipsapirone and cannabidiol on human experimental anxiety. Journal of 
Psychopharmacology 7 (1 Suppl), 82–88. doi: 10.1177/026988119300700112
Zuardi, A. W., Crippa, J. A., Hallak, J. E., Pinto, J. P., Chagas, M. H., Rodrigues, 
G. G., et al. 2009. Cannabidiol for the treatment of psychosis in Parkinson’s 
disease. Journal of Psychopharmacology 23 (8), 979–983. doi: 10.1177/
0269881108096519
Zuardi, A. W., Finkelfarb, E., Bueno, O. F., Musty, R. E., and Karniol, I. G. 1981. 
Characteristics of the stimulus produced by the mixture of cannabidiol with delta 
9-tetrahydrocannabinol. Archives Internationales de Pharmacodynamie et de 
Therapie 249 (1), 137–146.
Zuardi, A. W., Shirakawa, I., Finkelfarb, E., and Karniol, I. G. 1982. Action of 
cannabidiol on the anxiety and other effects produced by delta 9-THC in normal 
subjects. Psychopharmacology 76 (3), 245–250.

www.ebook3000.com

Addiction
cannabidiol, 92
cannabis-use disorder, 38, 69, 80–83
central mechanisms, 86–88
conditioned place preference, 48, 
84–89, 100
dopamine, 56–62, 86–100, 161, 166
drug self-administration models, 79, 
82–86, 89–92, 101
opiate/THC interactions, 92–96, 125, 
126, 137, 138, 165
relapse, 79, 85, 89–96
Adolescent cannabis use, 45, 46, 
58–62, 65, 70–72, 77, 78, 88, 89, 
141
Adverse effects of cannabis
acute psychosis, 56–58, 64
anxiety and depression 2, 35, 36, 39, 
40
cannabis-use disorder, 38, 69, 80–83
cognitive function 9, 10, 12, 27, 32, 
46, 55–57, 67–71, 74–78, 82, 128, 
134–136, 139, 145, 154, 157, 160, 
164, 168, 171–174
designer drugs, 169–171
driving impairment, 81, 173, 174
fetal development, 172
other illicit drug use, 89–92
psychomotor performance, 173, 174
psychosis, 2, 16, 55–66, 163, 165, 
171, 174
respiratory risk, 172, 173
tolerance 13, 14, 50, 81, 92, 126–
132, 137, 144, 154–156
Index
AIDS-associated anorexia, 97, 98
Ajulemic acid, 125, 134
Allosteric modulator, 21, 30, 31, 105, 
127–129, 166
Alzheimer’s Disease, 75, 76, 150, 
157–159
Amygdala, 36, 37, 41–47, 75, 86–88, 
117, 133, 143, 157
Amyotropic lateral sclerosis, 150, 162
Anxiety and depression, 2, 3, 7, 9, 15, 
16, 28, 33–56, 76, 81, 82, 91, 94, 
98, 104, 106, 115, 157, 163, 164, 
167–171, 175
animal models, 9, 35–52, 91, 167, 
168, 175
cannabidiol, 36–39, 46, 50–53
cannabis-induced, 35, 36, 39, 40, 
45–47, 52
extinction of aversive memories, 38, 
39, 47–50
hypothalamic-pituitary axis (HPA), 
42–46, 52
post-traumatic stress disorder, 3, 28, 
35–39, 47–53, 167
Appetite regulation, 2, 4, 15, 28, 81, 
82, 97–106,
AIDS associated anorexia, 97, 98
anorexia nervosa and bulimia, 29, 97, 
101, 102, 106, 108, 147, 163, 169
cancer-related cachexia, 2, 97, 105, 
168
cannabidiol, 106
CB1 antagonists/inverse agonists, 
98–104

234    Index
CB1 neutral antagonists, 104, 105
dronabinol, 97, 102
endocannabinoids, 97–103
leptin, 97–99, 102–104
homeostatic regulation of food 
intake, 98–100
metabolic disorders, 104, 105, 168
neuropeptide Y, 98
obesity, 2, 3, 91, 98, 101–106, 141, 
168
THC or tetrahydrocannabinol, 
97–101, 105
THCV, 9, 105, 106
Bhang, 4
Cannabichromene, 7, 127
Cannabidiol (CBD), 6–12, 15, 16, 19, 
24, 29, 31, 36–40, 50–53, 56–58, 
62, 63, 68, 78, 82, 83, 106, 110, 
111, 114, 115, 119, 121, 125–129, 
134–138, 141, 144–148, 151–161, 
165, 166, 171, 174, 175
addiction, 92
allosteric modulator of CB1 receptor, 
16
anxiety disorders, 36–40, 50, 56
appetite regulation, 106
cannabis use disorder, 83
CBD/THC interactions, 6, 12, 15, 38, 
40, 51, 56–59, 62, 63, 68, 78, 82, 
83, 106, 111, 114, 125, 128, 136, 
138, 141, 144, 153, 159, 165, 166, 
171, 174, 175
chemical structure, 9, 10, 24
epilepsy, 141, 144–148
glycine ligand gated ion channel 
interaction, 127
GPR55 receptor interaction, 29, 41, 
126, 127, 144, 164
inflammatory pain, 125–128, 
134–138
nausea and vomiting, 110, 111, 114, 
115, 119, 121
neurodegenerative disorders, 149, 
151–162
neuropathic pain, 126–128, 134, 136
schizophrenia, 56–58, 62, 63
serotonin interactions, 36, 37, 114, 
117–121
Cannabidiolic acid (CBDA) 10, 114, 
115, 119, 121
Cannabigerol, 7, 115
Cannabinol, 19
Cannabinoid designer drugs, 169–172
Clinical trials, 2
Cyclic adensosine monophosphate 
(cAMP), 22
Cyclooxygenease, 25, 76, 78, 131, 
137, 158
Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), 1, 
6–20, 24–32, 35–40, 45, 46, 
49–78, 81, 82, 85, 86, 88, 95–101, 
105–115, 124–141, 145, 148, 
149–155, 158–166, 170–175
Dronabinol 8, 12, 81, 82, 97, 102, 
108–110, 136, 154–156, 159, 168
Endocannabinoids
2-arachidonyl glycerol (2-AG), 1, 
23–33, 40–45, 48, 71–74, 85, 90, 
91, 100–105, 116–121, 129–133, 
143, 158, 165, 166
anandamide, 1, 24–33, 37, 40–53, 63, 
71–74, 85, 91, 98–105, 115, 116, 
121, 127–133, 143, 152, 158, 162, 
165–168
fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH), 
25–30, 33, 37, 40–44, 48–53, 
71–74, 85, 86, 89–91, 97, 103, 104, 
116, 117, 120, 121, 128–133, 
136–139, 143, 153, 156, 162, 166, 
167
monoacylglycerol lipase (MAGL), 
23–28, 33, 40–42, 45, 48, 71–74, 
85, 86, 90, 91, 105, 116–121, 
128–130, 137, 138, 143, 156, 166, 
167, 178
noladin ether, 24
virodhamine, 24
Epilepsy, 3, 10, 28, 139–148, 153, 163
cannabidiol, 144–148
Appetite regulation (cont.)
www.ebook3000.com

Index    235
cannabidivarin, 145
cannabis, 139–141
Dravet Syndrome, 145–147
epidiolex, 147
FAAH inhibition, 143, 153,
MAGL inhibition, 143, 156, 157, 166
preclinical (animal) models, 140–145
THC or tetrahydrocannabinol, 140, 
141
FAAH inhibition, 27, 28, 33, 166, 167
addiction, 90, 91, 129, 166, 167
anxiety and depression, 37, 40–44, 
48, 49, 52, 53, 166, 167
appetite regulation, 97, 103
learning and memory, 48, 73, 74, 85
nausea and vomiting, 116, 117, 120, 
121
pain, 27, 128–133, 136–138, 166, 
167
reward, 85, 86, 90
GABA, 20, 24–26, 32, 36, 40, 48, 76, 
86, 87, 96, 100, 110, 139–142, 160
Glutamate, 20–25, 28, 32–36, 48, 63, 
76, 86, 87, 92, 96, 100, 139, 
142–144, 149–154, 159–162
GPR55 (receptor), 29, 30, 127, 144, 
164
G-protein coupled receptor, 20, 21,  
29
GW Pharmaceuticals, 8–12, 127, 147
Hashish, 4–9, 56, 62, 79, 149
Hemp, 3–10, 94, 148
Heroin, 80, 85, 88–94
Huntington’s Disease, 150, 160, 161
Hyperemesis, 111
Hypothalamic-pituitary adrenal axis 
(HPA), 42–45, 145
Immune system, 1, 26, 131
Indian Hemp Drugs Commission, 4, 5, 
94
Insomnia, 2, 3, 15, 38, 39, 50–52, 81, 
82, 134, 156–159, 169
Inter-individual variability, 133
International controls on cannabis, 5, 
6
Ischemia, 159, 160
Learning and memory, 9, 27, 41, 
47–53, 67–78, 83–86, 89, 103, 
130, 135, 158, 169, 171, 175
brain morphology changes, 77–79, 
87–89,
CB1 antagonists/inverse agonists, 74, 
75
cognitive function, 9, 10, 12, 27, 32, 
46, 55–57, 67–71, 74–78, 82, 128, 
134–136, 139, 145, 154, 157, 160, 
164, 168, 171–174
FAAH inhibitors, 71–74
hippocampus, 57, 75–77
long-term potentiation, 76
MAGL inhibitors, 71–74
preclinical (animal) models, 71–78
Leptin, 97, 99, 102–104
MAGL inhibitors, 27, 28, 33, 166, 
167
addiction 90, 91
anxiety and depression, 37, 40–42, 
45, 48, 166, 167
epilepsy, 143, 156, 157, 166
learning and memory, 73, 74
neurogenerative disorders, 156
nausea and vomiting, 116–121
pain, 28, 128–130, 136–138
reward, 85, 86, 90
Marinol, 12, 16, 51, 108, 153, 164
Mechoulam, Raphael, 1, 2, 7, 19, 24, 
40, 146, 169
Microglia, 26, 131, 150–152, 158, 
160, 164, 166
Multiple sclerosis, 2, 8–12, 51, 127, 
136, 138, 149–157, 164
bladder incontinence, 149, 152, 153
chronic neuropathic pain, 8–12, 51, 
127, 136, 138, 149, 153, 155, 156, 
164
clinical trials, 136, 152–157
dronabinol, 154, 156
preclinical (animal) models, 152, 154

236    Index
Sativex, 8–12, 51, 127, 136, 138, 
149, 152–155, 160–162
spasticity, 8–12, 51, 127, 136, 138, 
149, 152–157, 162, 164
Nabilone, 8, 38, 39, 51, 52, 68, 81, 
82, 108, 134, 161, 164, 168, 170
Nabiximols. See Sativex
Nausea and vomiting, 2, 3, 8–10, 28, 
33, 91, 106–121
cannabidiol (CBD) 110, 114, 121
cannabidiolic acid (CBDA) 114, 115, 
121
CBDV, 115
FAAH inhibitors, 116, 117, 120, 121
interoceptive insular cortex, 118–121
MAGL inhibitors, 116–121
nabilone and marinol, 108, 110
preclinical (animal) models,  
111–121
serotonin interactions, 109, 110, 
114–121
THC or tetrahydrocannabinol, 
108–114
THCA, 114, 115
THCV, 115
Neurodegenerative disorders, 28, 
149–162
Alzheimer’s Disease, 75, 76, 150, 
157–159
Amyotropic lateral sclerosis, 162
brain trauma, 149, 159, 160
cannabidiol, 151–161
CB1 receptors, 149–154, 158–162
CB2 receptors, 149–151, 158–162
FAAH inhibitors, 153, 156, 162
Huntington’s Disease, 150, 160, 161
ischemia, 159, 160
MAGL inhibitors, 156
Parkinson’s Disease, 149, 150, 161, 
162
THC or tetrahydrocannabinol, 
149–155, 158–162
THCV, 161, 162
Neuropeptide Y, 98
Nicotine, 80, 90, 91, 164
Pain, 2–5, 8–12, 15, 27, 28, 33, 51, 
52, 81, 93, 123–138, 149, 153–
156, 162–169, 174
acute, 123–133
allodynia, 124, 130, 132
allosteric modulators of CB1 receptor, 
127–129
cannabidiol (CBD), 125–128, 
134–138
CB1 receptors, 125–133, 137, 138
CB2 receptors, 125, 130–133, 138
chronic, 123–128, 131–138
clinical trials, 127, 134–136, 140
FAAH inhibitors, 128–133, 136–138
inflammatory, 124–134, 138
MAGL inhibitors, 128–130,  
136–138
neuropathic, 123–138
opiate, 123–127, 137, 138, 164
preclinical (animal) models, 124–134, 
138
Sativex (nabiximols), 127, 134–138
THC or tetrahydrocannabinol, 
124–128
Pallative care, 168, 169
Parkinson’s Disease, 150
Pharmacokinetics of THC, 11–17, 170
Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) 
3, 28, 35–39, 47–53, 167
Psychosis, 2, 16, 55–66, 163, 165, 
171, 174
Receptor types
allosteric site on CB1 receptor, 21, 30, 
31, 105, 127–129, 166
CB1 receptor, 1, 9, 14, 16, 20–36, 
40–52, 60, 61 71–78, 86–106, 
111–121, 125–133, 137–144, 
149–154, 158–172
CB2 receptor 1, 20, 25–31, 92, 105, 
125–133, 138, 149–151, 158, 
160–170
GPR55 receptor, 29, 30, 126, 127, 
144, 164
PPARα receptor, 30, 74, 91
TRPV1 receptor, 28, 29, 36, 37, 126, 
127, 130, 133, 144, 164
Multiple sclerosis (cont.)
www.ebook3000.com

Index    237
Retrograde synaptic messenger, 21, 
23, 25, 76
Rimonabant, 9, 29, 47, 48, 72–75, 
90–93, 98, 100, 103–106, 112–115, 
141, 168
Route of administration (cannabis, 
humans)
oral, 5, 8, 10–16, 36, 40, 68, 81, 82, 
97, 106, 110, 111, 115, 125, 126, 
140, 144, 153, 154, 164, 165, 170
smoking, 6, 8–16, 32, 50, 51, 57, 67, 
70, 73, 78, 81, 82, 97, 110, 111, 
115, 134, 136, 140, 153, 164, 165, 
169–174
sublingual, 8–12, 51, 53, 82, 110, 
114, 127, 128, 134–138, 147, 149, 
152–156, 160–162, 168
vaporization, 10, 14, 15, 68, 73, 134, 
135, 164, 165, 172, 173
Sativex (nabiximols), 8–12, 51, 53, 82, 
110, 114, 127, 128, 134, 136 138, 
147, 149, 152–156, 160–162, 168
Schizophrenia, 55–65, 172
cannabidiol (CBD), 56–59, 62, 63
cannabis use, 55–65
preclinical (animal models), 61, 62
susceptibility genes, 57, 60, 61
type of cannabis used, 62
Serotonin (5-HT), 24, 32, 36, 37, 
108–110, 113–121, 166
Sexual function, 94–96
Sleep, 2, 3, 15, 38, 39, 50–52, 81, 82, 
134, 156–159, 169
Terpenoids, 7, 128
Tetrahydrocannabinolic acid (THCA), 
7, 8, 114
Tetrahydrocannabivarin (THCV), 9, 
105, 106, 115, 127, 161
Tolerance, 13, 14, 50, 81, 92, 126–
132, 137, 144
Transient receptor potential vanilliod 
type 1 (TRPV1), 28, 29, 36, 37, 
126, 127, 130, 133, 144, 164
Tumor necrosis factor α, 8, 126, 131, 
151, 154
Vaporization, 10, 14, 15, 68, 73, 134, 
135, 164, 165, 172, 173
Ventral tegmental area (VTA), 86–90, 
96, 100, 154
WIN 55,212,2 (CB1 agonist), 46, 143

