www.allitebooks.com

Canvas LMS Course Design
Design, build, and teach your very own online  
course using the powerful tools of the Canvas  
Learning Management System
Ryan John
BIRMINGHAM - MUMBAI
www.allitebooks.com

Canvas LMS Course Design
Copyright © 2014 Packt Publishing
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior written 
permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embedded in 
critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy 
of the information presented. However, the information contained in this book is 
sold without warranty, either express or implied. Neither the author, nor Packt 
Publishing, and its dealers and distributors will be held liable for any damages 
caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of the 
companies and products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of capitals. 
However, Packt Publishing cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information.
First published: August 2014
Production reference: 1180814
Published by Packt Publishing Ltd.
Livery Place
35 Livery Street
Birmingham B3 2PB, UK.
ISBN 978-1-78216-064-9
www.packtpub.com
Cover image by Shweta Suresh Karkera (shwetaimages@gmail.com)
www.allitebooks.com

Credits
Author
Ryan John
Reviewers
Deb Cook
Elizabeth Dennis
Travis Thurston
Donna Harp Ziegenfuss, Ed.D.
Acquisition Editor
Joanne Fitzpatrick
Content Development Editor
Priya Singh
Technical Editors
Venu Manthena
Nachiket Vartak
Copy Editors
Deepa Nambiar
Adithi Shetty
Stuti Srivastava
Project Coordinator
Swati Kumari
Proofreaders
Simran Bhogal
Ameesha Green
Paul Hindle
Indexers
Hemangini Bari
Mariammal Chettiyar
Tejal Soni
Priya Subramani
Production Coordinator
Nilesh R. Mohite
Cover Work
Nilesh R. Mohite
www.allitebooks.com

About the Author
Ryan John is a graduate of Westminster Choir College of Rider University, where 
he spent 3 years as a Technical Assistant for the pilot program of the Instructure 
Canvas Learning Management System at Rider University. While at Rider and 
Westminster, he served as a Technical Assistant, Course Designer, and Course 
Consultant for over a dozen courses offered by Westminster Choir College, the 
Westminster Office of Continuing Education, and the Westminster Center for Critical 
Pedagogy. During Rider's university-wide implementation of the Instructure Canvas 
LMS, he assisted with faculty training sessions and individual tutorials in course 
organization, design, and management.
In addition to his work in online course design, Ryan serves on the editorial board of 
Visions of Research in Music Education, the scholarly journal of the New Jersey Music 
Educators Association. He has worked as a freelance copy editor, both privately and 
for GIA Publications, and he has been a music editorial intern at Oxford University 
Press. He is currently the Upper School Choral Director at Léman Manhattan 
Preparatory School in New York City.
I would like to thank Frank Abrahams, Heeyoung Kim, Shaun 
Holland, Scott Hoerl, Boris Villic, and many other mentors I 
encountered at Westminster Choir College and Rider University for 
the incredible opportunities they afforded me during my time there. 
Thank you to James Jordan and Alec Harris at GIA as well as Norm 
Hirschy, Lisbeth Redfield, Suzanne Ryan, Adam Cohen, and Jessen 
O'Brien at Oxford University Press for allowing me to learn and grow 
on the job under their stellar guidance. Many thanks to Lisa Nowicki 
for her constant support and to all those at Sanford School who have 
helped me throughout the years. I am so grateful for the guidance 
of everyone at Léman Manhattan and Meritas. A huge thank you 
to everyone at Packt Publishing, especially, Joanne Fitzpatrick, 
Swati Kumari, Priya Singh, Venu Manthena, Nachiket Vartak, and 
Mohammad Rizvi. Finally, thank you my amazing parents, siblings, 
nieces and nephews, and Joshua for your unending care and support.
www.allitebooks.com

About the Reviewers
Deb Cook has more than a decade of experience in the classroom and is still that 
teacher who lives and loves the part. Being equal parts costume, dance, rap/song, 
and crazed energy, she tries to do it all for her precious lambs.
Her passion is to instill science literacy in our youth through meaningful 21st century 
avenues of engagement. This was the driving force behind the development of the 
Biomonsters experience (http://www.biomonsters.com). If her kids love it, she 
does it with gusto!
She currently teaches science in a brick and mortar high school in Charlottesville, 
Virginia and in the virtual environment using the Canvas LMS.
Elizabeth Dennis is an instructional designer and trainer for Instructure Canvas. 
With an in-depth knowledge of quality instructional design for online courses and  
an expert-level knowledge of Canvas LMS, she has developed a wide variety of 
courses for K-12, university, and corporate clients. She has published papers in the 
area of asynchronous instructional design and presented at national conferences on 
the subject.
Elizabeth is pursuing a Doctorate of Education in Leadership in Higher Education 
and holds a Master of Education degree with emphasis on educational technology 
and computer-assisted learning.
www.allitebooks.com

Travis Thurston is an Instructional Designer in the Center for Innovative Design  
& Instruction (CIDI) at Utah State University. He began his career teaching high 
school history and physical education courses. After earning a Master of Educational 
Technology degree from Boise State University, he found a new passion in online 
learning and curriculum development.
At USU, Travis works collaboratively with the team at CIDI to design and redevelop 
online courses in Instructure Canvas, consult with SMEs on campus to develop and 
deliver quality courseware, and find practical solutions to various design and delivery 
challenges. His interests also include utilizing learner analytics in curriculum design 
and implementing competency-based learning for online programs. Recently, he has 
written articles about the work done by the team at CIDI, which have been posted on 
eLearning Industry, eCampus News, and Edudemic.
Donna Harp Ziegenfuss is an Associate Librarian and Assistant Head of 
Scholarship & Education Services in the J. Willard Marriott Library at the University 
of Utah. She has an Ed.D. in Academic Leadership/Higher Education and an 
MS degree in Applied Technology/Instructional Design. She has led Faculty 
Development Centers and Teaching with Technology Centers, and currently works 
in the library, focusing on the topics of instructional design, assessment, research, 
and library instruction projects.
She has over 10 years of experience teaching in traditional, hybrid, and online 
formats. In addition, she has 15 years of experience working in the area of faculty 
and professional development. Her research interests focus on library and 
technology-based instructional planning and course design, assessment topics, 
faculty and professional development, qualitative research, and academic leadership. 
She has presented and published technology and teaching-related topics including 
course design and leadership.
www.allitebooks.com

www.PacktPub.com
Support files, eBooks, discount offers, and more
You might want to visit www.PacktPub.com for support files and downloads related to 
your book.
Did you know that Packt offers eBook versions of every book published, with PDF and 
ePub files available? You can upgrade to the eBook version at www.PacktPub.com and 
as a print book customer, you are entitled to a discount on the eBook copy. Get in touch 
with us at service@packtpub.com for more details.
At www.PacktPub.com, you can also read a collection of free technical articles, sign up 
for a range of free newsletters, and receive exclusive discounts and offers on Packt books 
and eBooks.
TM
http://PacktLib.PacktPub.com
Do you need instant solutions to your IT questions? PacktLib is Packt's online digital 
book library. Here, you can access, read, and search across Packt's entire library of books.
Why subscribe?
•	
Fully searchable across every book published by Packt
•	
Copy and paste, print, and bookmark content
•	
On demand and accessible via web browser
Free access for Packt account holders
If you have an account with Packt at www.PacktPub.com, you can use this to access 
PacktLib today and view nine entirely free books. Simply use your login credentials for 
immediate access.
www.allitebooks.com

www.allitebooks.com

Table of Contents
Preface	
1
Chapter 1: Getting Started with Canvas	
7
Types of Canvas accounts	
7
Institution-specific Canvas accounts	
7
Free for Teachers Canvas accounts	
8
Accessing Canvas and creating your account	
8
Accessing your institution's Canvas site	
8
Creating a Free for Teachers account	
9
Navigating Canvas – the dashboard	
11
Adjusting your profile, settings, and notifications	
13
Adjusting your profile	
14
Adding a profile picture	
15
Editing your profile	
17
Adjusting your account settings	
18
Adding a new e-mail address	
18
Adding a cell phone number for SMS text notifications	
19
Editing your general settings	
20
Using registered services	
23
Customizing your notification preferences	
24
Creating your Canvas course	
27
Joining a course created by your institution	
28
Creating a new course with a Free for Teachers account	
29
Summary	
32
Chapter 2: Building Your Canvas Course	
33
Exploring the Course Setup Checklist	
34
Planning your course – from syllabus to screen	
35
Importing content from another course	
38
Adding assignments and content	
41
Creating an assignment	
41
www.allitebooks.com

Table of Contents
[ ii ]
Editing an assignment	
43
Using the Rich Content Editor	
44
Basic formatting	
44
Embedding content	
44
The Insert/Edit Table feature	
45
The Link to URL feature	
46
The Unlink feature	
47
The Embed Image feature	
47
The Insert Math Equation feature	
50
The Record/Upload Media feature	
51
Embedded services	
55
The HTML Editor feature	
55
Inserting content using the right-side menu	
56
The Links tab	
56
The Files tab	
56
The Images tab	
57
Editing an assignment – adding content	
58
The grading type	
59
The Submission Type drop-down menu	
59
Group assignments	
60
Peer reviews	
61
Assignment availability	
62
Updating and publishing an assignment	
62
Creating different types of assignments	
63
Assignment	
65
Discussion	
65
Quiz	
67
Editing the settings for your quiz	
68
Adding questions to your quiz	
69
Managing question banks	
72
External tools	
74
Not Graded	
74
Creating assignment groups	
74
Weighting assignment groups	
76
Summary	
77
Chapter 3: Getting Ready to Launch Your Course	
79
Adding participants to the course	
79
Managing users	
85
Creating user groups	
87
Selecting navigation links	
89
Choosing a course home page layout	
91
The Recent Activity Dashboard layout	
92
The custom-designed content page layout	
93

Table of Contents
[ iii ]
The Course Modules layout	
96
The Assignment List layout	
99
The Syllabus layout	
100
Adding course calendar events	
101
Testing your course with Student View	
103
Publishing your course	
105
Summary	
106
Chapter 4: Teaching Your Canvas Course	
107
Communicating through Conversations	
108
Learning the layout of Conversations	
108
Composing and sending a message	
110
Organizing conversations	
112
Marking conversations as unread	
112
Starring conversations	
113
Viewing sent messages	
113
Archiving and unarchiving conversations	
114
Deleting conversations	
114
Posting announcements	
115
Using the Gradebook	
116
Accessing the Gradebook and entering grades	
116
Accessing and using a SpeedGrader	
119
Setting up synchronous meetings using Conferences	
123
Creating a conference	
123
Starting and facilitating your conference	
125
Summary	
131
Chapter 5: Exploring Special Features	
133
Using Canvas on your mobile devices	
133
Downloading and configuring the mobile app	
134
Using the features of the mobile app	
137
Navigating your course within the mobile app	
138
Viewing and sending messages within the mobile app	
140
Using the To Do feature of the mobile app	
143
Accessing your notifications within the mobile app	
144
Viewing your profile within the mobile app	
144
Finding help within the Canvas mobile app	
146
Creating Collaborations	
147
Editing or deleting Collaborations	
151
Setting up Outcomes	
152
Creating Outcomes	
152
Creating Outcome Groups	
155
Finding existing Outcomes to use	
157

Table of Contents
[ iv ]
Creating Rubrics and using Outcomes	
159
Adding Rubrics to Assignments	
162
Using Rubrics for Assessment	
164
Integrating outside apps into your course	
166
Installing and integrating the YouTube app	
168
Using Course Analytics and Course Statistics	
170
Viewing Course Analytics	
170
Viewing Course Statistics	
172
Summary	
173
Chapter 6: Where to Go for Help	
175
Finding help within Canvas	
175
Exploring the Canvas Guides and Community Forums	
177
Browsing and searching the Canvas Guides	
177
Searching the Canvas Guides	
180
Asking questions in the Community Forums	
182
Responding to questions in the Community Forums	
185
Reporting a problem	
187
Creating a screencast using Jing	
190
Obtaining Canvas pricing information	
195
Requesting a feature	
196
Finding help outside Canvas	
200
Summary	
200
Chapter 7: Now You're Ready!	
201
Exporting your course	
201
Connecting Canvas to education in the 21st century	
205
Enacting the Framework for 21st Century Learning	
206
Core subjects and 21st century themes	
206
Learning and innovation skills	
209
Information, media, and technology skills	
210
Life and career skills	
212
Summary	
216
Appendix: References and Resources	
217
Teaching and learning in the 21st century	
217
Designing online learning environments	
220
Conceptualizing online education	
222
Other online course design resources	
225
Index	
227

Preface
Welcome to Canvas LMS Course Design! This book will introduce you to Instructure 
Canvas as a learning management system designed to serve your needs. As citizens 
of the digital age, we are constantly surrounded by the influx and outflow of new 
and innovative technologies. We see new devices being introduced, new ideas 
materialize into software or hardware, and technological trends come and go. In 
recent decades, one of the most powerful technological trends to reach the field of 
education is the development of distance learning. For people around the world, the 
Internet has rapidly increased access to information and knowledge that was once 
only available to a select few. With technology growing increasingly sophisticated, 
people everywhere are able to access a world of information in an instant. These 
developments in accessibility have caused a stir in the field of formal education, 
which was once one of the only places such information could be found.
As a result of the incredible advances in technology over the recent decades, many 
of us in the field of education have worked to find ways of harnessing technology 
and utilizing it within our classrooms. Students' means of finding and interacting 
with information have been evolving; in contemporary education, there have been 
numerous advances in the integration of technological developments with the 
changing paradigms. One such advance is the development of learning management 
systems (LMSs) to connect students, teachers, and information through technology. 
First appearing in their current form in the 1990s, LMSs allowed educators to harness 
the power of the Internet to disseminate course content to students remotely. These 
systems began to gain popularity in schools worldwide and quickly began to reveal 
the enormous potential of distance learning and online education.

Preface
[ 2 ]
In the beginning of the 21st century, web-based media also began to expand and 
develop rapidly with the advent of contemporary social media sites. In a market 
driven by ease of use and functionalities for users, these social media sites began 
to integrate tools and features from across the Web with their interfaces to connect 
users quickly and efficiently across various online platforms. As these features 
developed and thrived in the realm of social media across the Web, computer 
scientists Devlin Daley and Brian Whitmer from Brigham Young University in 
Provo, Utah, saw a need to integrate this ease of use in LMSs. In 2008, they founded 
Instructure with the mission of creating an LMS with an intuitive, functional, 
and integrated user interface that would capitalize on the technological skills 
users already possessed—they called it Canvas (http://www.deseretnews.com/
article/700040784/BYU-grads-introduce-education-savvy-software.html).
In the six years since its inception, Canvas by Instructure has become the LMS 
for over 700 institutions with millions of users (http://www.instructure.com/
about-us). Institutions that adopted Canvas as a replacement for other systems 
have reported increased engagement with the LMS by students and faculty 
as well as a reduced number of support tickets (https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=NbqNxsPMRz4#t=167). Working to capitalize on the technological skills  
and expectations of their clientele, the designers of Canvas have not only 
incorporated elements and ideas from popular services across the Web into the 
design and features of Canvas, but have also partnered with those services to 
streamline and integrate users' online experience with the Canvas interface.
This book covers the use of Canvas as a powerful and revolutionary tool for 
education, both in the traditional classroom and a virtual learning environment. 
The early chapters of the book explain the setup of your Canvas experience, from 
setting up your personal profile to designing and building your first course. Taking 
cues from contemporary social media sites, Canvas allows you to configure your 
account in the same way you would with other social media accounts—you can add 
a profile picture, input important information about yourself, and customize the way 
you interact with Canvas notifications. As you add content to your course, Canvas 
utilizes text and content editing tools similar to those popular in word processing 
programs and blogging sites across the Web. With these tools, as well as the other 
layout and design features built into Canvas, you will have no problem finding the 
best way to present the content of your course, regardless of your comfort level or 
experience with web design. Whether you're a novice when it comes to creating 
content online, an expert in HTML code, or somewhere in between, you can choose 
from an array of presentation options to display your content without feeling 
overwhelmed or limited.

Preface
[ 3 ]
The second half of this book is focused on using Canvas to teach your course. 
Stemming from the tools and functions of a traditional live classroom—grade 
books, due dates, class meetings, and office hours—Canvas has transformed each 
of these tools and functions for use in the digital age. In addition to these basic 
features, Canvas offers a range of special features including a mobile application, 
learning outcomes and rubrics, web-based apps, and a Course Analytics feature. 
These features allow users to differentiate their own Canvas experience in the same 
way you differentiate learning activities for your students. As you work your way 
through your first experience with Canvas, questions are bound to arise. While 
this book seeks to predict and answer many of those questions, Canvas offers a 
phenomenal built-in user support system. Based directly on users' questions and 
concerns, Canvas Guides offers you a searchable wealth of information including 
video tutorials, step-by-step instructions, and frequently asked questions.
With all of the skills you will have gained from your first experience with Canvas 
over the course of this book, it is up to you to be a part of the educational revolution 
that can change the world (http://www.instructure.com/about-us). Exploring 
the Framework for 21st Century Learning as advocated by the Partnership for 21st 
Century Skills, the closing sections of this book offer specific suggestions for Canvas 
to engage many of the skills necessary for contemporary learners to succeed. These 
suggestions are intended to serve as fodder for your own creative explorations of 
Canvas, using it as a tool to enhance teaching and foster students' success.
As a product, Canvas has been designed to meet the unique needs of its users within 
contemporary education. As a powerful educational tool, Canvas opens the door to 
countless possibilities for you and the students you teach as citizens of the digital age.
What this book covers
Chapter 1, Getting Started with Canvas, addresses how to create a Canvas course, 
navigate Canvas, and set up your Canvas profile, including contact information  
and notification preferences.
Chapter 2, Building Your Canvas Course, guides you through building your course with 
in-depth, step-by-step guidance through the features of Canvas to successfully begin 
course construction by working through the integrated Course Setup Checklist.
Chapter 3, Getting Ready to Launch Your Course, continues along the Course Setup 
Checklist with a focus on organization and presentation of the course once the bulk 
of the content has been created. You will have your course built and published by the 
end of this chapter.

Preface
[ 4 ]
Chapter 4, Teaching Your Canvas Course, explains how to use the features of Canvas to 
enhance your teaching once your course begins. You will learn how to communicate 
with students through messaging, provide feedback on assignments, and use the 
grading and assessment tools offered by Canvas.
Chapter 5, Exploring Special Features, addresses special features and unique  
extras that Canvas offers such as the Canvas mobile app, outcomes and rubrics, 
registered services, apps, and more involved Canvas functions such as the Course 
Analytics system.
Chapter 6, Where to Go for Help, offers guidance on where to obtain help with Canvas. 
It covers how to access Canvas Guides and the option of contacting your institution's 
IT department for help with institution-specific Canvas sites.
Chapter 7, Now You're Ready!, offers a summary of the key points encountered during 
the course-building process, along with connections to educational philosophies and 
practices that support technology as a powerful way to enhance teaching and learning.
Appendix, References and Resources, offers information on materials referenced 
throughout this book and other resources that you might find helpful as you  
learn and grow as an online educator.
What you need for this book
For this book, you will need the following:
•	
A computer
•	
Reliable Internet access
•	
A webcam and a microphone
•	
Your course syllabus and materials (for example, readings, handouts,  
and videos)
If your institution uses Canvas, you may also need the following:
•	
The Canvas URL specific to your institution
•	
Your institution's login information
•	
The contact information for your institution's IT department

Preface
[ 5 ]
Who this book is for
This book will be of use to the following:
•	
Educators who use or are learning to use Canvas to house content for  
their courses
•	
Teacher's assistants who use or are learning to use Canvas to facilitate a class
•	
Individuals in charge of designing and building a Canvas course
•	
Administrators interested in the features of Canvas as an LMS
Conventions
In this book, you will find a number of styles of text that distinguish between 
different kinds of information. Here are some examples of these styles, and an 
explanation of their meaning.
Code words in text, database table names, folder names, filenames, file extensions, 
pathnames, dummy URLs, user input, and Twitter handles are shown as follows: 
"Files with a .zip extension contain a file or group of files that have been 
compressed for easy transportation between programs or devices."
New terms and important words are shown in bold. Words that you see on  
the screen, in menus or dialog boxes for example, appear in the text like this:  
"Click on Save to create your assignment."
Warnings or important notes appear in a box like this.
Tips and tricks appear like this.
Reader feedback
Feedback from our readers is always welcome. Let us know what you think about 
this book—what you liked or may have disliked. Reader feedback is important for  
us to develop titles that you really get the most out of.

Preface
[ 6 ]
To send us general feedback, simply send an e-mail to feedback@packtpub.com, 
and mention the book title via the subject of your message.
If there is a topic that you have expertise in and you are interested in either writing 
or contributing to a book, see our author guide on www.packtpub.com/authors.
Customer support
Now that you are the proud owner of a Packt book, we have a number of things to 
help you to get the most from your purchase.
Errata
Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our content, mistakes 
do happen. If you find a mistake in one of our books—maybe a mistake in the text or 
the code—we would be grateful if you would report this to us. By doing so, you can 
save other readers from frustration and help us improve subsequent versions of this 
book. If you find any errata, please report them by visiting http://www.packtpub.
com/submit-errata, selecting your book, clicking on the errata submission form link, 
and entering the details of your errata. Once your errata are verified, your submission 
will be accepted and the errata will be uploaded on our website, or added to any list of 
existing errata, under the Errata section of that title. Any existing errata can be viewed 
by selecting your title from http://www.packtpub.com/support.
Piracy
Piracy of copyright material on the Internet is an ongoing problem across all media. 
At Packt, we take the protection of our copyright and licenses very seriously. If you 
come across any illegal copies of our works, in any form, on the Internet, please 
provide us with the location address or website name immediately so that we can 
pursue a remedy.
Please contact us at copyright@packtpub.com with a link to the suspected  
pirated material.
We appreciate your help in protecting our authors, and our ability to bring you 
valuable content.
Questions
You can contact us at questions@packtpub.com if you are having a problem with 
any aspect of the book, and we will do our best to address it.

Getting Started with Canvas
In this chapter, we will cover how to access Canvas and navigate the home screen, 
which is called the dashboard. Once you have learned your way around the site, 
you will learn how to set up your Canvas profile, enter your contact information, 
adjust your general settings, and configure your notification preferences. Next, we 
will learn how to create a Canvas course, specifically, how to create a course yourself 
versus how to begin participating in a course that has been set up by your institution. 
Once we have created your course, we will be ready to move on to building your 
course in the next chapter.
A wide range of institutions across the world use Canvas as their institutional 
learning management system (LMS). In addition, Canvas is usable in a variety of 
learning situations outside of traditional institutions. To accommodate the different 
situations in which users may find themselves while teaching or learning, Canvas 
offers two types of accounts.
Types of Canvas accounts
To get started, let's discuss the two types of Canvas accounts that you may encounter.
Institution-specific Canvas accounts
If the college, university, or K-12 school that you work for uses Canvas for its LMS, you 
will most likely receive information from the Information Technology (IT) department 
or an administrator regarding the best ways to access and use Canvas. When Canvas 
is fully integrated into a university's enrollment and course registration system, for 
example, you may likely be able to log in using the same username and password you 
use to access your school e-mail account. In addition, once you log in, you may find 
that the IT department has enabled or disabled certain settings to maintain consistency 
for the institution. Each situation is slightly different, so reach out to someone in the IT 
or administrative departments to find out specific information for your school.
www.allitebooks.com

Getting Started with Canvas
[ 8 ]
Free for Teachers Canvas accounts
Canvas offers a Free for Teachers account for educators who do not have access to 
Canvas through an institution. This account allows you to register using any e-mail 
address, then create and build courses that you would like to teach, regardless of 
whether you work for an institution that uses Canvas as its LMS. We will go over 
how to set up a Free for Teachers account in the next section, where we will begin 
with a discussion of how to access Canvas. As a note, all examples and screenshots  
in this book are taken from a Free for Teachers account.
Accessing Canvas and creating  
your account
To begin, open your web browser (for example, Internet Explorer, Safari, Google 
Chrome, or Mozilla Firefox). If you are using an institution-specific Canvas site, 
consult any information you have received from your school, specifically looking for 
the URL (web address) for your school's Canvas site. After we address how to log in 
for institutional Canvas accounts, we will cover how to access and log in to a Free for 
Teachers account.
Accessing your institution's Canvas site
To access your institution's Canvas site, perform the following steps:
1.	 Open your web browser and enter the URL for your institution's Canvas site.
2.	 You can also copy and paste the URL from any informational e-mails you 
may have received from your institution. While your institution's Canvas 
URL may follow a variety of formats, a common formula for the institutional 
Canvas URL is http://institution.instructure.com in which you will 
enter the actual name of your school instead of "institution".
3.	 If you have instructions from the IT or administrative team at your school, 
follow those instructions to set up your account. As mentioned previously, 
each situation is slightly different, so you may need to get support for your 
specific case if you have questions.
Often, you will receive an e-mail invitation to join Canvas that includes a link to follow 
and clear step-by-step instructions once you follow the link to Canvas. In other cases, 
the institutional ID that you use to access your school e-mail account or registration 
system may automatically be carried over to Canvas, depending on how your school 
has integrated Canvas with the rest of their management systems.

Chapter 1
[ 9 ]
In most cases, if your institution uses Canvas as its LMS, you do not 
need to create a Free for Teachers account. However, consult members 
of your institution's IT or administrative department for specific 
instructions if you are not sure.
Creating a Free for Teachers account
The following steps will walk you through how to create your own Free for Teachers 
account within Canvas:
1.	 To create a Free for Teachers account, open your web browser and navigate 
to canvas.instructure.com.
2.	 When the page loads, click on Need a Canvas account? Click here, it's free! 
and you will be taken to a registration page.
3.	 Select whether you are a Teacher, Student, or Parent from the Title  
drop-down menu.

Getting Started with Canvas
[ 10 ]
4.	 Then, fill in your information on the registration screen, take a look at terms 
of use and privacy policy, check the You agree to the terms of use and 
acknowledge the privacy policy checkbox, and click on the blue box at the 
bottom-right corner of the window. This box will read Start Teaching, Start 
Learning, or Start Participating depending on whether you are a teacher, 
student, or parent. The following screenshot displays what you will see  
when you create an account as a Teacher:

Chapter 1
[ 11 ]
5.	 Once you submit your registration, you will receive a confirmation e-mail 
as well as a welcome e-mail. The confirmation e-mail will include a link that 
you must follow to complete your registration and create your password.
6.	 Once you have followed the e-mail link to confirm your registration, you can 
log in at http://canvas.instructure.com again using your e-mail address 
and a new password to begin using Canvas!
Navigating Canvas – the dashboard
When you log in for the first time, you will be taken to the Canvas dashboard.  
There are four main sections of the dashboard, which we'll familiarize ourselves with 
now, then go into more detail as we learn about what you can do within each section 
of Canvas:
1.	 In the top-right corner of the dashboard, you will see your name, Inbox, 
Settings, Logout, and Help. This menu, shown in the following screenshot, 
will usually be visible to you regardless of the page you are viewing in Canvas:
2.	 Along the top-left side of the screen, you will see the Canvas logo (or your 
institution's logo), and a list of tabs that read Home, Assignments, Grades, 
and Calendar. Once you get started with your course or courses, the Home 
link will turn into a Courses link with a drop-down menu. This top menu 
will also usually be visible to you on any page you are viewing in Canvas, 
and you can always access your Canvas dashboard by clicking on the logo  
in the top-left corner, as seen in the following screenshot:

Getting Started with Canvas
[ 12 ]
3.	 In the center of the dashboard, you will see a Welcome to Canvas! message, 
a message with a Configure Communication Preferences button to 
configure the communication preferences, and a Recent Activity section 
at the bottom. The Recent Activity section functions like the Newsfeed on 
Facebook or the Twitter feed on Twitter. Eventually, this section of your 
dashboard will display items such as announcements that have been posted 
in courses, messages that have been sent to you, and assignments that have 
been submitted to your courses. The Recent Activity section is a quick and 
easy way to check what has happened in your courses while you've been 
away from your computer. This section, which only appears on the Canvas 
dashboard, is shown in the following screenshot:
4.	 The Coming Up section on the right side of your screen will eventually be 
filled with helpful reminders about what's coming up on the calendars for  
all of your courses:
°°
You can click on View Calendar to see a calendar layout of what's 
going on in all of your courses including assignment due dates, 
online meetings, and more.
°°
Once your courses are up and running, you will also see a To Do list 
displayed above the Coming Up section. The To Do list will show 
you any assignments that need to be graded for any of your courses 
along with the number of submissions that need to be graded.

Chapter 1
[ 13 ]
°°
You will also see a Start a New Course button that will allow you to 
start a new course under the Coming Up section. We will get to this 
button soon, but as you can guess, this is the button you will click 
on to create a brand new course. This section, as displayed in the 
following screenshot, also only appears on the dashboard:
Another helpful section to notice is the menu at the very bottom of the screen. This 
menu includes links to Help, Privacy policy, Terms of service, Facebook, and 
Twitter. These links are useful guides to general information about Instructure as 
a company and your usage of Canvas. The Help link that appears in this menu will 
take you to the same page as the Help link in the top-right menu. The bottom menu, 
shown in the following screenshot, will usually be visible to you on any page you are 
viewing within Canvas:
Now that you're familiar with the basic layout of the Canvas dashboard, let's work 
through how to set up your personal settings and communication preferences.
Adjusting your profile, settings, and 
notifications
In this section, we will address how to set up your Canvas profile, adjust your 
general account settings, and personalize your notification settings. If you are using 
an institutional account, the ability to adjust your profile, settings, and notifications 
may be limited or different than described in this section. While your individual 
situation may vary, let's start by covering how to set up your Canvas profile, which 
other users will see as they interact with you on Canvas.

Getting Started with Canvas
[ 14 ]
Adjusting your profile
Your Canvas profile includes your profile picture, biography, and website links.  
To begin, perform the following steps:
1.	 Click on your name in the top-right menu of the dashboard.
2.	 This will bring you to your profile page. Your profile page is a part of your 
account settings, which are laid out similarly to the way Canvas courses are 
laid out.
Your other account settings appear on the left-side menu as shown in the following 
screenshot, but for now, let's update your profile picture:

Chapter 1
[ 15 ]
Adding a profile picture
Including a photo of yourself makes your presence on Canvas immediately more 
relatable and inviting. When participants can see a photo of someone who is writing 
to them or is posting on discussion boards, the Canvas community becomes more 
vibrant, personalized, and engaging. To add or change your profile picture, perform 
the following steps:
1.	 Click on the gray outline of a person next to your name on your profile 
page. Notice that when you hover your mouse over this gray image, an icon 
appears in the bottom-right part of the image that looks like a pencil. This 
pencil icon is the symbol for editing something within Canvas, so in most 
situations, you can click on the pencil icon wherever you see it in order to 
edit what you're looking at. In the following screenshot, you see an example 
of the gray outline as well as the editing pencil icon seen throughout Canvas:
2.	 After you click on the pencil icon, a pop-up window will appear with  
three options along the top side: Upload a Picture, Take a Picture, and  
From Gravatar.
3.	 To upload a photo from your computer, click on Upload a Picture and then 
click on choose a picture below it.
4.	 From there, another pop-up window will appear, which will allow you to 
select the image you would like to use as your profile picture from your 
computer. Once you have found the picture on your computer, click on the 
file and then click on Open.

Getting Started with Canvas
[ 16 ]
5.	 Next, you can crop the picture into a square using the cropping tools that 
appear. After you have cropped your photo, click on Save and your picture 
will be updated. The following screenshot displays the cropping tools  
as well as the Save button:
6.	 If you click on Take a Picture at the top of the pop-up window, your  
webcam will open and you will be able to take a new photo to use as  
your profile picture.
7.	 If you have a Gravatar account (a separate account from Canvas), you can click 
on From Gravatar to select your profile picture from your Gravatar account.
8.	 After you click on the Save button, the profile picture window will close and 
you will see that the image you selected has replaced the default gray outline 
profile picture as displayed in the following screenshot:

Chapter 1
[ 17 ]
Editing your profile
To edit what other Canvas users can see about you, you can adjust your name, title, 
and bio, as well as add links to your personal or professional websites. As with your 
profile picture, any information you add to your Canvas profile will help participants 
gain a better understanding of who you are as a person. Within a fully online learning 
environment, establishing personal connections with participants can be very important 
in building a productive and comfortable learning community. To add information to 
your profile, perform the following steps:
1.	 Begin on your profile page and click on Edit Profile on the right side of  
the screen.
2.	 This will open editing boxes for your Name, Title, Bio, and Links fields.  
You can click on each editing box to adjust or add content.
3.	 When you are finished editing, click on Save Profile at the bottom of the 
screen before moving on, as shown in the following screenshot:
Once you have saved your updates, they will be visible to other Canvas users when 
they view your profile. You may notice a message under the Ways to Contact Me 
section that mentions you have not registered any services. Next, we will learn how 
to adjust your account settings and add alternative forms of contact including e-mail 
addresses, cell phone numbers, or registered services such as Facebook, Twitter, 
Skype, or LinkedIn.
www.allitebooks.com

Getting Started with Canvas
[ 18 ]
Adjusting your account settings
To adjust your account settings such as your display name, contact information, 
language, time zone, and integrated web services, click on the Settings link in the 
top-right menu:
You can also access your settings by clicking on the Settings link on the left-side 
menu of your profile page. Let's begin by adjusting your contact information so 
anything you receive from Canvas goes to an address, device, or program that you 
check frequently.
Adding a new e-mail address
On your Settings page, the Ways to Contact section on the right-side menu includes 
the e-mail address with which you have registered and the option to add more 
e-mail addresses as well as more methods of contact. To add an e-mail address, 
perform the following steps:
1.	 Click on the Add Email Address link.
2.	 A pop-up window will appear that will let you add as many alternate e-mail 
addresses as you would like, with the option of signing in to Canvas with 
any of them.
3.	 If you would like to sign in to Canvas using a new e-mail, type in the new 
e-mail address, check the box next to I want to log in to Canvas using this 
email address, and then click on Register Email in the bottom-right corner  
of the pop-up window, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 1
[ 19 ]
Once you click on Register Email, the pop-up window will close and you can 
continue editing your contact information.
Adding a cell phone number for SMS text 
notifications
One of the unique features of Canvas is the ability to receive notifications from 
Canvas directly to your cell phone. Depending on your desired level of availability 
to participants and how frequently you would like to monitor activity with your 
courses, you may choose to add your cell phone number and receive notifications via 
SMS texts. For example, this feature might be a wise option if you consistently check 
your cell phone but rarely check your e-mail. To add your cell phone number in 
order to receive SMS text message notifications, perform the following steps:
1.	 Click on Add Contact Method under the Ways to Contact section on the 
right-side menu of the Settings page.
2.	 In the pop-up window, enter your cell phone number and select your 
provider. The SMS e-mail address should automatically appear once you 
select your provider. Note that Canvas SMS services are currently geared 
toward US providers.
3.	 Once you have entered your number and selected your provider, click on 
Register SMS in the bottom-right corner of the pop-up window, as shown  
in the following screenshot:

Getting Started with Canvas
[ 20 ]
4.	 You will then see a new pop-up window (next screenshot) appear in your 
browser that asks for a confirmation code. You should receive an SMS text 
on your cell phone with the confirmation code, which you should then enter 
into the pop-up window on your screen and click on Confirm. If you do not 
receive an SMS text with a confirmation number and you entered your phone 
number correctly, click on the Re-Send Confirmation link in the pop-up 
window. If you entered your number incorrectly, close the pop-up window 
and begin the process again by clicking on Add Contact Method under the 
Ways to Contact section on the right-side menu of the Settings page:
5.	 Once you have confirmed your cell phone number, you will be able to 
receive notifications via text messages.
Editing your general settings
As with many other online services you may have encountered, configuring the 
general settings of your Canvas account is important for proper and accurate 
functioning of your account. Your general settings include your name, preferred 
language, current time zone, and password. Also found within the general settings 
menu are the options to receive Instructure informational e-mails and delete your 
account. To edit your general settings, perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to the main Settings page.
2.	 On the right-side menu, click on the Edit Settings button underneath the 
Ways to Contact menu as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 1
[ 21 ]
3.	 You will see textboxes and drop-down menus appear in the center part of the 
screen. When adjusting the Full Name, Display Name, and Sortable Name 
fields for your account, each section includes a brief description of where that 
display name will appear. For example, if you are teaching a college course, 
you may want your name to be displayed with the title of Professor or Dr. 
for discussion posts, messages, and comments. The following screenshot 
provides an example of each type of name:

Getting Started with Canvas
[ 22 ]
4.	 Below your name settings, you can use the Language and Time Zone  
drop-down menus to adjust the language of your Canvas experience as well 
as the time zone in which you live. To adjust your time zone, click on the 
drop-down menu and select from the listed options.
5.	 You can check the box next to I want to receive information, news and 
tips from Instructure, as shown in the following screenshot, if you would 
like Instructure to e-mail you about certain features of Canvas. You will not 
receive informational product e-mails from Instructure if you do not check 
this box, though you will receive course notification e-mails based on your 
notification settings:
6.	 To change your password, check the box next to Change Password and  
a new menu will open below that checkbox.
7.	 Using the drop-down menu that appears, select the e-mail address you 
would like to change the password for, then enter your old password, your 
new password, and confirm your new password in the appropriate boxes  
as shown in the following screenshot:
8.	 When finished, click on the blue Update Settings box below your  
settings information.
The option to delete your account also appears within the menu to edit your general 
settings. To delete your account, perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to the the main Settings page and click on the Edit Settings button 
underneath the Ways to Contact menu.

Chapter 1
[ 23 ]
2.	 Scroll down and click on the red Delete My Account link.
3.	 You will be taken to a new page that asks if you really want to delete your 
account. If you are positive you would like to delete your account, click 
on the button that says Delete [Your Name] and your account will be 
permanently deleted, as shown in the following screenshot:
Moving on from your general account settings, let's explore some of the innovative 
connections you can configure between Canvas and other common online services, 
referred to as Registered Services.
Using registered services
Canvas allows you to link registered services to your Canvas account in order to 
better integrate Canvas into your life online. Utilizing Registered Services allows 
you to connect Canvas to other websites, programs, and networks you already use 
when you are online. Again, if you are using an institutional account, your options 
for external services may be limited or different compared to those discussed in this 
section. If you already have accounts with any of the services seen in the following 
screenshot, you can link your Canvas profile to your external accounts to utilize the 
features of those external services:

Getting Started with Canvas
[ 24 ]
To connect the preceding services to your Canvas account as registered services, 
perform the following steps:
1.	 Click on the service you would like to link to your Canvas account.
2.	 Each service has slightly different instructions that appear, so follow the 
onscreen instructions carefully to link your Canvas account to your external 
service account.
3.	 Once you have linked Canvas to one of the listed services, that service  
will appear under the Registered Services heading, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
One of the most common reasons to register an external service with Canvas is to 
receive Canvas notifications while you are logged in to that external service. To adjust 
these options, let's now discuss how to customize your notification preferences.
Customizing your notification preferences
Your notification preferences are some of the most important things to know how to 
adjust when using Canvas. The same goes for your students, since not being notified 
of an announcement or a direct message could mean missing an online meeting or 
assignment if their notification preferences are not adjusted appropriately. The easiest 
way to access your notification settings is to click on Notifications on the left menu 
of your account Settings page. If you've just added a profile picture, updated your 
profile, and edited your general account settings, look to the left of your screen and 
click on Notifications, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 1
[ 25 ]
The Notifications page allows you to adjust the following:
•	
Which activities you receive notifications about (for example, due dates, 
inbox messages, or announcements)
•	
How will you receive notifications (for example, via e-mail, text, Facebook,  
or Twitter)
•	
When will you receive notifications (for example, immediately, daily, weekly, 
or never)
When you open your Notification Preferences, you will see a spreadsheet-like 
grid, shown in the following screenshot, which lists the course activities you can be 
notified about in the left column and the method of notification along the top row:

Getting Started with Canvas
[ 26 ]
The methods of notification along the top come from the contact information and 
the registered services that you have configured in your general account settings. 
You will notice that in the center of the grid, you can hover your mouse over the 
cross sections of Course Activities and your chosen methods of contact. If you hover 
your mouse over any of these cross sections, you can select one of the four options 
for how frequently Canvas will notify you about the selected activity. The following 
screenshots show each option:
To adjust your notification preferences, perform the following steps:
1.	 Locate the course activity you would like to be notified about.
2.	 Then, find the method of contact through which you would like to  
be notified about that activity.

Chapter 1
[ 27 ]
3.	 Within the Notification Preferences grid, click on one of the four notification 
frequency options to set the notification method and frequency. For example, 
the following screenshot displays the Send daily summary option to send a 
daily summary for any changes to Grading Policies:
4.	 Once you have selected the notification frequency, you will see an icon with 
the selected frequency show up on the grid.
5.	 Your notification preferences are automatically saved once you select them.
As you become more familiar with Canvas and begin participating in courses, you 
may decide to return to your notification settings once you have a better idea of your 
needs and preferences.
Now that we've covered all of the basics of setting up your profile, adjusting your 
settings, and customizing your notification preferences, let's get started with creating 
your course!
Creating your Canvas course
As mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, your Canvas account will fall under the 
umbrella of an institutional Canvas account or a Free for Teachers account. Creating 
a course is different for both types of accounts, and you may find that your specific 
institution's Canvas situation might be a hybrid of both, depending on how your 
school has chosen to integrate Canvas with its other systems. To begin, let's start with 
how to access your new blank course if it has been set up by your institution's IT or 
other administrative department.
www.allitebooks.com

Getting Started with Canvas
[ 28 ]
Joining a course created by your institution
If your school uses Canvas as its LMS, you will mostly likely not need to deal with 
the initial creation of your Canvas course. In fact, you may not have the ability to 
create your own Canvas course; in this case, you will need to go through your IT or 
administrative department to create a course within your institution's Canvas site. 
Often, the IT or administrative department will have all of your courses created 
automatically when they create the course within the institutional course  
registration system.
When courses are created automatically, you will often also be automatically added 
to those courses, at which point they will appear when you log in to Canvas without 
any action on your part. Alternately, if your IT team manually creates your course, 
you will receive an e-mail inviting you to officially join the course. After the IT 
or administrative teams have created your course, you will receive an e-mail that 
informs you that you have been invited to participate in your course as a teacher. 
The following screenshot is a sample of what the e-mail may contain:

Chapter 1
[ 29 ]
From there, you should follow the link in the main body of the e-mail:
1.	 You will be directed to the Canvas login page for your institution,  
where you should log in using your institutional username and  
password or the username and password you set up with your IT  
or other administrative department.
2.	 Once you log in, your dashboard should include Decline or Accept buttons 
to decline or accept the course invitation. Once you click on Accept, the 
course will show up on the top-left menu under the Courses link.
3.	 From there, you can click on Courses, select the course you have just joined, 
and begin the course building process that we will cover in Chapter 2, 
Building Your Canvas Course.
If you are not using Canvas through an institution, you will need to create a course 
using your Free for Teachers account.
Creating a new course with a Free for 
Teachers account
If you are using the Free for Teachers version of Canvas, you can create a new course 
from your dashboard. For institutional account users, you may also have this option 
depending on how your IT team has configured Canvas. To create a new course, 
perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to your Canvas dashboard.
2.	 On the right-side menu, click on the button that says Start a New Course.
3.	 From there, a pop-up window will appear within your browser. In that 
window, you can name your course, assign an abbreviation and course 
number, select the content license from a drop-down menu, and choose 
whether you would like the course to be publicly accessible. In most cases, 
you will probably want to keep your course private, but you may choose 
whichever option is most applicable to your unique course situation.
4.	 Once you have entered all the information for your course, click on  
Create course.

Getting Started with Canvas
[ 30 ]
The following screenshot shows you how the pop-up window will look like and 
offers examples of what you might want to include when setting up your course:
Your course is now created! After you click on Create course, you will be taken to 
the home page of your new course. You'll notice that the course layout is similar to 
what we saw while editing your account settings. We will go over how to navigate 
your course in more detail throughout the rest of the book, but you should see that:
•	
The top-right menu is still visible and unchanged
•	
The top-left menu is still visible and unchanged
•	
The left-side menu lists specific locations and options within the course
•	
The center of the screen displays the main content of the course home page
•	
The right-side menu displays the Coming Up section along with the option 
to post a new announcement
•	
The bottom menu is still visible and unchanged

Chapter 1
[ 31 ]
Also, note that a course checklist hovers at the bottom of the screen. This checklist will 
walk you through the various steps in adding content to and publishing your course.
When you create your course, it will remain unpublished until you choose to publish 
it. Until your course is published, only teachers, designers, and teacher's assistants 
(TAs) that have been added to the course will be able to access the course content. 
Once the course is published, students you have added to the course will be able 
to access the course content. You will see the message displayed in the following 
screenshot when your course is unpublished:
Depending on how you would like your course to run, it is up to you when you 
decide to officially publish your course and allow all participants to access the 
content. In later chapters, we will cover how to control exactly what participants  
can see within your course once it is published, but at this point it is probably best  
to wait until you have finished designing your course before officially publishing it.
Now that we have created your first course, we can begin building the course by 
adding and organizing content in the coming chapters.

Getting Started with Canvas
[ 32 ]
Summary
At the beginning of this chapter, we discussed the different types of Canvas accounts 
you might encounter. We discussed how to set up and access an institutional 
Canvas account and a Free for Teachers Canvas account, and then we moved on 
to navigate Canvas once we logged in. After examining the various menus of the 
Canvas dashboard, we covered how to edit your profile, including how to add a 
profile picture, and update your bio and links. From there, we learned how to adjust 
your account settings including contact information, your display name, preferred 
language, and time zone. We worked through how to change your password and 
what to do if you need to delete your account for any reason. Next, we covered how 
to link registered services to your accounts such as Facebook, Twitter, Skype, and 
LinkedIn, and then we explored the extensive notification preferences that Canvas 
allows you to adjust. At the end of the chapter, you learned how to create a course, 
both from an institutional account and a Free for Teachers account perspective.
As we move forward into Chapter 2, Building Your Canvas Course, we will dive into 
adding content to your course and learn how to tailor your Canvas course to meet 
your needs and the needs of your students.

Building Your Canvas Course
This chapter will cover the foundations of building your Canvas course to create and 
arrange the content your students will interact with when they log in. We will start by 
exploring the Course Setup Checklist, which will help guide you through the process 
of building your course. We will then discuss some of the important ideas to keep in 
mind when planning your course and conceptualizing how you will use Canvas for 
your unique educational situation. After this, we will learn how to import content from 
another course on Canvas or from another learning management system (LMS). Next, 
we will work through how to add assignments and content to your course, specifically 
focusing on how to use the Rich Content Editor. We will examine the various types 
of assignments you can create within Canvas, and we will cover how to create 
assignment groups for weighted assignments.

Building Your Canvas Course
[ 34 ]
Exploring the Course Setup Checklist
When you click on your newly created course (remember that it's listed under 
Courses on the top-left menu of the dashboard), you will be taken to the home page 
of your new course. By default, you will see the Next Steps checklist appear at the 
bottom of your screen with a number of options listed for setting up your course. 
This checklist is a guide that helps you make sure that all of the essential elements of 
your course are up and running before you publish the course and allow students to 
access the content. The Next Steps checklist is shown in the following screenshot:
If you hover your mouse over the options in the Next Steps checklist, you will  
notice that a description of each option appears on the right-hand side.
Throughout Canvas, you can often hover your mouse over links or 
icons to learn more about how they work and what they do.
If you click on the X in the top-right corner of the Next Steps checklist, the checklist 
will disappear from your screen. You may wish to do this once you start designing 
assignments or content pages so that you can see the full screen more easily. If you 
wish to get the Next Steps checklist to appear again, go to the course's home page and 
click on Course Setup Checklist on the right-side menu above the announcements and 
calendar, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 2
[ 35 ]
While we will cover everything in the Next Steps checklist eventually, this chapter 
will walk you through the finer details of the first two items of this checklist:
•	
How to import content
•	
How to add course assignments and content to your course
Before we dive into actually building your course, let's discuss the planning that 
should go into designing your course before you start.
Planning your course – from syllabus to 
screen
As you sit down to think about how to build and organize your Canvas course, there 
are a number of things to consider that will impact the way you will use Canvas to 
manage your course content. The following questions and prompts will help you 
determine the approaches you could consider while building your course:
•	
What kind of course am I teaching?
°°
A traditional live course
°°
A fully online course
°°
A live course with online expectations (for example, assignment 
submission, discussion board postings, video assignments, and  
peer reviews)

Building Your Canvas Course
[ 36 ]
•	
What do I need to do to get the course content into a format that is suitable 
for Canvas?
°°
The course is brand new. I have not taught a live or online version of 
the course before, so I need to find and sequence the course content 
before I begin building my Canvas course.
°°
I have taught the course previously as a live course. The content is 
already organized in a syllabus, so the bulk of my work will be to 
obtain electronic copies of the content and add existing content to  
my Canvas course.
°°
I have taught the course previously as an online course using another 
LMS. The content is already organized in a syllabus and I have all of 
the content in an electronic form. I need to import and organize the 
course content into Canvas.
°°
I have taught the course previously, either live or online, using 
another LMS. The content is already organized in a syllabus, so I will 
need to obtain electronic copies of the content and import the course 
content from another LMS.
•	
What purpose will Canvas serve in the day-to-day life of my course?
°°
Canvas will be a supplement to a live course where students can access 
assigned content and communicate with their peers and me.
°°
Canvas will be the sole platform for a fully online course. Students will 
interact with all of the content, other students, and me via Canvas.
°°
Canvas will facilitate a variety of live and online assignments/expectations 
in addition to housing supplementary content and streamlining 
communication.
•	
How will students interact with Canvas?
°°
Students will use Canvas as a supplement to the live course in 
which they are participating. They will have access to a hard copy 
of everything they need in class, but they can find the same material 
online as well. They will check Canvas to see their grades for the 
various assignments that they will turn in to me during class.
°°
Students will use Canvas to participate in an online course. They  
will access the course content, submit assignments electronically,  
and communicate solely through Canvas.
°°
Students will use Canvas for the administrative aspects of their live 
course. They will access content via Canvas, and they may have the 
option to submit assignments in the class or electronically. Canvas 
will connect them in a way that is similar to how they connect over 
social media sites.

Chapter 2
[ 37 ]
•	
How will I interact with Canvas?
°°
I will post the material we cover in class on Canvas for students 
to access remotely (for example, the course syllabus, in-class 
presentations, class notes, readings, and assignment instructions).  
I will post grades to Canvas, but I will communicate comments and 
feedback in person.
°°
I will teach the entire course using Canvas. I will post content for 
students to explore, facilitate online lectures, collect and grade 
assignments, and communicate feedback to students via Canvas.
°°
I will use the features of Canvas to enhance the experiences that 
students have during class. I will post core and supplemental content, 
create assignments for electronic submission, and communicate with 
students via Canvas in addition to face-to-face interactions.
Your answers to these questions will vary depending on your situation, and the 
options listed in the preceding points are only the most common; you may have any 
combination of the preceding situations present in your workload. A vital aspect of 
successfully utilizing the capabilities of Canvas is determining what your needs are. 
Once you determine what you need to accomplish, you can use this book to help you 
meet your goals.
If you are using Canvas to teach a course that you have taught in the past with an 
existing syllabus, what you already have is a great place to start. Take the existing 
syllabus and organize it into sections. Think about the sequence of the content, the 
various types of projects and assignments, as well as the assessment and grading 
strategies you have used. Canvas can play as large or small a role as you need for any 
of these elements of your syllabus based on your answers to the preceding questions.
As an example, let's discuss using electronic versions of your course content. If you 
need to obtain electronic versions of your course content, check the copyright laws 
regarding the educational use of materials for your country. In many cases, you may 
be able to scan content and upload it directly to Canvas. This way, students have 
instant access to the content directly through Canvas, and you can sequence content 
within Canvas so students access it in the order you desire. You may alternatively 
wish to have your students purchase e-book or hard copy editions of your chosen 
textbooks. Another option still would be to only use traditional hard copies of the 
content by either distributing copies in class or requiring students to purchase the 
content on their own. As you become more familiar with the capabilities of Canvas 
in the coming chapters, you will gain a better understanding of how you would like 
to use Canvas for your course. However, the more traditional planning you put into 
your course before you start building it, the easier it will be for you to transition to 
using Canvas for that course.
www.allitebooks.com

Building Your Canvas Course
[ 38 ]
As a large number of institutions, especially those in higher education, have adopted 
and begun to use LMSs in recent years, you have probably encountered another 
LMS in the time you've spent at your institution. You may have taught courses using 
these systems in the past. If that's the case, the following section will help you import 
content from your previous courses in other systems into Canvas. If you are building 
your course from scratch or have not used another LMS when teaching your course 
previously, you are welcome to flip through to the following section on adding 
assignments and content to your course.
Importing content from another course
Though this is the first step of Course Setup Checklist, if you are a new Canvas  
user and are planning to build your Canvas course from scratch, you will most likely 
want to skip to the next section. If you are importing a course from another LMS, 
you can find the instructions to do so here, and then you will need to go through the 
course using information from the rest of the chapter to reformat the course content.
The first step in importing content from another Canvas course or LMS is to export 
or extract that content from its original host site. Exporting content is different for 
every LMS, but the option to export an entire course is usually found in the course 
settings. Consult your IT department or the technology support for the host site 
if you need help exporting. We will cover how to export a course from Canvas in 
Chapter 7, Now You're Ready! once we have completed building your course. To 
import content into your course, perform the following steps:
1.	 Export your course content from its original host site, and then make sure 
that you save the exported file to an easily accessible location on your 
computer (for example, your desktop or your My Documents folder).
One of the most common file formats for an exported course is the 
.zip file format. Files with a .zip extension contain a file or group 
of files that have been compressed for easy transportation between 
programs or devices. Think of it as a suitcase; rather than transporting 
four outfits individually for a business trip, you zip them all together 
in a suitcase for easy transportation.
2.	 Navigate to the home page of your course and look at the Next Steps 
checklist at the bottom of the screen. If you hover your mouse over Import 
Content in the Next Steps checklist, look to the right-hand side, and you will 
notice the following description appear. To begin importing the content, click 
on the Import Content link that appears in the description as shown in the 
following screenshot:

Chapter 2
[ 39 ]
3.	 On the page that appears, you will see the heading Import Content with a 
drop-down menu next to Content Type. From the drop-down menu, choose 
the type of content import you would like to import by selecting the file type 
and management system you have used in the past. For example, if you 
have an exported course from Blackboard or Moodle, choose the option that 
corresponds to the LMS with which you have created the course export file. 
The following screenshot displays the options you may choose from:
4.	 After you have selected your content type, options will appear on the Import 
Content page that will guide you through uploading your content bundle.
5.	 Follow the instructions that appear for the type of content you are importing 
and check any relevant adjustment options. In most cases, you will see an 
option to upload the content bundle from your computer.

Building Your Canvas Course
[ 40 ]
6.	 Select the appropriate content bundle file from your computer. You may see 
other appear options below the Content Type drop-down menu that include 
the ability to adjust the course's start and end dates or the assignment due 
dates. Select these options if you wish and enter the appropriate dates. You 
may also see options to select specific content that you would like to import 
to Canvas; check this option if you wish to upload only certain sections or 
files from your previous course.
7.	 Once you have selected the content bundle file to import and have selected 
the desired adjustment options, click on Import. From there, you will  
see your course import appear under Current Jobs at the bottom of the 
import screen.
8.	 You will see a progress bar appear, and once your import is finished, you 
will be able to see that the import is complete. You will also be able to see  
the time at which it was completed, as shown in the following screenshot:
9.	 When your import is completed, you can navigate back to the course's  
home page.
On the left-side menu, you can click through the navigation links to explore the 
content that has been imported. The Assignments or Files links on the left-side 
menu are the most common places for the imported content to appear, so feel free  
to click on those links to explore where your content has been imported.
The following sections will cover how to add to, adjust, modify, rearrange, or delete 
the content that you have now successfully imported.

Chapter 2
[ 41 ]
Adding assignments and content
The bulk of building a course in Canvas is creating your assignments and setting up 
the grading preferences to accurately reflect the expectations in your syllabus. As we 
discussed, the more planning that goes into your course before you begin building it, 
the easier it will be for you to assemble your course. Once you have developed your 
syllabus, identify the assignments, assessments, and grading policies you would like 
to put into action for your course. When you have developed the graded content for 
your course in the abstract, you can begin building each assignment within  
your Canvas course.
Creating an assignment
The following section will walk you through creating assignments for your course. 
As we work through the options available to you as you create your assignments, you 
will gain a better understanding of the variety of purposes the assignments may serve 
within your course. To create your first assignment, perform the following steps:
1.	 Open the home page of your course.
2.	 On the left-side menu, click on Assignments. This will bring you to the 
assignment list for your course, which you will notice is empty (unless  
you have imported assignments from another course or LMS). Click on 
the plus sign icon to begin creating your first assignment, as seen in the 
following screenshot:
3.	 You will see a pop-up screen appear that includes options to designate the 
Type, Name, Due, and Points value for your first assignment. You will also 
see buttons to view More Options, the Cancel button to cancel the assignment 
creation, and the Save button to save (that is, create) the assignment.

Building Your Canvas Course
[ 42 ]
4.	 For your first assignment, set the assignment type to Assignment for the 
purpose of learning the basics of assignment creation. We will discuss the 
four other types of assignments in the Creating different types of assignments 
section later in this chapter. Enter the name, due date, and point value for 
your assignment. When choosing the due date of your assignment, you can 
click on the small calendar icon next to the Due option, which will open a 
pop-up monthly calendar. Click on the day you would like to set as the due 
date, and then enter the time by which you would like the assignment to be 
turned in.
5.	 Click on Save to create your assignment. The following screenshot displays 
an example designated as Assignment named My First Assignment, due 
on September 19, 2014, and worth 100 points:
Your assignment name should reflect what your first assignment will be, for example, 
Week 1 Written Reflection or Getting-to-Know-You Video. The due date and 
points should correlate to your syllabus.
After you click on Save, you will have officially created your first assignment. This 
assignment will now show up in the course calendar and in the Gradebook with the 
due date and point value that you have assigned.

Chapter 2
[ 43 ]
Editing an assignment
After you have created your basic assignment, you can click on the name of your 
newly created assignment, which will take you to the assignment page for that 
assignment. When creating future assignments, you can access this page by clicking 
on the More Options button instead of clicking on Save to create the assignment. 
You will see that the assignment page lists all of the specifications you entered when 
you created the assignment, but the page will not contain specific completion or 
submission instructions for that assignment (that is, No content). From here, we want 
to edit the assignment to add more specifics that will guide students to accurately 
complete and submit the assignment, whether they are submitting the assignment live 
or electronically. We also want to adjust the grading and assignment specifications 
to make sure that the grade we eventually enter into the Gradebook affects each 
student's overall grade accurately. To edit the assignment, click on the Edit button  
at the top-right corner of the assignment page, as shown in the following screenshot:
This will open the editing page for your first assignment. You will see the option to 
edit the name of the assignment at the top of the screen. Below that, you will find a 
Rich Content Editor that contains a menu bar full of formatting and content options 
above a textbox. Below the Rich Content Editor, you will see options for Points, 
Assignment Group, Display Grade as, Submission Type, Group Assignment, and 
Peer Reviews as well as the Due Date options at the very bottom. Before we delve 
into all of these features, let's start by familiarizing ourselves with the Rich Content 
Editor, which appears throughout Canvas as a way to customize posted content.

Building Your Canvas Course
[ 44 ]
Using the Rich Content Editor
The Rich Content Editor allows you to post content to Canvas and customize the 
formatting for what you are posting. Formatting involves the presentation of the 
content (for example, the alignment, spacing, indentation, font color, and so on).  
The Rich Content Editor also allows you to do things such as insert a hyperlink, 
create a table, or upload media content (such as audio or video). If you hover your 
mouse over the icons in the Rich Content Editor, you will see a description of what 
each button does. Go ahead and hover your mouse to explore the options within the 
Rich Content Editor.
Basic formatting
The icons on the left-hand side and the drop-down menus on the right-hand side of 
the Rich Text Editor allow you to adjust the basic formatting of the text you wish to 
edit, as shown by the brackets in the following screenshot:
You will likely be familiar with most of these icons, as they are standard across many 
text editing and word processing programs. Again, you can hover your mouse over 
each icon to see a description of what each button will do. These basic formatting 
options adjust the appearance of the text within the textbox, for example, the size, 
emphasis, color, and position.
Embedding content
The icons indicated by the horizontal bracket in the following screenshot allow 
you to embed items into the textbox by navigating through the pop-up menus that 
appear when you click on each icon. The following sections describe each icon from 
left to right.

Chapter 2
[ 45 ]
The Insert/Edit Table feature
The Insert/Edit Table feature allows you to insert a table, similar to a table you 
would generate using a spreadsheet program such as Microsoft Excel. To insert  
a table, perform the following steps:
1.	 Click on the Insert/Edit Table icon within the Rich Content Editor.
2.	 You will see a pop-up menu with two tabs at the top, the General tab  
and the Advanced tab, as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 Based on the desired dimensions and characteristics of the table you wish 
to create, go through each option and type in the desired specifications. You 
will most likely only need to fill out the information under the General tab; 
however, feel free to explore the options available under the Advanced tab.

Building Your Canvas Course
[ 46 ]
4.	 Once you have filled out everything to your liking, click on Insert in the 
bottom-left corner of the pop-up menu to create your table. If you are editing 
a table that you have already created, click on Update in the bottom-left 
corner of the pop-up menu.
The Link to URL feature
The Link to URL feature allows you to insert a hyperlink that will open a URL  
(that is, a website address) in a new tab or window in your web browser. The easiest 
way to insert a hyperlink is to copy and paste the link into the Rich Content Editor 
textbox, and it will automatically be converted into a link. Alternatively, you can 
click on the Link to URL icon to add a link or change plain text to a hyperlink.  
To create a hyperlink, perform the following steps:
1.	 Click on the Link to URL icon.
2.	 You will see a pop-up menu with instructions to paste a URL in the box 
shown in the pop-up window:
3.	 Once you have pasted the web address in the box, click on Insert Link.  
This will display the link you have pasted as a clickable hyperlink in the 
main textbox below the Rich Content Editor.
You can also highlight plain text and then click on the Link to URL icon to change 
the plain text to a hyperlink. In this case, the selected text will open the web address, 
but the full URL will not be displayed in the main text box. This allows you to embed 
links into written content without interrupting the aesthetic of the written content 
with a cumbersome web address.

Chapter 2
[ 47 ]
If you paste the URL to a video hosted on YouTube, the Rich Content 
Editor will automatically embed a thumbnail of the video into the 
textbox. This allows users to click on the thumbnail and watch the 
video within the assignment or content page rather than opening a 
new tab or window in the web browser.
The Unlink feature
The Unlink feature allows you to remove a hyperlink that has been inserted using 
the Link to URL feature. To unlink a hyperlink, select the link and then click on the 
Unlink icon.
The Embed Image feature
The Embed Image feature allows you to embed an image into the textbox. When you 
click on the Embed Image icon, you will see a pop-up menu with three tabs at the 
top; the URL, Canvas, and Flickr tabs. Each of these tabs offers you a way to embed 
an image.
The URL tab allows you to paste the URL of an image that already exists online and 
embed the image. To add an image from a URL, perform the following steps:
1.	 Click on the URL tab and paste the URL for your image into the box at  
the top.
2.	 You may see an option to add alternative text for improved accessibility 
(optional) and adjust the dimensions of the image you wish to embed. 
Adjusting the dimensions basically allows you to resize the image so it does 
not fill the entire page once it is embedded. The aspect ratio (the proportional 
length and width of the image) will remain the same.
www.allitebooks.com

Building Your Canvas Course
[ 48 ]
3.	 To embed the image, click on Update in the bottom-right corner of the  
pop-up window, as shown in the following screenshot:
The Canvas tab allows you to insert an image that has been uploaded to the Files 
section of your course. To add an image from Canvas, perform the following steps:
1.	 Click on the Canvas tab and locate the image within the Files section of your 
Canvas account.
2.	 If you have imported content from another system, you may have images 
that you have used for your course previously. These images will most likely 
appear in the Files section of your course, and you can select and adjust the 
dimensions of these images.

Chapter 2
[ 49 ]
3.	 Click on the image to select it, then click on Update, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
The Flickr tab allows you to search for Creative Commons images that are available 
for free use online. To find and embed images using the Flickr tab, perform the 
following steps:
1.	 Click on the Flickr tab and enter your search terms into the search bar.
2.	 Press Enter or click on the magnifying glass search icon.
3.	 Select the desired image from the search results that appear.

Building Your Canvas Course
[ 50 ]
4.	 Enter the desired dimensions, and then click on Update, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
The Insert Math Equation feature
The Insert Math Equation feature allows you to insert a math equation into the 
textbox. To insert an equation, perform the following steps:
1.	 Click on the Insert Math Equation icon, which will open a pop-up menu 
with seven tabs. Each tab allows you to insert specific mathematical symbols 
to build basic or complex mathematical equations.
2.	 To insert a symbol, click on the desired symbol and make any necessary 
adjustments in the editing box below the symbols menu.

Chapter 2
[ 51 ]
3.	 If you are familiar with the LaTeX code, you can click on Switch View to 
Advanced to enter or paste the LaTeX code.
4.	 When you have successfully created the desired math equation, click on 
Insert Equation in the bottom-right corner of the pop-up window, as  
shown in the following screenshot:
The Record/Upload Media feature
The Record/Upload Media feature allows you to record or upload audio and video 
and then embed that media into the textbox. When you click on the Record/Upload 
Media icon, you will see a pop-up menu with two tabs: the Record Media and 
Upload Media tabs. If you do not see a pop-up window appear, make sure your 
browser settings are adjusted to allow pop-ups from Canvas.

Building Your Canvas Course
[ 52 ]
The Record Media tab
Within the Record Media tab, you will see a webcam icon and a microphone icon on 
the left-hand side of the Title box. To record and upload a video or audio, perform 
the following steps:
1.	 Click on the webcam icon to record and upload a video, or click on the 
microphone icon to record and upload audio. You may also see a dialogue 
box in the center of the pop-up window asking for access to your camera 
and/or microphone. Click on Allow, as shown in the following screenshot, 
to record video or audio:

Chapter 2
[ 53 ]
2.	 The webcam and/or microphone on your computer will turn on and you  
will see instructions that read Click anywhere to start recording, as shown  
in the following screenshot:
3.	 Once you click anywhere within the preview window, the video or audio 
recording will begin. The following screenshot shows you the instructions  
to start a video recording:

Building Your Canvas Course
[ 54 ]
4.	 To end the recording, click anywhere within the preview window. You can 
rerecord the video/audio recording using the record icon that appears at the 
bottom of the preview window.
5.	 You can save and embed the recording by clicking on the Save option that 
appears at the bottom of the preview window.
If you have media on your computer that you would like to upload to your course, 
you can do so using the Upload Media tab.
The Upload Media tab
The Upload Media tab appears to the right of the Record Media tab within the pop-up 
window. To upload a video or audio to your course, perform the following steps:
To upload a video or audio to your course, perform the following steps:
1.	 Click on the Upload Media tab.
2.	 You will see two options Select Audio File and Select Video File to either 
select an audio file or select a video file, respectively. Make your selection, 
and then locate the file on your computer in the window that appears.
3.	 Once you have found the file, select it, and the upload will automatically 
begin, as shown in the following screenshot:
4.	 You will have the option to rename the file, which will appear in the Files 
section of your course once it has finished uploading. The finished upload 
will also appear embedded in the textbox of the Rich Content Editor.
Moving back to the features of the Rich Content Editor, let's discuss embedded 
services next.

Chapter 2
[ 55 ]
Embedded services
In Chapter 5, Exploring Special Features, we will discuss the use of embedded services 
further. Once you have linked an embedded service to your Canvas account, these 
services will show up as icons in the Rich Text Editor. The following screenshot 
indicates the Equella embedded service, which gives you the option to embed links 
to content from the Equella online repository:
The HTML Editor feature
In addition to the wide variety of user-friendly formatting and embedding options 
available through the Rich Text Editor, Canvas also allows you to edit the HTML code 
directly. This allows users who are familiar with HTML code to manually adjust and 
modify the content of their pages. You can also paste HTML code to embed content 
from outside websites. To edit the HTML code, perform the following steps:
1.	 Click on the HTML Editor link in the upper-right corner of the Rich Text 
Editor, as shown in the following screenshot:
2.	 You will see any formatting or text you have inserted turn into HTML code 
that can be edited.
3.	 To return to the regular Rich Text Editor view, click on the Visual  
Editor link that now appears in the same place the HTML Editor link 
appeared previously.

Building Your Canvas Course
[ 56 ]
Inserting content using the right-side menu
You will notice that whenever the Rich Content Editor is available to edit a Canvas 
page, the right-side menu of your course will allow you to insert even more content 
to enhance the capabilities of the Rich Content Editor. If you look at the right-side 
menu of your course, you will see three tabs that read Links, Files, and Images.
The Links tab
The Links tab allows you to create a hyperlink to content within your Canvas 
course. You will see a list of content within the course. While there is not much 
in your course at this point, once you have created assignments, wiki pages, or 
announcements, for example, you will be able to insert a link to those items by 
clicking on the item in the right-side menu. The following screenshot displays  
the Links tab:
The Files tab
The Files tab allows you to quickly and easily upload files to your Canvas course and 
then link to those files directly. This is especially helpful if a certain file is necessary 
to complete an assignment, as students will have ready access to the file directly 
on the assignment page. Certain file types such as PDF documents will actually 
appear within the content page window, while other file types will be downloaded 
to students' computers when they click on the link. To add a new file to your course, 
perform the following steps:

Chapter 2
[ 57 ]
1.	 Click on Upload a new file, and then select the file from your computer. You 
can choose a destination folder within your course, and then click on Upload.
2.	 Once your file is uploaded, it will appear within the designated folder and 
you can add a hyperlink to the file by clicking on the file name. A link to 
the file will appear in the textbox of the Rich Content Editor. The following 
screenshot displays the Files tab:
The Images tab
The Images tab functions very similarly to the Embed Image feature of the Rich 
Content Editor, except that the Images tab allows you to upload images from your 
computer to the course files. To add a new image, perform the following steps:
1.	 Click on Upload a new image, and then select the image file from your 
computer. You can choose a destination folder within your course, and then 
click on Upload.
2.	 Once your image is uploaded, it will appear within the Images tab. When 
your image appears in the Images tab, you can click on it to embed it in the 
textbox underneath the Rich Content Editor.
3.	 In addition to uploading your own images, you can also search for Creative 
Commons images on Flickr, just as with the Embed Image feature of the Rich 
Content Editor. The following screenshot displays the Images tab:
www.allitebooks.com

Building Your Canvas Course
[ 58 ]
In addition to uploading files and images to your Canvas course using 
the right-side menu, you can manage your course files by clicking on 
the Files option on the left-side menu. There, you will be able to see all 
of the files that have been uploaded to your course and add folders to 
organize those files.
Editing an assignment – adding content
Now that we are familiar with the capabilities of the Rich Content Editor, which 
accompanies the right-side menu, we are ready to start adding content to our 
assignment. If you have closed the Edit Assignment screen, open up the assignment 
page and then click on Edit, just as we did previously. From there, you will see 
the same screen again with the Rich Content Editor and other adjustment options. 
Working from your syllabus, you can now begin to input instructions for your  
first assignment.
Type the assignment instructions into the textbox, and then add formatting using 
the icons on the left-hand side and far right-hand side of the Rich Content Editor. If 
you already have the instructions typed out in another document, you can also copy 
and paste them directly into the assignment page. The following points offer some 
suggestions for useful content that you may want to embed into your assignment page:
•	
Use the Record/Upload Media feature to record a video of yourself verbally 
explaining the instructions. You might consider doing this in addition to 
written instructions, or you might prefer to just record yourself giving 
instructions. Posting videos of yourself as the instructor can be very helpful 
for building a rapport with the students, especially in a fully online course 
where synchronous interaction might be limited.
•	
Use the Link to URL feature to embed a YouTube video. You might choose 
to embed a video as the content on which students will base their work for 
the assignment.
•	
Insert an image using the Embed Image feature to liven up the aesthetic of 
your assignment page. You could also insert images on which students could 
base their work for the assignment (for example, a political cartoon, artwork, 
and so on).
When you have finished inputting the content for your assignment page, you 
can make adjustments to the Points option for your assignment using the option 
underneath the textbox. For now, leave the Assignment Group option set to 
Assignments. We will discuss assignment groups in more detail at the end of this 
chapter. You can then adjust the other options listed in the following sections to 
customize your assignment.

Chapter 2
[ 59 ]
The grading type
You can adjust what the grade for your assignment will look by clicking on the  
drop-down menu next to Display Grade as, as shown in the following screenshot:
Click on one of the five drop-down items to select the type of grading you would like 
to utilize for the assignment. This feature is useful if you are required to submit final 
grades in a certain format. You can set your assignment preferences to allow you to 
grade assignments using different grading systems.
The Submission Type drop-down menu
Below the Display Grade as option, you can adjust the type of submission. This 
is a clear example of the flexibility of using Canvas for live or online courses, as 
the Submission Type drop-down menu clearly indicates options for Online or 
On Paper submissions. Also included are options for No Submission (such as 
attendance or participation grades) or External Tool, which we will cover in more 
detail in Chapter 5, Exploring Special Features. If you select the Online submission 
type, your screen will expand further to let you choose a variety of file types or 
submission formats, as shown in the following screenshot:

Building Your Canvas Course
[ 60 ]
Depending on the kind of submission you are looking for, you may wish to limit the 
submission formats:
•	
Text Entry: This option will enable students to enter text directly, which might 
be a good option for assignments that require brief paragraph responses.
•	
Website URL: This option will enable students to paste a web address that 
you will be able to view when grading their submission. You might enable 
this feature if you require students to maintain an external blog or website 
for your class. This feature would allow them to submit the link to their  
work directly through Canvas.
•	
Media Recordings: This option will enable students to record and upload 
audio and video to submit for the assignment. You might enable this 
feature if you would like students to submit audio or video recordings of 
a presentation or performance, an edited video on the assigned topic, or 
speaking an essay response instead of typing it out.
•	
File Uploads: This option will enable students to submit a file (such as a 
word processing document, a spreadsheet, or a photo) for the assignment, 
which might be useful for research papers, budgets, or the documentation  
of a final project.
Group assignments
Below the Submission Type option, you will see the option to make the assignment 
a Group Assignment. If you click on the checkmark next to This is a Group 
Assignment, a pop-up window will appear that will allow you to create a set of 
groups for the assignment, specify how you would like to form the groups, and 
decide how you would like to structure each group. The following screenshot  
shows you the options available in the pop-up window:

Chapter 2
[ 61 ]
Once you have entered the details in the Name for Groups field, decided whether 
students can sign-up for groups using the Self Sign-Up option, and selected the 
Group Structure, you can click on Create Category. When the pop-up window is 
closed, you will see an Assign Grades to Each Student Individually checkbox that 
allows you to assign grades to each student individually. You can check this box if 
you would like to assign individual grades or leave it unchecked to assign the same 
grade to all students in a group. Once you have created a group category, you will 
be able to use the same specifications for other group assignments if you wish. For 
group assignments, you can also select from user groups that you might create when 
adding participants to your course, which we will cover in Chapter 3, Getting Ready to 
Launch Your Course.
Peer reviews
If you would like to require students to review their peers' work, you can check off the 
box next to Require Peer Reviews. When you check the peer review box, you will see 
the Manually Assign Peer Reviews or Automatically Assign Peer Reviews options. 
For manual peer reviews, you will receive a notification to assign a peer reviewer to 
each assignment as it is submitted. Alternatively, you can set up the assignment so 
Canvas automatically makes peer assignments at the time of submission.

Building Your Canvas Course
[ 62 ]
Assignment availability
The final section of your new assignment allows you to select the availability of the 
assignment for the participants in your course. You can see the options of the final 
section in the following screenshot:
You can adjust whether the assignment is for everyone using Canvas or if it is 
only for students in your course. You can adjust the Due Date value, and you can 
set the length of time the assignment will be available to participants. Setting the 
availability limits when participants have access to the assignment page and restricts 
when students can make a submission to the assignment page. For example, you 
may wish to only allow students to view an introductory assignment page and 
make a submission during the first two weeks of your course, so you could set the 
availability to limit the time frame during which students could interact with the 
assignment page.
Updating and publishing an assignment
When you have finished adding content and adjusting the settings for your 
assignment, you are ready to update and publish the assignment. To update  
and publish your assignment, perform the following steps:
1.	 When you finish editing your assignment, click on the Update Assignment 
button at the bottom of the page, and you will be taken back to the 
assignment page.
2.	 At the top-right corner of the assignment page, click on the Publish button, as 
shown in the following screenshot next to the Edit button. You will notice that 
the button changes color from gray to green when you publish the assignment.

Chapter 2
[ 63 ]
If you are editing an assignment after you have published your course, 
you can check the box at the bottom of the Edit Assignment page 
that reads Notify users that this content has changed. This triggers a 
notification to all users involved with the course that you have edited 
and updated the assignment.
Creating different types of assignments
Now that you have successfully created your first assignment (remember, we 
designated the type of the first assignment as an Assignment), we can explore the 
four other types of assignments that you can create using Canvas. The different 
types of assignments can serve as assessment tools for you and can offer a variety of 
activities for students to complete. Just as in a live course, students might encounter 
quizzes, tests, essays, projects, presentations, or debates in your Canvas course. The 
designated assignment types can accommodate each of these traditional assignment 
styles in a variety of ways. You are welcome to adapt the designated assignment 
type to fit your needs.

Building Your Canvas Course
[ 64 ]
To create the different types of assignments, navigate back to the assignment list 
for your course by clicking on Assignments on the left-side menu. You will see an 
assignment group with your first assignment listed below the assignment group 
heading. To create a new assignment of a different type, perform the following steps:
1.	 Click on the plus sign icon that appears to the right of the assignment  
group bar:
2.	 Once you have begun to create your new assignment, click on the drop-down 
menu next to Type as you are creating your assignment. You will see the 
following options:
From the options that appear, you may choose to use any of the assignment type 
options. Some people choose to use all five types for different assignments in their 
course, while some people choose to only use one type. It all depends on your how 
you would like students to interact with the assignment and how you would like 
to collect, assess, and grade the work. To gain a better understanding of how to use 
each assignment type, let's take a look at each type individually.

Chapter 2
[ 65 ]
Assignment
The first assignment we created was designated as an Assignment. This designation 
can accommodate tasks wherein students submit a piece of work to you for assessment 
and grading. You have great flexibility with the assignment design and submission 
options, as detailed in the previous section. Once students have submitted their 
assignment, you will be able to see their work and offer them feedback. The work 
submitted for an Assignment can only be viewed by the student who has submitted 
the assignment and you; grades always remain private.
Discussion
A Discussion assignment creates a graded discussion thread in your course wherein 
students submit written comments or links in reply to a posted topic. Everyone in the 
course can see and comment on the discussion topics. When students post something 
on the discussion board, their post appears as their submission for the assignment, 
which you can then view and grade. As the content posted in discussions is viewable 
by everyone in the course, Discussion assignments can be a valuable tool for 
cooperative learning and peer review. Though the posts are public within the  
course, students' grades remain private.
After you create a Discussion assignment, you will be able to edit the discussion by 
clicking on the assignment name, which will open up the course discussion board 
to the discussion assignment that you have created. You can also access the course 
discussion board by clicking on the Discussions link on the left-side menu. To edit 
the discussion topic, perform the following steps:
1.	 Click on Edit in the top-right corner of the discussion page, as shown in the 
following screenshot:

Building Your Canvas Course
[ 66 ]
2.	 When you click on Edit, you will see a screen with the Rich Content Editor 
and assignment options below the Rich Content Editor textbox. Hopefully, 
this type of screen is starting to look familiar! Enter the content for your 
discussion topic.
3.	 Below the textbox, you will see options that are similar to the ones we edited 
for our first assignment. Some of the options look slightly different for 
Discussion assignments:
°°
Attachment: This feature allows you to attach a file to your 
discussion topic post, which students can download and use for their 
responses. To use this feature, click on Choose File and then locate 
the file that you would like to attach from your computer. Once you 
have selected the file, click on Open in the pop-up window, and the 
file will be attached once you update the discussion post.
°°
Allow threaded replies: This feature allows students to comment on 
other students' posts within a discussion thread. Allowing threaded 
replies will enable students to keep the conversation going rather 
than simply posting one response to the original topic.
°°
Users must post before seeing replies: This feature allows the 
posts in a graded discussion assignment to remain hidden from 
individual students until each of them has posted a response. You 
might consider using this feature to encourage originality in students' 
responses rather than letting students wait to post a response until 
they see what other students have already posted.
°°
Enable podcast feed: This feature allows you to let students 
subscribe to the discussion thread as a podcast, so they will see 
updates to the discussion thread along with their other podcast 
updates. If you select Enable podcast feed, you will see another 
option, Include Replies in podcast feed, which will allow students 
to see the discussion topic and the posted replies in their podcast 
feeds. If you enable the podcast feed option, you will see a link to the 
podcast feed appear on the list of course discussions. Once the course 
is published, students will be able to click on that link and view the 
podcast feed for that discussion.
°°
Graded: Because you created the discussion as an assignment, this 
box will be checked. Checking this box allows you to give students a 
grade for their contribution to the discussion.
4.	 Below these options, you will see the same advanced options that we 
discussed when setting up our first assignment.

Chapter 2
[ 67 ]
5.	 Once you have finished updating the content and settings for your discussion 
assignment, you can click on Save at the bottom of the page.
6.	 When you have saved your changes, click on the Publish button in the  
top-right corner of the discussion page next to the Edit button.
Once you have created and published your discussion, you may choose to pin the 
discussion to the top of the discussion board or close a discussion for comments. 
Pinning a discussion organizes the discussion board so your students will see 
Pinned Discussions listed first whenever they view the discussion board. Closing a 
discussion for comments prevents students from contributing to discussions that are 
Closed for Comments.
To pin a discussion or close a discussion for comments, perform the following steps:
1.	 Click on the Discussions tab on the left-side menu of your course.
2.	 Find the discussion you would like to pin or close for comments, and then 
click-and-drag that discussion into the Pinned Discussions section at the top 
of the discussion board or the Closed for Comments section at the bottom of 
the discussion board.
3.	 You can also pin or close a discussion by clicking on the gear icon to the 
right of the discussion title on the discussion board. Select Pin or Close for 
comments from the drop-down list, as shown in the following screenshot:
As your course progresses, you and your students may create numerous discussion 
threads. Pinning discussions or closing them for comments allows you to organize 
and keep track of discussions within your course based on their importance.
Quiz
A Quiz assignment allows you to create a quiz within your Canvas course that 
students can complete online. You are able to design the questions and incorporate a 
number of traditional question types while setting the various parameters for taking 
the quiz (for example, the time constraints).

Building Your Canvas Course
[ 68 ]
To create a quiz, perform the following steps:
1.	 Return to the assignment list by clicking on Assignments on the  
left-side menu.
2.	 Click on the plus sign icon on the assignment group bar, and then select  
Quiz from the Type drop-down menu.
3.	 Once you save the new quiz assignment, click on the title to view the quiz 
page. You can also access the quiz by clicking on Quizzes on the left-side 
menu of your course.
4.	 At the top of that page, you will see a message that notifies you that the quiz 
is unpublished and that only teachers can see the quiz before it is published. 
You will need to publish each quiz that you create individually once you 
have finished building the quiz.
5.	 To build the quiz question by question, click on Edit on the quiz page just 
underneath the message.
Editing the settings for your quiz
When the quiz-editing page is opened, you should recognize the Rich Text Editor 
and the options below it. It is important to notice that there are two tabs at the top 
of the quiz editing page, the Settings tab and the Questions tab, as shown in the 
following screenshot. It is easiest to begin on the Settings page by putting in the 
general instructions for the entire quiz and adjusting the settings listed below the 
textbox as you see fit:
Under the textbox, you will see a drop-down menu for Quiz Type; if you click on 
this drop-down, you are given the option to make the quiz a Practice Quiz, a Graded 
Quiz, a Graded Survey, or an Ungraded Survey. Quizzes serve to assess students' 
learning as students answer content-related questions, while surveys serve to collect 
information from students. You can choose which type of quiz you would like to 
create, and then move down the list of settings for your quiz. We will discuss grouping 
assignments a little later on, so for now, continue to the following list of settings:

Chapter 2
[ 69 ]
•	
Shuffle Answers: This option allows you to alternate the order of the answers 
when the same question is displayed on different computers, or if you allow 
students to take the quiz multiple times.
•	
Time Limit: This option allows you to restrict the amount of time students 
have to complete the quiz once they begin.
•	
Allow Multiple Attempts: This option enables students to take the quiz 
more than once. When you check this box, you will see options that allow 
you to designate which score to keep as the student's grade and how many 
times students are allowed to retake the quiz.
•	
Let Students See Their Quiz Responses: This option will show students 
their answers after they answer each question. If you check this option, 
another option appears that allows you to choose whether to display the 
correct answer to students once they have answered a question.
•	
Show one question at a time: This option requires students to move through 
the quiz sequentially rather than seeing the entire quiz and answering 
questions out of order. Through this option, you can also lock questions after 
answering them to prevent students from changing their answers.
•	
Quiz Restrictions: This option allows you to control who has access to the 
quiz. With this option, you can assign and require an access code to take the 
quiz, which basically acts like a password for students to access the quiz. In 
addition, you can filter who can take the quiz based on the range of their IP 
address. You may use this setting to limit students to only taking the quiz 
within a computer lab at your institution or within the wireless network of 
your institution.
The availability and date settings are the same as the other types of assignments we 
have talked about, so you can adjust them as required and then move on to adding 
questions and question groups to your quiz.
Adding questions to your quiz
Once you have input the general instructions for the quiz and adjusted all of the  
quiz settings as required, you can click on the Questions tab above the Rich Text 
Editor. This will present you with the three different options as displayed in the 
following screenshot:

Building Your Canvas Course
[ 70 ]
As you are creating your first quiz, you will need to create all of your quiz questions 
individually. To add a new question, perform the following steps:
1.	 Click on the New Question button, which will open a new blank  
question template.
2.	 The default question type is Multiple Choice, but you can choose from a 
large number of question types by clicking on the drop-down menu at the 
top of the New Question page, as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 Once you select the question type, type the question into the textbox of the 
Rich Content Editor. Instructions on how to format the questions appear 
above the Rich Content Editor.
4.	 The answer options below the Rich Content Editor will change to reflect 
the specific parameters of the selected question type. Fill in the answer or 
possible answers in the area below the Rich Content Editor. The following 
screenshot offers an example of a Fill In the Blank question. Notice the 
instructions above the Rich Content Editor as well as the possible answers 
below it:

Chapter 2
[ 71 ]
5.	 If you would like to add additional possible answers, click on the Add 
Another Answer button. You can also add comments that will appear 
when students answer the question. You may add comments for the correct 
answers by clicking on the green comment box, incorrect answers by clicking 
on the red box, and general comments for all answers by clicking on the blue 
box. The following screenshot shows each of these options:
6.	 After you have finished creating all of your quiz questions, click on the 
Update Question button in the bottom corner.

Building Your Canvas Course
[ 72 ]
Once you have begun adding questions, the New Question Group button will allow 
you to arrange the questions into categories and groups. From there, you can allow 
students to choose how many questions from the group they would like to answer 
and how many points each question will be worth. You also have the Link to a 
Question Bank option to link to a question bank.
You will be able to create and manage question banks by clicking on the Find 
Questions button, which will allow you to search for and add questions that you 
have already created for other quizzes.
To find and add previously created questions to your quiz, perform the  
following steps:
1.	 Click on the Find Questions button. A screen appears, listing all of the 
questions you have created for the current quiz. If you have created other 
quizzes, you will see those questions appear as well.
2.	 Select the questions you wish to add by clicking on the checkbox next to each 
question. You can click on the Select All button to select all of the questions 
listed or click on Clear All to clear your selections.
3.	 Scroll down and click on the Add Questions button at the bottom of the  
pop-up window to add the selected questions to your quiz.
Managing question banks
The Find Questions pop-up window also includes the Manage Course Question 
Banks option to manage your course question banks. Question banks allow you to 
organize and arrange your questions for use across multiple quizzes. To create or 
edit question banks, perform the following steps:
1.	 Click on the Find Questions button.
2.	 In the top-right corner of the pop-up window, click on Manage Course 
Question Banks, as displayed in the following screenshot:
3.	 On the page that opens, you can create a new question bank by clicking on 
the Add Question Bank button on the right-side menu of the page. You can 
then type in the information for the new question bank on the template that 
appears in the center of your screen:

Chapter 2
[ 73 ]
4.	 After you have typed in the title of the new bank, press Enter or Return on 
your keyboard to create the question bank.
5.	 Once you have created a new question bank, you can click on the title to 
open the question bank. The options pictured in the following screenshot 
appear on the right-side menu and allow you to edit and adjust the question 
bank to your liking:
6.	 Once you are satisfied with your new or edited question bank, you can  
return to your quiz by clicking on the Quizzes tab on the left-side menu  
of your course.
Once your quiz is saved, you will be redirected back to the quiz page, where the 
message that notifies you that the quiz is unpublished will appear again at the top. 
When your quiz is completely built, you must publish your quiz by clicking on the 
Publish button before students will be able to take it.

Building Your Canvas Course
[ 74 ]
External tools
While we will cover the details of enabling external tools in Chapter 5, Exploring 
Special Features, let's discuss what an external tool is and what it might look like as 
an assignment. Canvas has partnered with a large number of online resources to 
allow you to integrate their services directly into your Canvas course. The list of 
external tools that you have available to you varies based on what your institution 
has decided to make available through Canvas. An example of an assignment that 
utilizes an external tool might be an outside website where students could play an 
educational game. Once students complete the game, that external website would 
report their score back to you for review and grading.
Not Graded
You may choose to create assignments that are not graded, just as you would make 
assignments in a live class each day. These types of assignments might include 
bringing certain materials to class on a given day, handing in homework, or being 
present for a synchronous online meeting. Not Graded assignments most often serve 
to place heavy emphasis on certain information you would like your students to 
know, either at a specific time or throughout the duration of the course.
Creating assignment groups
As you work to create the assignments from your course syllabus, you may want to 
organize the assignments into assignment groups. You can create new assignment 
groups, adjust their weighted percentage, and add specific grading rules for each 
assignment group. To create an assignment group, perform the following steps:
1.	 Click on the Assignments tab on the left-side menu of your course, then  
click on the + Group button at the top-right corner of the assignments page.
2.	 In the pop-up window that appears, you can type in Group Name for the 
new assignment group. You will also see the option to adjust % of total 
grade, but you will not be able to adjust this option until you change the 
assignment weight settings for your course, which we will discuss in the  
next section, Weighting assignment groups.
3.	 After you have entered Group Name, click on the Save button.
4.	 From there, drag the assignments that you have already created into your 
new assignment group. To move an existing assignment to a different 
assignment group, click on the dots that appear to the left-hand side of the 
assignment name, and then drag the assignment underneath the desired 
assignment group heading, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 2
[ 75 ]
Once you have created your assignment groups and dragged your assignments into 
the correct groups, you can specify grading rules for each group. To specify grading 
rules for an assignment group, perform the following steps:
1.	 Click on the gear icon to the right-hand side of the assignment group name 
and select Edit from the drop-down menu.
2.	 The pop-up menu that appears includes the same options that you 
saw when you created the assignment group with the added ability to 
designate Number of scores to ignore for each student. You may choose to 
automatically drop the highest or lowest score of any assignment within an 
assignment group. You can also choose to never drop the score of certain 
assignments. The example in the following screenshot indicates that only the 
lowest score within the assignment group would be dropped, and the score 
for Sample Quiz would never be dropped even if it was the lowest score 
within the assignment group:
3.	 When you have finished creating the grading rules for your new assignment 
group, click on Save at the bottom-right corner of the pop-up window.

Building Your Canvas Course
[ 76 ]
Weighting assignment groups
Creating assignment groups not only organizes the assignments to let students see 
what they will need to complete for your course, but it also gives you the option to 
weight groups of assignments. In many traditional grading systems, certain types 
of assignments may count for various percentages of a student's final grade. For 
example, homework might make up 20 percent, quizzes might make up 30 percent, 
essays might make up 35 percent, and the final project might make up 15 percent.  
By creating assignment groups, you can quickly and easily arrange the assignments 
you have already created. This way, Canvas will be set up to automatically calculate 
their final grade as you grade their work throughout the duration of your course.  
To weight assignment groups, perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to the course assignments page by clicking on the Assignments 
option on the left-side menu of your course.
2.	 You will see the assignment groups that house all of the assignments you 
have created thus far. To weight the assignment groups, click on the edit  
icon that looks like a gear at the top-right corner of the Assignments page. 
This icon is located to the right of the +Group and +Assignment buttons.
3.	 Within the window that pops up, check the box that reads Weight final 
grade based on assignment groups.
4.	 When you check that box, notice that the assignment groups appear below 
the checkbox with a table of assignment group weights. You can then set 
each assignment group to make up a customized percentage of the final 
grade, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 2
[ 77 ]
After you have organized all of your assignments into the desired groups, look back 
over the table of assignment group weights next to each assignment group. You can 
edit your assignment groups by editing each individual group, or you can click on 
the edit icon in the top-right corner of the Assignments page to edit all of the group 
weights at once.
If you decide that you would rather not weight students' final grades based on the 
assignment groups, all you need to do is uncheck the weighting option after clicking 
on the edit icon at the top-right corner of the Assignments page.
Summary
We started this chapter with a discussion of the Next Steps checklist that appears 
when you open the home page of your new course for the first time. We next moved 
on to planning your course, and then we worked through how to import content 
from another course. Next, we dove into adding assignments and content and 
became acquainted with the Rich Content Editor. After this, we adjusted the basic 
and advanced assignment settings and then discussed creating different types of 
assignments. Finally, we explored how to create assignment groups and how to 
weight grades based on the assignment groups.
After having covered many of the skills that you need in order to add more content 
to your course, we will continue through the Next Steps checklist in Chapter 
3, Getting Ready to Launch Your Course. We will focus on the organization and 
presentation of your course, and then we will move on to adding students to the 
course and preparing your course to be published.


Getting Ready to Launch 
Your Course
In the previous chapter, we created the assignments for your course. Now, we can 
proceed through the rest of the checklist that appears on the home page of your 
course. In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
•	
Adding participants to your course so they can access content
•	
Selecting navigation links for the left-side menu that will be most useful  
to your students during the course
•	
Choosing a course home page layout
•	
Adding the course's calendar events 
•	
Publishing your course
By the end of this chapter, you will have your course totally built, organized, 
designed, and published in order to begin using Canvas to teach your course in 
Chapter 4, Teaching Your Canvas Course. Let's begin by adding students to the course.
Adding participants to the course
This section deals with manually adding participants to your course, which you may 
or may not have to do depending on the way your institution has integrated Canvas 
with its registration systems and technology departments. If your institution has 
integrated Canvas with its registration system, students and other participants may 
automatically be placed into your course upon its initial creation. However, if you 
have manually created the course or if your institution does not automatically create 
courses and add participants for you, you will need to follow the guidelines in this 
section to add people to your course.

Getting Ready to Launch Your Course
[ 80 ]
Now that the content of your course is created, we can add participants to the course. 
As we work our way through the process of adding participants to your course, keep 
in mind that students and observers will not receive anything from you via Canvas 
until you have published the course. Other types of participants, which we will discuss 
shortly, may or may not be able to see the course before it is published, depending on 
the role you assign them within the course. By adding students to the course at this 
point, you are simply placing their contact information in a queue, which Canvas will 
use to send out e-mail invitations for the course once you have completed the course 
design and published it. You can think of this stage of building your course simply as 
creating your roster before you actually meet your students. There are two main ways 
to go about adding students to your course, which are as follows:
1.	 For the first option, navigate to the home page for your course, then look 
at the Course Setup Checklist that appears at the bottom of your screen. 
Remember, if you don't see the checklist, click on the Course Setup Checklist 
button at the top of the right-side menu. The third option on the checklist will 
be Add Students to the Course, which is shown in the following screenshot. 
When you click on that option, you will be taken to the People page for the 
course, where you will be able to add students.
2.	 Another option is to click directly on the People tab on the left-side menu  
of your course.

Chapter 3
[ 81 ]
3.	 Once you are on the People page for your course, you will see a list of 
individuals who have already participated in your course. At this point, 
you will most likely only see yourself listed, unless your institution has 
automatically added your students for you.
4.	 Above the list of participants, you will see a search bar to search for 
individuals, a drop-down menu to limit the types of individuals you would 
like to view, and a button to add people. Click on the Add People button, 
and you will see a pop-up window with a text box where you can paste the 
e-mail addresses of the students you would like to add.
5.	 If you would like to include students' first and last names when you 
add them to the course, you have three options as demonstrated by the 
grayed-out text in the pop-up window. As you enter participants' contact 
information, separate all entries with commas. The following bullet points 
and the screenshot that follows them offer examples of how you can add 
students' information:
°°
Enter a student's first and last name within quotation marks, and 
then enter their e-mail address in brackets. For example:
"Ryan John" <ryanjohn@example.com>,
°°
Enter a student's last name with a comma, and then enter their first 
name, all within quotation marks followed by their e-mail address  
in brackets. For example:
"John, Ryan" <ryanjohn@example.com>,

Getting Ready to Launch Your Course
[ 82 ]
°°
Enter a student's e-mail address and separate entries with commas. 
For this option, students' names will show up within the course as 
their email address until they configure their own individual Canvas 
settings to display their name. For example, ryanjohn@example.com:
 
6.	 Once you have entered all of the e-mail addresses for people you wish to  
add to the course, you can select what type of users they will be once they are 
added to the course. The drop-down menu below the text box will allow you 
to add people to the course as a student, a teacher, a TA (Teacher's Assistant), 
a designer, or an observer. Each of these distinctions will allow participants 
to function within their designated role for the duration of the course. These 
distinctions allow participants to see and do different things within your 
course, either before or after the course is published:
°°
Students: Participants added to the course as Students will not be 
able to see the course content until the course is published. Once 
you publish the course, they will be able to see all of the course 
content you have made available to them, and they will be able to 
submit assignments. They will have a line within the Gradebook (to 
be discussed in Chapter 4, Teaching Your Canvas Course). In general, 
students cannot edit the course content unless you alter the settings 
to allow them to do so.

Chapter 3
[ 83 ]
°°
Teachers: Participants added to the course as Teachers have all of 
the same abilities that you do within your course and are able to see 
the course before and after it is published. They can add and change 
the course content, adjust settings, add or remove users, and grade 
assignments.
°°
TAs: Participants added to the course as teacher's assistants, referred 
to within Canvas as TAs, are largely able to see and do the same 
things as teachers within the course, but with the distinction of being 
the TA for the course. They can add and change the course content, 
adjust settings, add or remove users, and grade assignments. There 
are, however, a few things that TAs cannot do, such as publishing  
the course.
°°
Designers: Participants added to the course as Designers are able to 
see the course before it is published. In most cases, someone would 
be added as a Designer to build the course for you, so they are able 
to add and change the course content, adjust settings, and organize 
the course. They are not able to see the assignment submissions or 
grade students' work.
°°
Observers: Participants added to the course as Observers are not 
able to see the course until it is published. Observers have most 
of the same privileges as students, except that they cannot submit 
assignments, and they do not receive a line in the Gradebook. You 
can link observers to specific students, and the observer will be 
able to see the work of a specific student. An example of when you 
might add someone to the course as an observer might be of an 
administrator or parent who wants to see how a student is doing  
in a course, or a prospective student who wants to see what life in  
an online course at your institution is like.
7.	 You should add participants to your course in groups or as individuals, 
based on their role within your course. As such, it would make sense to add 
all of your students at one time or all of your observers at one time. You can 
certainly add people individually, as will probably be the case when you add 
any TAs or Designers to your course.
8.	 Once you have added the contact information and designated the role that 
the new participants will fulfill in the course, you can click on Next at the 
bottom of the pop-up window.

Getting Ready to Launch Your Course
[ 84 ]
9.	 Once you click on Next, you should see a message that informs you that the 
e-mail addresses you entered have been validated and you are now ready to 
add those users to the course.
10.	 Double-check to make sure that everyone you intended to add to the course is 
on the list of validated participants, and then click on the Add Users button at 
the bottom right of the pop-up window, as shown in the following screenshot:
11.	 When you have clicked on Add Users, the pop-up window will close and 
you will see the list of new participants appear on the People page of your 
course. You will notice a bubble that reads Pending next to all of the new 
participants' names. Students and observers will not receive an invitation 
to join the course until you have published it. However, teachers, TAs, and 
designers will receive an e-mail invitation after you click on Add Users. 
Their status in the course will remain Pending until they follow the link in 
the e-mail to accept their invitation to the course. Once someone has accepted 
their invitation to join the course, you will see their name on the People page 
without the Pending status.

Chapter 3
[ 85 ]
Managing users
You may find that you need to resend an invitation, edit the sections a participant 
is involved with, view the details of an individual's participation, or remove a user 
from the course. To accomplish any of these tasks, complete the following steps:
1.	 Click on the People button on the left-side menu of your course.
2.	 If you hover your mouse over any participant's name, you will see a gear 
icon appear on the right-hand side, next to their role designation. Click on 
the gear icon to manage the desired user, and you will see the following 
menu appear:
3.	 When you click on Resend Invitation, Edit Sections, or Remove from 
Course, you will see an instructional pop-up window appear that allows  
you to accomplish the desired task.
4.	 If you would like to know more about a specific user, click on User Details 
to see information about and adjust settings for individual users. You will 
be taken to the participant's details page, where you can view their course 
memberships, manage their privileges, and see their login information.

Getting Ready to Launch Your Course
[ 86 ]
If you add a participant as an Observer, they will be able to see the public course 
content such as assignment pages or discussions, but will not be able to see any 
private content such as assignment submissions or grades. In some situations, 
you may be adding a participant as an observer to monitor a specific student, for 
example, a parent, administrator, or a tutor. You can link an observer to a specific 
student, which will allow the observer to see the student's grades and interactions 
within the course. To link an observer to a student, complete the following steps:
1.	 Click on the People button on the left-side menu of your course.
2.	 Find the observer you wish to link to a student and hover your mouse 
over their name. Click on the gear icon that appears to the right of their 
information, then click on Link to Students from the drop-down menu  
that appears, as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 In the pop-up window that appears, type the name of the student with  
whom you wish to link the observer, and click on the student's name when  
it appears below the search bar. The pop-up window is shown in the 
following screenshot:

Chapter 3
[ 87 ]
4.	 Once you have selected the student that the observer will be linked to, click 
on Update. The observer will now be able to see the student's interactions 
in the course as well as their assignment submissions and grades. You can 
remove or adjust the observer's student link by following the preceding  
steps and changing the student selection in the pop-up window.
Now that you have added users and learned how to manage their roles, let's 
talk about how you can organize your users into groups if you are planning to 
incorporate group assignments and collaborations into your course.
Creating user groups
As you are adding users, you may wish to create user groups that organize 
participants and provide space within the course for collaboration between 
participants who are grouped together. Creating user groups also makes it easy to 
select groups for group assignments or to message groups of users all at once. This 
option is not mandatory, so you may skip ahead to the next section if you do not 
plan on organizing users into groups at any point during your course. To create  
user groups, complete the following steps:
1.	 Click on the People link on the left-side menu of your course.
2.	 On the People page, click on the View User Groups button that appears on 
the right-side menu.
3.	 The page that appears explains what you can do after creating student user 
groups. Read the explanation, and then click on the + Group Set button 
above the instructions, as shown in the following screenshot. You must first 
create a group set, and then you can create specific user groups within the 
group set.

Getting Ready to Launch Your Course
[ 88 ]
4.	 A pop-up window that allows you to designate the Group Set Name, Self 
Sign-Up permission, and Group Structure will appear. When deciding on 
these preferences, think about the way user groups will function within 
your course. You may choose to create a group set that you can utilize for a 
specific group assignment, or you may choose to have certain students work 
with each other for the entire duration of your course:
°°
For the Group Set Name, choose a name that describes how the user 
groups will be used. For example, if you will use the groups for a 
group assignment, consider including the assignment name in the 
Group Set Name.
°°
If you would like to allow students to sign up for their groups 
themselves, check the box next to Allow self sign-up. Notice that  
the options for the Group Structure change if you allow self sign-up.
°°
In determining the Group Structure, you can have Canvas 
automatically split students into a certain number of groups, or you 
can create the groups manually after you have created the group set. If 
you are allowing self sign-up, you can designate the number of groups 
within the set as well as how many students can join each group.
5.	 Click on Save to create your new group set.
If you elected for Canvas to automatically split students into groups, this will happen 
now and you will see the groups once the pop-up window closes. If you elected to 
create groups manually, you will see a list of unassigned students and an empty group 
set. To manually create groups within the group set, complete the following steps:
1.	 Click on the gray + Group button in the top-right corner, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
2.	 In the pop-up window that appears, enter Group Name and then click  
on Save.

Chapter 3
[ 89 ]
3.	 To add students to the group, find a student you would like to add to the 
group from the list of unassigned students. To add them to the group, you 
can click on the dots next to the student's name, and drag them into the 
group. You can also click the + symbol next to the student's name and  
select the group from the drop-down menu that appears, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
4.	 You can continue to add users to the group in the same manner and then 
create new user groups within the set depending on your needs.
Now that you have added users and explored how to manage participants within 
your course, let's move on to organizing the presentation of your course by changing 
the navigation links that participants will see on the left-side menu of your course.
Selecting navigation links
The next step in the course setup checklist found on the home page of your course is 
learning how to select navigation links. The navigation links appear on the left-side 
menu of your course, and you can decide which of these links your students see when 
they log in to participate:
1.	 You can find where to change the navigation links in two ways:
°°
Click on Select Navigation Links in the course setup checklist on 
your course home page.
°°
Click on Settings at the bottom of the left-side menu of your course, 
and then click on the Navigation tab at the top of the Settings page.

Getting Ready to Launch Your Course
[ 90 ]
2.	 When you have reached the Navigation tab of the Settings page, you will 
see a list of the available navigation links that you have the option to display 
for your course. You can reorder the links by clicking-and-dragging them, or 
you can disable and hide certain links from students to simplify the options 
by dragging the links to the bottom half of the screen. The following example 
has about half of the links hidden or disabled to simplify the presentation of 
the course:
3.	 When you have finished arranging the navigation links and have decided 
which links you would like students to see, click on the Save button at the 
bottom of the screen.

Chapter 3
[ 91 ]
Once you have saved your preferences, you will notice that you can still see all of the 
navigation links on the left-side menu, but the links that your students will be able to 
see appear in black and the links you have hidden or disabled appear in gray.
When deciding on which links to display to your students and which links to hide, 
consider what types of content you have made available to your students and the 
ways in which you have organized your course. For example, if you have decided 
against using the discussion feature of Canvas altogether and have not created 
any discussion posts or discussion assignments, you might consider hiding the 
discussion navigation link to simplify where students can go while exploring your 
course. In keeping with the idea of simplifying and streamlining, let's move on to  
the next part of the course setup checklist, which is choosing a home page layout.
Choosing a course home page layout
The home page for your course is the first thing your students will see when they log 
in. Even the most well-prepared courses can stall at the beginning if the directions 
for accessing the course content are not clear; therefore, choosing the best home page 
layout for your course is an important task. To accommodate a variety of needs and 
teaching styles, Canvas has made it possible to choose from five different course home 
page layouts. To select from these options, complete the following steps:
1.	 Go to the home page of your course, and then click on the Edit Homepage 
link in the right-side menu, as shown in the following screenshot:

Getting Ready to Launch Your Course
[ 92 ]
2.	 After you click on the Edit Homepage link, you will see a pop-up window 
with a drop-down menu from which you can choose one of the five layouts. 
The following screenshot shows you the five options that appear in the  
drop-down menu:
3.	 Select one of the layouts, and then click on the Save button to update your 
course home page.
Let's now take a look at each of the layouts and discuss when each layout might be 
most beneficial to your needs.
The Recent Activity Dashboard layout
The Recent Activity Dashboard will show users everything that has happened 
within your course that they might have missed, for example, new assignments, 
discussions, or grades that have been posted. You might consider using this  
course home page layout with students who you know have taken online  
courses previously and are familiar with accessing course content online.
•	
The Recent Activity Dashboard is very similar to the update streams on 
social media sites such as Twitter, Facebook, Tumblr, or Instagram. The 
similarities to these sites can help more technologically savvy students feel  
at ease with accessing your course and keeping up with their responsibilities.

Chapter 3
[ 93 ]
•	
If you have students in your class with less experience in online learning, you 
might want to consider one of the other course home page layouts that offer 
a more stable and sequential presentation of material.
For the Recent Activity Dashboard, you do not need to do anything once you select 
that option as your home page; it will automatically display recent events once 
the course begins. Your students will need to access the course content using the 
navigation links you have chosen for the left-side menu, and the course content will 
not be explicitly or consistently displayed when students open the home page to 
your course. Again, this layout would be well suited for technologically experienced 
students who are familiar with accessing content online.
The custom-designed content page layout
The next option, Pages Front Page, will allow you to create a content page  
that includes anything you would like to include. Most often, the content of a 
custom-designed welcome page contains welcome information, instructions,  
and links to course content. When you select this option from the drop-down  
menu and click on Save, you will see two buttons appear to the right of your  
course name on the home page, as shown in the following screenshot:

Getting Ready to Launch Your Course
[ 94 ]
To edit your custom home page, complete the following steps:
1.	 Click on the Edit button.
2.	 From there, you will see a screen that includes the Rich Content Editor that 
we discussed in depth during Chapter 2, Building Your Canvas Course. You can 
add as much information as you would like, but it's generally best to keep 
the home page as simple, straightforward, and concise as possible. While 
you are editing, your Rich Content Editor might look something like what is 
shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 After you have finished editing your custom page, click on Save at the 
bottom of the screen.
4.	 After you have saved your page, it will appear as the home page for your 
course. You can always edit your page by clicking on the Edit button on the 
top of the home page.

Chapter 3
[ 95 ]
You can also edit this page by clicking on the Pages tab in the left-side menu. You will 
see the front page of your course with an Edit button at the top. In addition, you will 
also see a button that will let you view all pages. If you click on this button, you will 
see a list of all of the content pages that have been created as well as a + Page button 
in the top-right corner that will let you create new content pages. These options are 
shown in the following screenshot:
At this point, the only content page that has been created is the Front Page, which 
is the default name of your course home page. You might also wish to set up other 
content pages with further instructions and content. This type of course design allows 
you to basically create a completely customized course that students work through 
just like any other website on the Internet. Once you have created a page, it will show 
up when you click on the Pages navigation link on the left-side menu. From the Pages 
page, you will be able to view, edit, and delete any content pages you have created:
•	
Using a custom-designed content page as your course home page layout is 
great for teachers who are comfortable with using the Rich Content Editor.
•	
This allows students to experience a personalized, unique welcome to 
the course when they log in that can offer clear instructions for how to 
participate in the course.
•	
You can easily embed important content that students will need for success 
in the course directly on the home page with the Rich Text Editor, and you 
may choose to design your course using other content pages that will allow 
students to explore and experiment with the course content at their own pace.
While you certainly do not have to create multiple content pages, you might wish to 
use pages in conjunction with materials and assignments in the next type of home 
page layout that we will discuss, which is the Course Modules layout.

Getting Ready to Launch Your Course
[ 96 ]
The Course Modules layout
The Course Modules layout allows you to sequence material very clearly on the home 
page so that students can begin participating immediately when they first log in:
1.	 If you select this option from the Edit Homepage drop-down menu and 
then click on Save, the options and instructions pictured in the following 
screenshot will appear on your home page.
2.	 Click on the Create a Module button and a pop-up window will appear that 
allows you to name the module, choose to lock the module until a certain 
date, and choose to require students to move through the content within the 
module sequentially. The following screenshot shows you an example of 
what the first course module might look like:

Chapter 3
[ 97 ]
3.	 When you have adjusted the settings to your liking, click on Add Module to 
create your first module. The pop-up window will close and reveal your new 
home page with an empty first module.
4.	 To add content to the module, click on the plus icon to the right of the 
module title bar, as shown in the following screenshot:
5.	 The pop-up window that opens will allow you to select the content you 
have created from your course and insert it into the module. For example, to 
include a quiz you have created, select Quiz from the top drop-down menu, 
and then select the desired quiz from the list that appears below it.
6.	 To indent the item within the module for aesthetic clarity, you can select 
the level of indentation from the bottom drop-down menu. In the following 
screenshot, you can see that a Quiz is being added to the Welcome and 
Course Overview module. The specific quiz is the Sample Quiz, and the 
Indentation will be Indent 1 Level:
7.	 Once you click on the Add Item button, you will see the item appear in the 
module on the home page. You can add as many items as you would like 
to each module, and you can create new modules by clicking on the Create 
Module button at the top of the home page.

Getting Ready to Launch Your Course
[ 98 ]
8.	 To rearrange items within a module, click-and-drag the dots that appear to 
the left of the item name as shown in the following screenshot:
By creating course modules, you are able to organize content together sequentially, 
with the capability to set prerequisites that ensure that students move through 
the through the content in a particular order. As you add content to modules, the 
options to edit will expand and allow you to set requirements for each item within 
the module. To adjust the restrictions and prerequisites for each module, complete 
the following steps:
1.	 Click on the gear icon to the right of the module name and click on Edit. 
2.	 Once you have added content to the module, you will see a new option to 
Add Requirement that students will need to complete in order to move 
past the module in the course. You can add requirements for as many items 
as you like, or you can allow students to move through the modules at 
their own pace. The following screenshot displays requirements for three 
assignments that have been added to a module:
3.	 When you have adjusted the settings to your liking, click on Update Module.

Chapter 3
[ 99 ]
The Course Modules home page layout offers a clear, concise sequence through which 
your students can move while allowing you to incorporate your own teaching style by 
adjusting the settings. You may wish to allow students to move through each module 
at their own pace or require them to move through the content sequentially.
When you organize content into modules and open the page for an item, Next  
or Previous arrows appear at the bottom of each item's page that allow students  
to move to the next item in the module sequentially. For example, if you have  
placed an assignment between two other items within a module, arrows will  
appear at the bottom of the assignment page that will allow you to navigate to the 
preceding and subsequent items in the module with one easy click, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
You may wish to only reveal content one week at a time or to make it all available 
from the first day, so students can move as quickly or slowly as they wish. You may 
also wish to add content pages that explain the instructions for the module to each 
module. The combinations and options are numerous, and you have the freedom to 
utilize as many or as few of the options made available to you depending on your 
needs and comfort level.
The Assignment List layout
The Assignment List layout allows your students to see a clear list of the 
assignments you have created for the course in a chronological order by the due 
date. When you select this course home page layout option and click on Save, you 
will see the list of assignments appear as the new home page for your course, as 
shown in the following screenshot:

Getting Ready to Launch Your Course
[ 100 ]
The sample assignments in the preceding example were all set for the same due date 
at the same time, but your assignments would be displayed in a chronological order.
This course home page layout would be an excellent idea for a live course with online 
expectations; students are able to log in and see the exact assignments they would 
need to complete with the due date and point value clearly listed in one place. Content 
delivered during the live class would allow students to successfully complete the 
assignments by logging in to Canvas and then completing and submitting their work 
for you to grade. Of course, this layout would also be suited for the other types of 
classes you may be teaching, and you may choose to use this layout depending on 
your teaching style and the needs of your students.
The Syllabus layout
The Syllabus course home page layout is very similar to the Assignment List layout, 
but includes a custom syllabus description above the assignment list as well as course 
syllabus information added to the bottom of the right-side menu of the new home 
page. Once you select this option as your course home page and click on Save, you  
will see the course syllabus information appear in the right-side menu of the home 
page with an Edit Syllabus Description button above the course calendar. The 
syllabus description gives you the option to create a custom description for your 
course, which could act just as the welcome page you might design if you were to 
choose the Pages Front Page layout. To customize your syllabus description,  
complete the following steps:
1.	 Click on Edit Syllabus Description on the right-side menu above the calendar 
and grading specifications will as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 3
[ 101 ]
2.	 From there, a page will open with the Rich Content Editor and you will be 
able to add a welcome message, write a syllabus description, and embed any 
content you might wish to include.
3.	 Click on Update Syllabus to save your course description, and it will appear 
above the assignment list on your new course home page.
This course home page layout is very well suited to any kind of course you 
may be teaching. It requires minimal work on your part in entering the syllabus 
description, and the course layout comes across very clearly to students at all levels 
of technological experience. 
Adding course calendar events
Once you have picked a course home page layout and finished organizing the 
content of your course accordingly, you may wish to add other events to your course 
calendar that do not already appear as assignments within your course. Examples of 
events you may wish to add to your course calendar might include the following:
•	
Live class meetings
•	
Synchronous online meetings
•	
Field trips
•	
Special events (for example, student birthdays, holidays, lectures,  
or performances)
To add events to your calendar, you can either click on the Calendar link on the 
top menu or navigate back to the course setup checklist and click on Add Course 
Calendar Events.
Once you see your course calendar, you will see a plus sign icon at the top-right 
corner of the calendar grid. To create a new event, use the following instructions:
1.	 Click on the plus sign icon at the top-right corner of the calendar page.  
A pop-up window will open that will allow you to create a new  
calendar event.
2.	 Notice that the tabs at the top of the pop-up window allow you to create  
an Event or create a new Assignment.

Getting Ready to Launch Your Course
[ 102 ]
3.	 To add an event, stay on the Event tab and enter the Title of the event, the 
Date of the event, the times From which the event will run, and to which 
Calendar you would like to add the event. These options are shown in the 
following screenshot:
4.	 If you would like to add more information to the event, you can click on the 
More Options button to view a page with the Rich Content Editor that will 
allow you to embed content for the event you are creating.
5.	 Once you are finished entering the information for your new event, click on 
the Submit button. The pop-up window will close, and your new event will 
appear on the calendar you selected.
Notice on the right-side menu that you have the option to change the calendar you 
are viewing. Your name will appear with a colored check box, as will the names of 
the courses you are teaching, as shown in the following screenshot. You can check or 
uncheck each calendar to see what items appear for each calendar. Students enrolled 
in a course will be able to see the calendar for that course, whereas only you will be 
able to see your personal calendar.

Chapter 3
[ 103 ]
Testing your course with Student View
Congratulations! You've made it through building your first Canvas course. Before 
we move on to publishing, it is always a good idea to start on the home page of your 
course and work your way through the entire course the same way a student would. 
Canvas has designed a Student View feature that allows you to see exactly what 
your course will look like to students. To access your course through Student View, 
complete the following steps:
1.	 Click on the Settings link on the left-side menu of your course.

Getting Ready to Launch Your Course
[ 104 ]
2.	 On the settings page, click on the Student View button at the top of the  
right-side menu, as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 From there, you will see your course home page in Student View. Notice the 
message at the bottom of your screen that lets you know You are currently 
logged into Student View.
4.	 While you are in Student View, you can view all of the areas of your 
course that your students are able to see. You can even view and submit 
assignments as a test student, which will show up privately in your 
Gradebook as a test student. However, keep in mind that anything you post 
publicly within the course, such as a reply on a discussion post, will be 
visible to real students under the name Test Student.
5.	 When you have worked your way through your entire course, you are able  
to reset the test student feature by clicking on the Reset Student button at  
the bottom of the screen. This will delete any mock assignments you may 
have submitted while in Student View, and it will allow you to view the 
course afresh as if you were a new student.
6.	 Once you are finished checking your course in Student View, click on the 
Leave Student View button at the bottom of your screen. The following 
screenshot shows you the Reset Student button and the Leave Student View 
buttons that appear at the bottom of your screen while in student view:

Chapter 3
[ 105 ]
Before you publish your course, it is a very good idea to go through your course 
one final time, either in student view or in regular view, to make sure your course is 
totally ready to go live:
•	
Double-check that everything is organized the way you want it to be, and 
that all of the content your students will need is embedded and ready to go
•	
Proofread all of your instructions and double-check all of your due dates
Once you are satisfied that everything in your course is set up accurately and 
correctly, you are ready to publish your course.
Publishing your course
To publish your course, complete the following steps:
1.	 Go to the course home page. At the top of the page, you will see the 
following message:
2.	 If you click on the published link, you will see the course setup checklist 
appear with the bottom Publish Course option selected. From the course 
setup checklist, go ahead and click on the Publish Course button in the 
course setup checklist, as shown in the following screenshot:

Getting Ready to Launch Your Course
[ 106 ]
When you click on the Publish Course button, your course will be live. All of the 
students and observers who have not already received invitations to join the course 
will receive e-mails instructing them to join the course. You are now ready to begin 
teaching your course!
Summary
In this chapter, we completed the construction of your course. We started by adding 
participants to the course, and we discussed the various roles participants can fulfill 
within your course: Students, Teachers, TAs, Designers, and Observers. Next, we 
discussed how to manage participants in your course and began to reorganize the 
appearance of your course by selecting which Navigation Links your students will  
see on the left-side menu. We discussed the various types of home page layouts 
available to you based on your needs, including the Recent Activity Dashboard, 
the Custom Content Page layout, the Course Modules, the Assignment List layout, 
and the Assignment List with Syllabus. Finally, we explored the Canvas Calendar, 
reviewing your course in the Student View mode, and learned how to Publish  
your course.
In the next chapter, we will cover topics that include how to communicate with  
users in your course using Canvas, how to use the Gradebook, and how to create  
and facilitate synchronous video meetings with all users within your course.

Teaching Your  
Canvas Course
Now that you've made it through building your course, you can breathe a sigh of 
relief and feel confident that your planning and hard work will pay off. From this 
point on, we begin the actual teaching of your course, where your finely honed 
skills as an educator will guide you and your students through the course content 
to success. While the Canvas platform for teaching and learning may be new to you, 
it is important to keep in mind everything you know from being a real-life teacher. 
Keep the following basics in mind:
•	
Getting to know your students
•	
Maintaining open communication
•	
Providing insightful feedback
•	
Fielding questions and concerns
Everything you know from your experience as an educator can and should be 
transferred to your Canvas course, and this chapter will help you make that happen 
through the medium of Canvas. As a teacher, you know that maintaining open 
communication with your students is key. To begin, let's explore the Conversations 
messaging feature of Canvas.

Teaching Your Canvas Course
[ 108 ]
Communicating through Conversations
To facilitate direct communication between users, as opposed to general information 
posted within a course, the Conversations feature in Canvas allows you to send 
messages directly to individual users or to groups of users. While we will discuss 
how to send messages to multiple users in this section, we will later discuss the 
Announcements feature, which is a more practical option when disseminating 
information to everyone within a specific course. Canvas organizes individual 
messages into conversations based upon the users involved in the exchange, so in the 
following sections, the term "message" refers to an individual entry of a conversation.
Most of the messages that appear in the Conversations feature of Canvas are messages 
that users send directly to one another. However, as you get further into your course, 
you will notice that other messages, such as comments left on submitted assignments, 
also appear in your conversations. The following sections will help familiarize you 
with the layout of the Conversations feature as well as how to compose, send, and 
organize conversations.
Learning the layout of Conversations
To access your conversations, click on the Inbox link in the top-right menu next 
to your name. Notice that when you have a new message waiting in your inbox, 
you will see a notification bubble next to the Inbox link, indicating how many new 
messages you have. The following screenshot displays the Inbox link as well as a 
new message notification:
When the Conversations page is opened, you will see two main parts to the screen. 
On the left-hand side, you will see the list of conversations with which you are 
involved. On the right-hand side of your screen, you will see the actual message 
body with the thread of messages contained within the selected conversation. As a 
brand new Canvas user, you will most likely not be involved with any conversations, 
so the list of conversations on the left-hand side of your screen will appear blank. 
Once you begin receiving messages, the list of conversations will grow to display 
each conversation with which you are involved. Note that you will not see the 
messages within a conversation until you select the conversation from the list of 
conversations on the left-hand side. The following screenshot shows you the top 
menu of the Conversations page as well as a list of conversations on the left-hand 
side and a No Conversations Selected message on the right-hand side where the 
message body would appear:

Chapter 4
[ 109 ]
The first item on the left-hand side of the top menu on the Conversations page is a 
drop-down menu that allows you to view messages from All Courses or select a 
specific course from which you would like to view messages. This feature can help  
you stay organized if you are teaching multiple courses using Canvas, as you will be 
able to focus on viewing or responding to messages from users in one course at a time.
The next option to the right-hand side is a drop-down menu that allows you to select 
which kinds of conversations you are viewing. The following list describes what 
types of messages fall under each option of this drop-down menu:
•	
Inbox: Selecting this option will display all conversations in which you  
are involved.
•	
Unread: Selecting this option will display all conversations that contain  
new messages you have not yet read.
•	
Starred: Selecting this option will display all conversations that you  
have starred or marked as important. We will learn how to star  
conversations shortly.
•	
Sent: Selecting this option will display all of the messages you have sent  
to other users.
•	
Archived: Selecting this option will display all messages you have archived 
or stored away out of your inbox. We will learn how to archive and 
unarchive conversations shortly.
As you become more comfortable using the Conversations feature of Canvas, you 
will develop your own organizational style of maintaining your inbox in the same 
way you probably have with any e-mail accounts you use. These options will help 
you quickly and easily find what you are looking for as you begin sending and 
receiving messages with users in your courses.

Teaching Your Canvas Course
[ 110 ]
To the right-hand side of the drop-down menus, you will see a number of icons that 
allow you to complete various tasks that involve your conversations. These icons offer 
many of the same functions as a standard e-mail client, including Compose a new 
message, Reply, Reply all, Archive, Delete, and More Options. Hover your mouse 
over each icon to see a textual description of the icon. These icons will be the central 
part of your message experience, as they allow you to complete all of the basic tasks 
required to send and receive messages using Canvas. If an icon appears as a gray 
outline, you will need to select a message before that option becomes available.
At the right-hand side of the top menu, you will see a search bar to Search by user. 
This feature can be very helpful for quickly finding a message from a specific user, 
especially if the message or conversation is not very recent. Now that we have 
familiarized ourselves with the layout of the Conversations page, let's move on to 
composing and sending messages to other Canvas users.
Composing and sending a message
To compose a message, perform the following steps:
1.	 On the top menu of the Conversations page, click on the Compose a new 
message icon, as pictured in the following screenshot:
2.	 In the pop-up window that appears, select the course in which the user(s) 
you would like to message are participating from the drop-down menu,  
as pictured in the following screenshot:
3.	 Next, type in the name or names of the users you wish to send a message  
to in the To field. If you click on the icon to the right-hand side of the To 
field, you can find and choose users from the many options that appear,  
as pictured in the following screenshot:

Chapter 4
[ 111 ]
4.	 Once you have selected the desired user(s) to be included in the message, 
enter the topic of your message in the Subject field.
5.	 If you are sending a message to multiple users and would like to disable the 
Reply all feature, you can check the box next to Send individual messages. 
This essentially functions in the same way as the blind carbon copy (BCC) 
feature in standard e-mail clients.
6.	 Next, you can type the text of your message in the large text box below the 
Course, To, and Subject fields.
7.	 When the text of your message is complete, you can choose Add an 
attachment or Record an audio or video comment by clicking on the icons 
on the bottom-left corner of the pop-up window. The Add an attachment 
option will open the Documents folder of your computer, from which you 
can select the desired attachment. The Record an audio or video comment 
option below the text box will open the same dialog box as you saw in the 
Media option within the Rich Content Editor that we discussed in Chapter 2, 
Building Your Canvas Course. Using this feature, you can record a new audio 
or video comment or upload an existing audio or video file to send along 
with your message.
8.	 When you are satisfied with your message, click on the Send button in the 
bottom-right corner of the pop-up window to send it to the specified users.

Teaching Your Canvas Course
[ 112 ]
Organizing conversations
When your course has started, you will begin receiving messages from users in your 
course through the Conversations feature of Canvas. In order to maintain open and 
prompt communication with participants of your course, you should make sure to 
keep your conversations organized. The first two drop-down menus on the top menu 
of the Conversations page will help you keep track of conversations that fall under 
various categories. The following section focuses on organizing conversations into the 
options of the second drop-down menu, which is pictured in the following screenshot:
Marking conversations as unread
As we discussed while learning the layout of the Conversations feature, the Inbox 
link in the top-right menu of Canvas will alert you to new messages by displaying 
a circle icon next to the Inbox link that shows you the number of new messages you 
have received. On the Conversations page, you will see a blue dot to the left-hand 
side of each conversation that contains a new message, such as the conversation in 
the following screenshot:
After you have selected and read a new message, this blue dot will disappear. If you 
would like to mark the conversation as unread again, perform the following steps:
1.	 Hover your mouse over the conversation you wish to mark as unread.

Chapter 4
[ 113 ]
2.	 Click on the circular outline that appears, as pictured next to (No subject) in 
the following screenshot:
3.	 Once you click on the circular outline, the message will be marked as  
unread and will appear if you select Unread from the drop-down filter  
on the top menu.
4.	 You can also mark a conversation as unread by selecting the conversation, 
clicking on the More options icon from the top menu, and then selecting 
Mark as unread from the drop-down menu that appears.
Starring conversations
When you hover your mouse over a conversation, you will also see the outline of a 
star appear next to the users involved with the message. You can star a particularly 
important message or a message that requires further response or follow-up. This 
option serves the same purpose as flagging a message in many standard e-mail 
clients. To star a message, complete the following steps:
1.	 Hover your mouse over the conversation you wish to star.
2.	 Click on the outline of a star that appears next to the users involved with  
the message.
3.	 Once you click on the starred outline, a yellow star will appear and the 
conversation will be starred. The conversation will now appear if you select 
Starred from the drop-down filter on the top menu.
4.	 You can also star a conversation by selecting the conversation, clicking on  
the More options icon on the top menu, and then selecting Star from the 
drop-down menu that appears.
Viewing sent messages
Should you wish to view messages that you have sent, select Sent on the second 
dropdown of the top menu. This will show you all messages that you have sent 
within any conversations with which you are involved.

Teaching Your Canvas Course
[ 114 ]
Archiving and unarchiving conversations
As you are viewing and responding to messages, you may wish to archive certain 
conversations. Archiving conversations removes them from your inbox and the list 
of conversations but does not delete them. To archive a conversation, perform the 
following steps:
1.	 Select the conversation you wish to archive from the list of conversations  
on the left-hand side of your screen.
2.	 Click on the Archive icon on the top menu, as pictured in the  
following screenshot:
3.	 The conversation will be removed from your Inbox and will appear if you 
select Archived from the drop-down filter on the top menu.
If you need to unarchive a conversation, perform the following steps:
1.	 Select Archived from the second dropdown on the top menu.
2.	 Find the conversation you wish to move back to your Inbox and select it 
from the list of conversations on the left-hand side.
3.	 Once the conversation is selected, click on the Unarchive icon, which is 
pictured in the following screenshot:
4.	 Once you click on the Unarchive icon, the conversation will be moved back 
to your inbox.
Deleting conversations
Once you have read and responded to messages within a conversation, you 
might wish to delete your copy of the conversation. Note that when you delete a 
conversation, you only delete the conversation from your account. The messages 
within the conversation will still be available to other users involved with a 
conversation. To delete a conversation, perform the following steps:
1.	 Select the conversation from the list of conversations on the left-hand side of 
your screen.

Chapter 4
[ 115 ]
2.	 Click on the Delete icon that looks like a trashcan on the top menu of the 
Conversations page.
3.	 You might see a pop-up message that asks you whether you are sure you 
want to delete your copy of the conversation. The message indicates that this 
action cannot be undone. If you are sure that you would like to delete the 
conversation, click on OK. This message may look different depending on 
the web browser you are using.
4.	 After you have clicked on the Delete icon and confirmed your action, the 
message will no longer be available to you.
Now that we've looked at how to communicate directly with users in your course, 
let's move on to communicating publicly with everyone in your course using the 
Announcements feature.
Posting announcements
The Announcements feature of Canvas allows you to post information publicly in 
your course. Posting Announcements is a quick and easy way to communicate with 
all participants in your class. The information you post can then be easily referenced 
from the Announcements navigation link on the left-hand side menu of your course.
To make an announcement, complete the following steps:
1.	 Click on the Announcements tab on the left-hand side menu of your course.
2.	 In the top-right corner of the page that opens, you will see the Make  
an announcement option. Click on this option, and a page will open  
up with the Rich Content Editor.
3.	 In the Topic Title bar at the top of the new announcement, type in the title  
of the announcement you would like to make.
4.	 In the textbox of the Rich Content Editor, enter the information you would 
like to post publicly within your course.
5.	 You can add an attachment using the option below the textbox, and you can 
adjust the options as you see fit for the announcement.
6.	 When you are satisfied with your post, click on Save in the bottom-right corner.
When you have posted your announcement, it will appear on the Announcements 
page of your course. Announcements have the same features and functionalities as 
a discussion board post, so participants in the course will be able to reply to the post 
with comments (unless you decide to select the Close for Comments option). You 
can edit your announcement or adjust the options for your announcement using the 
icons in the top-right corner of the Announcements page.

Teaching Your Canvas Course
[ 116 ]
To ensure that participants in your course have a positive and productive experience, 
it is best to utilize the communication features of Canvas consistently and predictably. 
You may choose to only use the Conversations or Announcements features of Canvas 
individually, or you may wish to convey certain types of information to participants 
through a combination of both features. Establishing open communication with your 
students at the beginning of your course is very important, as is maintaining open 
communication with participants when you begin grading their assignments using  
the Gradebook and the SpeedGrader features of Canvas.
Using the Gradebook
When students begin submitting assignments for your course, you will need to start 
viewing, assessing, and grading their assignments as well as offering them feedback 
on their work. Depending on the type of course you are teaching, submissions might 
be electronic or in hard copy, and your feedback to students might be electronic or  
in person.
Accessing the Gradebook and entering grades
The Gradebook in Canvas has all the basic functionality of a traditional analog 
gradebook, but it offers you a wide range of options that a traditional gradebook 
cannot. To access the Gradebook, you can click on the Grades link of the left-hand 
side menu within a course or on the Grades link on the top Canvas menu. Once the 
Gradebook has opened, you will see a grid with students' names along the left-hand 
side as well as their secondary ID, such as their e-mail address or student ID number. 
The following screenshot shows you a sample of a student name and secondary ID 
that appears on the left-hand side of the Gradebook grid:

Chapter 4
[ 117 ]
In the center of the Gradebook grid, you will see assignment names listed across  
the top with students' grades for each assignment listed underneath next to their 
names. If students have made submissions for particular assignments, you will see  
an icon indicating their submission within the Gradebook grid. Different icons appear 
for different assignment submission types—you can hover your mouse over any 
unfamiliar icons for a text description of the icon's function. For assignments that 
have not yet been submitted, you will see a dash. In the following screenshot, the 
icons under Sample Discussion and My First Assignment indicate an ungraded 
submission, the 95 under Sample Quiz indicates the graded score, and the dash under 
My Second Assignment indicates that the student has not yet made a submission:
To manually enter or change a grade within the Gradebook grid, click on the grade 
or dash under the assignment you wish to adjust. The grade or dash will turn into 
a textbox in which you will be able to manually type in the grade and then press 
Enter or return on your keyboard to save it. For example, if you were to click on the 
dash under My Second Assignment in the preceding screenshot, you would be able 
to enter a point value and then save it by pressing Enter. You will also notice that 
you have the option to use the up and down arrows that appear next to the textbox 
to adjust points for the grade instead of typing the grade in manually. Each type of 
assignment has a variety of grading options. For example, certain quiz types such 
as multiple choice, true/false, or fill in the blank are automatically graded when 
students complete them. Quizzes with essay or short answer responses will require 
manual grading through the SpeedGrader, which we will discuss shortly.
Along the right-hand side of the Gradebook, you will see the total averages for each 
assignment group as well as the students' overall average for all of their completed 
assignments. The following screenshot indicates the percent average for each 
assignment group as well as the student's total average for all completed assignments:

Teaching Your Canvas Course
[ 118 ]
Once you begin using the Gradebook, you might wish to use the options located 
above the Gradebook grid. If you click on the gear icon that appears above the 
column of students' names, a drop-down menu will open with a number of options, 
as pictured in the following screenshot:
These options allow you to customize the way your Gradebook appears as well 
as other helpful features such as downloading scores or viewing the history of 
your grading. You may experiment with these options and set your Gradebook 
preferences to your liking.
Another useful viewing feature of the Gradebook is the filter bar located 
above the assignment groups in the top-right corner of the Gradebook. 
You can filter the Gradebook grid to only display students that match 
the criteria you type into this bar.
Now that you are more familiar with the layout of the Gradebook and how to 
manually enter grades into the Gradebook grid, let's move on to accessing students' 
online submissions through the SpeedGrader. For assignments that require online 
submissions, such as Sample Discussion and My First Assignment in the previous 
screenshots, you will need to open the SpeedGrader to view the submission and 
utilize the grading options for various assignments.

Chapter 4
[ 119 ]
Accessing and using a SpeedGrader
The SpeedGrader in Canvas allows you to quickly view students' submissions, 
assess their work, enter a grade, and offer feedback for individual assignments.  
To view a student's submission in the SpeedGrader from the Gradebook, perform  
the following steps:
1.	 Click on the small blue icon that appears in the corner of the grid when  
you hover your mouse over the student's submission. This icon appears  
on the right-hand side of the dark thought bubble in the center of the 
following screenshot:
2.	 From here, a dialog box will appear over the Gradebook that shows you the 
student's submission, as pictured in the following screenshot:
3.	 Click on the More Details in the SpeedGrader link that appears in this 
dialog box to view the entire assignment in the SpeedGrader.
You can also access the SpeedGrader from the To Do list that appears 
on your Canvas home page and on the home pages for each course 
you teach. The To Do list appears on the right-hand side of the course 
home page with the calendar and Coming Up sections. As students 
submit assignments, you will see the name of each assignment appear 
under your To Do list along with the number of assignments that 
need to be graded. To open the SpeedGrader for assignments that 
need to be graded, you can click on the assignment link that appears 
on your To Do list.

Teaching Your Canvas Course
[ 120 ]
Once you have opened the SpeedGrader, you will see four main sections of the 
screen that allow you to complete various tasks for grading an assignment. Perform 
the following steps to utilize each section of the screen in grading your assignments:
1.	 In the top-left corner, you will see the student's name displayed with arrows 
on either side, as shown in the following screenshot. If you click on these 
arrows, you can navigate through all of the students' submissions for the 
selected assignment:
2.	 Across the top pane of the SpeedGrader page, you will find links for 
Gradebook, Course Home, assignment page, Mute Assignment, Settings, 
and Help along with specifics for the selected assignment and how many 
submissions you have graded. If you click on Mute Assignment, a pop-
up window will appear, explaining that muting an assignment will stop 
notifications about the assignment and limit accessibility of the muted 
assignment. From there, you can choose to mute the assignment or leave 
it unmuted for students to access. You can adjust the sorting and viewing 
options by clicking on the Settings link, and you can find help with the 
SpeedGrader by clicking on the Help link. The following screenshot shows 
you the top menu of the SpeedGrader:
3.	 In the bottom-left corner of the SpeedGrader page, you will see a display 
of the student's Submission with a drop-down menu that allows you to 
adjust the viewing options for the assignment. For text submissions, Paper 
View allows you to see the student's text submission with formatting and 
embedded content, while Plain Text View removes any formatting and 
embedded content to display plain text. The following screenshot displays  
a sample text submission in Paper View:

Chapter 4
[ 121 ]
4.	 On the right-hand side of the SpeedGrader page, you will see the Assessment 
and feedback section, where you can view the submission date/time, give 
a grade, view and utilize a rubric to assign a grade, and leave feedback for 
the individual student. Notice that you have the option to Add a Comment, 
Attach a file, record a media comment (audio or video), or use speech 
recognition to dictate a written comment. To utilize a rubric within the 
SpeedGrader, you will have to create a rubric for the assignment, which we 
will discuss in Chapter 5, Exploring Special Features. The following screenshot 
displays the assessment and feedback options that appear on the right-hand 
side of the SpeedGrader:
5.	 When you have finished reviewing the submission, assigning a grade, and 
providing feedback, you can click on Submit Comment to save any written 
feedback and then click on the arrows to the right- or left-hand side of the 
student's name in the top-left corner to move to the next submission. The 
SpeedGrader autosaves your grades, so if you do not need to leave a written 
comment, you can enter the grade and then navigate to the next student's 
assignment, and your work will automatically be saved.
6.	 When you have finished grading all submissions for a particular assignment, 
you can use the links at the top of the page to navigate back to the Gradebook 
or the course home page.

Teaching Your Canvas Course
[ 122 ]
If you would like to download all of the submissions that students have 
made for a particular assignment, you can navigate to the assignment 
page and click on the Download Submissions link that appears on the 
right-hand side menu of the assignment page. All of the submission 
files will be downloaded to your computer in a ZIP file; at which point, 
you can open each submission to make comments or corrections. You 
can then return to the assignment page and click on the Re-Upload 
Submissions link that also appears on the right-hand side menu. Once 
you have re-uploaded the altered submissions, students will receive a 
copy of their submission with your comments or corrections.
As you work through your students' assignment submissions, keep in mind the 
kind of feedback that you traditionally offer. Most likely, you are used to giving 
written feedback on assignments, which you have the capability of doing directly 
within Canvas. Since Canvas offers you the ability to record audio or video feedback, 
consider taking advantage of this unique opportunity to appeal to the non-visual 
learners you may have in your classes. After you have viewed an assignment 
submission and assigned a grade, you might consider starting an audio or video 
recording as you verbally speak your feedback for your students, and then attach 
that recording to their assignment. This is a wonderful opportunity to reach out 
to students who do their best when processing information aurally or by making 
personal connections through seeing a video of you speaking directly to them. 
Canvas allows you to reach a wider variety of students through the features it offers, 
so make sure that you take advantage of these opportunities as they arise during 
your course. In addition to offering assignment feedback, you can consider setting 
up synchronous online meetings with your class through the Conferences feature.

Chapter 4
[ 123 ]
Setting up synchronous meetings  
using Conferences
If you are teaching a fully online course, synchronous online meetings during which 
all members of your class are present online can be a huge benefit to the teaching and 
learning that takes place within your course. A synchronous online meeting allows 
all students and teachers involved in your course to participate in a virtual classroom, 
much like a conference call. Each member of the class logs in to the conference and 
connects to everyone else in the class; you are free to lead a presentation or lecture 
during this time, or open the conference up for group discussions and questions. In 
addition to the audio communication possible through these meetings, you and your 
students can enable your webcams. So, everyone in the class can see and talk to each 
other at the same time, just as you would in a live classroom. You can even record 
meetings so students who are not able to be present are still able to see what happened 
during the meeting. Students are also able to set up their own conferences, so means 
of collaboration and cooperation are built into your students' Canvas experience. 
Synchronous meetings afford students the opportunity for direct contact with you 
and their classmates in a real-time setting. As online learning gains popularity, one of 
the biggest critiques from educators and students alike is the lack of personal contact 
present in most online courses—the Conferences feature allows you to personalize 
learning and build community among you and your students.
Creating a conference
To set up a conference, complete the following steps:
1.	 Click on the Conferences link on the left-hand side menu of your course.
2.	 On the Conferences page, you will see a blue button in the top-right corner 
of the page that reads New Conference. Click on this button to open a  
pop-up window that will allow you to set up a new conference.

Teaching Your Canvas Course
[ 124 ]
3.	 The pop-up window that appears will allow you to configure the following 
elements of your conference:
°°
Name: This will allow you to configure the name of your conference.
°°
Type: This will allow you to configure the type of conference you 
would like to create. It refers to the external conferencing service 
you would like to use for your conference. Canvas has partnered 
with BigBlueButton as a conferencing service, so BigBlueButton will 
appear as the default conferencing service for you to use. You might 
see other conferencing options available, depending on the services 
your institution has integrated into Canvas.
°°
Duration: This will allow you to configure the duration of  
your conference.
°°
Record: This will allow you to configure the options to record your 
conference and to allow No Time Limit for long-running conferences.
°°
Description: This will allow you to configure the description of 
your conference. This is the best place to include information about 
the Date, Time, and Duration of your conference to ensure that all 
participants in your course are present for the conference. You might 
wish to post an announcement or send out a message to all of the 
participants in your course.
°°
Invite All Course Members: This will allow you to invite all course 
members to the conference.
4.	 Once you have adjusted all of the conference specifications to your liking, 
you can click on the Create Conference button in the bottom-right corner 
of the pop-up window. After you have created the conference, invited 
participants will receive a notification about the conference (depending on 
their notification settings), and the conference will be listed under the New 
Conferences section of the Conferences page.

Chapter 4
[ 125 ]
Starting and facilitating your conference
To start your conference, complete the following steps:
1.	 Click on the Start button that appears on the right-hand side of the conference 
name under New Conferences, as shown in the following screenshot:
2.	 When you click on the Start button, a new tab or window will open in your 
web browser, and you will be taken to the BigBlueButton conferencing 
service website (or to the conferencing service you or your institution have 
configured to work within Canvas). Note that students will not be able to join 
the conference until after you click on Start. While the following section will 
show you how to facilitate a conference using BigBlueButton as an example, the 
functions covered appear in most standard conferencing services and will help 
you better understand the possibilities of synchronous meetings.
3.	 The new tab or window that opens in your web browser will log you in to 
the conference. You will see a dialog box appear, as pictured in the following 
screenshot, that asks for permission to access your built-in microphone and 
webcam or the external microphone and webcam you have connected to 
your computer. In order to participate and facilitate the conference, you 
will need to click on Allow so the service can access your microphone and 
webcam, as shown in the following screenshot:

Teaching Your Canvas Course
[ 126 ]
4.	 Once you have clicked on Allow to enable the use of your microphone and 
webcam, you will see an Audio Settings dialog box. From this box, you can 
test and adjust the microphone you wish to use as well as test the speakers or 
headset you will be using. You must check the settings displayed in this box 
and then click on Join Audio in order to be heard during the conference.  
The Audio Settings dialog box is pictured in the following screenshot:
5.	 When you have joined the conference with your audio settings configured 
correctly, you will either hear other participants who are already in the 
conference or you will hear a message informing you that you are the only 
person in the conference so far.
Notice that when you hover your mouse over any item within the 
BigBlueButton page, an information box will pop up next to your 
cursor telling you what the item is. Use this to your advantage as 
you explore the conferencing screen to see what your options are.
The layout of the conferencing screen is broken down into a number of separate 
sections. First, the menu along the top of the screen allows you to control how you 
are participating in the conference and your language settings. You will also see the 
option to log out on the far right-hand side of this menu. The following screenshot 
displays the top menu of BigBlueButton:

Chapter 4
[ 127 ]
To adjust your audio and video settings or share your desktop (that is, 
broadcast what you see on your computer screen to other participants' 
screens), click on the corresponding icons in the top-left corner. Make 
sure that your microphone and webcam are enabled when you begin 
a conference so all participants will be able to hear and see you. You 
can be sure that your microphone and webcam are working properly 
when you see a green check appear within the icons in the top-left 
menu, as displayed in the preceding screenshot. If you do not see 
this checkmark or if you need to adjust your microphone or webcam 
settings, you can click directly on the icons in the top-left menu which 
will open the settings for each option.
Next, look at the Users list on the left-hand side, which lists all of the participants 
involved in the conference by name. You can also see each user's status, specifically 
whether they are the presenter or a participant. As the facilitator of the conference, you 
are able to mute or unmute participants' microphones, which you will find is a useful 
tool to cut down on extraneous noise and feedback from certain users. Participants 
have the option to virtually raise their hand, at which time a small hand icon will 
appear next to their name so the presenter (presumably you to begin with) will see that 
that user would like to speak. Also, notice the Settings icon in the bottom-left corner of 
this section that gives you a variety of useful options when facilitating a conference, as 
pictured in the following screenshot:

Teaching Your Canvas Course
[ 128 ]
Below the Users list, you will see a Webcams preview window, which allows you 
to see the video you are broadcasting to other users, as pictured in the following 
screenshot, as well as previews of other users' webcam feeds. If you hover over a 
webcam preview, an icon will appear that allows you to mute or unmute that user:
In the center of your screen, you will see the Presentation area. The most useful place 
to begin when looking at this area as the presenter is the bottom-left corner, where 
you will see an Upload Presentation icon. To upload a presentation, perform the 
following steps:
1.	 Click on the Upload Presentation icon, and from there, a dialog box 
will open and you will be able to upload any previously constructed 
presentations that you might have created using programs such as 
PowerPoint or Keynote.
2.	 Click on Select File in the dialog box, locate the desired file on your computer, 
and then click on Upload.
3.	 From here, the presentation will appear within the center Presentation area, 
and you will be able to scroll through the slides using the arrows at the 
bottom. You will also be able to use the annotation tools along the right-hand 
side of the presentation area to mark up the presentation in real time.
When making a presentation during a class, you can speak through the presentation 
just as you would in a live class, and you can use the annotation tools to highlight 
or draw attention to specific aspects of the slide. The following screenshot offers an 
example of a slide with shapes and marks created using the annotation tools shown 
in the menu on the right-hand side of the presentation area:

Chapter 4
[ 129 ]
On the right-hand side of the Conference screen, you will see the Chat window, 
where you can post chat messages to the entire group or to specific users. Notice the 
Public and Options tabs at the top of this window. To post chat messages, complete 
the following steps:
1.	 To post a public chat message, type the message under the Public tab and 
click on Send.

Teaching Your Canvas Course
[ 130 ]
2.	 To send a private chat message to an individual participant, select the 
participant from the Options tab and begin a private chat. The private chat 
will appear as a new tab where you can type your message and then click  
on Send. The following screenshot displays the Chat window, including  
the Public and Options tabs:
Finally, you will see a drop-down menu in the bottom-right corner of the screen that 
tells you that you are viewing the Default display view. The various display views 
change the layout of the conference depending on your needs, so you may choose 
to use a display view other then the default view, depending on how you intend to 
spend your time in the conference, as described in the following list:
•	
Default: This is a flexible view that allows you to see and manage all of the 
windows within the conference easily. This is useful when you are the sole 
presenter and facilitator of a conference.
•	
Video Chat: This view would be an excellent choice for a discussion-based 
class, wherein students had to keep the conference going by participating 
in the discussion. In most conferencing services, the person who is speaking 
will automatically appear on each user's screen when they speak as long 
as they are not muted. The chat, presentation, and user windows are not 
displayed in this view.
•	
Meeting: This view is helpful for situations when seeing people's faces 
and hearing their audio is important, but being able to see a presentation is 
also important. The webcam window takes up most of the screen, and the 
presentation and chat windows are visible.
•	
Webinar: This view works well for online class lectures wherein the 
presentation takes prominence, but seeing other participants and hearing 
their input is important. The presentation window takes up most of the 
screen, and the chat and webcam windows are visible.

Chapter 4
[ 131 ]
•	
Lecture Assistant: This view can be used by a teacher's assistant to facilitate 
the class easily while you are presenting. The chat window takes up most 
of the screen in this view so the assistant can, for example, aid in solving 
technical difficulties with individuals during the lecture. All other windows 
are also visible in this view so the assistant can manage all aspects of the 
conference.
•	
Lecture: This view would be helpful when making a presentation with 
the help of an assistant to facilitate the conference. In the lecture view, the 
presentation area takes up the full screen and you are not able to see any  
of the other windows, so your focus can remain solely on the presentation.
When you have completed your conference, you can log out of the conference  
by clicking on the Log Out icon in the top-right corner. When you return to  
Canvas and view the Conferences page, the conference will appear under 
Completed Conferences.
Summary
In this chapter, we began by exploring the Conversations message feature of 
Canvas. We covered how to access messages by clicking on the Inbox link in the 
top-right menu. We were able to compose and send a message to various users and 
talked about the various ways to manage conversations, including how to mark 
as unread, star, archive, and delete conversations. Next, we discussed how to post 
announcements to your course. We then moved on to viewing assignments and 
grading using the Gradebook and the SpeedGrader. We began by accessing the 
Gradebook and the SpeedGrader and looked at how to view a submission for a 
specific student, how to assign them a grade, and how to offer feedback. Finally,  
we discussed setting up synchronous online meetings using the Conferences feature 
of Canvas by creating a sample BigBlueButton conference. We covered how to join 
the conference using your audio and then explored the various windows within the 
conferencing service, including Top Menu, the Users window, the Webcam preview 
section, Presentation Area, the Chat window, and the various Display View options.
At this point in your journey, we have successfully covered the basics of building 
and teaching your Canvas course. The next chapter will cover some of the extras  
and special features available to you through Canvas to further enhance your 
teaching. These options will allow you to bolster your students' understanding  
and achievement through learning to use the Canvas mobile device app, designating 
learning outcomes, developing assessment tools, integrating outside applications, 
and tracking activity within your course.


Exploring Special Features
Now that we have covered the basic skills required to create, build, design, and teach 
your Canvas course, let's look into some of the more advanced special features that 
Canvas has to offer. We'll begin by taking a look at the mobile application of Canvas 
that is available for your mobile devices. Next, we will figure out how to create 
collaborations between students that will allow them to work on documents together 
online. After this, we will learn how to set up learning outcomes and how to create 
rubrics within Canvas. Finally, we will take a look into how to use the powerful 
assessment and statistics tools within Canvas to monitor your students' progress, 
gauge and bolster student engagement, and map interactions between users from 
course to course.
Let's get started by learning how to access Canvas from your mobile device using the 
Canvas mobile app.
Using Canvas on your mobile devices
As mobile devices become more and more a part of modern-day life, Canvas has 
ensured that accessing your course and interacting with other participants is as easy 
as possible wherever you are with the mobile app version of Canvas. After you have 
finished building your course on a computer, the Canvas mobile app is a great way 
to keep up with your course from your smartphone, tablet, or other mobile device. 
Let's start by downloading the app, logging in, and then familiarizing yourself with 
the layout of the Canvas mobile app.
Please note that the following screenshots are captured from 
an iPhone 5 that has iOS 7.1.1. The app is the Canvas by 
Instructure app, Version 3.2. The exact procedures and layout 
of the app may be different if you are using a different device, 
operating system, or app version.

Exploring Special Features
[ 134 ]
Downloading and configuring the mobile app
To download the mobile app to your device, complete the following steps:
1.	 Open the app store on your device. Search for canvas by instructure 
within the search field in the app store.
2.	 If multiple apps appear in your search results, make sure to select the 
Canvas by Instructure – the cloud native learning platform & learning 
management system app so that you download the most current version  
of the app.
3.	 Once you have found the app, follow the standard procedure to download 
apps from the app store on your device. For the Apple Store, tap on Free, 
which will turn into an Install option. Tap on Install and you will be 
asked to enter your Apple ID credentials. Once you enter your Apple ID 
credentials, the app will begin downloading to your device. The following 
screenshot displays the app as it appears in the Apple Store, including the 
FREE option that you need to tap to begin the download:

Chapter 5
[ 135 ]
4.	 When the app download is complete, locate the app on your phone and tap 
on the icon to open it. The app icon is pictured in the following screenshot:
5.	 On the screen that opens, you will be asked to enter your Canvas URL. 
This is the same URL you would enter to access your Canvas account on a 
computer; so, it would either be your institution's Canvas site (usually similar 
to https://institution.instructure.com) or the Free for Teachers site 
(https://canvas.instructure.com). Tap the textbox that says Enter your 
canvas URL, type in your Canvas URL using the keyboard that appears, and 
then tap Go on your mobile keyboard or Connect to Canvas Network. The 
following screenshot shows the screen that will appear when you first open 
the Canvas mobile app:

Exploring Special Features
[ 136 ]
6.	 Next, you will need to enter the e-mail address and password that you usually 
use to log in to Canvas on a computer. When you have entered your login 
credentials, tap Login. If you don't know your password, tap I don't know 
my password, then enter your e-mail address and tap Request Password to 
reset your password. The login screen is shown in the following screenshot:
7.	 Canvas will next ask permission to access your Canvas account through the 
mobile app. It will display the name and e-mail address associated with your 
account. To grant permission for the Canvas app to access your account and 
to do so in the future, tap the checkbox next to Remember my authorization 
for this service at the bottom of the screen and then tap Login as shown in 
the following screenshot:

Chapter 5
[ 137 ]
8.	 From here, the Courses screen will open within the app and you can begin to 
use the app.
Now that we have covered how to download and configure the Canvas app on your 
mobile device, let's move along to actually using the app to interact with content and 
users within your Canvas course.
Using the features of the mobile app
When your app first opens, you will see the Courses screen, which displays a list of 
the courses with which you are involved as pictured in the following screenshot:
On the Courses screen that appears when you log in, notice the tab options to view 
Favorite Courses or All Courses—right now, you most likely only have one course 
listed, but when you have many courses within Canvas, you can find your courses 
using these tabs.
Looking at the bottom menu, you will see icons that allow you to quickly and easily 
view overviews of your Courses, Messages, To Do items, Notifications, and Profile 
options within the app. Let's now work our way through navigating and using the 
five main sections of the app that are shown along the bottom menu.

Exploring Special Features
[ 138 ]
Navigating your course within the mobile app
The Canvas mobile app allows you to see and do most of the same things you are 
able to do within your course using a computer. To view and interact with the 
various sections and content of your course, complete the following steps:
1.	 Tap on your course to select it from the list of courses on the Courses screen 
that appears when you first open the mobile app.
2.	 When the course screen opens, you will see the Home page of your course. 
The home page layout you see within the mobile app will reflect the home 
page layout that you selected when you created your course. The following 
screenshot displays a Syllabus home page layout:

Chapter 5
[ 139 ]
3.	 To view the full list of content in the course that is displayed on the left-hand 
side menu of your course when viewing it on a computer, tap Home at the 
top of the screen. The home screen will disappear and you will see the list  
of navigation links you designated for your course as pictured in the 
following screenshot:
4.	 You can scroll through these options and explore the mobile version of 
each of these tabs. In addition, you can view the Home page and course 
Notifications by tapping the icons at the top of the screen. At the time of 
writing this, the Grades feature is not yet supported for instructors; however, 
your students will be able to view their grades in the course from within the 
mobile app by clicking on the Grades icon.
While the Grades feature of Canvas is not currently 
supported for instructors within the mobile app discussed 
here, you can download the SpeedGrader app for the 
iPad from the Apple Store. You can find instructions on 
how to use the SpeedGrader iPad app within Canvas 
Guides; we will discuss how to access and use this in 
Chapter 6, Where to Go for Help.

Exploring Special Features
[ 140 ]
As we discussed in the previous chapters, taking time to explore the various features 
of Canvas allows you to gain personal insight into the inner workings of each feature 
through trial and error. Do not hesitate to use the same approach to learning the 
Canvas mobile app—take some time to explore and experiment with each feature. 
You might find that some of the features that appear on your course navigation 
list are not currently supported within the mobile app. As Instructure continues to 
develop, expand, and improve the Canvas mobile app, these features will most likely 
become available to you.
Let's now move on to discuss the next option along the bottom menu of the mobile 
app, the Messages feature, which allows you to utilize the conversations feature  
of Canvas.
Viewing and sending messages within the  
mobile app
Within the Canvas mobile app, it is easy to communicate with other Canvas 
users through the Messages feature, which functions in the same way as the 
Conversations feature of the web version of Canvas. To access and use the  
Messages feature of the mobile app, complete the following steps:
1.	 Tap on Messages on the bottom menu of the app. Your conversations  
inbox will open, and you will see options to view messages in your Inbox, 
your Unread messages, and your Archived messages, as pictured in the 
following screenshot:

Chapter 5
[ 141 ]
2.	 Within your inbox, you will see the list of messages in your account with 
the most recent messages listed at the top of the screen. To open a message, 
tap on the message preview that includes the name of the sender and the 
beginning of the message.
3.	 Once you have read the selected message, you can tap the textbox that 
appears at the top of the message screen and type a response, as pictured  
in the following screenshot:
4.	 If you would like to add an attachment to your message, tap on the icon 
that looks like a paperclip. You have the option to Choose from Library…, 
Take Photo or Video…, or Record Audio… in order to attach a file. Choose 
the appropriate option and either locate the file on your device or follow 
the onscreen instructions to attach a new photo, video, or audio recording. 
The following screenshot displays the options that appear when you tap the 
attachment icon:

Exploring Special Features
[ 142 ]
5.	 When you are satisfied with your response, tap Send and your reply  
will be sent.
Within the messaging feature of the mobile app, you can also compose new messages 
to other Canvas users. To compose a new message, complete the following steps:
1.	 Click on the compose icon in the top-right corner of the messaging screen,  
as outlined in the following screenshot:
2.	 The first step in composing a new message is adding recipients. Tap  
on the plus sign icon to the right of the To: field as pictured in the  
following screenshot:
3.	 Next, tap on the Search for recipients bar that appears and type the name or 
names of those you wish to send a message. Suggestions will appear below 
the search bar—you can tap on the name of the desired recipient to add them 
to the message. When you have finished adding recipients, tap Done in the 
top-right corner, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 5
[ 143 ]
4.	 Next, you can type your message in the textbox that appears under the 
recipient list in the same way we replied to a message.
5.	 You can add an attachment in the same way to reply to a message.
6.	 When you are completely finished composing your message and attaching any 
items, tap the Send option to the right of the textbox to send your message.
Next, let's explore the To Do feature of the mobile app.
Using the To Do feature of the mobile app
The mobile app is helpful to easily view what you need to do for your course while 
you are away from your computer. To utilize the To Do feature of the mobile app, 
complete the following steps:
1.	 Tap on the To Do option on the bottom menu of the mobile app. You will see 
a list appear that identifies each task you need to complete for your course, as 
pictured in the following screenshot:
2.	 You can tap on each item in the To Do list to view the specifics of each 
task, such as the due date or the number of submissions received for an 
assignment. The following screenshot displays the options that appear  
when you tap on a To Do item:

Exploring Special Features
[ 144 ]
Most To Do items for instructors involve grading, which is currently not a supported 
feature in the mobile app. However, the To Do feature does offer you access to 
remind yourself of what you need to complete when you are back at your computer 
or able to use the SpeedGrader app for iPad mentioned previously.
Continuing on, we will take a look at the Notifications feature of the mobile app.
Accessing your notifications within the mobile app
While you are on the go, you can use the mobile app to view notifications of recent 
activity within your Canvas course. These notifications are based on the notification 
settings you configured when you set up your profile in Chapter 1, Getting Started 
with Canvas. To access your Notifications, complete the following steps:
1.	 Tap the Notifications option on the bottom menu of the mobile app. The 
screen that appears will display a list of recent activity within your course 
such as newly posted announcements or newly created assignments, as 
displayed in the following screenshot:
2.	 You can tap on any of the notifications that appear on the Notifications 
screen to view the full item, such as a new announcement or new assignment.
Now to review the final option of the bottom menu of the mobile app, viewing  
your Profile.
Viewing your profile within the mobile app
You are able to view the specifics of your Canvas profile within the mobile app.  
To see your Canvas profile from your mobile device, complete the following steps:
1.	 Tap on the Profile option on the bottom menu of the mobile app.

Chapter 5
[ 145 ]
2.	 From here, you will see your profile picture, name, and e-mail address above 
a number of options. You can utilize the following options from the Profile 
feature of the mobile app:
°°
Tap on your profile picture to take a new profile picture using  
your device or to choose a new picture from the photo library  
on your device.
°°
Tap on My Files to see files that are associated with your  
Canvas profile.
°°
Tap on About to view the specifics of your account, including legal 
information from Canvas.
°°
Tap on Help to find help using the mobile app, which we will discuss 
in more depth in the next section.
°°
Tap Logout to remove your account information from the mobile 
app. If you choose this option, you will have to log in again next 
time you open the mobile app. The following screenshot displays the 
Profile feature of the mobile app and all of the functions described in 
the preceding bullets:
The final feature we will discuss for the Canvas mobile app is the Help feature.

Exploring Special Features
[ 146 ]
Finding help within the Canvas mobile app
There are two ways you can access the Help feature within the Canvas mobile app:
•	
On the Courses screen, tap on Help in the top-left corner of the screen
•	
On the Profile screen, tap on the Help option
When you tap on the Help option, a screen will appear with a number of options 
from which you can choose. This screen is pictured in the following screenshot:
The following points describe the support available to you when you tap  
each option:
•	
Ask your instructor a question: This option is mainly for students who are 
having trouble or need to contact their instructor (you). This option opens 
a new message where students can type and send their problem to you as a 
message within Canvas.
•	
Search the Canvas Guides: This option allows you to browse and search 
some of the Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) about the mobile app within 
the Canvas Guides. We will discuss the Canvas Guides in much more depth 
in Chapter 6, Where to Go for Help.

Chapter 5
[ 147 ]
•	
Report a Problem: This option will open a new e-mail addressed to 
mobilesupport@instructure.com and will allow you to tell Canvas about 
any problems you might be encountering with the mobile app. This option 
works with the e-mail client app that you use on your device to send an 
e-mail to Canvas directly from your e-mail account.
•	
Request a Feature: This option will open a new e-mail addressed to 
mobilesupport@instructure.com and will allow you to send Canvas any 
ideas you might have for features that would improve the mobile app. This 
option works with the e-mail client app that you use on your device to send 
an e-mail to Canvas directly from your e-mail account.
•	
Show your love of the app: This option will open the app store for your 
device so that you can submit a review of the app to the app store.
Now that we have covered how to configure and navigate the Canvas mobile 
app, let's move back to your computer to discuss some of the more advanced 
special features of Canvas that allow you to customize and enhance the teaching 
and learning process. We'll start by taking a look at how to set up Collaborations 
between participants in your course.
Creating Collaborations
The Collaborations feature of Canvas allows you to set up ways in which your 
students can work together to create documents online. Through two integrated 
outside web tools, Collaborations allow you to set up documents that multiple users 
can access and edit together in real time from different locations. Some examples 
of situations in which you might choose to utilize the Collaborations feature of 
Canvas might be for planning group projects, full class note-taking, brainstorming 
ideas, signing up for activities, or writing a group paper to save and submit to a 
group assignment. In addition to teacher-created collaborations, students can use the 
Collaborations feature to create their own group documents as well by following the 
same steps described in this section.
Canvas allows you to set up group documents with EtherPad or with Google Docs. 
As mentioned on the Collaborations page within Canvas, EtherPad is better suited 
for use in situations where students need to contribute to the group document 
anonymously or without creating an individual outside account. For the purposes of 
this discussion, let's walk our way through setting up a collaboration using EtherPad 
as an example of how you might give your students the opportunity to work 
together using their existing Canvas accounts.

Exploring Special Features
[ 148 ]
Google Docs is a completely viable and oft-used option 
for collaborations, and you are welcome to encourage 
your students to create Google accounts and utilize the 
Collaborations feature using their personal Google accounts. 
To create a collaboration using Google Docs, follow the 
steps provided in this section and select Google Docs from 
the drop-down menu in step 3. Once you or your students 
authorize Google Docs access, the Collaborations feature 
will allow users to create a collaboration using Google Docs 
and it will function in the same way as described in the 
following steps.
To create a collaboration, complete these steps:
1.	 Click on the Collaborations tab of the left-hand side menu, as pictured at the 
bottom of the following screenshot:
2.	 Canvas offers a nice explanation of collaborations and how to use them 
on the Collaborations page; so, take a second to read the text on the main 
Collaborations page. Then, click on the Start a new collaboration button 
above the text and to the right, as shown in this screenshot:

Chapter 5
[ 149 ]
3.	 On the next page, you will see more explanation of collaborations; again, 
take the time to read this information to give yourself a better idea of how 
to use collaborations. The bottom half of the screen is labeled Start a New 
Collaboration. From the drop-down menu next to Collaborate using, select 
EtherPad as shown in the following screenshot:
4.	 Next, enter the Document name and Description that you want students to 
see when they join the collaboration.
5.	 Below the description, you will see the option to select participants for the 
collaboration. You can select individual People to include, or you can select 
entire user Groups (which you would have previously set up from within 
the People tab on the left-hand side menu as discussed in Chapter 3, Getting 
Ready to Launch Your Course).
6.	 To select individual People, click on their names from the list of participants 
on the left-hand side. Their names will then appear on the right-hand side, 
and you can remove them by clicking the X that appears when you hover 
over their name. In the following screenshot, you see Example Student in the 
list of participants on the left-hand side and John, Ryan in the collaboration 
list on the right-hand side:

Exploring Special Features
[ 150 ]
7.	 To select specific Groups, click on the Groups button above the participant 
list. You will see the list of groups that you previously created from within 
the People tab on the left-hand side menu, and you can select groups of 
people to include in the collaboration as pictured in the following screenshot:
8.	 When you have finished selecting participants or groups to include in the 
collaboration, click on the Start Collaborating button at the bottom of the 
screen, as shown in the following screenshot:
9.	 After that, the collaboration will be created and the EtherPad document will 
open in a new tab or window of your Internet browser. Close the EtherPad 
document and return to Canvas.
10.	 Your students will receive an invitation to join the collaboration you have 
created for them. Canvas EtherPad documents can be accessed at any time by 
clicking on the Collaborations tab on the left-hand side menu of the course.
Encourage your students to take advantage of the opportunity to work together using 
collaborations. The EtherPad document functions in much the same way as a basic 
word-processing document. In addition to basic formatting features, you can also use 
a timeslider to view the character-by-character progress of a document or generate an 
HTML code to embed the document elsewhere on the Web. These features appear on 
the top menu of the EtherPad page, and you can hover your mouse over each option 
for a description of the feature. Once a collaboration is created, the creator of the 
collaboration has the ability to edit or delete the collaboration.

Chapter 5
[ 151 ]
Editing or deleting Collaborations
If you are the creator of a collaboration and you would like to edit or delete the 
collaboration, complete the following steps:
1.	 Click on the Collaboration tab on the left-hand side menu.
2.	 On the list of collaborations, find the collaboration you would like to edit or 
delete. To the right of the collaboration name, you will see the edit icon that 
looks like a pencil and the delete icon that looks like a trashcan. To edit the 
collaboration, click on the edit icon, as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 Within the Collaborations page, you will see the name and description of the 
collaboration turn into textboxes where you can make your changes. You also 
see the participant list appear, which you can adjust in the same way you did 
to create the collaboration. When you are finished editing the collaboration, 
click on Update Collaboration to save your changes.
4.	 To delete a collaboration, click on the delete icon. You will see a pop up 
asking if you really want to delete the collaboration—click on Yes and your 
collaboration will be deleted.
Providing opportunities for your students to work together and combine their ideas is 
a way of making the content they are engaging with more meaningful and personal. 
As content gains meaning for your students, that meaning will hopefully begin to 
impact their achievement positively. In order to assess student achievement, it is 
helpful for you to articulate your goals for students as they work through the content 
of your course; one such way to do so within Canvas is to use the Outcomes feature.

Exploring Special Features
[ 152 ]
Setting up Outcomes
As general educational trends have moved toward more standardized and concrete 
methods of assessment in recent years, Canvas has incorporated the Outcomes 
feature to help you design assessment tools to keep up with the demands of teaching 
in the 21st century. The Outcomes feature of Canvas allows you to easily create, 
manage, and utilize assessment outcomes. Outcomes represent the skills, traits, or 
information you would like your students to come away with after your course. 
Standardized outcomes are becoming increasingly popular in North American 
schools and in institutions across the globe; many discipline-specific associations 
have created national standards that are comparable to the types of outcomes you 
would utilize in a Canvas course. Outcomes are also an excellent means of mapping 
your curriculum by providing you with a documentation of your learning goals. 
Should you choose to use your outcomes to create rubrics for assessment, you will 
also have a documentation of the ways in which your assessments directly relate to 
the concepts you set out to teach in the first place.
Once you have designed and created your outcomes, you will be able to quickly 
and easily access your outcomes when creating rubrics for assessments within your 
course. You can create outcomes that align to customized standards, benchmarks, 
and goals, or you can choose from common state and national standards that 
are already available through the Outcomes feature such as the Common Core 
Standards. Once you have set up your outcomes, you can use them to easily create 
a rubric for assignments, discussions, or quizzes within your course. The outcomes 
you create for one course are also accessible and usable within other courses; so, the 
hard work you put into creating outcomes for one course will come in handy if you 
would like to use them for another course you are teaching.
Creating Outcomes
To create a new outcome, we will perform the following steps:
1.	 Click on the Outcomes tab on the left-hand side menu of your course home 
page. You will see the Learning Outcomes page, with a menu across the top, 
a list of outcomes on the left-hand side (which will appear empty until you 
begin to add outcomes), and instructions in the center. These sections are 
labeled in the following screenshot:

Chapter 5
[ 153 ]
2.	 Take a look at the instructions, which offer an excellent overview of how 
you might choose to use outcomes within your course. Click on the New 
Outcome button in the top-left corner of the menu. You will see a new 
outcome template appear where the instructions were on the page.
3.	 Insert the desired name of your outcome into the Name this outcome: box 
at the top, then input the main body of your outcome in the Describe this 
outcome: Rich Content Editor box below. An example of a new outcome 
might be as follows:

Exploring Special Features
[ 154 ]
4.	 Once you are satisfied with the name and description of your outcome, look 
below the description at the Criterion Ratings. This section allows you to 
adjust how you wish to score your students' attainment of the outcome. The 
default criteria are as follows:
°°
Exceeds Expectations: 5 points
°°
Meets Expectations: 3 points
°°
Does Not Meet Expectations: 0 points
5.	 To edit the Criterion Ratings, click on the edit icon that looks like a  
pencil at the bottom-right corner of each rating box, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
6.	 You will see the name of the criterion and the point value displayed in 
textboxes. You can then rename or modify the title of the criterion and adjust 
the point value. If you would like to, you can enter a longer description 
of what the student needs to do in order to achieve the criterion you are 
describing, rather than offering only a title for the criterion. This can clarify 
the expectations for students and can help them better understand how to 
meet each criterion. This idea will also be discussed further in the following 
sections regarding rubrics.
7.	 Click on the OK button at the bottom of the criterion box to save your 
criterion. You also have the option to delete the criterion by clicking on  
the Delete button at the bottom, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 5
[ 155 ]
8.	 If you would like to add more than three criteria for your outcome, click on 
the Insert arrow above the lines separating existing criteria as pictured in the 
following screenshot. This will create a new criterion that you can edit and 
save in the same way as the other criteria.
9.	 You can assign the minimum point value that students must receive to 
determine when students have reached a Mastery of the desired outcome. 
The following screenshot shows that students will have reached a Mastery  
of the outcome if they score a 3:
10.	 When you have finished creating your outcome, click on Save in the  
bottom-right corner of the page. You will see your outcome appear in the 
center of the screen where the instructions first appeared, and you will also 
see the Delete Outcome and Edit Outcome buttons show up underneath 
your new outcome. You are always able to edit or delete an outcome by 
selecting it from the list of outcomes and clicking on the edit or delete 
buttons that appear underneath the outcome.
Creating Outcome Groups
Once you have finished creating your first outcome, you might decide to create an 
Outcome Group to organize your outcomes. Examples of group labels might be by 
subject matter, grade level, or unit of study.
To create an Outcome Group, complete the following steps:
1.	 Click on the New Group button next to the New Outcome button on the top 
menu of the Outcomes page.

Exploring Special Features
[ 156 ]
2.	 You will see a new outcome group template appear in the center of the screen 
with a box to name the group and a Rich Content Editor box to describe the 
group. This screen is very similar to the New Outcome template, but you will 
be describing the grouping of outcomes rather than the specific individual 
outcomes. The New Group template is shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 Click on Save at the bottom-right corner of the template. You will notice that 
your outcome group now appears to the left on the list of outcomes.
If you notice that your outcome groups and outcomes seem very 
disorganized on your screen, move around the screen erratically 
when you move your mouse, or are hard to click on, the Internet 
browser you are using might not be compatible with the way 
Canvas' outcomes are designed to work. Should you encounter this 
problem, try closing your Internet browser and logging in to Canvas 
using another browser. Common Internet browsers include Internet 
Explorer, Safari, Mozilla FireFox, Google Chrome, or Opera.
Now that you have created an outcome and an outcome group, you can add 
outcomes to your outcome groups:
1.	 To add an existing outcome to a newly created outcome group, click and 
hold on the title of the outcome in the list of outcomes and drag the outcome 
over the name of the desired outcome group. You will see a new column 
appear to the right of the list of outcomes that shows the outcome you moved 
nested within the outcome group.
2.	 To move the outcome back, simply click and drag the outcome back over to 
the main list of outcomes.

Chapter 5
[ 157 ]
3.	 To add a new outcome to an outcome group, click on the outcome group 
from the list of outcomes. When the outcome group is selected, click the  
New Outcome button at the top and input the information for the new 
outcome as usual.
4.	 When you click on Save, the outcome will appear within the outcome group 
you selected, as seen in the following screenshot:
Finding existing Outcomes to use
As many institutions across North America and beyond have begun adopting 
national and state standards, Canvas has integrated the Common Core standards for 
English and Mathematics within the Outcomes feature for you to quickly and easily 
import into your Canvas course. The Common Core standards, which have been 
adopted by a large majority of the states in the United States, aim to make clear the 
outcomes desired for students at various grade levels.
To access and import the Common Core standards for use within your courses, 
complete the following steps:
1.	 Click on the Find button on the top menu of the Outcomes page.
2.	 In the pop-up window that appears, you will see an outcome group called 
Common Core State Standards listed on the left-hand side. If you click on 
this group, the English Language Arts and Mathematics outcome groups will 
appear in the column to the right, as displayed in the following screenshot:

Exploring Special Features
[ 158 ]
3.	 Notice that once you click on the Common Core State Standards outcome 
group, the Import button appears in the bottom-right corner of the window. 
You have the option to import everything within that group, or you can click 
through to more specific outcome groups such as specific grade levels of 
English Language Arts or Mathematics.
4.	 If you are an English or Mathematics teacher, it will be most helpful for 
you to click through those outcome groups and find the specific standards 
for your grade level. For example, if you are a 5th grade Math teacher, the 
selection in the following screenshot will allow you to import all of the 
Common Core State Standards for 5th grade Mathematics:
5.	 When you have selected the outcome group or specific outcome you would 
like to utilize in your Canvas course, click on the Import button and the 
selected items will appear in your Outcomes page.
6.	 Once the outcome groups appear on your Outcomes page, you can edit or 
delete the outcome groups the same way you would for an outcome group 
you manually created. It is important to note that you cannot edit the actual 
Common Core outcomes, as they are standardized in their wording and intent.
In addition to the Common Core standards, your specific institution might have 
standards or benchmarks that they have included in Canvas for you to access. Your 
institution's outcomes will appear in the far left of the Find pop-up window in the 
same place you would find the Common Core State Standards outcome group.
With all of our outcomes and outcome groups now created, let's move on to actually 
utilizing the outcomes to create rubrics for the assignments within your Canvas course.

Chapter 5
[ 159 ]
Creating Rubrics and using Outcomes
The rubrics you can create within Canvas display the outcome followed by a grid 
containing the criterion ratings you created to rate students' performances. Using a 
rubric to assess a student's work, you will select the criterion rating that best describes 
the work they completed to meet the desired outcome. Based on the criterion ratings 
you choose and the point values associated with these ratings, Canvas determines the 
student's score based on the point value attained for each outcome.
With that understanding, let's look at how to create rubrics for Canvas assignments. 
Let's begin by creating a rubric within the Outcomes page using the following steps:
1.	 Click on the Manage Rubrics button at the top right of the Outcomes page 
menu, as shown in the following screenshot:
2.	 You will be taken to the Course Rubrics page. If you have not created any 
rubrics, this page will appear blank. On the right-hand side menu of this 
page, click on the Add Rubric button.
3.	 A new rubric template will appear on the Course Rubrics page. You can input 
a title for your rubric and then manually designate criteria and ratings below. 
For reference, the following screenshot shows the blank rubric template, and  
a description of how to manually add criteria and how ratings follow before 
we continue our discussion of using outcomes within the rubric (the phrase 
Some Rubric will appear as the default title of your rubric):
4.	 To change the title of your rubric, click on the textbox where Some rubric 
appears and type in the desired title.

Exploring Special Features
[ 160 ]
5.	 To edit the description of the blank criterion, hover your mouse over the 
criterion box and click on the pencil-shaped edit icon that appears in the 
bottom-right corner of the box. The criterion box will change into a textbox 
where you can edit the description of the criterion. Note that creating a  
new criterion for a rubric is not the same as creating a new outcome; so, any 
new criteria you create will only be useable within the rubric for which they 
were created.
6.	 You can also edit the description by clicking on the view longer description 
link, which will open a pop-up window that allows you to edit the  
criterion description.
7.	 There are two ratings in the default template, Full Marks with 5 points and 
No Marks with 0 points. To edit these ratings, hover your mouse and click 
on the pencil-shaped edit icon that appears in the bottom-right corner of 
the box. In the following screenshot, you can see the edit icon in the bottom 
corner of the Full Marks box:
8.	 To add a new rating, click on the line between the two default ratings. You 
will see a new rating appear with the Rating Description title with 3 points; 
you will need to edit the title to reflect your desired description. You can add 
more ratings in the same fashion by clicking on the lines between ratings.
9.	 To add a new criterion, click on the Add Criterion button underneath the 
description of the first criterion. You will see a new criterion row appear in 
the rubric graph that you can edit and customize.

Chapter 5
[ 161 ]
Now that we have covered how to manually input criteria and ratings into your 
rubric, let's return to our discussion on how to add Outcomes you created to your 
new rubric:
1.	 To include one of the outcomes you've created within your new rubric, click 
on the Find Outcome Criterion link next to the Add Criterion link at the 
bottom of your rubric. This will open a pop-up window that displays the 
outcome groups and outcomes you have already created or imported.
2.	 Locate the outcome you would like to use within your rubric by clicking 
through the outcome groups.
3.	 Click on the desired outcome, then click Import in the bottom-right corner 
of the pop-up window. Once you click on Import, the pop-up window will 
close and the selected outcome will appear within your rubric.
4.	 When you have adjusted all of the content within your rubric to your liking, 
click on the Create Rubric button in the bottom-right corner of the template. 
In the following screenshot, you will see a sample of the new template rubric 
completed with a title, a manually created criterion including an additional 
rating, and an imported outcome criterion:
Note that if you import an outcome into a rubric and then 
edit that outcome within the rubric, the outcome will remain 
unchanged in the outcome bank on the Outcomes page. 
When you import an outcome into a rubric, you are creating 
a copy of the outcome for use within the rubric rather than 
linking directly to the outcome.

Exploring Special Features
[ 162 ]
Adding Rubrics to Assignments
With your first rubric now created, you can now add this rubric to an assignment as 
an assessment tool. To add a rubric to an assignment and use it for grading, complete 
the following steps:
1.	 Click on the Assignments link on the left-hand side menu of your course. 
From the list of assignments, click on the assignment to which you would 
like to add your rubric.
2.	 The selected assignment page will open, and at the bottom of the page, you 
will see a button that reads Add Rubric below the due date information for  
the assignment, as shown in the bottom-left corner of the following screenshot:
3.	 You will see a new rubric template appear below the assignment that  
includes the option to Find a Rubric at the top-right corner, as pictured in  
the following screenshot. You have the option to create a new rubric directly 
from this template, which will appear on the Course Rubrics page once you 
save it. However, if you wish to utilize the rubric you created previously,  
click on Find a Rubric to select the rubric from the list of course rubrics,  
as shown in the top-right corner of the following screenshot. A pop-up 
window will appear that will allow you to locate rubrics you have created 
within the course.

Chapter 5
[ 163 ]
4.	 Once you find the rubric you would like to use for the assignment, select the 
rubric from the list and then click on the Use This Rubric button underneath 
the rubric, as pictured in the bottom-right corner of the following screenshot:
5.	 The pop-up window will close and you will see the rubric appear under 
the assignment description. If you would like to edit the rubric or adjust the 
settings for the rubric within the assignment, click on the pencil-shaped edit 
icon in the top-right corner of the rubric. Note that any changes you make to 
the rubric within the assignment will not adjust the rubric as it appears in the 
Course Rubrics list.

Exploring Special Features
[ 164 ]
6.	 When you choose to edit the rubric from within an assignment, you have 
the option to edit the rubric for that assignment. In addition to the basic 
edit features, three checkbox options appear below the rubric that allow 
you to remove ratings to leave free-form comments for each criterion. These 
boxes also allow you to use the rating points to determine the grade for the 
assignment or to hide the total score for assessment results. Based on how 
you would like to use the rubric within your course and for the chosen 
assignment, you may decide to check any of these options to enable you 
to leave more specific feedback when assessing your students or simplify 
grading with points. Click on Update Rubric when you have selected the 
desired options, as shown in the following screenshot:
If you check the Use this rubric for assignment grading 
option, the rubric will appear in the SpeedGrader when you 
grade the assignment. This is often a goal of creating a rubric 
in the first place, so make sure that you check this box if you 
wish to use the rubric for grading purposes.
Using Rubrics for Assessment
Once you have set up the rubric for the assignment, you can actually use the 
rubric for assessment and grading purposes. To do so, you will need to open the 
SpeedGrader for the assignment:
1.	 Scroll up on the assignment page and click on the SpeedGrader link on the 
right-hand side menu. This will open SpeedGrader and you will be able to 
see a student's submissions for the selected assignment.

Chapter 5
[ 165 ]
2.	 On the right-hand side of SpeedGrader, you will now see an option that  
says View Rubric in the Assessment section at the top, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
3.	 If you click on this button, the rubric will appear in a pop-up window and 
you can offer the student feedback on their submission using the rubric. You 
can click on the options listed under Ratings to assign points, manually assign 
rating point scores for each criterion, or leave comments if you selected the 
free-form comment option.

Exploring Special Features
[ 166 ]
4.	 Click on the Save button at the bottom when you are finished grading with 
the rubric. You will see the completed rubric now appears on the right-hand 
side of the SpeedGrader below the Assessment section. The student will be 
able to see this completed rubric as assignment feedback and gauge how they 
did on the assignment based on the criteria and ratings.
5.	 When you have finished grading the assignment completely, you can click 
through to other submissions using the arrows next to the student's name at 
the top as usual.
6.	 Outcomes and rubrics offer you a wide range of opportunities to clarify and 
standardize expectations while personalizing and specifying feedback for 
each student in your course. As a learning tool, outcomes and rubrics can 
push your students to think differently about how to complete assignments 
for your course and improve students' overall performance.
Another feature of Canvas that can improve overall performance, both for you and 
your students, is the use of outside apps that you can integrate into your course.
Integrating outside apps into your course
Canvas has partnered with a number of online resources to allow you to integrate 
outside applications (abbreviated as apps) into your courses. To view the list of 
available apps, perform the following steps:
1.	 Click on the Settings tab at the bottom of the left-hand side menu on your 
course home page.
2.	 Across the top of the Settings page, you will see tabs for various settings and 
options. The fourth tab, as shown in the following screenshot, is the Apps 
tab—click on it:

Chapter 5
[ 167 ]
3.	 When you open the Apps tab, you will see brief instructions at the top of the 
page with a large list of available apps displayed below, as pictured in the 
following screenshot:
4.	 Take some time to scroll through the available apps to find options that you 
might wish to integrate into your course. If you hover your mouse over the 
icon for an app, a description will appear over the icon that will explain  
what integrating that app will allow you to do. For example, if you use a 
McGraw-Hill textbook in your course, check to see whether the textbook 
has any interactive online resources listed; if it does, you can integrate the 
McGraw-Hill app directly into your course so that your students can take 
advantage of the online resources directly through Canvas. You might wish 
to connect the Khan Academy app to your course to open the door for your 
students to explore the myriad of free learning resources offered by Khan 
Academy. If you know you are going to be using lots of videos during your 
course, consider integrating the YouTube and Vimeo apps to more easily 
access and embed content from these sites into your course. Select the app 
you would like to integrate into your course by clicking on the app icon on 
the main list.

Exploring Special Features
[ 168 ]
5.	 On the app page that opens, click Add Tool underneath the icon and then 
follow any on-screen instructions that appear. Once you have followed all 
the instructions, the app will be integrated into your course. You may need 
to obtain additional information from your institution for certain apps, such 
as apps that require payment or access codes to use. Check in with your 
institution's IT or administrative team to obtain additional information you 
may need for integrating apps.
Installing and integrating the YouTube app
As an example of how to integrate an app into your course, let's walk through the 
steps of installing the YouTube app for your course. Each app will function slightly 
differently after you have installed it into your course, but the following section will 
show you exactly how to install and use the YouTube app as an example.
To install the YouTube app, complete the following steps:
1.	 From the list of available apps, scroll down and find the YouTube app. 
Hover your mouse over the app to see a description of what the app will 
allow you to do. You will see that installing the app will add a YouTube icon 
to your Rich Content Editor that will allow you to search for and embed 
videos from YouTube directly in to Canvas.
2.	 Click on the YouTube app. You will see a page open with more details about 
the YouTube app and what it will allow you to do within Canvas.
3.	 To install the app, click the blue + Add Tool button that appears  
directly below the YouTube logo on the left-hand side, as pictured  
in the following screenshot:

Chapter 5
[ 169 ]
4.	 When you click on the + Add Tool button, the installation will begin 
automatically. You will see a pop-up window appear momentarily with the 
name of the app that will close after Canvas has finished saving the name 
of the app. The app page will display an icon indicating that the installation 
is loading, and then YouTube will appear on your list of installed apps. As 
displayed in the following screenshot, your list will only include one app 
once you have finished installing YouTube:
5.	 When your installation has finished, you will be able to utilize the  
YouTube icon that will appear within the Rich Content Editor when  
you post or edit content including assignments, content pages, discussion 
posts, and announcements. You will also be able to insert YouTube videos 
directly into course modules after integrating the app. To use the app within 
the Rich Content Editor, click on the YouTube icon as highlighted in the 
following screenshot:
6.	 When you click on the YouTube icon in the Rich Content Editor, a pop-up 
window will appear with a search bar that allows you to search for videos on 
YouTube. Type in your search terms and then click on Search.
7.	 From the results that appear, click on the name of the video you would like 
to embed and the pop-up window will close. The selected video will appear 
within the Rich Content Editor textbox and will be playable once you save the 
item you are editing such as a discussion post, assignment, or content page.

Exploring Special Features
[ 170 ]
By utilizing the wide variety of apps available to you for installation and integration 
within your Canvas account, you have the opportunity to create an engaging, 
unique, and transformative learning experience for your students online. With the 
combination of your teaching expertise, clearly articulated outcomes incorporated 
into rubrics, and the integration of cutting-edge apps, you have the tools to increase 
student engagement and achievement. Rather than assuming that this statement is 
true, let's take a look at the tracking tools Canvas has to offer for you to track student 
activity, engagement, and growth.
Using Course Analytics and Course 
Statistics
Canvas allows you to easily view how users are participating within your course, 
when most assignments are being submitted, and how a class is doing as a whole 
based on a combination of individual grades. In addition, Canvas allows you to 
easily view specific elements that make up your course such as the number of items 
within your course or how much file storage space your course takes up. To begin, 
let's check out how to view activity and achievement within your course using the 
Course Analytics feature.
Viewing Course Analytics
To view the course analytics, complete the following steps:
1.	 On the home page of your course, look at the right-hand side menu. Click 
on the View Course Analytics button, which is the fifth option down in the 
following screenshot:

Chapter 5
[ 171 ]
2.	 Once you click on the View Course Analytics button, you will see the 
Course Analytics page. This page contains three main sections that include 
explanations and graphs: Activity, Assignments, and Grades.
As your course progresses while students interact with the course content, submit 
assignments, and receive grades, your course analytics will grow and change to 
indicate the evolution of your course from start to finish. The following screenshot 
offers an example of what your course might look like after two months of use:
The explanations underneath each section heading help you to understand the 
graphs that appear to the right, and the graphs offer visual representation of the 
movement within your course. While the Course Analytics feature allows you to 
track aspects of the interactions with content happening in your course, the Course 
Statistics feature lets you quickly and easily view a breakdown of what makes up 
your course.

Exploring Special Features
[ 172 ]
Viewing Course Statistics
To view Course Statistics for your course, follow these steps:
1.	 Click on the Settings link on the left-hand side menu of your course.
2.	 Once the Settings page is open, look at the right-hand side menu. Click 
on the Course Statistics button, which appears as the second option in the 
following screenshot:
3.	 The Course Statistics page will open and you will be able to view the statistics 
by clicking through the tabs along the top of the page. The Totals tab will 
show you the total number of items within your course. The Assignments 
tab will show you how many assignments of each type you have created and 
how many submissions have been made for each of those assignments. The 
Students tab will show you students who have recently logged in and their 
activity while logged in. The File Storage tab will show you how many files 
you have uploaded to your course and how much storage space those files are 
using up. The following screenshot displays the content of the Totals tab with 
the other tabs visible along the top:
 

Chapter 5
[ 173 ]
As users interact with your course, both the analytics and statistics features of Canvas 
will become more and more useful. You will be able to see what items in your course 
students most frequently utilize, which can help you in adjusting the types of content 
you choose to include in your course and in designing your next course.
Summary
In this chapter, we began by discussing how to navigate and use the Canvas mobile 
app with your mobile devices. The following section covered the Collaborations 
feature of Canvas, including the use of EtherPad and Google Docs. Next, we covered 
the Outcomes feature of Canvas, including how to create individual outcomes as well 
as how to organize those outcomes into outcome groups. We also covered how to 
find and import the Common Core standards for use within your courses. After that, 
we learned how to incorporate outcomes into Rubrics to use as assessment tools for 
grading assignments in your course. Then, we moved on to installing external Apps 
for integration into your course, using the YouTube app as an example. Finally, we 
examined how Course Analytics and Course Statistics can help you monitor activity 
and achievement within your course and improve engagement for the future.
At this point, we have covered all of the basics of Canvas course design. As we move 
into the next chapter, we will cover the options you have to find help with questions 
or problems you might encounter while using Canvas. We will look specifically at 
the range of options found within Canvas as well as help options available to you 
outside of Canvas.


Where to Go for Help
As you work through building and teaching your Canvas course, you are bound 
to run into questions or concerns about your course. In some instances, you might 
encounter error messages, broken links, or other problems within your course. 
Fortunately, Canvas has a vast number of built-in resources that you can utilize to 
help solve your problems. In addition, there are other resources available online or 
through your institution that can help you solve problems and answer questions you 
might encounter. In this chapter, we will discuss a number of options you have, both 
built into Canvas or available elsewhere, to obtain help with Canvas should you run 
into trouble. Topics covered in this chapter include the following:
•	
Searching and using the Canvas Guides
•	
Reporting a problem with Canvas
•	
Obtaining pricing information for the use of Canvas at your institution
•	
Requesting a new feature for Canvas
•	
Finding help from your institution's tech support team
To begin, let's start with the help options Canvas offers from within the site.
Finding help within Canvas
There are two Help links that are visible in most areas of Canvas. The first is in the 
top-right menu of your screen on the far right, as shown in the following screenshot:

Where to Go for Help
[ 176 ]
The second link is on the bottom menu on the far left of your screen, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
These menus are visible on the vast majority of pages within Canvas, with the 
exception of certain pages such as SpeedGrader. The ease of access to support  
within Canvas allows you and your students to troubleshoot and solve your own 
problems quickly and easily. Clicking on either of these links will open the Help 
pop-up window for Canvas, which provides you with the options pictured in the 
following screenshot:
The first option, Search the Canvas Guides, brings you to the hub of Canvas' online 
support resources. Let's begin by exploring the Canvas Guides within the Help 
Center and learning how to find what you need within this support resource.

Chapter 6
[ 177 ]
Exploring the Canvas Guides and  
Community Forums
If you need help with Canvas, you can either browse or search the Canvas Guides, 
or you can ask the Canvas Community for help. To begin, let's examine how to 
browse and search the Canvas Guides for the information you need.
Browsing and searching the Canvas Guides
The Canvas Guides offer you a huge number of user manuals and instructions. 
Compared to other websites, the layout of the Canvas Guides closely resembles  
a Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) format, wherein you are able to browse or 
search for the question or problem you are facing, and then click on the question  
to see the answer. When you click on Search the Canvas Guides in the Help  
pop-up window, you are brought to the Canvas Guides page, pictured in the 
following screenshot, which lists a number of guidance pages that are constantly 
updated by the Canvas operating team.

Where to Go for Help
[ 178 ]
From the main Canvas Guides page, you can search for a question or for the feature 
with which you are having trouble. In addition, you can browse through multiple 
guides within the headings described as follows:
•	
Getting Started with Canvas: This section offers you four guides to view: the 
Getting Started manual, the Canvas Student Quickstart Guide, the Canvas 
Instructor Quickstart Guide, and the Canvas Course Collections. Clicking 
on any of these guides will display a number of further subsections that 
include questions you might encounter and tutorial lessons that you might 
find helpful in mastering the use of Canvas or troubleshooting problems you 
are encountering. This section features a general overview in the first guide, 
and then allows users to view questions that will apply to them based on the 
user role they fulfill within a course. The Canvas Course Collections page 
offers you a number of public Canvas courses that you can view as examples 
of what you can do within Canvas. The Getting Started options are pictured 
in the following screenshot:
•	
Canvas Guides: This section offers you six guides to view: the Canvas Admin 
Guide, the Canvas Instructor Guide, the Canvas Student Guide, the Canvas 
Observer Guide, the Canvas Designer Guide, and the Canvas Video Guide. 
Recall that each user in your Canvas course participates as a specific user 
type—these guides address many of the user types we discussed in Chapter 
3, Getting Ready to Launch Your Course. The guidance for users enrolled as 
a TA can be found within the guide for Designers, and the guide for an 
Administrator (Admin) presents detailed technical information that would be 
helpful for individuals working for an institutional IT department. The Admin 
guide might also be useful to you if you wish to explore some of the advanced 
features of Canvas that are not covered here. You can direct your students 
to the Student guide as a way to help them acclimate to using Canvas. The 
Canvas Video Guide offers you video tutorials for a huge variety of tasks you 
might undertake while using Canvas. These videos are tremendously helpful, 
so take some time to look through the options available to you on this page. 
The Canvas Guides menu is pictured in the following screenshot:

Chapter 6
[ 179 ]
•	
Mobile Guides – Canvas by Instructure: This section offers you manuals for 
help within versions of the Canvas mobile app for Android and iOS phones 
and tablets.
•	
Mobile guides - MagicMarker: This section provides help with the iOS 
MagicMarker tablet app.
•	
Mobile Guides – Polls for Canvas: This section offers you manuals for help 
within versions of the Poll mobile app for Android and iOS phones and tablets.
•	
Mobile Guides – SpeedGrader: This guide provides information and 
support for the SpeedGrader mobile app for iOS tablet devices. The following 
screenshot displays the menus for each of the Mobile Guides menus:

Where to Go for Help
[ 180 ]
As you browse through each of these headings, you will be able to read through 
dozens of up-to-date pages that show you exactly how to accomplish certain tasks, 
complete with step-by-step screenshots and quite often accompanying video 
tutorials. While you have already learned much of the information covered in many 
of the tutorials from the first five chapters of this book, the Canvas Guides serve as 
an easily accessible and constantly updated resource for you as you experiment and 
increase your knowledge of Canvas.
Searching the Canvas Guides
While browsing the Canvas Guides can be very helpful, you also have the option to 
search the Canvas Guides by entering search terms into the search bar on the main 
Canvas Guides page.
To search the Canvas Guides, complete the following steps:
1.	 Open the main Canvas Guides page and click on the Search bar that  
appears above the list of Canvas Guide headings, as indicated in the 
following screenshot:

Chapter 6
[ 181 ]
2.	 Type in your question or search terms, and then click on the Search button as 
shown to the right in the following screenshot:
3.	 You will be taken to the search results page, where you will be able to browse 
through the Canvas Guides topics that might pertain to your question based 
on the words included in your search. You can browse through the search 
results to find the article that will best address your question. The following 
screenshot shows you a results page, indicating that nine articles might 
address the question entered:
4.	 When you find the article that seems to address your question, click on the 
bold title of the article. You will be taken to the article page where you can 
find instructions and guidance to address your question.
The Canvas Guides are an excellent place to find answers to questions that might 
arise as you are creating, designing, or teaching your course. However, you might 
not always be able to find the answer to your question within the existing Canvas 
Guides. If you are unable to locate an answer to a question that arises, you can 
visit the Community Forums and post specific questions that other members of the 
Canvas community can answer.

Where to Go for Help
[ 182 ]
Asking questions in the Community Forums
There are two easy ways to access the Canvas Community Forums, where you can 
browse and search for answers to questions that other users have posed:
1.	 The first link can be found on the top menu of the Canvas Guides page.  
Click on the Canvas Community tab of the top menu, as indicated in the 
following screenshot:
2.	 You will be taken to the Canvas Community page, which displays a number 
of forums that you can browse through. To find the forum in which you can 
ask a question to the community, click on either the Higher Education or 
K12 forum under the list of Community Forums, depending on which forum 
applies to the audience of your course. These forums are shown on the  
right-hand column in the following screenshot:
3.	 You can also access the Community Forums by clicking on the link at the top 
of the right-hand side menu on the Canvas Guides page.

Chapter 6
[ 183 ]
4.	 Look to the right-hand side of the Canvas Guides page. At the top, you  
will see a heading that reads Can't find what you're looking for?. Go  
ahead and click on the first link, Ask the community, as pictured in the 
following screenshot:
5.	 You will be taken to the Ask a Question (Higher Education) forum, where 
you are able to browse and ask questions related to higher education Canvas 
courses. Should you wish to view the K-12 forum, you should click on the 
Canvas Community tab on the top menu and access the forum as described 
in the preceding section.
6.	 Once you have navigated to the appropriate community forum, you can 
search the forum for your question by typing your question into the search 
bar at the top of the page.
7.	 You can also browse questions that have already been asked and answered 
by filtering the questions displayed by Most asked, Recent, Needs Answer, 
or Answered. The following screenshot indicates the search bar and filter 
options you can use to navigate the Community Forums:

Where to Go for Help
[ 184 ]
If you are unable to find your question within the Community Forums, you can 
choose to ask a question and post it to the forums for other users to answer. To post  
a question on the Community Forums, complete the following steps:
1.	 Click on the Ask a Question button on the right-hand side next to the filter 
options, as shown in the bottom-right corner of the following screenshot:
2.	 A page will open that will allow you to ask your question and describe what 
you are encountering. You will notice when you type your question that 
related topics appear below your question that might be able to answer your 
question. If none of the related topics meet your needs, proceed to describe 
what you are encountering in the main textbox. The following screenshot 
offers a sample of a question that could be posted:

Chapter 6
[ 185 ]
3.	 You can format the text of your response using the editing buttons 
underneath the main text box. These options function the same way as the 
options in the Rich Content Editor found elsewhere in Canvas.
4.	 You can also attach a file to your question. You might consider attaching a 
screenshot or another useful file if it will help other users understand what 
you are encountering.
5.	 When you have finished typing your question, click on the Add button  
in the bottom-right corner of the screen. Your question will be added to  
the Community Forums and other users will be able to see and respond  
to your question.
Once your question is posted to the community forum, you will be able to see  
when another Canvas user has posted a reply and the status of your question 
changes to Answered. Depending on your notification settings, you might receive  
an e-mail notifying you that another user has responded to your post. While we're  
in the Community Forums, let's discuss how to respond to questions other users 
have posted.
Responding to questions in the Community Forums
The Community Forums work well when everyone combines their knowledge to 
help one another out in confusing situations, so if you see a question that you know 
how to answer or that reflects one of your own questions, go ahead and help out the 
community by responding to that question.
To respond to a question in the Community Forums, complete the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to the Community Forums in the same way you would to browse 
questions or ask your own question. Select the Needs answer filter to view 
questions that you might be able to answer. This option is underlined in the 
following screenshot:

Where to Go for Help
[ 186 ]
2.	 Once you can see the posted questions that still need answers, locate the 
question that you would like to respond to. Your response might be an 
answer, or you might wish to let Canvas know that you have the same 
question. Click on the bold question title, as highlighted in the following 
screenshot. The question page will open, displaying the question heading at 
the top, the main body of the question below, and any responses that other 
users have posted in the Comments section below the question.
3.	 One of the options you have in the Community Forums is to tell the 
community that you would also like to know the answer to a question; you 
could think of it as clicking on Like on a post on Facebook or clicking on 
Favorite for a tweet on Twitter. Underneath the main body of the question, 
you will see a button that reads Be the first! to indicate that you would also 
like the question answered, as pictured in the following screenshot:
4.	 Alternatively, this option might appear as Me too! if other users have already 
expressed interest in knowing the answer to the question, as pictured in the 
following screenshot. Click on one of these buttons to flag the question and 
let the community know that multiple users have the same question:
5.	 If you would like to post a comment on the question to answer the question, 
share similar feedback, or respond to other users' comments, scroll down on 
the page to the Add a comment textbox underneath the Comments section.
6.	 The Add a comment text box is the same style as the text box we discussed to 
post a question to the Community Forums. You can type your comment into 
the text box, adjust the formatting using the options underneath the text box, 
and attach a file using the button on the  
bottom-left side.

Chapter 6
[ 187 ]
7.	 When your comment is complete, click on the Save Comment button at the 
bottom right and your comment will be posted publicly for other users to see. 
The following screenshot offers you a sample comment response:
The Canvas Guides and the Community Forums offer you a huge wealth of 
knowledge regarding Canvas. By browsing and searching these resources, you will 
most likely be able to figure out how to accomplish certain tasks and find answers 
to questions you encounter. However, you might encounter circumstances where 
Canvas is malfunctioning, or as described in the Help menu, if Canvas misbehaves.
Reporting a problem
While designing, building, or teaching your course, you might run into features that 
are flat out not working. Usually, you will be able to tell if something is not working 
by an error message appearing at the top of your screen or displaying on the page 
you are trying to view. Should you encounter an error message, the message might 
include a link to report the problem. If not, you can tell Canvas about the issue 
through the Help menu. To report a problem, complete the following steps:
1.	 Click on the Help link on the top-right menu or the bottom menu of Canvas.
2.	 From the pop-up Help menu, click on Report a Problem, which appears as 
the second option in the following screenshot:

Where to Go for Help
[ 188 ]
3.	 This will open a dialogue window that allows you to input the subject, 
description, and priority of your problem. You will notice at the top of the 
window that you are submitting a ticket for a personal response from a 
member of the Canvas support team. Also notice that the dialogue window 
includes a link to the Canvas Guides as a reminder to check the Canvas 
Guides and Community Forums first before submitting a ticket. This helps 
reduce redundant help requests, which in turn allows the Canvas support 
team to respond to your problems more quickly. The dialogue window to 
report a problem is pictured in the following screenshot:
4.	 You can enter the subject of your problem, which will offer the support team 
member an instant idea of what you're encountering, and then you can enter 
a detailed description of the problem.
When entering a description, make sure that you include 
each step you went through before encountering the 
problem. For example, if you encounter an error message 
every time you try to view a custom content page, describe 
how you are navigating to the page and exactly what is 
displayed each time you receive the error message.

Chapter 6
[ 189 ]
5.	 Above the Description textbox, you will see a message requesting that you 
include a link for a screencast or screenshot that will show the support team 
member exactly what you're encountering. You can follow the suggested 
link to download the Jing software that will allow you to create a video 
screencast for free. Look ahead to the following section if you would like to 
include a screencast using Jing.
6.	 When you have finished typing the description of your problem, click on the 
drop-down menu underneath the question How is this affecting you? to 
select the priority of your question. From the options that are displayed, you 
will notice the user-friendly language that helps you gauge the importance of 
your problem in order to report it to the Canvas support team. You will see a 
number of options, as shown in the following screenshot:
The options are described in the following bullet points:
°°
Just a casual question, comment, idea, suggestion: Select this option 
if your message refers to something that is not directly impeding 
the building or teaching of your course. This marks your message as 
the lowest priority for an immediate response; however, the Canvas 
support team is generally very prompt in replying to even the lowest 
priority messages.
°°
I need some help but it's not urgent: Select this option if you are 
having a problem with Canvas but it is not directly impeding the 
building or teaching of your course. This marks your message as the 
second lowest priority for an immediate response.
°°
Something's broken but I can work around it for now: Select this 
option if the problem you are encountering needs to be solved in 
the future but is not immediately preventing you from building 
or teaching your course. This marks your message as the middle 
priority for an immediate response.

Where to Go for Help
[ 190 ]
°°
I can't get things done until I hear back from you: Select this option 
if the problem you are encountering is directly impeding you from 
building or teaching your course. This marks your message as the 
second highest priority for an immediate response.
°°
EXTREME CRITICAL EMERGENCY!!: Select this option if the 
problem you are encountering is directly impeding you from 
building or teaching your course and it is having a significant impact 
on the success of the participants in your course. This marks your 
message as the highest priority for an immediate response and 
should be used only in extreme cases.
7.	 After you have entered the subject, description, and selected a priority from 
the How is this affecting you? drop-down menu, click on the Submit Ticket 
button at the bottom of the pop-up window.
8.	 Again, if you would like to create and link to a screencast or screenshot 
using Jing to include in your description of the problem, please refer to the 
following section before submitting your ticket.
9.	 Once you have submitted your help ticket, you will receive a confirmation 
email that it has been received and a member of the support team will follow 
up with you personally to help you resolve the problem.
Creating a screencast using Jing
As mentioned in the preceding section, you can record a screencast or a screenshot 
using Jing. Jing is a program that you can download for free and allows you to 
record a video of your computer screen that shows exactly what your screen 
looks like when you encounter the problem you are reporting. Please note that the 
following installation and usage procedures are described based on their use with 
a Mac and might be slightly different for PC users. Note that the screenshots in this 
section are taken from a Mac computer.
There are a number of screencast and screenshot programs 
available for free and for purchase online. This section only 
discusses Jing as the Canvas-recommended software, but 
you are free to use other programs to record and attach your 
screencasts or screenshots.

Chapter 6
[ 191 ]
To download Jing and create a screencast or screenshot to include in your help ticket, 
complete the following steps.
1.	 Click on the link to Jing that is included in the Report a Problem pop-up 
window, as shown in the following screenshot:
2.	 Make sure that you leave the Report a Problem pop-up window open in 
your browser, as you will return to the window at the end of this process 
where you need to paste the link to your screencast in the description of your 
problem. At this point, open a new tab or window in Canvas in your browser 
so that you can recreate the problem you are encountering when you record 
your screencast. After you have opened the new window of Canvas, return 
to the Report a Problem pop up and click on the link to Jing. You will be 
taken to this website: http://www.techsmith.com/download/jing/.
3.	 On the Jing website, click on the download button that corresponds to the 
operating system you are using.
4.	 Follow the standard installation procedures for your operating system to 
install Jing onto your computer.
5.	 Once Jing is installed, open the program. You will see a video tutorial appear; 
go ahead and take a few minutes to watch the video tutorial to gain a better 
understanding of how Jing works and what you can do with it.
6.	 After you have watched the tutorial video, click on the Get Started button 
under the tutorial video. You will be prompted to create a Jing account by 
entering your contact information and following the onscreen instructions  
to create your account.

Where to Go for Help
[ 192 ]
7.	 When you have successfully created your account, Jing will open. When the 
program is running, you will see a faint yellow circle in the top-right corner 
of your screen. Hover your mouse over the circle to see the three options 
that appear: Capture, History, and More. Click on the Capture option, as 
displayed in the following screenshot:
8.	 When you click on Capture, you will be able to select which part of your 
screen you would like to include in the screen capture.
9.	 To record a screencast or screenshot of the problem you are encountering in 
Canvas, click on your browser window with the Canvas page open that you 
would like to record. You will notice that the outside regions of your screen 
are grayed out and will not be included in the screen capture.
10.	 Once you have selected the capture area, you will see a menu appear with 
four icons that allow you to Capture an Image, Capture a Video, Redo 
Selection, or Cancel your capture.
11.	 To record a screencast, select the second icon, Capture a Video. A window 
will appear asking which microphone you wish to use. If you wish to record 
audio narration as you click through the problem you are encountering and 
recording on your screen, select the microphone you wish to use.
12.	 Once you have selected your audio options, you will see a large countdown 
starting at 3, which appears over the section of your screen that will be 
recorded in the video. When the countdown is finished, your recording will 
begin automatically.

Chapter 6
[ 193 ]
13.	 When the recording starts, you will see a menu appear in the bottom-left 
corner of your screen with five buttons: a Finish icon that looks like a stop 
button, a Pause button, a Mute button to turn off your microphone, a Reset 
button, and a Cancel button. These options are indicated as the Recording 
Menu in the following screenshot:
14.	 As the recording begins, you can navigate through the problem you are 
encountering in Canvas. As you click through each step, narrate your actions 
if you have enabled your microphone. Click on the Mute button if you would 
not like to include narration.

Where to Go for Help
[ 194 ]
15.	 When you have finished recording the issue, click on the Finish button that 
looks like a square. A new menu will appear underneath the preview of 
your recording. Watch your recording to make sure it includes everything 
you would like. If you are finished, enter a name for your video and click on 
the Share via Screencast.com button. You can also Save the video to your 
computer or Cancel the recording. The Share via Screencast.com button is 
visible in the bottom-left corner of the following screenshot:
16.	 Your video will automatically begin to upload to http://screencast.com. 
A notification window will appear once your upload is complete and you can 
follow the link in the window to view your video online, as pictured in the 
following screenshot:
17.	 Once you can see the video in your browser, copy the link to your video from 
the web address bar.
18.	 Return to your Report a Problem pop-up window in Canvas. Paste the link 
to your recording in the Description section of your problem, finish creating 
your help ticket as described in the previous section, and then click on 
Submit Ticket.
Now that we have covered how to Report a Problem, let's take a look at obtaining 
Canvas pricing information for your institution.

Chapter 6
[ 195 ]
Obtaining Canvas pricing information
If you are using the Free for Teachers version of Canvas, chances are that the 
institution you work for has not adopted Canvas as its learning management system. 
As you gain more familiarity with Canvas, you might decide that Canvas would be 
an excellent choice for your institution to adopt. You may or may not see the option 
Canvas Pricing Information on your help menu depending on the way your version 
of Canvas is configured. The following section will guide you through this option if 
it is available to you.
To obtain pricing information about Canvas, complete the following steps:
1.	 Open the Help menu by clicking on the link in the top-right or bottom 
menus, and then select the Canvas Pricing Information option, as pictured 
in the following screenshot. A new tab or window will open in your browser 
that takes you to the Canvas website.
2.	 At the bottom-right corner of your screen, you will see a tab that reads Have 
a question? that stays visible no matter where you scroll on the page. Click 
on this tab.

Where to Go for Help
[ 196 ]
3.	 This tab will expand into a message box that allows you to send a message 
to Canvas, requesting information about the pricing of Canvas for your 
institution. Go ahead and fill in the following information:
°°
Name
°°
E-mail address
°°
Institution or organization
°°
Your title
°°
The subject of your message
°°
The body of your message, explaining your specific situation and the 
nature of the information you would like to receive
°°
Your phone number if you would like to discuss pricing over  
the phone.
4.	 From there, click on the Leave a Message button at the bottom-left corner  
of the tab.
Your message will be sent to Canvas and one of their representatives will be in touch 
with you to answer your questions, either via e-mail, phone, or both. Should your 
institution decide to adopt Canvas as its LMS after you have already created and 
taught a course using your Free for Teachers account, you will be able to roll your 
course over into your new institutional Canvas account. You can do so by following 
the instructions for exporting your course in Chapter 7, Now You're Ready!, and then 
following the instructions to import a course into your new account, as covered in 
Chapter 1, Getting Started with Canvas.
Now that we have covered the Canvas Guides and the Community Forums, how 
to report a problem, and how to obtain pricing information for your institution, let's 
take a look at the last option on the Help menu: Request a Feature.
Requesting a feature
In your use of Canvas, you might come up with an idea for a feature that Canvas 
does not yet offer. As Canvas is an ever-evolving and constantly improving system 
that adapts its technology to the needs of the educators who use it, Canvas takes 
your suggestions very seriously. Before requesting a feature, double-check the 
Canvas Guides and the Community Forums to make sure the feature does not 
already exist. If you confirm that your idea hasn't yet been implemented, go ahead 
and request a new feature.

Chapter 6
[ 197 ]
To request a feature, complete the following steps:
1.	 Open the Help menu by clicking on the link in the top-right or bottom 
menus, and then select the Request a Feature option, as pictured in the 
following screenshot:
2.	 A new tab or window will open in your browser and you will see the 
Community Forums page for new feature suggestions. As mentioned 
previously, make sure that you search the forums for your suggestion before 
adding a new suggestion. If your idea is not already listed or available, click 
on the heading at the top-left section of the list of forums, which reads After 
Searching, Start a New Discussion, as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 On the page that opens, you will see the first discussion listed as Feature 
Discussion Guidelines. Before submitting your request, go ahead and  
read this discussion for specific tips on how to suggest a feature and what 
you can do to increase the likelihood that your feature will be implemented 
in the future.

Where to Go for Help
[ 198 ]
4.	 Once you have read this discussion, return to the main page and click on the 
Request a Feature button on the right-hand side, above the list of existing 
discussions, as shown in the following screenshot:
5.	 On the page that opens, enter the subject of your suggestion, followed by a 
detailed description of the feature you would like to suggest. You will notice 
that when you enter the subject of your suggestion, related topics will appear 
from the Canvas Guides and Community Forums. If none of the suggestions 
match your own, continue by filling in the following description. As with 
the other text boxes you have used within the Canvas Help Center, you can 
adjust the formatting using the menu below the main textbox and you can 
attach a file using the Attach file link in the bottom-left corner, as shown in 
the following screenshot:
6.	 When you have entered all of the details of your suggestion, click on the  
Add button in the bottom-right corner.

Chapter 6
[ 199 ]
After you have submitted your suggestion, other users will be able to see your 
request and personnel from Canvas will file it into the appropriate category on 
the Feature Discussions Categories page. Should your suggestion be chosen for 
implementation, you will most likely receive feedback from a Canvas employee and 
a Planned icon will appear next to the title of your discussion wherever it appears, as 
pictured in the following screenshot:
While your suggestions are very valuable and many user suggestions are later 
implemented, not all suggested features will be chosen for implementation.  
Your suggestion might be set aside for later discussion and can be brought  
back to the forefront if a large number of users express interest in seeing your 
suggestion implemented.
At this point, we have been through each of the options that are available to you 
should you need help with Canvas at any point. Before moving on and addressing 
alternative options to obtain help outside of Canvas, let's close this section with a 
list of important contact information should you need to get in touch with a Canvas 
employee to help solve your Canvas problems or answer your Canvas questions:
•	
Canvas Phone Numbers:
°°
1 (866) 494-1971 for information regarding Canvas
°°
1 (800) 203-6755 for general assistance with Canvas
•	
Canvas Information E-mail Address:
°°
info@instructure.com
•	
Canvas Address:
°°
633 South 300 East, Suite 700, Salt Lake City, UT 84121
Let's now discuss alternative help options from outside of Canvas that you might 
choose to utilize if the problems or questions you encounter cannot be resolved using 
the built-in help options.

Where to Go for Help
[ 200 ]
Finding help outside Canvas
Should you encounter a problem or question that is not addressed in the built-in 
help features of Canvas, the best option to consider is contacting your institution's 
Information Technologies (IT) department. Questions or problems that you might 
choose to direct to your institution's IT department, rather than Canvas directly, 
might include issues related to an institution-specific Internet server or information 
that is automatically imported, such as student rosters, course content, calendar 
events, external applications, or grading tools. There are a number of places where 
you might find the contact information for your institution's IT department, 
including the following:
•	
Your institution's phone or e-mail directory
•	
Your institution's website
•	
Fellow faculty or staff members
Related to the last bullet point, you can also reach out to fellow faculty members, 
staff, or students to ask for help with Canvas. If your institution has recently adopted 
Canvas as its LMS, chances are that other members of your school community have 
encountered similar problems or questions and might be able to help you find the 
answers to your questions.
Summary
In this chapter, we discussed how to find help within Canvas. We discussed how to 
access the Help menu through the link in the top-right or bottom menus. Then, we 
worked our way through each item on the Help menu. We discussed how to search 
the Canvas Guides and the Community Forums to see whether other Canvas users 
have already posed and answered your questions. Next, we walked through how to 
report a problem with Canvas. After that, we explored how to obtain Canvas pricing 
information as well as how to request a feature that you would like to see available 
through Canvas. After reviewing some of the contact information for Canvas that 
you might find useful when looking for an answer to your questions, we closed the 
chapter with a discussion of other places that you might be able to find help outside 
the Canvas website.
In our next and final chapter, you will learn how to export your course content  
for backup and transferring purposes, and we will also explore the ways in  
which Canvas can connect to the trends and requirements of education in the 
twenty-first century.

Now You're Ready!
As we begin our final chapter, let's take some time to learn how to export your course. 
We have explored a wide range of topics, focusing on learning what features Canvas 
offers, how to use those features, and the various options you have in customizing 
your Canvas course. As you finish teaching your course, you will be well served to 
export your course to keep as a backup, to upload and reteach later within Canvas to 
a new group of students, or to import into another LMS. After covering how to export 
your course, we will tie everything we've learned together through a discussion of 
how Canvas can help you and your students achieve educational goals while acquiring 
important 21st century skills. Overall, we will cover the following topics:
•	
Exporting your course from Canvas to your computer
•	
Connecting Canvas to education in the 21st century
Exporting your course
Now that your course is complete, you will want to export the course from Canvas to 
your computer. When you export your course, Canvas compiles all the information 
from your course and allows you to download a single file to your computer. This 
file will contain all of the information for your course, and you can use this file as 
a master template for each time you or your colleagues teach the course. Exporting 
your course is helpful for two main reasons:
•	
It is wise to save a back-up version of your course on a computer. After all 
the hard work you have put into building and teaching your course, it is 
always a good decision to export your course and save it to a computer. If 
you are using a Free for Teachers account, your course will remain intact and 
accessible online until you choose to delete it. However, if you use Canvas 
through your institution, each institution has different procedures and 
policies in place regarding what happens to courses when they are complete. 
Exporting and saving your course will preserve your hard work and protect 
it from any accidental or unintended deletion.

Now You're Ready!
[ 202 ]
•	
Once you have exported your course, you will be able to import your course 
into Canvas at any point in the future. You are also able to import your 
course into other LMSs such as Moodle or BlackBoard. You might wish to 
import your course back into Canvas if your course is removed from your 
institution-specific Canvas account upon completion. You will have a copy 
of the course to import for the next time you are scheduled to teach the 
same course. You might build and teach a course using a Free for Teachers 
account, and then later wish to import that version of the course into an 
institution-specific Canvas account or another LMS.
Exporting your course does not remove the course from Canvas—your course  
will still be accessible on the Canvas site unless it is automatically deleted by  
your institution or if you choose to delete it.
Exporting your course will only export the content of your 
course, not your students' assignment submissions or grades. 
Make sure that you download the grades for your course as 
well as students' individual assignment submissions if you 
wish to keep that information. To review how to download 
the grades or assignment submissions for your course, turn 
back to Chapter 4, Teaching Your Canvas Course.
To export your entire course, complete the following steps:
1.	 Click on the Settings tab at the bottom of the left-hand side menu,  
as pictured in the following screenshot:

Chapter 7
[ 203 ]
2.	 On the Settings page, look to the right-hand side menu. Click on the Export 
Course Content button, which is highlighted in the following screenshot:
3.	 A screen will appear asking you whether you would like to export the Course 
or export a Quiz. To export your entire course, select the Course option and 
then click on Create Export, as shown in the following screenshot:

Now You're Ready!
[ 204 ]
4.	 Once you click on Create Export, a progress bar will appear. As indicated 
in the message below the progress bar, the export might take a while to 
complete, and you can leave the page while Canvas exports the content.  
The following screenshot displays this progress bar and message:
5.	 When the export is complete, you will receive an e-mail from 
notifications@instructure.com that resembles the following  
screenshot. Click on the Click to view exports link in the e-mail:
6.	 A new window or tab will appear in your browser that shows your Content 
Exports. Below the heading of the page, you will see your course export 
listed with a link that reads Click here to download, as pictured in the 
following screenshot. Go ahead and click on the link, and the course export 
file will be downloaded to your computer.
7.	 Your course export file will be downloaded to your computer as a  
single .imscc file. You can then move the downloaded file to a folder  
on your computer's hard drive for later access.

Chapter 7
[ 205 ]
Your course export is complete, and you can save the exported file for later use. To 
access the content stored in the exported .imscc file, you will need to import the file 
back into Canvas or another LMS. To review how to import a course, turn back to 
Chapter 1, Getting Started with Canvas.
Your course export will include any announcements you 
have posted during the duration of your course, so you will 
most likely want to delete these announcements if you will be 
importing the course to use in a future class.
You might notice an option to Conclude this Course on the course Settings page 
if your institution has not hidden or disabled this option. In most cases, it is not 
necessary to conclude your course if you have set the correct course start and end 
dates in your Course Details. Concluding your course prevents you from altering 
grades or accessing course content, and you cannot unconclude your course on your 
own. Some institutions conclude courses automatically, which is why it is always 
best to export your course to preserve your work.
Now that we have covered the last how-to aspects of Canvas, let's close with some 
ways to apply the skills we have learned in this book to contemporary educational 
practices, philosophies, and requirements that you might encounter in your teaching.
Connecting Canvas to education in  
the 21st century
While learning how to use the features of Canvas, it is easy to forget the main 
purpose of Canvas' existence—to better serve your students and you in the process 
of education. In the midst of rapidly evolving technology, students and teachers 
alike require skills that are as adaptable and fluid as the technologies and new ideas 
swirling around them. While the development of various technologies might seem 
daunting, those involved in education in the 21st century have access to new and 
exciting tools that have never before existed. As an educator seeking to refine your 
craft, utilizing tools such as Canvas can help you and your students develop the 
skills that are becoming increasingly necessary to live and thrive in the 21st century. 
As attainment of these skills is indeed proving more and more valuable in recent 
years, many educational systems have begun to require evidence that instructors are 
cognizant of these skills and actively working to ensure that students are reaching 
valuable goals. The final sections of this book will offer some connections and 
examples of assignments that can help you utilize Canvas to meet the expectations  
of teaching in the 21st century.

Now You're Ready!
[ 206 ]
Enacting the Framework for 21st  
Century Learning
As education across the world continues to evolve through time, the development of 
frameworks, methods, and philosophies of teaching have shaped the world of formal 
education. In recent years, one such approach that has gained prominence in the 
United States' education systems is the Framework for 21st Century Learning, which 
was developed over the last decade through the work of the Partnership for 21st 
Century Skills (P21). This partnership between education, business, community, and 
government leaders was founded to help educators provide children in Kindergarten 
through 12th Grade (K-12) with the skills they would need going forward into the 
21st century. Though the focus of P21 is on children in grades K-12, the concepts and 
knowledge articulated in the Framework for 21st Century Learning are valuable for 
learners at all levels, including those in higher education. In the following sections, we 
will apply our knowledge of Canvas to the desired 21st century student outcomes, as 
articulated in the P21 Framework for 21st Century Learning, to brainstorm the ways 
in which Canvas can help prepare your students for the future.
In the following sections, all information and quotations 
regarding the P21 Framework for 21st Century Learning come 
from the P21 Framework Definitions document, which is 
available at http://www.p21.org/storage/documents/
P21_Framework_Definitions.pdf.
Feel free to visit http://www.p21.org to learn more about 
the Partnership for 21st Century Skills and the valuable 
contributions they are making to contemporary education.
Core subjects and 21st century themes
The Framework for 21st Century Learning describes the importance of learning 
certain core subjects including English, reading or language arts, world languages, the 
arts, Mathematics, Economics, Science, Geography, History, Government, and Civics. 
In connecting these core subjects to the use of Canvas, the features of Canvas and the 
tips throughout this book should enable you to successfully teach courses in any of 
these subjects. In tandem with teaching and learning within the core subjects, P21 also 
advocates for schools to "promote understanding of academic content at much higher 
levels by weaving 21st century interdisciplinary themes into core subjects."

Chapter 7
[ 207 ]
The following examples offer insight and ideas for ways in which Canvas can help 
you integrate these interdisciplinary themes into your course. As you read through 
the following suggestions and ideas, think about strategies that you might be able to 
implement into your existing curriculum to enhance its effectiveness and help your 
students engage with the P21 skills:
•	
Global awareness: Since it is accessible from anywhere with an Internet 
connection, Canvas opens the opportunity for a myriad of interactions across 
the globe. Utilizing Canvas as the platform for a purely online course enables 
students from around the world to enroll in your course. As a distance-
learning tool in colleges, universities, or continuing education departments, 
Canvas has the capacity to unite students from anywhere in the world to 
directly interact with one another:
°°
You might utilize the graded discussion feature for students to post a 
reflection about a class reading that considers their personal cultural 
background and how that affects their perception of the content. 
Taking it a step further, you might require students to post a reply 
comment on other students' reflections to further spark discussion, 
collaboration, and cross-cultural connections. As a reminder, it is 
always best to include an overview of online discussion etiquette 
somewhere within your course—you might consider adding a 
"Netiquette" section to your syllabus to maintain focus and a 
professional tone within these discussions.
°°
You might set up a conference through Canvas with an international 
colleague as a guest lecturer for a course in any subject. As a 
prerequisite assignment, you might ask students to prepare 
three questions to ask the guest lecturer to facilitate a real-time 
international discussion within your class.
•	
Financial, economic, business, and entrepreneurial literacy: As the world 
becomes increasingly digitized, accessing and incorporating current content 
from the Web is a great way to incorporate financial, economic, business, and 
entrepreneurial literacy into your course:
°°
In a Math course, you might consider creating a course module 
centered around the stock market. Within the module, you 
could build custom content pages offering direct instruction and 
introductions to specific topics. You could upload course readings 
and embed videos of interviews with experts with the YouTube app. 
You could link to live steam websites of the movement of the markets 
and create quizzes to assess students' understanding.

Now You're Ready!
[ 208 ]
•	
Civic literacy: In fostering students' understanding of their role within their 
communities, Canvas can serve as a conduit of information regarding civic 
responsibilities, procedures, and actions:
°°
You might create a discussion assignment in which students search 
the Internet for a news article about a current event and post a 
reflection with connections to other content covered in the course. 
Offering guidance in your instructions to address how local and 
national citizenship impacts students' engagement with the event 
or incident could deepen the nature of responses you receive. Since 
discussion posts are visible to all participants in your course, a 
follow-up assignment might be for students to read one of the articles 
posted by another student and critique or respond to their reflection.
•	
Health literacy: Canvas can allow you to facilitate the exploration of health 
and wellness through the wide array of submission options for assignments. 
By utilizing the variety of assignment types you can create within Canvas, 
students are able to explore course content in new and meaningful ways:
°°
In a studio art class, you can create an out-of-class assignment to be 
submitted to Canvas in which students research the history, nature, 
and benefits of art therapy online and then create and upload a video 
sharing their personal relationship with art and connecting it to what 
they have found in the art therapy stories of others.
•	
Environmental literacy: As a cloud-based LMS, Canvas allows you to share 
files and course content with your students while maintaining and fostering 
an awareness of environmental sustainability:
°°
In any course you teach that involves readings uploaded to 
Canvas, encourage your students to download the readings to 
their computers or mobile devices rather than printing the content 
onto paper. Downloading documents to read on a device instead 
of printing them saves paper, reduces waste, and helps foster 
sustainable environmental habits. For PDF files embedded into 
content pages on Canvas, students can click on the preview icon that 
appears next to the document link and read the file directly on the 
content page without downloading or printing anything. Make a 
conscious effort to mention or address the environmental impacts of 
online learning versus traditional classroom settings, perhaps during 
a synchronous class conference or on a discussion board.

Chapter 7
[ 209 ]
Learning and innovation skills
A number of specific elements combined can enable students to develop learning 
and innovation skills to prepare them for the increasingly "complex life and work 
environments in the 21st century." The communication setup of Canvas allows for 
quick and direct interactions while offering students the opportunity to contemplate 
and revise their contributions before posting to the course, submitting an assignment, 
or interacting with other students. This flexibility, combined with the ways in which 
you design your assignments, can help incorporate the following elements into your 
course to ensure the development of learning and innovation skills:
•	
Creativity and innovation: There are many ways in which the features of 
Canvas can help your students develop their creativity and innovation. As 
you build your course, finding ways for students to think creatively, work 
creatively with others, and implement innovations can guide the creation of 
your course assignments:
°°
You might consider assigning groups of students to assemble a content 
page within Canvas dedicated to a chosen or assigned topic. Do so by 
creating a content page, and then enable any user within the course to 
edit the page. Allowing students to experiment with the capabilities of 
the Rich Content Editor, embedding outside content and synthesizing 
ideas within Canvas allows each group's creativity to shine.
°°
As a follow-up assignment, you might choose to have students transfer 
the content of their content page to a public website or blog using 
sites such as Wikispaces, Wix, or Weebly. Once the sites are created, 
students can post their group site to a Canvas discussion page, where 
other students can view and interact with the work of their peers. 
Asking students to disseminate the class sites to friends or family 
around the globe could create international connections stemming 
from the creativity and innovation of your students' web content.
•	
Critical thinking and problem solving: As your students learn to overcome 
obstacles and find multiple solutions to complex problems, Canvas offers 
a place for students to work together to develop their critical thinking and 
problem-solving skills:
°°
Assign pairs of students to debate and posit solutions to a global issue 
that connects to topics within your course. Ask students to use the 
Conversations feature of Canvas to debate the issue privately, finding 
supporting evidence in various forms from around the Internet. Using 
the Collaborations feature, ask each pair of students to assemble 
and submit a final e-report on the topic, presenting the various 
solutions they came up with as well as supporting evidence in various 
electronic forms such as articles, videos, news clips, and websites.

Now You're Ready!
[ 210 ]
•	
Communication and collaboration: With the seemingly impersonal nature 
of electronic communication, communication skills are incredibly important 
to maintain intended meanings across multiple means of communication. 
As the nature of online collaboration and communication poses challenges 
for understanding, connotation, and meaning, honing communication skills 
becomes increasingly important:
°°
As a follow-up assignment to the preceding debate suggestion, use 
the conferences tool in Canvas to set up a full class debate. During 
the debate, ask each pair of students to present their final e-report 
to the class, followed by a group discussion of each pair's findings, 
solutions, and conclusions. You might find it useful for each pair to 
explain their process and describe the challenges and/or benefits 
of collaborating and communicating via the Internet in contrast to 
collaborating and communicating in person.
Information, media, and technology skills
The rapid growth of electronic technology and the ubiquitous influence of the 
Internet on life in the 21st century has not gone unnoticed in the realm of education. 
Many administrators expect teachers of all levels to stay up-to-date on the most 
current technologies and trends that can increase student engagement, and thus, 
student achievement. As shown in the following examples, ways to exercise 
information, media, and technology skills for your students are abundant when 
using Canvas:
•	
Information literacy: The ease with which anyone in the entire world can 
post and circulate information on the Internet is greater than ever before. As 
such, students need to be able to judge the quality, accuracy, and validity of 
the information they encounter:
°°
Set up a discussion assignment in which students are required to post 
an article related to an assigned topic. Before posting the article they 
find, students must check other students' posts to make sure no one 
else has posted the same article. Once all of the different articles are 
posted, require students to pick two articles posted by other students. 
For each chosen article, ask students to post a critique of the quality, 
accuracy, and validity of each article and its source.

Chapter 7
[ 211 ]
•	
Media literacy: Information can be confounded as it passes through various 
forms of media before reaching the general public. Canvas Apps connect  
to a variety of media outlets and sources, so utilizing Canvas Apps to 
compare and contrast information via various forms of media can refine  
your students' perception:
°°
Enable the Wikipedia, New York Times, and USA Today apps for 
your course. Create an assignment, and then within the description 
for that assignment, search for and embed articles that present 
information on the same topic or event from Wikipedia, the New 
York Times, and USA Today. Following these embedded articles, 
instruct students to compare and contrast the information from each 
media outlet and submit a written, video, or audio response sharing 
their findings.
•	
Information, Communications, and Technology (ICT) literacy: The mere 
act of using Canvas immediately begins to hone students' ICT literacy, as 
using Canvas requires the development and use of basic ICT skills. By using 
Canvas, students are processing information from a variety of sources, 
building an understanding of modern communication and exercising their 
knowledge of computers and mobile devices to execute complex tasks:
°°
At the beginning of any course you teach, ask students to pay close 
attention to all of the steps required to access, configure, and begin 
using Canvas. Once all of the students are successfully enrolled 
in your course, ask them to reflect on all of the skills they used to 
begin using Canvas. You might choose to create a discussion or an 
assignment where students can submit their reflections, and you 
can give students the option to submit their reflections in a written, 
video, or audio format (each of which requires varied and unique  
ICT skills).

Now You're Ready!
[ 212 ]
Life and career skills
It seems that in the whirlwind of education, teachers try frantically to cover as much 
content as possible while other imperative life skills are thrown to the wayside. In 
working to educate your students, keeping in mind the goal of helping them develop 
as well-rounded, whole individuals is incredibly important. Not only are life and 
career skills important for students' individual happiness and well-being, these skills 
are invaluable as your students seek to build relationships, achieve personal goals, 
and realize a desirable, fulfilling future. Keeping in mind the seemingly impersonal 
nature of online communication, it is important to consciously integrate these skills 
into the courses you create using Canvas. Fortunately, the array of features within 
Canvas makes this an attainable goal that can often develop organically as you 
design and create assignments:
•	
Flexibility and adaptability: As mentioned earlier, students and teachers  
in the 21st century need skills that are as flexible and adaptable as the  
ever-changing technology around them. Canvas frequently updates and adds 
to the current features, so simply using Canvas over an extended period of 
time can help both students and teachers learn to be flexible and adapt to 
new situations:
°°
Within the time constraints of your course, there are bound to be 
some necessary adjustments. Using the course calendar and the 
conversations tools, communicating changes and adaptations within 
your course can help students become flexible learners. Explicitly 
mentioning the value of being able to adapt can help students 
conceptualize these skills in a more concrete way. Canvas also offers 
some built-in notification features that help students prepare for 
adjustments, such as the Notify users that this content has changed 
checkbox (pictured in the following screenshot) when editing an 
assignment. Checking this box makes it easy to let users know when 
you have updated or altered the expectations for an assignment, 
which requires flexibility and adaptability on the part of the student:

Chapter 7
[ 213 ]
•	
Initiative and self-direction: In today's school and work environments, 
learning to be a self-guided learner who takes the initiative to gain 
knowledge and solve problems is an incredibly valuable skill. The expanse of 
the World Wide Web is at your disposal as an instructor using Canvas, and 
helping your students realize that that expanse is also open to them can help 
guide them to take the initiative and direct their own learning:
°°
Create an assignment that purposely forces your students to take a 
leap into the unknown. You might choose to introduce a challenging 
new topic that they have not encountered before, pose a question 
or problem that requires knowledge not yet covered in the course, 
or utilize an external tool that requires procedural skills only found 
elsewhere online. Carefully explain that you expect students to 
search the Web to find the information they need to complete the 
assignment, and that their success with the assignment depends on 
the quality and content of the resources they find. While education 
typically follows a scaffolded approach where new knowledge builds 
on previous knowledge, an occasional foray into the unknown is an 
excellent exercise to develop students' initiative and self-direction.
°°
Encourage students to explore the huge array of open online courses at 
http://www.canvas.net, which hosts Canvas' Massive Open Online 
Course (MOOC) options that are free and open for anyone around the 
world to take. Like other MOOCs available online, the open courses 
on the Canvas Network allow students to explore topics of interest on 
their own by enrolling in other online courses free of charge.
•	
Social and cross-cultural skills: Fostering empathy and understanding 
between your students often pervades the beginning of any class you 
teach. Setting the tone of your course from the very beginning is incredibly 
important to help your students learn in a comfortable, safe, and supportive 
environment. Teachers in traditional classroom settings often cover these 
expectations during the first few classes, and you can cover these same ideas 
within your Canvas course as well:
°°
Within your course syllabus description, the home page description of 
your course, or each assignment description, clearly communicate the 
social and cross-cultural skills you expect to see your students display 
during the course. Reminding students to consider how others in the 
class might perceive their comments on discussion boards, during 
conferences, or within private messages can help develop the skills 
and frame of mind necessary to flourish in a social environment. As 
mentioned previously, consider adding a Netiquette section to your 
syllabus to articulate the positive, productive online communication 
skills you expect to see students utilize during your course.

Now You're Ready!
[ 214 ]
•	
Productivity and accountability: Traditional live classes often meet many 
times a week, and as your students attend each class, they are reminded of 
the work they are expected to complete for each meeting. Courses within 
Canvas that do not have a live component force students to manage their 
time independently as they complete their work outside of a traditional 
classroom setting. Students are expected to complete and submit their work 
in a timely fashion without the reminders they receive by attending a live 
class multiple times a week:
°°
While it is always a good idea to post announcements and send 
out reminders in conversations a day or two before assignments 
are due in the beginning of your course, let students know that 
as your course progresses, they will be responsible for managing 
their own productivity and you will hold them accountable for 
their performance throughout the course. Keep in mind the age 
group with which you are working, and maintain realistic, age-
appropriate expectations throughout your course. When students 
are first learning how to use Canvas and getting used to your 
expectations within the online learning platform, you might consider 
some leniency with late submissions, but coupled with feedback 
communicating your expectations for timely submissions in the 
future. It is important to help your students succeed, but it is valuable 
to get students on the right track initially and then let them monitor 
themselves for the rest of your time together. The communication 
features of Canvas allow you to do this on an individual basis or for 
the entire group, so take advantage of these features to ensure your 
students' success.
•	
Leadership and responsibility: When designing your assignments and 
activities, it is important to find ways for your students to hone their 
leadership skills and to demonstrate responsibility within Canvas. Think of 
ways to explore the individual and community aspects of your course to help 
students develop these valuable skills:

Chapter 7
[ 215 ]
°°
Organize participants in your course into user groups or create group 
assignments. Over the course of multiple group assignments or group 
activities, ask one student from each group to be the "group leader". 
Using the conversation and collaborations features of Canvas, have 
the groups work together to accomplish the assignment or activity. Set 
up a discussion board or conference where each group leader presents 
the work for the entire group. Over the duration of your course, make 
sure that each student in the class serves as the group leader at least 
once. You might also consider creating a follow-up assignment for the 
group leader in which each student reflects on the specific challenges 
and successes they encountered while being the group leader. The 
directions for the reflection might ask students to discuss how their 
experience as the group leader contributed to their leadership skills 
and sense of personal or group responsibility.
The Framework for 21st Century Learning offers a wide array of concepts, skills, 
and attributes that are valuable for students to attain during the course of their 
education. The suggested activities in the preceding section offer just a small sample 
of ideas that you might be able to implement within your courses to help your 
students develop these important skills. As you work to help your students excel in 
the content area of your course and develop useful life skills, consider how modeling 
behavior in a live classroom can be one of the most powerful tools in a teacher's set 
of resources. Transfer this idea to teaching with Canvas; as you strive to master the 
technology of Canvas and as you interact with your students, think about how you 
are demonstrating and modeling the skills you would like to see in your students. 
Consider how your electronic communication reflects on your overall communication 
skills; do you seem like a different person online than you do in person? How does 
your leadership style relate to the traits you would like to see develop in your 
students? Do your assignments reflect the creative and unique nature of the responses 
you hope to receive from your students? The list goes on and on, so as you continue 
to improve your teaching, try to demonstrate the attitudes and behaviors you would 
want your students to exhibit in class, whether that class is a fully live class, a hybrid 
live course with online expectations, or a fully online experience.

Now You're Ready!
[ 216 ]
Summary
In this chapter, we brought our work to a close. We began with the final step-by-step 
element of this book as we learned how to export your course. Next, we worked to 
apply the technical knowledge we have gained to practical educational resources 
that you are likely to encounter as an educator. We covered each of the four 21st 
Century Student Outcomes as articulated in the P21 Framework for 21st Century 
Learning in detail, discussing the importance of each outcome and offering concrete 
examples of ways you might use Canvas to help students achieve these outcomes.
At the close of this book, it is important to keep in mind the reason that Canvas 
exists: education. Everything we have discussed in the last seven chapters should 
help you in your quest to becoming a better, more effective teacher. Through Canvas, 
you can help your students engage with course content and help empower them 
to take ownership of their learning. It is important to remember that Canvas is an 
educational tool, and you have the opportunity and responsibility to use it to better 
the quality of your students' lives. With the skills you have gained, you can now 
work to create exciting, engaging, and unique learning experiences for you and your 
students using Canvas.
The final chapter, Appendix, References and Resources, will provide you with a 
number of valuable resources that you might find helpful in your current and future 
work with Canvas, online course design, general online learning, and practical 
applications of educational philosophy.

References and Resources
The following sections offer information on materials referenced throughout this 
book and other resources that you might find helpful as you learn and grow as an 
online educator. While many of these resources do not mention Canvas specifically, 
they reference broader topics related to teaching and learning in the 21st century, 
designing online learning environments, and conceptualizing online education. The 
description of each resource in the following sections includes connections to Canvas 
that you might find helpful as you explore online education through Canvas.
As a reminder, you can always find help with Canvas within 
the Canvas Guides and Community Forums, as discussed in 
Chapter 6, Where to Go for Help. You can find these resources at 
http://guides.canvas.com should you need assistance 
with Canvas directly.
Teaching and learning in the 21st century
As discussed in Chapter 7, Now You're Ready!, Canvas offers a wide array of features 
that allow you to address contemporary trends in education. The resources and 
books described in the following sections will provide you with more specific 
information about current best practices in teaching and learning.
Partnership for 21st Century Skills
•	
Authors: Partnership between educational leaders from 19 states in the US 
and 26 organizations.
•	
Website: http://www.p21.org.

References and Resources
[ 218 ]
•	
Description: Partnership for 21st Century Skills (P21) provides valuable 
information regarding skills gleaned from educational experiences that will 
enhance the lives of learners in the 21st century. These skills go beyond 
traditional behaviorist goals to include more complex thought processes 
by making connections, synthesizing information, and thinking critically. 
The P21 Framework for 21st Century Learning has been adopted as a 
contemporary best practice in education throughout the United States with 
worldwide implications. The details of the P21 skills and framework are 
freely available online at the P21 website.
•	
Connections to Canvas: Chapter 7, Now You're Ready!, includes a detailed 
discussion of the ways in which Canvas can help you connect to and address 
a wide variety of 21st century skills in a live, online, or hybrid course. 
Familiarizing yourself with these skills can inform you about the ways  
in which you might choose to utilize Canvas to enhance your students' 
learning experience.
•	
Further Reading: A number of publications address the P21 skills and 
framework, including 21st Century Skills: Learning for Life in Our Times by 
Bernie Trilling and Charles Fadel, published by Jossey-Bass.
Understanding by Design
•	
Authors: Grant Wiggins and Jay McTighe
•	
ISBN: 978-0131950849
•	
Publisher: Pearson (Expanded 2nd Edition)
•	
Description: Understanding by Design presents ways to conceptualize 
curriculum design to ensure lasting student understanding. Addressing 
the contemporary push for standards-based education, components of 
Understanding by Design such as Backwards Design, the Six Facets of 
Understanding, Essential Questions, and Teaching for Understanding offer 
ways to ensure that your students are able to fully understand and utilize 
content to meet the educational standards of your country, district, or 
institution. A number of resources related to Understanding by Design are 
available online for free in addition to a wide range of publications available 
for purchase in printed format.

Appendix
[ 219 ]
•	
Connections to Canvas: As you work to design your Canvas courses, 
referring to the concepts and techniques articulated in the Understanding by 
Design literature can help you ensure that your course design, assessments, 
and outcomes are all aligned with one another to ensure maximum student 
understanding and retention of information. The Outcomes feature of 
Canvas offers you a unique way to directly incorporate the standards of your 
country, district, or institution into your course, and incorporating strategies 
of Understanding by Design can further aid you in helping your students 
attain these outcomes.
Creating Significant Learning Experiences: An Integrated Approach to Designing 
College Courses
•	
Author: L. Dee Fink
•	
ISBN: 978-1118124253
•	
Publisher: Jossey-Bass (Revised and Updated)
•	
Website: http://www.deefinkandassociates.com
•	
Description: Considering the tremendous changes, developments, and 
advances within higher education in recent decades, this book offers you 
insight into new research on learning in higher education as well as research 
regarding Fink's popular instructional design model used in colleges and 
universities around the world. This revised edition presents examples of 
Fink's model from online education, explores how student engagement 
impacts student learning, and suggests strategies for addressing resistance 
from students to innovative teaching strategies within higher education.
•	
Connections to Canvas: Though the trend of online learning has begun to 
spread to institutions serving students of younger ages, online learning started 
and has remained prominent within higher education. Fink's instructional 
design model offers guidance for instructors of college-aged learners and 
integrates current research to support best practices in instructional design. 
This book can offer context, guidance, and scholarly grounding for you  
as you work to build and teach your Canvas course within a higher  
education environment.

References and Resources
[ 220 ]
Designing online learning environments
In the following section, you will find a number of resources that offer specific 
strategies for designing and developing cooperative, productive, and meaningful 
online learning communities in which you and your students can engage with 
one another as well as the content of your course. These resources include general 
strategies that might be implemented across any number of LMSs, or they might 
include techniques specific to one LMS. By comparing the ways in which you might 
use Canvas to strategies that other educators have used with alternate LMSs, you can 
expand your understanding of the possibilities of online learning and find unique 
ways to enhance your Canvas courses.
How to Design and Teach a Hybrid Course: Achieving Student-Centered Learning 
through Blended Classroom, Online and Experiential Activities
•	
Author: Jay Caulfield
•	
ISBN: 978-1579224233
•	
Publisher: Stylus Publishing
•	
Description: Exploring the educational philosophy and theories behind hybrid 
courses as well as the actual design and implementation of such courses, 
this book explores the ways in which combining live and online components 
in a course can impact student achievement and understanding. Hybrid 
courses allow instructors and students to take advantage of the best aspects 
of traditional and online learning environments, and this book offers you 
techniques to ensure a meaningful educational experience for all involved.
•	
Connections to Canvas: Hybrid courses have been a topic of discussion 
throughout this book, and many of the chapters have addressed ways 
in which you can utilize Canvas within a hybrid teaching situation. You 
can directly implement the concepts covered in How to Design and Teach a 
Hybrid Course: Achieving Student-Centered Learning through Blended Classroom, 
Online and Experiential Activities into your Canvas course in order to foster 
collaboration, student-guided learning, and ownership of material through 
both contemporary and traditional best practices.
Discussion-Based Online Teaching To Enhance Student Learning: Theory, Practice 
and Assessment
•	
Author: Tisha Bender
•	
ISBN 13: 978-1579227470
•	
Publisher: Stylus Publishing

Appendix
[ 221 ]
•	
Description: Discussion-based activities are a powerful means of engaging 
online learners and creating opportunities for interacting with content in 
meaningful ways. This book looks into the distinction between "digital 
natives", the generation of students and teachers who have grown up 
surrounded by technology, and "digital immigrants", the generation of 
teachers and students during whose lifetime current technologies have 
developed. Included in this resource are a myriad of ways in which teachers 
might be able to design online course activities to more effectively encourage 
cooperation through discussion-based collaboration.
•	
Connections to Canvas: Canvas offers you numerous outlets for 
collaboration and cooperation through discussion-based activities such as 
the Discussions, Collaborations, Conversations, and Conferences features. 
Applying the philosophical considerations and instructional strategies 
within this resource to your Canvas course can increase the quality and 
sophistication of discussion-based elements in your course.
The Gamification of Learning and Instruction: Game-based Methods and 
Strategies for Training and Education
•	
Author: Karl M. Kapp
•	
ISBN: 978-1118096345
•	
Publisher: John Wiley & Sons
•	
Description: This book offers an exciting look into the process of Gamification, 
or reframing learning through the lens of a game. As a means of increasing 
engagement with content, designing learning experiences as games offers the 
potential to help students apply and retain the knowledge they gain as they 
work through information embedded in various game concepts.
•	
Connections to Canvas: The layout options and customizable features 
of Canvas make it an excellent platform for gamified learning. Within 
sequential modules that only unlock once students complete certain 
activities, you can build custom content pages full of embedded content 
and incorporate them into outside resources that could function as levels 
or worlds of a game. As we have focused so much on the importance 
of sequence, structure, and scaffolding in choosing your course design, 
considering a gamified version of your course could offer your students 
unique and lasting interactions with the content of your course.
Blackboard Essentials for Teachers
•	
Author: William Rice
•	
ISBN: 978-1849692922
•	
Publisher: Packt Publishing

References and Resources
[ 222 ]
•	
Description: Taking a look at the specifics of the Blackboard LMS, this book 
offers an in-depth insight into how to use the Blackboard system to design 
and teach courses. Exploring the full features offered through Blackboard, 
this book walks you through the steps of building and teaching a course.
•	
Connections to Canvas: Blackboard is another very popular LMS that many 
schools around the world use to host course content. Exploring the options 
available through other LMSs and seeing the types of content and activities 
demonstrated in Blackboard Essentials for Teachers, you can further your 
understanding of how you might adapt and improve your course design 
within Canvas. With the wide array of tools and features available through 
Canvas, exploring options available through other LMSs can offer you new 
ideas for your own courses.
•	
Further Reading: If you would like more insight into what the  
behind-the-scenes management of an LMS looks like for an institution, 
consider checking out Blackboard Learn Administration, which explores the 
administrative side of managing the Blackboard LMS:
°°
Author: Terry Patterson
°°
ISBN: 978-1849693066
°°
Publisher: Packt Publishing
Conceptualizing online education
As time moves forward, advancements in education, technology, and culture 
pose challenges regarding relevancy for teachers and learners. We struggle with 
determining what information is the most valuable for the coming generations to 
know and finding the best means of sharing that information with those generations. 
Online and distance learning are relatively new concepts in the world of education, 
and finding a balance between traditional approaches and contemporary practices 
can be challenging. Many educators, authors, and policy makers have worked to 
address these challenges for teachers by illuminating the immense opportunities 
available through new technologies, philosophies, and strategies. Finding ways 
to conceptualize online learning within the historical context of education and the 
advancements of the modern era is vital to ensure relevant, meaningful education for 
our students. The following resources offer excellent ways to understand, frame, and 
reframe online learning within the context of traditional and contemporary education.
Building Online Learning Communities: Effective Strategies for the  
Virtual Classroom
•	
Authors: Rena M. Palloff and Keith Pratt
•	
ISBN: 978-0787988258

Appendix
[ 223 ]
•	
Publisher: Jossey-Bass (Second Edition)
•	
Description: Offering many real-life examples from successful online courses, 
this book examines the ways in which instructors can foster a sense of 
community among students in an online environment. Considerations include 
the engagement of learners not only with content, but with one another, as well 
as how to encourage self-guided learning and motivation among students.
•	
Connections to Canvas: As online learning becomes increasingly ubiquitous 
in higher education, one of the chief fears and criticisms is the impersonal 
nature of early online learning platforms. Focusing on establishing a 
personal, "real" presence in your virtual classroom can be achieved through 
a number of features offered in Canvas such as announcements, discussions, 
conferences, and conversations. Finding ways to build a unified group of 
learners who can collaborate with and rely upon one another is sure to 
improve your students' achievement and overall success in your course.
Essentials of Online Course Design: A Standards-Based Guide
•	
Authors: Marjorie Val and Kristen Sosulski
•	
ISBN: 978-0415873000
•	
Publisher: Routledge
•	
Website: http://essentialsofonlinecoursedesign.blogspot.com
•	
Description: Presenting a methodical, standards-based approach for 
designing and building online courses, this book focuses on the pedagogical, 
organizational, and visual elements of course design that will ensure ease 
of use for both instructors and teachers. To help users avoid confusion and 
disengagement with content, following the steps in this guide will help 
instructors design courses that present information clearly and logically to 
promote maximum engagement and achievement.
•	
Connections to Canvas: Making sure your students feel comfortable 
and at ease with their online learning experience is key in helping them 
understand the content and obtain desired outcomes. With the flexibility and 
customizations inherent in Canvas as an LMS, you are able to present only the 
most pertinent, valuable information and features, while hiding unnecessary 
or confusing tools. You are able to control the left-hand side menu items that 
students see, and you can choose from a wide range of layout designs that 
make it clear and simple for your students to participate in the course. The 
ideas within Essentials of Online Course Design: A Standards-Based Guide can 
help you on your journey to creating an intuitive, clear, concise, and robust 
online learning experience.

References and Resources
[ 224 ]
Best Practices for Teaching with Emerging Technologies
•	
Author: Michelle Pacansky-Brock
•	
Series: Best Practices in Online Teaching and Learning
•	
ISBN: 978-0415899390
•	
Publisher: Routledge
•	
Description: With the vast array of social media and Internet resources at the 
disposal of educators utilizing online technologies, finding ways to integrate 
web-based tools into educational settings while maintaining student privacy 
is an important goal for contemporary educators. Exploring social media, 
web-based tools, and mobile device options, this book presents valuable tools 
at a variety of prices for educators teaching in live, hybrid, or online settings.
•	
Connections to Canvas: Connecting your Canvas account to your social 
media accounts, integrating apps into your Canvas course, and encouraging 
students to use the Canvas mobile app are just some of the ways in which 
you can connect to the students in your Canvas course. Considering the ideas 
and concepts included in Best Practices for Teaching with Emerging Technologies 
can further your understanding of ways in which you might connect with 
your students and help them integrate participation in your course into their 
digital lives.
Online Teaching and Learning Series Books
The Online Teaching and Learning (OTL) series from Jossey-Bass covers a tremendous 
range of topics regarding online learning experiences. Books in this series include 
step-by-step guides as well as explorations of topics including student engagement, 
assessment, collaboration, and inclusion.
The following books from the OTL series will prove valuable additions to your 
collection of resources, and each connects to topics directly covered in our 
exploration of Canvas as a platform for online course content:
•	
Conquering the Content: A Step-by-Step Guide to Online Course Design
°°
Author: Robin M. Smith
°°
ISBN: 978-0787994426
•	
Engaging the Online Learner: Activities and Resources for Creative 
Instruction, Updated Edition
°°
Authors: Rita-Marie Conrad and J. Ana Donaldson
°°
ISBN: 978-1118018194

Appendix
[ 225 ]
•	
Learning Online with Games, Simulations, and Virtual Worlds: Strategies 
for Online Instruction
°°
Author: Clark Aldrich
°°
ISBN: 978-0470438343
•	
Assessing the Online Learner: Resources and Strategies for Faculty
°°
Authors: Rena M. Palloff and Keith Pratt
°°
ISBN: 978-0470283868
•	
Using Wikis for Online Collaboration: The Power of the Read-Write Web
°°
Authors: James A. West and Margaret L. West
°°
ISBN: 978-0470343333
•	
Collaborating Online: Learning Together in Community
°°
Authors: Rena M. Palloff and Keith Pratt
°°
ISBN: 978-0787976149
•	
Making Online Teaching Accessible: Inclusive Course Design for Students 
with Disabilities
°°
Author: Norman Coombs
°°
ISBN: 978-0470499047
Other online course design resources
In addition to the resources listed previously, there are many more resources 
available online that deal with designing online courses, ensuring the high quality of 
online learning opportunities, and utilizing best practices. The following list includes 
further resources that you may find helpful, but feel free to explore the Web for your 
own resources as you work to improve your approach to online education.
The Blended Learning Toolkit
•	
Prepared by: University of Central Florida (UCF) and American Association 
of State Colleges and Universities (AASCU)
•	
Website: http://blended.online.ucf.edu
The 5 Pillars – Sloan-C Quality Framework
•	
Prepared by: Online Learning Consortium (formerly the Sloan Consortium)
•	
Website: http://onlinelearningconsortium.org/5pillars

References and Resources
[ 226 ]
Quality Matters: A National Benchmark for Online Course Design
•	
Prepared by: MarylandOnline
•	
Website: http://www.qualitymatters.org
Quality Course Framework: A Framework for Developing Quality  
Course Environments
•	
Prepared by: The University of Utah
•	
Website: http://tlt.utah.edu/qcf/
Teaching Online: Design of an Online Course
•	
Prepared by: The University of Central Florida
•	
Website: http://teach.ucf.edu/pedagogy/design-of-an-online-
course/
CanvasLMS YouTube Channel
•	
Prepared by: Instructure Canvas and YouTube
•	
Website: http://www.youtube.com/user/CanvasLMS

Index
A
account settings
adjusting  18
cell phone number, adding for SMS text 
notifications  19, 20
general settings, editing  20-23
new e-mail address, adding  18
notification preferences, customizing  24-27
registered services, using  23, 24
announcements
posting  115, 116
apps
integrating, into course  166-168
Assessment
rubrics, using for  164-166
assignment
about  65
adding  41
creating  41, 42
editing  43
publishing  62, 63
rubrics, adding to  162-164
updating  62, 63
assignment availability  62
assignment groups
creating  74, 75
weighting  76
Assignment List layout  99, 100
assignment types
Assignment  65
creating  63, 64
Discussion assignment  65-67
external tools, enabling  74
Not Graded assignment  74
Quiz assignment  67, 68
B
basic formatting, Rich Content Editor  44
BlackBoard  202
C
Canvas
Announcements feature  115
connecting, to education in  
21st Century  205
Conversations feature  107
Help, finding within  175, 176
URL  135, 213
using, on mobile devices  133
Canvas accounts
Free for Teachers Canvas accounts  8
Institution-specific Canvas accounts  7
Canvas Community Forums
exploring  177
questions, asking in  182-185
response, providing to questions in  185-187
Canvas dashboard
navigating  11-13
Canvas Guides
browsing  177-180
exploring  177
searching  180, 181
URL  217
Canvas Guides menu
Mobile Guides - Canvas by Instructure  179
Mobile Guides - MagicMarker  179
Mobile Guides - Polls for Canvas  179
Mobile Guides - SpeedGrader  179
Canvas mobile app
configuring  134-137

[ 228 ]
course, navigating within  138-140
downloading  134-137
features, using  137
Help feature, finding within  146, 147
messages, sending within  140-143
messages, viewing within  140-143
notifications, accessing within  144
profile, viewing within  144, 145
To Do feature, using of  143, 144
Canvas Network  213
Canvas pricing information
obtaining  195
cell phone number
adding, for SMS text notifications  19, 20
collaborations
about  147
creating  148-150
deleting  151
editing  151
Collaborations feature  147, 209
conference
default  130
facilitating  126-131
lecture  131
lecture assistant  131
meeting  130
starting  125
video chat  130
webinar  130
Conference feature
setting up  123, 124
synchronous meetings, setting up  123
configuration, Canvas mobile app  134-137
content
adding  41, 58
embedding  44
importing, from another course  38-40
content, adding
assignment availability  62
assignment, publishing  62, 63
assignment, updating  62, 63
Grading type  59
Group assignments  60, 61
peer reviews  61
Submission Type drop-down menu  59, 60
content, embedding
embedded services  55
Embed Image feature  47-49
Insert/Edit Table feature  45
Insert Math Equation feature  50
Link to URL feature  46
Record/Upload Media feature  51
Unlink feature  47
conversations
archiving  114
deleting  114, 115
marking unread  112
organizing  112
sent messages, viewing  113
starring  113
unarchiving  114
Conversations feature
communicating through  108
layout  108-110
message, composing  110
message, sending  110
message, sending to multiple users  111
course
apps, integrating into  166-168
benefits, of exporting  201, 202
content, importing from  38-40
Course Statistics, viewing for  172, 173
creating, with Free for Teachers  
account  29-31
exporting  203, 204
navigating, within Canvas mobile  
app  138-140
participants, adding to  79-84
planning  35-38
publishing  105, 106
testing, with Student View feature  103-105
course analytics
using  170
viewing  170, 171
course calendar events
adding  101, 102
course home page layout
Assignment List layout  99, 100
Course Modules layout  96-99
custom-designed content page layout  93-95
Recent Activity Dashboard layout  92, 93
selecting  91, 92
Syllabus layout  100, 101
Course Modules layout  96-99

[ 229 ]
Course Setup Checklist
exploring  34, 35
Course Statistics
using  170
viewing, for course  172, 173
custom-designed content page layout  93-95
D
Discussion assignment  65-67
E
education
Canvas, connecting to  205
e-mail address
adding  18
embedded services  55
Embed Image feature  47-49
EtherPad  147
existing Outcomes
finding, for usage  157, 158
external tools
enabling  74
F
features, Canvas mobile app
about  137
course, navigating  138-140
Help feature, finding  146, 147
message, sending  140-143
message, viewing  140-143
notifications, accessing  144
profile, viewing  144, 145
To Do feature, using  143, 144
Files tab  56
File Uploads option  60
Framework for 21st Century Learning  206
Free for Teachers account
creating  9-11
new course, creating  29-31
URL  9
Free for Teachers Canvas accounts  8
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)  177
G
general settings
editing  20-23
Google Docs  147, 148
Gradebook
about  116
accessing  116
grades, entering  116-118
graded discussion feature  207
Grading type  59
Group assignments  60, 61
H
Help feature
finding, outside of Canvas  200
finding, within Canvas  175, 176
finding, within Canvas mobile app  146, 147
Help, finding within Canvas
about  175, 176
Canvas Community Forums, exploring  177
Canvas Guides, exploring  177
Canvas pricing information,  
obtaining  195, 196
feature, requesting  196-199
problem, reporting  187-190
HTML Editor feature  55
I
ideas, P21 skills
about  207
business literacy  207
civic literacy  208
economic literacy  207
entrepreneurial literacy  207
environmental literacy  208
financial literacy  207
global awareness  207
health literacy  208
Images tab  57
Information Technologies (IT)  200
Insert/Edit Table feature  45
Insert Math Equation feature  50
installation, YouTube app  168-170
institutional Canvas URL
URL  8

[ 230 ]
institution's Canvas site
accessing  8, 9
course, creating  28, 29
Institution-specific Canvas accounts  7
Instructure app  133
J
Jing
about  190
downloading  191
used, for creating screencast  190-194
K
Khan Academy app  167
Kindergarten through 12th  
Grade (K-12)  206
L
learning management system (LMS)  7, 33
life and career skills, P21
about  212
accountability  214
adaptability  212
cross-cultural skills  213
flexibility  212
initiative  213
leadership  214, 215
productivity  214
responsibility  214, 215
self-direction  213
social skills  213
Links tab  56
Link to URL feature  46
M
Massive Open Online Course (MOOC)  213
Media Recordings option  60
messages
sending, within Canvas mobile app  140-143
viewing, within Canvas mobile app  140-143
mobile devices
Canvas, using on  133
Moodle  202
N
navigation links
selecting  89-91
New York app  211
Not Graded assignment  74
notification preferences
customizing  24-27
notifications
accessing, within Canvas mobile app  144
O
online education
design resources  225, 226
resources, for conceptualizing  222-224
online learning environments
designing  220-222
Outcome
creating  152-155
using  159-161
Outcome Groups
creating  155-157
P
P21 Framework
about  206
URL  206
P21 Framework, for 21st Century Learning
21st Century Themes  206
about  206
core subjects  206
Information, Communications and  
Technology (ICT) literacy  211
information literacy  210
innovation skills  209, 210
learning skills  209, 210
life and career skills  212
media literacy  210, 211
URL  206
participants
adding, to course  79-84
user groups, creating  87-89
users, managing  85-87
Partnership for 21st Century Skills. See   
P21 Framework
peer reviews  61

[ 231 ]
profile
adjusting  14
editing  17
profile picture, adding  15, 16
viewing, within Canvas mobile app  144, 145
profile picture
adding  15, 16
Q
question banks
managing  72, 73
questions
adding, to quiz  69-72
asking, in Canvas Community  
Forums  182-185
responding to, in Canvas Community  
Forums  185-187
quiz
question banks, managing  72, 73
questions, adding to  69-72
settings, editing for  68, 69
Quiz assignment  67, 68
R
Recent Activity Dashboard layout  92, 93
Record Media tab  52-54
Record/Upload Media feature  51
registered services
using  23, 24
Rich Content Editor
basic formatting  44
content, embedding  44
content, inserting  56
HTML Editor feature  55
using  44
rubrics
adding, to assignments  162-164
creating  159-161
using, for Assessment  164-166
S
screencast
creating, Jing used  190-194
settings
editing, for quiz  68, 69
SMS text notifications
cell phone number, adding for  19, 20
SpeedGrader
about  119, 139, 164, 176
student's submission, viewing  119-121
using  119-121
Student View feature
course, testing with  103-105
Submission Type drop-down menu  59, 60
Syllabus layout  100, 101
synchronous meetings, Conference
setting up  123
T
teaching and learning, in 21st century
resources  217-219
Text Entry option  60
To Do feature
using, of Canvas mobile app  143, 144
U
Unlink feature  47
Upload Media tab  54
USA Today app  211
user groups
creating  87-89
users
managing  85-87
V
View User Groups button  87
Vimeo  167
W
Website URL option  60
Weebly  209
Wikipedia app  211
Wikispaces  209
Wix  209
Y
YouTube app
about  167
installing  168-170


Thank you for buying  
Canvas LMS Course Design
About Packt Publishing
Packt, pronounced 'packed', published its first book "Mastering phpMyAdmin for Effective 
MySQL Management" in April 2004 and subsequently continued to specialize in publishing 
highly focused books on specific technologies and solutions.
Our books and publications share the experiences of your fellow IT professionals in adapting 
and customizing today's systems, applications, and frameworks. Our solution based books 
give you the knowledge and power to customize the software and technologies you're using 
to get the job done. Packt books are more specific and less general than the IT books you have 
seen in the past. Our unique business model allows us to bring you more focused information, 
giving you more of what you need to know, and less of what you don't.
Packt is a modern, yet unique publishing company, which focuses on producing quality,  
cutting-edge books for communities of developers, administrators, and newbies alike. For  
more information, please visit our website: www.packtpub.com.
About Packt Open Source
In 2010, Packt launched two new brands, Packt Open Source and Packt Enterprise, in order to 
continue its focus on specialization. This book is part of the Packt Open Source brand, home 
to books published on software built around Open Source licenses, and offering information 
to anybody from advanced developers to budding web designers. The Open Source brand 
also runs Packt's Open Source Royalty Scheme, by which Packt gives a royalty to each Open 
Source project about whose software a book is sold.
Writing for Packt
We welcome all inquiries from people who are interested in authoring. Book proposals 
should be sent to author@packtpub.com. If your book idea is still at an early stage and you 
would like to discuss it first before writing a formal book proposal, contact us; one of our 
commissioning editors will get in touch with you. 
We're not just looking for published authors; if you have strong technical skills but no writing 
experience, our experienced editors can help you develop a writing career, or simply get some 
additional reward for your expertise.

Desire2Learn for Higher 
Education Cookbook
ISBN: 978-1-84969-344-8             Paperback: 206 pages
Gain expert knowledge of the tools within the 
Desire2Learn Learning Environment, maximize your 
productivity, and create online learning experiences 
with these easy-to-follow recipes
1.	
Customize the look and feel of your online 
course, integrate graphics and video, and 
become more productive using the learning 
environment's built-in assessment and 
collaboration tools.
2.	
Recipes address real world challenges in clear 
and concise step-by-step instructions, which 
help you work your way through technical 
tasks with ease.
Blackboard Learn Administration
ISBN: 978-1-84969-306-6            Paperback: 326 pages
Discover how to administrate your Blackboard Learn 
platform through step-by-step tutorials
1.	
Learn both the simple and the complex skills  
to become an expert Blackboard Learn admin.
2.	
Optimize the security and performance of 
Blackboard Learn and create a disaster  
recovery plan.
3.	
Gain insight from an experienced Blackboard 
administrator using a hands-on approach.
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles

Moodle 2.5 Multimedia Cookbook
Second Edition
ISBN: 978-1-78328-937-0            Paperback: 300 pages
75 recipes to help you integrate different multimedia 
resources into your Moodle courses to make them 
more interactive
1.	
Add all sorts of multimedia features to your 
Moodle course.
2.	
Lots of easy-to-follow, step-by-step recipes.
3.	
Work with sound, audio, and animation to 
make your course even more interactive.
HTML5 Graphing and Data 
Visualization Cookbook
ISBN: 978-1-84969-370-7            Paperback: 344 pages
Learn how to create interactive HTML5 charts and 
graphs with canvas, JavaScript, and open source tools
1.	
Build interactive visualizations of data from 
scratch with integrated animations and events.
2.	
Draw with canvas and other HTML5 elements 
that improve your ability to draw directly in 
the browser.
3.	
Work and improve existing third-party charting 
solutions such as Google Maps.
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles

