
Advanced Ozonation Processes for Water and Wastewater
Treatment
Active Catalysts and Combined Technologies

Chemistry in the Environment Series
Editor-in-chief:
Dionysios D. Dionysiou, University of Cincinnati, USA
Series editors:
Rajasekhar Balasubramanian, National University of Singapore, Singapore
Triantafyllos Kaloudis, Athens Water Supply and Sewerage Company
(EYDAP S.A.), Greece
Rafael Luque, University of Cordoba, Spain
Titles in the series:
1: Graphene-based 3D Macrostructures for Clean Energy and Environmental
Applications
2: Metallurgical Slags: Environmental Geochemistry and Resource Potential
3: Functional Hybrid Nanomaterials for Environmental Remediation
4: Emerging Nanotechnologies for Water Treatment
5: Biological Treatment of Industrial Wastewater
6: Advances in Functional Separation Membranes
7: Persulfate-based Oxidation Processes in Environmental Remediation
8: Advanced Ozonation Processes for Water and Wastewater Treatment:
Active Catalysts and Combined Technologies
How to obtain future titles on publication:
A standing order plan is available for this series. A standing order will bring
delivery of each new volume immediately on publication.
For further information please contact:
Book Sales Department, Royal Society of Chemistry, Thomas Graham House,
Science Park, Milton Road, Cambridge, CB4 0WF, UK
Telephone: þ44 (0)1223 420066, Fax: þ44 (0)1223 420247
Email: booksales@rsc.org
Visit our website at www.rsc.org/books

Advanced Ozonation Processes
for Water and Wastewater
Treatment
Active Catalysts and Combined
Technologies
Edited by
Hongbin Cao
Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
Email: hbcao@ipe.ac.cn
Yongbing Xie
Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
Email: ybxie@ipe.ac.cn
Yuxian Wang
China University of Petroleum, China
Email: yuxian.wang@cup.edu.cn
and
Jiadong Xiao
Shinshu University, Japan
Email: jdxiao_915@shinshu-u.ac.jp

Chemistry in the Environment Series No. 8
Print ISBN: 978-1-83916-389-0
PDF ISBN: 978-1-83916-573-3
EPUB ISBN: 978-1-83916-574-0
Print ISSN: 2516-2624
Electronic ISSN: 2516-2632
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
r The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
All rights reserved
Apart from fair dealing for the purposes of research for non-commercial purposes or for
private study, criticism or review, as permitted under the Copyright, Designs and Patents
Act 1988 and the Copyright and Related Rights Regulations 2003, this publication may not
be reproduced, stored or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the prior
permission in writing of The Royal Society of Chemistry or the copyright owner, or in the
case of reproduction in accordance with the terms of licences issued by the Copyright
Licensing Agency in the UK, or in accordance with the terms of the licences issued by
the appropriate Reproduction Rights Organization outside the UK. Enquiries concerning
reproduction outside the terms stated here should be sent to The Royal Society of
Chemistry at the address printed on this page.
Whilst this material has been produced with all due care, The Royal Society of Chemistry
cannot be held responsible or liable for its accuracy and completeness, nor for any
consequences arising from any errors or the use of the information contained in this
publication. The publication of advertisements does not constitute any endorsement by
The Royal Society of Chemistry or Authors of any products advertised. The views and
opinions advanced by contributors do not necessarily reflect those of The Royal Society of
Chemistry which shall not be liable for any resulting loss or damage arising as a result of
reliance upon this material.
The Royal Society of Chemistry is a charity, registered in England and Wales,
Number 207890, and a company incorporated in England by Royal Charter
(Registered No. RC000524), registered oﬃce: Burlington House, Piccadilly,
London W1J 0BA, UK, Telephone: þ44 (0) 20 7437 8656.
For further information see our website at www.rsc.org
Printed in the United Kingdom by CPI Group (UK) Ltd, Croydon, CR0 4YY, UK

Preface
Water is one of the most valuable resources on our Earth, and it ensures
human survival and supports the development of human civilization.
However, a safe and stable water supply has become intensively precious
nowadays. The natural water body contains a large number of waste
materials and/or by-products from human activities and industrial pro-
duction, among which organics are one kind of typical pollutants in was-
tewater. Organic pollutants widely exist in municipal, industrial and
agricultural wastewater, and they are toxic, persistent and easily transferred,
posing a great challenge to in-depth decontamination. Even worse is the
organic pollution from industrial wastewater in some developing countries.
Integrating advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) before or after biological
degradation is one of the most eﬀective strategies for organic wastewater
treatment because of the merits of the fast and complete destruction of the
aqueous organics into nontoxic products by the generated active species at
relatively low cost. Until now, various AOPs have been developed, among
which Fenton reaction and ozonation prove to be the most promising
technologies for practical application. Ozonation can be operated in mild
conditions without secondary pollution, yet ozone shows a selectivity in
organics oxidation that hinders its broad application. To intensify ozonation
eﬃciency, heterogeneous catalysts are fabricated, and a series of additional
technologies/substances, such as photocatalysis, hydrogen peroxide, electric
field, membrane and nanobubbles, are incorporated. The added chemicals
or energy either greatly accelerates ozone transformation to reactive oxida-
tive species or enhances the mass transfer of ozone, ultimately boosting
eﬃciencies in organics mineralization and/or disinfection. These combined
processes bring a new outlook to the traditional ozonation technologies,
and this topic has received widespread attention all over the world,
Chemistry in the Environment Series No. 8
Advanced Ozonation Processes for Water and Wastewater Treatment: Active Catalysts and
Combined Technologies
Edited by Hongbin Cao, Yongbing Xie, Yuxian Wang and Jiadong Xiao
r The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry, www.rsc.org
v

especially in the field of wastewater treatment. It is the right time to popu-
larize the state-of-the-art coupled ozonation technologies for advanced water
and wastewater treatment.
For this book, we invited scientists from several countries who have been
working on wastewater treatment with ozone for years to give a com-
prehensive and in-depth illustration of advanced ozonation processes for
organic wastewater treatment. This book includes 12 chapters on intensified
ozonation
technologies
and
the
corresponding
mechanistic
insights,
which are catalytic ozonation processes with various heterogeneous catalysts
(metal oxides, supported metal oxides and carbonaceous materials), ultra-
violet- and visible-light-assisted photocatalytic ozonation, catalytic peroxone,
electroperoxone, ultrasound-assisted catalytic ozonation, hybrid ceramic
membrane–assisted catalytic ozonation and nanobubble-enhanced ozona-
tion processes.
Addressing climate change has become a major concern of humankind
and requires the mitigation of total carbon emissions by upgrading the
heavy-emission processes. Coupled ozonation processes have demonstrated
their superiority over time- and energy-consuming traditional processes in
water decontamination. By summarizing their recent developments and the
underlying mechanisms, this book is expected to facilitate the application of
the eﬀective coupled ozonation processes and stimulate the development of
cost- and energy-eﬃcient water purification technologies in order to create a
sustainable future.
Hongbin Cao,
Yongbing Xie,
Yuxian Wang,
Jiadong Xiao
vi
Preface

Foreword
In an era of continually accelerating industrial growth and global climate
change, the necessity of controlling environmental pollution and increasing
clean water availability has promoted the development of advanced water
treatment technologies. Ozone is one of the most active, readily available
and safest oxidizing agents, and it has been widely used for water purifi-
cation and wastewater treatment since the operation of the first ozonation-
based drinking water plant in Nice, France, in 1906.
The ozonation reaction is accomplished by direct ozone oxidation and
indirect oxidation with in situ generated, highly oxidizing radical species
typically including hydroxyl radicals, and the latter means is particularly
powerful to mineralize a wide variety of micropollutants. Over the years, in
order to improve the hydroxyl radical yield to ultimately attain a maximized
overall eﬃciency, diﬀerent types of active solid catalysts were designed,
fabricated and applied in ozonation-based systems and various integrated
technologies by combining ozonation with other oxidation processes (e.g.,
photocatalytic/electrochemical oxidation, ultrasonic treatment, other oxi-
dants that have been developed).
This book provides an overview of the most studied catalytic ozonation
process and advanced ozone-integrated processes, some of which have been
largely implemented for practical water treatment, given their proven eﬃ-
cacy, attractive economics and sustainability. The fundamental mechanism,
kinetic modeling, operational conditions’ impact on process performance,
and economics are discussed. In particular, the book summarizes the syn-
thesis methods, structure-property-performance relationships and stabilities
of the best-in-class solid catalysts and provides examples of pilot-scale and
full-scale plants as well as future research needs toward developing scalable
applications in a real world for each process.
Chemistry in the Environment Series No. 8
Advanced Ozonation Processes for Water and Wastewater Treatment: Active Catalysts and
Combined Technologies
Edited by Hongbin Cao, Yongbing Xie, Yuxian Wang and Jiadong Xiao
r The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry, www.rsc.org
vii

Most books available today concentrate on the general aspects of the ty-
pical catalytic ozonation process, seldom dealing with the best-in-class solid
catalysts, advanced ozone-integrated processes and their applicable situ-
ations. This book, written by the leading scientists of the field from diﬀerent
nations, fills the gap. Anyone interested in the latest scientific and techno-
logical achievements in advanced ozonation processes, including water in-
dustry
professionals,
university
professors,
consulting
scientists
and
engineers, and students, will find this book useful.
Prof. Jun Ma
Harbin Institute of Technology, China
E-mail: majunhit@126.com
viii
Foreword

Contents
Chapter 1
Heterogeneous Catalytic Ozonation over Metal Oxides
and Mechanism Discussion
1
Na Tian, Yulun Nie, Xike Tian, Jialu Zhu and Dong Wu
1.1
Introduction
1
1.1.1
Typical Transition Metal Oxides as
Ozonation Catalysts
2
1.1.2
Catalytic Ozonation over Other Single
Metal Oxides
10
1.1.3
Mixed Metal Oxides for Catalytic Ozonation
18
1.1.4
Summary
24
References
24
Chapter 2
Heterogeneous Catalytic Ozonation over Supported
Metal Oxides
29
Zhaokun Xiong, Yang Liu, Peng Zhou, Heng Zhang, and
Bo Lai
2.1
Typical Supported Metal Oxides as Ozonation
Catalysts
30
2.1.1
Metal Oxides/Al2O3
30
2.1.2
Metal Oxides/TiO2
31
2.1.3
Metal Oxides/Zeolites
32
2.1.4
Metal Oxides Supported on Other
Porous Materials
34
Chemistry in the Environment Series No. 8
Advanced Ozonation Processes for Water and Wastewater Treatment: Active Catalysts and
Combined Technologies
Edited by Hongbin Cao, Yongbing Xie, Yuxian Wang and Jiadong Xiao
r The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry, www.rsc.org
ix

2.2
Eﬀects of Operation Parameters on Catalytic
Ozonation Eﬃciency
35
2.2.1
Initial pH
35
2.2.2
Ozone Dosage
36
2.2.3
Catalyst Dosage
37
2.2.4
Initial Concentration of Contaminants
37
2.2.5
Reaction Temperature
38
2.2.6
Coexisting Ions in Water
38
2.3
Catalytic Reaction Mechanisms
39
2.3.1
The Circumstance of Radical and Non-
radical Pathways
39
2.3.2
Identification of Catalytic Active Sites
42
2.3.3
Mechanism Analysis by Theoretical
Calculation
44
2.4
Practical Applications
47
2.4.1
Application Case
48
2.4.2
Limitations in Practical Applications
48
2.5
Summary
51
Acknowledgements
51
References
52
Chapter 3
Catalytic Ozonation over Composite Metal Oxides
56
Rodrigo Pereira Cavalcante and Renato Falcao Dantas
3.1
Introduction
56
3.2
Perovskite-type Catalysts
58
3.3
Spinel-like Oxide-type Catalysts
64
3.4
Other Natural Minerals
71
3.5
Concluding Remarks and Future Trend
77
3.5.1
Perovskite Oxides
78
3.5.2
Spinel Oxide
78
3.5.3
Natural Minerals
78
Acknowledgements
79
References
79
Chapter 4
Catalytic Ozonation over Activated Carbon-based Materials
85
Zheng-Qian Liu, Jia-Ying Li and Shu-Ting Li
4.1
Activated Carbon
85
4.1.1
Adsorption or Catalysis During Ozonation
with AC?
85
4.1.2
Influence of Chemical Properties, Texture
Characteristics and Impurities
89
x
Contents

4.1.3
Influence of Water Matrix
91
4.1.4
Deactivation and Regeneration of Activated
Carbon
93
4.2
Activated Carbon-supported Metal Oxides
95
4.2.1
Single-metal Oxides
95
4.2.2
Bimetallic Oxides
98
4.3
Biochar-based Materials
101
4.3.1
Biochar
101
4.3.2
Biochar-supported Metal Oxides
104
4.4
Reaction Mechanisms
107
4.4.1
Brief Description of Several Viewpoints
107
4.4.2
Reactive Oxygen Species and Intermediates
Formation
108
4.4.3
Hydroxyl Radical Mechanism
111
4.5
Practical Applications
116
Acknowledgements
117
References
117
Chapter 5
Catalytic Ozonation over Nanocarbon Materials
123
Ya Liu and Yuxian Wang
5.1
Introduction
123
5.2
Carbon Nanotube-based Metal-free Nanocarbons
124
5.3
Graphene-based Metal-free Nanocarbons
129
5.4
Other Types of Metal-free Nanocarbons
134
5.5
Active Sites on Metal-free Nanocarbons
141
5.5.1
Carbon Framework and Dimensional Eﬀect
141
5.5.2
Surface Oxygen Functionalities
142
5.5.3
Edging and Structural Defects
143
5.5.4
Heteroatom Dopants
145
5.6
Active Sites on Supported Nanocarbons
147
5.7
Methods to Probe the Active Sites on Nanocarbons
147
5.8
Oxidation Pathways in Metal-free Nanocarbon
Catalyzed Ozonation
149
5.8.1
Radical-based Oxidations
149
5.8.2
Nonradical Oxidations
152
5.8.3
Identification of the Types of ROS and
Evaluation of Their Roles
155
5.8.4
Critical Issues in Determination of the
Oxidation Pathways
159
5.9
Conclusions and Perspectives
159
Acknowledgements
160
References
160
Contents
xi

Chapter 6
UVA Photocatalytic Ozonation of Water Contaminants
166
F. J. Beltra´n and O. Gimeno
6.1
Introduction
166
6.2
Ozonation of Water Contaminants
167
6.3
Photocatalytic Oxidation of Water
Contaminants
168
6.4
Photocatalytic Ozonation
170
6.5
UVA Photocatalytic Ozonation
171
6.5.1
Catalysts
171
6.5.2
Radiation Sources
187
6.5.3
Reactor Type
189
6.5.4
Organics Studied and Water Matrices
191
6.5.5
AOP Comparison, Influence of Variables
195
6.5.6
Ozone Consumption, Rct, RHOO3,
Scavengers
198
6.5.7
Synergism
201
6.5.8
Mechanisms of Reactions
202
6.5.9
Kinetics
203
6.5.10
Energy and Cost
207
6.5.11
Other Aspects
209
6.6
Conclusions
211
Acknowledgements
212
References
212
Chapter 7
Visible-light-driven Photocatalytic Ozonation of
Aqueous Organic Pollutants
218
Jiadong Xiao, Zhuang Guo, Hongbin Cao and
Yongbing Xie
7.1
Introduction
218
7.2
Overview of the Catalysts and Their Performances
219
7.3
Reaction Mechanism
224
7.4
Structure–Performance Relationship of Catalysts
228
7.4.1
WO3
228
7.4.2
g-C3N4
231
7.4.3
Future Design and Optimization of g-C3N4
233
7.5
Stability of g-C3N4 Catalysts
235
7.6
Present State and Challenges for Practical
Application
236
7.7
Conclusions
237
Acknowledgements
238
References
238
xii
Contents

Chapter 8
Catalytic Peroxone Process and the Coupled Processes
241
Zhuang Guo, Yongbing Xie and Hongbin Cao
8.1
Introduction
241
8.1.1
Mechanism
242
8.1.2
Application
243
8.1.3
Drawbacks
246
8.2
Catalysts in Peroxone Process
246
8.2.1
Traditional Metal Catalysts
246
8.2.2
Single-atom Catalysts
250
8.3
Enhancement by Other Processes
252
8.3.1
Photolysis and Photocatalysis
253
8.3.2
Sonolysis
254
8.3.3
Plasma
255
8.4
Conclusions
255
References
256
Chapter 9
Promising Electrocatalytic Ozonation Processes for
Water and Wastewater Treatment
258
Huijiao Wang, Weikun Yao, Juhong Zhan, Gang Yu and
Yujue Wang
9.1
Introduction
258
9.2
Mechanisms of Electrocatalytic Ozonation
262
9.2.1
Mechanisms of OH Generation
262
9.2.2
Mechanisms of Pollutant Abatement
264
9.3
Cathode Studies During the E-peroxone Process
264
9.3.1
Cathode Materials
264
9.3.2
Cathode Configuration
265
9.3.3
Cathode Stability
267
9.4
Water and Wastewater Treatment by the E-peroxone
Process
268
9.4.1
Removal of Organic Pollutants
268
9.4.2
Control of Harmful Oxidation By-products
268
9.4.3
Disinfection and Removal of Antibiotic
Resistance Genes (ARGs)
278
9.4.4
Pilot-scale Study
279
9.5
Integration of the E-peroxone Process with Other
Technologies
280
9.5.1
Combination with UV Photolysis
280
9.5.2
Combination with Adsorption
281
9.5.3
Combination with Membrane
282
9.5.4
Combination with Electrocoagulation
283
Contents
xiii

9.6
Challenges and Prospects
284
9.6.1
Challenges
284
9.6.2
Prospects
285
Acknowledgements
286
References
286
Chapter 10 Catalytic Ozonation with Ultrasound
293
Lei Zhao
10.1
Introduction
293
10.2
Fundamental Characteristics of Ultrasound
294
10.2.1
Generation of Ultrasound
294
10.2.2
Typical Reactors Applied
295
10.3
Reactivity of Compounds
300
10.3.1
Phenols
300
10.3.2
Aromatics
303
10.3.3
Dyes
303
10.3.4
Antibiotics
305
10.3.5
Industrial Wastewater
305
10.4
Reaction Kinetics
306
10.5
Influencing Factors
306
10.5.1
Ultrasonic Power Density
306
10.5.2
Frequency
306
10.5.3
The Concentration of Ozone
308
10.5.4
pH
308
10.5.5
Temperature
308
10.6
Combined Processes
309
10.6.1
Homogeneous
309
10.6.2
Heterogeneous
310
10.7
Enhanced Mechanism
310
References
311
Chapter 11 Hybrid Ceramic Membrane Catalytic Ozonation
313
Zilong Song, Ruijun Ren, Yuting Zhang, Ao Li, Jing Liu and
Fei Qi
11.1
Introduction
313
11.2
Coupling of Ceramic Membranes with Ozonation
314
11.2.1
Eﬀect of Ozone Coupling Mode on EfOM
Removal
315
11.2.2
Eﬀects of Pre-O/F and In-situ-O/F on
Membrane Fouling
316
11.2.3
Membrane Fouling Mitigation Mechanism
316
xiv
Contents

11.3
Coupling of Catalytic Ceramic Membranes with
Ozonation
318
11.3.1
Kinds of Catalytic Ceramic Membranes
and Corresponding Fabrication Methods
318
11.3.2
Reaction Mechanism
323
11.3.3
Fe-based Catalytic Ceramic Membranes
325
11.3.4
Mn-based Catalytic Ceramic Membranes
329
11.3.5
Ce-based Catalytic Ceramic Membranes
332
11.3.6
Cu-based Catalytic Ceramic Membranes
333
11.3.7
Hybrid Metal-oxide-based Catalytic
Ceramic Membranes
334
11.3.8
Carbon-based Catalytic Ceramic Membranes
338
11.4
Conclusions and Outlook
346
Acknowledgements
347
References
347
Chapter 12 Ozonation Nanobubble Technology
353
Xiaonan Shi, Taha Marhaba and Wen Zhang
12.1
Introduction to Water Disinfection and Ozonation
Disinfection
353
12.1.1
Principles of Ozonation Disinfection
353
12.1.2
Limitations of Traditional Ozonation
Disinfection
354
12.2
Nanobubbles and Generation Principles of Ozone
Nanobubbles
355
12.2.1
Nanobubbles and Their Applications
355
12.2.2
Ozone Nanobubble Generation Methods
356
12.3
Ozone Nanobubble Properties and Applications
358
12.3.1
Stability and Disinfection Characteristics
of Ozone Nanobubbles
358
12.3.2
Mass Transfer of Ozonation
359
12.3.3
Enhanced Reactivity of Ozone Nanobubbles
361
12.3.4
Applications of Ozone Nanobubbles
361
12.4
Future Research Directions
362
12.4.1
Industrialized Ozone Nanobubble
Generator Development
362
12.4.2
Safety Concerns of Ozone Nanobubbles
363
Acknowledgements
364
References
364
Subject Index
371
Contents
xv

CHAPTER 1
Heterogeneous Catalytic
Ozonation over Metal Oxides
and Mechanism Discussion
NA TIAN,a YULUN NIE,*b XIKE TIAN,b JIALU ZHUb AND
DONG WUb
a School of Environmental Studies, China University of Geosciences,
Wuhan, P.R. China; b Faculty of Materials Science and Chemistry,
China University of Geosciences, Wuhan, P.R. China
*Email: ylnie@cug.edu.cn
1.1
Introduction
Nowadays, the catalytic ozonation process, which includes homogeneous
and heterogeneous catalytic ozonation, is often regarded as a potential
technology in water treatment due to its notable performance. Compared to
single ozonation and homogeneous catalytic ozonation, heterogeneous
catalytic ozonation could increase oxidation rate as well as mineralization
degree and decrease the utilization eﬃciency of ozone, and it is characteristic
of reclamation and lack of secondary pollution. Thus it is considered to be a
promising wastewater treatment process. Various metal oxides, including
typical transition metal oxides, other single-metal oxides and mixed metal
oxides, have been widely adopted as heterogeneous catalysts in catalytic
ozonation because of their excellent catalytic capability. A comprehensive
summary of the application and mechanism in heterogeneous catalytic
ozonation can provide theoretical support and guidance for designing and
Chemistry in the Environment Series No. 8
Advanced Ozonation Processes for Water and Wastewater Treatment: Active Catalysts and
Combined Technologies
Edited by Hongbin Cao, Yongbing Xie, Yuxian Wang and Jiadong Xiao
r The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry, www.rsc.org
1

choosing suitable catalysts to obtain higher removal eﬃciency in diﬀerent
kinds of wastewater. Therefore, the application and recent advances of vari-
ous metal oxides in catalytic ozonation of organic contaminants in waste-
water are summarized in this chapter. Moreover, their mechanism of
heterogeneous catalytic ozonation by metal oxides, the reactive oxygen
species and surface reaction process will also be discussed.
1.1.1
Typical Transition Metal Oxides as Ozonation Catalysts
Several typical transition metal oxides that are promising as alternative
catalysts have been intensively exploited during the heterogeneous catalytic
ozonation process, such as manganese oxides, iron oxides and cobalt
oxides.1–4 Advances in their possible application and relevant ozonation
mechanisms are described here in detail.
1.1.1.1
Manganese Oxides
Manganese oxides possess diﬀerent crystal structures (a-, b-, g- etc.) and
oxidation states (Mn21, Mn31, Mn41 etc.); hence various manganese oxide
catalysts including MnO2, Mn2O3 and Mn3O4 have been applied for water and
wastewater treatment during heterogeneous catalytic ozonation.5–7 Numer-
ous studies have been conducted on catalytic ozonation by manganese oxides
in aqueous solution during the past decades. For instance, a manganese
catalyst has been studied in the heterogeneous catalytic ozonation of phenol,
indicating that hydroxyl radicals (OH) generated from the manganese
catalyst play a significant role in the oxidation of phenol.5 Manganese cata-
lysts in this study can react with ozone (O3) and then undergo several steps to
completely mineralize the phenol. The catalytic activity of Mn2O3 nano-
particles also has been investigated in the presence of ozone for the removal
and decomposition of humic acids (HAs).8 The results show that Mn2O3 with
a higher point of zero charge exhibits eﬀectively catalytic performance for
ozone decomposition and HAs removal. Besides, Nawaz et al. have investi-
gated several manganese oxides with controlled morphologies (including
MnO2, Mn2O3 and Mn3O4) for catalytic ozonation of phenolic compounds; it
was ascertained that MnO2 has greater catalytic activity than Mn2O3 and
Mn3O4 since it possesses considerable electron transferability and a larger
number of oxygen vacancies and hydroxyl groups on the surface.9
Among the various manganese oxides, MnO2 has been proved to be the
most eﬃcient catalyst for the decomposition of ozone and degradation of
organic pollutants in many studies. Apart from the oxidation states of man-
ganese oxides, crystal structure is an important factor determining the activity
of manganese oxides. The degradation of 4-nitrophenol (4-NP) by catalytic
ozonation over various MnO2 with six crystal phases (a-, b-, g-, d-, e- and l-
MnO2) have been studied, and the results indicate that there are various re-
moval eﬃciencies of 4-NP in MnO2 with diﬀerent crystal structures.10 Among
them, a-MnO2 is the most eﬃcient catalyst for the catalytic ozonation of 4-NP,
2
Chapter 1

in which the generated superoxide radicals (O2
, 60.2%) are the primary
reactive oxygen species (ROS), while singlet oxygen (1O2, 27.7%) contributes a
little bit to 4-NP removal. In addition, three kinds of MnO2 with tunneling
structures, including a-MnO2, b-MnO2 and g-MnO2, have been synthesized
and applied to catalytic ozonation in order to explore the eﬀect of the crystal
structure of MnO2, indicating that the order of the catalytic capability by
MnO2 in heterogeneous catalytic ozonation is a-MnO24g-MnO24b-MnO2.11
It is obvious that a-MnO2 exhibits superior activity during catalytic ozonation
due to its larger specific surface area, the lower average oxidation state of Mn
and the higher density of oxygen vacancies. To investigate the eﬀect of the
crystal phase in the catalytic ozonation process, three types of MnO2 (a-, b-
and g-MnO2) have been developed by a uniform hydrothermal process and
further investigated for the catalytic ozonation of phenol.12 Compared with
single ozonation, ROS with strong oxidation can be formed by the reaction
between ozone and Mn–O bonds during the catalytic ozonation processes,
which contributes to better oxidation eﬃciency. In addition, the increasing
catalytic ozonation activity has been observed in the a-MnO2/O3 system with
its enhanced surface active oxygen. The analysis confirmed that there were
two critical factors for the enhanced catalytic activity of a-MnO2: active surface
oxygen and lattice oxygen. Also, the catalytic activities of b-MnO2 and g-MnO2
are aﬀected by the lattice oxygen and the bonded manganese of MnO2.
According to previous studies, moderately acidic pH is of great benefit to
the heterogeneous catalytic ozonation for organic contaminants removal by
MnO2 in an aqueous solution. The obvious indication is that the catalytic
ozonation eﬃciency of oxalic acid significantly increases with the decreasing
pH of the aqueous solution and that the appropriate range of pH is from 4.1
to 6.0 for the improvement of ozonation capability.13 Therefore, the pH of
the solution substantially influences the catalytic eﬃciency of manganese
oxides, and the results acquired by heterogeneous catalytic ozonation over
MnO2 catalysts with diﬀerent pHpzc values are consistent with the reaction
mechanism involving the formation of a surface manganese–oxalic acid
complex. Similarly, a lack of catalytic activity occurred in diﬀerent types of
MnO2 with a lower pHpzc than that of the solution pH.
In addition, it has been concluded that the capabilities of manganese
oxides in catalytic ozonation are dependent on morphology. In previous
research, an a-MnO2 nanotube and b-MnO2 nanowires have been developed
as ozonation catalysts and have revealed remarkable stability and catalysis
for phenol degradation.14,15 Compared to that of ozonation alone, the
a-MnO2 nanotube and b-MnO2 nanowires remarkably accelerate the removal
of phenol and chemical oxygen demand (COD). The degradation eﬃciency of
phenol is up to approximately 94.9% in the presence of an a-MnO2 nano-
tube, while there are increases of 38% and 27.1% on the degradation and
mineralization eﬃciencies of phenol in the b-MnO2 nanowires/ozone sys-
tem, respectively. Petal-like d-MnO2 microspheres have been successfully
synthesized and evaluated for eﬃciencies of catalytic ozonation for the
degradation of bisphenol A (BPA) and ibuprofen (IBP).16 The degradation
Heterogeneous Catalytic Ozonation over Metal Oxides and Mechanism Discussion
3

eﬃciencies of BPA and IBP in 20 min are 68.2% and 68.5%, respectively.
Clearly, petal-like d-MnO2 microspheres have greater catalytic eﬃciencies
than those of ozone alone and other heterogeneous catalytic commercial
MnO2/O3 systems. In addition to the generation of OH, the strong inter-
action between ozone and organic matters on the surface of metal oxide
catalysts contributes to the rapid catalytic ozonation of organic compounds
in the system of d-MnO2 microspheres and ozone.
Considering their unique structures with large specific surface areas and
high porous properties, manganese oxides with hollow structures have been
designated as an eﬃcient ozonation catalyst with superior ozonation cap-
ability owing to the synergetic eﬀect of adsorption and degradation for organic
contaminant removal.17 Three-dimensional a-MnO2 porous hollow micro-
spheres have been applied for the degradation of BPA in catalytic ozonation,
and more than 90% degradation eﬃciency can be achieved within 30 min.
This is higher than that of b-MnO2 porous hollow microspheres and is at-
tributed to the acceleration of the ROS generated rate (such as O2
 and OH),
as well as to the more abundant lattice oxygen on the surface of a-MnO2
porous hollow microspheres. Recently, a-MnO2 with its mesoporous structure
possesses a higher surface area and also shows the highest catalytic activity
compared to those with lower surface areas. This indicates that the critical
factors aﬀecting the catalytic eﬃciencies of catalysts are the porous structure
and specific surface areas in catalytic ozonation. For example, the mesoporous
a-MnO2 has been synthesized by using cetyltrimethylammonium bromide
(CTAB), and studies on its catalytic ozonation activities for 4-NP degradation,
compared with the MnO2 synthesized with sodium dodecyl benzene sulfate
(SDBS) as well as commercial MnO2, have also been carried out.18 Although 4-
NP is completely degraded after 90 min during these catalytic ozonation
processes, the removal eﬃciency of total organic carbon (TOC) is the highest
in the mesoporous a-MnO2/O3 system. In this study, superoxide radicals are
verified to have made a great contribution to the catalytic ozonation process,
whereas hydroxyl radicals are not attributed to the removal of 4-NP. An or-
dered mesoporous b-MnO2 has also been prepared by the nanocasting
method and investigated for the catalytic degradation eﬃciency of phenol in
the catalytic ozonation process.19 There was an obviously great increase in
phenol removal compared with the control MnO2. In addition, mesoporous
Mn2O3 has shown higher activity in benzene oxidation with ozone than
commercial bulk Mn2O3 because of its higher surface area as well as its large
number of oxygen vacancies and lattice oxygen.20
1.1.1.2
Iron Oxides
Owing to the abundant active sites and hydroxyl groups on their surface, iron
oxides, including Fe2O3, Fe3O4 and FeOOH, with diverse structures and prop-
erties have been widely investigated in the catalytic ozonation process.21–23
The outstanding performances in catalytic ozonation are attributed to the dif-
ferences in their composition and crystal structures. For instance, FeOOH
4
Chapter 1

possesses abundant hydroxyl groups on its surface, while Fe3O4 oﬀers a su-
perparamagnetic property. Furthermore, many Lewis acidic sites deposited on
the surface of iron oxides can promote the decomposition of ozone into ROS. In
previous studies, Trapido et al. have investigated and compared their catalytic
ozonation of m-dinitrobenzene by diﬀerent metal oxides as heterogeneous
catalysts.24 Their results have revealed that the catalytic capability of Fe2O3 is
the highest of all others due to the additional ozone decomposition accom-
plished by accumulating the formation of ROS; these results indicate that iron
oxides could be the most potent catalysts in m-dinitrobenzene ozonation.
Recently, the transformation process of ozone on various iron oxides, including
a-Fe2O3, a-FeOOH and Fe3O4, with diﬀerent acid sites and hydroxyl groups
has been investigated.23 It has been shown that Lewis acid sites located on
a-FeOOH and Fe3O4 are the active centers of catalytic ozonation, in which ozone
molecules could substitute for the surface OH on the Lewis acid sites of iron
oxides and directly interact with the iron ions in the surface of iron oxides,
eﬀectively decomposing into ROS and initiating the redox of iron ions.
Compared with various iron oxides, FeOOH has received significant atten-
tion and has become a promising heterogeneous catalyst in catalytic ozonation
because of their extremely low solubility in water and more Lewis acid sites on
their surface.25–27 In addition, they are also eﬃcient adsorbents for the removal
of organic matter and inorganic ions in water. FeOOH, with a variety of crystal
phases, is used to catalyze ozone for the degradation of contaminants,
including goethite (a-FeOOH), akaganeite (b-FeOOH), lepidocrocite (g-FeOOH)
and feroxyhyte (d-FeOOH). The comparison of catalytic activities of a-FeOOH
in acidic and neutral conditions for the ozonation of oxalic acid (OA) has been
carried out in Sui’s work.26 It was revealed that a-FeOOH could eﬃciently
boost the formation of ROS (OH) under acidic and neutral conditions, con-
tributing to the improvement of the ozonation eﬃciency of OA by accelerating
ozone decomposition. In this case, OH has been generated from ozone
decomposition both in a neutral state (Fe–OH) and a positive charge state
(Fe–OH2
1) and performs as the main ROS in heterogeneous catalytic
ozonation. In addition, diﬀerent FeOOH catalysts, including SO4
2FeOOH,
Cl–FeOOH and NO3
–FeOOH, have been proposed and used for IBP removal
in catalytic ozonation. Among them, the degradation eﬃciencies of IBP follow
the order of SO4
2–FeOOH (40.2%)4NO3
–FeOOH (35.7%)4Cl–FeOOH
(34.6%). The results reveal that the pH of the aqueous solution is a critical
factor for the charge properties of surface hydroxyl groups on the interface of
metal oxides. Because of the closeness of the pHpzc value of SO4
2–FeOOH
(7.12) to the pH of IBP solution (7.05), SO4
2–FeOOH presents a higher capacity
than that of the other two FeOOH in catalytic ozonation. Moreover,
SO4
2–FeOOH has possessed more hydroxyl groups than that of other
catalysts, which can enhance its catalytic activity by the generation of OH.
Furthermore, ultra-small b-FeOOH nanorods are used as an eﬀective catalyst
to decompose ozone for the degradation of 4-chlorophenol (4-CP) in water.27
Compared with ozonation alone, the degradation eﬃciency of 4-CP in
heterogeneous catalytic ozonation has been significantly improved by adding
Heterogeneous Catalytic Ozonation over Metal Oxides and Mechanism Discussion
5

b-FeOOH catalyst. The removal eﬃciencies in the ozonation alone and
heterogeneous catalytic ozonation system within 40 min are 67% and 99%,
respectively. The high degradation eﬃciency of 4-CP in the b-FeOOH/O3 system
can be attributed to direct ozonation by ozone, the heterogeneous catalytic
ozonation and homogeneous catalysis owing to b-FeOOH dissolution.
Although the redox transformation between Fe21 and Fe31 ions acceler-
ates the generation of OH by directly decomposing ozone, iron ions dis-
solved and released from iron oxides could lead to secondary pollution in an
aqueous environment. The recovery of the catalyst after catalytic ozonation
and the release of iron ions restricts the reuse of the iron oxides in hetero-
geneous catalytic ozonation. Therefore, several studies have attempted to
suppress the release of metal ions by improving the stability of the catalysts.
Ferrocene, which is used as an eﬃcient and recyclable heterogeneous
catalyst, has been developed for catalytic ozonation since it is nontoxic and
highly stable.28 Once ferrocene is introduced to the ozonation system,
amaranth can be almost completely degraded in 120 min, and TOC
decreases significantly during the degradation. It has been demonstrated
that the degradation of amaranth has been considerably improved in the
ferrocene/O3 system. Furthermore, there is little change in the degradation
eﬃciencies of amaranth after several cycles, and ferrocene remains intact
and undecomposed without any regeneration treatments, indicating that
ferrocene as an alternative catalyst can be recyclable and remain highly
eﬃcient for catalyzing ozonation.
The development of magnetic iron oxides also can resolve the issue of
catalyst recovery because it can be easily separated from the aqueous solu-
tion for further reuse. In addition to its magnetic property, Fe3O4 generally
contains both Fe21 and Fe31 in the octahedral sites, which can remarkably
accelerate electron transfer during the heterogeneous catalytic ozonation
process. This unique property can be employed to facilitate the formation of
ROS and further enhance catalytic ozonation eﬃciency. Thus in recent years,
magnetic Fe3O4 has been fabricated by various methods and successfully
applied as an eﬃcient catalyst for the mineralization of organic con-
taminants in heterogeneous catalytic ozonation. In the research of Yin et al.,
Fe3O4 nanoparticles have been prepared by a low-cost and green route and
utilized in the catalytic ozonation of sulfamethoxazole (SMX).29 It has been
demonstrated that Fe3O4 nanoparticles can significantly boost the ozonation
eﬃciency of SMX, which has been increased by 51% compared with ozo-
nation alone. The increasing number of Lewis acid sites on the interface of
the catalyst can be formed to interact with ozone for SMX degradation by
adding Fe3O4 into the catalytic ozonation process, which is the easiest way to
attack the targeted contaminants for greater catalytic eﬃciency in SMX re-
moval. Furthermore, Fe3O4, with its ordered mesoporous structure, has been
successfully synthesized and intensively studied for its catalytic capability in
the heterogeneous ozonation process.30 Compared to Fe3O4 nanoparticles
synthesized by the conventional method, the ordered mesoporous Fe3O4
exhibits
a
superior
capability
for
atrazine
(ATZ)
degradation
in
6
Chapter 1

heterogeneous catalytic ozonation. Homogeneous catalytic ozonation using
the leached iron ions does not contribute to the degradation of ATX, which
reveals that the heterogeneous catalytic ozonation promotes the generation
of ROS and dominates the degradation of organic contaminants in the or-
dered mesoporous Fe3O4/O3 system. In addition, the redox cycles between
Fe21 and Fe31 that occurred in Fe3O4 contribute to the generation of OH
which is the dominant ROS in ATZ degradation during the heterogeneous
catalytic ozonation process.
1.1.1.3
Cobalt Oxides
Transition metal cobalt oxides also are the prevalent catalysts that have been
proposed for heterogeneous catalytic ozonation. Co3O4 is a common form in
cobalt oxide, and the improvement of organic contaminants mineralization
has been achieved in the Co3O4/O3 system owing to the formation of OH
from ozone decomposition.31–33 Many researchers have investigated the
catalytic capability of Co3O4 as an alternative heterogeneous ozonation
catalyst for the mineralization of organic contaminants; this indicates that
the morphology and structure of cobalt oxide significantly aﬀect its catalytic
ozonation performance. Initially, Co3O4 nanoparticles with diﬀerent average
diameters have been synthesized, and their properties of catalytic ozonation
have been investigated in the degradation of phenol.34 The degradation
eﬃciencies of phenol in aqueous solution have been studied in the absence
and presence of Co3O4 nanoparticles during the ozonation process. The
results indicate their dramatically catalytic capabilities for phenol mineral-
ization, which denotes an alternative application as a heterogeneous ozo-
nation catalyst in wastewater treatment. In a comparison of various Co3O4
nanoparticles with diﬀerent average diameters, there is a slight increase in
catalytic capabilities with decreasing average diameter, which is attributed
to the better dispersion and higher surface area of Co3O4 with smaller sizes.
It is further explained that these are important for catalysis eﬃciency.
Subsequently, two kinds of cobalt oxides, bulky Co3O4 and Co3O4 nano-
particles, were investigated to assess their catalytic activity, which indicated
that Co3O4 nanoparticles exhibited superior ozonation eﬃciency in the
mineralization of phenol compared with bulky Co3O4 and ozone alone.35
There is a small negative eﬀect on catalytic ozonation in the presence of tert-
butyl alcohol, revealing that OH is the main ROS and that the catalytic re-
action significantly depends on the surface properties of Co3O4 nano-
particles in heterogeneous catalytic ozonation for phenol degradation. In
particular, the specific surface area, the number of hydroxyl groups and the
good dispersibility of Co3O4 nanoparticles are beneficial for their higher
catalytic eﬃciency than that of bulky Co3O4.
Compared with other metal oxides, Co3O4 not only exhibits an excellent
catalytic activity but also possesses a high selectivity for catalytic products
during heterogeneous catalytic ozonation. Ichikawa et al. have elucidated
the catalytic ozonation activities of various metal oxide catalysts for the
Heterogeneous Catalytic Ozonation over Metal Oxides and Mechanism Discussion
7

ozonation decomposition of ammonia nitrogen in water.36 Among these
metal oxide catalysts, MgO and NiO have exhibited excellent catalytic ac-
tivities, but they possess low selectivity to catalytic ozonation products,
which necessitates producing a large amount of NO3
. Nevertheless, Co3O4,
which is slightly less eﬃcient than MgO and NiO, has a higher selectivity for
gaseous products in all of those metal oxides. Thus Co3O4 is regarded as the
optimal catalyst in catalytic ozonation under the comprehensive consider-
ation of catalytic activity, selectivity and stability. Similarly, they have further
investigated and found that the catalytic activity of Co3O4 can be greatly
improved by repeated catalysis for the catalytic ozonation of ammonia ni-
trogen, which is primarily the reaction between the ammonium ion with
hydroxyl groups and the formation of Co–NHx groups on the Co3O4 sur-
face.37 Recently, the catalytic ozonation mechanism has been the subject of
an intensive investigation involving the heterogeneous catalytic ozonation of
ammonia nitrogen in the presence of Co3O4.38 The results demonstrate that
Co3O4 eﬀectively promotes the formation of chloramines as ozonation
products during the heterogeneous catalytic ozonation process.
Currently, there is a decreasing trend in catalytic ozonation by cobalt oxide
alone. In recent decades, much investigation has been done on cobalt oxides
with excellent behavior being supported on some catalysts, including other
metal oxides and carbon materials and/or being combined with other oxides
for catalytic ozonation.
1.1.1.4
Mechanism of Catalytic Ozonation
Heterogeneous catalytic ozonation involves the decomposition of ozone by
various transition metal oxides; thus the reaction process and mechanisms
are much more complicated. To a large extent, the eﬃciencies of hetero-
geneous catalytic ozonation are heavily dependent on the properties of the
catalyst as well as on their surface structure. On the active sites of the
catalyst’s surface, organic pollutants can be adsorbed; these then form
surface complexes with hydroxyl groups or ozone that can be decomposed to
all kinds of ROS, including surface atomic oxygen (*O), O2
 and OH, on the
surface of the catalysts. The decisive factor regarding the ozonation rate of
metal oxides species and the removal eﬃciency of organic contaminants
depends on the generated ROS involved in diﬀerent reaction mechanisms.
Several corresponding reaction mechanisms of heterogeneous catalytic
ozonation have been carried out in previous investigations, including the
radical mechanism, surface complexes theory, oxygen vacancies theory and
the surface atomic oxygen mechanism.
According to previous studies performed on several transition metal oxi-
des, catalytic ozonation mainly follows the radical oxidation pathways in
some cases in which O2
 and OH are the main ROS involved in the het-
erogeneous catalytic ozonation. The surface-bond and/or isolated hydroxyl
groups on the surface of metal oxides can accelerate the decomposition of
ozone, subsequently initiating the generation of strong oxidative ROS,
8
Chapter 1

including O2
, OH and even 1O2. Specifically, this is greatly prone to the
hydroxylation that occurred on the surface of metal oxides in the aqueous
solution; the Brønsted acid sites can then be observed in these situations by
delivering the protons from the surface hydroxyl groups on metal oxides.
Meanwhile, diverse metal cations, as well as coordinately unsaturated oxy-
gen, can be formed, which may be used at the Lewis acid and base centers
for heterogeneous catalytic ozonation. Surface hydroxyl groups and these
active centers deposited on the surface of metal oxides not only aﬀect the
adsorption of organic contaminants but also influence ozone decomposition
during catalytic ozonation. Therefore, the Brønsted acid sites, as well as the
Lewis acid and base sites, are regarded as the reactive centers of metal oxide
catalysts for the degradation of organic contaminants in heterogeneous
catalytic ozonation, which always reacts with ozone according to its elec-
trophilic or nucleophilic property. Generally, ozone can combine primarily
with the active centers on the surface of metal oxides and can then be de-
composed into diﬀerent radicals through a series of catalytic reactions (eqn
(1.1)–(1.5)). The corresponding catalytic ozonation mechanisms by typical
transition metal oxides are shown in Figure 1.1.
O3 þ Me–OH2
1-Me–OH1 þ HO3
(1.1)
2O3 þ Me–OH-Me–O2
 þ HO3 þ O2
(1.2)
Me–OH1 þ H2O-Me–OH2
1 þ OH
(1.3)
Me–O2
 þ O3 þ H2O-Me–OH þ O2 þ HO3
(1.4)
HO3-OH þ O2
(1.5)
For example, Sun et al. have investigated the catalytic eﬃciency of OA in
the MnOx/O3 system, in which OH is the primary ROS followed by the
Figure 1.1
Possible radical catalytic ozonation mechanisms of metal oxides. Repro-
duced from ref. 1 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019.
Heterogeneous Catalytic Ozonation over Metal Oxides and Mechanism Discussion
9

radical mechanism.39 The protonated surface hydroxyl groups (Mn–OH2
1)
significantly promote the adsorption of OA and the generation of OH on the
surface of MnOx in catalytic ozonation, which can play a critical role in the
catalytic capability of metal oxides catalysis. The superior degradation eﬃ-
ciency of OA can be achieved by adding the MnOx because of an increasing
number of surface hydroxyl groups generated on the surface of MnOx. Fur-
thermore, Sui et al. also have demonstrated that FeOOH as an eﬃcient
heterogeneous ozonation catalyst can eﬀectively accelerate the generation of
OH under acidic and neutral pH conditions and further improve the re-
moval capability of OA by ozonation alone.26 It is clear that all the proto-
nated and neutral hydroxyl groups on the surface of typical metal oxides can
be used as the active sites for decomposing ozone into OH.
In addition, previous studies have shown that oxygen vacancy (OV), which is
a 2-electron donor and is commonly distributed on the surface of transition
metal oxides, is the major factor for organic contaminants removal during
catalytic ozonation. Jia et al. have proposed the possible mechanism for ozone
decomposition according to the involvement and recycling of oxygen vacancy
deposited on the MnO2.11 First of all, ozone molecules combine with oxygen
vacancy existing on the metal oxides’ surface by withdrawing two electrons
from oxygen vacancy to the oxygen atom of ozone when ozone contacts the
ozonation catalyst. Thus an oxygen species (O2) in the oxygen vacancy site
and an oxygen molecule that desorbs into the air can be generated, as de-
scribed in eqn (1.6). Subsequently, the oxygen molecule and peroxide species
(O2
2) are produced by the reaction of another ozone molecule with oxygen
species (eqn (1.7)). As shown in eqn (1.8), O2
2 finally decomposes to release
an oxygen molecule and consequently recovers the oxygen vacancy, a reaction
that can occur circularly in ozone decomposition.
O3 þ OV-O2 þ O2
(1.6)
O3 þ O2-O2 þ O2
2
(1.7)
O2
2-O2 þ OV
(1.8)
Although the various catalytic reaction mechanisms have been introduced
specifically, the process of catalytic ozonation by transition metal oxides is
much more complicated and involves many reactions and reactive species.
Generally, in many cases the outcome depends on the coexistence of various
catalytic mechanisms during the catalytic ozonation processes.
1.1.2
Catalytic Ozonation over Other Single Metal Oxides
In addition to transition metal oxides, some other metal oxides are used as
catalysts during the ozonation process. Aluminum, titanium, magnesium and
calcium oxides have been the common ozonation catalysts in previous re-
search. Their performances and possible mechanisms for heterogeneous
catalytic ozonation of organic contaminants in water are briefly discussed next.
10
Chapter 1

1.1.2.1
Aluminum Oxides
Aluminum oxides can be regarded as suitable and alternative catalysts for the
mineralization of organic contaminants in heterogeneous catalytic ozonation,
including Al2O3 and AlOOH.40,41 Apart from their exceptional catalytic cap-
abilities, some study has been conducted on the ability of g-AlOOH and g-Al2O3
to exhibit excellent stabilities due to the small amount of leaching of aluminum
ions in the ozonation degradation of 2-isopropyl-3-methoxypyrazine (IPMP)
from water.42 The catalytic eﬃciency of IPMP by catalytic ozonation in the
presence of g-AlOOH and g-Al2O3 is 94.2% and 90.0%, respectively. In the
g-AlOOH/O3 system, the surface hydroxyl group on aluminum oxides also is a
dominantly active center for ozone decomposition in the formation of OH
during the heterogeneous catalytic ozonation of IPMP. While the surface
complexes can be easily produced through physical adsorption between the
ozone molecule and the catalyst surface in the heterogeneous catalytic ozona-
tion over g-Al2O3, they can further aﬀect the capability of IPMP degradation.
Based on these results, g-AlOOH and g-Al2O3 have exhibited diﬀerent reaction
mechanisms (shown in Figure 1.3). Therefore, a detailed introduction on the
application of these two kinds of aluminum oxides in heterogeneous catalytic
ozonation is presented here.
As we all know, there are both Lewis acid and basic sites (AlOH–H1 and
Al–OH) on the surface of g-Al2O3 since it is an amphoteric solid; thus the
number and structure of hydroxyl groups existing on the alumina surface
determine its acidity and basicity. Similarly, these hydroxyl groups are of
critical importance in ozone decomposition and ROS formation.43 Generally,
the number of basic sites decreases to some extent due to the adsorption of
carboxylates after catalytic ozonation, while several investigations give evi-
dence that the Lewis acid sites remain constant. Indeed, it has been recently
reported that Al2O3 can decompose ozone by the heterogeneous catalytic
ozonation and improve the generation of various ROS by the interaction be-
tween their hydroxyl groups and ozone. Ikhlaq et al. have demonstrated the
mechanisms of catalytic ozonation for coumarin degradation on g-alumina,
and the results show that alumina is an eﬃcient catalyst for coumarin removal
by catalytic ozonation.44 Catalytic ozonation for coumarin degradation follows
a corresponding radical mechanism in the presence of alumina, and OH can
be produced from the reaction between ozone and surface hydroxyl groups and
is almost certainly involved in the heterogeneous catalytic ozonation process.
Some other studies have demonstrated that g-Al2O3 reacts with O3 to
elevate the harvest of OH through various radical reactions involving O2

and/or ozonide radicals (O3
), which contributes to the more eﬃcient re-
moval of carboxylic acids and 2,4-dimethylphenol (2,4-DMP) than ozonation
alone.45 There was clear observation of the degradation of 2,4-DMP within
25 min by the heterogeneous catalytic ozonation over g-Al2O3. No adsorption
of 2,4-DMP has occurred on g-Al2O3, while an increase of 2,4-DMP oxidation
can be observed after adding g-Al2O3 in the ozonation process. Indeed, the
removal eﬃciencies of TOC in single ozonation and in catalytic ozonation by
Heterogeneous Catalytic Ozonation over Metal Oxides and Mechanism Discussion
11

g-Al2O3 is 14% and 46%, respectively. Similarly, the removal of COD has
increased from 35% to 75% in the g-Al2O3/O3 system. Moreover, the catalytic
eﬀect of a-Al2O3 has been studied by several ozonation systems, indicating a
crucial role of the active sites in catalytic ozonation. Although alumina is
regarded as an ineﬃcient adsorbent for BPA removal without ozone, there is
an obvious increase in BPA mineralization, which can reach above 90%
when alumina is joined in the ozonation system.46 In another investigation,
the results demonstrate that alumina remarkably promotes the degradation
eﬃciency of NOM in the ozonation process.47 In addition to the prominent
adsorption property of alumina, the NOM removal eﬃciency in hetero-
geneous catalytic ozonation is twice as high as that of ozonation alone. In
addition, there is no significant decline in the catalytic capability of alumina
during the catalytic ozonation process with 62 cycles, which is attributed to
the definite surface property of alumina.
Salla et al. have investigated and compared the performance of a-Al2O3 and
MnO2 for HAs removal in the catalytic ozonation process, indicating that
a-Al2O3 exhibits better activity than MnO2 for the catalytic ozonation of HAs.8
Moreover, a-Al2O3 in a few amounts has been used as an alternative catalyst
to degrade HAs in the ozonation process, and the catalytic reaction has taken
place on the interface of a-Al2O3 by decomposing ozone into various ROS to
further mineralize diverse organic contaminants. Also, g-AlOOH is widely
employed as an ozonation catalyst in the degradation of organic con-
taminants. For instance, the degradation of 2,4,6-trichloroanisole (TCA) has
been investigated in the heterogeneous catalytic ozonation process with g-
AlOOH. This study demonstrated that the catalytic eﬃciency can achieve 80%
within 10 min in catalytic ozonation when the initial concentration of TCA is
200 mg L1, whereas it is only 37.3% in ozonation alone.43 In addition, g-
AlOOH as an eﬀective catalyst has been further explored to remove 2-
methylisoborneol (MIB), while the eﬀect of adsorption occurring at the
interface of g-AlOOH also can be discussed for explaining the role of surface-
active centers in g-AlOOH (including acid and base sites) during hetero-
geneous catalytic ozonation.48 The authors also discuss the mechanism of
catalytic ozonation, in which surface hydroxyl groups of g-AlOOH play a vital
role in the adsorption and ozonation of MIB. The results of radical scavenger
experiments have indicated that the surface hydroxyl groups determine the
catalytic capability of g-AlOOH in the ozonation process and that they are
active sites of catalysts. In addition, the radical mechanism may be involved
by exploring the pathway of catalytic ozonation by g-AlOOH, in which the
chemical adsorption occurs at the interface of g-AlOOH by the interaction
between surface hydroxyl groups and MIB. Owing to the competitive reaction
on the interface, there are significant eﬀects on ozone decomposition and
ROS generation. Therefore, the adsorption occurring in the active centers can
restrain the formation of ROS and inhibit the catalytic ozonation of MIB. An
intensively study of the surface structure and property of ozonation catalysts
would be beneficial for the in-depth understanding of the reaction mech-
anism in heterogeneous catalytic ozonation.
12
Chapter 1

1.1.2.2
Titanium Oxides
As an inexpensive, eﬃcient and notable catalyst, titanium dioxide (TiO2) is
used in a variety of technological fields, especially those having to do with
energy and environment.49 Generally, TiO2 comes in two types, anatase and
rutile, and has been intensely applied in photocatalysis due to its semi-
conductor characteristics and other properties. According to previous stud-
ies, TiO2 eﬀectively accelerates ozone decomposition into
OH for the
improvement of catalytic eﬃciency in organic contaminants removal in the
heterogeneous catalytic ozonation, especially the rutile phase. In fact, TiO2
exhibits superior capability in the catalytic ozonation of ATZ compared to
ozonation alone.50 There is a remarkable increase in ATZ degradation eﬃ-
ciency with the increase of the amount of TiO2 and ozone, but it is clear that
there is no influence on catalytic ozonation by the diﬀerent initial concen-
trations of ATZ. Ninety-three percent degradation eﬃciency of ATZ can be
achieved within 30 min in heterogeneous catalytic ozonation, whereas
mineralization achieves 56% in the same conditions.
Another study compared the heterogeneous catalytic ozonation over TiO2
catalyst with ozonation alone for the degradation of naproxen and carba-
mazepine, and the results reveal that two kinds of organic contaminants are
completely removed within several minutes in catalytic ozonation.51 Never-
theless, the degradation of naproxen and carbamazepine in ozone alone
without TiO2 catalyst takes some time, and only 50% mineralization can be
reached in 20 min. In addition, the results show that the adsorption capacity
of the catalyst significantly aﬀects the ozonation eﬃciency, which is con-
sistent with that of alumina previously mentioned. More hydroxyl radicals
are generated from ozone decomposition for improving the mineralization
degree in catalytic ozonation since the adsorption can take place on acid
catalytic sites, especially in slightly acidic conditions. Moreover, the influ-
ences of ozonation and heterogeneous catalytic ozonation over TiO2 on the
structure and the amount of NOM have been studied and compared.52 In the
heterogeneous catalytic ozonation process, producing radicals is favorable in
NOM degradation, which follows the radical mechanism. And the DOC re-
moval eﬃciency in heterogeneous catalytic ozonation (up to 18%) is higher
than that of ozonation alone (only 6%).
As we all know, there are abundant oxygen vacancies with Ti31 atoms in
the lattice of both anatase- and rutile-phase TiO2. According to the oxygen
vacancy theory, ozone molecules easily combine with oxygen vacancy on the
TiO2 surface by withdrawing two electrons from oxygen vacancy to the oxy-
gen atom of ozone, which contributes to the generation of strong oxidative
ROS for organic contaminants removal during catalytic ozonation. Also, the
morphology and crystal phase of TiO2 can be regarded as the primary in-
fluences on their catalytic capabilities in heterogeneous catalytic ozonation.
Therefore, some research has been conducted on the eﬀect of the morph-
ology and crystal structure of TiO2 on the catalytic ozonation of phenol.53 It
has been indicated that TiO2, with its high specific surface area and
Heterogeneous Catalytic Ozonation over Metal Oxides and Mechanism Discussion
13

abundant surface hydroxyl groups, shows excellent catalytic activity for
phenol removal in catalytic ozonation. Apart from the surface property, the
crystal phase of TiO2 exerts a great influence on its capability since TiO2 with
diﬀerent crystal phases possesses various amounts of oxygen vacancy, which
contributes to the performance of the heterogeneous catalytic ozonation. For
instance, many surface hydroxyl groups are deposited on the rutile rather
than other crystalline phases, and the degradation of phenol strongly relies
on the concentration of surface hydroxyl groups. In conclusion, the mech-
anism of catalytic ozonation over TiO2 catalyst is related to the adsorption
capacity of the reaction intermediates on the Lewis acid sites of the TiO2
surface and does not follow the pathway of radicals.
Furthermore, the crystal facet of TiO2 also can severely influence their cata-
lytic eﬃciencies of ozonation. For anatase TiO2 catalyst, the thermodynamically
stable (101) facet, rather than the more reactive (001) facet, dominates catalytic
eﬃciency due to the rapid decrease of the surface with high reactivity during the
crystal growth process as a result of the minimization of surface energy.54
However, the catalytic activity of TiO2 with exposed (001) facets could be
enhanced through surface fluorination, and the ozonation eﬃciency of OA
clearly can be accelerated by adding fluorinated TiO2 catalyst.55 Thus it can be
deduced that two aspects, the high surface energy of (001) facets and the
increased oxygen vacancies, contribute to the improved activity of fluorinated
TiO2 in the catalytic ozonation.
1.1.2.3
Magnesium and Calcium Oxides
Magnesium oxides and calcium oxides have always gathered much attention
for catalytic ozonation as a result of their superior catalytic performances in
organic contaminants degradation. In addition, magnesium and calcium
oxides have a variety of advantages, including abundant surface basic sites,
high insolubility, low toxicity, environmental friendliness and large specific
surface area, which promote their application in heterogeneous catalytic
ozonation.56–60 First, MgO has been applied especially to the removal of COD
and phenol from wastewater. The influence of certain factors on the eﬃciency
of the catalytic ozonation also is evaluated, including MgO dosage, solution
pH and the coexisting substance in the wastewater.61 The experiment results
reveal that 70% of the COD and 96% of the phenol are respectively removed at
neutral pH in the MgO/O3 system and that a synergistic eﬃciency for phenol
degradation and COD removal can reach 39%. Meanwhile, the organic azo dye
(Red 198) is degraded by the heterogeneous catalytic ozonation over MgO.56
The catalytic eﬃciency of Red 198 has been greatly enhanced by adding MgO
catalyst; thus the superior activity of heterogeneous catalytic ozonation leads
to a shortened reaction time compared to single ozonation. It takes only 9 min
to completely remove Red 198 in the heterogeneous catalytic ozonation, while
the reaction time is about 30 min in ozonation alone. In the previous study,
various metal oxides as the catalyst (such as Co, Ni, Fe, Sn, Mn, Cu, Mg and Al
oxides) are evaluated for the ozonation of ammonia nitrogen in the presence
14
Chapter 1

of Cl, indicating that MgO possesses the optimum catalytic activity for the
decomposition of ammonia nitrogen.36
Due to the notable eﬀects of surface area on its catalytic activity, the MgO
catalyst synthesized by the conventional approach possesses a relatively
large particle size and low specific surface area. Therefore, an increasing
number of nano-sized MgO have been developed recently and applied for
catalytic ozonation due to their controlled particle size and crystallinity. The
use of a nano-sized MgO catalyst to degrade quinoline in wastewater has
been investigated, and the results show that about 90.7% of quinolone can
be eﬀectively removed after 15 min.62 It is also evidenced that the OH
produced from ozone decomposition by the nano-sized MgO catalyst con-
tributes to quinoline mineralization and that the partial adsorption occur-
ring on the surface of nano-sized MgO can be ignored. In addition,
mesoporous nanocrystalline MgO nanoparticles have been prepared by the
hydrothermal or sol–gel approach and applied to improve the ozonation
eﬃciency of acetaminophen, which indicates this MgO has superior catalytic
activity in catalytic ozonation.63 The functional groups on the MgO surface
are crucial for boosting the ozone decomposition to OH, in which the re-
action between O3 molecules and the hydroxyl groups can occur on the
interface. The reaction between hydroxyl radical with acetaminophen mol-
ecules can also take place in the solution. In addition, MgO catalysts can
adsorb the water molecules and dissociate them into hydroxyl radicals and
hydrogen ions, thus enhancing the amount of OH in the heterogeneous
catalytic ozonation process.
Indeed, the surface properties of catalysts, such as the exposed crystal
facets, determine their active sites and markedly aﬀect their catalytic per-
formance in heterogeneous catalytic ozonation. Several MgO nanocrystals
with diﬀerent crystal facets of (111), (110), (100) and (200) have been
synthesized and applied to investigate their reactivity in the catalytic ozona-
tion of Escherichia coli.64 Their catalytic capabilities follow the order of
MgO(111)4MgO(200)4MgO(110)4MgO(100), indicating that the crystal fa-
cets play a crucial role in catalytic activity. This is also evidenced by scavenger
experiments in which OH detected in the heterogeneous catalytic ozonation
was the main ROS in the MgO(111)/O3 system, while more direct ozonation
and a portion of O2
 can be observed in other catalytic ozonation processes.
Calcium oxides are relatively inexpensive solids, which have a variety of
properties and applications, certainly including wastewater treatment and
remediation. Among them, CaO2 can be regarded as a stable source of
oxygen release depending on the pH of the solution since it can react with
water molecules to generate hydrogen peroxide and calcium hydroxide.65
In Izadifard’s study, CaO2 and CaO are used for catalyzing O3 to degrade
sulfolane, whose complete removal and TOC can be achieved within 40 and
150 min with CaO2 and CaO, respectively.66 The results demonstrate that
both CaO2 and CaO are available and alternative catalysts for heterogeneous
catalytic ozonation treatment of wastewater contaminated with sulfolane. In
addition, CaO exhibits greater activity than other metal oxides in the
Heterogeneous Catalytic Ozonation over Metal Oxides and Mechanism Discussion
15

catalytic ozonation of cinnamaldehyde since it has Brønsted acid sites.59
Compared with the surface structure in a series of metal oxides, it is already
clear that CaO possesses only trace Lewis acid sites but has a strong base
site. According to its superior cinnamaldehyde conversion and benzaldehyde
selectivity, CaO, with its strong base sites, can boost the ozone de-
composition to various ROS, including *O, OH and O2
 etc. And the
amount and property of diﬀerent ROS generated from catalytic ozonation
have strongly depended on reaction temperature.
1.1.2.4
Reaction Mechanism Discussion
The typical radical pathway is the primary mechanism of heterogeneous
catalytic ozonation over diﬀerent metal oxides for organic contaminants
degradation. Generally, the free radicals, OH and O2
, are regarded as the
main ROS in the catalytic ozonation. Based on electron transfer, the catalytic
ozonation can occur in the surface-active center of metal oxides by dissoci-
ating the O–O bond in ozone to generate various ROS for contaminants deg-
radation. In Section 1.1.1.4, the mechanism of heterogeneous catalytic
ozonation following the radical pathway has been discussed in detail.
In addition to radical oxidation, previous studies also have investigated the
degradation pathway of carboxylates followed by non-radical oxidation in the
heterogeneous catalytic ozonation process, which is attributed to intra-
molecular electron transfer.67 Moreover, the pathway of organic degradation
depends on the generated surface complex in the active sites deposited on the
surface of metal oxides. Under certain conditions, organic matters in aqueous
solution react with the adsorbed ozone molecules on the interface of metal
oxides to generate the surface complexes that induce non-radical oxidation by
intermolecular electron transfer instead of ozone decomposition. Thus the
influence of solution pH (as well as pHpzc of the catalyst and pKa of the organics)
on catalytic ozonation eﬃciency has been investigated in the non-radical
pathways due to the significant eﬀect on the adsorption of ozone and organics.
The possible ozonation pathways for the surface-complex reactions can be
summarized in the following three cases (shown in Figure 1.2). First, organic
matter can be chemisorbed on the surface of the metal oxide catalysts and can
further react with ozone molecules leading to the generation of various ROS.
Then ozone molecules are chemisorbed on the surface of the metal oxide
catalysts, and the generated surface-ozone complexes can destroy the organic
contaminants. Finally, organic matter and ozone molecules are chemisorbed
on the surface of the metal oxide catalysts at the same time, and then the
organic contaminants are degraded by intramolecular electron transfer.
For the degradation of organic contaminants via a surface complex
mechanism, g-Al2O3 has been investigated as a typical ozonation catalyst in
the catalytic ozonation of 2-isopropyl-3-methoxypyrazine.42 The results re-
veal that ozone molecules adsorbed on the g-Al2O3 surface could either
directly oxidize organic matter or decompose into free radicals for catalytic
ozonation. However, the oxidation potential for direct ozone decomposition
16
Chapter 1

Figure 1.2
Possible surface-complex catalytic mechanisms of metal oxides. Repro-
duced from ref. 2 with permission from American Chemical Society,
Copyright 2020.
Figure 1.3
Proposed reaction pathways in catalytic ozonation by diﬀerent alumina:
(A) g-AlOOH and (B) g-Al2O3. Reproduced from ref. 42 with permission
from Elsevier, Copyright 2013.
Heterogeneous Catalytic Ozonation over Metal Oxides and Mechanism Discussion
17

can be promoted by increasing the amount of the adsorbed ozone on the
g-Al2O3 surface. Clearly, it is especially diﬃcult to achieve the complete
mineralization of contaminants by this surface complex due to coexisting
radical oxidation. Therefore, the surface complexes can acquire a mild
oxidation potential for unsaturated organic matter degradation, but the
mineralization of aliphatic acid cannot be realized.
Although diﬀerent ozonation mechanisms have been involved in hetero-
geneous catalytic ozonation over various metal oxides catalysts, the ozonation
eﬃciencies of catalysts depend to a large extent on their surface properties as
well as on the solution pH, which dominate the surface active sites and ozone
decomposition reactions in aqueous solutions. The physical and chemical
properties of metal oxide catalysts must be preferentially considered when
selecting the catalyst in the ozonation process, including the crystal size,
surface area, crystal phase, surface groups and even surface active sites.
Generally, hydroxyl groups situated on the metal oxide surface can behave as
Brønsted acid sites, and Lewis acids and Lewis bases are special sites located
on the metal cation and coordinatively unsaturated oxygen, respectively.
Those active sites on the surface of metal oxide catalysts are responsible for
catalytic eﬃciency in heterogeneous catalytic ozonation. The adsorption be-
havior of metal oxide catalysts is of great benefit to their activity of hetero-
geneous catalytic ozonation since the adsorption reaction is the preferential
stage in the overall process; thus it must be taken into consideration to im-
prove catalytic eﬃciency. All in all, the heterogeneous catalytic ozonation
process certainly involves various reactions, including the adsorption, single
ozonation, and catalytic ozonation of those metal oxides catalysts.
1.1.3
Mixed Metal Oxides for Catalytic Ozonation
An increasing number of mixed polymetallic oxides are used as the hetero-
geneous catalysts since they commonly possess greater catalytic capability
and stability than those of monometallic oxides. Two typical representatives,
perovskite and spinel-like oxides, have received increasing attention and
possess good catalytic abilities in catalytic ozonation because of their
availability, persistent structure, abundant metal valence states, controlled
morphologies and various exposed defects.
1.1.3.1
Perovskites
As alternative catalysts, mixed metal oxides possessing the perovskite
structure have been extensively utilized for catalytic ozonation of organic
contaminants during the last two decades.68–70 Generally, perovskites pos-
sess a formula of ABO3, in which A usually represents the rare earth cation
(the majority being La), and the B position has a transition metal cation.
Perovskite catalysts can endure the replacement of both cation sites, in
which the structural defects, including anionic and cationic vacancies, can
be generated when the A position is substituted by lower-valence metal ions.
18
Chapter 1

Subsequently, the oxidation state of metal ions is altered to maintain the
electrical neutrality of perovskites, and the extensively available oxygen also
can be formed with the increasing oxidation state of the B cation. The
generated oxygen vacancies are responsible for promoting the catalytic ac-
tivity in the ozonation process owing to the enhanced mobility of lattice
oxygen. Thus the use of these perovskite catalysts has especially promoted
applications involving ozone decomposition and has enhanced the catalytic
ozonation rate of organic contaminants, even improving the mineralization
degree during the ozonation process. To date, a series of perovskites (LaMO3,
M ¼ Fe, Mn, Co, Cu, Ti and Ni) have been investigated as an eﬀective al-
ternative in the heterogeneous catalytic ozonation process for organic con-
taminants degradation.
Initially, the perovskite LaTi0.15Cu0.85O3 has been successfully synthesized
and evaluated for the catalytic ozonation of pyruvic acid, resulting in the for-
mation of a refractory substance after catalytic ozonation.71 The same per-
ovskite was evaluated in the catalytic ozonation of diﬀerent phenolic
wastewaters, but no obvious changes were observed in this study according to
the results regarding removal eﬃciency and mineralization degree.72 There
were no diﬀerences in single ozonation and heterogeneous catalytic ozonation
for non-refractory wastewater. Thus the addition of perovskite can eﬀectively
dispose of those refractory organic contaminants in wastewater. It is evidenced
that there was no improvement in the removal eﬃciency of pharmaceutical
compounds when the catalysts were added into the single ozonation process in
ultrapure water.69 However, TOC removal is significantly increased in the
presence of perovskite catalysts, especially for copper perovskite, where 90% of
TOC removal could be achieved after 120 min. This is attributed to the for-
mation of hydroxyl radicals resulting from the reaction of ozone molecules
with hydrogen peroxide generated in the aromatic ring and unsaturated car-
bon bond-breaking. In addition, ozone decomposition occurred on the catalyst
surface, especially copper perovskite, leading to eﬃcient TOC removal.
Further investigation also has shown that a significant enhancement of
catalytic capability is observed in the presence of perovskites with a diﬀerent
composition, which severely aﬀects the catalytic property during the ozo-
nation process. For instance, several lanthanum-based perovskites were
carried out for the catalytic ozonation of organic contaminants.73 LaCoO3
has been supposed to be an eﬃcient catalyst for organic contaminants as a
result of the rapid ozonation rate, complete mineralization of organics and
negligible metal leaching. It exhibits significant catalytic activity for benzo-
triazole (BZA) degradation, where complete degradation and about 71% of
BrO3
 inhibition can be achieved within 15 min.70 While no catalytic activity
for BZA degradation can be observed in the LaFeO3/O3 process, there is 73%
of inhibition for the generation of BrO3
. In these cases, oxygen vacancies
play a crucial role in the heterogeneous catalytic ozonation as a result of the
ability to activate adsorbed species. It has been shown that H2O2 has an
important but varied eﬀect in diﬀerent ozonation systems and combines
with the surface hydroxyl groups to accelerate the BZA degradation and to
Heterogeneous Catalytic Ozonation over Metal Oxides and Mechanism Discussion
19

inhibit the generation of BrO3
. For other perovskites, LaMnO3 also certainly
exhibits catalytic performance, but it facilely suﬀers from the leaching of
metal cations. Moreover, LaMnO3 and La0.8Sr0.2MnO3 perovskites have
shown greatly inferior catalytic activity for ozone utilization in benzene
oxidation than manganese monoxide, and La sites in perovskite accelerate
the accumulation of less reactive by-product compounds on the catalysts.74
In the case of manganese-based perovskite, ozone decomposition and
organic contaminant degradation are decided by the catalyst composition.
Therefore, suitable modifications can be carried out to improve the
properties of catalysts in catalytic ozonation. In Afzal’s study, mesoporous
nanocast LaMnO3 and LaFeO3 perovskites have been synthesized and
applied eﬀectively for 2-chlorophenol degradation in the heterogeneous
catalytic ozonation process.75 It has been demonstrated that nanocast per-
ovskites, with their unique structure, exhibit higher catalytic eﬃciency than
their uncast counterparts, as well as highly active Mn3O4 and Fe2O3. Based
on various detailed analyses, it is evidenced that a neutrally charged surface
(MnOH), as well as a protonated surface (MnOH2
1), presented as more
catalytically active than the deprotonated surface (MnO) in promoting
ozone decomposition into
OH. Hence the generated
OH rather than
surface O2
2, *O, O2
 and 1O2 is the primary ROS that contributes to the
excellent activity in the heterogeneous catalytic ozonation process.
1.1.3.2
Spinel Oxides
Recently, some spinel oxides, with a general formula of AB2O4 in which A
and B are metal ions, also are being extensively investigated for organic
contaminants removal in heterogeneous catalytic ozonation systems owing
to their superior catalytic activity, various valence states, and high
stability.76–80 All kinds of spinel oxides have been synthesized and applied to
degrade the organic contaminants in catalytic ozonation. For instance,
several magnetic spinel ferrites, including CoFe2O4, CuFe2O4, NiFe2O4 and
ZnFe2O4, have been applied to dispose of shale gas in the heterogeneous
catalytic ozonation.81 It is obvious that these magnetic spinel oxides all oﬀer
attractive catalytic and recycling performance; their catalytic eﬃciencies
follow the order of CuFe2O44NiFe2O44CoFe2O44ZnFe2O4. Their capacities
of catalytic ozonation mainly rely on the surface property of these catalysts,
and the proposed interaction pathway follows the typical radicals-involved
process. Firstly, the ozone molecules can be adsorbed into the surface of the
spinel ferrite and react with the surface functional groups to generate vari-
ous radicals. In addition, the metal cations cycles in spinel oxides surface
such as Fe21/Fe31, Cu21/Cu1 and Co21/Co31 significantly aﬀect the gener-
ation of radicals. As shown in eqn (1.1)–(1.5), hydroxyl radicals could be fi-
nally produced by the series of chain reactions and then interact with the
targeted organic matters for contaminants removal.
Furthermore, the same kinds of spinel oxides have been synthesized and
investigated in the catalytic ozonation of oxalic acid.82 In this study, 68.3% of
20
Chapter 1

TOC could be removed within 120 min in the CoFe2O4/O3 system, indicating
CoFe2O4 has a more superior catalytic performance than others for oxalic
acid mineralization. The reason for the excellent catalytic performance is
that spinel oxides possess reducibility and electron-donating capacity; the
order of catalytic activity is CoFe2O4, NiFe2O4, CuFe2O4 and ZnFe2O4. Simi-
larly, the radical-based catalytic mechanisms and reaction pathways also can
be proposed in the cases of spinel oxides, which include the interaction of
ozone molecules with hydroxyl groups and metal ions on the surface of
catalysts.
Due to the fascinating electromagnetic property, a large amount of re-
search has been conducted on heterogeneous catalytic ozonation over
magnetic spinel ferrite for easily recycling.83–85 Magnetic spinel oxide crys-
tals have a completely inverse spinel structure, where iron ions have
occupied the tetrahedral and octahedral sites and all other metal ions (such
as Ni, Cu, Co, Mn etc.) have located in the octahedral sites. For instance,
Zhang et al. have prepared copper ferrite magnetic nanoparticles (CuFe2O4
MNPs) by the sol–gel approach for the catalytic ozonation of N,N-dimethy-
lacetamide (DMAC).86 The results have demonstrated that the removal eﬃ-
ciency of DMAC in the heterogeneous CuFe2O4/O3 process (95.4%) is much
higher than that of only CuFe2O4 catalyst (0%), ozonation alone (55.4%) and
other heterogeneous Fe2O3/O3 processes (32.1%). Hydroxyl groups on the
surface of CuFe2O4 catalyst are the active sites and contribute to the ozone
decomposition into OH as the dominant ROS in the CuFe2O4/O3 process.
Finally, a possible reaction mechanism in the CuFe2O4/O3 process has been
proposed according to research results, which mainly consists of ozonation
alone as well as homogeneous and heterogeneous catalytic ozonation.
Magnetic NiFe2O4 as a catalyst also has been used for catalytic ozonation
of di-n-butyl phthalate (DBP), and it has also been concluded that the surface
hydroxyl groups as the catalytic active centers could boost OH generation.87
Moreover, Ni21 in the catalyst could facilitate electron transfer from the
catalyst surface to induce ozone decomposition and enhance the formation
of hydroxyl radicals, which lead to the improvement of DBP degradation.
Additionally, magnetic NiFe2O4 could also be proposed for heterogeneous
catalytic ozonation of phenol contaminants,88 in which study, Lewis acid
sites were indicated as catalytic reactive centers in the process. Therefore,
the reasons for the superior catalytic activity of NiFe2O4 catalyst are not only
the greater number of surface-active centers, including surface hydroxyl
groups and Lewis acid sites, but also the enhanced interfacial electron
transfer. Furthermore, the magnetic NiFe2O4 can be easily and eﬃciently
separated from the heterogeneous catalytic system with an external magnet,
making it promising for being an attractively separable catalyst in the het-
erogeneous catalytic ozonation of organic contaminants.
In addition, ZnAl2O4, another spinel-like ozonation catalyst, has been
significantly reported to improve phenol degradation, in which the removal
rate of phenol with a high concentration of 300 mg L1 can arrive at 73.4%
within 60 min.89 After recycling four times on the catalyst, there is a slight
Heterogeneous Catalytic Ozonation over Metal Oxides and Mechanism Discussion
21

decrease (only 5.7%) in the removal eﬃciency of phenol, illustrating the
excellent reusability of ZnAl2O4 in the heterogeneous catalytic ozonation
process. In addition to high reusability, ZnAl2O4 possesses brilliant stability
since it can be extensively utilized in a wide pH range from 3.3 to 9.3, be-
coming a promising ozonation catalyst for wastewater treatment. These
studies also imply that surface hydroxyl groups are the active sites and that
OH is the main ROS in catalytic ozonation.90
For the spinel oxides, various metal cations possess diﬀerent valence
states, which can facilitate electron transfer on the catalyst surface for fur-
ther boosting ozone decomposition to enhance oxidation eﬃciency.91 To
further study the catalytic mechanism, the degradation of dimethyl
phthalate by CuFe-based spinel oxide as an ozonation catalyst has been
evaluated, and the redox recycling of Fe21/Fe31 and Cu1/Cu21 at the surface
of the catalyst can accelerate electron transfer and OH generation. Similar
results have been obtained in the degradation of organic dye by CuAl2O4
catalyzed ozonation, and almost 100% of the dye and 87.2% of the COD can
be removed within 25 min at neutral pH in this heterogeneous catalytic
ozonation process. It is worth mentioning that the catalytic reaction rate in
heterogeneous ozonation is higher than that of other systems since the
better textural properties and the higher density of active sites in CuAl2O4
(both Cu21 and Al31) are critical for the degradation of the contaminants.
1.1.3.3
Mechanism of Catalytic Ozonation
The reaction mechanisms of catalytic ozonation over mixed metal oxides are
more complex due to the distinctive structure of catalysts. For example, a
large number of defective sites and active sites exist in mixed metal oxides,
including oxygen vacancies, acid sites, and basic sites.92 Also, metal cations
that possessed diverse valence states on the catalyst surface are beneficial for
redox cycling and electron transfer leading to the facile generation of ROS in
catalytic ozonation.
Some studies have reported oxygen vacancies as the active centers of
catalysis for radical-based oxidation in catalytic ozonation. In La-based
perovskite, the lattice oxygen vacancies possess the capability to adsorb
the ROS, which is crucial for catalytic eﬃciency in the ozonation process.73
Similarly, it is observed that the oxygen vacancies and multivalence Mn of
perovskite are at the Lewis acid sites, which are regarded as the active cen-
ters for ozone decomposition and the formation of OH, O2
, and 1O2.93
Generally, Lewis acid sites are covered by hydroxyl groups on the perovskite
surface, which might mean that the reaction between ozone molecules with
hydroxyl groups rather than with Lewis acid sites in the perovskite can
preferentially occur.
According to previous studies, the overall heterogeneous mechanism of
catalytic ozonation over mixed metal oxides is illustrated in Figure 1.4.
Generally, the radical-based and non-radical mechanisms of catalytic ozo-
nation have been proposed by the interaction of ozone with surface active
22
Chapter 1

sites on mixed metal oxides, which can accelerate the decomposition of
ozone. The surface hydroxyl groups are primarily formed on account of the
interaction between a water molecule and metal ions located in the A-site of
mixed metal oxides. In some cases, the surface hydroxyl groups with positive
charges are prone to be formed since the pH of the solution containing or-
ganic contaminants is basically lower than pHpzc of spinel oxides. Then it can
react with ozone molecules to generate the intermediate hydroozonide rad-
icals (HO3) by electrostatic force, while OH is produced by the reaction of
ozone molecules with hydrogen bonds. An electron transfer from the bivalent
metal ion in the A site to ozone molecules can be observed, thus resulting in
the generation of O3
 and the trivalent metal ion in the A site. Also, HO3 as
well as OH are formed by the reaction between the intermediate O3
 and
hydrogen ions in the solution. At the same time, the trivalent A site metal ion
is reduced to its bivalent state by the lattice oxygen. It should be emphasized
that the coexistence of iron ions with multiple valences and metal ions in the
A site may accelerate the process of ozone decomposition.
On account of the ROS from catalytic activation of ozone molecules, het-
erogeneous catalytic ozonation processes have been evidenced to surpass single
ozonation by the non-selective mineralization of contaminants with superior
eﬃciency. In addition to OH, other ROS such as O2
 and 1O2 can also be
generated in catalytic ozonation, which contributes to the degradation of or-
ganic contaminants. Meanwhile, the pH dependence in ozone decomposition
can be rationally regulated by the catalysts, adapting the eﬀectiveness of ozo-
nation to a wider pH range. For the heterogeneous catalytic ozonation over
mixed metal oxides, the variable valence states of metal ions are responsible for
the electron transfer, and the surface hydroxyl groups and oxygen vacancies of
the catalysts can serve as Lewis acid sites for accepting electrons.
Figure 1.4
Catalytic mechanism of oxalic acid ozonation catalyzed by spinel ferrites.
Reproduced from ref. 82 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2017.
Heterogeneous Catalytic Ozonation over Metal Oxides and Mechanism Discussion
23

1.1.4
Summary
To sum up, a comprehensive understanding of the heterogeneous catalytic
ozonation process over various metal oxides is provided in this chapter based
on advanced research. The characteristics of heterogeneous ozonation cata-
lysts have been proven to significantly aﬀect their catalytic activities and ef-
ficiencies, such as their components, crystalline structure and morphology.
Moreover, the heterogeneous catalytic ozonation mechanisms over various
metal oxides have been summarized and analyzed in detail. In particular,
active centers on the surface of diﬀerent metal oxides are described re-
spectively, including hydroxyl groups, metal cations, oxygen vacancies, acid
sites and basic sites. Generally, the radical and/or non-radical degradation
pathways including radical mechanism, surface complexes theory and oxy-
gen vacancies mechanism are involved in the ozonation process.
Although numerous studies on heterogeneous catalytic ozonation have
been investigated in the last decade, several limitations restrict the further
applications of these metal oxide catalysts in water treatment, including the
leaching of toxic metal ions and the reuse of solid catalysts separated from
the aqueous solution. Hence developing environmental-friendly hetero-
geneous ozonation catalysts with excellent long-term stability is the key to
accelerating the practical application of this technique. In this chapter, the
metal oxides composed of natural abundant elements (Mg, Ca etc. instead of
transition metals) have exhibited a satisfying ozonation performance, where
the organic pollutants can also be completely degraded and mineralized. In
addition, an in-depth understanding of the possible ozonation mechanism
regarding metal oxides can provide theoretical support for properly de-
signing and applying ozonation catalysts.
References
1. J. L. Wang and H. Chen, Sci. Total Environ., 2020, 704, 135249.
2. G. F. Yu, Y. X. Wang, H. B. Cao, H. Zhao and Y. B. Xie, Environ. Sci.
Technol., 2020, 54(10), 5931.
3. J. Nawrocki, Appl. Catal. B: Environ., 2013, 142–143, 465.
4. B. Peng, W. J. Bao, L. L. Wei, R. D. Zhang, Z. J. Wang, Z. C. Wang and
Y. Wei, Petrol. Sci., 2019, 16(4), 912.
5. S. Khuntia, M. K. Sinha and P. Singh, Environ. Technol., 2019, 1.
6. J. Z. Hu, Y. M. Li, S. S. Nan, B. A. Yoza, Y. F. Li, Y. L. Zhan, Q. H. Wang,
Q. X. Li, S. H. Guo and C. M. Chen, Front. Chem., 2020, 8, 80.
7. T. Gopi, G. Swetha, S. Chandra Shekar, C. Ramakrishna, B. Saini,
R. Krishna and P. V. L. Rao, Catal. Commun., 2017, 92, 51.
8. J. S. Salla, N. Padoin, S. M. Amorim, G. Li Puma and R. F. P. M. Moreira,
J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2020, 8(2), 102780.
9. F. Nawaz, Y. B. Xie, J. D. Xiao, H. B. Cao, Z. A. Ghazi, Z. Guo and Y. Chen,
Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6(21), 7875.
24
Chapter 1

10. F. Nawaz, H. B. Cao, Y. B. Xie, J. D. Xiao, Y. Chen and Z. A. Ghazi,
Chemosphere, 2017, 168, 1457.
11. J. B. Jia, P. Y. Zhang and L. Chen, Appl. Catal. B: Environ., 2016, 189, 210.
12. Y. M. Dong, K. Li, P. P. Jiang, G. L. Wang, H. Y. Miao, J. J. Zhang and
C. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4(74), 39167.
13. R. Andreozzi, A. Insola, V. Caprio, R. Marotta and V. Tufano, Appl. Catal.
A: Gen., 1996, 138, 75.
14. H. Zhao, Y. M. Dong, P. P. Jiang, G. L. Wang, J. J. Zhang, K. Li and
C. Y. Feng, New J. Chem., 2014, 38(4), 1743.
15. Y. M. Dong, H. X. Yang, K. He, S. Q. Song and A. M. Zhang, Appl. Catal. B:
Environ., 2009, 85(3–4), 155.
16. K. Luo, S. X. Zhao, Y. F. Wang, S. J. Zhao and X. H. Zhang, New J. Chem.,
2018, 42(9), 6770.
17. X. Q. Tan, Y. F. Wan, Y. J. Huang, C. He, Z. L. Zhang, Z. Y. He, L. L. Hu,
J. W. Zeng and D. Shu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2017, 321, 162.
18. F. Nawaz, Y. B. Xie, H. B. Cao, J. D. Xiao, Y. Q. Wang, X. H. Zhang, M. J. Li
and F. Duan, Catal. Today, 2015, 258, 595.
19. J. L. Zhang, T. Zhuang, S. J. Liu, G. C. Zhang and K. L. Huo, J. Environ.
Chem. Eng., 2020, 8(4), 103967.
20. M. S. Jin, J. W. Kim, J. M. Kim, J. Jurng, G. N. Bae, J. K. Jeon and
Y. K. Park, Powder Technol., 2011, 214(3), 458.
21. A. Ziylan and N. H. Ince, Catal. Today, 2015, 240, 2.
22. L. Y. Yang, M. Sheng, Y. J. Li, W. B. Xue, K. Li and G. M. Cao, Chemo-
sphere, 2020, 238, 124639.
23. L. Q. Yan, J. S. Bing and H. C. Wu, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9(1), 14752.
24. M. Trapido, Y. Veressinina, R. Munter and J. Kallas, Ozone Sci. Eng.,
2005, 27(5), 359.
25. Y. L. Nie, C. Hu, N. N. Li, L. Yang and J. H. Qu, Appl. Catal. B: Environ.,
2014, 147, 287.
26. M. H. Sui, L. Sheng, K. X. Lu and F. Tian, Appl. Catal. B: Environ., 2010,
96(1–2), 94.
27. O. Oputu, M. Chowdhury, K. Nyamayaro, O. Fatoki and V. Fester,
J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2015, 35, 83.
28. K. A. Lin, T. Y. Lin, Y. C. Chen and Y. F. Lin, Catal. Commun., 2017,
95, 40.
29. R. L. Yin, W. Q. Guo, X. J. Zhou, H. S. Zheng, J. S. Du, Q. L. Wu,
J. S. Chang and N. Q. Ren, RSC Adv., 2016, 6(23), 19265.
30. S. M. Zhu, B. Z. Dong, Y. H. Yu, L. J. Bu, J. Deng and S. Q. Zhou,
Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 328, 527.
31. B. B. Xu, F. Qi, J. Z. Zhang, H. N. Li, D. Z. Sun, D. Robert and Z. L. Chen,
Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 284, 942.
32. C. Hu, S. T. Xing, J. H. Qu and H. He, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 5978.
33. A. Abdedayem, M. Guiza, F. J. R. Toledo and A. Ouederni, Sep. Purif.
Technol., 2017, 184, 308.
34. Y. M. Dong, K. He, L. Yin and A. M. Zhang, Nanotechnology, 2007,
18(43), 435602.
Heterogeneous Catalytic Ozonation over Metal Oxides and Mechanism Discussion
25

35. Y. M. Dong, G. L. Wang, P. P. Jiang, A. M. Zhang, L. Yue and X. M. Zhang,
B. Kor. Chem. Soc., 2010, 31, 2830.
36. S.-i. Ichikawa, L. Mahardiani and Y. Kamiya, Catal. Today, 2014, 232, 192.
37. L. Mahardiani and Y. Kamiya, J. Jpn. Pet. Inst., 2016, 59(1), 31.
38. P. A. Krisbiantoro, T. Togawa, L. Mahardiani, H. Aihara, R. Otomo and
Y. Kamiya, Appl. Catal. A: Gen., 2020, 596, 117515.
39. Q. Q. Sun, L. S. Li, H. H. Yan, X. T. Hong, K. S. Hui and Z. Q. Pan,
Chem. Eng. J., 2014, 242, 348.
40. Z. S. Ncanana and V. S. R. Rajasekhar Pullabhotla, J. Environ. Chem. Eng.,
2019, 7(3), 103072.
41. P. Pocostales, P. A´lvarez and F. J. Beltra´n, Chem. Eng. J., 2011,
168(3), 1289.
42. F. Qi, B. Xu, Z. Chen, L. Feng, L. Zhang and D. Sun, Chem. Eng. J., 2013,
219, 527.
43. F. Qi, Z. L. Chen, B. B. Xu, J. M. Shen, J. Ma, C. Joll and A. Heitz,
Appl. Catal. B: Environ., 2008, 84(3–4), 684.
44. A. Ikhlaq, D. R. Brown and B. Kasprzyk-Hordern, Appl. Catal. B: Environ.,
2012, 123–124, 94.
45. J. Vittenet, W. Aboussaoud, J. Mendret, J. S. Pic, H. Debellefontaine,
N. Lesage, K. Faucher, M. H. Manero, F. Thibault Starzyk, H. Leclerc,
A. Galarneau and S. Brosillon, Appl. Catal. A: Gen., 2015, 504, 519.
46. R. Keykavoos, R. Mankidy, H. Ma, P. Jones and J. Soltan, Sep. Purif.
Technol., 2013, 107, 310.
47. J. Nawrocki and L. Fijo"ek, Appl. Catal. B: Environ., 2013, 142–143, 533.
48. F. Qi, B. B. Xu, Z. L. Chen, L. Q. Zhang, P. Y. Zhang and D. Z. Sun,
Chem. Eng. J., 2010, 165(2), 490.
49. D. Alrousan, A. Afkhami, K. Bani Melhem and P. Dunlop, Water, 2020,
12(10), 2811.
50. Y. X. Yang, H. B. Cao, P. Peng and H. M. Bo, J. Hazard. Mater., 2014,
279, 444.
51. R. Rosal, A. Rodrı´guez, M. S. Gonzalo and E. Garcı´a-Calvo, Appl. Catal. B:
Environ., 2008, 84(1–2), 48.
52. J. J. Molnar, J. R. Agbaba, B. D. Dalmacija, M. T. Klasnja, M. B. Dalmacija
and M. M. Kragulj, Sci. Total Environ, 2012, 425, 169.
53. S. Song, Z. W. Liu, Z. Q. He, A. L. Zhang and J. M. Chen, Environ. Sci.
Technol., 2010, 44, 3913.
54. H. G. Yang, C. H. Sun, S. Z. Qiao, J. Zou, G. Liu, S. C. Smith, H. M. Cheng
and G. Q. Lu, Nature, 2008, 453(7195), 638.
55. Z. Q. He, Q. L. Cai, F. Y. Hong, Z. Jiang, J. M. Chen and S. Song, Ind. Eng.
Chem. Res., 2012, 51(16), 5662.
56. G. Moussavi and M. Mahmoudi, Chem. Eng. J., 2009, 152(1), 1.
57. H. L. Liu, L. Chen and L. Ji, J. Hazard. Mater., 2019, 376, 125.
58. Q. Wang, Z. C. Yang, B. Chai, S. Cheng, X. H. Lu and X. F. Bai, RSC Adv.,
2016, 6(18), 14730.
59. J. F. Wu, T. M. Su, Y. X. Jiang, X. L. Xie, Z. Z. Qin and H. B. Ji, Appl. Surf.
Sci., 2017, 412, 290.
26
Chapter 1

60. J. He, W. C. Song, Z. Y. Gao and X. B. Huang, Environ. Eng. Sci., 2020,
37(6), 450.
61. G. Moussavi, A. Khavanin and R. Alizadeh, Appl. Catal. B: Environ., 2010,
97(1–2), 160.
62. H. Zhu, W. C. Ma, H. J. Han, Y. X. Han and W. W. Ma, Chem. Eng. J.,
2017, 327, 91.
63. A. Mashayekh-Salehi, G. Moussavi and K. Yaghmaeian, Chem. Eng. J.,
2017, 310, 157.
64. J. Chen, S. Xu, H. Yang, C. Au, S. H. Tian and Y. Xiong, J. Chem. Technol.
Biotechnol., 2018, 93(6), 1648.
65. S. G. Lu, X. Zhang and Y. F. Xue, J. Hazard. Mater., 2017, 337, 163.
66. M. Izadifard, G. Achari and C. H. Langford, Chemosphere, 2018, 197, 535.
67. T. Zhang and J. P. Croue´, Appl. Catal. B: Environ., 2014, 144, 831.
68. W. J. Sun, H. Z. Wei, L. Y. An, C. Y. Jin, H. L. Wu, Z. A. Xiong, C. Y. Pu and
C. L. Sun, Appl. Catal. B: Environ., 2019, 245, 20.
69. F. J. Beltra´n, P. Pocostales, P. Alvarez, J. F. Garcı´a Araya and O. Gimeno,
Ozone Sci. Eng, 2010, 32(4), 230.
70. Y. T. Zhang, Y. J. Xia, Q. W. Li, F. Qi, B. B. Xu and Z. L. Chen, Sep. Purif.
Technol., 2018, 197, 261.
71. F. Rivas, M. Carbajo, F. Beltran, B. Acedo and O. Gimeno, Appl. Catal. B:
Environ., 2006, 62(1–2), 93.
72. M. Carbajo, F. J. Beltra´n, O. Gimeno, B. Acedo and F. J. Rivas, Appl. Catal.
B: Environ., 2007, 74(3–4), 203.
73. C. A. Orge, J. J. M. O´rfa˜o, M. F. R. Pereira, B. P. Barbero and L. E. Cadu´s,
Appl. Catal. B: Environ., 2013, 140–141, 426.
74. H. Einaga, N. Maeda and Y. Teraoka, Appl. Catal. B: Environ., 2013,
142–143, 406.
75. S. Afzal, X. Quan and J. L. Zhang, Appl. Catal. B: Environ., 2017, 206,
692.
76. J. Lu, X. D. Wei, Y. Chang, S. H. Tian and Y. Xiong, J. Chem. Technol.
Biotechnol., 2016, 91(4), 985.
77. S. S. Sable, F. Medina and S. Contreras, Appl. Catal. B: Environ., 2014,
150–151, 30.
78. C. X. Fang, X. M. Gao, X. C. Zhang, J. H. Zhu, S. P. Sun, X. M. Wang,
W. D. Wu and Z. X. Wu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 551, 164.
79. J. S. D. Oliveira, J. D. S. Salla, R. C. Kuhn, S. L. Jahn and E. L. Foletto,
Mater. Res., 2018, 22(1), e20180405.
80. F. Z. Zhang, C. H. Wei, Y. Hu and H. Z. Wu, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2015,
156, 625.
81. P. X. Liu, Y. M. Ren, W. J. Ma, J. Ma and Y. C. Du, Chem. Eng. J., 2018,
345, 98.
82. F. Z. Zhang, C. H. Wei, K. Y. Wu, H. T. Zhou, Y. Hu and S. Preis,
Appl. Catal. A: Gen., 2017, 547, 60.
83. F. Qi, W. Chu and B. B. Xu, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 262, 552.
84. F. Qi, W. Chu and B. B. Xu, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 284, 28.
85. F. Qi, B. B. Xu and W. Chu, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2015, 396, 164.
Heterogeneous Catalytic Ozonation over Metal Oxides and Mechanism Discussion
27

86. H. Zhang, F. Z. Ji, Y. H. Zhang, Z. C. Pan and B. Lai, Sep. Purif. Technol.,
2018, 193, 368.
87. Y. M. Ren, Q. Dong, J. Feng, J. Ma, Q. Wen and M. L. Zhang, J. Colloid
Interface Sci., 2012, 382(1), 90.
88. H. Zhao, Y. M. Dong, G. L. Wang, P. P. Jiang, J. J. Zhang, L. N. Wu and
K. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 219, 295.
89. H. Zhao, Y. M. Dong, P. P. Jiang, G. L. Wang, J. J. Zhang and C. Zhang,
Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 260, 623.
90. Q. Z. Dai, Z. Zhang, T. T. Zhan, Z. T. Hu and J. M. Chen, ACS Omega,
2018, 3(6), 6506.
91. Z. Y. Bai, Q. Yang and J. L. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 300, 169.
92. X. K. Tian, J. L. Zhu, M. Tang, D. Wang, Y. L. Nie, L. Z. Yang, C. Dai,
C. Yang and L. Q. Lu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 402, 123475.
93. Y. X. Wang, L. L. Chen, H. B. Cao, Z. X. Chi, C. M. Chen, X. G. Duan,
Y. B. Xie, F. Qi, W. Y. Song, J. Liu and S. B. Wang, Appl. Catal. B: Environ.,
2019, 245, 546.
28
Chapter 1

CHAPTER 2
Heterogeneous Catalytic
Ozonation over Supported
Metal Oxides
ZHAOKUN XIONG,a,b YANG LIU,a,b PENG ZHOU,a,b
HENG ZHANG,a,b AND BO LAI*a,b
a State Key Laboratory of Hydraulics and Mountain River Engineering,
College of Architecture and Environment, Sichuan University, Chengdu
610065, P.R. China; b Sino-German Centre for Water and Health Research,
Sichuan University, Chengdu 610065, P.R. China
*Email: laibo@scu.edu.cn
Although tremendous eﬀorts have been devoted to develop catalysts for
heterogeneous catalytic ozonation, few catalysts can meet the requirements of
the favorable catalysts: fast ozonation rate, high organic removal eﬃciency,
long-term stability, good recyclability and easy separation from treated was-
tewater.1 The highly eﬃcient heterogeneous catalysts are usually composed of
micro- or nanoscale particles to provide a large specific surface area and great
number of active sites.2–4 However, the small sizes of those particles make
them diﬃcult to separate and collect from wastewater. In order to increase the
performance of metal oxides in catalyzing ozone, researchers often synthesize
metal oxides on corresponding supports to increase the active sites and surface
area of catalysts.5–8 The dispersion of transition metals (Fe, Cu, Co, Mn, Ni, Ce,
etc.) or oxides (Fe3O4, MnO2, CeO2, TiO2, FeOOH, etc.) on porous hard sup-
porters, such as Al2O3, TiO2 and zeolites, is a common catalyst production
Chemistry in the Environment Series No. 8
Advanced Ozonation Processes for Water and Wastewater Treatment: Active Catalysts and
Combined Technologies
Edited by Hongbin Cao, Yongbing Xie, Yuxian Wang and Jiadong Xiao
r The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry, www.rsc.org
29

method.9 The selection of the support, the active components of catalysts and
the preparation of the catalysts aﬀect the activity of a supported catalyst.
Therefore, the suitable metal oxides and supported carrier have been widely
investigated to meet the requirements of the industrial catalysts.
2.1
Typical Supported Metal Oxides as Ozonation
Catalysts
2.1.1
Metal Oxides/Al2O3
The porous feature of Al2O3 can enhance the adsorption of pollutants, and
the basic sites on the surface can promote the generation of hydroxyl rad-
icals (OH). In addition, Al2O3 has become one of the most typical supported
metal oxides for ozone oxidation catalysts because of its low price, good
machinery and stability.10–12 The metal oxide supported on Al2O3 is usually
prepared by dipping and drying, which has the advantages of simple oper-
ation and low cost.13 These metal oxides include nickel oxide,14,15 cobalt
oxide16,17 and manganese oxides.18–20 After being loaded on Al2O3, the
catalytic performance of these metal oxides was distinctly improved, and
they are widely used to remove various refractory organic pollutants.
In the early days, the main focus was on a single metal oxide supported on
Al2O3. In 2005, Einaga et al. studied the oxidation behavior of organic pol-
lutants on Al2O3-supported manganese oxide in the presence of ozone.21 The
catalytic performance was related to the intermediate products formed on
the surface of the catalyst. The sharp drop in activity was mainly due to the
accumulation of intermediate compounds. Subsequently, they did a study
on the eﬀect of water vapor on the oxidation of benzene under the condition
of ozone by Al2O3-supported manganese oxide.22 Water vapor could eﬀect-
ively inhibit the accumulation of by-products on the surface of the catalyst,
thereby inhibiting the deactivation of the catalyst. Moreover, Yang et al.
studied the surface acidity and reactivity of b-FeOOH/Al2O3 to ozone-
degrading drugs by in situ ATR-FTIR.23 The Lewis acid sites on the
material surface enhanced the binding of b-FeOOH and Al2O3. And their
observations confirmed that the Lewis acid site was the active site of the
reaction. Soltan et al. investigated the role of surface carboxylates in catalytic
ozonation of acetone on alumina-supported manganese oxide.24 Al2O3
reacted with adsorbed acetone to form a carboxylate intermediate. Then
the carboxylate immediately migrated to the Mn site and reacted with the
highly active atomic oxygen species produced by ozone decomposition.
In recent years, the synergy of bimetal oxides and even trimetal oxides has
been extensively studied.25–28 Chen et al. compared the eﬀects of Ce, Mg and
Mg–Ce oxides loaded onto Al2O3 on the catalytic ozone processes (COPs) for
the
oxidation
of
refractory
oil
refinery
wastewater.29
As
shown
in
Figure 2.1(a), compared with Mg/Al2O3–COP, Ce/Al2O3–COP, Al2O3–COP and
single ozonation, the removal rate of COD by Mg–Ce/Al2O3–COP increased by
4.7%, 4.1%, 6.0% and 17.5%, respectively. This result demonstrated the
30
Chapter 2

advantages of bimetallic oxides over monometallic oxides. In addition, Song
et al. prepared Mn–Fe–Ce/g-Al2O3 ternary catalyst by dipping and roasting in
order to catalytic ozone oxidate dairy farming wastewater.25,27 The removal
rates of COD and chromaticity reached 48.9% and 95%, respectively
(Figure 2.1(b)). It was particularly important that this catalyst had excellent
stability. After ten cycles, the removal rate of COD was not significantly re-
duced (Figure 2.1(c)). Compared with single-metal oxides, multimetal oxides
tended to have better catalytic performance. However, the synergistic
mechanism of multimetal oxides and the issue of metal leaching should be
considered further in the treatment of pollutants in wastewater.
2.1.2
Metal Oxides/TiO2
TiO2 is one of the most extensively studied materials in the field of photo-
catalysis.30 It is also one of the most typically supported metal oxides for
ozone oxidation catalysts, owing to its high chemical stability, biological
Figure 2.1
(a) COD removals for refractory oil refinery wastewater by single ozonation
and various COPs systems. Reproduced from ref. 29 with permission from
MDPI, Copyright 2017. (b) COD removal ratio and colority removal ratio
under diﬀerent reaction times. (c) COD removal ratio using Mn–Fe–Ce/
c-Al2O3 catalyst in 10 consecutive cycles. Reproduced from ref. 25 with
permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2020.
Heterogeneous Catalytic Ozonation over Supported Metal Oxides
31

non-toxicity, low cost, porosity and other properties, coupled with its
excellent catalytic performance for ozone.31 Guo et al. used the impregnation
method to prepare MnOx–CeO2/TiO2.31 By comparing the results of
three catalysts (Mn–Ce/TiO2-A, Mn–Ce/TiO2-B, Mn–Ce/TiO2-AB), the eﬃ-
ciency order of the ozone-catalyzed conversion of NOx to HNO3 was
Mn–Ce/TiO2-AB4Mn–Ce/TiO2-B4Mn–Ce/TiO2-A. The impregnation method
was the most commonly used method for the synthesis of metal oxide load-
ing, but when the metal loading was too high, sintering occurred during the
calcination process. Valenzuela et al. explored the photochemical deposition
method to deposit nickel nanoparticles on TiO2.32 This enabled reduction of
the nickel precursor to a short time at room temperature. It was also a good
direction to study the synergy of the two supported carriers to catalyze ozone
because of the advantages of alumina and titania. Chen et al. synthesized
TiO2/Al2O3 by the dipping method and found that the TiO2/Al2O3 catalyst
was composed of approximately 10.0 wt% TiO2 and 87.3 wt% Al2O3 and that
TiO2/Al2O3 was the most active.33 Compared with Al2O3 catalyst, TiO2/Al2O3
could achieve a higher total organic carbon (TOC) removal rate (98%), and the
larger particle size was more conducive to recovery after the reaction.
2.1.3
Metal Oxides/Zeolites
As a porous frame structure, zeolite has the advantages of large specific
surface area, developed pores and good reusability. It can selectively adsorb
organic molecules in wastewater. In recent years, zeolite has been widely
used to catalyze the ozone process.34–36 Common zeolite types are 13X,37–39
SBA-15,40,41 ZSM-5,42,43 MCM-4144–46 and USY.47,48
Zhang et al. studied the eﬀect of Ce-loaded natural zeolite on the catalytic
ozone oxidation of penicillin G.35 Quenching experiments proved that OH
and superoxide radicals (O2
) were the main active species (Figure 2.2(a)).
The possible mechanism was proposed according to the quenching experi-
ments (Figure 2.2(b)). The toxicity of the catalytic ozonation process was
evaluated, and the highly toxic intermediates were decomposed into less
toxic intermediates after 60 min of degradation. Their study indicated the
application of Ce-loaded natural zeolite catalyst in the catalytic ozonation of
penicillin G. Li et al. investigated the eﬀect of modification methods (in situ
synthesis and impregnation) and transition metal types (Cu and Co) on the
catalytic ozonation of toluene by loading on MCM-41.45 Compared with the
impregnation method, the synthesis of copper oxide in situ was more likely
to sinter and aggregate during the calcination process. Cobalt-modified
catalysts had higher catalytic activity and stability compared with copper-
modified catalysts. This excellent performance was attributed to the well-
dispersed metal oxides and their strong ability to decompose and accumu-
late organic by-products on the catalyst surface. The optimal modification of
diﬀerent supports required specific metal oxides and synthesis methods.
The investigation of optimal conditions was of great significance for prac-
tical applications.
32
Chapter 2

Gopi et al. loaded diﬀerent kinds of metal oxides on 13X zeolite to catalyze
the oxidation of toluene by ozone.38 The change in the conversions of
toluene and ozone with time revealed that the activity was in the order of
Mn/13X4Ce/13X4Cu/13X4Ag/13X4Co/13X
and
Mn/13X4Cu/13X4Ce/
13X4Ag/13X4Co/13X, respectively (Figure 2.2(c)). They also found that the
increase in temperature and humidity was beneficial to increase the activity
and selectivity of catalytic ozone. Moreover, after the addition of water, the
molar ratio of ozone to toluene consumption also decreased from 12 to 9.5,
which indicated that adding water to the reaction stream could significantly
reduce the amount of ozone required for oxidation and decomposition of
carbon dioxide. Chen et al. studied the process of various ZSM-5 zeolite–
supported metal (Ce, Fe or Mn) oxides to catalyze ozone oxidation to remove
nitrobenzene in aqueous solution.34 Compared with ZSM5 zeolite, the sup-
port of Ce, Fe or Mn oxides increased the catalytic activity, and Ce/NaZSM5-
38 had the highest removal rate of TOC (86.3%). HZSM5-38 and NaZSM5-100
zeolites had a strong adsorption eﬀect on nitrobenzene.
The combination of zeolite and Al2O3 will also get unexpected results. Bing
et al. prepared Fe2O3/Al2O3@SBA-15 by the simple impregnation method.40
The TOC removal rate could reach about 90% after 60 min of reaction. The
characterization results showed that Al–O–Si was formed by Al31 replacing
Figure 2.2
(a) Eﬀect of scavengers on penicillin G removal eﬃciency in Ce-loaded
natural zeolite catalytic ozonation system. (b) Reaction mechanism of
penicillin G degradation in Ce-loaded natural zeolite catalytic ozonation
system. Reproduced from ref. 35 with permission from Elsevier,
Copyright 2019. (c) Change in the conversions of toluene and ozone
with time on Mn/13X, Co/13X, Ce/13X, Ag/13X and Cu/13X catalysts.
Reproduced from ref. 38 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019.
Heterogeneous Catalytic Ozonation over Supported Metal Oxides
33

the hydrogen of the surface Si–OH group, which not only gave Al2O3 and
Fe2O3 a higher dispersibility on SBA-15 but induced a large amount of sur-
face Lewis acid sites. The synergistic eﬀect of iron Lewis acid sites and
alumina promoted the generation of surface-adsorbed OH and O2
 and
accelerated the oxidative degradation of ibuprofen.
2.1.4
Metal Oxides Supported on Other Porous Materials
In addition to these supports, many other porous materials are used as
supports for supporting metal oxides. For example, SiO2,49–51 MnO2,52,53
CeO2
54–56 and ZrO2
57,58 have been widely used in the field of catalytic ozone
oxidation. Einaga et al. loaded manganese oxide and manganese–copper
oxide on SiO2 to catalyze the oxidation of benzene by ozone.49,50 Diﬀerent
metal precursors would aﬀect the structure of the catalyst. Extended X-ray
absorption fine structure (EXAFS) analysis showed that aggregated manga-
nese oxide Mn2O3 would be formed when using manganese nitrate precursor
to prepare the catalyst, whereas using manganese acetate precursor would
form highly dispersed manganese oxide. For other heavy-loaded catalysts,
the Mn/SiO2 containing highly dispersed manganese sites prepared by
manganese acetate precursor showed much higher performance than the
catalyst prepared by manganese nitrate precursor. In addition, the catalytic
activity of Cu–Mn mixed oxides rose with the increase of calcination tem-
perature, which was related to the increase of the spinel-type Cu–Mn mixed
oxide phase. Hu et al. loaded cobalt oxide on mesoporous zirconia and used
it to catalyze ozonation of the herbicide 2,4-D.57 The author proved that OH
was the main reactive oxygen species. However, because cobalt is a heavy
metal that is relatively harmful to the environment, its leaching problem
should be paid more attention. Also, Ncanana et al. studied the degradation
of cresol isomers by ozone oxidation under the catalyst of silica-supported
nickel, iron, manganese and vanadium.51
Krisbiantoro et al. used palladium supported by cerium oxide as a highly
active and selective catalyst to catalyze the oxidation and decomposition of
ammonium ions in water by ozone.54 Among the noble metals, Ru, Rh, Pd,
Ag, Ir, Pt and Pd exhibited the highest activity and selectivity to gaseous
compounds when catalyzing ozone to decompose NH4
1 in water. The Pd
carrier had a great influence on the catalytic performance, and CeO2 was the
most suitable carrier with high activity, selectivity and stability. In addition,
Xing et al. also found that mesoporous cerium oxide, supported by manga-
nese oxide catalytic ozone, could eﬀectively oxidize sulfosalicylic acid.55 As
shown in Figure 2.3(a), Nawaz et al. prepared the mesoporous Fe3O4/MnO2
composite material by the co-precipitation method.52 Its catalytic ozone
oxidation activity of p-cresol and p-chlorophenol mixture was much higher
than those of Fe3O4 and MnO2. At pH 9, it was proved to have the highest
catalytic activity and the smallest amount of metal leaching. This experiment
was of great significance for studying the synergy between diﬀerent metal
oxides.
34
Chapter 2

The same metal oxides loaded on diﬀerent carriers have diﬀerent eﬀects.
Chen et al. used diﬀerent supports (Al2O3, TiO2, SiO2, CeO2, ZrO2) to prepare
a series of MnOx-based catalysts.59 As shown in Figure 2.3(b), the chlor-
obenzene conversion rate of the Mn/Al2O3 catalyst was the highest, reaching
82.92%. The conversion rate of other catalysts was in the order of Mn/
TiO24Mn/SiO24Mn/CeO24Mn/ZrO2. In addition, Maddila et al. researched
the degradation of trichlorophenol by using Ce–Zr on diﬀerent metal oxides
(Al2O3, SiO2 and TiO2) for catalytic ozonation.60 SEM-EDX results illustrated
that cerium–zirconia oxide was better dispersed on the surface of TiO2
compared with Al2O3 and SiO2 carriers. Also, they investigated the degrad-
ation of trichlorophenol by ozonation by using Ce–V on diﬀerent metal
oxides (Al2O3 and SiO2).61 Alkaline pH promoted the formation of OH in
heterogeneous catalysts. Five percent Ce–V/SiO2 catalyzed ozone oxidation
could significantly increase the degradation rate of chloronitrophenol, and it
was an eﬀective method to remove chlorine, nitro and hydroxyl functions in
organic compounds in water.
2.2
Eﬀects of Operation Parameters on Catalytic
Ozonation Eﬃciency
2.2.1
Initial pH
The pH value, a critical environmental parameter, is important in the cata-
lytic ozonation system. It not only aﬀects ozone mass transfer and de-
composition but has eﬀects on catalyst surface properties and the
dissociation constant pKa of contaminants. Aqueous hydroxide in alkaline
conditions can boost ozone decomposition and promote the generation of
OH. Zhao et al. prepared Ag-doped nickel ferrite for the catalytic ozonation
treatment of secondary biochemical eﬄuent for papermaking wastewater.6
They reported that the COD removal was enhanced with the increase of
Figure 2.3
(a) Schematic illustration for the synthesis of Fe3O4/MnO2. Reproduced
from ref. 52 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.
(b) Catalytic performance of chlorobenzene ozonation over MnOx with
diﬀerent supports. Reproduced from ref. 59 with permission from
Elsevier, Copyright 2020.
Heterogeneous Catalytic Ozonation over Supported Metal Oxides
35

initial pH in a sole ozone system. However, diﬀerent from the sole ozone
system, the highest removal eﬃciency was achieved around the pH of the
point of zero charge (pHpzc) of catalyst, which played an important role in
promoting ozone decomposition and OH production. When the pH con-
dition was lower or higher than the pHpzc of the catalyst, the catalyst surface
presented a protonated or deprotonated state, causing the decrease of
catalytic eﬃciency.
Zhang et al. synthesized a cerium-loaded natural zeolite (CZ) for catalytic
ozonation of penicillin G. The eﬀect of initial pH on penicillin G removal by the
CZ catalytic ozonation system was evaluated.35 Penicillin G removal eﬃciency
was enhanced by increasing the initial pH from 3.0 to 4.5; then it changed
slightly with the initial pH increasing from 4.5 to 5.0, and the removal eﬃ-
ciency dropped with the initial pH further increasing from 5.0 to 9.0. The
apparent rate constant (kobs) showed the same trend as the removal eﬃciency.
As mentioned previously, OH could initiate ozone decomposition to generate
OH. Apart from the eﬀect of OH, the pHpzc of CZ was tested to be 5.4 in the
experiments; when the initial pH was near pHpzc, the removal eﬃciency of
penicillin G reached the maximum.
In literature, OH could initiate ozone decomposition to generate OH. As
for pH eﬀects on the catalyst surface property, the surface hydroxyl groups
were the active sites for OH production. The closer the pH came to the pHpzc
of the catalyst, the better performance the catalyst exhibited. Compared with
the protonated or deprotonated form, the zero-charged surface of catalyst is
mainly responsible for catalytic eﬃciency.
2.2.2
Ozone Dosage
Increasing ozone dosage can raise the dissolved ozone concentration in
aqueous solution, which could facilitate the removal of contaminants since
catalytic performance is usually proportional to the ozone concentration.
Tong et al. synthesized a novel iron-doped SBA-16 mesoporous structure
catalyst that showed eﬃcient catalytic ozonation of diclofenac.62 The eﬀect
of ozone dosage was discussed in this work. When the ozone dosage was
60 mg h1, the TOC removal rate reached 79.3%. Further increasing the
ozone dosage to 80 and 100 mg h1 led to a higher TOC removal rate up to
82.5% and 88.8%, respectively. The increase of ozone dosage contributes
little to TOC removal improvement, probably due to the limited active sites
on the Fe–SBA-16 surfaces.
In the ozone catalytic oxidation system, the concentration of ozone dosage
plays a crucial role in the amount of free radicals generated in the catalytic
system, thereby causing the degradation of organic matter in wastewater. Sun
et al. prepared a Fe–Mn@Bt catalyst used to deeply treat the biochemical
tailwater of coal chemical wastewater for catalytic ozonation. When the ozone
generation rate ranged from 0.5 g h1 to 2.5 g h1, the degradation perform-
ance of Fe–Mn@Bt ozone catalyst increased significantly with the growth of
the ozone generation rate. When the amount exceeded 2.0 g h1, the removal
36
Chapter 2

rate of the phenol and TOC in the wastewater rose very slowly. When the
ozone concentration was low, it could be dissolved in water suﬃciently and
react with organic matter rapidly. The dissolved ozone in the water combined
with the active sites in the Fe–Mn@Bt catalyst to catalyze the generation of
free radicals with strong oxidative properties, and the capacity to remove the
pollutant was significantly increased. However, the ozone dosage was not a
restricting factor when the ozone flow rate was added excessively while the
ozone concentration in the liquid phase had approached saturation.
Under normal circumstances, increasing ozone dosage leads to better
catalytic performance. Nevertheless, from a practical point of view, it is not
economically sound to perform catalytic ozonation by further increasing
ozone dosage. Ozone utilization is the key factor in evaluating the activity of
catalysts.
2.2.3
Catalyst Dosage
Catalyst dosage usually impacts catalytic performance. Increasing dosage
mostly leads to rising eﬃciency at first and then a gradually slowing down at
a certain concentration. Therefore, identifying the optimum catalyst dosage
makes economic sense. Zhao et al. investigated catalytic activity in a series of
catalyst concentrations (0–200 mg L1).6 Catalytic eﬃciency was enhanced by
increasing dosage from 0 to 100 mg L1. However, the further increase of
catalyst dosage showed an unfavorable eﬀect on degradation rate. The
phenomenon was caused by the decrease of active sites owing to catalyst
aggregation, and excessive leached Fe ions may act as a scavenger of OH.
Yan et al. prepared a complex catalyst, copper–oxygen–manganese/g-alu-
mina (CMA), and explored the eﬀect of CMA dosage on polyvinyl alcohol
(PVA) removal.63 With the increase of catalyst dosage from 0 to 100 mg L1,
the removal rate of PVA increased rapidly to 88.1%. Afterward, the removal
rate of PVA remained constant and even decreased slightly when the dosage
was raised to 240 mg L1. The phenomenon had also been observed in other
studies, possibly due to the aggregation of particles and the quenching of
OH due to the excessive active sites.
In general, catalytic eﬃciency is usually boosted by increasing catalyst
dosage at the very beginning. It is caused by the growing active sites provided
in the reaction system. Up to a certain dosage, the eﬃciency no longer im-
proves and tends to maintain a level or even fall back. Catalyst aggregation,
which decreases exposed active sites or/and excessive catalyst quenching
OH, account for the phenomenon.
2.2.4
Initial Concentration of Contaminants
There is no doubt that the initial concentration of contaminants can aﬀect
the degradation eﬃciency of contaminants in the heterogeneous catalytic
ozonation process with other experiment conditions staying the same.
Generally, higher concentration decreases catalytic eﬃciency. Kruanak et al.
Heterogeneous Catalytic Ozonation over Supported Metal Oxides
37

studied the initial concentration of contaminant during the degradation of
2,4,6-trichlorophenol in synthetic wastewater by catalytic ozonation using
alumina-supported nickel oxides.14 The results reported that as the initial
concentration increased, the removal eﬃciency decreased due to the in-
creasing amount of 2,4,6-trichlorophenol to react with ozone or OH.
2.2.5
Reaction Temperature
Reaction temperature mainly aﬀects the solubility of ozone and then weakens
or enhances reaction eﬃciency. Yan et al. synthesized Si-doped a-Fe2O3 for
the removal of nitrobenzene in aqueous solution. The eﬀect of solution
temperature on removal eﬃciency was studied at temperatures ranging from
15 1C to 35 1C.7 Results showed that the removal eﬃciency of nitrobenzene
under diﬀerent reaction temperatures was discrepant and that the ad-
sorption amounts of nitrobenzene under diﬀerent temperatures were less
than 3.5%. The removal eﬃciency increased from 74.2% to 82.0%, 85.0% and
94.5% with the reaction temperature ranging from 15 1C to 30 1C. And 72.5%
of nitrobenzene can be rapidly degraded within 2 min under a reaction
temperature of 30 1C. Further increasing the reaction temperature from 30 1C
to 35 1C decreased the removal eﬃciency from 94.5% to 88.0% at 20 min,
which showed a negative eﬀect on the catalytic process. Chen et al. prepared
MnOx/SBA-15 for norfloxacin degradation by catalytic ozonation and dis-
cussed temperature eﬀects on degradation eﬃciency.64 The TOC removal
eﬃciency increased with temperature from 5 1C to 25 1C. However, when the
temperature continued to climb to 30 1C, its mineralization rate decreased,
possibly due to the reduction of ozone solubility in solution. The increase of
temperature would accelerate the mass transfer rate of norfloxacin onto the
catalyst and enhance the reaction rate of ozone and OH with the norfloxacin.
Reaction temperature is an important factor for the behavior of ozone in a
catalytic system. Within a befitting range, increasing reaction temperature
can positively increase the activation molecules and promote the degrad-
ation of contaminants. Simultaneously, ozone shows a lower solubility in
water with the increasing of temperature.
2.2.6
Coexisting Ions in Water
Coexisting ions are of vital importance to the ozone oxidation process in
aqueous condition. Levanov et al. studied ozone catalysis reaction with
chloride ions by metal ions in an acidic medium.65 The results showed that
VO21, Fe31, Co21 and Cu21 ions catalyze the reaction of ozone with Cl in an
acidic medium, whereas Al31, Cr31, Cr21, Ni21, Zn21, Sn41 and Ce31 ions do
not have a catalytic eﬀect. Those phenomena can be explained in two ways.
On one hand, metal ions in a higher oxidation state can be formed in oxi-
dation with ozone. These can oxidize the chloride ion by transferring charge.
On the other hand, a catalytic complex that decomposes with the liberation
of chlorine can be formed by coordination catalysis. Trapido et al. studied
38
Chapter 2

the eﬀects of coexisting ions on ozone performance for the degradation of
m-dinitrobenzene.66 The work reported that with dissolved ions of Fe21,
Mn21, Cu21, Ni21, Co21, V51, Cr31 and Mo61, the ozonation catalytic eﬃ-
ciency was promoted significantly. Wang et al. selected bicarbonate
(HCO3
), phosphate (PO4
3) and sulfate (SO4
2) as inorganic anions to
investigate the influence on phthalic acid degradation in the O3/CeO2 and
O3/FeOOH systems.67 The results showed that HCO3
 scarcely aﬀected the
phthalic acid degradation in the O3/CeO2 system while significantly influ-
encing the O3/FeOOH system. PO4
3 and SO4
2, which are good at chelation,
curbed the removal of phthalic acid notably in the O3/CeO2 system. It could
be deduced that phthalic acid was mainly degraded by OH oxidation in the
O3/FeOOH system and by complexation in the O3/CeO2 system.
As mentioned previously, coexisting ions in the aqueous ozonation process
strongly aﬀect the reaction process. When metal ions were added into the
solution, the routine of generating OH changes. Electron transfer between the
diﬀerent valence states of metal ions can promote the production of OH, or
coordination catalysis happens. However, inorganic anions aﬀect the catalytic
process diﬀerently. If the reaction system mainly eliminates the pollutant by
generating OH, some inorganic anions, such as HCO3
, can clearly inhibit the
catalytic process. If complexation plays a dominant role in the degradation
process, inorganic anions such as PO4
3 and SO4
2 competitively adsorb on
the catalyst surface to occupy the active sites and restrain the catalytic process.
2.3
Catalytic Reaction Mechanisms
To date, supported metal oxides in catalytic ozonation for the degradation of
organic pollutants have been widely investigated. Unfortunately, despite in-
creasing research eﬀorts in the field of catalytic ozonation and the introduction
of new catalysts, the specific catalytic reaction mechanism has not been widely
recognized. In particular, there is a lack of understanding of catalyst activity
and deactivation. Various reaction mechanisms have been proposed. Fre-
quently, the same catalysts studied by diﬀerent research groups, sometimes
contradictory results. The performance of catalytic ozonation depends largely
on the surface properties of the catalyst, but the reaction process and mech-
anism are complex, particularly concerning supported metal oxides. Therefore,
the catalytic active sites and proposed catalytic reaction mechanisms need to
be intensively summarized and discussed.
2.3.1
The Circumstance of Radical and Non-radical Pathways
It is well-known that heterogeneous catalytic ozonation can proceed via two
major pathways to degrade pollutants: direct molecular ozone reactions and the
adsorption of O3 and/or pollutants on the surface of the catalyst leading to
ozone dissociation and the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS, e.g. OH,
O2
 or singlet oxygen [1O2]).68,69 Radicals oxidation relying on OH and/or O2

from O3 decomposition on the active sites of catalysts has been recognized as
Heterogeneous Catalytic Ozonation over Supported Metal Oxides
39

the dominant pathway for the degradation of pollutants. To identify the gen-
eration of radicals, quenching experiments, chemical probes and electron
paramagnetic resonance (EPR) analyses have been utilized. Quenching experi-
ments have been widely applied to investigate the generated radical species and
the contribution of corresponding radicals by evaluating the inhibitory degree
of degradation eﬃciency in the presence or absence of radical scavengers such
as tert-butanol (TBA), isopropanol (IPA), methanol, p-benzoquinone (p-BQ), etc.
Apart from selecting the appropriate chemical scavengers, the concentration of
scavengers also needs to be noted based on the competition between the target
organic pollutants and chemical scavengers to react with ROS.70 Besides, the
improper selection of the radical scavengers and design of the quenching
experiments often cause mistakes or misinterpretations of the results.69
For example, the competitive reactions between the scavengers and the target
radicals and other oxidants can mislead the interpretation of the quenching
results.69 Steady-state ROS concentration can also be quantitatively detected by
means of chemical probe methods. Typically, benzoic acid is employed as a
probe compound for the capture of OH in order to quantify the yield of OH.71
Benzoic acid can react with OH to produce three isomers of hydroxyl benzoic
acid. Total hydroxybenzoic acid yield is calculated from this ratio by measuring
p-HBA.70 Also, p-chlorobenzoic acid, terephthalic acid and coumarin can be
applied to quantitatively examine the steady-state concentration of generated
OH.1,27,72 Nitro blue tetrazolium (NBT) was selected as a qualitative indicator of
O2
 as it could be reduced by O2
 (k ¼ [5.8–6.0]104 M1 s1) to form purple
product, which exhibits a maximum absorption region at 530 nm.70,73 In add-
ition, the adoption of chemical scavengers to determine the contribution of
ROS, spin trapping agents can be used to directly quantify ROS by detecting the
by-products through EPR. 5,5-Dimethyl-1-pyrrolidine N-oxide (DMPO) is a
frequently used spin trapping agent in the EPR for OH and O2
 identification
via the formation of specific adducts. Thereinto, DMPO–OH is a typical 4-line
EPR spectrum with the relative intensity ratio of 1 : 2 : 2 : 1 due to the equivalent
hyperfine splitting constants of aN¼ aH¼ 14.9 G.74 Also, DMPO can be applied
as a spin trapping agent for O2
 with six characteristic peaks of DMPO–OOH in
EPR spectrum.73 It should be emphasized that the adoption of organic solvent
such as absolute ethanol and/or dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) as the reaction
medium instead of ultrapure water can prolong the half-life of O2
 as well as
act as the scavenger for OH.70,75
Li et al. fabricated the Mn–Fe–Ce/g-Al2O3 ternary catalyst by the impreg-
nation roasting method to catalyze ozone for dairy farming wastewater treat-
ment.27 The catalyst was found to significantly influence the generation of
OH. EPR and coumarin fluorescence techniques were applied to qualitatively
and quantitatively investigate the generation of OH. As shown in Figure 2.4(a),
the generation of OH in the Mn–Fe–Ce/g-Al2O3/O3 system as OOM (O3–OH
metals) due to the electrons in OH were transferred to the metals, and O3
was attracted to the surface hydroxyl groups.27 Bing et al. prepared the
Fe2O3/Al2O3@SBA-15 catalyst to highly eﬀective mineralize ibuprofen in the
presence of ozone.40 Mechanism analysis found that the chemisorbed O3 was
40
Chapter 2

decomposed into surface atomic oxygen species at the Lewis acid sites of Al31
while it was converted into surface-adsorbed OHads and O2
 at the Lewis acid
sites of Fe31.40 The combination of both Lewis acid sites of Fe31 and Al31 onto
the catalyst could promote the generation of OHads and O2
.
Recently, non-radical oxidation processes relying on surface complexes,
surface-adsorbed activated oxygen species or 1O2 oxidation have been found
as the alternative degradation pathways in heterogeneous catalytic ozona-
tion.69,76 Zhang et al. found that cerium-supported palladium oxide (PdO/
CeO2) at a low palladium loading was an eﬃcient catalyst in catalytic ozo-
nation of oxalate not relying on OH oxidation.77 As shown in Figure 2.4(b),
the oxalate molecule was adsorbed on the surface of the CeO2 of the catalyst
forming surface complexes, and O3 was adsorbed on the PdO of the catalyst
and further decomposed into surface atomic oxygen (*O), surface peroxide
(*O2) and O2 gas in sequence.77 In addition, the CeO2 support also enhanced
the conglutination and decomposition of O3 on the surface of PdO. The
strong aﬃnity probably increased the stability of the surface atomic oxygen
against the fast reaction with ozone forming peroxide. Whereafter, the same
group developed the CuO/CeO2 catalyst to significantly enhance oxalate
degradation in reaction with ozone.56 They uncovered a novel catalytic
ozonation pathway that depended on neither acid assistance nor radical
oxidation. In addition, the hybrid mechanisms consisting of radical and
Figure 2.4
(a) Proposed OOM model of the Mn–Fe–Ce/g-Al2O3 þ O3 system. Repro-
duced from ref. 27 with permission from American Chemical Society,
Copyright 2020. (b) The proposed mechanisms of PdO/CeO2 for catalytic
ozonation of oxalate. Reproduced from ref. 77 with permission from
American Chemical Society, Copyright 2011.
Heterogeneous Catalytic Ozonation over Supported Metal Oxides
41

non-radical pathways were found by Chen et al. CuOx, supported on meso-
porous alumina microsphere catalysts with hierarchical structures, were
fabricated to boost catalytic ozonation for the degradation of phenol was-
tewater. The quenching experiments and EPR analysis indicated that O2
,
1O2 and OH were the predominant reactive species.
It is still challenging to precisely and quantitatively estimate the contri-
bution of the radical and non-radical pathways in total oxidation. Moreover,
since the complicated mechanisms of non-radical processes remain am-
biguous and controversial, more attention should be paid to designing more
eﬃcient catalysts and exploring deep mechanisms in order to investigate the
intrinsic catalytic sites, improve their stabilities and exploit the full potential
of these properties.70
2.3.2
Identification of Catalytic Active Sites
Surface hydroxyl groups, Lewis acid sites, structural defects and surface
functionalities have been suggested as potential catalytic active sites for cata-
lytic O3 activation to produce radicals.69 However, identification of catalytic
active sites is still ambiguous even for similar heterogeneous catalytic ozona-
tion systems. For heterogeneous catalytic ozonation over supported metal
oxides, the complicated structure of catalysts and the interfacial reaction make
it not so easy to identify the precise catalytic active sites. As shown in
Figure 2.5(a), H2O molecules strongly adsorbed on the metal oxides surface
when the metal oxide catalyst was introduced into aqueous solution. Then the
adsorbed H2O always dissociated into OH and H1, forming the surface hy-
droxyl groups with surface cations and oxygen anions, respectively.78,79 Ozone
molecules in aqueous solution interacted with the surface–OH2
1 existing on
the surface of the catalyst due to electrostatic forces and/or hydrogen bonding
due to their resonance structures, resulting in the radical chain reactions and
promoting OH generation.78 Sun et al. investigated the catalytic ability and
mechanisms of SBA-15-supported manganese oxide (MnOx/SBA-15) for the
degradation of oxalic acid. The adsorption of oxalic acid and OH initiation on
the protonated surface hydroxyl groups (Mn–OH2
1) are the two key factors that
enhance the degradation of oxalic acid.80 Mn–OH2
1 groups were the active
sites for ozone molecules decomposing into OH according to the investigation
of radical scavengers and pHpzc. It happens that, in a similar case, mesoporous
Mn–CeOx/g-Al2O3 catalyst was practicably fabricated via a facile impregnation–
calcination method. The protonated surface hydroxyl groups of S–OH2
1 on
Mn–CeOx/g-Al2O3 were the active sites for ozone decomposition to generate
OH and O2
.81 The oxygen vacant sites derived from electron transfer
from Olatt to Ce41 and Mn41 can promote ozone molecules adsorption
(Figure 2.5(b)). Water molecules are adsorbed onto the surface of Lewis acid
sites when Mn–CeOx/g-Al2O3 are introduced into solution and then dissociate
into the protonated surface hydroxyl groups (S–OH2
1). Subsequently, the
surface complex S–OH2
1–O3 was formed by the interaction of aqueous ozone
molecules with Brønsted acid S–OH2
1 via hydrogen bonding and/or
42
Chapter 2

Figure 2.5
(a) Proposed enhancement mechanism of ozone decomposition on the surface of CH-supported metals. Reproduced from
ref. 78 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2009. (b) Schematic illustrations of the synergistic eﬀect
of Mn–CeOx component and a probable mechanism of Mn–CeOx/g-Al2O3-catalyzed ozonation. Reproduced from ref. 81 with
permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2018. (c) Proposed ozonation mechanisms of chemicals in RPRW
upon metal oxide–loaded Al2O3 catalysts. Reproduced from ref. 29 with permission from MDPI, Copyright 2017.
Heterogeneous Catalytic Ozonation over Supported Metal Oxides
43

electrostatic forces and was then transformed into OH and O2
 through
radical chain reactions (Figure 2.5(b)).81 Chen et al. found that surface hydroxyl
groups (–OHs) were the dominant catalytic active sites on Al2O3 in the Mg–Ce
oxide-loaded Al2O3 catalytic ozonation system.29 As shown in Figure 2.5(c), the
metal oxide–loaded Al2O3 catalysts provided a platform for the adsorption of
chemicals and/or ozone molecules, resulting in the dissociation of ozone and
the generation of OH.
Moreover, Lewis acid sites,23,40 metal ions56,82 and/or metal oxides13,77 also
have been explored as the catalytic active sites in heterogeneous catalytic
ozonation over supported metal oxides. The representative studies on the
supported metal oxides catalytic ozonation systems for illustrating the cata-
lytic active sites and the dominant radicals were summarized in Table 2.1.
2.3.3
Mechanism Analysis by Theoretical Calculation
Theoretical calculation based on density functional theory (DFT) is a powerful
tool to predict and/or confirm the possible reaction mechanism of hetero-
geneous catalytic ozonation. The surface energy of the a-MnO2 adsorption
energy of ozone on the oxygen vacancy of a-MnO2 and the adsorption energy
of a S atom in CH3SH on oxygen vacancy of a-MnO2 with diﬀerent exposed
facets are shown in Figure 2.6(a).83 The DFT calculation results indicated that
the (310) facets possess higher surface energy than other facets and feature
the construction of oxygen vacancies, thus facilitating the adsorption and
activation of ozone into intermediate peroxide species (O2/O2
2) and reactive
oxygen species (O2
 or 1O2).83 Yang et al. adopted DFT to deepen com-
prehension of the adsorption behavior of CH3SH over the CuO/MnO2 interface
in catalytic ozonation.53 As shown in Figure 2.6(b), the CH3SH molecule can
be steadily adsorbed on CuO(111) in two diﬀerent configurations with higher
adsorption
energies
than
that
of
MnO2.
In
addition,
Figure
2.6(c)
demonstrates that the DFT calculated energy barriers of ozone activation by
VO–MnO2 in CuO/VO–MnO2. The calculation results of the energy profile of
the ozone activation by VO–MnO2 in 5CuO/VO–MnO2 in a humid atmosphere
revealed that the larger number of oxygen vacancies in 5CuO/VO–MnO2 enable
more O3 molecules to convert into OH and O2
 and rapidly react with
CH3SH. Also, Chen et al. developed the DFT calculation to explore the
ozonation activity on the surface of faceted CeO2.84 It revealed that ozone
activation on O-(1 0 0) leads to ozone decomposition into a surface oxygen
atom
and
an
oxygen,
while
ozone
physisorption
occurs
without
decomposition on O-(1 1 0) and O-(1 1 1). The tendency order of ozone de-
composition was (1 0 0)4(1 1 0)4(1 1 1), and the theoretical results were in
accord with the experimental data of bromate inhibition eﬃciencies.
Furthermore, the degradation pathway of organic contaminants can also
be investigated and predicted by DFT calculation. According to Fukui’s
frontier orbit theory, the nucleophilic reaction easily occurs in dense places
of the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO), and the electrophilic
reaction tends to occur in the dense places of the lowest unoccupied
44
Chapter 2

Table 2.1
Catalytic active sites and involved ROS in supported metal oxides for catalytic ozonation.
Catalyst
Pollutants
ROS
Catalytic active site
Ref.
Fe2O3/Al2O3@SBA-15
Ibuprofen
OH and O2

Lewis acid sites of Fe31
40
CuO/CeO2
Oxalate
No-radical
Cu(II)
56
Cerium oxides loaded natural
zeolite
Penicillin G
OH and O2

Surface hydroxyl groups
35
MnOx/SBA-15
Oxalic acid
OH
Surface hydroxyl groups
(Mn–OH2
1)
80
Ce, Mg, and Ce–Mg oxides–loaded
Al2O3
Petroleum refinery
wastewater
OH
Surface hydroxyl groups
29
b-FeOOH/Al2O3
Ibuprofen
OH
Surface Lewis acid sites
23
Ciprofloxacin
CuFe2O4/sepiolite
Quinoline
OH and O2

Surface hydroxyl groups and Lewis acid
sites
8
NiFe2O4–NiO/NF
Methyl orange
nitrobenzene
OH and O2

Lewis acid sites
1
SD-CuOx@Al2O3
Phenol
O2
, 1O2 and OH
Surface hydroxyl groups and CuOx
13
ZSM-5 zeolites loaded with metallic
(Ce, Fe, or Mn) oxides
Nitrobenzene
OH
Surface Si–O bonds and/or Si–O(H)–Al
structures
34
PdO/CeO2
Oxalate
Surface atomic oxygen
(*O), surface peroxide
(*O2)
PdO
77
Mn/Al2O3, Cu/Al2O3 and Mn–Cu/
Al2O3
Benzotriazole
OH
Lewis acid sites
12
Mn–CeOx/g-Al2O3
Bromaminic acid
OH and O2

Surface hydroxyl groups S–OH2
1
81
PdO/CeO2
Pyruvic acid
No-radical
Lewis acid sites
94
PdO/CeO2
Pyruvic acid
O
Pd (II)
82
Fe oxides/MCM-41
p-Chlorobenzoic acid
OH
Iron oxide
95
Alumina-supported Mn and Cu
oxides
Refinery wastewater
OH
Surface hydroxyl groups
96
Heterogeneous Catalytic Ozonation over Supported Metal Oxides
45

Figure 2.6
(a) Surface energy of a-MnO2, adsorption energy of O3 on oxygen vacancy of a-MnO2 and adsorption energy of S atom in CH3SH
on oxygen vacancy of a-MnO2 with diﬀerent exposed facets. Red sphere stands for oxygen atom, and violet sphere stands for
manganese atom. Reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020. (b) Schematic
states of adsorbed CH3SH group on CuO (111) surface and on VO–MnO2 (100) surface. Reproduced from ref. 53 with
permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2020. (c) DFT calculated energy barriers of ozone activation by VO–MnO2 in CuO/VO–
MnO2. Schematic process states and energy profile of ozone activation by VO–MnO2 in 5CuO/VO–MnO2 under humid
atmosphere. Reproduced from ref. 53 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2020.
46
Chapter 2

molecular orbital (LUMO).70,85 Turkay et al. adopted frontier (HOMO/LUMO)
orbitals to discuss donor–acceptor interaction between substance and
catalyst, and the calculation results revealed that the [CuO þ O3 þH2O] re-
action system was found to be more appropriate for CuO-catalyzed ozona-
tion with regard to energy level.86
These results indicated that DFT calculation has progressively become an
important working tool in exploiting the possible mechanism and degrad-
ation pathway of organic pollutants in catalytic ozonation process. However,
it remains a major challenge in the theoretical community to improve its
accuracy and eﬃciency. Further investigations should employ more appro-
priate DFT methods to improve its accuracy and eﬃciency.
2.4
Practical Applications
Although the total amount of industrial wastewater has been decreasing year by
year under the strict requirements of state and scientific control, it still occupies
a large proportion of the total amount of environmental pollution sources and
an important position in current pollution control work.36,87 The application of
ozonation technology in this field has a noticeable eﬀect and relatively simple
technological process.6,19 At present, a big part of the wastewater treatment
facilities are still adopting the traditional wastewater treatment technology.
Along with the development of the industry, traditional technology has been
unable to meet the demand for wastewater treatment. As an advanced oxidation
technology, catalytic ozonation has a good treatment eﬀect, simple operation
and bare secondary pollution.6,88 It has a good application prospect in the in-
depth treatment of industrial wastewater. Strengthening the research in this
field can provide better guidance for industrial wastewater treatment and en-
vironmental protection work. Herein, Heterogeneous catalytic ozonation over
supported metal oxides in engineering applications was discussed.
At present, the catalysts used in industrial wastewater treatment can be
divided into homogeneous catalysts and heterogeneous catalysts. Due to
various defects such as unstable chemical composition, short duration of
use, and prone to recontamination, homogeneous catalysts are not widely
promoted in actual use, so the relevant research proportion is relatively
low.89 For heterogeneous catalysts, the current researches mainly focus on
two aspects: one is transition metal oxides. The second is supported catalyst.
Transition metal oxides also have many unsolvable problems in chemical
mechanisms such as acid resistance and solubility resistance.1,61 Therefore,
the research mainly focuses on supported catalysts in practical applications.
The carriers include Al2O3, ceramics and other novel chemical carriers. The
study of heterogeneous catalysts composed of transition metals mainly fo-
cuses on Mn, Fe and Cu. By studying these metals in various aspects, con-
sidering the impact on the ecological environment, economic cost and other
factors, Mn and Fe have a more comprehensive range of applications in
practical applications.25,30,90
Heterogeneous Catalytic Ozonation over Supported Metal Oxides
47

2.4.1
Application Case
In catalytic ozonation processes, Al2O3-supported catalysts usually have
stable structures but relatively low surface activity, while carbon-supported
catalysts are the opposite. Wei et al. designed a Ni-induced C–Al2O3-frame-
work (NiCAF) and reinforced it with a Cu–Co bimetal to create an eﬃcient
catalyst (CuCo/NiCAF) with a core–multishell structure.91 The pilot-scale
demonstration of CuCo/NiCAF-catalyzed ozonation revealed a 120% in-
crease in ozone-utilization eﬃciency (DCOD/DO3 ¼ 2.12) compared to that of
sole ozonation (0.96) (Figure 2.7(a)). During the treatment of crude carbolic
acid wastewater at a COD of B130 mg L1 and an HRT of 30 min, a 15.2%–
46.3% decrease in COD residue in the eﬄuent could be observed in catalytic
ozonation compared with that of sole ozone. CuCo/NiCAF demonstrated
good and steady performance during long-term operation (Figure 2.7(b)). In
addition, massive destruction or elimination of aromatic groups occurred in
the catalytic ozonation processes. These results imply both excellent per-
formance and structural stability of CuCo/NiCAF, which could be useful for
practical application.
Figure 2.8(a)–(c) was the pilot-scale units for catalytic ozonation. A unique
core–multishell structure could be observed for CuCo/NiCAF. Based on the
EDS-mapping analysis, C, Cu, Co and Ni were successfully introduced inside
the pore channels of the Al2O3 substrate. Simultaneously, the enrichment of C
and Cu elements near the catalyst edge resulted in a core–multishell appear-
ance within the section. The NiCAF-supported catalysts showed the best TOC
removal performance. Besides, CuCo/NiCAF exhibited the highest eﬃciency
in OH production (Rct of 1.02108), which was 76% greater than CuCo/NiA
(5.78109) and 20-fold higher than ozone alone (4.801010). The syn-
ergisms resulting from carbon–Al2O3, carbon–metal, and metal–metal inter-
actions could contribute to its high performance during catalytic ozonation.
The authors used a pilot-scale reactor with a fixed bed filled with CuCo/NiCAF
catalysts to further demonstrate the potential for engineering applications. In
contrast, a reactor without catalysts was used to determine benchmarks.
In addition, as shown in Figure 2.8(d), two diﬀerent two-stage ozone oxi-
dation towers were designed to evaluate the potential of practical application
of as-prepared Mn–CeOx/g-Al2O3 catalysts, which can be easily prepared on a
large scale through an impregnation–pelletizing–calcination method with
the commercial industrial alumina as support.81 The established system
exhibited excellent catalytic ozonation performance in the oxidative deg-
radation of pharmaceutical and chemical industry wastewater.
2.4.2
Limitations in Practical Applications
2.4.2.1
The Lower Eﬃciency of Mineralization
In current practical engineering applications, due to the diﬀerent industrial
wastewater types and the technical limitations of catalyst types, there is a big
diﬀerence between the overall mineralization rate of catalytic ozone and the
48
Chapter 2

Figure 2.7
(a) Schematic of the integrated mechanisms of the CuCo/NiCAF catalyzed
ozonation process. (b) Eﬀects of ozone dosage (HRT 30 min) and hydraulic
retention time (ozone dosage 25 mg L1) during the treatment of crude
carbolic acid. Conditions: feed CODE130 mgL1, pH 6–7; Long-term water
quality indexes before and after catalytic ozonation of coal-gasification
wastewater (secondary eﬄuent) (the following six figures). Influent: COD
70–80 mg L1, TOC 20–25 mg L1, NH3–N 3–6 mg L1, Tph 6–11 mgL1, Vph
2–7 mg L1, UV254 1–1.5, pH 6.5–7.0, SSo20. Conditions: ozone dosage
25 mg L1, HRT 30 min, feed flux 200 L h1. Reproduced from ref. 91 with
permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019.
Heterogeneous Catalytic Ozonation over Supported Metal Oxides
49

actual requirements. Generally, the rate of increase is only about 10%–
30%.30,92 The lower eﬃciency has a strong limitation on the popularization
and application of catalytic ozone technology, making its overall engineering
application level relatively low.
2.4.2.2
The Lower Reuse Rate
Whether the catalyst can be reused directly determines the cost of catalytic
ozonation in engineering applications. In practical application, the prepar-
ation method of the catalyst determines its stability. No matter which
preparation method is adopted, the catalyst activity will gradually decrease
Figure 2.8
Pilot-scale units for catalytic ozonation: (a) coagulation sedimentation
and cartridge filtration, (b) oxygen generator, ozone generator, and
ozone detector and gas flowmeters, and (c) a pair of cylinder column
reactors for ozone reactions (the left one filled with CuCo/NiCAF, the
right one empty for blank control). Reproduced from ref. 91 with
permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019. (d) Photo-
graphs of the large-scale production of Mn–CeOx/g-Al2O3 catalysts and
two-stage ozone oxidation towers for the pilot-scale catalytic ozonation of
real wastewater. Reproduced from ref. 81 with permission from Ameri-
can Chemical Society, Copyright 2018.
50
Chapter 2

with increasing reactions, thus reducing industrial wastewater’s treatment
eﬀect. To maintain the catalytic ozonation eﬀect continuously, it is necessary
to increase capital investment and increase the overall operating cost.
2.4.2.3
Dependent on Solution pH
Under acidic conditions, catalytic ozonation has a relatively weak eﬀect.8,93
For industrial wastewater with acidity, especially strongly acidic industrial
wastewater containing heavy metal ions, the eﬀect should also be considered
as well as the overflow of metal ions in the treatment process. Therefore, the
application of catalytic ozonation technology in this field also has significant
limitations.
2.5
Summary
Catalytic ozonation technology can alone eﬀectively solve the limitations of
weak ozonation and selectivity. By improving the ozone utilization rate, re-
ducing ozone dosage and improving the mineralization eﬀect, the feasibility
of the deep treatment of refractory industrial wastewater in terms of tech-
nical and economic indexes can be realized. In line with the principle of no
secondary pollution to industrial wastewater and the realization of catalyst
reuse, the current mainstream way to catalyze ozone in industrial wastewater
is to use heterogeneous catalytic oxidation of supported catalysts containing
transition metals. The development and preparation of more stable, durable
eﬃcient and inexpensive catalysts is the desired direction. To further
broaden the application scope of catalytic ozonation technology in industrial
wastewater, the coupling of the catalytic ozone and the biological unit can be
considered to improve biodegradability and to reduce biotoxicity as the
primary catalytic objectives, as well as to reduce operating cost by reducing
ozone dosage. In addition, the organic combination of and coordination
between catalytic ozone and traditional water treatment units must also
meet the inevitable trend-related and technical requirements of current in-
dustrial wastewater treatment and upgrading. Finally, although the catalytic
ozone oxidation technology in engineering application has many limi-
tations, its technological level also needs improvement. Nevertheless,
through the in-depth study of related aspects, further incorporating the
adjacent technology research, transforming enterprise-level operating facil-
ities in governance and enhancing treatment eﬀects all still play a role in
practical, broad market application perspective.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support from National
Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 52070133) and National Key Re-
search and Development Program of China (Grant No. 2021YFA1202500).
Heterogeneous Catalytic Ozonation over Supported Metal Oxides
51

References
1. C. Feng and P. Diao, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 541, 148683.
2. F. Qi, W. Chu and B. Xu, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 284, 28.
3. J. Zhang, Y. Wu, L. Liu and Y. Lan, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2015, 151, 318.
4. L. Yuan, J. Shen, Z. Chen and X. Guan, Appl. Catal. B Environ., 2016,
180, 707.
5. J. Wang and H. Chen, Sci. Total Environ., 2020, 704, 135249.
6. J. Zhao, J. Cao, Y. Zhao, T. Zhang, D. Zheng and C. Li, J. Environ. Sci.,
2020, 97, 75.
7. P. Yan, J. Shen, L. Yuan, J. Kang, B. Wang, S. Zhao and Z. Chen, Sep.
Purif. Technol., 2019, 228, 115766.
8. D. Liu, C. Wang, Y. Song, Y. Wei, L. He, B. Lan, X. He and J. Wang,
Chemosphere, 2019, 227, 647.
9. Z. Ma, L. Zhu, X. Lu, S. Xing, Y. Wu and Y. Gao, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2014,
133, 357.
10. S. M. He, P. C. Luan, L. H. Mo, J. Xu, J. Li, L. Q. Zhu and J. S. Zeng,
Bioresources, 2018, 13, 3686.
11. Y. Chen, C. M. Chen, B. A. Yoza, Q. X. Li, S. H. Guo, P. Wang, S. J. Dong
and Q. H. Wang, Pet. Sci., 2017, 14, 605.
12. B. Roshani, I. McMaster, E. Rezaei and J. Soltan, Sep. Purif. Technol.,
2014, 135, 158.
13. H. Chen, C. Fang, X. Gao, G. Jiang, X. Wang, S. P. Sun, W. Duo Wu and
Z. Wu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 581, 964.
14. K. Kruanak and C. Jarusutthirak, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 102825.
15. M. Stoyanova, P. Konova, P. Nikolov, A. Naydenov, S. Christoskova and
D. Mehandjiev, Chem. Eng. J., 2006, 122, 41.
16. P.
Konova,
M.
Stoyanova,
A.
Naydenov,
S.
Christoskova
and
D. Mehandjiev, Appl. Catal., A, 2006, 298, 109.
17. P. Pocostales, P. A´lvarez and F. J. Beltra´n, Chem. Eng. J., 2011, 168, 1289.
18. F. Lin, Z. Wang, Q. Ma, Y. Yang, R. Whiddon, Y. Zhu and K. Cen, Appl.
Catal. B Environ., 2016, 198, 100.
19. E. Rezaei, J. Soltan, N. Chen and J. R. Lin, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 214, 219.
20. R. Rosal, M. S. Gonzalo, A. Rodriguez and E. Garcia-Calvo, J. Hazard.
Mater., 2010, 183, 271.
21. H. Einaga and S. Futamura, Appl. Catal. B Environ., 2005, 60, 49.
22. H. Einaga and S. Futamura, J. Catal., 2006, 243, 446.
23. L. Yang, C. Hu, Y. Nie and J. Qu, Appl. Catal. B Environ., 2010, 97, 340.
24. M. Aghbolaghy, J. Soltan and R. Sutarto, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2017, 128, 73.
25. J. Li, W. Song, Z. Yu and Q. Li, Arabian J. Chem., 2020, 13, 3724.
26. C. M. Chen, B. A. Yoza, Y. D. Wang, P. Wang, Q. X. Li, S. H. Guo and
G. X. Yan, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2015, 22, 5552.
27. J. Y. Li, W. F. Song, X. C. Mao, Q. H. Li and Z. F. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. C,
2020, 124, 13215.
28. S.-P. Tong, R. Shi, H. Zhang and C.-A. Ma, J. Hazard. Mater., 2011,
185, 162.
52
Chapter 2

29. C. M. Chen, Y. Chen, B. A. Yoza, Y. H. Du, Y. X. Wang, Q. X. Li, L. P. Yi,
S. H. Guo and Q. H. Wang, Catalysts, 2017, 7, 72.
30. B. Wang, H. Zhang, F. F. Wang, X. G. Y. Xiong, K. Tian, Y. B. Sun and
T. T. Yu, Catalysts, 2019, 9, 241.
31. L. Guo, F. Meng, Y. Zeng, Y. Jia, F. Qian, S. Zhang and Q. Zhong, Mol.
Catal., 2020, 493, 111095.
32. J. L. Rodrı´guez, M. A. Valenzuela, F. Pola, H. Tiznado and T. Poznyak,
J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2012, 353–354, 29.
33. Y. H. Chen, D. C. Hsieh and N. C. Shang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2011,
192, 1017.
34. C. Chen, X. Yan, B. A. Yoza, T. Zhou, Y. Li, Y. Zhan, Q. Wang and Q. X. Li,
Sci. Total Environ., 2018, 612, 1424.
35. J. Zhang, Z. Xiong, J. Wei, Y. Song, Y. Ren, D. Xu and B. Lai, Chem. Eng. J.,
2020, 383, 123144.
36. A. L. Petre, J. B. Carbajo, R. Rosal, E. Garcia-Calvo and J. A. Perdigo´n-
Melo´n, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 225, 164.
37. T. Gopi, G. Swetha, S. C. Shekar, C. Ramakrishna and A. K. Gupta,
J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 4031.
38. T. Gopi, G. Swetha, S. C. Shekar, R. Krishna, C. Ramakrishna, B. Saini
and P. V. L. Rao, Arabian J. Chem., 2019, 12, 4502.
39. C. Ramakrishna, S. C. Shekar, A. K. Gupta, B. Saini, R. Krishna,
G. Swetha and T. Gopi, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 1484.
40. J. S. Bing, C. Hu, Y. L. Nie, M. Yang and J. H. Qu, Environ. Sci. Technol.,
2015, 49, 1690.
41. R. Huang, H. Yan, L. Li, D. Deng, Y. Shu and Q. Zhang, Appl. Catal.
B Environ., 2011, 106, 264.
42. Y. Shu, M. He, J. Ji, H. Huang, S. Liu and D. Y. C. Leung, J. Hazard.
Mater., 2019, 364, 770.
43. H. Huang, X. Ye, W. Huang, J. Chen, Y. Xu, M. Wu, Q. Shao, Z. Peng,
G. Ou, J. Shi, X. Feng, Q. Feng, H. Huang, P. Hu and D. Y. C. Leung,
Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 264, 24.
44. E. Rezaei and J. Soltan, Chem. Eng. J., 2012, 198–199, 482.
45. M. Li, K. N. Hui, K. S. Hui, S. K. Lee, Y. R. Cho, H. Lee, W. Zhou, S. Cho,
C. Y. H. Chao and Y. Li, Appl. Catal. B Environ., 2011, 107, 245.
46. Z. Jeirani and J. Soltan, J. Water Process. Eng., 2016, 12, 127.
47. R. Yang, P. Han, Y. Fan, Z. Guo, Q. Zhao, Y. Wang, S. Che, S. Lin and
R. Zhu, Chemosphere, 2020, 247, 125864.
48. H. Einaga, Y. Teraoka and A. Ogata, J. Catal., 2013, 305, 227.
49. H. Einaga, N. Maeda, S. Yamamoto and Y. Teraoka, Catal. Today, 2015,
245, 22.
50. H. Einaga, S. Yamamoto, N. Maeda and Y. Teraoka, Catal. Today, 2015,
242, 287.
51. Z. S. Ncanana, N. J. Sadgrove and V. S. R. Rajasekhar Pullabhotla, Catal.
Today, 2020, 358, 284.
52. F. Nawaz, Y. B. Xie, J. D. Xiao, H. B. Cao, Y. P. Li and D. Zhang, RSC Adv.,
2016, 6, 29674.
Heterogeneous Catalytic Ozonation over Supported Metal Oxides
53

53. J. Yang, Y. Huang, Y.-W. Chen, D. Xia, C.-Y. Mou, L. Hu, J. Zeng, C. He,
P. K. Wong and H.-Y. Zhu, Nano Today, 2020, 35, 100944.
54. P. A. Krisbiantoro, T. Togawa, K. Kato, J. Zhang, R. Otomo and
Y. Kamiya, Catal. Commun., 2021, 149, 106204.
55. S. Xing, X. Lu, J. Liu, L. Zhu, Z. Ma and Y. Wu, Chemosphere, 2016, 144, 7.
56. T. Zhang, W. Li and J.-P. Croue´, Appl. Catal. B Environ., 2012,
121–122, 88.
57. C. Hu, S. T. Xing, J. H. Qu and H. He, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 5978.
58. S. T. Xing, C. Hu, J. H. Qu, H. He and M. Yang, Environ. Sci. Technol.,
2008, 42, 3363.
59. G. Y. Chen, Z. Wang, F. W. Lin, Z. M. Zhang, H. D. Yu, B. B. Yan and
Z. H. Wang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 391, 122218.
60. S. Maddila, V. D. B. C. Dasireddy, E. O. Oseghe and S. B. Jonnalagadda,
Appl. Catal. B Environ., 2013, 142–143, 129.
61. S. Maddila, V. Dasireddy and S. B. Jonnalagadda, Appl. Catal. B Environ.,
2014, 150, 305.
62. X. Tong, Z. Li, W. Chen, J. Wang, X. Li, J. Mu, Y. Tang and L. Li, J. Colloid
Interface Sci., 2020, 578, 461.
63. Z. C. Yan, J. X. Zhu, X. Y. Hua, D. P. Liang, D. M. Dong, Z. Y. Guo,
N. Zheng and L. W. Zhang, J. Cleaner Prod., 2020, 272, 122856.
64. W. Chen, X. Li, Z. Pan, S. Ma and L. Li, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2017, 173, 99.
65. A. V. Levanov, I. V. Kuskov, K. B. Koiaidarova, A. V. Zosimov,
E. E. Antipenko and V. V. Lunin, Kinet. Catal., 2005, 46, 138.
66. M. Trapido, Y. Veressinina, R. Munter and J. Kallas, Ozone: Sci. Eng.,
2005, 27, 359.
67. Q. Wang, Z. Yang and H. Xu, Chin. J. Environ. Eng., 2017, 11, 2113.
68. J. Nawrocki and B. Kasprzyk-Hordern, Appl. Catal. B Environ., 2010,
99, 27.
69. G. Yu, Y. Wang, H. Cao, H. Zhao and Y. Xie, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2020,
54, 5931.
70. Z. Xiong, Y. Jiang, Z. Wu, G. Yao and B. Lai, Chem. Eng. J., 2020,
421, 127863.
71. S. H. Joo, A. J. Feitz, D. L. Sedlak and T. D. Waite, Environ. Sci. Technol.,
2004, 39, 1263.
72. M. Cho, H. Chung, W. Choi and J. Yoon, Water Res., 2004, 38, 1069.
73. M. Hayyan, M. A. Hashim and I. M. AlNashef, Chem. Rev., 2016,
116, 3029.
74. M. Kubo, K. Sekiguchi, N. Shibasaki-Kitakawa and T. Yonemoto, Res.
Chem. Intermed., 2012, 38, 2191.
75. J. Yan, J. Peng, L. Lai, F. Ji, Y. Zhang, B. Lai, Q. Chen, G. Yao, X. Chen and
L. Song, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 52, 14302.
76. Z. Sun, L. Zhao, C. Liu, Y. Zhen and J. Ma, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2019,
53, 10342.
77. T. Zhang, W. Li and J. P. Croue, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 9339.
78. L. Zhao, Z. Sun and J. Ma, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 4157.
79. T. Zhang and J. Ma, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2008, 279, 82.
54
Chapter 2

80. Q. Sun, L. Li, H. Yan, X. Hong, K. S. Hui and Z. Pan, Chem. Eng. J., 2014,
242, 348.
81. Z. Wu, G. Zhang, R. Zhang and F. Yang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2018,
57, 1943.
82. W. Li, Z. Qiang, T. Zhang, X. Bao and X. Zhao, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem.,
2011, 348, 70.
83. C. He, Y. Wang, Z. Li, Y. Huang, Y. Liao, D. Xia and S. Lee, Environ. Sci.
Technol., 2020, 54, 12771.
84. X. Chen, H. Yang, C. Au, S. Tian, Y. Xiong and Y. Chang, Chem. Eng. J.,
2020, 390, 124480.
85. K. Fukui, T. Yonezawa and H. Shingu, J. Chem. Phys., 1952, 20, 722.
86. O. Turkay, H. Inan and A. Dimoglo, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2014, 134, 110.
87. A. K. H. Al jibouri, J. N. Wu and S. R. Upreti, Can. J. Chem. Eng., 2019,
97, 67.
88. J. Liu, L. Ke, J. Liu, L. Sun, X. Yuan, Y. Li and D. Xia, J. Hazard. Mater.,
2019, 371, 42.
89. S. Maddila, V. Dasireddy and S. B. Jonnalagadda, Appl. Catal. B Environ.,
2013, 138, 149.
90. P. Liu, G. Wei, H. He, X. Liang, H. Chen, Y. Xi and J. Zhu, Appl. Surf. Sci.,
2019, 464, 287.
91. K. Wei, X. Cao, W. Gu, P. Liang, X. Huang and X. Zhang, Environ. Sci.
Technol., 2019, 53, 6917.
92. M. Sui, J. Liu and L. Sheng, Appl. Catal. B Environ., 2011, 106, 195.
93. C. V. Rekhate and J. K. Srivastava, Chem. Eng. J. Adv., 2020, 3, 100031.
94. W. Li, Z. Qiang, T. Zhang and F. Cao, Appl. Catal. B Environ., 2012,
113–114, 290.
95. R. Huang, B. Lan, Z. Chen, H. Yan, Q. Zhang, J. Bing and L. Li, Chem.
Eng. J., 2012, 180, 19.
96. F. Deng, S. Qiu, C. Chen, X. Ding and F. Ma, Ozone: Sci. Eng., 2015,
37, 546.
Heterogeneous Catalytic Ozonation over Supported Metal Oxides
55

CHAPTER 3
Catalytic Ozonation over
Composite Metal Oxides
RODRIGO PEREIRA CAVALCANTE AND
RENATO FALCAO DANTAS*
School of Technology, University of Campinas–UNICAMP, Paschoal Marmo,
1888, CEP 13484-332, Limeira, SP, Brazil
*Email: renatofalcaod@ft.unicamp.br
3.1
Introduction
Ozone (O3) is a powerful oxidizer extensively used in the treatment of water
and eﬄuents for disinfection purposes, due to its ability to inactivate re-
sistant pathogenic microorganisms, such as Escherichia coli, Salmonella and
Bacillus sp. where conventional chlorine-based disinfectants can fail and/or
may contribute to the preferred selection of chlorine-resistant bacteria.1,2
Also, it is well-known that ozone can react with various contaminants in
diﬀerent environmental compartments, such as secondary wastewater
eﬄuents.3,4 However, it is also well reported that ozone has a selective
oxidation character, leading to very limited mineralization and in many
cases to the formation of toxic by-products.5 In contrast, ozone-refractory
organic compounds are eliminated to a certain extent by hydroxyl radicals
(OH) that are formed by the decomposition of O3 in water.6,7
Unlike the direct reaction by ozone, which is selective, it is known that
OH radicals are characterized by being non-selective and reacting quickly
(rate constants varying between 107 and 1010 L mol1 s1)8 with practically
Chemistry in the Environment Series No. 8
Advanced Ozonation Processes for Water and Wastewater Treatment: Active Catalysts and
Combined Technologies
Edited by Hongbin Cao, Yongbing Xie, Yuxian Wang and Jiadong Xiao
r The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry, www.rsc.org
56

all organic compounds, leading to the complete breakdown of these mol-
ecules and even reaching high levels of mineralization.
As the generation of OH radicals during ozone reactions is relatively low,
additional alternatives are investigated in order to increase the production of
OH radicals, leading to ozonation processes being considered, such as
advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) or AOPs-like processes.6,9 In this sense,
several strategies are applied in the ozonation processes to form diﬀerent
types of ozone-based AOPs. This involved the addition of hydrogen peroxide
(H2O2) to the ozonation process (known as the peroxone process), ozonation
at high pH (O3/HO), as well as the combination of ozone with ultraviolet
radiation (UV) and/or catalyst (catalytic ozonation).6,10 The processes using
H2O2 and UV radiation have some limitations for practical applications,
such as residual H2O2 and high energy consumption for UV lamp operation.5
Among ozone-based treatment processes, catalytic ozonation is gaining
prominence in the field of drinking water and wastewater treatment. The
main advantage of this technology is related to the increase in the gener-
ation of active species, mainly OH radicals, which consequently increase the
rate of degradation of recalcitrant compounds and especially decreases the
number of toxic by-products due to the improvement in the degree of
mineralization.11 The encouragement of catalysts use in ozonation is due to
the reduction of operating costs, since it does not require additional energy
costs such as operating the UV lamp and/or costs related to pH adjustment
and control.10 In addition, it is well described that the application of cata-
lytic ozonation results in a significant decrease in ozone consumption.12
Ozone decomposition in the presence of catalysts is subdivided into two
categories depending on the physical nature of the catalyst used.10,12–14
When transition metal ions are employed in solution, catalytic ozonation is
considered to be homogeneous; however, if solid catalysts are involved, such
as solid metal oxides or noble metals supported on alumina, silica, activated
carbon, etc., the process is known as heterogeneous catalytic ozonation. In
summary, several types of catalysts are eﬀective for ozonation, especially
transition metals13,15 such as Fe21, Fe31, Mn21, Cu21, Co21, Zn21 and Cr31.
Among the solid catalysts, carbon materials, metal oxides (e.g. MnO2, TiO2,
Al2O3, Fe2O3, WO3 and CeO2) and supported metal oxides (e.g. Cu–Al2O3,
Cu–TiO2, Ru–CeO2, Fe2O3/Al2O3 and TiO2/Al2O3) are frequently mentioned in
applications of catalytic ozonation.5,12,16,17 Physical properties such as the
particle size, porosity, morphology and composition of the catalysts are
fundamental parameters that influence catalytic activity.
In the last decades, the application of composite materials in catalytic ozo-
nation has received significant attention from the scientific community.
Composite materials are classified as materials that are manufactured from two
or more constituent substances with distinct properties.18 The combination of
these materials develops some new characteristics to the resulting material,
which were not present in the individual materials. It can give them higher
recyclability, stability and performance in ozone decomposition. Their use can
increase ozonation eﬃciency at the same time it reduces drawbacks of
Catalytic Ozonation over Composite Metal Oxides
57

heterogeneous catalytic ozonation. Consequently, composite materials are
good alternatives to perform catalytic ozonation; thus the number of publi-
cations related to the application of these composite materials in catalytic
ozonation has been increasing continuously over the last years. Figure 3.1
presents a histogram showing the evolution of the number of publications per
year that address the application of composite materials in ozonation. For
comparison, the graph also shows the number of publications reported using
‘‘ozonation’’ or ‘‘catalytic ozonation’’ as a search keyword.
Diﬀerent types of oxide composites have been used to explore their feasibility
for catalytic ozonation application, such as Mn-based composite oxide,19,20
composite metal oxide–loaded alumina,21 magnetic Fe3O4@SiO2@Mg(OH)2
composite,22 pure zeolites and doped with metals,23–25 perovskites,26,27 spinel
oxides.28,29 Among the types of composite materials, composite mixed oxides
with perovskite- and spinel-type structures are attractive catalysts of continuous
interest to the scientific community and have been investigated in catalytic
ozonation due to their promising physicochemical properties for application in
catalytic processes.30,31 Sections 3.2 and 3.3 present basic knowledge along with
a critical review of composite materials with perovskite-type and spinel-type
mixed oxides use for catalytic ozonation applied for water and wastewater
treatment. Other natural minerals commonly used in catalytic ozonation are
also reported.
3.2
Perovskite-type Catalysts
Perovskite oxide-based catalysts are successfully applied in diﬀerent
processes,
including
supercapattery
applications,32
sensors,33
cathode
Figure 3.1
Number of publications per year related to ozonation, catalytic ozonation
and catalytic ozonation using composite materials carried out in the ISI
Web of Science database, using the following search keywords separ-
ately: ‘‘ozonation,’’ ‘‘catalytic ozonation.’’ ‘‘ozonation and composites.’’
Data from https://www.webofknowledge.com/, accessed July 26, 2021.
58
Chapter 3

materials,34 thermoelectric technology,35 solar cells,36 electrocatalytic activ-
ity toward the oxygen evolution reaction37 and catalytic and photocatalytic
activity for removal of pollutants.38,39 In particular, perovskite-type oxides
appear as a class of catalysts with potential for application in catalytic ozo-
nation. These materials exhibit excellent properties that may be responsible
for catalytic improvement such as (1) high stability under severe conditions
and at high temperature, which facilitates the application of catalytic
ozonation in real samples such as wastewater treatment; (2) a high degree
of stabilization of transition metals in their respective oxidation states; and
(3) high oxygen mobility.40,41
These perovskite class catalysts are a group of inorganic compounds that
have the general chemical formula ABO3, where A indicates a metal be-
longing to the group of alkali metals, beryllium, magnesium and rare earth
metals and B is a transition metal cation, normally titanium, niobium,
tantalum or manganese.13,40,41 The name of the group comes from the
natural mineral perovskite CaTiO3.13 In the ABO3 structure, the A-site cation
is 12-fold coordinated and the B-site cation is 6-fold coordinated with oxygen
anions.42 These types of materials are susceptible to substitution of both
cations without alteration in the crystalline structure.43 It is described in the
literature that the catalytic performance of a perovskite oxide is related to
the B-site transition metal element.44 When the oxidation state of the B
cation increases, the redox reaction generates greater amounts of available
oxygen, that is, it increases the lattice oxygen mobility, and, as a result, the
overall oxidation activity is increased.43 On the other hand, the substitution
of metals at A-sites does not directly aﬀect catalytic activity; however, de-
pending on the type of cation in the A-site, it can aﬀect the electronic
structure and change the oxidation state of the transition metal cation, thus
introducing its eﬀect on catalytic activity in an indirect way.43,44
Therefore, one of the advantages of perovskite structures is the possibility
of regulating the composition, changing either the A or the B cations or
partially replacing each cation with others of diﬀerent sizes or oxidation
states, resulting in perovskite with the general formula A1xA0xB1yB0yO3  d.45
Thus the oxidation state of the B-site cation and the oxygen vacancy content
can be controlled, consequently enabling the correlation of the physico-
chemical properties with the catalytic performance of the materials.42
The types of perovskite catalysts that have been used for catalytic ozona-
tion are shown in Table 3.1. Among the 14 works found using perovskite
oxides for application in ozonation, only one did not use lanthanum (La) as
an A-site metal. Lanthanides are commonly used in position A in a per-
ovskite oxide because of their crystalline structure that benefits the exposure
of active sites.46 Among the lanthanide-based perovskites that have been
applied in ozonation so far, it can be seen from the distribution shown in
Table 3.1 that LaTi1xCuxO3, with an emphasis on LaTi0.15Cu0.85O3
11,14,47–49
was the most used and demonstrated high catalytic eﬃciency.
The first publications on catalytic ozonation with perovskites, reported in
2006, were developed by the same research group.11,14,47 First, the authors
Catalytic Ozonation over Composite Metal Oxides
59

Table 3.1
Catalytic ozonation of pollutants in water and wastewater by perovskites.a
No. Catalysts (Cat.)
Synthetic
Methods
Pollutants/water
matrix
Reaction parameters
Catalytic eﬃciency (%)/
time (min)
Comments/additional
information
Refs.
1
LaTi0.15Cu0.85O3
Citrate
decomposition
Pyruvic acid (PA)/
ultrapure water
[PA]¼ 5.0103 molL1,
[O3]¼ 50 mg L1,
[Cat.]¼ 1.0 g L1,
T¼ 20 1C
Total removal of pyruvic acid
after 150 min
Ozone dose, catalyst
concentration and
temperature influenced
the degradation
Rivas
et al.47
2
LaTi1xCuxO3
(x ¼ 0.15, 0.22, 0.40,
0.60, 0.85) and
LaTi1xCoxO3
(x ¼ 0.60, 0.85)
Citrate
decomposition
Pyruvic acid (PA)/
ultrapure water
[PA]¼ 5.0103 molL1,
[O3]¼ 50 mg L1,
[Cat.]¼ 1.0 g L1,
pH ¼ 6.0, T¼ 20 1C
LaTi0.15Cu0.85O3 and
LaTi0.15Co0.85O3: ¼ 80%
removal of pyruvic acid in
120 min
Perovskites catalysts did
show significant catalytic
activity to increase the
ozonation of pyruvic acid
Carbajo
et al.14
3
LaTi0.15Cu0.85O3
Citrate
decomposition
Gallic acid (GA)/pure
water
[GA]¼ 1.0103 molL1,
[O3]¼ 5 mgL1,
[Cat.]¼ 2.5 g L1,
pH ¼ 3.5, T¼ 20 1C.
O3 þ LaTi0.15Cu0.85O3¼ 90%
mineralization in 180 min.
O3 alone ¼ 35% at the same
time.
Several series of experiments
carried out at diﬀerent
operating conditions.
Carbajo
et al.11
4
LaTi0.15Cu0.85O3
Citrate
decomposition
Mixture of three
phenols (tyrosol,
gallic acid and
syringic acid)
[COD]0¼ 1200 mgL1,
[O3]¼ 50 mg L1,
[Cat.]¼ 0.1 g L1,
pH ¼ 3.0, T¼ 20 1C
490% mineralization/
300 min
Concentration of
perovskites did show no
appreciable influence for
values above 0.1 gL1
Carbajo
et al.48
5
LaTi0.15Cu0.85O3
Citrate
decomposition
Pyruvic acid (PA)/
ultrapure water
[PA]¼ 5.0103 molL1,
[O3]¼ 50 gm3,
[Cat.]¼ 1.0 g L1,
T¼ 20 1C.
O3 ¼ above 20% of
degradation after 180 min.
O3/perovskite¼
complete removal in about
120 min.
Using the combination of
the oxidants O3/UV/
perovskite the pyruvic acid
is eliminated in just 45
min.
Rivas
et al.49
6
Copper or cobalt
perovskites
(LaTi0.15Me0.85O3
with Me as Cu or
Co)
Citrate
decomposition
Sulfamethoxazole
(SULFA)/ultrapure
water
[SULFA]¼ 30 mgL1,
[O3]¼ 20 mg L1,
[Cat.]¼ 0.3 g L1,
pH ¼ 7.0, T¼ 20 1C
TOC removal in 120 min:
O3þ copper
perovskite¼ 85%;
O3þ cobalt
perovskite¼ 60%; single
ozonation¼ 28%
Low pH has a negative eﬀect
when perovskite-type
catalysts are used because
of metal leaching
Beltra´n
et al.50
7
Copper or cobalt
perovskites
(LaTi0.15Me0.85O3
with Me as Cu or
Co)
Citrate
decomposition
Diclofenac (DCF) and
17a-Ethynylstradiol
(EST)/ultrapure
water and domestic
wastewater
Ultrapure water:
[DCF]¼ 30 mgL1,
[EST]¼ 9 mgL1,
[O3]¼ 20 mg L1,
[Cat.]¼ 0.1 g L1,
TOC removal in 120 min:
DCF in ultrapure water:
O3þ cobalt or copper
perovskite¼ 80 or 95% in
During ozone processes of
domestic wastewater, the
presence of cobalt
perovskite catalyst does
not allow any
Beltra´n
et al.51
60
Chapter 3

pH ¼ 7.0 and 2.0,
T¼ 20 1C
Domestic wastewater
spiked up with DCF
and EST:
T ¼ 20 1C. [TOC]0 ¼
30 mg L1, [COD]0 ¼
80 mg L1, pH ¼ 7.0
120 min. ozonation
alone¼ 40%
EST in ultrapure water:
ozonation alone ¼ 55% in
120 min;
O3 þ perovskite ¼ about
85% (regardless of the
type of perovskite)
Domestic
wastewater ¼ 60% in 120
min using copper catalyst
improvement of the
oxidation rate
8
La-containing
perovskites
(LaFeO3; LaNiO3;
LaCoO3; LaMnO3;
LaFexCu1xO3 and
LaAlxCu1xO3,
x ¼ 0.9 and 0.7)
Citrate method
Oxalic acid (OA) and
CI Reactive Blue
5/pure water
[OA]¼ 1 mmolL1,
[dye]¼ 50 mgL1,
[O3]¼ 50 gm3,
[Cat.]¼ 0.14 mgmL1,
pHoxalic acid¼ 3.0,
pHdye¼ 5.5
O3 þ LaCoO3: complete
removal of oxalic acid after
around 60 min and an
almost complete
mineralization of dye after
180 min
Single O3: 70%
mineralization after 180
min
LaMnO3 presented the best
performance; however,
metal leaching was
observed during catalytic
ozonation
Orge
et al.43
9
Mesoporous
nanocast
perovskites (NC-
LaMnO3 and NC-
LaFeO3)
Nanocasting
technique
2-Chlorophenol
(2-CH)/pure water
[2-CH] ¼ 50 mgL1,
[O3]¼ 12 mg L1,
[Cat.]¼ 0.3 gL1
TOC removal in 75 min: O3
alone¼ 25%; O3 þ NC-
LaMnO3¼ 80%; O3þ NC-
LaFeO3¼ 68%
Uncast counterpart
perovskites (CA-LaMnO3
and CA-LaFeO3), were also
prepared and all showed
lower eﬃciencies than the
NC-LaMnO3 and NC-
LaFeO3
Afzal
et al.52
10
Bismuth ferrite
(BiFeO3) magnetic
Thermal
decomposition
Oxalic acid (OA)
solution and
norfloxacin (NFX)
solution
[OA]¼ [NFX]¼ 10 mgL1,
[Cat.]¼ 0.2 mgL1,
[O3]¼ 75 mg h1,
T¼ 25 1C
OA¼ 8.6% degradation in
single O3 after 60 min.
O3þ BiFeO3 ¼ 27.9%
NFX ¼ O3 alone: about
37.9% of TOC removal in
120 min; O3 þ BiFeO3:
39.1%.
A photocatalytic ozonation
mechanism for BiFeO3 was
proposed.
Yin
et al.26
11
LaFeO3 and LaCoO3
Sol–gel method
Benzotriazole (BZA)/
pure water and
bromate (BrO3
)
[BZA] ¼ 10 mgL1,
[Br-]¼ 100 mgL1,
[O3]¼ 2 mgL1,
O3 or O3 þ LaFeO3:
¼ complete degradation of
BZA in 20 min.
LaFeO3 showed no catalytic
activity for BZA
degradation but inhibited
Zhang
et al.53
Catalytic Ozonation over Composite Metal Oxides
61

Table 3.1
(Continued)
No. Catalysts (Cat.)
Synthetic
Methods
Pollutants/water
matrix
Reaction parameters
Catalytic eﬃciency (%)/
time (min)
Comments/additional
information
Refs.
[Cat.]¼ 0.5 gL1,
pH¼ 6.4
O3þ LaCoO3: complete
degradation of BZA in 15
min and about 71% BrO3

inhibition
the generation of BrO3
 by
73%
12
LaCoO3
Sol–gel method
Benzotriazole (BZ)/
Wastewater
samples
[BZ]¼ eﬄuent spiked with
benzotriazole
(100 mgL1) and Br
(100 mgL1). [O3]
¼ 1.0 mg L1,
[Cat.]¼ 0.25 gL1,
pH¼ 7.39
O3 ¼ complete degradation
of benzotriazole after 20
min with a reaction kinetic
constant of 0.1462 min1
O3 þ LaCoO3
¼ complete degradation
after 20 min with
significant increase of
kinetic constant (0.2141
min1)
LaCoO3 catalytic ozonation
promoted the reduced the
formation of aldehydes
and oxalic acid as
important toxic by-
products in the sole
ozonation.
Zhang
et al.54
13
Combination of
perovskite oxide
(LaCoO3, LCO) and
graphitic carbon
nitride (g-C3N4,
CN): CN/LCO
Sol–gel method
Benzotriazole (BZ)/
pure water
[BZ]¼ 10 mg L1,
[O3]¼ 1.0 mgL1,
[Cat.]¼ 0.25 gL1,
pH¼ 6.4
The highest removal
eﬃciency was observed
when CN/LCO-400 was
used (kobs was 0.0820
min1)
The better degradation
eﬃciency of BZA was
observed in CN/LCO-400
catalytic ozonation, which
indicated that the optimal
calcination temperature
was 400 1C
Zhang
et al.27
14
Lanthanum
manganite
perovskites
composites
(LaMn4Ox)
Modified co-
precipitation
method
Oxalic acid (OA) and
1H-benzotriazole
(BTA)/pure water
[OA]¼ 50 mgL1,
[BTA] ¼ 50 mgL1,
[O3]¼ 20 mg L1,
[Cat.]¼ 0.2 gL1,
pH¼ 6.8, T¼ 25 1C
OA¼ O3 alone: less than 10%
of removal after 60 min;
O3þ LaMn4Ox: complete
removal in 45 min
BTA ¼ O3 alone: complete
removal in 60 min;
O3 þ LaMn4Ox: complete
removal in 30 min
The hierarchical structure
favored the catalytic
activities of lanthanum
manganite perovskites
composites
Wang
et al.55
aTOC ¼ total organic carbon; COD ¼ chemical oxygen demand
62
Chapter 3

evaluated the catalytic ozonation of pyruvic acid, a common by-product
formed after ozonation of aromatic compounds, in the presence of the
perovskite LaTi0.15Cu0.85O3.47 The mechanistic studies developed indicated
that a reaction occurs on the catalyst surface, after subsequent reaction
products are formed and desorb to bulk solution. Continuing these studies,
the researchers evaluated the ozonation of pyruvic acid using LaTi1xCuxO3
and LaTi1xCoxO3 peroskovites14 synthesized with diﬀerent proportions of
the transition metal. In the same year, another pioneering study developed
by the authors was the application of LaTi0.15Cu0.85O3 in the catalytic ozo-
nation of gallic acid.11 In the following year, the authors published a paper
that demonstrated the application of the same catalyst to evaluate eﬃciency
in the catalytic ozonation of a mixture of three phenols (tyrosol, gallic acid
and syringic acid).48 Furthermore, in that same work, the catalyst was tested
in the remediation of real eﬄuents from a wine distillery industry and two
processes related to olive oil and table olive manufacturing.
Subsequently, Beltran et al.50,51 studied combined ozone and copper or
cobalt perovskites (LaTi0.15Me0.85O3 with Me as Cu or Co) to assess the min-
eralization degree of pharmaceutical compounds by using sulfamethox-
azole,50 diclofenac51 and 17a-ethynylstradiol51 as model compounds. The
increase in mineralization was highly significant in the presence of perovskite
when compared to single ozonation, regardless of the pharmaceutical to be
removed (see results in Table 3.1). It is worth mentioning that catalytic
ozonation was also eﬃcient for the mineralization of organic matter from a
domestic eﬄuent enriched with the drugs diclofenac and 17a-ethynylstradiol.
Three years after the work developed by Beltran et al.50,51 in 2013, the work
developed by Orge et al.43 was highlighted. In this research, non-substituted
perovskites (LaFeO3, LaNiO3, LaCoO3 and LaMnO3) and substituted per-
ovskites (LaFexCu1xO3 and LaAlxCu1xO3, x ¼ 0.9 and 0.7) were employed as
eﬃcient catalysts for the removal of oxalic acid and dye CI Reactive Blue 5.
More recently, in 2017, Afzal et al.52 in their research work, synthesized
mesoporous perovskites type NC-LaMnO3 and NC-LaFeO3, where NC was the
acronym used by the authors to represent the mesoporous materials.
Mesoporous materials have high surface areas, and it is well reported that
the increase in surface area increases the catalytic response. The researchers
synthesized these mesoporous materials in order to increase the catalytic
response of perovskites in ozonation applications. As a target compound, the
researchers chose 2-chlorophenol, which is considered a priority pollutant.
The synthesized perovskites showed a comparatively high catalytic activity in
terms of mineralization in the ozonation of 2-chlorophenol in relation to the
other conventional perovskites (see summary in Table 3.1). From a detailed
study carried out by the researchers to discuss the mechanism of catalytic
ozonation of NC-LaMnO3 perovskite,
OH radicals were the dominant
reactive oxygen species contributed to high catalytic activity.
Perovskite type BiFeO3 magnetic nanoparticles were evaluated by Yin
et al.26 for catalytic and photocatalytic ozonation using oxalic acid and
norfloxacin as model compounds. In this case, BiFeO3 has low activity for
Catalytic Ozonation over Composite Metal Oxides
63

the catalytic activation of ozone. However, under visible light irradiation, a
high increase in catalytic activity was obtained. The authors attributed this
increase to the synergy between photocatalysis and ozonation that resulted
from the recombination inhibition of the photo-generated electron–hole
pairs and the improved yield of OH radicals.
Zhang et al.53 investigated benzotriazole removal in catalytic ozonation
with two perovskites, LaCoO3 and LaFeO3, as catalysts and investigated the
minimization of bromate (BrO3
) formation in the presence of the per-
ovskites. It is worth noting here that it is extremely important to investigate
the generation of BrO3
 (anion classified as a potential carcinogen to
humans) in ozonation processes. In another study, Zhang et al.54 evaluated
the performance of catalytic ozonation in the presence of LaCoO3 in a
comprehensive manner and in real conditions, including a real matrix de-
rived from eﬄuents of primary and secondary clarifiers in a municipality’s
wastewater. They investigated the degradation of benzotriazole as a typical
emerging pollutant, the reduction of bromate, and the ability of the system
to remove precursors from disinfection by-products. The results obtained by
the researchers showed that catalytic ozonation in the presence of
perovskite-type LaCoO3 improved the removal of contaminant and organic
matter from the eﬄuent. Advantageously, LaCoO3 catalytic ozonation has
shown an ability to remove toxic halogenated organic by-products, aldehydes
and the disinfection by-product precursors.
In particular, the hierarchically clustered microsphere structure of the per-
ovskites could enable the active sites to be highly exposed and consequently
favor catalytic activities. Wang et al.55 synthesized a series of hierarchical
lanthanum
manganite
perovskites
composites
(LaMn4Ox)
with
non-
stoichiometric compositions and evaluated the catalytic ozonation activities
of the as-synthesized perovskites using oxalic acid and 1H-benzotriazole as
the target pollutants. The hierarchical structure favored the catalytic activities
of these lanthanum manganite perovskites. From the various mechanistic
studies carried out by the authors, it was proven that oxygen vacancies, the
Mn31/Mn41 redox centers and the surface hydroxyl groups were the potential
active sites for ozone decomposition in the presence of LaMn4Ox. Reactive
oxygen species, among them OH radicals, superoxide (O2
) and singlet
oxygen (1O2), also contributed to catalytic activity in LaMn4Ox catalytic
ozonation. In this catalytic system, the authors proposed that the produced
O2
 and 1O2 might originate from the ozone-dissociated products on oxygen
vacancies, while OH might stem from O3 adsorbed onto Mn sites and/or
surface hydroxyl groups. The mechanism of catalytic ozonation with per-
ovskites is still a challenge for chemists, and there are not many detailed
studies, demonstrating the need to explore this field.
3.3
Spinel-like Oxide-type Catalysts
The combination of two single-cation oxides to form two-cation oxide with
spinel structure is a strategy to improve the properties of this material
64
Chapter 3

compared to its binary oxide’s counterparts, among them stability, elec-
tronic, magnetic and optical properties.56–58 The interesting properties of
these oxides enhance their use as a catalyst in several applications, with
emphasis on catalytic ozonation, discussed in this chapter.
Spinel oxides are typically known as mixing metal oxides with the stoi-
chiometric chemical formula AB2O4, where A and B represent divalent and
trivalent metallic ions, respectively.57,58 Spinel oxides are being widely used as
non-noble catalysts in catalytic ozonation. The catalytic performance of AB2O4
nanoparticles in ozonation processes is practically studied using aluminate
and ferrite spinel oxides. Spinel ferrites with the general formula MeFe2O4
(Me ¼ Ni, Cu, Mn, Zn, Co) are widely studied for their catalytic applications in
ozonation as they have the advantages of easy recovery, good stability and
high activity.15 The use of ferrites also makes it possible to recover the catalyst
at the end of the process, allowing reuse and consequently reducing operating
costs and facilitating application in full-scale eﬄuents.
Table 3.2 presents a summary of the catalytic performance of pure and
doped ferrite spinel oxides for application in catalytic ozonation used to
remove contaminants such as di-n-butyl phthalate, phenacetin, phenol in
pure water and wastewater.
Di-n-butyl phthalate (DBP), a common member of phthalate esters, is one
of the most reported compounds to evaluate the eﬀectiveness of the use of
spinel ferrites in ozonation. The first study reporting the use of magnetic
porous ferrospinel materials for the removal of DBP in catalytic ozonation
was carried out by Ren et al.59 In this research, magnetic porous ferrospinel
NiFe2O4 was prepared by a sol–gel method. According to the results sum-
marized in Table 3.2, the presence of the catalyst showed more than 60%
increase in the rate of DBP degradation (in 30 min of reaction), compared to
ozonation alone. In the work of Zhao et al.,60 NiFe2O4 nanomaterials were
prepared by two diﬀerent methods. NiFe2O4 synthesized by the hydro-
thermal method significantly increased the removal of phenol (around 16%
compared to ozonation alone), while the catalyst synthesized by the calcined
method was non-eﬀective. This was due to diﬀerences in the properties of
the catalysts that showed diﬀerences in interaction with ozone.
Qi et al.61,62,64 published a series of three scientific articles in the years
2015–2016 using copper, manganese and nickel spinel ferrites, for application
in the catalytic ozonation of phenancentin, a non-opioid analgesic and
antipyretic agent. The catalytic activity of copper ferrite, CuFe2O4, for the
removal of NOx and N,N-dimethylacetamide (a widely used industrial solv-
ent) via the catalytic ozonation process was also investigated by Zhao et al.66
and Zhang et al.,69 respectively. CuFe2O4 showed high activity for application
in catalytic ozonation, as observed in results shown in Table 3.2. The main
problem with the application of these metals in catalytic ozonation is
leaching, which can cause secondary pollution due to their toxicity.15 How-
ever, as demonstrated by the results obtained by the researchers,64,66,69 the
magnetism of spinel ferrites favors recycling, which can be used to separate
it from the solution for reuse and consequently reduce the problems of
Catalytic Ozonation over Composite Metal Oxides
65

Table 3.2
Catalytic ozonation of pollutants in water and wastewater by undoped (No. 1–12) and doped (No. 13–18) spinel ferrites.
No. Catalysts (Cat.)
Synthetic
methods
Pollutants/water
matrix
Reaction parameters
Catalytic eﬃciency (%)/time
(h or min)
Comments/additional
information
Refs.
1
NiFe2O4
Sol–gel process
Di-n-butyl phthalate
(DBP)/deionized
water
[DBP]¼ 0.5 mgL1, [O3]¼ 5
mg L1, [Cat.]¼ 0.01
gL1, pH¼ 7.7. T¼ 25 1C.
Single ozonation¼ 25% of
removal in 10 min, and 42%
after 60 min.
O3 þ NiFe2O4¼ almost 100%
removal in 30 min
NiFe2O4 catalytic ozonation
followed a OH radical-
type mechanism
Ren
et al.59
2
NiFe2O4
Hydrothermal
method
(NiFe2O4–H)
and calcined
method
(NiFe2O4–C)
Phenol/deionized
water
[Phenol] ¼ 300 mgL1,
[O3]¼ 0.75 mgmin1,
[Cat.]¼ 1.0 gL1,
pH¼ 6.5 0.1,
T¼ 20.0 1.0 1C
Phenol removal in 60 min: Sole
ozonation¼ 38.9%;
O3 þ NiFe2O4–H¼ 55.2%
NiFe2O4–C was non-eﬀective Zhao
et al.60
3
CuFe2O4
Co-precipitation-
calcination
method
Phenacetin (PNT)/
distilled-deionized
water and
wastewater
treatment plant
eﬄuent
[DBP]¼ 0.2 mmolL1,
[O3]¼ 0.36 mgL1 or 3.85
mg L1, [Cat.]¼ 2.0 gL1,
pH¼ 7.72
(1) Sole ozonation [0.36
mgL1]¼ 95% of PNT
removal in 30 min.
(2) sole ozonation [3.85
mgL1]¼ complete removal
in 5.0 min
(3) O3 þ CuFe2O4 ¼ The total
reaction time was reduced by
half to obtain the same
removal
(4) the eﬄuent of wastewater
treatment: did not show some
negative eﬀect on the
performance of catalytic
ozonation
In sole ozonation, the
molecular ozone was
reacted with phenacetin
fast, but it was less
eﬀective for phenacetin’s
mineralization
Qi
et al.61
4
MnFe2O4 and
NiFe2O4
Co-precipitation-
calcination
method
Phenacetin (PNT)/
distilled-deionized
water
[PNT] ¼ 0.2 mmolL1,
[O3]¼ 0.36 mgL1,
[Cat.]¼ 2.0 gL1,
pH¼ 7.72
Sole ozonation¼ 29.36% of TOC
removal in 3 h
In the presence of a catalyst, the
mineralization increased to
60%, regardless of the catalyst
selection
All catalysts showed a weak
heavy metal leaching;
catalysts can be reused
many times
Qi
et al.62
66
Chapter 3

5
ZnFe2O4 (ZFO)
Hydrothermal
(ZFO-H) and
citrate sol–gel
methods
(ZFO-C)
Phenol/ultrapure
water and
biologically treated
coking wastewater
(BTCW)
Ultrapure water:
[phenol]¼ 300 mgL1,
[O3]¼ 14 1 mgL1,
[Cat.]¼ 1.0 gL1,
pH¼ 6.38
BTCW: [O3]¼ 31 1
mg L1, [Cat.]¼ 1.0 gL1,
pH¼ 7.0 0.5
Sole ozonation¼ 63.4% of
phenol removal in 30 min
O3þ ZFO-H¼ 92.6% after
30 min
O3þ ZFO-C¼ no increment of
removal was obtained
BTCW: TOC removal in 60
min¼ 23.4% (sole O3); 27.9%
(O3 þ ZFO-C); 35.8%
(O3 þ ZFO-H)
The eﬀect of TBA as radical
scavenger demonstrated
the predominant role of
ozone in non-catalytic
ozonation, whereas OH
notably prevailed in
catalytic ozonation
Zhang
et al.63
6
CuFe2O4 (CFO) and
CFOH (precursor
of copper ferrite)
CFO: Co-
precipitation-
calcination
method;
CFOH: same
procedure
without the
calcination step
Phenacetin (PNT)/
distilled-deionized
water
[PNT] ¼ 0.2 mmolL1,
[O3]¼ 0.36 mgL1 or 3.85
mg L1 [Cat.]¼ 2.0 gL1,
pH¼ 7.72
TOC removal in 180 min: Sole O3
[3.85 mgL1]¼ about 30%; O3
[3.85 mgL1]/CFOH¼ about
90%
Better performance and
mineralization of PNT in
catalytic ozonation by
CFOH were observed,
which was dominated by
the surface reaction
Qi
et al.64
7
MgFe2O4
Sol–gel
combustion
process
Acid Orange II (AOII)/
simulated
wastewater
[AOII]¼ 50 mgL1,
[O3]¼ 5.0 mgL1
[Cat.]¼ 0.1 gL1.
O3þ MgFe2O4 ¼ 94.1% of AOII
removal after 40 min and
48.1% of TOC removal in 80
min (4.74 times that in O3
alone)
The degradation of AOII
using other spinel ferrites,
among them NiFe2O4,
MnFe2O4, and CuFe2O4 as
catalysts were investigated
for comparisons
Lu
et al.65
8
CuFe2O4
Hydrothermal
method
Simulated flue gas
(mixing N2 and NO
gas (5% (v/v),
balanced with N2))
[NOx]¼ 450 mgL1,
[O3]¼ 2.8 mgL1,
Cat.¼ 200 mg, pH¼ 6.38
O3þ CuFe2O4¼ 83% NOx
removal
A possible mechanism for
the catalytic ozonation of
NOx was proposed
Zhao
et al.66
9
AFe2O4 (A¼ Co, Ni,
Cu, and Zn)
Citrate sol–gel
method
Oxalic acid (OA)/
ultrapure water
[OA]¼ 5 mmolL1,
[O3]¼ 14 1 mgL1,
[Cat.]¼ 1.0 gL1,
pH¼ 2.30 0.02
TOC removal in 120 min: single
ozonation¼ 4.7%;
O3 þ CoFe2O4 ¼ 68.3%;
O3 þ ZnFe2O4 ¼ 8.5%;
O3 þ CuFe2O4;
O3 þ NiFe2O4¼ 15%
The mechanism of oxalic
acid ozonation catalyzed
by spinel ferrites have been
proposed
Zhang
et al.67
10
MeFe2O4 (Me¼ Cu,
Co, Ni, Zn)
Auto combustion
reaction
method
Shale gas produced
water (PW)
PW¼ 1.0 L, mixing
gas¼ flow rate of 0.8
Lmin1, O3¼ 1.0
mg L1min1,
[Cat.]¼ 0.15 gL1,
COD removal of PW in 24 h: (i)
O3 alone: less than 200 mgL1
COD removal;
O3 þ CuFe2O4 ¼ 572 mgL1;
O3 þ NiFe2O4¼ 530 mgL1;
The catalytic performance of
catalysts was ranked as
CuFe2O4
4NiFe2O4
4CoFe2O44ZnFe2O4
Liu
et al.68
Catalytic Ozonation over Composite Metal Oxides
67

Table 3.2
(Continued)
No. Catalysts (Cat.)
Synthetic
methods
Pollutants/water
matrix
Reaction parameters
Catalytic eﬃciency (%)/time
(h or min)
Comments/additional
information
Refs.
T¼ 25 2 1C,
pH¼ 10.2 0.2
O3 þ CoFe2O4 ¼ 503 mgL1;
O3 þ ZnFe2O4 ¼ 413 mgL1 of
COD removal
11
CuFe2O4
Sol–gel
combustion
method
N,N-
dimethylacetamide
(DMAC)/deionized
water
[DMAC]¼ 200 mgL1,
[O3]¼ 4.6 mgL1,
[Cat.]¼ 30 gL1,
pH¼ 6.7. T¼ 25 1 1C
COD and TOC removal in 120
min: sole O3: COD¼ 11.1%,
TOC¼ 6.8%; O3 þ CuFe2O4:
COD¼ 30.1%, TOC¼ 22.3%
The performance of
O3 þ CuO process for the
DMAC degradation was
much stronger than that of
O3 þ CuFe2O4 process, but
the leaching concentration
of Cu21 in O3þ CuO
process was about 10 times
than that of O3 þ CuFe2O4
process
Zhang
et al.69
12
CoFe2O4
Sol–gel
combustion
technique
Clofibric acid (CA)/
deionized water
[CA]¼ 0.1 mmolL1,
[O3]¼ 5.1 mgmin1,
[Cat.]¼ 0.2 gL1,
pHB4.0, T¼ 25 2 1C
CA removal in 30 min: sole
O3 ¼ 64%;
O3 þ CoFe2O4 ¼ 98.7%
TOC removal in 120 min: sole
ozonation¼ 29.8%.
O3 þ CoFe2O4 ¼ 72.7%
The O3þ CoFe2O4 was
eﬃcient for the oxidation
of other contaminants
(2,4-dichlorophenol and
bisphenol A) and it also
performed well in
removing CA in river, lake
and tap water
Cai
et al.70
13
Bi-doping MnFe2O4
(Mn1xBixFe2O4,
x¼ 0, 0.005, 0.01,
0.02, 0.05)
Sol–gel process
Di-n-butyl phthalate
(DBP)/
deionized water
[DBP]¼ 0.05 mgL1,
[O3]¼ 0.3 mgL1,
[Cat.]¼ 0.01 gL1,
pH¼ 6.9. T¼ 25 1 1C
DBP removal in 60 min: sole
O3 ¼ 33%; O3 þ Bi-doping
catalysts: follows the order of
Mn0.95Bi0.05Fe2O4 (more than
70% removal)
4Mn0.98Bi0.02Fe2O4
4Mn0.99Bi0.01Fe2O4
4Mn0.995Bi0.005Fe2O4
4MnFe2O4
O3þ Mn0.95Bi0.05Fe2O4
exhibits the highest
eﬃciency on removal of
DBP, which is about twice
higher than degradation of
ozone alone
Ren
et al.71
14
Graphene oxide
doping MnFe2O4
(rGO-MnFe2O4,
rGO¼ mass ratio:
1%, 5%, 10%)
Electrospinning
method
Di-n-butyl phthalate
(DBP)/deionized
water
[DBP]¼ 0.5 mgL1,
[O3]¼ 0.40 mgmin1,
[Cat.]¼ 0.01 gL1,
pH¼ 7.0, T¼ 20 2 1C
DBP removal in 60 min: sole
O3 ¼ 32%; O3 þ 5% rGO-
MnFe2O4¼ 87%
In 5% rGO-MnFe2O4/O3
system, OH is the main
radicals and chemisorbed
oxygen groups act as
extremely important active
sites in the catalytic
reaction
Ren
et al.72
68
Chapter 3

15
Ag-doped MnFe2O4
(Ag molar loading
of 0.2, 0.5, 1, 2,
and 5%)
Sol–gel process
Di-n-butyl phthalate
(DBP)/deionized
water
[DBP]¼ 0.5 mgL1,
O3¼ 0.68 mg min 1,
[Cat.]¼ 10 mgL1,
pH¼ 7.3, T¼ 25 2 1C
DBP removal in 60 min: sole
O3 ¼ 30%; O3 þ 0.5%
Ag/MnFe2O4¼ 75.3%
Experiments showed an
important role of surface
hydroxyl groups to
promote the ozone
decomposition and OH
radical production
Wang
et al.73
16
CuFe2O4 loaded on
natural sepiolite
(CuFe2O4/SEP)
Citrate sol–gel
method
Quinoline/deionized
water and
biologically treated
coking wastewater
Ultrapure water:
[quinoline]¼ 50 mgL1,
O3¼ 1.0 Lmin1,
[Cat.]¼ 1.0 gL1,
pH¼ 6.8
Quinoline (TOC removal in
30 min): sole O3 ¼ 16.8%;
O3 þ CuFe2O4 ¼ 55.8%;
O3 þ CuFe2O4/SEP¼ 90.3%
Biologically treated coking
wastewater (TOC removal in
60 min): sole O3 ¼ 19.99%;
O3 þ CuFe2O4/SEP¼ 57.81%
Mechanistic studies
indicated that OH and
O2
 were the main
reactive species in the
ozonation in the presence
of CuFe2O4/SEP
Liu
et al.74
17
Mn-doped ZnFe2O4
(MnxZn1xFe2O4,
x¼ 0, 0.2, 0.5, 0.8)
Sol–gel process
Di-n-butyl phthalate
(DBP)/deionized
water
[DBP]¼ 0.5 mgL1,
[O3]¼ 0.5 mgmin1,
[Cat.]¼ 0.01 gL1,
pH¼ 7.0, T¼ 20 2 1C.
DBP removal in 30 min: Sole
O3 ¼ 36%; O3 þ ZnFe2O4 ¼
50.5%; O3þ Mn0.5Zn0.5Fe2O4
¼ 91.7%.
The surface hydroxyl groups
were the main active sites
for MnxZn1xFe2O4 in the
catalytic ozonation
process. OH was the
primary species
responsible for DBP
degradation
Zhao
et al.75
18
Ag-doped NiFe2O4
(Ag2xNi1xFe2O4,
x¼ 0, 0.01, 0.02,
0.03, 0.05)
Sol–gel method
Papermaking
wastewater
[O3]¼ 5 mgL1, [Cat.]¼ 0.1
gL1, T¼ 25 2 1C
COD removal in 60 min: Sole
O3 ¼ 23%;
O3 þ NiFe2O4¼ 53%;
O3 þ Ag0.02Ni0.99Fe2O4 ¼ 58%;
O3 þ Ag0.04Ni0.98Fe2O4 ¼ 62%;
O3 þ Ag0.06Ni0.97Fe2O4 ¼ 65%;
O3 þ Ag0.1Ni0.95Fe2O4 ¼ 70%
Ag and Ni worked as the
active sites and the
eﬃcient cycling of electron
between Ag and Ni
enhanced the
decomposition of ozone
and generated more OH
radicals
Zhao
et al.76
Catalytic Ozonation over Composite Metal Oxides
69

secondary pollution. In general, mechanistic studies indicate that the high
density of surface hydroxyl groups and oxygen vacancies promotes the
generation of OH radicals, which is the main active species responsible for
the eﬃciency of the application of spinel oxides in catalytic ozonation.
It is also found in the literature (see Table 3.2) that the magnetic nano-
particles of ZnFe2O4,63,67,68 MgFe2O4
65 and CoFe2O4
67,68,70 are catalytically
active in the ozonation of emerging organic contaminants.
Based on the possible reaction mechanisms for catalytic ozonation with
diﬀerent ferrite spinel oxides proposed by Zhang et al.,67,69 as proposed by
Cai et al.70 and complemented with the results obtained by Lu et al.,65 a
possible general mechanism for catalytic ozonation by spinel ferrites is il-
lustrated in Figure 3.2. From the discussions held by the researchers, a
possible explanation for the mechanism is described here: (1) Superficial
M–OH groups formed due to the adsorption of water molecules on the active
sites of the metal oxide70 (eqn (3.1)). (2) Then, the dissolved ozone adsorbed
on the surface of the catalyst and interaction with the hydroxyl groups on the
surface occurred, resulting in the generation of OH radicals69 (eqn (3.2)–
(3.4)). (3) In addition, the transfer of an electron from the bivalent A-site
metal ion to ozone generated the radical O3
 and trivalent A-site metal ion.
This radical reacts with H1 in solution, generating HO3 and finally OH
radicals. Simultaneously, oxidized trivalent metals are reduced by lattice
oxygen, regenerating their bivalent state.67
 M21 þ H2O-  M21  OH þ H1
(3.1)
Figure 3.2
Scheme illustrating the possible mechanism for ozonation process in the
presence of ferrite spinel oxides catalysts.
70
Chapter 3

 M21–OH þ 2O3-  M21–O2
 þ HO3 þ O2
(3.2)
HO3- OH þ O2
(3.3)
 M21–O2
 þ O3 þ H2O-  M21–OH þ HO3 þ O2
(3.4)
More recently (2016), some researchers have focused on the modification
of ferrite spinel oxides for application in catalytic ozonation. Generally, the
addition of a metal dopant can significantly increase the catalytic properties
of ferrites and of spinel oxides in general due to changes in the properties of
catalysts, such as increased surface area, particle size distribution, ion dis-
tribution, formation of porous oxides and surface morphology.71 In add-
ition, metal-doped catalysts have more Lewis acid sites on the surface, which
hold more hydroxyl groups on the surface and consequently increase the
generation of active species.76
The first work using spinel ferrite doped for ozonation applications was
reported by Ren et al.71 In this study, Bi-doping spinel ferrite Mn1xBixFe2O4
was applied in the catalytic ozonation of DBP, and it was found that the
introduction of Bi into MnFeO4 improved the catalytic DBP decomposition
due to decreased crystallite size and the increased surface hydroxyl site
concentration of MnFe2O4. In the literature (see Table 3.2), there are re-
ported works applying spinel ferrites doped with Ag and Mn for application
in ozonation. More specifically, the eﬀectiveness of Ag-doped MnFe2O4
73 and
Mn-doped ZnFe2O4
75 as catalysts for the ozonation of DBP degradation and
Ag-doped NiFe2O4
76 for catalytic ozonation of secondary eﬄuents of paper-
making wastewater are highlighted.
Table 3.3 represents the review of other spinel oxides that have been ap-
plied in the catalytic ozonation process. From the presented works, it is
possible to observe that aluminate spinel oxides, specifically cobalt,77 cop-
per78,80,83 and zinc79,82 aluminates, are generally used in catalytic ozonation.
Aluminate spinels have been reported to be good catalysts for application in
catalytic ozonation (see Table 3.3 No. 1–4, 6, 7). For example, Xu et al.83
studied the catalytic ozonation of the common azo dyes, CI Acid Orange 7
using CuAl2O4-based mixed oxides, obtaining a high rate of dye de-
composition (96% of removal) and an increase of about 47% in the removal
of COD compared to ozonation alone. Recently, Chen and Wang85 reported a
spinel cobaltite NiCo2O4 as the catalyst for the ozonation of sulfamethazine
(SMT), an antibiotic widely used in veterinary practice.
In summary, to the best of our knowledge, Tables 3.2 and 3.3 show the
spinel oxides that have been used so far for application in catalytic ozonation.
3.4
Other Natural Minerals
Many natural minerals have been used in the field of water treatment by the
catalytic ozonation process due to their low cost and ready availability. The
most common natural minerals used as catalysts in ozonation processes are
shown in Figure 3.3(a) and (b) and Table 3.4, which include goethite,90
Catalytic Ozonation over Composite Metal Oxides
71

Table 3.3
Review of other types of spinel oxides used in the catalytic ozonation process.a
No. Catalysts (Cat.)
Synthetic
methods
Pollutants/water
matrix
Reaction parameters
Catalytic eﬃciency
(%)/time (h or min)
Comments/additional
information
Refs.
1
Co/Al2O3 (Co/Al2O3-
X-Y 1C-Z%,
X¼ calcination
atmosphere
(nitrogen, N, or air,
A), Y¼ calcination
temperature (500 to
800 1C) and
Z¼ weight
percentage of
cobalt (0.5 to 5%)).
Incipient
wetness
impregnation
method
Pyruvic acid (PA)/
deionized water
[PA] ¼ 5 mmolL1, [O3]¼ 40
mgL1, [Cat.]¼ 0.01 gL1,
pH¼ 2.5, T ¼ 20 1C
DOC removal in 120 min:
Sole O3 ¼ 5.5%;
O3 þ Al2O3¼ 41.1%;
O3 þ Co/Al2O3-A-500
1C-2% ¼ 90.2%
All the Co/Al2O3 catalysts
prepared showed good
stability as the percentage
of cobalt leached out was
rather low
A´lvarez et
al.77
2
CuAl2O4 and
CuxMg1xAl2O4
(x ¼ 0.75, 0.5, 0.25)
Co-precipitation
method
Clofibric acid (CFA)/
deionized water
[CFA]¼ 100 mgL1,
[O3]¼ 1.2 gh1, [Cat.]¼ 0.5
gL1, T¼ 25 2 1C
TOC removal in 6 h: Sole
O3 ¼ about 40%; O3
þ CuAl2O4¼ 83%;
O3 þ Cu0.75Mg0.25Al2O4
¼ 85%
The fast disappearance of
CFA in less than 15 min
was observed, as with
spinel catalysts
Sable et
al.78
3
ZnAl2O4
Hydrothermal
method
Phenol/deionized
water
[Phenol]¼ 300 mgL1, [O3]
¼: 0.75 mg min1,
[Cat.]¼ 1.0 gL1,
pH¼ 6.4 0.1,
T¼ 25 0.5 1C
Phenol removal in 60 min:
sole O3¼ about 50%;
O3 þ ZnAl2O4¼ 73.4%
In the presence of ZnAl2O4,
ozone transformed into
high active OH radicals
Zhao et
al.79
4
CuAl2O4 and
Cu0.75Mg0.25Al2O4
Co-precipitation
method
Clofibric acid (CFA)/
deionized water
[CFA]¼ 100 mgL1,
[O3]¼ 1.2 gh1, [Cat.]¼ 0.5
gL1
TOC removal in 2 h: sole
O3 ¼ 28.1%;
O3 þ CuAl2O4¼ 50%;
O3 þ Cu0.75Mg0.25Al2O4¼
55.3%
The surface hydroxyl groups
and Lewis acid sites are
responsible for promoting
the generation of OH
radicals
Sable et
al.80
5
Ordered mesoporous
Fe3O4
Nanocasting
route
Atrazine (ATZ)/
ultrapure water
[ATZ]¼ 5.0 mmolL1,
[O3]¼ 0.1 mmolL1,
[Cat.]¼ 0.2 gL1,
pH¼ 6.54, T¼ 25 2 1C
ATZ removal after 10 min:
sole O3¼ 9.1%;
O3 þ Fe3O4 ¼ 82%
A mechanism based on the
redox cycles of Fe21/Fe31
and OH radical was
proposed
Zhu et
al.81
72
Chapter 3

6
ZnAl2O4
Hydrothermal
(ZnAl2O4-H),
sol–gel
(ZnAl2O4–S),
and
coprecipitation
(ZnAl2O4–C)
methods
5-Sulfosalicylic acid
(SSal)/ultrapure
water
[SSal] ¼ 500 mgL1,
[O3]¼ 5.0 mgmin1 or 10.0
mgmin1, mgmin1,
[Cat.]¼ 0.2 gL1, pH¼ 7
SSal removal after 60 min:
sole O3¼ 49.4%;
O3 þ ZnAl2O4-H ¼ 64.8%;
O3 þ ZnAl2O4-S ¼ 61.7%;
O3 þ ZnAl2O4-
C¼ 59%
COD removal after 60 min:
sole O3¼ 33.2%;
O3 þ ZnAl2O4-H ¼ 46.2%;
O3 þ ZnAl2O4-S ¼ 38.8%;
O3 þ ZnAl2O4-C¼ 36.6%
OH radicals were the main
active oxidative species in
catalytic ozonation
Dai et
al.82
7
CuAl2O4
Conventional
citric acid
complexation
method
C. I. Acid Orange 7
(AO7)/deionized
water
[AO7]¼ 100 mg L1,
[O3]¼ 10.06 mgmin1,
[Cat.]¼ 0.5 gL1,
pH¼ 6.54
AO7 in 25 min: sole
O3 ¼ 76.4%;
O3 þ CuAl2O4¼
96.0%
COD removal in 120 min:
sole O3¼ 40%;
O3 þ CuAl2O4¼ 87.2%
Combination of Al and Cu
was found highly eﬀective
to catalyze ozone and form
reactive radicals (adsorbed
OH and few O2
)
Xu
et al.83
8
g-Al2O3 doped with
diﬀerent metals M
alone or in mixture
(M ¼ Mg, Ca, Zn,
Fe, Ba, Zr, Cu, Co,
Ni, Ce, Ti, with
0.05oM/Alo0.5
molar ratio)
Incipient
wetness
deposition or
by direct sol–
gel
Synthetic mixture
representative of a
produced water
(water coming
naturally during oil
or gas extraction)
Synthetic mixture:
pH¼ 3.3–4.3, TOC¼ 216
mgL1, COD¼ 668 mgO2
L1, [O3]¼ 5 gNm3,
[Cat.]¼ 5.0 gL1, T¼ 30 1C
TOC removal: O3 þ Mg/g-
Al2O3 Mg/Al(0.2/1),
O3 þ Cu/Mg/Al2O3 Cu/Mg/
Al (0.2/0.2/1), O3 þ Mg/g-
Al2O3 Mg/Al (0.1/1)
¼ 490% after 2 h and 95%
after 5 h
Among the catalysts, Mg-
doped alumina with molar
ratio Mg/Al ¼ 0.1, 0.2
prepared by incipient
wetness deposition were
the more eﬃcient catalysts
Xu
et al.84
9
NiCo2O4
Hydroxide
coprecipitation
and thermal
decomposition
Sulfamethazine
(SMT)/deionized
water
[SMT] ¼ 20 mgL1,
[O3]¼ 4.5 mgmin1,
[Cat.]¼ 0.05 gL1,
pH¼ 5.2
TOC removal in 60 min: sole
O3 ¼ B11%;
O3 þ NiCo2O4 ¼ 34.1%
NiCo2O4 could accelerate the
generation of OH, which
was responsible for the
improvement of TOC
removal
Chen
and
Wang85
aDOC ¼ dissolved organic carbon.
Catalytic Ozonation over Composite Metal Oxides
73

ceramic honeycomb,91,98 red mud,95 montmorillonite,96 zeolites.25,104 These
minerals can accelerate ozone decomposition leading to the production of
more OH radicals on the surface of mineral catalysts107 and are used pure
or modified with metals or metal oxides in order to increase the catalytic
response. Figure 3.3(b) shows that zeolites are the most used minerals in
catalytic ozonation, representing 61.44% of the publications in relation to
the catalysts presented here. Ceramic honeycomb is a stable material and
has also been used to improve the eﬃciency of ozonation processes.98 The
use of goethite, montmorillonite and red mud are also significant but are
less explored compared to zeolites and ceramic honeycomb. In addition to
these minerals, bauxite, sepiolite and brucite, along with others of lesser
significance (see Figure 3.3), are also found for few application studies in
catalytic ozonation.
Zeolites have been used successfully in catalytic ozonation to remove various
pollutants,
including
pharmaceuticals,24,25
leachate,104
nitrobenzene,108
Figure 3.3
(a) Distribution of the number of publications on the catalytic activity of
the most common minerals in ozonation. (b) Comparison of the use of
catalysts in ozonation in percentages for the minerals shown in graph
(a). Data taken from ISI Web of Science database using the keyword
‘‘catalytic ozonation’’ and the name of each mineral shown on the y-axis
of the graph. Data from https://www.webofknowledge.com/, accessed
July 27, 2021.
74
Chapter 3

Table 3.4
Application of catalytic ozonation with minerals.
Catalysts
Pollutants
Catalytic eﬃciency (%)
Refs.
Brucite
Active brilliant red X-3B dye
89% degradation in 10 min
Dong et al.86
Brucite, magnesia
Nitrobenzene and aniline
495% of nitrobenzene and aniline degradation in 120 min Dong et al.87
De-aluminated Y zeolite
Phenol
87.5% degradation in 45 min
Dong et al.88
Brucite, magnesia
Phenol
Brucite: 55% increase in degradation in 15 min; Magnesia:
91% increase in 15 min.
He et al.89
Goethite
Nitrobenzene
65% of nitrobenzene degradation in 20 min
Zhang and Ma90
Mn–ceramic honeycomb
Nitrobenzene
74% of nitrobenzene degradation in 15 min
Zhao et al.91
Cordierite-supported
copper
Nitrobenzene
77.9% of degradation after 20 min
Zhao et al.92
Bauxite
2,4,6-Trichloroanisole
86.0% of degradation after 10 min
Qi et al.93
Calcined magnetite
Reactive Red-120 dye
84.5% of degradation in 10 min
Moussavi et al.94
Red mud
Nitrobenzene
67.17% of degradation in 40 min
Qi et al.95
Fe21-montmorillonite
Sulfamethoxazole antibiotic
98–99% COD removal in 20 min
Shahidi et al.96
Cobalt-loaded red mud
Bezafibrate
480% of bezafibrate removal in 30 min
Xu et al.97
MgO/ceramic honeycomb Acetic acid
81.6% of degradation in 30 min
Shen et al.98
Natural mackinawite
N,N-Dimethylacetamide
96.6% of degradation after 20 min
Peng et al.99
Tourmaline
Atrazine herbicide
98% of degradation after 10 min
Wang et al.100
Zeolite 4A
Paracetamol
90.68% removal eﬃciency in 60 min
Ikhlaq et al.25
Kaolinite
p-Nitrophenol
89% of degradation after 8 min
Ma et al.101
Natural and plasma-
treated goethite
Sulfasalazine antibiotic
96.05% of degradation in 40 min (plasma-treated goethite
using nitrogen)
Pelalak et al.102
Cerium-loaded zeolite
Penicillin G antibiotic
99.5% of degradation in 15 min
Zhang et al.24
Sepiolite
Caﬀeine
96% of degradation in 10 min
Savun-Hekimog˘lu
et al.103
Natural zeolite
Landfill leachate
66% COD removal in 120 min
AlGburi et al.104
Montanit300s zeolite
Orange II dye
91% TOC removal in 240 min
Inchaurrondo
et al.105
Mg/Al hydrotalcite
2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic
acid herbicide
68% COD removal in 60 min
Tian et al.106
Catalytic Ozonation over Composite Metal Oxides
75

dyes,105,109 and surfactants.110 Some of these works24,105,108,110 discussed the
mechanisms involved in catalytic ozonation and point out that zeolites are
responsible for ozone decomposition leading to the production of OH rad-
icals. As described by Valde´s et al.,109 zeolites are known to exhibit both Lewis
acidic sites (such as acidic OH groups) and basic sites (such as basic oxygen
atoms or alkaline metal clusters) on their surfaces that can eﬀectively convert
aqueous ozone into reactive radicals. Valde´s et al. reported in their works109,111
that the use of zeolites increased the decomposition rates of ozone, leading to a
greater generation of free radicals. In the case of modified zeolites, the ozone
decomposition capacity is probably increased by increasing Lewis acid sites.
For example, Zhang et al.24 studied the mechanism of catalytic ozonation for
the removal of penicillin G using cerium-loaded natural zeolite as the catalyst.
They found that OH and O2
 radicals were the dominant reactive oxygen
species that belong to the penicillin G degradation mechanism. In summary,
the main points addressed by the mechanism proposed by Zhang et al.24 were
(1) part of the contaminant could be adsorbed on the porous surface of the
catalyst, leading to degradation in situ during the process of catalytic ozona-
tion; (2) the cerium dopant can participate in redox reactions triggering radical
reactions, producing OH radicals; and (3) direct ozonation can contribute to
the degradation of the drug.
However, some other studies have suggested a non-radical mechanism.
Ikhlaq et al. proposed in his works25,112,113 that the catalytic ozonation of
organic pollutants using ZSM-5 zeolites (a type of zeolite that contains high
silica content) occurred via adsorption of pollutant on the surface of zeolites,
followed by their reactions with molecular ozone in a four-step cycle, con-
sisting of (1) adsorption, (2) surface reaction, (3) desorption of by-products
and (4) surface regeneration. Therefore, it is important to investigate the
mechanism of diﬀerent types of zeolites.
Another mineral used as a catalyst for ozonation is ceramic honeycomb,
mainly investigated by Zhao and collaborators,91,114–117 who are among the
main research groups that applied O3/ceramic honeycomb and O3/modified
ceramic honeycomb processes for the degradation of organic con-
taminants, with emphasis mainly on the removal of nitrobenzene, a com-
pound commonly used in industrial processes, including the production of
pesticides, dyes and explosives. The results presented from these studies
showed that the presence of ceramic honeycombs significantly increased
the ozonation degradation rate of nitrobenzene compared to ozonation
alone. Zhao et al.114 found that the nitrobenzene removal increased from
45% to 69.5% in the presence of ceramic honeycombs and led to 49.6% of
total organic carbon (TOC) removal compared to 31.7% in ozonation alone.
The process was found to proceed via a radical-type mechanism, and cer-
amic honeycomb was responsible for accelerating the ability to generate
OH radicals, initiated by the surface of the catalyst. In addition, the
modification of ceramic honeycomb with Mn, Cu and K ions increased the
catalytic ozonation of nitrobenzene, resulting from a significant increase in
its surface area and the ability to initiate the generation of OH radicals.115
76
Chapter 3

The same group91 also demonstrated that the degradation of nitrobenzene
is accelerated in the presence of Mn–ceramic honeycomb as the catalysts,
and mechanistic studies indicated that the loading of Mn caused an in-
crease of pH at the point of zero charge (pHpzc) and that the enhancement
of the density of surface hydroxyl groups, which were responsible for ac-
celerating the decomposition of ozone leading to the generation of OH
radicals.
Goethite (FeOOH) mineral90 was also used as the catalyst in the ozona-
tion of nitrobenzene. With this catalyst, 65% removal of nitrobenzene was
obtained in 20 min of reaction (see Table 3.4). The removal increment was
about two times higher than in ozonation alone and was due to the gen-
eration of more OH radicals from the decomposition of the ozone induced
by the uncharged surface hydroxyl groups of FeOOH. Another mineral
catalyst, red mud, which is an abundant waste product from the aluminum
industry, was also studied by Qi et al.95 for degradation of nitrobenzene,
reaching 67.17% removal of the contaminant in 20 min under conditions
considered ideal. The authors performed experiments on inhibiting OH
radicals, and it was proven that these radicals participate in red mud
catalytic ozonation.
Many other catalysts have shown excellent performance in catalytic ozo-
nation (see Table 3.4 and Figure 3.3); however, they are still little explored.
Recently, Savun-Hekimog˘lu et al.103 tested low-cost natural clay mineral
sepiolite for the degradation and mineralization of caﬀeine by catalytic
ozonation. The catalytic ozonation with sepiolite provided 96% of caﬀeine
removal and 30% mineralization during 10 min and 60 min reaction,
respectively, while 72% degradation and 18% mineralization were obtained
by ozonation alone during equivalent reaction times.
3.5
Concluding Remarks and Future Trend
The combination of catalysts and ozonation aims to solve the problems
found in ozonation alone, mainly to increase the degradation of organic
pollutants in water and to reduce the generation of toxic by-products by
increasing mineralization. These processes also stand out for normally re-
quiring a lower dose of ozone and a shorter reaction time when compared to
ozonation alone. The application of composite materials for this purpose
has been highlighted due to interesting physical and chemical properties
that present high performance in ozone decomposition.
This chapter summarized the diﬀerent research endeavors dedicated to
the use of composite materials with an emphasis on perovskite and spinel
oxides for application in catalytic ozonation to remove organic contaminants
in water and wastewater. We focused mainly on showing all the applications
of these materials for catalytic ozonation, as well as discussing the mech-
anisms involved.
For a better understanding, we divided this section into three blocks:
Catalytic Ozonation over Composite Metal Oxides
77

3.5.1
Perovskite Oxides
For application in catalytic ozonation, perovskite with lanthanide as a metal
in position A stands out. In all these studies, using La-containing per-
ovskites, mainly of the type LaTi0.15Cu0.85O3, showed that they were eﬀective
for the removal of diﬀerent contaminants in water. Benzotriazole, pyruvic
acid and oxalic acid have been the most studied contaminants, but there is
also an application for the removal of drugs (diclofenac, sulfamethoxazole
and norfloxacin), phenols and gallic acid.
3.5.2
Spinel Oxide
Some types of spinel oxides have demonstrated great applicability in catalytic
ozonation, due to their low cost, high reactivity and low toxicity. Among
them, Fe-based catalysts are the most often employed since these catalysts
present the additional advantages of easy removal from the reaction medium
and recovery provided by their magnetic properties. Mechanistic studies have
demonstrated a mechanism based on radicals, including the interaction of
ozone with surface hydroxyl groups and surface metal ions. We could see that
the doping of spinel ferrites increased catalytic activity. Some researchers
have also demonstrated the use of aluminate spinel oxides in catalytic ozo-
nation with excellent eﬃciency due to their superlative textural properties
and high density of active sites (hydroxyl groups and Lewis acidity).83
3.5.3
Natural Minerals
As presented in this chapter (Section 3.4), several natural minerals are ex-
plored in catalytic ozonation, due to their low cost and ready availability with
emphasis on zeolites and ceramic honeycomb. Zeolites have the advantages
of high surface area, well-developed pores and perfect reusability,24 which
makes them promising for application in catalytic ozonation. As discussed
in this chapter, there are contradictions regarding the catalytic mechanism.
Some studies reported that zeolites are responsible for the decomposition of
aqueous ozone leading to the generation of OH radicals, while other studies
have shown a non-radical mechanism. Other minerals (Table 3.4 and
Figure 3.3) are also applied for catalytic ozonation; however, there are not
many studies in the literature with these catalysts.
Some important points related to future trends can be summarized.
In general, a significant number of studies are found in the literature for
the catalysts presented here. These studies are on a laboratory scale, and
various parameters inherent to the processes were investigated, such as
catalyst concentration, ozone dose, pH, catalyst reuse potential. However,
few studies have evaluated the eﬀect of the water matrix, taking the work to a
more realistic scenario. Nevertheless, more catalytic ozonation studies are
required to treat real eﬄuents, such as secondary eﬄuent from wastewater
treatment plants, industrial eﬄuents like distilleries, pulp and paper,
78
Chapter 3

petrochemicals. Another point of paramount importance that has been little
explored in the works found in the literature is the application of experi-
mental design to evaluate the various parameters involved in the process of
catalytic ozonation.
Future studies should be focused on the identification of intermediates
and the assessment of the toxicity of by-products, since the generation of
toxic by-products causes ineﬃciency in the process, especially when the re-
duction in TOC is low, as seen in most studies presented here. It is also
extremely important to evaluate the cost:benefit ratio of catalytic ozonation
since the high eﬃciency and low cost make the process attractive for the
remediation of wastewater.
Recently, research is focused on the development of new nanocomposites
containing spinel or perovskite oxides combined with other materials, such
as carbon materials, zeolites and clay minerals. As reported in Table 3.1,
Zhang et al.27 studied catalytic ozonation of benzotriazole using the coupling
of graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) and perovskite oxide (LaCoO3). As an-
other example, in the work carried out by Liu et al.,74 the researchers
evaluated the mineralization of quinoline and biologically treated coking
wastewater using spinel ferrite CuFe2O4 loaded on natural sepiolite.
The use of composite materials for application in catalytic ozonation,
given their potential, should attract more attention in research and become
promising materials for the treatment of wastewater.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the financial support of the Fundaça˜o de Amparo a`
Pesquisa do Estado de Sa˜o Paulo FAPESP [2019/26210-8; 2014/17774-1],
project CAPES/COFECUB [88881.191742/2018-00] and Conselho Nacional de
Desenvolvimento Cientı´fico e Tecnolo´gico CNPq [308914/2017-1].
References
1. W. Ding, W. Jin, S. Cao, X. Zhou, C. Wang, Q. Jiang, H. Huang, R. Tu,
S.-F. Han and Q. Wang, Water Res., 2019, 160, 339.
2. U. V. Gunten, Water Res., 2003, 37, 1469.
3. J. A. Malvestiti, A. Cruz-Alcalde, N. Lo´pez-Vinent, R. F. Dantas and
C. Sans, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 259, 118104.
4. J. Gomes, R. Costa, R. M. Quinta-Ferreira and R. C. Martins, Sci. Total
Environ., 2017, 586, 265.
5. H. M. Jalali, Phys. Chem. Res, 2017, 5, 1.
6. M. Sillanpa¨a¨, M. C. Ncibi and A. Matilainen, J. Environ. Manage., 2018,
208, 56.
7. L. Rizzo, S. Malato, D. Antakyali, V. G. Beretsou, M. B. Ðolic´,
W. Gernjak, E. Heath, I. Ivancev-Tumbas, P. Karaolia, A. R. L. Ribeiro,
G.
Mascolo,
C.
S.
McArdell,
H.
Schaar,
A.
M.
T.
Silva
and
D. Fatta-Kassinos, Sci. Total Environ., 2019, 655, 986.
Catalytic Ozonation over Composite Metal Oxides
79

8. B. A. Wols and C. H. M. Hofman-Caris, Water Res., 2012, 46, 2815.
9. D. B. Miklos, C. Remy, M. Jekel, K. G. Linden, J. E. Drewes and
U. Hu¨bner, Water Res., 2018, 139, 118.
10. J. Wang and H. Chen, Sci. Total Environ., 2020, 704, 135249.
11. M. Carbajo, F. J. Beltra´n, F. Medina, O. Gimeno and F. J. Rivas, Appl.
Catal. B, 2006, 67, 177.
12. B. Kasprzyk-Hordern, M. Zio´"ek and J. Nawrocki, Appl. Catal. B, 2003,
46, 639.
13. J. Nawrocki and B. Kasprzyk-Hordern, Appl. Catal. B, 2010, 99, 27.
14. M. Carbajo, F. J. Rivas, F. J. Beltra´n, P. Alvarez and F. Medina, Ozone:
Sci. Eng., 2006, 28, 229.
15. C. V. Rekhate and J. K. Srivastava, CEJ Adv., 2020, 3, 100031.
16. D. Shahidi, R. Roy and A. Azzouz, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 174–175, 277.
17. G. Boczkaj and A. Fernandes, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 320, 608.
18. N. Pal, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 280, 102156.
19. J. Xu, Y. Li, M. Qian, J. Pan, J. Ding and B. Guan, Appl. Catal., B, 2019,
256, 117797.
20. C. Fei, D. Li, X. Mao, Y. Guo and W. Jing, J. Chem. Eng., 2018, 26,
1862.
21. Y. Chen, C.-M. Chen, B. A. Yoza, Q. X. Li, S.-H. Guo, P. Wang, S.-J. Dong
and Q.-H. Wang, Pet. Sci., 2017, 14, 605.
22. J. Wu, Q. Sun and J. Lu, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 104318.
23. J. Kim, E. E. Kwon, J. E. Lee, S.-H. Jang, J.-K. Jeon, J. Song and
Y.-K. Park, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 403, 123934.
24. J. Zhang, Z. Xiong, J. Wei, Y. Song, Y. Ren, D. Xu and B. Lai, Chem. Eng.
J., 2020, 383, 123144.
25. A. Ikhlaq, S. Waheed, K. S. Joya and M. Kazmi, Catal. Commun., 2018,
112, 15.
26. J. Yin, G. Liao, J. Zhou, C. Huang, Y. Ling, P. Lu and L. Li, Sep. Purif.
Technol., 2016, 168, 134.
27. Y. Zhang, Q. Li, Y. Long, J. Zou, Z. Song, C. Liu, L. Liu, F. Qi, B. Xu and
Z. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 254, 569.
28. S. Hou, S. Jia, J. Jia, Z. He, G. Li, Q. Zuo and H. Zhuang, J. Environ.
Manage., 2020, 267, 110615.
29. C. Li, F. Jiang, D. Sun and B. Qiu, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 325, 624.
30. S. A. Hosseini and M. C. Alvarez-Galvan, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng.,
2016, 61, 261.
31. J. Zhu and A. Thomas, Appl. Catal. B, 2009, 92, 225.
32. M. P. Harikrishnan, A. J. C. Mary and A. C. Bose, Electrochim. Acta, 2020,
362, 137095.
33. Q. Rong, Y. M. Zhang, J. C. Hu, H. P. Wang, Z. Q. Zhu, J. Zhang and
Q. Liu, Mater. Res. Bull., 2020, 132, 111006.
34. H. Li and Z. Lu¨, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 361, 137054.
35. P. Rajasekaran, Y. Kumaki, M. Arivanandhan, M. M. S. I. Khaleeullah,
R. Jayavel, H. Nakatsugawa, Y. Hayakawa and M. Shimomura, Physica B
Condens. Matter., 2020, 597, 412387.
80
Chapter 3

36. M. De Bastiani, A. S. Subbiah, E. Aydin, F. H. Isikgor, T. G. Allen and
S. De Wolf, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 2791.
37. C. B. Njoku, B. P. Doyle, E. Carleschi and R. J. Kriek, Electroanalysis,
2020, 32, 1.
38. H. Chen, J. Motuzas, W. Martens and J. C. D. da Costa, Appl. Catal., B,
2018, 221, 691.
39. L. E. Verduzco, R. Garcia-Dı´az, A. I. Martinez, R. A. Salgado,
F. Me´ndez-Arriaga, S. A. Lozano-Morales, M. Avendan˜o-Alejo and
K. P. Padmasree, Dyes Pigm., 2020, 183, 108743.
40. M. L. Rojas-Cervantes and E. Castillejos, Catalysts, 2019, 9, 230.
41. A. Kumar, B. Prasad and K. K. Garg, Process. Saf. Environ., 2021,
147, 162.
42. J. Zhu, H. Li, L. Zhong, P. Xiao, X. Xu, X. Yang, Z. Zhao and J. Li, ACS
Catal., 2014, 4, 2917.
43. C. A. Orge, J. J. M. O´rfa˜o, M. F. R. Pereira, B. P. Barbero and L. E. Cadu´s,
Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 140–141, 426.
44. J. Miao, X. Duan, J. Li, J. Dai, B. Liu, S. Wang, W. Zhou and Z. Shao,
Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 355, 721.
45. S. Royer, D. Duprez, F. Can, X. Courtois, C. Batiot-Dupeyrat, S. Laassiri
and H. Alamdari, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 10292.
46. Y. Wang, Z. Chi, C. Chen, C. Su, D. Liu, Y. Liu, X. Duan and S. Wang,
Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 272, 118972.
47. F. J. Rivas, M. Carbajo, F. J. Beltra´n, B. Acedo and O. Gimeno, Appl.
Catal., B, 2006, 62, 93.
48. M. Carbajo, F. J. Beltra´n, O. Gimeno, B. Acedo and F. J. Rivas, Appl.
Catal., B, 2007, 74, 203.
49. F. J. Rivas, M. Carbajo, F. J. Beltra´n, O. Gimeno and J. Frades, J. Hazard.
Mater., 2008, 155, 407.
50. F. J. Beltra´n, P. Pocostales, P. M. A´lvarez and F. Lo´pez-Pin˜eiro, Appl.
Catal., B, 2009, 92, 262.
51. F. J. Beltra´n, P. Pocostales, P. Alvarez, J. F. Garcı´a-Araya and O. Gimeno,
Ozone Sci. Eng., 2010, 32, 230.
52. S. Afzal, X. Quan and J. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 206, 692.
53. Y. Zhang, Y. Xia, Q. Li, F. Qi, B. Xu and Z. Chen, Sep. Purif. Technol.,
2018, 197, 261.
54. Y. Zhang, Y. An, C. Liu, Y. Wang, Z. Song, Y. Li, W. Meng, F. Qi, B. Xu,
J.-P. Croue, D. Yuan and A. Ikhlaq, Water Res., 2019, 166, 115026.
55. Y. Wang, L. Chen, H. Cao, Z. Chi, C. Chen, X. Duan, Y. Xie, F. Qi,
W. Song, J. Liu and S. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 245, 546.
56. N. A. Masmali, Z. Osman and A. K. Arof, Ceram. Int., 2021, 47, 2949.
57. M. A. Rafiq, A. Javed, M. N. Rasul, M. Nadeem, F. Iqbal and A. Hussain,
Mater. Chem. Phys., 2021, 257, 123794.
58. V. S. Kirankumar and S. Sumathi, Mater. Today Chem., 2020,
18, 100355.
59. Y. Ren, Q. Dong, J. Feng, J. Ma, Q. Wen and M. Zhang, J. Colloid
Interface Sci., 2012, 382, 90.
Catalytic Ozonation over Composite Metal Oxides
81

60. H. Zhao, Y. Dong, G. Wang, P. Jiang, J. Zhang, L. Wu and K. Li, Chem.
Eng. J., 2013, 219, 295.
61. F. Qi, W. Chu and B. Xu, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 262, 552.
62. F. Qi, B. Xu and W. Chu, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2015, 396, 164.
63. F. Zhang, C. Wei, Y. Hu and H. Wu, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2015, 156, 625.
64. F. Qi, W. Chu and B. Xu, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 284, 28.
65. J. Lu, X. Wei, Y. Chang, S. Tian and Y. Xiong, J. Chem. Technol. Bio-
technol., 2016, 91, 985.
66. W. Zhao, S. Zhang, J. Ding, Z. Deng, L. Guo and Q. Zhong, J. Mol. Catal.
A: Chem., 2016, 424, 153.
67. F. Zhang, C. Wei, K. Wu, H. Zhou, Y. Hu and S. Preis, Appl. Catal., A,
2017, 547, 60.
68. P. Liu, Y. Ren, W. Ma, J. Ma and Y. Du, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 345, 98.
69. H. Zhang, F. Ji, Y. Zhang, Z. Pan and B. Lai, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2018,
193, 368.
70. C. Cai, X. Duan, X. Xie, S. Kang, C. Liao, J. Dong, Y. Liu, S. Xiang and
D. D. Dionysiou, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 410, 124604.
71. Y. Ren, Y. Chen, T. Zeng, J. Feng, J. Ma and W. A. Mitch, Chem. Eng. J.,
2016, 283, 662.
72. Y. Ren, H. Zhang, H. An, Y. Zhao, J. Feng, L. Xue, T. Luan and Z. Fan,
J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 526, 347.
73. Z. Wang, H. Ma, C. Zhang, J. Feng, S. Pu, Y. Ren and Y. Wang, Chem.
Eng. J., 2018, 354, 42.
74. D. Liu, C. Wang, Y. Song, Y. Wei, L. He, B. Lan, X. He and J. Wang,
Chemosphere, 2019, 227, 647.
75. Y. Zhao, H. An, G. Dong, J. Feng, Y. Ren and T. Wei, Appl. Surf. Sci.,
2020, 505, 144476.
76. J. Zhao, J. Cao, Y. Zhao, T. Zhang, D. Zheng and C. Li, J. Environ. Sci.,
2020, 97, 75.
77. P. M. A´lvarez, F. J. Beltra´n, J. P. Pocostales and F. J. Masa, Appl. Catal.,
B, 2007, 72, 322.
78. S. S. Sable, F. Medina and S. Contreras, Appl. Catal., B, 2014,
150–151, 30.
79. H. Zhao, Y. Dong, P. Jiang, G. Wang, J. Zhang and C. Zhang, Chem. Eng.
J., 2015, 260, 623.
80. S. S. Sable, P. P. Ghute, D. Fakhrnasova, R. B. Mane, C. V. Rode,
F. Medina and S. Contreras, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 209, 523.
81. S. Zhu, B. Dong, Y. Yu, L. Bu, J. Deng and S. Zhou, Chem. Eng. J., 2017,
328, 527.
82. Q. Dai, Z. Zhang, T. Zhan, Z. -T. Hu and J. Chen, ACS Omega, 2018,
3, 6506.
83. Y. Xu, Z. Lin, Y. Zheng, J. -P. Dacquin, S. Royer and H. Zhang, Sci. Total
Environ., 2019, 651, 2585.
84. R.
Xu,
H.
Nabet,
A.
Breton,
P.
Baldoni-Andrey,
N.
Lesage,
T. Cacciaguerra, V. Hulea, F. Fajula and A. Galarneau, Pet. Chem., 2020,
60, 858.
82
Chapter 3

85. H. Chen and J. Wang, Chemosphere, 2021, 268, 128840.
86. Y. Dong, K. He, B. Zhao, Y. Yin, L. Yin and A. Zhang, Catal. Commun.,
2007, 8, 1599.
87. Y. Dong, K. He, L. Yin and A. Zhang, Catal. Lett., 2007, 119, 222.
88. Y. Dong, H. Yang, K. He, X. Wu and A. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2008,
82, 163.
89. K. He, Y. M. Dong, Z. Li, L. Yin, A. M. Zhang and Y. C. Zheng, J. Hazard.
Mater., 2008, 159, 587.
90. T. Zhang and J. Ma, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2008, 279, 82.
91. L. Zhao, J. Ma, Z.-Z. Sun and X.-D. Zhai, Appl. Catal., B, 2008,
83, 256.
92. L. Zhao, Z. Sun, J. Ma and H. Liu, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43,
2047.
93. F. Qi, B. Xu, Z. Chen, J. Ma, D. Sun, L. Zhang and F. Wu, J. Hazard.
Mater., 2009, 168, 246.
94. G. Moussavi, R. Khosravi and N. R. Omran, Appl. Catal. A Gen., 2012,
445–446, 42.
95. F. Qi, H. Li, B. Xu and D. Sun, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2014, 14, 6984.
96. D. Shahidi, A. Moheb, R. Abbas, S. Larouk, R. Roy and A. Azzouz,
J. Hazard. Mater., 2015, 298, 338.
97. B. Xu, F. Qi, J. Zhang, H. Li, D. Sun, D. Robert and Z. Chen, Chem. Eng.
J., 2016, 284, 942.
98. T. Shen, Q. Wang and S. Tong, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2017, 56, 10965.
99. J. Peng, J. Yan, Q. Chen, X. Jiang, G. Yao and B. Lai, Chemosphere, 2018,
210, 831.
100. D. Wang, H. Xu, J. Ma, X. Lu, J. Qi and S. Song, Chem. Eng. J., 2018,
354, 113.
101. W. Ma, J. Hu, B. A. Yoza, Q. Wang, X. Zhang, Q. X. Li, S. Guo and
C. Chen, Appl. Clay Sci., 2019, 175, 159.
102. R. Pelalak, R. Alizadeh and E. Ghareshabani, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020,
392, 122269.
103. B. Savun-Hekimog˘lu, Z. Eren and N. H. Ince, Environ. Prog. Sustainable
Energy, 2021, 40, e13552.
104. H. R. AlGburi, H. A. Aziz, H. M. Zwain and A. F. M. Noor, Environ. Eng.
Sci., 2021, 38(7), 635.
105. N. Inchaurrondo, C. di Luca, G. Zˇerjav, J. M. Grau, A. Pintar and
P. Haure, Catal. Today, 2021, 361, 24.
106. X. Tian, J. Zhu, M. Tang, D. Wang, Y. Nie, L. Yang, C. Dai, C. Yang and
L. Lu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 402, 123475.
107. P. Fu, X. Lin, L. Wang and Y. Ma, Appl. Clay Sci., 2020, 198, 105834.
108. C. Chen, X. Yan, B. A. Yoza, T. Zhou, Y. Li, Y. Zhan, Q. Wang and
Q. X. Li, Sci. Total Environ., 2018, 612, 1424.
109. H. Valde´s, R. F. Tardo´n and C. A. Zaror, Chem. Eng. J., 2012,
211–212, 388.
110. J.
Rivera-Utrilla,
M.
Sa´nchez-Polo,
M.
I.
Bautista-Toledo
and
J. D. Me´ndez-Dı´az, Chem. Eng. J., 2012, 180, 204.
Catalytic Ozonation over Composite Metal Oxides
83

111. H. Valde´s, V. J. Farfa´na, J. A. Manoli and C. A. Zaror, J. Hazard. Mater.,
2009, 165, 915.
112. A. Ikhlaq, D. R. Brown and B. Kasprzyk-Hordern, Appl. Catal., B, 2013,
129, 437.
113. A. Ikhlaq and B. Kasprzyk-Hordern, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 200, 274.
114. L. Zhao, J. Ma and Z.-Z. Sun, Appl. Catal. B, 2008, 79, 244.
115. L. Zhao, J. Ma, Z.-Z. Sun and X.-D. Zhai, J. Hazard. Mater., 2009,
161, 988.
116. L. Zhao, J. Ma, Z.-Z. Sun and H. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 89, 326.
117. L. Zhao, W. Ma, S. Lu and J. Ma, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2019, 210, 167.
84
Chapter 3

CHAPTER 4
Catalytic Ozonation over
Activated Carbon-based
Materials
ZHENG-QIAN LIU,* JIA-YING LI AND SHU-TING LI
School of Environmental Science and Engineering, Huazhong University
of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, P.R. China
*Emails: zhengqianliu@126.com; zhengqianliu@hust.edu.cn
4.1
Activated Carbon
Ozonation is widely used in drinking water and wastewater treatment, however,
it has the disadvantages of selectivity oxidation and oxidation eﬃciency easily
aﬀected by the water matrix (e.g. carbonate).1 Therefore, various heterogeneous
catalysts2,3 have been developed to overcome these disadvantages of ozonation
alone,4 and some catalysts have been used in full-scale applications.5,6 Among
these heterogeneous catalysts, activated carbon (AC) has not only a large specific
surface area but also good stability in acidic and basic media, which has received
extensive attention in the past two decades.7–10 To the best of our knowledge,
AC was used as the catalyst to treat contaminated groundwater during the
earliest full-scale application of heterogeneous catalytic ozonation in 1992.6
4.1.1
Adsorption or Catalysis During Ozonation with AC?
As Nawrocki said, only when the eﬀect of ozonation with a catalyst to remove
the target organic compound exceeds the combined eﬀect of ozonation alone
Chemistry in the Environment Series No. 8
Advanced Ozonation Processes for Water and Wastewater Treatment: Active Catalysts and
Combined Technologies
Edited by Hongbin Cao, Yongbing Xie, Yuxian Wang and Jiadong Xiao
r The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry, www.rsc.org
85

and adsorption of the catalyst under the same experimental conditions can we
discuss the catalytic role of the catalyst during ozonation.11 As far as AC is
concerned, Asgari et al. observed that the degradation eﬃciency of penta-
chlorophenol for AC catalytic ozonation is slightly higher than that of the
combination of ozonation alone and AC adsorption.12 Vatankhah et al. found
in the AC catalytic ozonation of secondary municipal wastewater eﬄuent for
the removal of micropollutants, additional degradation eﬀect could be only
obtained for meprobamate, sucralose and tris(2-chloroethyl) phosphate
among the investigated 13 micropollutants compared to the superposition
eﬀect of ozonation alone and AC adsorption.9 However, not every researcher is
as lucky as Asgari et al.12 or Vatankhah et al.9 since AC usually has good
adsorption performance for many organic pollutants. Hadavifar et al. found
that the performance on chemical oxygen demand (COD) or color removal for
AC catalytic ozonation is even lower than the superposition eﬀect of ozonation
alone and AC adsorption for initial pH from 2 to 10, and this is due to the
excellent adsorption performance on alcohol distillery wastewater of AC.13
Therefore, it often encounters the dilemma that the eﬀect of AC catalytic
ozonation is not as good as the superposition eﬀect of ozonation alone and AC
adsorption (see Figure 4.1). In this case, it is easy to cause controversy because
some researchers believe that there is a catalytic eﬀect, while others think that
there is none. A simple method is to replace a target pollutant that AC cannot
easily adsorb, such as oxalic acid.14 However, this method is only suitable for
activity testing during the development of catalysts in the laboratory. When you
need to test the feasibility of the catalytic ozonation for treating actual waste-
water (Figure 4.1), this method is no longer applicable.
A good method is to simultaneously conduct ozonation alone, AC
adsorption and AC catalytic ozonation experiments in continuous mode.
According to the results obtained during the treatment of a food processing
secondary eﬄuent, although the total organic carbon (TOC) removal by AC
catalytic ozonation is less than the combined eﬀect of ozonation alone and
AC adsorption at the beginning of the reaction, after 180 min of continuous
operation, the TOC removal by AC adsorption suddenly dropped to close to
zero due to the saturation of the AC adsorption. In this case, the catalytic
activity of AC could be confirmed since the TOC removal by AC catalytic
ozonation and ozonation alone was still about 36% and 20%, respectively.16
It should be noted that this experiment cannot fully prove the catalytic
activity of AC because it ignores the diﬀerence between the adsorption of
intermediates and the adsorption of raw wastewater on the AC surface. In
addition, most of the laboratory researches are in batch or semi-batch mode,
so other methods are needed to solve this problem.
4.1.1.1
Adsorption of Target Organic Compound on the AC
Surface
In order to distinguish whether the better TOC removal is only due to the
superposition of AC adsorption and ozonation alone or not, we have tried to
86
Chapter 4

perform the adsorption pretreatment of AC in reverse osmosis concentrate
(ROC) first (its adsorption time is the same as that of catalytic ozonation)
and then AC with ROC pre-adsorbed was separated through filtration after
adsorption, and subsequently this AC was used as a catalyst directly for an
experiment of ozonation of ROC.15 As shown in Figure 4.1, AC with ROC pre-
adsorbed or not has a similar activity on TOC removal during ozonation of
ROC within the first 75 min. As the reaction time was prolonged, the TOC
removal during ozonation in the presence of AC with ROC pre-adsorbed is
gradually lower than that without ROC pre-adsorbed. This is because the pre-
adsorbed organic matter begins to desorb from its surface with the organic
matter removal of the ROC in solution.15
Moussavi et al.17 first separated the AC after reaction, dried it, then eluted
the amoxicillin adsorbed on the AC surface using a mixture of acetonitrile
and phosphate buﬀer solution, and subsequently measured the amoxicillin
Figure 4.1
TOC removal by O3, AC adsorption, O3 followed by AC adsorption and
ozonation in the presence of AC with or without CG-ROC adsorbed.
(Experimental conditions: ozone gas concentration: 20 mg min1; AC
dose: 1.5 g L1; initial pH: 9; temperature: 20 1C.) (Note: For the experi-
ment of O3 followed by AC adsorption, O3 was conducted first through
continuous bubbling ozone into a 1.0 L CG-ROC solution, and then
15 mL of the solution was taken out during diﬀerent reaction times, and
5 mL of the solution was diluted to determine the TOC after O3. The
remaining ozone in the 10 mL residual solution is removed by nitrogen
purge first, and the subsequent adsorption experiment was carried out
by the addition of 15 mg of AC to the solution for the same time as
adopted for O3, and then the AC was removed by filtration before the
TOC measurement, and the obtained TOC is the result of the combined
eﬀect of O3 and subsequent AC adsorption. For the experiment of AC
with CG-ROC pre-adsorbed, 1.5 g AC was dosed into a 1.0 L CG-ROC
solution (TOC: 113.8 mg L1) with an initial pH 9 for 210 min 20 1C, and
then the obtaining AC with pre-adsorbed CG-ROC was used for ozona-
tion of CG-ROC [TOC: 113.8 mg L1].) Reproduced from ref. 15 with
permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2020.
Catalytic Ozonation over Activated Carbon-based Materials
87

concentration in the eluate to determine the contribution of adsorption to
its removal. The results show that whether it is the original or NH4Cl-treated
AC, the contribution on amoxicillin removal by the adsorption is less than
17% compared to that by catalysis.
4.1.1.2
Adsorption of Intermediates on the AC Surface
As mentioned, when the removal of TOC or COD instead of the target pol-
lutant is used as an indicator of catalytic ozonation activity, the removal of
intermediates by adsorption on the AC surface needs to be considered.11
This is because the catalytic activity on TOC or COD removal may only be an
illusion caused by the adsorption of intermediates on the AC surface.
In order to clarify this point, Beltra´n et al. used the maximum concen-
tration of the intermediates during ozonation alone as the initial concen-
tration to investigate the adsorption performance of AC on intermediates18
and then used these results to estimate the contribution of adsorption
during ozonation of polyphenol compounds with AC.18,19
Chen et al. found that the catalytic activity upon COD removal during the
ozonation of heavy oil refinery wastewater in the presence of MnOx supported
on AC is less than that of AC. This may be due to the better adsorption per-
formance of AC for wastewater. However, the catalytic activity of MnOx/AC is
higher than that of AC from the second use, and as the number of repeated uses
increases, the diﬀerence between the COD removed in the process of ozonation
with MnOx/AC and the process of ozonation with AC will become larger and
larger, until the final diﬀerence is constant. The authors believe that this is the
catalytic activity of the supported MnOx since the adsorption of catalyst on COD
removal will decrease with the increasing of the number of reuses.20 In the
same way, as AC adsorption reaches saturation after repeated use, the diﬀer-
ence in COD between AC catalytic ozonation and ozonation alone also reflects
the catalytic activity of AC for ozonation of heavy oil refinery wastewater.
As suggested by Nawrocki,11 we conducted an experiment of ozonation
alone followed by AC adsorption during the investigation of ozonation of
ROC derived from coal gasification wastewater. We first performed an
ozonation-alone experiment and determined the TOCs at diﬀerent reaction
times, then conducted the adsorption experiment after AC addition for the
same reaction time without ozone, and measured the corresponding TOC
again. The diﬀerence between the two measured TOCs indicates the
adsorption performance of AC for intermediates (Figure 4.1). Interestingly,
unlike AC’s eﬃcient adsorption of raw ROC (27.8% TOC removal in
210 min), the adsorption after oxidation by ozonation alone can only in-
crease TOC removal by 3%–4% after 60 min.15 This may be due to the fact
that the hydrophobic components in eﬄuent organic matter (EfOM, the
main component of ROC) are progressively transformed into hydrophilic
components during ozonation alone,21 which is unfavorable to the ad-
sorption of AC. A similar phenomenon was also observed in the investigation
of the adsorption of intermediates during ozonation of diclofenac with AC.22
88
Chapter 4

Please keep in mind that the intermediates of ozonation alone and AC
catalytic ozonation will definitely be diﬀerent, so the adsorption in the
process of ozonation alone followed by AC adsorption does not completely
represent AC adsorption during catalytic ozonation. However, since the
concentrations of intermediates of AC catalytic ozonation are usually lower
than that of ozonation alone,19,23 the contribution of adsorption on TOC or
COD removal during the AC catalytic ozonation should not exceed that of AC
adsorption in the process of ozonation alone followed by AC adsorption.
Soares et al. conducted a similar experiment under a continuous operation
in a column; that is, the treatment eﬀects of textile eﬄuent and dye solutions
by AC catalytic ozonation and ozonation alone, followed by AC adsorption,
were compared to determine whether AC has a catalytic eﬀect.24
In general, if some of the adsorption experiments on target organic
compounds and intermediates just mentioned are investigated reasonably,
whether the increase in organic compound removal with the presence of AC
is a catalysis or a simple superposition of ozonation alone and AC adsorption
could be more clearly understood.
4.1.2
Influence of Chemical Properties, Texture
Characteristics and Impurities
As early as 2002, Rivera-Utrilla and Sanchez-Polo’s research showed that the
surface basicity, macroporous volume and mineral impurities of commercial
AC all play a role in the ozonation of 1,3,6-naphthalenetrisulphonic acid.25
As presented in Figure 4.2, various surface functional groups, including the
lactone, carboxyl, carbonyl, phenolic hydroxyl, pyrrole and pyridine groups,
are usually presented on the surface of carbon materials.26 A high basicity
of
AC
usually
has
a
higher
catalytic
activity
in
promoting
ozone
decomposition30 and pollutant degradation;16,25,27 therefore, many re-
searchers use various methods to treat AC to increase its surface basicity for
promoting its catalytic activity.17,27–29 Unfortunately, these basic groups
(such as pyrrole groups) on the AC surface are expected to be easily ex-
hausted during ozonation, leading to a quick decrease in AC activity.1,16
However, it was suggested that phenolic hydroxyl on the AC surface could
promote ozone decomposition into OH,30 thus resulting in improvement
on pollutant removal.31 Due to the continuous changes of the surface
properties of AC during ozonation, it is generally accepted that AC is not a
real catalyst but rather an initiator and/or promoter that accelerates ozone
decomposition to generate OH since 2005.1,28,30,32
Carbon materials usually have porous structures and large specific surface
areas. Some researchers have suggested that there is no close relationship
between the ozone adsorption on the AC surface and the specific surface
area of AC, but ozone adsorption may depend on pore diﬀusion.28,30 Oxalic
acid degradation was found to increase for the AC with a larger specific
surface area,27 while Rivera-Utrilla and Sanchez-Polo found no clear rela-
tionship between the degradation rate of 1,3,6-naphthalenetrisulphonic acid
Catalytic Ozonation over Activated Carbon-based Materials
89

and the specific surface area of AC.25 Certainly, a high macroporosity of AC
could reduce the diﬀusion of ozone and/or pollutant, favor the contact
between active sites on the AC surface and ozone and/or pollutant, and then
enhance the ozonation of the pollutant.25
As far as the mineral impurities in AC are concerned, in contrast to Rivera-
Utrilla and Sanchez-Polo’s opinion that the mineral impurities in AC pro-
mote the ozone decomposition to generate highly reactive oxygen species,25
Alva´rez et al. believe that the mineral impurities may promote the
decomposition of H2O2 on the AC surface instead of promoting ozone
decomposition, which certainly would result in a decrease in the amount of
H2O2 entering the solution.30 Nawrocki and Fijo"ek believe that the mineral
impurities in AC would dissolve during ozonation, which would aﬀect the
pH of the solution, so that the improvement in ozone decomposition may be
caused by the increase in the solution pH, not necessarily the initiation or
promotion of AC. Therefore, the authors suggested that demineralization
treatment for AC should be conducted to avoid its interference when
investigating the possible catalytic role of AC in ozonation.32
Figure 4.2
Nitrogen and oxygen surface groups on carbon. Reproduced from ref. 26
with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2009.
90
Chapter 4

4.1.3
Influence of Water Matrix
4.1.3.1
Chloride and Sulfate
As environmental protection policies are becoming stricter, more and more
advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) (such as catalytic ozonation, Fenton)
are used for the advanced treatment of wastewater,33 especially for industrial
wastewater.34 Unlike conventional municipal wastewater, these industrial
wastewaters usually contain high concentrations of chloride and sulfate.34
Chloride has been regarded as a typical OH scavenger under acidic con-
ditions (eqn (4.1)–(4.3)).35 It is interesting that the presence of 0.8 mM
chloride or sulfate has a negative eﬀect on the phenazone degradation
during ozonation alone at pH 7, and the authors speculated that this may be
due to the less active Cl2
 and SO4
 generated from the reactions between
these ions and OH.36 However, based on our results of kinetic model cal-
culations, the total contribution of Cl2
, SO4
, Cl and ClO on the EfOM
degradation is less than 0.6% during ozonation of ROC in a basic
condition.15
Cl þ OH-ClOH
k1 ¼ 4.3109 M1 s1
(4.1)
ClOH-Cl þ OH
k2 ¼ 6.1109 s1
(4.2)
ClOH þ H1-Cl þ H2O
k3 ¼ 2.11010 M1 s1
(4.3)
ClOH þ Cl-Cl 
2 þ OH
k4 ¼ 1.0105 M1 s1
(4.4)
Cl þ Cl-Cl 
2
k5 ¼ 6.5109 M1 s1
(4.5)
Cl 
2 -Cl þ Cl
k6 ¼ 1.1105 s1
(4.6)
As for AC catalytic ozonation, the presence of chloride leads to a decrease
in the specific surface area of AC, and perhaps this is the reason why a high
chloride concentration reduces the adsorption capacity of AC.37 The add-
ition of 50 mM chloride was found to have no eﬀect on formic acid removal
during AC catalytic ozonation at pH 3.0, and the authors believe that this
may be due to this reaction’s involving carbon-based radicals that are not
easily captured by chloride.38 As the NaCl concentration was increased from
5 to 50 g L1 during the Reactive Blue 194 oxidation, the UV254 abatement
was changed only slightly by ozonation alone, while it is interesting that the
UV254 abatement increased significantly during AC catalytic ozonation.
The authors believe that this may be caused for two reasons: One is that the
increase in NaCl concentration promotes the aggregation of dye, thereby
promoting its adsorption on AC; the other is the conversion of OH into
more selective chlorine radicals, and these chlorine radicals have a stronger
aﬃnity for pollutants with electron-rich functional groups.39
Catalytic Ozonation over Activated Carbon-based Materials
91

4.1.3.2
Bicarbonate and Carbonate
Bicarbonate and/or carbonate could react with OH generated by ozone
decomposition to form CO3
 with lower activity, which is detrimental to the
degradation of pollutants.1 It is reported that the presence of 9.43 mM
carbonate has almost no eﬀect on COD removal for the ozonation of the
eﬄuent of a pulp and paper mill with or without AC; however, the adverse
eﬀect of the presence of carbonate on COD removal may be oﬀset by
the promotion caused by the increase of initial pH from 7.3 to 8.5 with the
addition of carbonate.40 Some researchers even found that the degradation
eﬃciency of phenol increased with the increase of carbonate concentration
during ozonation of sludge-based biochar, and the authors also believe
that the increase in pH caused by the addition of carbonate is one of the
reasons.41 In fact, the change in pH caused by carbonate may have a very
significant impact on phenol degradation. It is well-known that the pH of the
solution will drop rapidly with prolonged reaction time41 due to the gener-
ation of intermediates (such as small molecular organic acids) during the
ozonation of phenol.1,34 The more carbonate is added, the stronger its
buﬀering eﬀect on the pH of solution will be, and the higher the second rate
constant will be of the reaction between ozone and phenol.1,34 Since the
degradation eﬃciency of pollutants usually increases with the increase of pH
during ozonation,1 the influence of added carbonate on the pH of the
solution is necessarily a concern if there is no buﬀer.
ROC and some industrial wastewater often contain relatively high con-
centrations of carbonate.33,34 This may have a significant impact on ozo-
nation alone at high pH because sometimes the ozonation of industrial
wastewater may even be conducted at initial pH 11 to achieve a high COD
removal.42 In our previous work, the TOC removal was significantly delayed
in the initial reaction stage during the treatment of ROC by ozonation alone
at an initial pH 11.34 According to the pKa (pKa1 ¼ 6.35 and pKa2 ¼ 10.33), the
proportion of carbonate in ROC is about 82% at initial pH 11, and the
reaction rate of OH reacting with carbonate to form CO3
 is nearly two
orders of magnitude higher than that with bicarbonate (eqn (4.7) and (4.8)).1
This means that, although more OH are expected to be generated at pH 11
during ozonation alone, they may also be quickly scavenged by the large
amount of carbonate present in the ROC to generate CO3
 with lower
reactivity, and this leads to the slow TOC removal at the beginning of the
reaction. Our kinetic calculation results also show that a high concentration
of CO3
 is generated at the beginning of the reaction.15
HCO 
3
þ OH-CO 
3 þ H2O
k7 ¼ 8.5106 M1 s1
(4.7)
CO 2 
3
þ OH-CO 
3 þ OH
k8 ¼ 3.9108 M1 s1
(4.8)
However, no remarkable eﬀect on the TOC removal was observed during AC
catalytic ozonation at initial pH 11 because it is believed that the reaction
between OH and organic matter mainly occurs on the carbon surface.43 A slight
92
Chapter 4

reduction in COD and TOC was observed with the addition of 26.9 mM and 9.4
mM bicarbonate and/or carbonate during the treatment of the real landfill
leachate4 and the dye wastewater44 with AC catalytic ozonation, respectively.
4.1.4
Deactivation and Regeneration of Activated Carbon
4.1.4.1
Deactivation of Activated Carbon
Rivera-Utrilla and Sanchez-Polo suggested that the surface basic groups and
mineral impurities of commercial AC play a major role in the ozonation of
organic matter.25 Nawrocki and Fijo"ek believed that these mineral impur-
ities contained in commercial AC, especially alkaline elements, are easily
dissolved during ozonation.32 Clearly these mineral impurities dissolved in
the ozonation can no longer play a catalytic role in subsequent use, and they
may show activity on the transformation of ozone into OH only once. Cer-
tainly, these mineral impurities cannot be restored through AC regeneration.
In the absence of pollutant, a relatively high TOC was observed at the
initial stage of AC catalytic ozonation in batch mode, especially in the case of
a basic AC, and Rivera-Utrilla and Sanchez-Polo believe that this is due to
ozone attacking AC to produce soluble organic matter.25 Our previous study
has also shown that the TOC increases with the extension of the reaction
time during AC catalytic ozonation without pollutant in semi-batch mode.14
It is interesting that the oxalic acid concentration increased gradually with
the extension of the reaction time during the ozonation of oxalic acid with
AC in the presence of tert-butanol (tBA), and the authors believe that this
increase was caused by the oxidative attack of some functional groups on the
AC surface by ozone.29 During the AC catalytic ozonation, the basic groups
on its surface continue to decrease, while the acidic groups continue to in-
crease with the extension of the oxidation time.30 Therefore, it is generally
believed that AC is not a real catalyst but an initiator and/or promoter that
accelerates ozone decomposition to generate OH.1,30,32
AC with high basicity generally has higher activity in promoting ozone
decomposition30 and organic matter degradation.25 However, with the con-
tinuous increase in the number of reuses, the basic groups on the AC surface
gradually decrease, and the acidic groups gradually increase, resulting in a
continuous decrease in the rate of ozone decomposition. The rate of AC
decomposing ozone is reduced by more than 30% after 200 reuses.30 After
20 hours of continuous operation, a significant reduction in degradation per-
formance was observed for all investigated micropollutants during AC catalytic
ozonation of secondary municipal wastewater eﬄuent, and a fourfold increase
in the ratio of O and C on the AC surface was found according to XPS analysis.
The authors believe that this is due to the significant increase in acidic groups
on the AC surface.9 In addition, the specific surface area of AC also decreased by
about 10% after 20 hours of continuous use.9 Furthermore, the pretreatment of
AC with ozone in the gas phase28 or nitric acid29 will cause a significant de-
crease in its specific surface area.
Catalytic Ozonation over Activated Carbon-based Materials
93

Certainly, it was found that the slightly acidic AC is more diﬃcult to
deactivate than the basic AC.16 Wei et al. also found that the phenol in waste-
water can more eﬀectively compete with ozone compared to oxalic acid, thereby
reducing the conversion of carbonyl groups on the AC surface being oxidized by
ozone to carboxyl groups.23 However, the gradual acidification of the surface of
AC is inevitable during ozonation, resulting in a gradual decrease in its activity,
and then it still needs to be regenerated after a period of use.
4.1.4.2
Regeneration of Activated Carbon
Bakht Shokouhi et al. found that the color removal eﬃciency decreases from
94% to 70% after 65 repeated use of AC during the ozonation of Reactive Blue
194, and the specific surface area of multi-used AC is also reduced by about 223
m2g1 compared with the raw AC. Subsequently, this multi-used AC was re-
generated through ozonation with organic matter for 10 h in situ, and then the
color removal eﬃciency can be restored to 88%, but the recovery of the specific
surface area of this regenerated AC is not significant.39 Sanchez-Polo et al.
found that the specific surface area of AC significantly decreases from 1075 to
632 m2g1 after 120 min pretreatment with ozone in gas phase.28 Cao et al.
observed that the specific surface area of AC after nitric acid pretreatment
dropped drastically from 1128 to 232 m2 g1, while its specific surface area
increased to 1023 m2g1 after subsequent amination pretreatment.29 The
authors believe that this is because the nitric acid treatment did not cause the
collapse of the micropores, but the generated acidic groups blocked the en-
trance of the micropores and prevented the inaccessibility of N2 molecules,
which caused a significant underestimation of the specific surface area.28,29
These acidic groups could be eliminated or changed after subsequent amina-
tion pretreatment, and then the specific surface area could be recovered.29 In
addition, Wang et al. used the pyrolysis method to regenerate the AC saturated
with the eﬄuent of the biological treatment of the dyeing and finishing was-
tewater and found that this regenerated AC still exhibited a high activity on
COD removal during ozonation of the eﬄuent of the biological treatment of the
dyeing and finishing wastewater.45
The electroperoxone (E-peroxone) process was proposed by Wang’s group in
2013, which combines conventional ozonation and in situ generation of
hydrogen peroxide at the cathode for water and wastewater treatment.46 They
found that the adsorption capacity of powdered AC saturated with rhodamine B
could be restored by more than 90% through the regeneration by either ozo-
nation or E-Proxone but that the complete mineralization of desorbed rhoda-
mine B can be achieved only by E-Proxone regeneration.47 Furthermore, if using
an activated carbon fiber (ACF) as the cathode in the E-peroxone process, not
only can ACF significantly increase the apparent reaction rate for the nitro-
benzene degradation by E-peroxone, but also the surface basic groups of ACF
could increase slightly after 100 times of repeated use.48 However, similarly to
AC catalytic ozonation, ACF has a significant decrease in basic groups and a
remarkable increase in acidic groups after 100 times of repeated use.48
94
Chapter 4

Wang’s group also found that the combination of ozonation and the
three-dimensional electrochemical process can not only improve TOC re-
moval during the pharmaceutical wastewater treatment but also achieve
the in situ regeneration of granular AC electrode.49 Wang et al. found that the
activity of AC in the catalytic ozonation decreases relatively quickly, that the
number of basic groups on the AC surface decreases by more than 50%, and
that the number of acidic groups increases by nearly 50% after 20 times of
repeated use. However, in the combination of the ozonation and three-
dimensional electrochemical process, the activity of AC is relatively stable,
and the numbers of surface acidic groups and basic groups are almost un-
changed after 50 times of repeated use.50
4.2
Activated Carbon-supported Metal Oxides
Ma et al. prepared amorphous manganese dioxide supported on the AC
surface through the direct redox reaction of KMnO4 and AC, and they used
this as the catalyst in the ozonation of nitrobenzene. This was the first article
in catalytic ozonation about AC-supported metal oxide.51 Since then, various
AC-supported single-metal oxides (CeOx, FeOx, CoOx, CuOx, MnOx, ZnO,
TiOx, MgO) and bimetallic oxides are widely used in catalytic ozonation,
especially from the last decade.
4.2.1
Single-metal Oxides
4.2.1.1
Cerium Oxide
Orge et al. prepared the cerium oxide–AC composites using the precipitation
method and investigated its catalytic activity on the degradation of oxalic
acid, oxamic acid and CI Reactive Blue 5 during ozonation.52 A rod-like
CeO2@AC catalyst was prepared by Feng et al. using hydrothermal treatment
and calcination, and it has a performance on oxalic acid removal similar to
that of cerium oxide–AC composites; however, the TOC is not increased with
prolonged reaction time during the ozonation of CeO2@AC without organic
pollutant compared to the increase of TOC during the ozonation of AC or
cerium oxide–AC composites. It also has a good stability in ozonation with a
trace amount of leached cerium.53
However, in most studies, cerium oxide is used as the active component
and loaded on AC to prepare a supported catalyst in the last decade
(Table 4.1). Gonçalves et al. found that the highly dispersed cerium oxide on
AC catalyst has a better performance compared to a cerium oxide–AC com-
posite with a similar composition. They also found that diﬀerent precursors
also have diﬀerent eﬀects on the activity of the prepared catalyst; the cata-
lysts prepared from precursor Ce(NO3)3 and (NH4)2[Ce(NO3)6] favor the re-
moval of aniline and oxalic acid, respectively.54
Many studies have shown that the reaction mechanism of Ce/AC catalytic
ozonation is similar to that of AC, which involves the OH oxidation on the
Catalytic Ozonation over Activated Carbon-based Materials
95

catalyst surface and in the bulk solution simultaneously. The active sites of
catalysis for ozone decomposition are not only from the AC surface but also
from the cerium oxide supported on AC.54–57 Ce31 species on the AC surface
are recognized as the active sites for promoting ozone decomposition to
form OH, and then the amount of Ce31 species dominates the activity of
catalysis during ozonation.54–56,58 Liu et al. suggested that the mineral im-
purities in the AC are helpful to fluoranthene removal during ozonation with
Ce/AC catalyst.55
4.2.1.2
Iron Oxide
Iron oxides and supported iron oxides have been widely used in ozonation.61
The review on iron oxides and supported iron oxides has been systematically
reviewed a few years ago,61 so this section will not be expanded in detail
(Table 4.2). Yuan et al. found that the solution pH has a significant eﬀect on
formate degradation by Fe/AC catalytic ozonation and that the presence of
Table 4.1
Ozonation of pollutant in the presence of AC supported cerium oxide.
Catalyst
Organic
pollutants
Highlights
Ref.
20%
CeO2/AC
Oxalic acid and
aniline
Ce31 species on the surface are the active
sites for promoting ozone decomposition
to formation OH, and then its amount
dominates the activity of catalyst during
ozonation.
54
0.2%–1%
Ce/AC
Pyrene and
fluoranthene
Compared to ozonation alone and AC
catalytic ozonation, the degradation
eﬃciencies of pyrene and fluoranthene
could be significantly improved using
0.3% Ce/AC catalyst.
55
20%
CeO2/AC
Sulfamethoxazole
TOC removal during ozonation with CeO2/
AC is slightly higher than that of CeO2/
CNT (carbon nanotube), which may be
due to the higher adsorption capacity of
CeO2/AC.
56
0.5%–2%
Ce/AC
p-Toluenesulfonic
acid
COD removal eﬃciency is 50.8%, 62.4%
and 74.1% for the degradation of
p-toluenesulfonic acid by ozonation
alone, AC and 1% Ce/AC catalytic
ozonation, respectively.
59
20%
CeO2/AC
Bezafibrate
TOC removal during ozonation with CeO2/
AC is higher than that of CeO2/CNT.
57
5% Ce/AC
Oxytetracycline
TOC removal eﬃciency is 9.1%, 17.5% and
46.0% for the oxytetracycline degradation
by ozonation alone, AC and Ce/AC
catalytic ozonation, respectively.
60
Ce/AC
p-Chlorobenzoic
acid, ROC
Ce/AC has a high activity on the ozonation
of p-chlorobenzoic acid in water and
mineralization of organic compounds in
ROC derived from a municipal
wastewater treatment plant.
58
96
Chapter 4

Fe/AC is only eﬀective for the ozonation of formate at pH 3.0, which does not
lead to an improvement in either the degradation rate or the extent of
ozonation of formate at pH 7.3 and 8.5, indicating that only the protonated
iron oxide active sites on the surface can promote ozone decomposition to
generate reactive oxygen radicals. The main oxidant produced is OH at pH
Table 4.2
Ozonation of pollutant in the presence of AC-supported iron oxide.
Catalyst
Organic
pollutants
Highlights
Ref.
0.2%–10%
Fe/AC
Omethoate
Omethoate degradation eﬃciency is 37.6%,
58.0% and 82.4% for ozonation alone, AC
and 5% Fe/AC catalytic ozonation,
respectively, and only less than 7% of
omethoate removal by the adsorption of
AC or 5% Fe/AC.
62
5%–35%
Fe/AC
Heavy oil
refining
wastewater
COD removal eﬃciency during ozonation of
Fe/AC is significantly higher than that of
AC due to its greater OH formation.
67
5.6% Fe/AC
Crystal Violet
COD removal eﬃciency is 41% and 57% for
ozonation alone and 5% Fe/AC catalytic
ozonation, respectively.
68
15%–30%
Fe/AC
Dibutyl
phthalate
A highest degradation eﬃciency was
achieved at initial pH 8 during ozonation
of dibutyl phthalate with 15% iron loading
among all the experimental conditions.
63
Fe3O4/PAC
High saline
petrochemical
wastewater
The order for the degradation of organic
compounds is Fe3O4/PAC catalytic
ozonation4PAC catalytic
ozonation4Fe3O4 catalytic
ozonation4ozonation alone.
64
48.7% g-
Fe2O3/PAC
Alizarin Red S
The mineralization of Alizarin Red S is 13%,
25% and 40% for ozonation alone, PAC
and Fe2O3/PAC catalytic ozonation,
respectively.
69
0.11–11.2%
Fe2O3/AC
Oxalic acid
The oxalic acid removal is 3.2%, 79.6% and
89.2% for ozonation alone, PAC and 1.12%
Fe2O3/PAC catalytic ozonation, respectively.
65
14% Fe/AC
ROC from coal
gasification
wastewater
Solution pH, ozone dose and catalyst dose
have positive eﬀects on ozonation of ROC
with Fe/AC, and high salinity has a
negative impact on the TOC removal.
70
0.1% Fe/AC
Formate
The solution pH would change the
properties of catalyst surface and
speciation of iron oxide and then aﬀect the
ozone decomposition to generate reactive
oxygenated radicals, which in turn aﬀects
the formate degradation.
38
FeOx/AC
Industrial
phenolic
wastewater
Reaction rate constant in TOC removal is
0.008, 0.013 and 0.023 min1 for
microbubble ozonation alone, AC and
FeOx/AC catalytic microbubble ozonation,
respectively.
66
Catalytic Ozonation over Activated Carbon-based Materials
97

3.0 during Fe/AC catalytic ozonation.38 In addition, the degradation of for-
mate during Fe/AC catalytic ozonation mainly occurs on the interface be-
tween solid and liquid and/or in bulk solution, and the formate adsorption
is not necessary for the overall oxidation reactions.38 Ling et al. suggested
that the ferrihydrite particles on the surface act as the main active sites for
ozone decomposition in order to generate OH during the ozonation of
omethoate with Fe/AC and that the catalytic activity of Fe/AC is obtained
mainly at pH 7.0–8.0 due to the nearly neutral surface charge of the Fe/AC.62
Huang et al. believe that the improvement in dibutyl phthalate degradation
is likely due to the promoting of ozone decomposition to generate OH
on the Fe/AC surface.63 The major COD removal mechanisms include the
Fe3O4/PAC adsorption and the OH oxidation reactions occurring both on
the catalyst surface and in the bulk solution according to the eﬀect of OH
scavenger.64 Li et al. believe that the hydroxyl groups on the Fe2O3/AC surface
play an important role in the ozonation of oxalic acid and that the oxalic acid
removal follows a OH oxidation reaction mechanism.65 In addition, after
FeOx/AC catalytic microbubble ozonation of industrial phenolic wastewater
for 60 min, the BOD5/COD increases from 0.31 to 0.76 and the acute bio-
toxicity is reduced by 79.2%.66
4.2.1.3
Other Metal Oxides
As shown in Table 4.3, various metal oxides (CoOx, CuO, MnOx, TiO2, ZnO
and MgO) have been used as an active component support AC, and the
catalytic activity of these catalysts is investigated during the ozonation of
pollutants. The catalytic activity of TiO2/AC catalysts obtained by diﬀerent
preparation methods also varies significantly. Ferreiro et al. found that both
the oxidation rate of aniline and the degree of mineralization decrease in the
following order: TiO2/AC prepared by precipitation method4AC4TiO2/AC
prepared by wet impregnation method4TiO2/AC prepared by hydrothermal
method during ozonation.71
Faleh et al. believe that the oxalic acid removal mainly occurs on the AC
surface since both ozone and oxalic acid could be adsorbed and reacted on
the surface and that the Co(III) species may be generated by the redox re-
action between cobalt and AC and may promote ozone decomposition into
OH.72
4.2.2
Bimetallic Oxides
To improve catalytic activity and/or stability, loading of bimetallic and even
multi-metallic oxides on some supports was sometimes used.5,78 Lu¨ et al.
found that the catalytic activity on TOC removal during ozonation of 2,4-
dichlorophenoxyacetic acid in the presence of Fe–Ni/AC (72%) is higher than
that of Fe/AC (60%) or Ni/AC (62%).79 Unfortunately, the other four papers
only compared the activity of AC-supported bimetallic catalyst with the AC
98
Chapter 4

but did not provide the comparison results of the activity of the two single-
metal oxides supported on AC (Table 4.4).
According to the finding that tBA strongly inhibits 2,4-dichlorophenoxy-
acetic
acid
degradation,
it
is
suggested
that
ozonation
of
2,4-di-
chlorophenoxyacetic acid in the presence of Fe–Ni/AC follows a OH oxidation
mechanism.79 Li et al. believe that the presence of MnO2–Co3O4/AC catalyst
could accelerate the aqueous ozone decomposition into OH and then promote
the degradation of the refractory pollutants in incineration leachate. As con-
firmed by ESR, OH are considered to be the main active free radicals in ozo-
nation alone and MnO2–Co3O4/AC catalytic ozonation.80 The reason why OH
Table 4.3
Ozonation of pollutant in the presence of other AC-supported metal
oxides.
Catalyst
Organic
pollutants
Highlights
Ref.
1%–10%
Co/AC
Oxalic acid
Oxalic acid removal eﬃciency is 25%, 77%
and 91% for ozonation alone, AC and 5%
Co/AC catalytic ozonation, respectively.
72
2%–12%
CuO/AC
Nitrobenzene
Reaction rate constant in nitrobenzene
degradation is 0.0063, 0.0076 and
0.0109 min1 for ozonation alone, AC
and 12% Cu/AC catalytic ozonation,
respectively.
73
MnOx/AC
Heavy oil refinery
wastewater
Activity on COD removal for AC in
ozonation at the first use is higher than
that of MnOx/AC, while MnOx/AC has
higher activity from the second use.
20
2.1%–9.1%
TiO2/AC
Aniline
TiO2, formed in situ using alcoholic TiCl4
precursor solutions on AC, has a better
performance in aniline degradation than
that of TiO2/AC prepared by immersion
impregnation or hydrothermal method.
71
TiO2/AC
Aniline
A three-phase mathematical model
reaction was proposed to describe the
stages of gas–liquid transfer, catalyst
adsorption and oxidation in the bulk
solution and on the catalyst surface.
74
ZnO/AC
Metronidazole
The presence of phosphate significantly
inhibits the metronidazole degradation
due to the high tendency of phosphate to
be combined with functional groups on
the catalyst surface.
75
ZnO/AC
Dibutyl phthalate
in goat whey
solution
The degradation eﬃciency of dibutyl
phthalate in goat whey solution
decreases in the following order: ZnO/AC
catalytic ozonation4ZnO catalytic
ozonation4ozonation alone
76
0.5%–10%
MgO/AC
Phenol
COD removal eﬃciency is 21.3%, 15.1%
and 83.5% for ozonation alone, MgO/AC
adsorption and 1% MgO/AC catalytic
ozonation, respectively.
77
Catalytic Ozonation over Activated Carbon-based Materials
99

is also the main active free radical in ozonation alone may be related to the fact
that many organic compounds with aromatic structure in the incineration
leachate can trigger ozone decomposition to generate OH.1,81
As the number of reuses increases, the TOC removal eﬃciency decreases
slightly during ozonation of 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid in the presence
of Fe–Ni/AC catalyst. Lu¨ et al. believe that the variation of the specific surface
area of Fe–Ni/AC catalyst during repeated use may be the main reason, since
it decreases from 519.68 to 401.54 m2 g1 after three uses, and some com-
posite oxides of Fe–Ni particles were expected to spall during the ozonation
of 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid in the presence of Fe–Ni/AC due to the
partial oxidation of the AC surface by ozone.79 A similar phenomenon was
observed during the ozonation of papermaking wastewater in the presence
of Fe/AC catalyst, and the specific surface area of Fe/AC catalyst also
decreased from 825 to 786 m2 g1 after five uses.40
The loading of metal oxides usually causes significant changes in the
specific surface area of carbon materials. After AC loaded 12% Cu by im-
pregnation, the specific surface area of the Cu/AC catalyst increased from
926.7 to 1040 m2 g1 for the increase in calcination temperature from 350 1C
to 550 1C, which the authors believe is mainly caused by the development of
the porosity of the catalyst under diﬀerence calcination temperatures. Also,
Table 4.4
Ozonation of pollutant in the presence of AC-supported bimetallic oxides.
Catalyst
Organic pollutants
Highlights
Ref.
Fe2O3–CeO2/
AC
Sulfamethoxazole
TOC removal eﬃciency is 37%,
78% and 86% for ozonation
alone, AC and Fe2O3/CeO2/AC
catalytic ozonation, respectively
82
0.22% Fe–Ni/
AC
2,4-
Dichlorophenoxyacetic
acid
TOC removal eﬃciency is 34%,
8%, 50%, 60%, 62% and 72%
for ozonation alone, Fe–Ni/AC
adsorption, AC, Fe/AC, Ni/AC
and Fe–Ni/AC catalytic
ozonation, respectively
79
Fe–Mn/AC
Methyl orange
TOC removal eﬃciency is 18.0%,
31.0% and 42.5% for ozonation
alone, AC and Fe–Mn/AC
catalytic ozonation, respectively
83
Fe–Ni/AC
Phenol
O2
 was suggested to play a key
role in the phenol degradation,
while other radicals were not
important according to the
experiments of radical
scavenging.
84
MnO2–Co3O4/
AC
Incineration leachate
COD removal eﬃciency is 21%,
5%, 5%, 27% and 30% for
ozonation alone, AC
adsorption, Mn–Co/AC
adsorption, AC and Mn–Co/AC
catalytic ozonation, respectively
80
100
Chapter 4

the performance in nitrobenzene adsorption improved for AC with the
copper loading.73 Nasseh et al. also found that the specific surface area of
AC significantly increased from 284 to 442 m2 g1 after coating with ZnO
nanoparticles by the deep-coating methodology.75 However, the loading of
metal oxides usually leads to a decrease in the specific surface area of the
catalyst.40,58,70 Chen et al. found that the COD removal eﬃciency during the
ozonation of heavy oil refinery wastewater in the presence of MnOx/AC is less
than that of AC for the first use, which may be due to the better adsorption
performance of AC for wastewater because the specific surface area of AC
decreased from 1143.3 to 975.6 m2 g1 after MnOx loading.20 The remarkable
reduction of the specific surface area of AC is more likely to occur at a high
metal oxide loading, and about 19% and 31% reductions of the specific
surface area of AC were observed with 30%63 and 48.7%69 Fe loading, re-
spectively. Except for in situ formed amorphous MnOx,85 the specific surface
area is usually small for metal oxide compared to carbon materials. There-
fore, if the weight ratio of the metal oxide in the AC-supported catalyst is
taken into consideration, the specific surface area may not change drastic-
ally after metal oxide loading in most cases.
As previously mentioned, the activity reduction of metal oxide supported on
AC may be diverse. For example, the active sites on the AC-supported metal
oxide catalyst may be covered by pollutants, oxidation intermediates or water
matrix, or the metal oxides may leach during ozonation, or the metal oxide
may spall during ozonation due to the partial oxidation of the AC surface by
ozone. As observed by Wang et al. during the treatment of actual bio-treated
dyeing and finishing wastewater in a continuous mode, the COD removal
during ozonation in the presence of AC could be enhanced 14%–25% with the
loading of iron oxide; however, this improvement eﬀect by Fe/AC can only last
for less than 2 d, and the catalytic activity of AC can be maintained for at least
20 d.45 Therefore, the activity and stability of AC-supported metal oxide
catalysts is an important issue that deserves more attention.
4.3
Biochar-based Materials
4.3.1
Biochar
Various biomass materials (such as pistachio hull, sewage sludge and pet-
roleum sludge) are used to prepare biochar for catalytic ozonation
(Table 4.5). No catalytic activity on oxalic acid removal is found for the
sludge-based carbon using KOH or H2SO4 as the activated agent, while a
high catalytic activity is observed for the sludge-based carbon using ZnCl2 as
the activated agent, the authors believe that this is due to the fact that the
specific surface area of sludge-based carbon activated by KOH (99 m2 g1) or
H2SO4 (68 m2 g1) is much lower than that activated by ZnCl2 (363 m2 g1).86
The specific surface area of biochar increases with the pyrolysis temperature,
which is 0.4, 39.1 and 95.9 m2 g1 for the pyrolysis temperature of 500, 700
and 900 1C, respectively, while the catalytic activity on phenol degradation
Catalytic Ozonation over Activated Carbon-based Materials
101

for the pyrolysis temperature of 700 1C is comparable to that for 900 1C.41
However, the higher the pyrolysis temperature of sludge-based carbon is in
the range of 500–800 1C, the higher the catalytic activity on hydroquinone
degradation will be.87
The specific surface areas are 143, 561 and 569 m2 g1 for the raw pet-
roleum sludge biochar, the biochar pretreatment with HNO3 and the biochar
pretreatment with both HNO3 and NaOH, respectively. It is found that TOC
removal during ozonation with biochar is significantly higher than that of
the combination of ozonation alone and biochar adsorption, while TOC
removal during ozonation with biochar pretreatment with HNO3 or with
both HNO3 and NaOH is lower than or comparable to that of the
Table 4.5
Ozonation of pollutant in the presence of biochar.
Source of
biochar
Preparation
conditions
Highlights
Ref.
Pistachio
hull
Pyrolysis at 500 1C
in air
SBET ¼ 2.85 m2 g1, pHpzc ¼ 11.5,
macroporous, the decolorization
of Reactive Red 198 by ozonation
alone, biochar adsorption and
biochar catalytic ozonation are
about 20%, 20% and 98%,
respectively.
89
Sewage
sludge
Pyrolysis at 700 1C
in N2 using
ZnCl2 as
activation agent,
and inorganic
impurities
removed by HCl
SBET ¼ 363 m2 g1, pHpzc ¼ 3.8,
mesoporous, the oxalic acid
removal by biochar catalytic
ozonation is 45.4% higher than
that of the superposition of
ozonation alone and biochar
adsorption.
86
Sewage
sludge and
corncob
(1 : 1, w/w)
Pyrolysis at 600 1C
using ZnCl2 as
activation agent,
and inorganic
impurities
removed by HCl
SBET ¼ 712.8 m2 g1, the Ibuprofen
degradation by biochar catalytic
ozonation is slightly higher than
that of the superposition of
ozonation alone and biochar
adsorption.
92
Coking
wastewater
treatment
sludge
Pyrolysis at 300,
500, 700 or
900 1C in N2
SBET ¼ 39.1 m2 g1 for pyrolysis at
700 1C, the phenol degradation by
biochar catalytic ozonation is
much higher than that of the
superposition of ozonation alone
and biochar adsorption.
41
Sewage
sludge
Pyrolysis at 500,
600, 700 or
800 1C in N2
Hydroquinone degradation
eﬃciency during ozonation with
biochar heat-treated at 700 1C is
higher than that of biochar
pretreatment by HNO3.
87
Petroleum
sludge
Pyrolysis at 850 1C
in N2 using
ZnCl2 as
activation agent
SBET ¼ 143 m2 g1, the TOC removal
(53.5%) during ozonation of
petroleum refinery wastewater
with biochar is twice that of
ozonation alone (26.9%).
88
102
Chapter 4

combination of ozonation alone and biochar adsorption. The authors be-
lieve that the surface functional carbon groups, Si–O structures, and metal
oxides of biochar promote the ozone decomposition to generate OH for
mineralizing petroleum contaminants.88 Xu et al. also suggested that Fe21
and Fe31 in the sludge-based carbon may act as active sites to improve its
catalytic activity according to the results of Mo¨ssbauer spectrum.87 tBA has
no eﬀect on oxalic acid removal during ozonation in the presence of sludge-
based carbon.86 Moussavi and Khosravi also found that tBA has no eﬀect on
the decolorization of Reactive Red 198 during ozonation in the presence of
biochar, while the presence of 5 mM phosphate changes the decolorization
rate of Reactive Red 198 from 95% to 45% in 30 min, and the authors believe
that this may be caused by the strong bonding of phosphate to surface
groups;89 however, this phenomenon usually occurs in ozonation with metal
oxide catalyst.90 Certainly, if the mainly active sites of biochar used by
Moussavi and Khosravi89 are surface hydroxyl groups, the presence of
phosphate is expected to have a significant eﬀect on the catalytic activity of
biochar since phosphate could prevent OH formation by covering the Lewis
acid sites.91
Some researchers have compared the catalytic activity of biochar with
commonly used commercial AC. Moussavi and Khosravi found that the
decolorization of Reactive Red 198 during ozonation in the presence of
biochar and AC catalytic ozonation is about 98% and 44% in 60 min, re-
spectively.89 Hydroquinone degradation eﬃciency during ozonation with
biochar heat-treated at 700 1C is higher than that of commercial coal AC.87
Although the specific surface area of sludge-corncob AC (712.8 m2 g1) is
lower than that of coconut shell AC (835.6 m2 g1), apricot shell AC (962.9
m2 g1) or coal AC (1030.5 m2 g1), the degradation eﬃciency of ibuprofen
during ozonation with sludge-corncob AC is higher than that of coconut
shell AC, apricot shell AC or coal AC.92 This may be caused by the more basic
functional groups of sludge-corncob AC. However, Wen et al. observed that
oxalic acid removal during ozonation with sludge-based carbon and AC is
81.2% and 98.7% in 40 min, respectively.86
Some researchers are also concerned about the stability of biochar in
ozonation. The stability of heat-treated biochar at 700 1C is poor stability
during ozonation, and the degradation eﬃciency of phenol is reduced from
95.4% in the first use to 59.3% in the fourth use.41 The organic carbon
dissolved in the distilled water of the 1.0 g L1 raw sludge, or the biochar
heat-treated at 300 1C is in the range of 130–140 mg L1, and it decreases to
less than 3.5 mg L1 for the heat-treated biochar at no less than 500 1C.
Meanwhile, the leaching of Co21, Fe31, Ni21, Cu21 and Mn21 is also ob-
served for raw sludge and the biochar heat-treated at 300 1C.41 Chen et al.
also found that TOC removal decreases with repeated use of petroleum
sludge-based biochar during ozonation and that the leaching of metal ion
was also observed after the first use, while the TOC removal eﬃciency for
ozonation with petroleum sludge-based biochar after the fifth reuse is still
higher than that of ozonation alone.88
Catalytic Ozonation over Activated Carbon-based Materials
103

In addition, in order to investigate the relationship between the surface
functional groups of carbon materials and their catalytic activity, Boehm
titration93 is often used to quantitatively determine the various functional
groups on the surface of carbon materials. However, the multiple steps of
Boehm titration are conducted in various ways by diﬀerent research groups,
making these results diﬃcult to compare. Therefore, Andreas Olsson’s
research group standardized the Boehm titration procedure in 2010 to
minimize errors.94,95 It should be noted that the relatively high content of
impurities (such as oxides, silica and alumina) in biochar may cause obvious
interference in determining functional groups on biochar surface using
Boehm titration, so it needs to be pretreated with NaOH and HCl before
Boehm titration.96
4.3.2
Biochar-supported Metal Oxides
As shown in Tables 4.5 and 4.6, the specific surface area of biochar prepared
without adding activator is usually not large, and it ranges from 2.85 to
95.9 m2 g1, which may be related to diﬀerent raw materials.41,89 The specific
surface area of biochar activated by diﬀerent activators is very diﬀerent,
and the specific surface area of sludge-based carbon activated by ZnCl2
(18.3 m2 g1) or H2SO4 (51.9 m2 g1) is much lower than that activated by
ZnCl2 þ H2SO4 (179.9 m2 g1).97 While Wen et al. found that the specific
surface area of sludge-based carbon prepared by ZnCl2 activator is more than
three times that of other activators (KOH or H2SO4).86
Some researchers have found that metal oxides have only a slight eﬀect on
the specific surface area of biochar,98,99 while some researchers have found
that metal oxide loading reduces the specific surface area of biochar by more
than 15%.100,101 It is interesting that the specific surface area of biochar
(87.4 m2 g1) increases significantly with the loading of either MnOx
(109.8 m2 g1) or FeOx (99.8 m2 g1); this may be due to the fact that these
catalysts have not undergone the pyrolysis process but are only formed by
the redox reaction between biochar and KMnO4 or K2FeO4.
85 Lu et al. found
that not only the specific surface area of ferromagnetic sludge-based AC
decreases with the increase of the amount of iron loading (940.9 m2 g1 for
2.3% Fe, 936.7 m2 g1 for 4.3% Fe and 880.6 m2 g1 for 9.5% Fe) but also the
catalytic activity gradually decreases with the increase of Fe loading. This
may be caused by the continuous agglomeration of iron oxide on the biochar
surface with the increase of iron loading.102 The adsorption of pollutants
may also significantly reduce the specific surface area of biochar; MnOx/
biochar and FeOx/biochar decreased by 36.1%, 32.9% and 34.0% due to the
adsorption of pollutants, although it can be recovered up to 89.1%, 96.5%
and 91.2% after 60 min ozonation, respectively.101
Catalytic ozonation can significantly improve the biodegradability of
wastewater. The BOD5/COD of biologically pretreated papermaking waste-
water is 0.16, 0.27, 0.35 and 0.46 for untreated wastewater, ozonation
alone, biochar catalytic ozonation and MnOx/biochar catalytic ozonation,
104
Chapter 4

Table 4.6
Ozonation of pollutant in the presence of biochar-supported metal oxides.
Source of biochar
Biochar preparation
Biochar supported metal
oxide preparation
Highlights
Ref.
Supported iron oxide
Sewage sludge
Pyrolysis at 700 1C in N2
using ZnCl2 as activation
agent, and inorganic
impurities removed by
HCl
Wet impregnation with
Fe(NO3)3 and pyrolysis at
600 1C in N2
SBET decrease from 398.6 to 339.1 m2 g1 with
the 7.51% Fe loading, the COD removal for
biologically pretreated Lurgi coal gasification
wastewater by ozonation alone, biochar and Fe/
biochar catalytic ozonation is about 42.1%,
54.3% and 73.7%, respectively
101
Sewage sludge and
corncob (1 : 1, w/w)
Pyrolysis at 600 1C using
ZnCl2 as activation agent,
and inorganic impurities
removed by HCl
Co-precipitation with FeCl3
and FeSO4 and dried at
50 1C
SBET decrease from 941.0 to 940.9 m2 g1 with
the 2.3% Fe loading, the p-chlorobenzoic acid
degradation by biochar catalytic ozonation is
slightly lower than that of the superposition of
ozonation alone and biochar adsorption
102
Cow dung
Pyrolysis at 800 1C in N2
In situ precipitation
oxidization using FeSO4
and dried at 60 1C
SBET decrease from 55.1 to 20.6 m2 g1 with the
Fe3O4 loading, the COD removal eﬃciency
reached 74% during ozonation of biologically
pretreated coal gasification wastewater in the
presence of catalyst
100
Commercial biochar
Not mentioned
Impregnation with K2FeO4
and dried
Atrazine degradation eﬃciency by ozonation
alone and FeOx/biochar catalytic ozonation is
48.1% and 100%, respectively
85
Supported manganese oxide
Sewage sludge
Pyrolysis at 700 1C in N2
using ZnCl2 as activation
agent, and inorganic
impurities removed by
HCl
Wet impregnation with
Mn(NO3)2 and pyrolysis
at 600 1C in N2
SBET decrease from 398.6 to 327.5 m2 g1 with
the 15.23% Mn loading, the COD removal for
biologically pretreated Lurgi coal gasification
wastewater by ozonation alone, biochar and
Mn/biochar catalytic ozonation is 42.1%,
54.3% and 78.1%, respectively
101
Commercial biochar
Not mentioned
Impregnation with KMnO4,
and dried
Atrazine degradation eﬃciency by ozonation
alone and MnOx/biochar catalytic ozonation is
48.1% and 83%, respectively
85
Catalytic Ozonation over Activated Carbon-based Materials
105

Table 4.6
(Continued)
Source of biochar
Biochar preparation
Biochar supported metal
oxide preparation
Highlights
Ref.
Sewage sludge
Pyrolysis at 550 1C in N2
using ZnCl2, H2SO4, and
ZnCl2 þ H2SO4 as
activation agent, and
inorganic impurities
removed by HCl
Wet impregnation with
KMnO4 and pyrolysis at
550 1C in N2
Oxalic acid removal eﬃciency by ozonation
alone and 30% MnOx/biochar catalytic
ozonation at pH 3.5 is 10.3% and 92.2%,
respectively
97
Rice straw
Impregnated into the
H3PO4 solution and dried
at 80 1C
Wet impregnation with
Mn(NO3)2 and pyrolysis
at 550 1C in N2
SBET decrease from 917.6 to 901.1 m2 g1 with
11.8% Mn loading, COD removal eﬃciency by
ozonation alone and MnOx/biochar catalytic
ozonation is 45.5% and 75.5%, respectively
98
Piggery residue
Pyrolysis at 550 1C
Impregnation with MnSO4
and KMnO4, and dried
SBET decrease from 16.27 to 16.09 m2 g1 with
the Mn loading, COD removal eﬃciency by
ozonation alone, biochar and MnOx/biochar
catalytic ozonation is 24.0%, 31.6% and 36.9%,
respectively
99
Supported cobalt oxide
Olive stones
Carbonization at 600 1C
and then activated using
steam as oxidizing agent
at 850 1C
Impregnation with CoSO4
and pyrolysis at 550 1C in
N2
SBET decrease from 734.2 to 721.9 m2 g1 with
the 5% Co loading, TOC removal eﬃciency by
ozonation alone, biochar and CoOx/biochar
catalytic ozonation is 24%, 45% and 65%,
respectively
103
106
Chapter 4

respectively.98 The BOD5/COD of biologically pretreated coal gasification
wastewater also increased from 0.04 to 0.52 after Fe3O4/biochar catalytic
ozonation. The authors believe that this is due to the electron transfer be-
tween Fe21 and Fe31 in Fe3O4 and the improved OH formation through the
reaction of active sites and ozone; the OH reaction mechanism is confirmed
by ESR.100 Tian et al. also believed, by means of radical scavenger experiment
and ESR analysis, that the OH is the main active species during ozonation
with MnOx/biochar or FeOx/biochar.85 Nitrobenzene degradation is pro-
posed as the improvement of the OH formation on the CoOx/biochar sur-
face according to the eﬀect of OH scavengers.103
Despite finding only trace amounts of iron and manganese during
ozonation of atrazine with MnOx/biochar or FeOx/biochar, the atrazine
degradation eﬃciency decreases 23.9% and 24.3% for MnOx/biochar or
FeOx/biochar after four uses.85 The leaching of iron is more remarkable than
that of manganese during repeated use, while no remarkable diﬀerence was
found on the catalytic activity of the prepared MnOx/biochar or FeOx/biochar
catalysts after ten uses.101 Lu et al. found that the adsorption capacity
and catalytic activity on the p-chlorobenzoic acid degradation decrease
only slightly during ozonation with ferromagnetic sludge-based AC after
six uses.102 Zhuang et al. observed that the COD removal eﬃciency decreased
by only 4.1% during the ozonation of papermaking wastewater with MnOx/
biochar after 20 uses, indicating that the catalyst has a good stability.98
4.4
Reaction Mechanisms
4.4.1
Brief Description of Several Viewpoints
4.4.1.1
Adsorption Mechanism
Sa´nchez-Polo et al. observed that the adsorption rate of atrazine on AC was
faster than its oxidation rate by ozone; therefore, the authors believed that
atrazine removal during the AC catalytic ozonation is mainly caused by its
adsorption on the AC surface.104 This is because AC usually has better
adsorption performance for hydrophobic micropollutants.
It should be noted that adsorption may not play a major role in organic
matter removal for the ozonation of wastewater with AC. The concentration
of organic matter in wastewater is relatively high, and the hydrophobicity of
the organic matter usually decreases significantly21 due to the longer oxi-
dation time compared with that in drinking water treatment, which is not
conducive to the adsorption of the oxidation products on the AC surface.
As mentioned, 27.8% of TOC removal can be achieved for ROC treatment by
AC adsorption in 210 min; however, only 3%–4% TOC can be obtained by AC
adsorption for ROC after treating by ozonation for more than 60 min.15
In general, if the pollutant concentration is low and its hydrophobicity is
also strong, then adsorption may play an important role in this pollutant’s
removal during AC catalytic ozonation.
Catalytic Ozonation over Activated Carbon-based Materials
107

4.4.1.2
Direct Ozonation Reaction Mechanism
Beltra´n et al. proposed a two-stage reaction mechanism during ozonation of
polyphenols (gallic acid, tyrosol and syringic acid) in the presence of AC, that
is, the first-stage direct molecular ozone reaction mechanism involving the
oxidation of polyphenols and the second-stage hydroxyl radical reaction
mechanism involving the oxidation of intermediates.105 Since they found that
there is no dissolved ozone in the initial stage of the reaction (15–60 min), this
means that the gas–liquid ozone reacts with polyphenols directly and quickly
in solution,105 and that these reactions may be due to the ozone attack on
aromatic rings through electrophilic substitution and 1,3-cycloaddition re-
action.1 Beltra´n et al.105 found that the second-order reaction rate constants of
these three polyphenols and ozone are all above 5104 M1 s1, which means
that the prerequisite for the direct molecular ozone reaction is that the reaction
between ozone and organic matter is relatively fast. Lee et al.106 also found in
the ozonation of secondary municipal wastewater eﬄuent for the removal of
micropollutants, the contribution of direct ozone oxidation in the degradation
of micropollutants exceeded 80% when the second-order reaction rate con-
stants of ozone and micropollutants exceeded 105 M1 s1.
4.4.1.3
Free Radicals
Logemann and Annee4 believe that the AC-catalytic ozonation is not a re-
action of OH but a reaction mechanism of the surface-bound oxygen-con-
taining free radicals (O, O2
 and O3
)6 oxidizing the organic matter
adsorbed on the AC surface. Jans and Hoigne´ believe that AC is a catalyst in
ozonation, which reacts with ozone to generate OH.107 More and more re-
searchers agree that AC catalytic ozonation follows the
OH reaction
mechanism.108 However, the basic groups on the AC surface continue to
decrease, while the acidic groups continue to increase with the extension of
ozonation, which in turn leads to the decrease of its performance on pol-
lutant degradation during ozonation with AC.28 Therefore, it is generally
believed that AC is not a real catalyst but an initiator and/or promoter that
accelerates the ozone decomposition to generate OH.1,28,30,108
4.4.2
Reactive Oxygen Species and Intermediates Formation
4.4.2.1
Superoxide Radical Formation
Organic matter can still be eﬃciently degraded in the condition of a low pH
3.5 or a high concentration of OH scavenger carbonate;4 therefore, in 1997,
Kaptijn believed that the free radicals that oxidize organic matter in the AC
catalytic ozonation are surface-bound oxygen-containing free radicals (O,
O2
 and O3
).6 In 2005, Sa´nchez-Polo et al.28 further confirmed the exist-
ence of O2
 in the AC catalytic ozonation by detecting the product of the
rapid reaction of tetranitromethane and O2
 (k ¼ 2109 M1 s1); the higher
the concentration of pyrrole groups was on the AC surface, the more O2
 will
108
Chapter 4

be generated during ozonation, but the pyrrole groups will be quickly con-
sumed due to its rapid reaction with ozone (k ¼ 5.8105 M1 s1).109
Using 5,5-dimethyl-pyrrolineoxide (DMPO) as a O2
 trapping agent, the
existence of O2
 during ozonation with powder AC was confirmed since
the DMPO-O2
 signal was detected by electron spin resonance (ESR), while
O2
 can be generated more eﬀectively during ozonation with CNT.43
In recent years, many researchers have adopted p-benzoquinone as a O2

scavenger2,41,110 because of the rapid reaction between p-benzoquinone
and
O2
 (k ¼ 9.8108 M1 s1).2 But it should be noted that the rate
of
direct
reaction
between
ozone
and
p-benzoquinone
is
not
slow
(k ¼ 2.5103 M1 s1).111 In order to eﬀectively scavenge the O2
 generated
during the reaction, it is usually necessary to add excess p-benzoquinone. If
the ozone dose is limited or the target pollutant is an ozone refractory, the
decrease in the degradation eﬃciency of the target pollutant with the add-
ition of p-benzoquinone is not necessarily caused by the capture of O2
 by
p-benzoquinone. It may also be caused by the additional consumption of
ozone with the addition of p-benzoquinone through competing with the
target pollutant. Recently, Wang’s group proved that in the case of a certain
dosage of ozone, the decomposition rate of ozone will increase as the ratio of
p-benzoquinone to ozone increases, which leads to a gradual decrease in the
degradation of target compound.112 The authors suggested that the addition
of trace O2
 probe compound (such as chloroform) is a good choice for the
quantitative determination of O2
 generated in the catalytic ozonation,
since the presence of trace O2
 probe compound has no noticeable eﬀect on
the reaction mechanism of catalytic ozonation.112 In addition, the con-
sumption of
OH caused by the reaction of
OH and p-benzoquinone
(k ¼ 1.2109 M1 s1)112 is also not conducive to achieving the target pol-
lutant degradation, which may be another issue that needs attention.
4.4.2.2
Hydroxyl Radical Formation
Many researchers have reported the role of singlet oxygen (1O2) in the deg-
radation of organics during photocatalysis and persulfate-based AOPs.2,113
In recent years, researchers have also found that 1O2 is generated during
ozonation with graphene-based, manganese-based or perovskite cata-
lysts.2,110 To the best of our knowledge, there is no report that 1O2 plays a
role in the degradation of organics during ozonation with AC.
Jans and Hoigne´ found that AC can accelerate the transformation of dis-
solved ozone to OH and believe that this is an AOP comparable to the
combination of ozone and H2O2 in 1998.107 Sa´nchez-Polo et al. found that the
activity of AC catalytic ozonation is lower than that of the combination of
ozone and OH or H2O2 in synthetic water, but the activity on the pollutant
degradation is similar for all three ozone-based AOPs (AC, OH, and H2O2) in
the actual water with the existence of OH scavenger bicarbonate/carbon-
ate.104 Furthermore, the existence of OH during ozonation with powder AC
was demonstrated since the typical characteristic peaks of DMPO-OH with
Catalytic Ozonation over Activated Carbon-based Materials
109

an intensity ratio of 1 : 2 : 2 : 1 was detected by ESR, while its OH concen-
tration was found to be much less than that of ozonation with CNT.43
In fact, most researchers deduce the role of OH in AC catalytic ozonation
based on the eﬀect of tBA on the degradation eﬃciency of pollutants,
since tBA is a typical OH scavenger due to its very slow reaction with ozone
(3 103 M1 s1)114 and fast reaction with OH (6108 M1 s1).115
4.4.2.3
Hydrogen Peroxide Formation
It is reported that a very small amount of H2O2 is generated during ozone
decomposition in the absence of pollutant in acidic conditions.116,117 It is also
observed that a small amount of H2O2 is formed in aqueous solution with the
presence of AC and dissolved oxygen because the dissolved oxygen can be re-
duced by the oxygen-containing groups (such as quinone and chromene) on
the AC surface (eqn (4.9)).118 In fact, the direct oxidation of organic matter by
ozone involves the breaking of the aromatic ring or the Criegee mechanism of
ozone attacking double bonds, which may also generate hydrogen per-
oxide.1,119 H2O2 was found to be generated during ozonation of gallic acid with
or without AC, and the H2O2 concentration formed during ozonation with AC
was lower than that in ozonation alone. The authors believe that this was
because AC more eﬀectively promotes the H2O2 decomposition to generate
OH for promoting the degradation of saturated carboxylic acids.18
C*Redþ 1
2 O2 þ H2O ! C*OX þ H2O2
(4:9)
It is generally accepted that the H2O2 formation during AC catalytic ozo-
nation is mainly related to the p electron of basal planes,25 basic oxygen-
containing groups (such as quinone and chromene)25,30 and phenolic
groups30 on the AC surface. Nawrocki’s group found that the AC heat-treated
in a hydrogen atmosphere has a significant increase in the H2O2 concen-
tration produced during ozonation. The authors believe that this is because
the heat treatment eliminates oxygen-containing groups, thereby removing
the hindrance of ozone from attacking the double bond on the AC surface.120
Furthermore, Nawrocki’s group also observed that the lower the pH was, the
larger the amount of H2O2 usually generated. This is because the ozone and
H2O2 in the solution will be more stable at low pH and will not easily de-
compose to generate OH. Therefore, a relatively high H2O2 concentration
would not be expected for the case of pH45, and the authors believe that
H2O2 could not be the source of OH during AC catalytic ozonation under
this condition.120 However, Alva´rez et al. found that AC promotes ozone
decomposition more significantly under neutral and basic pH than under
that in acidic conditions, and the authors believe that the promotion of
ozone decomposition only comes from the reactions between adsorbed/
non-adsorbed ozone and some surface groups and mineral impurities of AC
at acidic pH due to the very high pKa (11.6) of H2O2. While at a neutral and
110
Chapter 4

basic pH, besides the accelerating ozone decomposition on the AC surface,
H2O2 dissociates into HO2
 in solution, thereby promoting the dissolved
ozone decomposition in solution (eqn (4.10) and (4.11)).30
H2O2  !
pKa ¼ 11:6
Hþ þ HO
2
(4:10)
HO 
2 -  -OH
(4.11)
OH may generate on the AC surface due to the ozone decomposition, but
its populations are extremely short-lived (109 s)121 due to its extremely high
reactivity with AC and/or the pollutant adsorbed on the AC surface, resulting
in the impossible diﬀusion of generated OH from the AC surface into the
solution.30 The concentration of OH generated by the ozone decomposition
on the AC surface depends on how fast the ozone is transferred from the
aqueous solution to the carbon surface. The generated OH may react with
ozone or interact with one another to form H2O2,122 while it is reported
that the active site on the carbon surface that initiates the decomposition of
H2O2 may be the same as that of ozone.123 In this case, H2O2 that has not
decomposed on the AC surface may desorb into the solution and may be
detected.120 In addition, diﬀerent from Rivera-Utrilla and Sanchez-Polo’s
opinion that the mineral impurities in AC promote the ozone decomposition
to generate highly reactive oxygen species,25 Alva´rez et al. believe that the
mineral impurities may promote the decomposition of H2O2 on the AC
surface instead of promoting ozone decomposition, and certainly this will
result in a decrease in the amount of H2O2 entering the solution.30
4.4.3
Hydroxyl Radical Mechanism
OH plays an important role in the degradation of pollutants during AC
catalytic ozonation, as recognized by more and more researchers.11,108,124,125
However, tBA can eﬀectively scavenge the OH only in the bulk solution but
cannot eﬀectively quench the OH adsorbed on the AC surface due to the
very weak adsorption of tBA on the surface of carbon materials.30,126,127
According to the eﬀect of tBA on the degradation eﬃciency of pollutants,
diﬀerent researchers have debated whether the OH oxidation occurs in the
bulk solution126 or on the AC surface.128
4.4.3.1
Bulk Solution Reaction
Beltra´n’s group found that tBA hardly adsorbed on the AC surface within
150 min and that it also has no impact on the oxalic acid adsorption on the AC
surface, indicating that tBA can only quench the OH generated in the solution,
not on the AC surface. The presence of tBA significantly inhibited TOC removal
during AC catalytic ozonation, and so it is suggested that the reaction between
oxalic acid and OH occurs in the bulk solution.126 Jans and Hoigne´ also be-
lieved that the reaction between OH and pollutant occurs in the aqueous
Catalytic Ozonation over Activated Carbon-based Materials
111

solution.107 Gu et al. observed that the tBA has a slight and remarkable eﬀect
on the p-nitrophenol degradation at pH 4.0 and 10.0, respectively. The
authors believe that this is due to the diﬀerent degradation mechanisms of
p-nitrophenol at pH 4.0 and pH 10.0. AC adsorption plays a major role in the
p-nitrophenol degradation at pH 4.0, while OH oxidation in the solution plays
an important role in the p-nitrophenol degradation at pH 10.0.129
4.4.3.2
Surface and Bulk Solution Reactions
Pereira’s group found that the tBA has no eﬀect on the oxalic acid removal at
pH 3.0 but that it inhibits the ozonation of oxalic acid with AC or AC pre-
treated by HNO3, similarly to the same reaction with the absence of tBA at
pH 7.0. Therefore, the authors believe that the oxidation of oxalic acid or
oxamic acid by OH generated in AC catalytic ozonation will occur simul-
taneously on the AC surface and in the bulk solution. The contribution of the
bulk solution reaction in the degradation of pollutants depends on the
surface properties of the AC, the pollutants and the pH of solution.128
Many researchers have investigated the adsorption of tBA on carbon
materials, and all studies have found that tBA scarcely adsorbs on the surface
of carbon materials (Table 4.7).30,126,127,130,131 Furthermore, Alva´rez et al.
found that although some tBA is eventually adsorbed on the AC surface, its
Table 4.7
Adsorption of tBA on the surface of carbon materials and its impact on
pollutant degradation.
Carbon
Experimental
conditions
Highlights
Ref.
Granular AC
(1.25 mg L1)
Adsorption of 1 mM tBA
on AC with or without
8 mM oxalic acid at pH
2.5
tBA adsorption on AC surface
o2% within 150 min, and tBA
has no impact on the oxalic acid
adsorption on the AC surface.
126
Granular AC
(4.0 g L1)
Adsorption of 1–10 mM
tBA on AC at pH 7
(phosphate buﬀer)
tBA adsorption on AC surface
B12% within 10 d, and tBA has
significant impact on the ozone
decomposition rate on AC
surface.
30
CNT (0.1 g L1)
Adsorption of 1 mM tBA
on CNT with or
without 1 mM oxalic
acid at pH 3.0
tBA adsorption on CNT surface
o2% within 40 min, and tBA has
no eﬀect on the oxalic acid
adsorption on CNT surface.
127
Powder AC
(0.1 or
0.5 mg L1)
Adsorption of 1–100
mM tBA on AC with
0.5 mM oxalic acid at
pH 7 (Phosphate
buﬀer)
tBA adsorption on AC surface
B2% for the 100 mM tBA dose,
and the total amount of tBA
adsorption on AC surface is
relatively high (2 mM).
130
Granular AC
(2.0 gL1) or
super-fine
powdered AC
(1.0 gL1)
Adsorption of 1 mM tBA
on AC with 1 mM
p-chlorobenzoic acid
tBA adsorption on AC surface
o10% within 20 min
131
112
Chapter 4

adsorption rate on the AC surface is much slower compared with the ozone
decomposition rate.30 If ozone decomposes on the AC surface to generate
OH, it is diﬃcult for tBA to eﬀectively scavenge OH due to the scarce ad-
sorption of tBA on the AC surface. On the contrary, since tBA mainly exists in
the bulk solution, it can very eﬀectively scavenge the OH derived from the
ozone decomposition in bulk solution. Therefore, the reaction mechanism in
which the surface reactions and the bulk solution reactions occur simul-
taneously is generally accepted for AC catalytic ozonation.27,29,38,58,127,130–132
The more tBA is added in the solution, the higher the OH scavenging will
be. However, it should be noted that too much tBA may bring other side
eﬀects. Cao’s group found that the presence of 1 mM or 10 mM tBA has no
eﬀect on the oxalic acid removal during ozonation with 0.5 g L1 powder AC;
however, it is interesting that the addition of 100 mM tBA aﬀects the oxalic
acid removal to a certain extent. A reasonable explanation is that although
tBA adsorbs scarcely on the AC surface, the tBA adsorbed on the AC surface
can reach about 2 mM for the addition of 100 mM tBA in solution, which
may occupy some active sites originally involved in the surface catalytic re-
action.130 In addition, Li et al. observed that the presence of tBA not only did
not inhibit the pyruvic acid degradation during Pd/CeO2 catalytic ozonation
but slightly promoted it. The authors believe the reasons are as follows. One
is that the pyruvic acid degradation mainly occurs on the Pd/CeO2 surface, so
the addition of tBA would not reduce its degradation eﬃciency, and the
other is that the addition of tBA will inhibit the ozone decomposition in the
solution, thereby increasing the dissolved ozone concentration in water and
then slightly promoting the pyruvic acid degradation.133
Therefore, the tBA scavenger dose should meet the minimum dose
principle that can meet the requirement of the OH scavenging eﬃciency
(e.g. 90% or 95%). Certainly, the appropriate tBA dose can be deduced
through the influence of diﬀerent concentrations of tBA on the pollutant
degradation.130,134 In fact, since the second rate constant of the reaction
between tBA and OH is known to be 6108 M1 s1,115 if the second rate
constant of the reaction between pollutant and OH is known, the required
concentration of OH scavenger tBA can be directly calculated by eqn (4.12)
and (4.13) according to the requirement of the OH scavenging eﬃciency.135
R ¼
kOH;tBA  CtBA
kOH;Pollutant  CPollutant þ k OH;tBA  CtBA
(4:12)
Where R is the scavenging eﬃciency of OH in bulk solution, which is
usually 90%, 95% or even higher. It should be noted that the eqn (4.13) is
based on the assumption that synthetic water contains only tBA and pollu-
tant and that the reaction between water matrix (such as bicarbonate/car-
bonate) and OH needs to be considered for an actual water.
And then the required CtBA can be expressed as:
CtBA ¼
R  k OH;Pollutant
ð1  RÞk OH;tBA  CPollutant
(4:13)
Catalytic Ozonation over Activated Carbon-based Materials
113

It should also be noted that the excessive addition of tBA will also
adversely aﬀect the exploration of the reaction mechanism. Wang’s group
observed that the ozone decomposition rate during ozonation with MnO2
catalyst is remarkably reduced to an even lower rate during ozonation
alone with the presence of a high concentration of tBA,112 and the authors
believe that this is because the presence of high concentration of tBA will
capture all the primary OH without producing O2
 during ozonation
alone, thus preventing the occurrence of radical chain reactions.1 Taking
into account that the addition of trace OH probe compound (such as
p-chlorobenzoic acid136 or deethylatrazine137) will not have a significant
impact on the reaction mechanism of catalytic ozonation, the authors
recommend that the addition of OH probe compound is more suitable
for the investigation of the reaction mechanism than tBA.112,138 Actually,
this method had been adopted by the von Gunten’s group as early as
15 years ago to detect the
OH concentration during AC catalytic
ozonation,28,104
Cao’s group observed that the eﬀect of tBA on AC catalytic ozonation
gradually decreases with the increase of AC dose, indicating that the OH
oxidation in the bulk solution plays a smaller and smaller role in oxalic
acid removal, until the OH oxidation in the bulk solution disappears
completely when the AC dose exceeds 0.2 g L1. The authors believe that
this may be caused by the quenching of OH in the bulk solution by AC.130
In fact, there is another possible explanation: the dissolved ozone in the
solution tends to zero during the reaction when the AC dose is more than
0.2 g L1, which makes it diﬃcult to generate OH in the bulk solution.
Cao’s group also found that diﬀerent basic groups have diﬀerent eﬀects on
the proportion of OH oxidation on the AC surface or in bulk solution for
oxalic acid removal and that the pyrrole groups and pyridine groups on the
AC surface may directly or indirectly facilitate the OH oxidation in the bulk
solution, while other basic sites (e.g. basal planes and basic oxygen-
containing groups) promote oxalic acid removal through OH oxidation
on the AC surface.27
Chen et al. changed the granular AC from 863 mm to 1 mm superfine
powder AC by ball milling, which increased the external specific surface area
and the sum of the volume of mesopores and macropores by 190% and
563%, respectively, and then led to change in the contribution of surface
reaction on the oxalic acid removal from 61% to 96%. Meanwhile, the au-
thors believe that the changes in surface oxidation and basic value of AC
caused by ball milling also play an important role in improving its catalytic
activity.131 However, Biernacki et al. believe that not only the external surface
plays an important role in the ozone decomposition with granular AC, since
the active sites on the external surface are too limited to meet the require-
ments of ozone decomposition.122
7-Hydroxycoumarin, a hydroxylation product obtained by attacking cou-
marin with OH, was used as a OH marker. Zhang et al. creatively proposed
to detect the generation of OH in the surface region using fluorescence
114
Chapter 4

microscopy image analysis, and the abundance of OH in the surface region
was at least 1000 times higher than that of the bulk solution during CNT
catalytic ozonation. Although the abundance of OH on the surface region in
AC catalytic ozonation is significantly lower than that of CNT, it is still sig-
nificantly higher than that in the bulk solution.43
Based on these results and discussion, it can be concluded that OH plays
an important role in the AC catalytic ozonation and that the pollutant oxi-
dation by OH occurs simultaneously on the AC surface and in the bulk
solution. As shown in Figure 4.3, as far as the reactions in bulk solution are
concerned, the OH for the degradation of the pollutant and/or intermedi-
ates could be produced in two ways. The first way is to assume that AC
initiates dissolved ozone decomposition and transforms into OH in bulk
solution. The second way is that ozone reacts with some functional groups
on the AC surface to form adsorbed H2O2, and then some H2O2 may diﬀuse
into the solution and react with dissolved ozone to form OH in the bulk
solution. As for the reactions on the AC surface, the ozone adsorbed on the
AC surface decomposes to generate surface-oxygenated radicals (such as
OH), which can oxidize the pollutant and/or intermediates adsorbed on the
AC surface.127
Although most researchers use AC as a catalyst for ozonation of pollutant,
the mechanisms obtained vary significantly in diﬀerent works. Some authors
believe that the OH reactions mainly occur on the AC surface, while other
authors believe that the major OH reactions occur in the bulk solution. The
factors aﬀecting the changes in these mechanisms are not yet clear, which
may be related to the complexity of surface reactions. As we know, surface
Figure 4.3
Illusion of the mainly reaction mechanism for the pollutant degradation
during ozonation in the presence of carbon materials. Reproduced from
ref. 127 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2009.
Catalytic Ozonation over Activated Carbon-based Materials
115

reaction involves the adsorption of ozone and pollutant and/or intermedi-
ates, surface reaction and desorption. The surface charging of AC is related
to the pH of the solution and the pHpzc of AC,139 which may have a
significant impact on the adsorptions of ozone and pollutant and/or inter-
mediates, surface reaction and desorption. Similarly, the nature of pollu-
tants, the surface modification of AC, the structure and specific surface area
of AC, mineral impurities of AC, etc. may all have a certain impact on its
reaction mechanism. Therefore, more systematic and in-depth investigation
is needed in the future.
For metal oxide-supported catalysts using AC as a support, the reaction
mechanism may be diﬀerent from that of AC catalytic ozonation. Even if it
still follows the OH mechanism of surface reaction and bulk solution re-
action simultaneously, the loading of diﬀerent metal oxides may also bring
diﬀerent eﬀects on the mechanism. Yuan et al. observed that the addition of
tBA has no eﬀect on formate removal during ozonation with AC, whereas
it has a significant eﬀect on formate removal during ozonation with
AC-supported iron oxide, and the authors believe that the major oxidation
reaction of formate does not occur on the AC surface after iron oxide
loading.38 Xu et al. found that the loading of Ce on AC leads to the decrease
of the contribution of surface reactions in the p-chlorobenzoic acid
degradation from 64.4% to 8.6%.58
4.5
Practical Applications
As mentioned, many studies have reported that the toxicity of organic sub-
stances has been significantly reduced after ozonation of AC, AC-supported
catalysts, biochar or biochar-supported catalysts. However, the acute toxicity
increases from 98.3 to 146.5 mg HgCl2 L1 during AC catalytic ozonation of
the eﬄuent of the biological treatment of the dyeing and finishing waste-
water, but its toxicity can be significantly reduced to 13.1 mg HgCl2 L1 after
subsequent biological AC treatment.45
The earliest full-scale application of heterogeneous catalytic ozonation
was reported using AC as the catalyst for the treatment of a contaminated
groundwater in 1992.6 In the past roughly three decades, AC as a catalyst or
catalyst support has been used in the full-scale applications of actual water
and wastewater treatment, especially in industrial wastewater treatment in
China in the last decade. However, there are almost no articles about the
full-scale application of AC catalytic ozonation. Full-scale application data
for about three months from July 6 to September 30, 2020, is shown in
Figure 4.4 for ozonation of the wastewater from a fine chemical industry
park in the presence of AC-supported iron oxide. The COD of the influent
varies from 35 to 40 mg L1, and the COD of the eﬄuent is usually around
20 mg L1 after the catalytic ozonation for 20 min with the 30 mg L1 ozone
dose. The DO3/DCOD varies within the range of 1.5–2 mg O3 mg1 COD,
which is economically acceptable for the refractory wastewater treated by
heterogeneous catalytic ozonation in the full-scale application.
116
Chapter 4

Acknowledgements
The authors are very grateful to Dr. Xintao Li of Beijing OriginWater Tech-
nology Co., Ltd for providing the data and picture of a full-scale application
of catalytic ozonation. The authors appreciate the work done by master
student Chenxi Huang and undergraduate Shenglan Gong on the collection
and classification of literature.
References
1. C. von Sonntag and U. von Gunten, Chemistry of Ozone in Water and
Wastewater Treatment: From Basic Principles to Applications, IWA
Publishing, London, 2012.
2. G. Yu, Y. Wang, H. Cao, H. Zhao and Y. Xie, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2020,
54, 5931–5946.
3. C. V. Rekhate and J. K. Srivastava, Chem. Eng. J. Adv., 2020, 3, 100031.
4. F. P. Logemann and J. H. J. Annee, Water Sci. Technol., 1997, 35, 353–360.
Figure 4.4
(a) Variations of CODCr of eﬄuent and wastewater treatment capacity. (b)
Full-scale application of ozonation of the wastewater from a fine chem-
ical industry park in the presence of AC-supported iron oxide. Reaction
conditions: ozone gas concentration: 30 mg L1; CODCr of influent:
35–40 mg L1; reaction time: 20 min.
Catalytic Ozonation over Activated Carbon-based Materials
117

5. Z.-Q. Liu, B.-J. Han, G. Wen, J. Ma, S.-J. Wang, R.-G. Zha, L.-P. Shen and
C. Wang, J. Environ. Eng., 2014, 140, A5013002.
6. J. P. Kaptijn, Ozone: Sci. Eng., 1997, 19, 297–305.
7. J. Wang and H. Chen, Sci. Total Environ., 2020, 704, 135249.
8. O. Rozas, C. Baeza, K. Nunez, A. Rossner, R. Urrutia and H. D. Mansilla,
Sci. Total Environ., 2017, 590–591, 430–439.
9. H. Vatankhah, S. M. Riley, C. Murray, O. Quinones, K. X. Steirer,
E.
R.
V.
Dickenson
and
C.
Bellona,
Chemosphere,
2019,
234,
845–854.
10. M. Alameddine, Z. T. How and M. Gamal El-Din, Sci. Total Environ.,
2021, 770, 144679.
11. J. Nawrocki, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 142–143, 465–471.
12. G.
Asgari,
F.
Samiee,
M.
Ahmadian,
A.
Poormohammadi
and
B. solimanzadeh, Appl. Water Sci., 2017, 7, 393–400.
13. M. Hadavifar, H. Younesi, A. A. Zinatizadeh, F. Mahdad, Q. Li and
Z. Ghasemi, J. Environ. Manage., 2016, 170, 28–36.
14. Z.-Q. Liu, J. Ma and Y.-H. Cui, Carbon, 2008, 46, 890–897.
15. Z.-Q. Liu, C. Huang, J.-Y. Li, J. Yang, B. Qu, S.-Q. Yang, Y.-H. Cui, Y. Yan,
S. Sun and X. Wu, J. Cleaner Prod., 2021, 124951.
16. P. M. Alvarez, J. P. Pocostales and F. J. Beltran, J. Hazard. Mater., 2011,
185, 776–783.
17. G. Moussavi, A. Alahabadi and K. Yaghmaeian, Chem. Eng. Res. Des.,
2015, 97, 91–99.
18. F. J. Beltra´n, J. F. Garcı´a-Araya and I. Gira´ldez, Appl. Catal., B, 2006, 63,
249–259.
19. I. Gira´ldez, J. F. Garcı´a-Araya and F. J. Beltra´n, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res.,
2007, 46, 8241–8247.
20. C. Chen, L. Wei, X. Guo, S. Guo and G. Yan, Fuel Proc. Technol., 2014,
124, 165–173.
21. P. Jin, X. Jin, V. A. Bjerkelund, S. W. Osterhus, X. C. Wang and L. Yang,
Water Res., 2016, 88, 643–652.
22. F. J. Beltran, P. Pocostales, P. Alvarez and A. L. Oropesa, J. Hazard.
Mater., 2009, 163, 768–776.
23. K. Wei, Z. Wang, C. Ouyang, X. Cao, P. Liang, X. Huang and X. Zhang,
Water Res., 2020, 173, 115536.
24. O. S. G. P. Soares, P. C. C. Faria, J. J. M. O´rfa˜o and M. F. R. Pereira, Sep.
Sci. Technol., 2007, 42, 1477–1492.
25. J. Rivera-Utrilla and M. Sanchez-Polo, Appl. Catal., B, 2002, 39,
319–329.
26. J. L. Figueiredo and M. F. R. Pereira, Catal. Today, 2010, 150, 2–7.
27. L. Xing, Y. Xie, H. Cao, D. Minakata, Y. Zhang and J. C. Crittenden,
Chem. Eng. J., 2014, 245, 71–79.
28. M. Sa´nchez-Polo, U. von Gunten and J. Rivera-Utrilla, Water Res., 2005,
39, 3189–3198.
29. H. Cao, L. Xing, G. Wu, Y. Xie, S. Shi, Y. Zhang, D. Minakata and
J. C. Crittenden, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 146, 169–176.
118
Chapter 4

30. P. M. Alva´rez, J. F. Garcı´a-Araya, F. J. Beltra´n, I. Gira´ldez, J. Jaramillo
and V. Go´mez-Serrano, Carbon, 2006, 44, 3102–3112.
31. J. Feng, B. Xing and H. Chen, J. Environ. Manage., 2019, 237, 114–118.
32. J. Nawrocki and L. Fijo"ek, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 142–143, 307–314.
33. M. Umar, F. Roddick and L. Fan, Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol., 2014,
45, 193–248.
34. Z.-Q. Liu, L. You, X. Xiong, Q. Wang, Y. Yan, J. Tu, Y.-H. Cui, X.-Y. Li,
G. Wen and X. Wu, Chemosphere, 2019, 222, 696–704.
35. G. G. Jayson, B. J. Parsons and A. J. Swallow, J. Chem. Soc. Faraday
Trans., 1973, 69, 1597–1607.
36. H. F. Miao, M. Cao, D. Y. Xu, H. Y. Ren, M. X. Zhao, Z. X. Huang and
W. Q. Ruan, Chemosphere, 2015, 119, 326–333.
37. F. Fang and H. Han, Ozone: Sci. Eng., 2018, 40, 275–283.
38. Y. Yuan, G. Xing, S. Garg, J. Ma, X. Kong, P. Dai and T. D. Waite, Water
Res., 2020, 177, 115785.
39. S. Bakht Shokouhi, R. Dehghanzadeh, H. Aslani and N. Shahmahdi,
J. Water Proc. Eng., 2020, 35, 101188.
40. S. He, J. Li, J. Xu and L. Mo, BioResources, 2016, 11, 8396–8408.
41. F. Zhang, K. Wu, H. Zhou, Y. Hu, P. Sergei, H. Wu and C. Wei,
J. Environ. Manage., 2018, 224, 376–386.
42. C. X. Wen, H. Wang, L. C. Wang, Z. Y. Lou, Z. Y. Sun and Z. Zhou,
J. Clean. Prod., 2019, 240, 118194.
43. S. Zhang, X. Quan, J.-F. Zheng and D. Wang, Water Res., 2017, 122, 86–95.
44. P. C. C. Faria, J. J. M. O´rfa˜o and M. F. R. Pereira, Appl. Catal., B, 2009,
88, 341–350.
45. W. L. Wang, H. Y. Hu, X. Liu, H. X. Shi, T. H. Zhou, C. Wang, Z. Y. Huo
and Q. Y. Wu, Chemosphere, 2019, 231, 369–377.
46. S. Yuan, Z. Li and Y. Wang, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 29, 48–51.
47. S. Liu, Y. Wang, B. Wang, J. Huang, S. Deng and G. Yu, J. Cleaner Prod.,
2017, 168, 584–594.
48. X. Zhang, Y. Zhou, C. Zhao, Z. Sun, Z. Zhang, Z. A. Mirza, G. Saylor,
J. Zhai and H. Zheng, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 304, 129–133.
49. J. Zhan, Z. Li, G. Yu, X. Pan, J. Wang, W. Zhu, X. Han and Y. Wang, Sep.
Purif. Technol., 2019, 208, 12–18.
50. T. Wang, Y. Song, H. Ding, Z. Liu, A. Baldwin, I. Wong, H. Li and
C. Zhao, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 394, 124852.
51. J. Ma, M.-H. Sui, Z.-L. Chen and L.-N. Wang, Ozone: Sci. Eng., 2004, 26, 3–10.
52. C. A. Orge, J. J. M. O´rfa˜o and M. F. R. Pereira, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 102,
539–546.
53. J. Feng, X. Zhang, J. Fu and H. Chen, Catal. Commun., 2018, 110, 28–32.
54. A. Gonçalves, J. Silvestre-Albero, E. V. Ramos-Ferna´ndez, J. C. Serrano-
Ruiz, J. J. M. O´rfa˜o, A. Sepu´lveda-Escribano and M. F. R. Pereira, Appl.
Catal., B, 2012, 113–114, 308–317.
55. L. Hao, D. Huiping and S. Jun, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2012, 363, 101–107.
56. A. G. Gonçalves, J. J. M. O´rfa˜o and M. F. R. Pereira, J. Environ. Chem.
Eng., 2013, 1, 260–269.
Catalytic Ozonation over Activated Carbon-based Materials
119

57. A. G. Goncalves, J. J. Orfao and M. F. Pereira, Environ. Technol., 2015, 36,
776–785.
58. X. Xu, Z. Xia, L. Li, Q. Huang, C. He and J. Wang, Molecules, 2019,
24, 4365.
59. Q. Dai, J. Wang, J. Chen and J. Chen, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2014, 127, 112–120.
60. Z.-Q. Liu, Y.-H. Cui, M.-Y. Wang, Y.-J. Zheng, Z.-X. Zhong, X.-H. Wu,
Z. Wang and B.-P. Zhang, Environ. Eng. Manage. J., 2016, 15, 2231–2237.
61. J. Wang and Z. Bai, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 312, 79–98.
62. W. Ling, Z. Qiang, Y. Shi, T. Zhang and B. Dong, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem.,
2011, 342–343, 23–29.
63. Y. Huang, C. Cui, D. Zhang, L. Li and D. Pan, Chemosphere, 2015, 119, 295–
301.
64. M. Ahmadi, B. Kakavandi, N. Jaafarzadeh and A. Akbar Babaei,
Sep. Purif. Technol., 2017, 177, 293–303.
65. X. Li, W. Chen and L. Li, Ozone: Sci. Eng., 2018, 40, 448–456.
66. S. Deng, L. Jothinathan, Q. Cai, R. Li, M. Wu, S. L. Ong and J. Hu,
Water Res., 2021, 190, 116687.
67. C. Chen, H. Chen, X. Guo, S. Guo and G. Yan, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2014,
20, 2782–2791.
68. J. Wu, H. Gao, S. Yao, L. Chen, Y. Gao and H. Zhang, Sep. Purif. Technol.,
2015, 147, 179–185.
69. B. Kamarehie, A. Jafari, M. Ghaderpoori, M. Amin Karami, K. Mousavi
and A. Ghaderpoury, Chem. Eng. Commun., 2018, 206, 898–908.
70. F. Fang and H. Han, Ozone: Sci. Eng., 2018, 40, 275–283.
71. C. Ferreiro, N. Villota, J. I. Lombran˜a and M. J. Rivero, J. Cleaner Prod.,
2019, 228, 1282–1295.
72. S. Faleh, M. Guiza and A. Ouederni, Ozone: Sci. Eng., 2018, 41, 274–285.
73. A. Abdedayem, M. Guiza and A. Ouederni, C. R. Chim, 2015, 18, 100–109.
74. C. Ferreiro, N. Villota, J. I. Lombran˜a and M. J. Rivero, Water, 2020,
12, 3448.
75. N. Nasseh, F. S. Arghavan, S. Rodriguez-Couto, A. Hossein Panahi,
M. Esmati and T. J. A-Musawi, Adv. Powder Technol., 2020, 31, 875–885.
76. J. Zhang, L. Liu, H. Shi, X. Li and X. Zhang, Environ. Technol. Innovation,
2020, 20, 101165.
77. L. Zhou, S. Zhang, Z. Li, X. Liang, Z. Zhang, R. Liu and J. Yun, J. Water
Proc. Eng., 2020, 36, 101168.
78. Y. J. Hou, J. Ma, Z. Z. Sun, Y. H. Yu and L. Zhao, J. Environ. Sci., 2006, 18,
1065–1072.
79. X. Lu¨, Q. Zhang, W. Yang, X. Li, L. Zeng and L. Li, RSC Adv., 2015, 5,
10537–10545.
80. C. Li, F. Jiang, D. Sun and B. Qiu, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 325, 624–631.
81. Y. Liu, J. Jiang, J. Ma, Y. Yang, C. Luo, X. Huangfu and Z. Guo, Water
Res., 2015, 68, 750–758.
82. J. Akhtar, N. S. Amin and A. Aris, Chem. Eng. J., 2011, 170, 136–144.
83. S. Tang, D. Yuan, Q. Zhang, Y. Liu, Q. Zhang, Z. Liu and H. Huang,
Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. Int., 2016, 23, 18800–18808.
84. Y. Yang, X. Shi, M. Zhao, S. Chu and J. Xiao, Catalysts, 2020, 10, 1123.
120
Chapter 4

85. S. Q. Tian, J. Y. Qi, Y. P. Wang, Y. L. Liu, L. Wang and J. Ma, Water Res.,
2021, 193, 116860.
86. G. Wen, Z.-H. Pan, J. Ma, Z.-Q. Liu, L. Zhao and J.-J. Li, J. Hazard. Mater.,
2012, 239–240, 381–388.
87. J. Xu, Y. Yu, K. Ding, Z. Liu, L. Wang and Y. Xu, Water Sci. Technol.,
2018, 77, 1410–1417.
88. C. Chen, X. Yan, Y. Xu, B. A. Yoza, X. Wang, Y. Kou, H. Ye, Q. Wang and
Q. X. Li, Sci. Total Environ., 2019, 651, 2631–2640.
89. G. Moussavi and R. Khosravi, Bioresour. Technol., 2012, 119, 66–71.
90. M. Sui, L. Sheng, K. Lu and F. Tian, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 96, 94–100.
91. J. Feng, Y. Yang, H. Chen and X. Zhang, Water Sci. Technol., 2017, 2017,
58–65.
92. H. Wang, L. Zhang, F. Qi, X. Wang, L. Li and L. Feng, J. Nanosci.
Nanotechnol., 2014, 14, 7266–7271.
93. H. P. Boehm, Carbon, 1994, 32, 759–769.
94. S. L. Goertzen, K. D. The´riault, A. M. Oickle, A. C. Tarasuk and
H. A. Andreas, Carbon, 2010, 48, 1252–1261.
95. A. M. Oickle, S. L. Goertzen, K. R. Hopper, Y. O. Abdalla and
H. A. Andreas, Carbon, 2010, 48, 3313–3322.
96. L. Tsechansky and E. R. Graber, Carbon, 2014, 66, 730–733.
97. Y. Huang, Y. Sun, Z. Xu, M. Luo, C. Zhu and L. Li, Sci. Total Environ.,
2017, 575, 50–57.
98. H. Zhuang, J. Guo and X. Hong, Pol. J. Environ. Stud., 2018, 27, 451–457.
99. Z. Luo, D. Wang, W. Zeng and J. Yang, Sci. Total Environ., 2020,
734, 139448.
100. S. Hou, S. Jia, J. Jia, Z. He, G. Li, Q. Zuo and H. Zhuang, J. Environ.
Manage., 2020, 267, 110615.
101. H. Zhuang, H. Han, B. Hou, S. Jia and Q. Zhao, Bioresour. Technol.,
2014, 166, 178–186.
102. S. Lu, Y. Liu, L. Feng, Z. Sun and L. Zhang, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. Int.,
2018, 25, 5086–5094.
103. A. Abdedayem, M. Guiza, F. J. R. Toledo and A. Ouederni, Sep. Purif.
Technol., 2017, 184, 308–318.
104. M. Sanchez-Polo, E. Salhi, J. Rivera-Utrilla and U. von Gunten, Ozone:
Sci. Eng., 2006, 28, 237–245.
105. F. J. Beltra´n, I. Gira´ldez and J. F. Garcı´a-Araya, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res.,
2008, 47, 1058–1065.
106. Y. Lee, D. Gerrity, M. Lee, A. E. Bogeat, E. Salhi, S. Gamage,
R. A. Trenholm, E. C. Wert, S. A. Snyder and U. von Gunten, Environ.
Sci. Technol., 2013, 47, 5872–5881.
107. U. Jans and J. Hoigne´, Ozone: Sci. Eng., 1998, 20, 67–90.
108. J. Nawrocki and B. Kasprzyk-Hordern, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 99, 27–42.
109. R. Flyunt, A. Leitzke, G. Mark, E. Mvula, E. Reisz, R. Schick and
C. von Sonntag, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 7242–7253.
110. Y. Wang, X. Duan, Y. Xie, H. Sun and S. Wang, ACS Catal., 2020, 10,
13383–13414.
111. E. Mvula and C. von Sonntag, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2003, 1, 1749–1756.
Catalytic Ozonation over Activated Carbon-based Materials
121

112. Y. Guo, Y. Zhang, G. Yu and Y. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 280, 119418.
113. J. Lee, U. von Gunten and J. H. Kim, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2020, 54,
3064–3081.
114. J. Hoigne´ and H. Bader, Water Res., 1983, 17, 173–183.
115. B. Ervens, S. Gligorovski and H. Herrmann, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.,
2003, 5, 1811–1824.
116. K. Sehested, H. Corfitzen, J. Holcman and E. J. Hart, J. Phys. Chem. A,
1998, 102, 2667–2672.
117. I. Fa´bia´n, Pure Appl. Chem., 2006, 78, 1559–1570.
118. E. Ahumada, H. Lizama, F. Orellana, C. Sua´rez, A. Huidobro, A. Sepu´lveda-
Escribano and F. Rodrı´guez-Reinoso, Carbon, 2002, 40, 2827–2834.
119. Y. Pi, J. Schumacher and M. Jekel, Water Res., 2005, 39, 83–88.
120. L. Fijo"ek, A. Malaika, W. Biernacki and J. Nawrocki, Ozone: Sci. Eng.,
2018, 41, 128–136.
121. S. Zhang, X. Quan and D. Wang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 52, 8701–8711.
122. W. Biernacki, L. Fijo"ek and J. Nawrocki, Ozone: Sci. Eng., 2018, 41, 296–311.
123. G. I. Razdyakonova, O. A. Kokhanovskaya and V. A. Likholobov,
Radioelectron. Nanosyst. Inf. Technol., 2015, 7, 180–190.
124. S. P. Ghuge and A. K. Saroha, J. Environ. Manage., 2018, 211, 83–102.
125. S.-J. Yuan and X.-H. Dai, Environ. Sci.:Nano, 2017, 4, 17–26.
126. F. J. Beltran, F. J. Rivas, L. A. Fernandez, P. M. Alvarez and R. Montero-
de-Espinosa, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2002, 41, 6510–6517.
127. Z.-Q. Liu, J. Ma, Y.-H. Cui and B.-P. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 92,
301–306.
128. P. C. C. Faria, J. J. M. O´rfa˜o and M. F. R. Pereira, Appl. Catal., B, 2008, 79,
237–243.
129. L. Gu, X. Zhang and L. Lei, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2008, 47, 6809–6815.
130. L. Xing, Y. Xie, D. Minakata, H. Cao, J. Xiao, Y. Zhang and
J. C. Crittenden, J. Environ. Sci., 2014, 26, 2095–2105.
131. T. Chen, W. Gu, G. Li, Q. Wang, P. Liang, X. Zhang and X. Huang,
Front. Environ. Sci. Eng., 2017, 12, 6.
132. Z.-Q. Liu, J. Ma, Y.-H. Cui, L. Zhao and B.-P. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2010,
101, 74–80.
133. W. Li, Z. Qiang, T. Zhang and F. Cao, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 113–114,
290–295.
134. Z.-Q. Liu, J. Ma, Y.-H. Cui, L. Zhao and B.-P. Zhang, Sep. Purif. Technol.,
2011, 78, 147–153.
135. Z.-Q. Liu, J. Tu, Q. Wang, Y.-H. Cui, L. Zhang, X. Wu, B. Zhang and
J. Ma, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2018, 200, 51–58.
136. M. S. Elovitz and U. von Gunten, Ozone: Sci. Eng., 1999, 21, 239–260.
137. J. Yang, J. Li, W. Dong, J. Ma, T. Li, Y. Yang, J. Li and J. Gu, Chem. Eng.
J., 2016, 295, 443–450.
138. Y. Guo, J. Zhan, G. Yu and Y. Wang, Water Res., 2021, 116927.
139. L. Radovic, C. Moreno-Castilla and J. Rivera-Utrilla, Carbon Materials as
Adsorbents in Aqueous Solutions Dekker, Inc., New York, 2001.
122
Chapter 4

CHAPTER 5
Catalytic Ozonation over
Nanocarbon Materials
YA LIUa,b AND YUXIAN WANG*a
a State Key Laboratory of Heavy Oil Processing, State Key Laboratory of
Petroleum Pollution Control, China University of Petroleum–Beijing,
Beijing 102249, China; b School of Chemical Engineering and Advanced
Materials, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia
*Email: yuxian.wang@cup.edu.cn
5.1
Introduction
Thanks to their highly active and environmentally benign nature and in the
interest of avoiding the secondary contamination by toxic metal leaching,
carbonaceous materials, especially the nanocarbons, have been developed as
promising alternatives to conventional transition/noble metals and oxides in
the past two decades.1 In recent years, fruitful contributions have been made to
metal-free purification systems, especially for catalytic ozonation in advanced
material design, mechanistic investigation, theoretical computations and
applications in practical water treatment.2–4 Additionally, breakthroughs in
carbon structure and surface functionalities and their correlations to catalytic
ozonation, as well as advances in the fundamental understanding of materials
properties and catalytic mechanism, have been achieved. Nevertheless, the
bottlenecks are the economical production of high-performance nanocarbons
with robust structures and the improved utilization eﬃciency of ozone.
In this chapter, we showcase the road map of the development of reaction-
oriented nanocarbons, unraveling the intrinsic active sites in carbocatalytic
Chemistry in the Environment Series No. 8
Advanced Ozonation Processes for Water and Wastewater Treatment: Active Catalysts and
Combined Technologies
Edited by Hongbin Cao, Yongbing Xie, Yuxian Wang and Jiadong Xiao
r The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry, www.rsc.org
123

ozonation, the identification of reactive oxygen species (ROS), reaction
intermediates and reaction pathways. Additionally, critical issues and future
directions are proposed in the implementation of nanocarbon-catalyzed
ozonation for real-world wastewater treatment.
5.2
Carbon Nanotube-based Metal-free Nanocarbons
Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are one-dimensional carbon nanomaterials and
can be regarded as a single piece of graphene rolled up to form a tubular
structure. According to the number of carbon nanotube layers, they can be
classified as single-wall carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) and multiwall carbon
nanotubes (MWCNTs), as shown in Figure 5.1. MWCNTs are formed by two
or more SWCNTs with diﬀerent diameters surrounding the same hollow
shaft, and the distance between two adjacent lattices is about 0.34 nm. The
mesoporous structure of CNTs with a large external specific surface area
(SSA) facilitates the dispersion of the active components on the catalyst,
helps reduce the influence of the mass transfer and diﬀusion of the react-
ants in the liquid phase and promotes the interaction between the organic
matter and the catalyst, thereby contributing to the improvement of catalyst
activity. In recent years, CNTs as well as their surface-engineered derivatives
have been widely used as heterogeneous catalysts to catalyze ozonation in
aqueous solutions to degrade organic pollutants.
Catalytic activities of CNTs can be significantly influenced by their surface
chemistries. Previous studies reported that O3 oxidation will induce certain
changes in the number and types of oxygen-containing functional groups on
the surface of nanocarbons, thus altering the physical and chemical prop-
erties of CNTs, which in turn aﬀect their catalytic activities. Based on this
consideration, Liu et al. studied the eﬀect of ozonation pretreatment on the
surface properties of MWCNTs and explored its eﬀect on the catalytic activity
of MWCNTs with oxalic acid as the target organic pollutant.5 Based on the
Boehm titration results, it can be found that with the increase of O3 oxi-
dation pretreatment time, the number of basic functional groups on the
surface of MWCNTs continues to decrease, while the number of acidic
functional groups increases rapidly. In addition, after ozonation pretreat-
ment, the SSA and mesoporous volume of MWCNTs increased slightly.
Figure 5.1
Schematic illustration of SWCNTs (left) and MWCNTs (right) structure.
124
Chapter 5

Compared with untreated MWCNTs, the catalytic activity of MWCNTs was
significantly reduced after O3 oxidation pretreatment. And the catalytic ac-
tivity of MWCNTs decreases with the increase of O3 pretreatment time. This
is consistent with the changing trend of the treated MWCNT surface groups
(Table 5.1). Therefore, the loss of MWCNT activity after ozonation pretreat-
ment is mainly due to the increase of acidic functional groups and the de-
crease of basic functional groups. The mechanism of catalytic ozonation
using the O3-treated MWCNTs was further explored by the quenching tests
with tert-butanol (TBA) as the quenching agent. The addition of TBA reduced
the removal rate of oxalic acid (OA); however, it did not fully quench the
reaction. Meanwhile, a trivial eﬀect on OA adsorption on the surface of
MWCNTs with the addition of TBA was observed. Based on these results, it
was suggested that a OH-based free radical mechanism, involving both
surface reactions on MWCNTs and reactions in the aqueous bulk, was
responsible for OA degradation, as schematically shown in Figure 5.2.
In a subsequent study, Liu et al. further investigated the influence of heat
treatment temperature and atmosphere on catalytic ozonation activities of
MWCNTs by annealing them in N2 and H2 at diﬀerent temperatures.6
Table 5.2 summarizes the changes in the physical and chemical properties
of the MWCNT surface after diﬀerent pretreatments. After HNO3 pretreat-
ment, the pH point of zero charge (pHpzc) of the MWCNTs decreased sig-
nificantly. This was due to the decrease of basic functional groups on the
surface of MWCNTs and the increase of acidic functional groups (lactone,
phenol, carboxyl). Compared with MWCNT-HNO3, under N2 or H2 atmos-
phere heat treatment, the number of acidic functional groups on the
MWCNT surface was significantly reduced, and the number of basic func-
tional groups was significantly increased, resulting in a significant increase
in the pHpzc of the treated MWCNTs.
For catalytic ozonation activities, MWCNTs treated with a higher heat
treatment temperature (950 1C) exhibited higher catalytic activities. And the
H2-treated MWCNTs showed higher activities than the N2-treated ones.
Further analysis found that the pHpzc of MWCNTs had a linear relationship
with the rate constant of OA degradation. It was proposed that the reducing
property of H2 decreased the population of acidic groups on MWCNTs and
increased the basic properties and thus enhanced the activity. Therefore, a
higher number of the basic groups on the surface of MWCNTs induced a
Table 5.1
Influence of MWCNTs ozonation pretreatment time on its physical and
chemical properties. Reproduced from ref. 5 with permission from Else-
vier, Copyright 2009.
Sample
SBET
(m2 g1)
Acidity (mmol g1)
Basicity
(mmol g1)
pHpzc
Carboxyl
Lactone
Phenol
Untreated
117.5
70
14
37
163
6.1
O3 (10 min)
125.1
196
67
39
70
3.9
O3 (120 min)
129.2
238
98
61
29
3.6
Catalytic Ozonation over Nanocarbon Materials
125

greater pHpzc value, which promoted the catalytic ozonation activity.
Goncalves et al. also reported similar results, i.e. the low acidic nature of
the MWCNTs promoted the catalytic ozonation process of degradation of
aliphatic acids.7
However, contradictory results have been reported by Qu et al.8 and
Oulton et al.9 Qu et al. functionalized CNTs with diﬀerent contents of
carboxylic groups and reported that a higher number of carboxylic groups on
the surface of CNTs resulted in greater catalytic ozonation activity for indigo
decolorization.8 Oulton further synthesized a CNTs/ceramic membrane filter
and evaluated its catalytic ozonation activity for the removal of several ozone
recalcitrant species, such as para-chlorobenzoic acid, atrazine and ibu-
profen,9 and reported that the surface oxygen functionalities resulted from
the HNO3 treatment are the potential active sites for O3 decomposition and
OH formation.
Heteroatom doping in the carbon framework can significantly enhance
the catalytic activity of nanocarbons. Introduction of heteroatoms such as N,
P and B into the carbon framework redistributes the charge density around
the doping elements and results in the changes in sp2 carbon band structure
Figure 5.2
The clearer version of the image is provided. acid in aqueous solution.
Reproduced from ref. 5 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2009.
Table 5.2
Physical and chemical properties of CNTs under diﬀerent pretreatment
methods. Reproduced from ref. 6 with permission from Elsevier,
Copyright 2010.
Sample
SBET
(m2 g1)
Acidity (mmol g1)
Basicity
(mmol g1)
pHpzc
Carboxyl
Lactone
Phenol
Commercial MWCNTs
118
70
14
37
163
6.1
MWCNT-HNO3
125
307
91
63
14
2.9
MWCNT-N2-450
123
—
19
56
87
6.2
MWCNT-N2-950
119
—
—
—
193
8.9
MWCNT-H2-450
121
—
—
34
111
7.4
MWCNT-H2-950
115
—
—
—
208
9.2
126
Chapter 5

because of the diﬀerence in electronegativity. On the other hand, heteroa-
tom doping will change the Fermi energy level on the surface of the material,
improve the electron transfer eﬃciency and enhance the catalytic activity
and stability of the carbon materials. Restivo et al. synthesized N-, S-,
and O-doped CNTs by chemical and thermal treatments and evaluated their
catalytic ozonation activities for OA removal (Figure 5.3).10 In this study, it is
reported that thermal annealed N-doped CNTs utilizing urea as the pre-
cursor obtained a greater catalytic activity than the untreated CNTs, while
the CNTs treated by other methods, such as CNT-N by HNO3 boiling and
CNT-S by concentrated H2SO4, exhibited inferior activities to the untreated
CNTs. The authors proposed that these modification methods introduced a
redundant number of acidic surface groups on the surface of CNTs, which
were detrimental to the adsorption and decomposition of O3 necessary to
generate the highly eﬀective ROS.
Soares et al. further used melamine and urea as nitrogen precursors to
synthesize N-doped CNTs by ball milling and evaluated the influence of ball
milling
methods
(dry
and
wet)
on
catalytic
ozonation
activities
of
the N-doped CNTs.11 XPS results suggested that diﬀerent nitrogen contents
(0.2%–4.8%) were doped on the surface of CNTs, and the samples were
prepared with melamine as the precursor obtained higher nitrogen contents
than the samples prepared with urea. Moreover, all of the as-synthesized
samples obtained nearly neutral pHpzc (6.4–6.8). For catalytic ozonation ac-
tivities, CNTs (CNT-BM-M-DT) prepared by dry treatment with melamine
Figure 5.3
Schematic illustration of carbon nanotubes functionalized with O-, S-,
and N-containing surface groups. Reproduced from ref. 10 with permis-
sion from Elsevier, Copyright 2014.
Catalytic Ozonation over Nanocarbon Materials
127

displayed a higher removal rate of OA than the ball-milled CNTs (CNT-BM)
sample. This indicates that N-containing functional groups on the surface of
CNTs introduced by dry treatment ball milling improved the catalytic ozo-
nation activity. In addition, the eﬀect of heat treatment at 600 1C after ball
milling treatment on catalyst performance was also investigated. Under this
heat temperature, the melamine-induced N-containing functional groups
were removed. As expected, the catalytic activity of the CNTs without heat
treatment (CNT-BM-M-DT-w/oTT) was lower than the untreated sample.12
This further proves that the N-containing functional groups introduced on
the CNTs through the decomposition of melamine during the heat treat-
ment at 600 1C played an important role in the catalytic ozonation and
degradation of OA.
Fluorine (F) is the most negatively charged element with an electro-
negativity of 3.98, which is much higher than N (3.04) and O (3.44). Compared
with N- or O-doping, F-doping can generate a relatively high positive charge
density on adjacent C atoms because of the strong electron-withdrawing
ability of F, which further accelerates ozone activation. Wang et al. used HF
as the precursor of F and synthesized F-CNTs with diﬀerent F contents.13
The eﬀect of F-CNTs with the same F content in catalytic ozonation and
degradation of OA is shown in Figure 5.4(a). F-doped CNTs demonstrated a
better catalytic ozonation activity than non-F-doped CNTs, and F-CNTs-0.45
that were synthesized with the HF concentration of 0.45 M obtained the
highest activity. Additionally, synthesized F-CNTs-0.45 achieved a superior
catalytic ozonation activity to most of the prevailing metal-based catalytic
ozonation materials (Figure 5.4(b)). It should be noted that with the increase
of F content, the catalytic activity of F-CNTs first increased and then de-
creased, which may be related to the interdependence between catalytic per-
formance and the dispersibility of F-CNTs in the aqueous medium. The
dispersibility of the catalyst can play a vital role in the liquid-phase catalysis
Figure 5.4
The eﬀect of (a) F-CNTs with diﬀerent F content and (b) various metal-
based catalysts on the catalytic ozonation degradation of oxalic acid.
Reaction conditions: initial pH: 2.8; initial concentration of oxalic acid:
2 mmolL1; ozone concentration: 4 mgmin1; catalyst dosage: 0.05 g L1.
Reproduced from ref. 13 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2018.
128
Chapter 5

process, which dominates the mass transfer process. The dispersibility
of F-doped CNTs is worse than that of the original CNTs because of the
hydrophobicity of the C–F bond. Therefore, it is necessary to synthesize F-CNT
catalysts with high dispersibility to further improve the catalytic activity.
In this study, electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) experiments were
further carried out with 5-tert-butoxycarbonyl-5-methyl-1-pyrroline-N-oxide
(BMPO) and 2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-4-piperidone hydrochloride (TEMP) as free
radical spin trapping agents to investigate the ROS generated in the catalytic
ozonation process. The results suggested that O2
 and 1O2 are the main ROS
in the process of catalytic ozonation and degradation of OA and that the
doping of F can promote the generation of O2
. XPS analysis revealed that,
compared with the original F-CNTs, the content of carbonyl groups (CQO)
in the used F-CNTs decreased from 4.5% to 3.2%, while the carboxyl group
(–CQO) content increased from 1.7% to 6.6%. In addition, compared with
the original F-CNTs-0.45, the pHpzc of the used F-CNTs-0.45 is slightly
lower, which is consistent with its catalytic performance for O3. These results
indicate that the surface acid-base groups of carbon materials may play an
important role in the catalytic ozonation process. However, the pHpzc of the
F-doped CNTs was quite similar to those of the undoped CNTs, so more
critical factors might be dominating catalytic activity. Changes in the surface
electronic properties of carbon nanotubes caused by F-doping might also play
a crucial role in their catalytic properties. Compared with the original F-CNTs-
0.45, the content of sp2 C–C and delocalized p system in the used F-CNTs-0.45
was significantly reduced. Therefore, the delocalized p system in F-CNTs could
be the predominant active sites since the delocalized p electrons within the
graphene basal plane are closely related to the electron transfer ability of the
catalyst.
5.3
Graphene-based Metal-free Nanocarbons
Graphene is a two-dimensional carbon nanomaterial with a periodic
honeycomb lattice structure formed by a single layer of carbon atoms with
sp2 hybrid orbitals.14 The carbon atoms in graphene form a fairly strong s
bond with adjacent carbon atoms, while the remaining unbonded p-orbital
electrons form delocalized p bonds across the entire layer in a perpendicular
direction to the graphene plane. p electrons can move freely in the plane,
endowing graphene with good electrical conductivity. In addition, graphene
with high SSA facilitates the adsorption of substances and the exposure of
catalytic active sites. Therefore, graphene and graphene-based materials are
environmentally friendly alternatives to the metal-based materials as was-
tewater treatment and environmental remediation catalysts.
In terms of environmental remediation, graphene-based materials are also
widely used in the fields of persulfate catalysis, photocatalysis, electrocatalysis
and catalytic ozonation, showing excellent catalytic activity for organics
removal.15–17 Not only does graphene completely avoid the secondary pol-
lution problem caused by the dissolution of metal ions, but also the surface
Catalytic Ozonation over Nanocarbon Materials
129

defect sites and oxygen-containing functional groups in graphene can be
acted as active sites to catalyze the decomposition of oxides into highly active
oxidation species. Meanwhile, the doping of non-metallic heteroatoms in the
graphene structure can further improve catalytic performance and stability.
However, the synthesis cost of highly active graphene-based nanocarbon
materials is relatively high, the synthesis steps are complicated and the yield is
low. It is of great significance to seek a simple, economical and eﬃcient
method for the synthesis of nanocarbides.
Oxidation of graphite is one of the most eﬀective methods to achieve large-
scale production of graphene. However, chemical groups such as carboxyl
(–COOH), hydroxyl (–OH), carbonyl (–CQO) and epoxy (C–O–C) will be
introduced. The presence of these groups alters the bonding mode between
carbon atoms, leading to a dramatic decline in the conductivity of graphene
and thus aﬀecting the excellent properties of graphene.18 Therefore, in order
to obtain better physical and chemical properties, graphene oxide (GO)
needs to be reduced, and the product obtained after reduction is reduced
graphene oxide (rGO). During the pyrolysis process, the oxygen-containing
functional groups will volatilize and escape as the pyrolysis temperature
rises, thereby peeling oﬀthe stacked graphite flakes to restore the 2D
morphology and corresponding physical and chemical properties. In add-
ition, due to the exfoliation of graphite flakes, the SSA and pore volume of
rGO also increase significantly via thermal reduction, which is conducive to
the adsorption of substances and the improvement of catalytic activity.
Therefore, rGO is widely used in the research of catalytic ozonation.
In recent years, our group performed a series of studies on rGO-based
nanocarbons with diﬀerent reduction methods. Moreover, the catalytic
ozonation mechanism, as well as the generated ROS for the degradation of
organic contaminants, has been elucidated. In a pioneer study, rGO was
obtained by the thermal reduction of GO, which was synthesized via the
modified Hummers method from commercially obtained graphite.19 In this
study, rGO that was annealed in the air at 300 1C was denoted as rGO-300,
while rGO heated in and N2 atmosphere at 700 1C was labeled as rGO-700.
SEM observations suggested that the removal of oxygen-containing func-
tional groups on the surface of rGO resulted in the exfoliation of graphene
oxide nanosheets compared with GO. GO had a wrinkled and silk-like
structure, while rGO exhibited highly exfoliated graphene nanosheets. At
the same time, some aggregated and wrinkled structures were observed at
the ends of rGO nanosheets since the samples produced more defect sites
after heat treatment at higher temperatures.20
The exfoliation of GO nanosheets increased the SSA of the sample. After
thermal reduction, the functional groups on the surface of the sample dis-
appeared, and the BET surface area of rGO-300 and rGO-700 increased from
40.3 to 305.4 and 265.4 m2 g1, respectively. In addition, the heat treatment
also increased the total pore volume and average pore diameter of the
sample. The ID/IG value in Raman spectroscopy is typically used to reflect
the degree of graphitization of carbon materials.21 After thermal reduction,
130
Chapter 5

the ID/IG values of rGO-300 and GO did not change much (0.84 versus 0.86),
indicating that low-temperature thermal reduction in the air will not pro-
duce more defect sites on the graphene layer. The ID/IG value of rGO-700 was
calculated to be 0.98, indicating that more defect sites were formed on the
partially aggregated edge.
In a para-hydroxylbenzoic acid (PHBA) solution with an initial pH of 3.5,
the catalytic ozonation performance of graphene was investigated. Although
rGO-300 and rGO-700 had larger SSA, the adsorption of PHBA was negligible.
The pHpzc of rGO-300 and rGO-700 were 4.7 and 4.9, respectively, indicating
that they were positively charged in a solution with a pH of 3.5. PHBA has a
pKa value of 4.85, which mainly exists in the form of molecules in the so-
lution. Therefore, the catalysts had low physical adsorption capacities for
PHBA. rGO-300 and rGO-700 obtained similar catalytic activities in PHBA
removal and completely degraded PHBA within 30 min, and the removal
rates of total organic carbon (TOC) were significantly increased from 25% to
95%, which indicated that rGO could eﬀectively activate ozone molecules to
produce active species. Although rGO-700 obtained a higher defective level
than rGO-300, it had a smaller number of oxygen-containing groups than
rGO-300. The comparable catalytic activity of rGO-300 and rGO-700 might be
caused by both defect sites and oxygen-containing groups.20,22
Apart from thermal reduction, we also investigated the eﬀect of microwave
reduction on the catalytic activity of rGO, and the sample synthesized by
microwave reduction was denoted as MWI-rGO. To compare, Argon-rGO was
synthesized under Ar annealing at 700 1C. From the SEM images (Figure 5.5),
MWI-rGO obtained a greater exfoliation level. Moreover, the SSA of MWI-rGO
was higher than that of Argon-rGO (734 and 654 m2 g1). This is because the
microwave method can generate higher heat instantaneously, resulting in a
greater degree of exfoliation of the graphite sheet. In addition, the pore vol-
ume of MWI-rGO was also larger than that of argon-rGO (5.05 and
4.81 cm3 g1). XPS results also showed that there was less residual oxygen on
the rGO after microwave treatment, which further proved that microwave re-
duction would lead to better peeling of GO and produce abundant bare edges.
Figure 5.5
The SEM images of (a) Argon-rGO and (b) MWI-rGO. Reproduced from
ref. 23 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019.
Catalytic Ozonation over Nanocarbon Materials
131

This work investigated the catalytic performance of these graphene-based
catalysts by evaluating their catalytic ozonation activities for both 4-nitrophenol
(4-NP) and OA degradation. For both MWI-rGO and Argon-rGO, 4-NP was
completely degraded within 20 min with more than 80% of TOC mineral-
ization within 60 min. MWI-rGO demonstrated a higher degradation eﬃ-
ciency and TOC mineralization rate for 4-NP than argon-rGO. Similar trends
were observed when OA was used as the target pollutant, further indicating
that microwave reduction was more eﬀective than high-temperature pyrolysis.
EPR combined with Raman observations found that microwave pyrolysis
formed more structural defect sites, such as armchair and zigzag edges. These
defects had delocalized electrons and dangling bonds, which were beneficial
to adjust the surface reactivity of the adsorbed reactants, thereby improving
the catalytic potential of ozone decomposition into ROS.
In a subsequent study, we further employed graphite that was obtained
from the anode of waste lithium-ion battery (LIB) as the precursor to
synthesized GO.24 And three kinds of rGO samples were prepared by the
thermal reduction method, chemical reduction method25 and hydrothermal
method,15 labeled as LIB-rGO, LIB-rGO-C and LIB-rGO-H, respectively. Com-
mercial graphite was also used as the carbon precursor, and the same prep-
aration process as LIB-rGO was used, denoted as C-rGO. The Raman spectra
showed that the ID/IG ratios of LIB-rGO, LIB-rGO-C and LIB-rGO-H were 0.93,
1.05 and 1.25, respectively. Therefore, the degree of defects of these three
materials was LIB-rGO-H4LIB-rGO-C4LIB-rGO. By comparing the cata-
lytic ozonation activity of these three materials, it was found that the de-
gree of defects directly aﬀected the catalytic activity. More defect sites
resulted in the better catalytic activity (Figure 5.6). LIB-rGO-H had higher
defect sites and SSA than LIB-rGO, and its first-order reaction rate constant
was higher. Therefore, this work preliminarily indicated that structural
defects (vacancies and defect edges) on rGO were the main active sites for
ozone activation.
Doping of metal-free heteroatoms can improve the electrochemical
catalytic activity, hydrophilicity and selectivity of carbon materials.26,27 In
the field of environmental remediation, Sun et al. found that doping nitro-
gen atoms into rGO and carbon nanotubes could significantly improve the
adsorption capacity and catalytic activity of persulfate.28,29 Yin et al.
synthesized N-doped rGO (NGO) and P-doped rGO (PGO) utilizing GO as the
carbon precursor.30 Ammonium nitrate and ammonium dihydrogen phos-
phate were employed as nitrogen and phosphorus precursors, respectively.
The catalytic ozonation activities of the as-synthesized samples were evalu-
ated by measuring the sulfamethoxazole (SMX) degradation rates. In order to
explore the eﬀect of heteroatom doping on the structure and properties of
rGO, Raman spectroscopy was used to characterize the defects and disorder
of carbon materials. The higher D band intensity achieved by rGO, NGO
and PGO suggested the increased disorder level with N- and P-doping.
The corresponding ID/IG of rGO, NGO and PGO was 0.868, 0.987, and 0.898,
respectively. XPS results revealed that pyrrole N was the main N species
132
Chapter 5

within the NGO structure. PGO obtained a higher P-doping content (9.86%),
mainly in the form of P–O bonds.
For catalytic ozonation activities, the degradation rates of SMX after 5 min
of treatment by using rGO, NGO and PGO were 83%, 95% and 99%,
respectively. It showed that NGO and PGO had higher catalytic ozonation
activity than rGO. It was speculated that the doped N and P atoms with lone
pairs of electrons destroyed the original sp2 carbon structure and generated
more defect sites. The promoted adsorption of O3 molecules and the elec-
tron transfer between the graphene basal plane and the adsorbed O3 sig-
nificantly improved the eﬃciency of the catalytic ozonation process.
Song et al. evaluated the catalytic ozonation eﬃciency of nitrogen-doped,
phosphorus-doped, boron-doped and sulfur-doped rGO (N-, P-, B-, S-rGO) for
the degradation of benzotriazole (BZA) and p-chlorobenzoic acid (PCBA).31
Moreover, the catalytic active sites and ROS of the process were system-
atically analyzed. In this study, GO was synthesized by the Hummers
method, and N-, P-, B- and S-rGO were synthesized through further thermal
annealing using melamine, phosphoric acid, boric acid and anhydrous so-
dium sulfate as the N, P, B, and S precursors, respectively. rGO obtained the
Figure 5.6
(a) OA removal in ozonation, adsorption and catalytic ozonation with
diﬀerent materials. (b) OA adsorption and degradation over diﬀerent
LIB-rGO materials. (c) OA adsorption and degradation over various
materials. (d) Reaction rate constant for LIB-rGO made from diﬀerent
methods in OA degradation. Reaction conditions: [OA]0: 50 mg L1;
catalyst loading: 0.1 g L1; ozone flow rate: 100 mL min1; ozone con-
centration: 50 mg L1; temperature: 25 1C; initial pH: 3.0. Reproduced
from ref. 24 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019.
Catalytic Ozonation over Nanocarbon Materials
133

largest SSA (273.3 m2 g1) and pore volume (0.83 cm3 g1). Doping of
heteroatoms reduced the SSA of rGO, which might be due to the stacking of
graphitic layers after doping. Among the doped rGO, N-rGO had the highest
SSA (136.2 m2 g1). N-rGO, P-rGO and B-rGO exhibited excellent performance in
the catalytic ozonation of BZA and PCBA. The calculated kobs showed that the
order of catalytic activity was N-rGO4P-rGO4B-rGO4rGO4S-rGO. N-, P-
and B-doping significantly improved the catalytic ozonation activity of rGO;
however, S-doped exerted an adverse eﬀect. It was speculated that integrating S
atoms within the graphene basal plane destroyed the stability of graphene
during ozonation, with the observed partial performance improvement caused
by surface adsorption.
By conducting the quantitative structure–activity relationship (QSAR)
analysis, the potential active sites on the doped rGO for catalytic ozonation
were proposed. It was suggested that surface oxygen functionalities, the
doped metal-free heteroatoms, and the delocalized p electrons within the sp2
graphene lattice were catalytically active for O3 adsorption and de-
composition. Among these active sites, the electron transfer mechanism
induced by the free electrons on the doped rGO was the predominant step
for O3 activation. The detailed mechanism is schematically illustrated in
Figure 5.7.
5.4
Other Types of Metal-free Nanocarbons
Nanocarbons have been proved to be catalytically active in energy con-
version, electrochemical applications and environmental remediations.
However, their synthesis is often cost-intensive, complicated and low-yield,
Figure 5.7
Schematic illustration of O3 activation mechanisms using metal-free-
doped rGO as catalysts. Reproduced from ref. 31 with permission from
American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019.
134
Chapter 5

which hindered their wide application. In recent years, synthesis of nano-
carbons from cost-eﬃcient precursors has attracted widespread attention.
Wang et al. used b-cyclodextrin and melamine as precursors to synthesize
an N-doped layered graphite carbon material catalyst by a one-step pyrolysis
method and to evaluate its catalytic ozonation activity for decontamination
of organic pollutants.32 In accordance with mass ratios of melamine and
b-cyclodextrin, the as-synthesized materials were denoted as N1C-1100 and
N3C-1100.
The involvement of melamine in the precursors induced the formation of
layered structures. Moreover, with the increase in N/C ratio of the pre-
cursors, higher SSA resulted. Specifically, the SSA (78.9 m2 g1) of N3C-1100
is 2.6 times that of N1C-1100 (29.6 m2 g1). Additionally, ordered graphitic
lattice with the interlayer spacing of 0.38 nm was discerned in HRTEM
observation, which was larger than that of the pristine graphene (0.34 nm).
The extended interlayer spacing indicated the successful doping of N atoms
within the graphene basal plane. The doped N atoms also broke the internal
strain balance of the pristine graphene lattice and induced the formation of
bent layers.
Catalytic ozonation activities of the as-synthesized materials were evalu-
ated by using OA as the target pollutant, which is fairly resistant to O3 attack.
For catalytic ozonation using the sample without adding melamine as the
precursor (CD-1100) as the catalyst, only 18% of the initial OA was removed
after 1 h treatment (Figure 5.8(a)). N-doping significantly enhanced the
catalytic activity. N1C-1100 obtained a greater catalytic activity than the
undoped CD-1100, resulting in 70% of OA removal after 90 min. For
N3C-1100, complete OA removal was achieved within 45 min. The reusability
of N3C-1100 was evaluated using a four-run catalytic ozonation test
(Figure 5.8(b)). A slight deactivation was noticed after four cycles of usage.
Compared with the unused N3C-1100, the SSA and pore volume of the used
catalyst slightly decreased, suggesting the deactivation may be caused by the
Figure 5.8
(a) Catalytic ozonation of oxalic acid using diﬀerent catalysts. (b) Stability
tests for N3C-1100. Reaction conditions: catalyst dosage: 0.1 g L1; [oxalic
acid]0: 50 mg L1; ozone flow rate: 100 mL min1; ozone concentration:
25 mg L1; temperature: 25 1C; initial pH: 3.2. Reproduced from ref. 32
with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019.
Catalytic Ozonation over Nanocarbon Materials
135

blockage of active sites or the physical changes on the surface. A mild heat
treatment was conducted to regenerate the used catalysts, and it was dis-
covered that the catalytic activity was dramatically restored, and OA could be
completely removed after 60 min.
Previous studies revealed that defect sites played a critical role in carbo-
catalysis as delocalized electrons, and carbon dangling bonds may provide
high chemical potential. Although similar defective levels were observed for
N3C-600, N3C-800, and N3C-1100 by the Raman spectra (Figure 5.9(a)), the
slightly higher ID/IG of N3C-600 did not result in the best catalytic activity,
which could be ascribed to the redistribution of charge density caused
by N-doping or the existence of other more eﬀective active sites. N-doped
sites may be the dominant active sites for promoting the catalytic activity
because N-doping can stimulate electron transfer from adjacent C atoms
owing to the higher electronegativity of N. The relationship between the
relative amounts of N-doping types of diﬀerent samples obtained from XPS
analysis and their corresponding pseudo-first-order reaction rate constants
is shown in Figure 5.9(b). It is found that the catalytic activity of this material
is proportional to the graphite N content. To further illustrate the catalytic
activity enhancement resulting from graphitic N, the turnover frequency
(TOF) of the catalysts was estimated based on the OA degradation eﬃciency
Figure 5.9
(a) Raman spectra of the as-prepared carbonaceous materials. (b) N species
composition versus pseudo-first-order reaction rate. (c) Radical quenching
during N3C-1100 catalytic ozonation. Reaction conditions: catalyst dosage:
0.1 g L1; [oxalic acid]0: 50 mg L1; ozone flow rate: 100 mLmin1; ozone
concentration: 25 mgL1; temperature: 25 1C; initial pH: 3.2. Reproduced
from ref. 32 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019.
136
Chapter 5

and their BET surface areas. The TOFs for N3C-600, N3C-800 and N3C-1100
were calculated to be 4.4104, 1.4103, and 1.9103 s1 m2, respect-
ively. Thus a higher graphitic N content promoted the catalytic activity and
corresponding TOF for OA removal.
To investigate the generated ROS and their contributions to OA degrad-
ation, quenching tests were performed. Addition of TBA and methanol only
resulted in a minor inhibitory eﬀect, suggesting the contribution of OH
(Figure 5.9(c)). The partial inhibition also indicated that N3C-1100 may
initiate nonradical reaction pathway which did not rely on OH or O2
.
Apart from layered nanocarbons, 3D nanocarbons with large SSA and
porous structure not only facilitated mass transfer in multiphase reactions
but also maximized the exposure of reaction sites. Wang et al. used low-cost
a-cyclodextrin (a-CD) as a carbon precursor and co-pyrolyzed with Co ions to
synthesize a non-metallic 3D mesoporous material (CPG) with an embedded
carbon nanotube structure.33 According to the amount of cobalt precursor
(0.25 g, 0.5 g and 1 g), the synthesized products were marked as CPG-0.5,
CPG-1 and CPG-2, respectively. The synthesized material prepared by the
single a-CD according to this process is denoted as CD-1000.
Compared with the prevailing catalytic ozonation materials such as non-
metal commercial graphite, rGO, CNTs and metal-based LaMnO3 per-
ovskite,34 CPG-2 obtained the highest catalytic activity (Figure 5.10(a) and
(b)). The enhanced catalytic activity of CPG-2 may be originated from the
increase of SSA and the multilayer embedded nanotubes in the graphitic
carbon structure. The pseudo-first-order reaction rate constant of CPG-2 was
calculated to be four times higher than CD-1000 (Figure 5.10(c)). The reusability
of CPG-2 is shown in Figure 5.10(d). After four repeated uses, only slight de-
activation was observed, indicating that the catalyst achieved a good stability.
In order to study the ROS produced by CD-1000 and CPG-2 in the process of
catalytic ozone oxidation of OA, EPR tests were performed. From Figure 5.11(a),
it can be seen that the signal intensity of the DMPO–OH adduct of CPG-2
was higher than that of CD-1000, indicating that CPG-2 generates more OH.
To distinguish the signal of O2
, methanol was added to quench OH
(Figure 5.11(b)). The amount of O2
 in the CPG-2/O3 system was significantly
greater than that of CD-1000/O3. TEMP was employed as the spin trapping
agent to detect the possible generation of 1O2 (Figure 5.11(c)). The signal in-
tensity of CPG-2 was higher, indicating that a higher amount of 1O2 was
generated.
The results of the quenching experiments are shown in Figure 5.11(d). The
addition of methanol (MeOH) or carbonate anion (HCO3
) to the reaction
solution had an inhibitory eﬀect on the degradation of OA, indicating the
contribution of OH to OA degradation. After adding para-benzoquinone
(p-BQ), the OA degradation curve almost overlapped with that after adding
MeOH, suggesting O2
 was insignificant to degradation of OA. Moreover, to
further diﬀerentiate the contribution of surface-adsorbed oxygen atoms to
OA destruction, NaN3 (2 mM), MeOH (2 mM) and p-BQ (0.5 mM) were added
simultaneously to the reaction solution. With the addition of these
Catalytic Ozonation over Nanocarbon Materials
137

scavengers, more than 95% of the initial OA decomposed in 60 min, sug-
gesting the dominant role of surface-adsorbed oxygen atoms in the CPG-2/O3
catalytic system. Therefore, these results indicate that in addition to free
radical oxidation and singlet oxygen oxidation, the reaction process also
includes non-radical oxidation based on surface oxidation.
Sun et al. also synthesized nitrogen-doped nanocarbon hollow spheres
(NHCs) using polydopamine (PDA) as a precursor, and the hollow sphere
morphology was validated by both SEM and TEM observations.35 To evaluate
the catalytic ozonation activities of the as-prepared NHCs, ketoprofen (KTP)
was used as the target pollutant. Increasing the calcination temperature,
which helped improved activity. NHC8 synthesized at 800 1C obtained the
highest catalytic activity; however, further elevating the calcination tempe-
rate decreased the catalytic activity. The stability of the NHC8 was also
evaluated. Minor deactivation was observed after the third usage, and the
catalytic activity can be restored by the reannealing process.
EPR experiments and quenching tests were further performed to evaluate
the possible generated ROS and their contributions to KTP degradation.
A higher intensity of DMPO–OH adduct was observed when NHC8 was em-
ployed as the catalysts, suggesting that a greater amount of OH was produced.
Figure 5.10
(a and b) Oxalic acid removal by diﬀerent treatments. (c) Comparison of
pseudo first-order inverse rates of diﬀerent catalysts. (d) Four-cycle reusa-
bility test. Reaction conditions: catalyst dosage¼ 0.1 gL1; [OA]0: 50 mgL1;
ozone flow rate ¼ 100 mLmin1; ozone concentration¼ 25 mgL1;
temperature¼ 25 1C. Reproduced from ref. 33 with permission from
Elsevier, Copyright 2019.
138
Chapter 5

However, a negligible EPR signal for O2
 was observed for all samples.
Methanol was further added to diﬀerentiate the O2
 signal. However, strong
peaks of 5,5-dimethyl-2-oxo-pyrroline-1-oxyl (DMPOX) were observed with
the occurrence of DMPO–OOH signal, indicating DMPO might be directly
oxidized by the surface-confined active species. Moreover, minor quenching
eﬀects resulted when TBA was added as the OH scavenger, suggesting the
degradation of KTP might follow a non-radical oxidation scheme.
The study further correlated the amount of oxygen-containing functional
groups, defect sites and types of N-doping with the catalytic activities. Scattered
correlations were established between the types of the oxygen-containing
functional groups and the rate constants. Meanwhile, a negative correlation
between the defective level (ID/IG) of the sample and the intensity of DMPO–
OH indicates that the defect sites in the O3/NHCs system might not promote
the production of more OH. Nevertheless, positive correlations were observed
when correlating the types of N-dopants and the intensity of DMPO–OH.
Therefore, the in situ doped N atoms are the catalytically active sites of NHCs,
while the degradation of KTP is based on the synergy between the radical
oxidation of OH and the non-radical reaction of internal electron transfer.
The as-proposed mechanism of NHC-catalyzed ozonation for the degradation
of KTP is schematically illustrated in Figure 5.12. Both nonradical oxidation
Figure 5.11
(a) EPR test using DMPO as a spin trapping agent. (b) EPR test using
DMPO as a spin trapping agent and methanol (1 M). (c) EPR test using
TEMP as a spin trapping agent. (d) Quenching tests with CPG-2 as
catalyst. Reaction conditions: ozone flow rate: 100 mL min1; ozone
concentration: 25 mg L1; temperature: 25 1C. Reproduced from ref. 33
with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019.
Catalytic Ozonation over Nanocarbon Materials
139

relying on the intra-electron transfer between the surface-adsorbed O3 mol-
ecules and organics and the OH-dominated radical oxidation were responsible
for KTP destruction, and the doped N species were critical for ruling the oxi-
dation pathways. For nonradical oxidation, the doped graphitic N in the frame
of graphitic carbon modulated the electron structures of the adjacent carbon
atoms by enhancing their charge densities and thus facilitated the adsorption of
O3 molecules. In addition, the delocalized conjugated system between lone
electron pairs of doped N atoms and the adjacent sp2 hybridized carbon
framework promoted the localized electron transfer process. Therefore, graph-
itic N functioned as the ‘‘electron-mobility’’ region accelerating the electron-
transfer between the adsorbed O3 and KTP and induced a nonradical oxidation.
Meanwhile, radical-based oxidation was observed on pyridinic N and pyrrolic N
sites. The edging-located or the defect-located pyridinic N and pyrrolic N
obtained high activity since their lone pair electrons were not confined by the
adjacent carbon atoms. Consequently, these sites acted as the ‘‘radical-gener-
ation’’ regions where O3 molecules could be catalytically decomposed into OH.
As a 2D material, graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) has been widely em-
ployed as the eﬃciency photocatalysts energy conversion and environmental
remediations. However, several studies reported that g-C3N4 demonstrated
poor activities when employed in catalytic ozonation for removal of organic
contaminants.32,36 For instance, Xiao et al. used p-hydroxybenzoic acid as
the target pollutant to evaluate the catalytic activity of g-C3N4 in the photo-
catalytic ozonation reaction and reported the marginal catalytic ozonation
activity of g-C3N4 in p-hydroxybenzoic acid without light irradiation.37
Nevertheless, Song et al. synthesized two types of g-C3N4 with melamine
and urea as the precursors and reported that g-C3N4 could eﬃciently activate
ozone to produce ROS for degradation of refractory organic compounds such
as 4-chlorobenzoic acid (p-CBA) and benzotriazole (BZA).38 Observed from
Figure 5.12
Schematic illustration on mechanism ozonation of ketoprofen (KTP)
catalyzed by NHCs. Reproduced from ref. 35 with permission from
American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019.
140
Chapter 5

SEM images, the as-synthesized g-C3N4 had a layered stacked structure with
folded edges. After catalytic ozonation, the layered structure of g-C3N4 was
retained, proving the good structural stability of g-C3N4.
Catalytic ozonation activities in organic removal and bromate elimination
by utilizing diﬀerent layered nanocarbon materials were evaluated by util-
izing the as-synthesized g-C3N4 catalysts. The results showed that, although
the catalytic ozonation activities of the two types of g-C3N4 were lower than
those of GO and rGO, they achieved greater rate constants than ozonation
alone. EPR tests combined with the radical quenching tests suggested that
both OH and O2
 were generated during the catalytic ozonation process and
that OH dominated ROS in g-C3N4 catalytic ozone oxidation. Additionally,
compared to g-C3N4 synthesized from melamine (M-g-C3N4), g-C3N4 syn-
thesized from urea (U-g-C3N4) obtained higher concentrations in the generated
OH and O2
, which further explained the higher catalytic activity of U-g-C3N4.
To investigate the active sites on g-C3N4, this study further analyzed the
changes of the surface chemistries of g-C3N4 before and after the reaction
through EPR experiments. For fresh M-g-C3N4, a sharp resonant peak
(g ¼ 2.001) with high intensity was observed, ascribed to the p conjugate
structure of the s-triazine units. The fresh U-g-C3N4 demonstrated a similar
EPR signal profile but with a lower intensity than the M-g-C3N4. Based on the
EPR observations, M-g-C3N4 obtained more delocalized electrons and a
higher defective level (nitrogen vacancies) than U-g-C3N4. After catalytic
ozonation, the number of delocalized electrons in both M-g-C3N4 and
U-g-C3N4 decreased, indicating the participation of structural defects and
delocalized electrons in catalytic ozonation.
5.5
Active Sites on Metal-free Nanocarbons
In catalytic ozonation, active sites on the carbocatalysts are of great im-
portance to determine the interactions with the O3 molecules and organic
contaminants, thus influencing the ROS production and remediation
eﬃciency.1,39,40 Therefore, obtaining the fundamental knowledge on the
intrinsic nature of the active sites on the nanocarbons would help evaluate
the catalytic activities of the nanocarbon and establish synthesis protocols
for manipulating the desired active sites for the specified catalytic reactions.
5.5.1
Carbon Framework and Dimensional Eﬀect
The highly graphitic sp2 carbon network with delocalized p electrons of the
nanocarbons has been recognized as one of the potential active sites for
ozone activation. The delocalized p networks significantly increase the mo-
bility of the electrons that participate in the redox reactions for O3 activation
and the oxidation of organics.31 The enhanced electron transfer might also
induce a synergistic eﬀect with the adjacent active sites, thereby promoting
the catalytic activity of the nanocarbons.17 Meanwhile, the delocalized p
networks also develop a strong aﬃnity toward the electrophilic binding with
Catalytic Ozonation over Nanocarbon Materials
141

O3 molecules.41 The p–p interactions or charge transfer interactions expedite
the adsorption of aromatic organics.42
The dimensional eﬀects of the nanocarbons can also exert a profound eﬀect
on catalytic ozonation activities. As 1D carbon-organized structures, carbon
nanotubes (CNTs), including single-walled CNTs (SWCNTs), multiwalled
CNTs (MWCNTs) and their derivatives, have been broadly utilized in the ac-
tivation of O3 for the decontamination of wastewater.9,43 The diameter, heli-
city and curvature of the CNTs regulate the electronic properties owing to the
1D feature.44,45 They also enhanced structural stability with resistance to
chemical abrasion, envisioning the possibility of long-term operation in
highly oxidative environments. Additionally, surface chemistries of the CNTs
can also be facilely manipulated to achieve the optimum types and contents
for ROS generation. Additionally, the nanoconfinement eﬀect accelerating
chemical reactions can be taken advantage of by the tubular structure of
CNTs, which act as the microreactors.46 As the 2D structure, graphene—
especially the pristine graphene, which is made of single-layered sp2 hybrid-
ized carbon atoms—takes on outstanding electronic properties because of the
highly delocalized p networks.14 However, the diﬃculties in a scaled-up syn-
thesis block its further application. Reduced graphene oxide (rGO), which is
synthesized from the reduction of graphene oxide (GO) possessing over-
abundant oxygen functionalities. is one alternative.47 Developing porous
graphitic nanocarbons with 3D structures with the exposure of mesopores and
macropores is a promising strategy to shorten the mass diﬀusion length,
enhance the interactions with the active sites and accelerate the reaction
kinetics.48–50 In recent years, various 3D porous graphitic nanocarbons such
as hierarchical nanocarbons, layered nanocarbons and hollow carbon mi-
crospheres have been synthesized and employed as the eﬃcient catalyst for
catalytic ozonation for removal of organic contaminants.
5.5.2
Surface Oxygen Functionalities
Surface oxygen groups are the inherent functionalities on the nanocarbons
originating from the materials fabrications.51 The existence of the surface oxy-
gen groups alters the surface properties of the nanocarbons and the electronic
properties by aﬀecting the electron charge distribution and thus influences the
interactions of the surface of nanocarbons with the organic contaminants and
O3. Nevertheless, it is quite challenging to diﬀerentiate the separated roles of
surface oxygen groups in catalytic ozonation reactions because of their coexist-
ence as well as the complexity of the surface properties of the nanocarbons.
5.5.2.1
Hydroxyl/Phenolic Groups
The mildly electron-donating hydroxyl groups could increase the electron
density of the carbon basal plane and facilitate the electrophilic interaction
with the O3 for its catalytic decomposition to produce ROS.52,53 The hydroxyl
group as well as the oxidizing product-ketonic group would function as the
142
Chapter 5

redox pairs for O3 activation.52 Furthermore, the presence of hydroxyl groups
enhances the water dispersibility of nanocarbons by increasing the hydro-
philicity, which promoted the mass transfer process.
5.5.2.2
Ketone Groups/Quinone Groups
Located at the structural defects or edges of the graphene framework, the
electron-rich –CQO group can be significant in O3 activation. The Lewis
basic character of the lone-paired electrons within –CQO groups supply
extra electrons to the bonded O3 for its activation to generate O3
 a pro-
moter for radical chain reactions. Additionally, the lone-paired electrons can
also activate the conjugated p networks in the sp2 carbon matrix.54 For in-
stance, in the catalytic ozonation of PHBA degradation with rGO as the
catalysts, the activities of rGO samples with similar defective levels but dif-
ferent compositions of surface oxygen functionalities were evaluated.19 It
was discovered that the electron-rich –CQO groups promoted O3 activation
by the electron transfer process and that rGO with a higher content of –CQO
demonstrated a greater activity. Similar results were also reported in
a g-C3N4/O3 system.31 It has been found that the great content of surface
–CQO group was oxidized to –COOH during the catalytic ozonation process,
suggesting the dominating role of –CQO in O3 activation.
5.5.2.3
Carboxyl Groups
The existence of CQO within the carboxyl group also increases the charge
density and facilitates the interaction with O3 via the electron transfer pro-
cess.31 Alternatively, carboxylates can also be destructed by O3 and serve as
the initiator for radical chain reactions.55
It is noteworthy that although surface oxygen functionalities can con-
tribute to O3 activation, it is unfavorable to anchor the excess amount of
oxygen functionalities on the surface of the nanocarbons. The over-
abundant oxygen functionalities will (1) occupy the edges or the defective
sites, which are also critical active sites for O3 activation; (2) obstruct the
electron mobilities via steric hindrance; and (3) decrease the reductive de-
gree of the carbon lattice, which determines the charge transport capacity
toward the redox reactions. It is thus suggested that the types as well as the
populations of the surface oxygen functionalities should be tuned precisely.
5.5.3
Edging and Structural Defects
Edging sites and structural defects are inherent point defects in nanocarbons
and have gained much research attention because of their enhanced eﬀect on
surface reactivities arising from the variations in electronic properties by de-
viating the homogeneity of the carbon network with high chemical potentials
and the existence of abundant unpaired electrons. Edging sites (for both
carbene-type C atoms at zigzag edges and carbine-like C atoms in armchair
Catalytic Ozonation over Nanocarbon Materials
143

edges) obtain a great aﬃnity to covalent bonds, and the subsidiary dangling
bonds can promote radical chain reactions.57,58 Furthermore, electron trans-
fer can be significantly improved on the edging sites rather than on the basal
plane, which boosts catalytic reactions.59 Previous studies reported that the
high exposure of the edging sites in nanocarbon accelerated the activation of
O3 for ROS production (Figure 5.13(a) and (b)).9,24,31 Moreover, activities of the
incorporated heteroatoms or oxygen functionalities can be further enhanced
when they are located within the proximity of edging sites or vacancies.60,61
Density functional theory (DFT) calculations suggested that higher adsorption
energies and more elongated lO–O would result when an O3 molecule was
placed around the hydroxyl groups located at the zigzag and armchair con-
figurations rather than on the basal plane.24
Structural defects arising from the nonhexagonal rings or a random point
mismatch destroy the perfection of the graphene lattice and break up the
conjugated p networks by creating unpaired electrons.62 Additionally, the
charge distribution of C atoms near the defective sites can also be altered,
resulting in the promoted aﬃnities for binding with O3. DFT simulation results
suggested that when O3 was placed near the zigzag edge, armchair edge and
the structural vacancy, its peroxide bond within O3 molecule would be broken
and evolved a surface-adsorbed atomic O (*Oad) and a free peroxide species
(O2
free) (Figure 5.13(c)–(f)). The corresponding adsorption energies were
5.69, 3.88 and 4.64 eV accordingly, which were much higher than the
cases in which O3 was located adjacent to the surface oxygen functionalities.24
Figure 5.13
(a) Relationship between defective level of various rGO samples and the
pseudo-first-rate constants for catalytic ozonation of 4-nitrophenol
degradation. (b) Relationship between defective level of various doped
rGO samples and the pseudo-first-rate constants for catalytic ozonation
of p-chlorobenzoic acid and benzotriazole degradation. (c) DFT simu-
lations of O3 adsorption on basal plane, (d) structure edge, (e) zigzag
edge, and (f) armchair edge of graphene. Reproduced from ref. 56 with
permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020.
144
Chapter 5

5.5.4
Heteroatom Dopants
Nonmetallic atoms such as B, N, F, P and S with diﬀerent electronegativities
(w) to the C atom can be doped into the graphene lattice as the point defects
to break the stable delocalized p electrons and redistribute the electronic
density (Figure 5.14).63 The electron relocalization induced by heteroatom
doping also changes the local density of states (DoS) of the graphene lattice
and results in the variation in the work function.64
5.5.4.1
N-doping
The large electronegativity diﬀerence between N and C (w, 3.07 versus 2.55)
induces a significant relocation of the charge density on the graphene lattice
and a notable influence on the mobility of electrons,32,65 resulting in en-
hanced interactions with O3 molecules. The significantly improved elec-
tronic properties, making the N-doping the prevailing doping strategy in
catalytic ozonation to increase the catalytic activity.16,23,30,31,35,66 In fact, the
pyridinic N can oﬀer a p electron to the delocalized p networks of the carbon
matrix and thus enhance electron-donating behavior.67
Apart from activating O3 for its catalytical decomposition to produce
ROS, N-doping sites can also induce the direct oxidation of the adsorbed
organic by the direct electron transfer process. The ortho-located C atoms
Figure 5.14
Heteroatom doping in the graphene. Reproduced from ref. 56 with
permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020.
Catalytic Ozonation over Nanocarbon Materials
145

adjacent to the quaternary N were reported to obtain much higher electronic
densities near the Fermi level than the C atoms on the basal plane, which
induced an electronic structure similar to the d band of transition metals
and endowed these C atoms with a strong aﬃnity toward the nucleophilic
interactions with O3.35,68 Additionally, the conjugated system formed between
the lone pair electrons of the quaternary N and the sp2-hybridized carbon
framework accelerated electron mobilities. As a result, regions around qua-
ternary N facilitated nonradical oxidation via the enhanced electron transfer
process from the adsorbed O3 to organics without the generation of radicals.
5.5.4.2
B-doping/P-doping
Doping the graphene lattice with boron or phosphorus atoms can induce a
diﬀerent scenario from doping with nitrogen atoms because of the smaller
electronegativities of B/P atoms than that of C atoms. As a result, positive-
charged B-doping or P-doping sites are formed by polarizing the paired
covalent electrons toward C atoms.69 Theoretically, the strong electron-
withdrawing capability of the doped B/P atoms introduced a high local spin
density to the carbon basal plane,70 favoring the electrophilic interaction with
the O3 molecules and the p–p interaction with the aromatic pollutants.
B-doping sites also facilitate the electron transfer from the graphitic carbon p
electrons to the adsorbed O3 molecules.71,72 Furthermore, a higher defective
level will be expected for P-doping than B-doping because of the larger atomic
size of P atoms over B atoms. In B-rGO/O3 for degradation of benzotriazole
and p-CBA, B-doping only gave rise to marginal improvements in both deg-
radation eﬃciency and TOC mineralization rates compared to the undoped
rGO.31 However, P-doping significantly improved the degradation rates of
organics, obtaining a similar catalytic activity to the N-doped rGO.30,31 The
enhanced delocalized p networks and the higher defective level induced
by P-doping are responsible for the activity improvement.30
5.5.4.3
S-doping/F-doping
Doping S and F atoms within the graphene lattice can be more challenging
than the others because of the much larger atomic size of S than that of C
and the chemical inertness of F.72 Successful S-doping usually induces an
increased number of defective sites, which is similar to P-doping.73,74
However, little or even negative doping eﬀects were reported for S-doping
due to the atomic size-eﬀect that encumbered the electron transfer.4,16,31
For F-doping, the large diﬀerence in electronegativity endows C atoms ad-
jacent to the F dopants’ high positive charge densities, which are in favor of
the nucleophilic interactions with O3.75 In F-doped CNT–catalyzed ozonation
for OA degradation, the covalent C–F bonds were reported to form at the sp3-
hybridized C sites rather than on the sp2 hybridizations.13 The selectively
doped F atoms retained the integrity of the delocalized p networks on the
graphene lattice, facilitating the activation O3 by the electron transfer
146
Chapter 5

process. Moreover, the positively charged C atoms adjacent to F atoms in-
duced the nucleophilic activation of O3.
In addition to single-atom doping, co-doping with diﬀerent heteroatoms
have been suggested as an eﬀective strategy to further boost the catalytic
activities of the carbon materials in environmental remediations and energy
conversions because of the synergistic eﬀects associated with synergistic
electronic interactions between the co-doped heteroatoms and the adjacent
C atoms.4,76,77 Future studies can take the advantage of these synergistic
eﬀects to improve the catalytic activities of nanocarbon in catalytic ozona-
tion for aqueous organics degradation.
5.6
Active Sites on Supported Nanocarbons
Integrating metal components on nanocarbons is another strategy to in-
crease the catalytic activities of nanocarbons by the synergistic eﬀects be-
tween
the metals and nanocarbons.
The electron-donating
d-orbital
electrons of the integrated metal components regulate their electronic
properties such as spin structures and work functions to improve the charge
transfer (Figure 5.15(a)–(c)).78,79 Geometric eﬀects related to the intrinsic
structural characters of nanocarbons and the crystallographic/shape vari-
ations of metal components can be induced to enhance mass transfer and
facilitate the exposure of the highly active facets.80 Additionally, the
appearance of complexing structures at the metal–carbon boundaries are
also catalytically active. As already mentioned, surface defective sites, non-
metallic heteroatom dopants and surface oxygen functionalities on the
graphitic carbon basal plane can act as the potential sites for anchoring
the metal components via the improved metal–carbon interactions and the
corresponding charge transfer (Figure 5.15(d)).81 Comprehensive under-
standing on the interactions of the metal components on nanocarbons is
critical for surface engineering of the nanocarbons to improve catalytic ac-
tivity. On the other hand, the metal@carbon hybrids are appealing for
practical heterogeneous reactions. The nanoscale catalysts can be easily re-
cycled in the presence of an external magnet or a magnetic field because of
the loaded paramagnetic transition metal species, addressing the long ex-
isting problem of secondary contamination due to the loss of nanomaterials.
5.7
Methods to Probe the Active Sites on Nanocarbons
Variable control is one of the most prevailing methods to investigate active
sites based on the activity evaluation of a series of catalysts with a specified
parameter gradient changed.54,82 Nevertheless, it is quite demanding to alter
the population of the specified types of the active sites without influencing the
others. Another methodology is the employment of analogs with single or
limited types of the proposed active sites on the bulk nanocarbons as the
alternative catalysts. It can be achieved either by utilizing the discrete organic
molecules with the same functional groups that were proposed as the active
Catalytic Ozonation over Nanocarbon Materials
147

sites on the nanocarbons or the carbon allotropes with a much simpler
structure than the bulk nanocarbon catalysts. Apart from these methods, post-
treatments of the nanocarbons that selectively mask the specified types of the
active sites have been suggested as the credible method for assessing the
active sites.83 The inhibition in catalytic activities demonstrated the partici-
pation of the masked active sites in catalytic reaction and vice versa. However,
the accurate and complete removal of a specified type of the active sites
without aﬀecting the others is quite challenging because of the limited se-
lectivity of the post treatments. As a result, the conventional application of this
methodology is to compare the variations in morphology, surface chemistries
and structures of the deactivated catalysts with the fresh ones.3,84 By correl-
ating the variation factors with the catalytic activities via quantitative
Figure 5.15
Schematic illustrations of variations in electronic properties after metal
loading. (a) Work functions of the isolated support and NP. (b) Illus-
tration of the additional net electrostatic energy contribution (e) F
resulting from electronic equilibration. An outer surface charge on the
NP is necessary to account for the diﬀerence FNP-V of the net electro-
static potential levels in a vacuum and inside the NP, respectively.
(c) The equilibrated system is characterized by a common Fermi level
and work function WNP/S. (d) Eﬀect of the introduction of heteroatoms
in the nanocarbon support on metal NP–nanocarbon support inter-
actions. Reproduced from ref. 56 with permission from American
Chemical Society, Copyright 2020.
148
Chapter 5

structure–activity relationship (QSAR) analysis, the dominant active sites can
be discovered.
Characterization including morphology observation, surface chemistry
analysis and structural analysis by employing advanced characterization
techniques can help obtain the basic physiochemical information of the
nanocarbons. In addition, theoretical computations such as calculations
with density functional theory (DFT) have been applied as a powerful
method to investigate the intrinsic nature of the active sites and the reaction
pathways. By constructing rational and suitable models in atomic level, the
electronic states of the catalysts can be visualized and a comprehensive
understanding of the reaction mechanism can be achieved by simulating the
interactions between the reactants and the proposed active sites on the
catalysts.20
5.8
Oxidation Pathways in Metal-free Nanocarbon
Catalyzed Ozonation
Catalytic ozonation can induce two types of oxidations of the aqueous
organics: O3 direct oxidation and indirect oxidation by the produced ROS via
the catalytic dissociation of O3 on the active sites of the nanocarbons or O3
self-dissociation. However, for O3 direct oxidation, the previously mentioned
selective oxidation ability of O3 is only capable of attacking organics
with unsaturated carbon bonds and results in partial mineralization.85,86
Additionally, the limited solubility of O3 further hinders its interaction with
the aqueous organic pollutants.86 Hence it is of great importance to focus on
the indirect oxidation pathways by the produced ROS.
5.8.1
Radical-based Oxidations
5.8.1.1
OH-based Oxidations
Two routes have been reported for OH generation in catalytic ozonation:
ozone self-decomposition and catalytic O3 decomposition. O3 is quite slug-
gish in producing OH in acidic environment with the pseudo first reaction
rate constant (k) of 1.1104 M1 s1 (eqn (5.1)),87 yet its self-decomposition
is remarkably influenced by the solution pH. The alkaline activated HO2/
O2
 performs as a critical linker for the formation of OH, as discussed in
the following section. It is worth noting that the amount of OH generated
from O3 self-decomposition in both acidic and basic environments is quite
limited with respect to achieving an eﬃcient treatment.
O3 þ H2O-2OH þ O2,
k ¼ 1.1104 M1 s1
(5.1)
Catalytic O3 decomposition on the active sites of the nanocarbons plays a
critical role in OH production. The enhanced electron transfer on the active
sites facilitates the catalytic activation of O3 to initiate the chain reactions.
Catalytic Ozonation over Nanocarbon Materials
149

The following equations (eqn (5.2)–(5.4)) describe the possible interactions
between O3 and the carbon surface, as well as the subsequent activation
process for OH generation. During the catalytic ozonation, these inter-
actions might alter the surface chemistries of the nanocarbons, resulting in
the passivation of the catalysts.5,19,35 Moreover, the carbon framework could
be dissociated by the O3 and the produced ROS into soluble organics,
leading to the increase of dissolved TOC.33,88 Therefore, some studies re-
ported that the carbon surface acted more like the initiator or promoter for
O3 decomposition rather than like the true catalyst.89,90
O3 þ S2O3 – S
(5.2)
O3 – S2O – S þ O2
(5.3)
O – S þ H12OH þ S
(5.4)
Degradation or mineralization of organic pollutants by the generated
OH can occur in the bulk solution and/or on the surface of the catalysts
depending on the whether the generated OH was released from the surface
of the catalyst into the aqueous bulk or was still adsorbed on the surface
(Figure 5.16(a)). Radical quenching test employing TBA as the scavenger
has been suggested as an eﬀective method to diﬀerentiate the place where
the organics are degraded since TBA hardly adsorbs on the surface of the
carbon-based
materials
and
achieves
a
fast
reaction
rate
with
the
OH (6108 M1 s1) in the aqueous bulk. For mineralization of organics in
the aqueous bulk, the generated OH was released from the active sites and
Figure 5.16
(A) Schematic illustration of the mineralization of organic by OH in the
aqueous bulk and on the surface of the nanocarbons; (B) Quenching
tests for oxalic acid degradation in the bulk solution (rGO/O3, red) and
on the surface of nanocarbons (H2 treated CNTs/O3, blue); (C) Sche-
matic illustration of OH generation on the surface or around the
surface region of CNTs. Reproduced from ref. 56 with permission from
American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020.
150
Chapter 5

reacted with the non-adsorbed organics, and the presence of TBA can rapidly
react with
OH, and significantly inhibited the destruction of organics
(Figure 5.16(b)).90,91 The generated OH can also adsorb on the surface of the
catalyst and achieve the oxidation process. In MWCNTs/O3 systems, the
presence of TBA partially inhibited or had no influence on the degradation
of the organics; however, the variation in O3 consumption rates and the
suppression of the reaction by adding bicarbonates that quench OH both in
the aqueous bulk and on the surface of the catalysts validated the generation
of OH.5,43,92–94 Fluorescence microscopy image (FMI) analysis with cou-
marin as the OH probe can be utilized to visualize the OH produced and
accumulated within a surface region of the CNTs by observation of the
fluorescence oxidation product of 7-hydroxylcoumarion.41 It was found that
the catalytic degradation of the organics occurred on the surface of CNTs
and the solid–liquid interphase (Figure 5.16(c)), and the radical abundance
within the solid–liquid interface was calculated to be at least 1000 times
greater than that in the bulk solution.
5.8.1.2
O2
 Mediated Oxidations
HO2/O2
 are the key radical chain reaction intermediates. HO2 can be
generated by OH activation of O3 (eqn (5.5)), and it dissociates into O2

when the solution pH is greater than 4.8 (eqn (5.6)).87 In alkaline solution,
O3 can be activated by the ambient OH to form HO2/O2
 (eqn (5.7)).
Additionally, the delocalized p electron donated by the sp2 frame of the
nanocarbon also facilitated O2
 formation.31 HO2/O2
 can demonstrate a
reducing capability (E0 (O2aq/O2
) ¼  0.18 V) or an oxidizing capability
(E0 (O2
/H2O2) ¼ 1.44 V) based on the evolution pathways. As a reductive
radical, O2
 can act as the chain carrier pairs accelerating the radical chain
reactions for OH generation (eqn (5.8)–(5.11)).41,95 The reductive property of
O2
 is helpful in restoring the oxidation states of the metal/oxygen redox
couples, which are the key active sites in catalytic ozonation.95 HO2/O2
,
with its mild oxidation potential, can directly oxidize aqueous organics with
low oxidation barriers.19,31 As a result, O2
 has been regarded as the
dominant ROS for p-CBA degradation.
O3 þ OH-O2 þ HO2
(5.5)
HO22O2
 þ H1,
pKa ¼ 4.8
(5.6)
O3 þ OH-HO2 þ O2
,
k ¼ 70 M1 s1
(5.7)
O2
 þ O3-O3
 þ O2
(5.8)
O3
 þ H2O-HO3 þ OH,
k ¼ 5.21010 M1 s1
(5.9)
HO3-OH þ O2
,
k ¼ 1.1105 M1 s1
(5.10)
2O2
 þ HO2 þ H2O-H2O2 þ O2 þ OH
(5.11)
Catalytic Ozonation over Nanocarbon Materials
151

5.8.2
Nonradical Oxidations
Apart from radical-based oxidations, nonradical oxidations depending
on the surface-confined activated species or singlet oxygen (1O2) have been
recently reported as the alternative pathways for the degradation of the or-
ganics in nanocarbon-catalyzed ozonation (Figure 5.17(a)). For the non-
radical oxidations, adding the prevailing alcohol-based or inorganic
quenching agents usually has negligible inhibition eﬀect on degradation
eﬃciency. Varying the adsorption of O3 and target pollutants on the surface
of the nanocarbons by altering the solution pH or adding surface reaction
quenchers could tremendously aﬀect catalytic eﬃciency since the degrad-
ation process occurs on the surface of the catalysts by the interactions be-
tween the surface-adsorbed activated species from O3 dissociation and the
adsorbed organics.96,97
Figure 5.17
(A) Schematic illustration of various types of nonradical oxidations;
(B) Eﬀect of inorganic anions on nonradical oxidations; (C) Demon-
stration of the selective oxidation of the nonradical species by
zero-order rate constants for oxalic acid (blue) and 4-nitrophenol
removals (red). Reproduced from ref. 56 with permission from
American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020.
152
Chapter 5

5.8.2.1
Nonradical Oxidations by Surface-adsorbed Activated
Species
Two types of surface-adsorbed activated species have been discovered to be
responsible for degradation of the organics in nanocarbon-catalyzed ozo-
nation: surface O3 complexing structure and surface-adsorbed atomic oxy-
gen (*Oad). For the formation of surface O3, the O3 molecule was chemically
adsorbed on the surface active sites without decomposition, which drastic-
ally increased the oxidation potential of the surface of the catalyst.35,98–102
Destruction of the adsorbed organics via the intramolecular electron transfer
process was thus expected by forming the complexing or bridging structure
with surface O3 because of its high oxidation potential. During this process,
the sp2 carbon with delocalized p electrons serves as an electron tunnel to
accelerate charge transportation.
Surface-adsorbed atomic oxygen (*Oad) has been reported as another
dominant surface-adsorbed activated species for the destruction of organics
in nanocarbon-catalyzed ozonation.96,103 The high oxidation potential of
*Oad (2.43 V), which is comparable to that of OH, enables the mineralization
of the recalcitrant organics with high reaction energy barriers. For layered
N-doped nanocarbon catalyzed ozonation, a multistrategy evaluation based
on quenching tests (in situ EPR, in situ Raman and DFT simulation) was
performed to prove the role of *Oad in the degradation of oxalic acid.32
5.8.2.2
Nonradical Oxidation by 1O2
1O2 as the by-product of the chain reactions has also been considered as
another nonradical species, and thus the occurrence of the 1O2-nonradical
oxidations is often in accompanied by radical-based oxidation.34,95,104,105
The following equations (eqn (5.12)–(5.14)) describe the typical generation
pathways of 1O2, where *O2 denotes the surface-adsorbed peroxide or free
peroxide from O3 dissociation products.106,107 It is worth noting that 1O2,
with its mild oxidation potential (E0 (1O2/O2
) ¼ 0.81 V, NHE), is a highly
selective oxidant that reacts exclusively with unsaturated organics via elec-
trophilic addition and electron abstraction, yet it is incapable of degrading
the aliphatic acids with saturated carbon bonds. Therefore, 1O2 demon-
strates a limited oxidation capability that can only degrade a specified range
of target pollutants, and it is erroneous to correlate TOC abatement with the
contribution of 1O2.
*O2 !
electron transfer
1O2
(5:12)
O2
 þ HO2 þ H1-H2O2 þ 1O2
(5.13)
O2
 þ OH-1O2 þ OH
(5.14)
Catalytic Ozonation over Nanocarbon Materials
153

5.8.2.3
Engineering Outlooks of Nonradical Oxidations
For the treatment of real wastewater containing abundant inorganic anions,
the eﬃciency of radical-based systems could be dramatically impacted because
of the radical-scavenging nature of the inorganic anions and background
matters. In practical application, either the treatment time was extended or a
higher amount of O3 and/or catalysts was dosed to achieve a satisfactory
purification eﬃciency. Nevertheless, the existence of inorganic anions in high
concentrations negligibly influences the nonradical oxidations that are based
on the surface-adsorbed ROS and 1O2 (Figure 5.17(b)).32,33 Therefore, the
nonradical systems broaden the ‘‘sweet zone’’ of the catalytic ozonation
treatment by intensifying its treatment compatibility. However, the nonradical
systems are selective and substrate dependent: The surface-adsorbed ROS with
strong oxidation potentials tend to react with the aliphatic compounds in
saturated carbon bonds, while 1O2 with a moderate redox capacity would
preferentially attack phenolics with unsaturated carbon bonds together with
O3 molecules (Figure 5.17(c)). As a result, in the case of phenolics treatment,
the degradation rate of carbocatalytic ozonation is slower than that of the OH-
based system because of the relatively lower oxidation potentials of 1O2 and O3
than OH, whereas the subsequent mineralization processes are accelerated
owing to the participation of surface-adsorbed ROS.
Figure 5.18 summarizes the O3 dissociation mechanism in the formation
and evolution of diverse ROS. Direct ozone oxidation is favorable for the de-
struction of unsaturated organics, while O3 is dissociated over nanocarbons to
produce ROS with high oxidation potentials, which are responsible for the
complete mineralization of contaminants. The free and surface-confined
hydroxyl radicals would non-selectively attack the organics. O2
 manifests
either a reductive capability as a key linker for the formation of other ROS or a
mild oxidative potential for oxidizing less recalcitrant organics. H2O2, as the
annihilation product of O2
, is a critical index to indirectly quantify the
concentration of
O2
. The activated surface O3 complex and *Oad are
Figure 5.18
Schematic illustration of both radical and nonradical oxidation path-
ways via O3 dissociation on the surface of nanocarbons towards the
formation and evolution of diverse ROS. Reproduced from ref. 56 with
permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020.
154
Chapter 5

nonradical ROS with high oxidation potentials, and they involve particular
selectivity toward aliphatic acids against aromatics. Similar to O2
, 1O2 is
often detected in catalytic ozonation with a mild oxidation potential, which
facilitates the oxidation of electron-rich aromatics.
5.8.3
Identification of the Types of ROS and Evaluation of
Their Roles
The electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) or the electron spin resonance
(ESR) technique with the aid of spin trapping agents has been employed as
the most definitive method to demonstrate the existence of the ROS and to
diﬀerentiate their types owing to characteristic EPR signals of the radical
adducts from the reactions between the generated ROS and the specific spin
trapping agents.108,109 Apart from EPR/ESR measurement, in situ charac-
terization techniques such as in situ Raman and in situ diﬀuse reflectance
infrared Fourier transform spectroscopy (DRIFTS) as well as probe methods
can be employed to identify and evaluate the role of ROS
5.8.3.1
Identification and Evaluation of Roles of OH
For OH identification, prevailing spin trapping agents such as 5,5-di-
methyl-pyrroline-N-oxide (DMPO) and 5-tert-butoxycarbonyl-5-methyl-1-
pyrroline-N-oxide (BMPO) have been utilized because of their high
stabilities as well as their strong and distinguishable EPR signals of the
adducts.32 Figure 5.19(a) and (b) demonstrates the characteristic EPR
signals for the DMPO–OH and BMPO–OH adducts. 5,5-Dimethyl-2-oxo-
pyrroline-1-oxyl
(DMPOX)
signals
with
the
peak
intensity
ratio
of
1 : 2 : 1 : 2 : 1 : 2 : 1 might be observed, which can be probably ascribed to the
over-oxidation of the DMPO.110,111
Quenching tests can be conducted to evaluate the contributions of the
generated ROS to the removal of organic pollutants. The ideal radical
quenchers or scavengers employed in catalytic ozonation should obtain a
high selectivity against the particular ROS, yet they should be quite inert
against the attack from other ROS or O3 to avoid the occurrence of com-
petitive reactions. Aliphatic alcohols with small molecular weights such as
tert-butanol (TBA) and methanol have been widely employed as the OH
scavenger because of their fast reaction rates with OH (6108 M1 s1 and
3109 M1 s1) and high recalcitrance against O3 (botho3103 M1 s1).112
Diﬀerent from methanol, TBA is only capable of quenching the OH in
the bulk solution and cannot react with the OH on the surface of the
catalysts.113,114 It is worth noting that the presence of TBA reduces the surface
tension of the aqueous solution, increasing the dispersion of gaseous
O3 within the aqueous solution by producing numerous fine bubbles and
therefore enhancing the ozone mass transfer.34 Inorganic scavengers
such as carbonate (CO3
2, 3.9108 M1 s1) and bicarbonate (HCO3
,
Catalytic Ozonation over Nanocarbon Materials
155

Figure 5.19
(A) Structures and simulated EPR signals of DMPO–OH and DMPO–OOH adducts formed by trapping OH and O2

radicals with DMPO and DMPOX formed by oxidation of DMPO with O3; (B) Structures and EPR signals of BMPO–OH and
BMPO–OOH adducts formed by trapping OH and O2
 radicals with BMPO; (C) Structures and EPR signals of TEMPO
adducts formed by trapping 1O2 with TEMP. Reproduced from ref. 56 with permission from American Chemical Society,
Copyright 2020.
156
Chapter 5

8.5106 M1 s1) anions can also be utilized in catalytic ozonation to evaluate
the role of OH in TOC mineralization, which alcohol-based scavengers
cannot achieve.115
5.8.3.2
Identification and Evaluation of Roles of HO2/O2

In catalytic ozonation, the identification of HO2/O2
 and determination of
its role for organics degradation can be more demanding than that of OH
since the generation of HO2/O2
 is often accompanied by the production
of other ROS with higher oxidation potentials such as OH and 1O2.19,116,117
In EPR measurements, the peak intensities of the DMPO–OOH and BMPO–
OOH adducts were much inferior to those of OH-adducts. Moreover, the
characteristic signals for OOH-adducts and OH-adducts overlap. Alcohols
can be added into the reaction solution as OH scavengers to shield the
strong
OH-adduct peaks. The characteristic signals with aN ¼ 14.2 G,
aH
b ¼ 11.4 G, and aH
g1 ¼ 1.2 G can be accounted for by the DMPO–OOH
(Figure 5.19(a)). Nevertheless, the produced DMPO–OOH adducts with the
half-life time (t1/2) of 45 s is unstable and can be decayed into DMPO–OH.111
In addition, the carbon-centered radicals such as CH3, arising from the
oxidation of the added alcohols by OH might be generated and further
disturb the identification of DMPO–OOH adducts. BMPO can be employed
as a better alternative to DMPO for O2
 trapping owing to the much longer
half-life of BMPO–OOH adduct (t1/2 ¼ 23 min).
Organic probes such as para-benzoquinone (p-BQ) and 4-chloro-7-ni-
trobenzo-2-oxa-1,3-dizole (NBD-Cl) have been employed as a HO2/O2

scavenger in catalytic ozonation.13,31,116,118–120 However, the quenching re-
sults are sometimes debatable. OH reacts quickly with p-BQ as a non-
selective ROS, while its influence can be reduced by adding OH scavengers.
Meanwhile, p-BQ possesses similar reaction rates with HO2/O2
 and with
O3 (9.8108 M1 s1 versus 2.5108 M1 s1),121 which results in competitive
reactions. Moreover, the overdosage of p-BQ further depletes the dissolved
O3 and misdirects the quenching results. Similar issues also exist in the
application of NBD-Cl. Therefore, precise control of the quenching agent’s
dosage and careful interpretation of the quenching results are required.
5.8.3.3
Identification and Evaluation of Roles of 1O2
As one of the nonradical species, 1O2 can also be detected by EPR meas-
urement with 2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-4-piperidone hydrochloride (TEMP) as the
spin trapping agent.34,105 The occurrence of the characteristic EPR signals of
three lines with identical peak intensities and the hyperfine coupling of
aN ¼ 13.4 G confirms the formation of 4-hydroxyl-2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-4-pi-
peridone-N-oxyl (TEMPO), which is the oxidation product of TEMP by 1O2
(Figure 5.19(c)).106 However, other ROS such as OH, HO2/O2
 and the
photo-induced holes (h1) produced in photocatalysis can also oxidize TEMP
Catalytic Ozonation over Nanocarbon Materials
157

to generate TEMPO.106,122–124 A multistrategy evaluation is thus suggested
for identifying 1O2.
The eﬀect of 1O2 on the organic pollutant removal can be evaluated by
adding furfuryl alcohol (FFA) as the scavenger owing to the fast reaction
rate (1108 M1 s1).125 Noteworthily, FFA is also an eﬀective OH scav-
enger (1109 M1 s1).126,127 The influence of OH needs to be excluded by
the corresponding quenching tests when evaluating the contribution of
1O2. Sodium azide (NaN3) has also been employed as the 1O2 quenching
agents (2109 M1 s1).128 However, azide anion with a strong reducing
potential also obtains high reaction rates with O3 (2.5106 M1 s1) and
OH. The inlet O3 can be quickly depleted if NaN3 is overdosed, and the
results would be deviated because of the hindered generation of ROS.
Moreover, solution pH needs to be adjusted when NaN3 is added because of
the high alkalinity of N3
; otherwise, alkaline activation of O3 is induced.
Therefore, careful attention is required when employing NaN3 as the 1O2
scavenger. The isotopic kinetic solvent eﬀect can be taken advantage of when
diﬀerentiating the role of 1O2 by replacing the reaction medium to D2O. The
lifetime of 1O2 becomes 20-fold longer in D2O than that in H2O (3 ms versus
68 ms), and the reaction activity of 1O2 is also enhanced in D2O.129
5.8.3.4
Identification and Evaluation of the Roles of
Surface-adsorbed Species
Identification of the nonradical surface-adsorbed species might be more
complicated than that of the radicals because of transient formation and fast
evolutions. Coloration, fluorescence and chemiluminescence approaches
have been applied to demonstrate the presence of OH, HO2/O2
 and 1O2
in diﬀerent catalytic reaction systems.41,130–132 In situ surface-based char-
acterization techniques are thus required for their diﬀerentiation. In situ
Raman spectroscopy can be employed to investigate the types of the surface-
adsorbed species from O3 dissociation.32,133,134 In accordance with Oyama
et al., the characteristic peaks occurring at the Raman shift of 580 and
1020 cm1 can be ascribed to the *O, while the peak generated at 884 cm1
confirms the adsorbed peroxide species.134 Isotopic substitution of 16O3 by
18O3 further reveals the evolution pathway of the surface-adsorbed activated
species. The active surface complexing structures and the surface-adsorbed
species can be analyzed by in situ diﬀuse reflectance infrared Fourier
transform spectroscopy (DRIFTS).135 Recently, electrochemical analysis has
been employed to investigate the surface-based nonradical reactions in
persulfate activation.2,136,137 By measuring the open-circuit potentials with/
without the addition of diﬀerent persulfates and the target pollutants, it is
discovered that the formation of the carbon-persulfate surface complexes
was critical for the nonradical oxidations.136
For assessing the contribution of surface-absorbed ROS, quenching agents
such as dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) and potassium iodide (KI) with high af-
finities to the surface of the catalysts can be employed.84,138 However, the fast
158
Chapter 5

reaction rate between KI and O3 (1108 M1 s1) encumbers its application.
Though DMSO obtains a sluggish reaction rate with O3 (0.4162 M1 s1),139 it
also reacts quickly with OH besides the surface-adsorbed ROS. The contri-
bution of OH requires its exclusion when interpreting quenching results.
5.8.4
Critical Issues in Determination of the Oxidation
Pathways
A multistrategy combining the results from diﬀerent evaluations is recom-
mended for proposing and determining the oxidation pathways. In some early
studies, the proposed reaction pathways were not solid since they were derived
based merely on the simple radical quenching tests with TBA as the
quenching agent and/or analyzing the variation in O3 consumption rate. The
validations by the results of other evaluation techniques, such as EPR, in situ
Raman and the employment of other quenching agents, are missing. On the
basis of this review, the slight inhibition with the addition of TBA might also
be ascribed to the occurrence of non-radical reactions relying on the surface-
adsorbed activated species such as *Oad and surface O3 complexing structures.
On the other hand, attention should also be paid to the actual oxidation
potentials of the generated ROS for the degradation and mineralization of the
target organics. Though ROS with weak oxidation potentials, such as O2
 and
1O2, might be detected in the catalytic ozonation systems, it is unrealistic to
expect these ROS to act as the dominant reactive species for the degradation of
organics with a high energy barrier of reaction, such as aliphatic acids. They
might behave more like the critical linkers that initiate or promote the chain
reactions rather than contributing to the degradation of the organics. The
misuse of quenching agents or misinterpretation of quenching results might
also misdirect the determination of the dominant reactive species, since some
of the quenchers did not achieve the single selectivity toward the specified
ROS or induce the competitive reactions against other oxidants. In light of the
results from the previous findings, 1O2 with a mild oxidation potential usually
obtains a high oxidation tendency toward the organics with unsaturated
carbon bonds and electron-rich functionalities because of its electrophilic
nature. *Oad, with a higher oxidation potential (2.43 V), was more favorable to
the degradation of recalcitrant pollutants such as aliphatic acids than the
unsaturated organics, while the high oxidation potential of OH endows its
non-selective oxidation capability.
5.9
Conclusions and Perspectives
To conclude, surface-engineered nanocarbon materials with diﬀerent dimen-
sions have been developed as eﬃcient ozonation catalysts for wastewater re-
mediation. The versatility of the nanocarbons facilitates in-depth investigation
of the interactions of O3 and organics on their active sites by surface and
morphology control, post-functionalization or creating discrete organic mol-
ecules containing analogous active sites on the nanocarbons. Defective sites,
Catalytic Ozonation over Nanocarbon Materials
159

including intrinsic defects (such as vacancies, edges and topological defects)
and impurity defects of heteroatom dopants as well as surface functionalities,
are the key active sites for catalytic ozone decomposition to produce ROS.
Additionally, the synergies between the active sites are critical to further boost
catalytic activity by governing electronic properties, regulating the adsorption
behaviors of the reactants and tuning electron-transfer capacity. The inter-
actions of O3 on the active sites of the nanocarbons can induce the conventional
OH-based oxidation pathway, which can occur either in the aqueous bulk or
on the surface of the nanocarbons. Meanwhile, O2
 can also be produced as
the reaction intermediate and serves as the chain carrier pairs for promoting
OH or directly oxidizing vulnerable aromatic organics. However, the oxidation
capability of O2
 is still debatable since it can be mildly reductive or mildly
oxidative. On the other hand, nonradical oxidation pathways relying on the
surface-adsorbed activated species and/or 1O2 might also be induced. By ma-
nipulating the types and configuration of the active sites, the reactive species
and reaction pathways of the nanocarbon/O3 system can be controlled, herein
providing an oxidation system with a tunable redox potential and capacity.
Additionally, a ‘‘substrate-dependent’’ oxidation regime was discovered to
manifest specific selectivity to the organic contaminants because of the dif-
ference in oxidation potentials of the ROS. The discovery of the non-radical
pathway in nanocarbon-based catalytic ozonation significantly broadens the
applications of the AOP’s technology for treating the real wastewater with the
coexistence of a myriad of inorganic anions and/or organic matters. Notably,
careful attention should be paid to the interpretation of EPR spectra and to the
results of quenching tests for identifying ROS and evaluating their roles, since
the employed spin trapping agents and the scavengers might not be ‘‘single-
selective’’ to the specified ROS. Multiple strategies are thus recommended for
assessing the ROS with weak oxidation potential. For transient surface-
adsorbed activated species, in situ or operando techniques can be employed.
Acknowledgements
The authors greatly appreciate the financial supports from the National
Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21978324), Beijing Natural Sci-
ence Foundation (No. 8192039) and Science Foundation of China University
of Petroleum, Beijing (No. 2462020YXZZ034).
References
1. X. Duan, H. Sun and S. Wang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 678.
2. W. Ren, L. Xiong, G. Nie, H. Zhang, X. Duan and S. Wang, Environ. Sci.
Technol., 2020, 54, 1267.
3. X. Duan, Z. Ao, L. Zhou, H. Sun, G. Wang and S. Wang, Appl. Catal., B,
2016, 188, 98.
4. X. Duan, K. O’Donnell, H. Sun, Y. Wang and S. Wang, Small, 2015,
11, 3036.
160
Chapter 5

5. Z. Liu, J. Ma, Y. Cui and B. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 92, 301.
6. Z. Liu, J. Ma, Y. Cui, L. Zhao and B. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2010,
101, 74.
7. A. G. Gonçalves, J. L. Figueiredo, J. J. O´rfa˜o and M. F. Pereira, Carbon,
2010, 48, 4369.
8. R. Qu, B. Xu, L. Meng, L. Wang and Z. Wang, Water Res., 2015, 68, 316.
9. R. Oulton, J. P. Haase, S. Kaalberg, C. T. Redmond, M. J. Nalbandian
and D. M. Cwiertny, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2015, 49, 3687.
10. J. Restivo, R. P. Rocha, A. M. T. Silva, J. J. M. O´rfa˜o, M. F. R. Pereira and
J. L. Figueiredo, Chin. J. Catal., 2014, 35, 896.
11. O. Soares, R. Rocha, A. Gonçalves, J. L. Figueiredo, J. O´rfa˜o and
M. F. R. Pereira, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 192, 296.
12. O. Soares, R. P. Rocha, A. Gonçalves, J. L. Figueiredo, J. O´rfa˜o and
M. F. R. Pereira, Carbon, 2015, 91, 114.
13. J. Wang, S. Chen, X. Quan and H. Yu, Chemosphere, 2018, 190, 135.
14. A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183.
15. H. Sun, S. Liu, G. Zhou, H. M. Ang, M. O. Tade´ and S. Wang, ACS Appl.
Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 5466.
16. M. Pedrosa, L. M. Pastrana-Martı´nez, M. F. R. Pereira, J. L. Faria,
J. L. Figueiredo and A. M. T. Silva, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 348, 888.
17. S. Navalon, A. Dhakshinamoorthy, M. Alvaro and H. Garcia, Chem. Rev.,
2014, 114, 6179.
18. M. J. McAllister, J.-L. Li, D. H. Adamson, H. C. Schniepp, A. A. Abdala,
J. Liu, M. Herrera-Alonso, D. L. Milius, R. Car and R. K. Prud’homme,
Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4396.
19. Y. Wang, Y. Xie, H. Sun, J. Xiao, H. Cao and S. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces, 2016, 8, 9710.
20. X. Duan, Z. Ao, H. Sun, S. Indrawirawan, Y. Wang, J. Kang, F. Liang,
Z. H. Zhu and S. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 4169.
21. C. H. Choi, S. H. Park and S. I. Woo, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7084.
22. X. Duan, H. Sun, J. Kang, Y. Wang, S. Indrawirawan and S. Wang,
ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 4629.
23. Y. Wang, H. Cao, C. Chen, Y. Xie, H. Sun, X. Duan and S. Wang, Chem.
Eng. J., 2019, 355, 118.
24. Y. Wang, H. Cao, L. Chen, C. Chen, X. Duan, Y. Xie, W. Song, H. Sun
and S. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 229, 71.
25. S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, R. D. Piner, K. A. Kohlhaas, A. Kleinhammes,
Y. Jia, Y. Wu, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoﬀ, Carbon, 2007, 45, 1558.
26. B. Frank, J. Zhang, R. Blume, R. Schlo¨gl and D. S. Su, Angew. Chem., Int.
Ed., 2009, 48, 6913.
27. J. Zhang, X. Liu, R. Blume, A. Zhang, R. Schlo¨gl and D. S. Su, Science,
2008, 322, 73.
28. H. Sun, C. Kwan, A. Suvorova, H. M. Ang, M. O. Tade´ and S. Wang, Appl.
Catal., B, 2014, 154, 134.
29. H. Sun, Y. Wang, S. Liu, L. Ge, L. Wang, Z. Zhu and S. Wang, Chem.
Commun., 2013, 49, 9914.
Catalytic Ozonation over Nanocarbon Materials
161

30. R. Yin, W. Guo, J. Du, X. Zhou, H. Zheng, Q. Wu, J. Chang and N. Ren,
Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 317, 632.
31. Z. Song, M. Wang, Z. Wang, Y. Wang, R. Li, Y. Zhang, C. Liu, Y. Liu,
B. Xu and F. Qi, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2019, 53, 5337.
32. Y. Wang, L. Chen, C. Chen, J. Xi, H. Cao, X. Duan, Y. Xie, W. Song and
S. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 254, 283.
33. Y. Wang, J. Xi, X. Duan, W. Lv, H. Cao, C. Chen, Z. Guo, Y. Xie and
S. Wang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 384, 121486.
34. Y. Wang, L. Chen, H. Cao, Z. Chi, C. Chen, X. Duan, Y. Xie, F. Qi,
W. Song, J. Liu and S. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 245, 546.
35. Z. Sun, L. Zhao, C. Liu, Y. Zhen and J. Ma, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2019,
53, 10342.
36. J. Yin, G. Liao, D. Zhu, P. Lu and L. Li, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2016,
315, 138.
37. F. Yang, M. Zhao, Z. Wang, H. Ji, B. Zheng, D. Xiao, L. Wu and Y. Guo,
RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 58325.
38. Z. Song, Y. Zhang, C. Liu, B. Xu, F. Qi, D. Yuan and S. Pu, Chem. Eng. J.,
2019, 357, 655.
39. X. Duan, H. Sun, Z. Shao and S. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 224, 973.
40. J. Yu, H. Feng, L. Tang, Y. Pang, G. Zeng, Y. Lu, H. Dong, J. Wang, Y. Liu,
C. Feng, J. Wang, B. Peng and S. Ye, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2020, 111, 100654.
41. S. Zhang, X. Quan, J. F. Zheng and D. Wang, Water Res., 2017, 122, 86.
42. S. Navalon, A. Dhakshinamoorthy, M. Alvaro, M. Antonietti and
H. Garcı´a, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 4501.
43. X. Fan, J. Restivo, J. J. M. O´rfa˜o, M. F. R. Pereira and A. A. Lapkin, Chem.
Eng. J., 2014, 241, 66.
44. S. Iijima, Nature, 1991, 354, 56.
45. H. Dai, Surf. Sci., 2002, 500, 218.
46. X. Pan and X. Bao, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 44, 553.
47. D. Chen, H. Feng and J. Li, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 6027.
48. D. Yu, K. Goh, H. Wang, L. Wei, W. Jiang, Q. Zhang, L. Dai and Y. Chen,
Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 555.
49. Y. Xue, Y. Ding, J. Niu, Z. Xia, A. Roy, H. Chen, J. Qu, Z. L. Wang and
L. Dai, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, e1400198.
50. J. Zhao, Y. Jiang, H. Fan, M. Liu, O. Zhuo, X. Wang, Q. Wu, L. Yang,
Y. Ma and Z. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604569.
51. D. R. Dreyer, S. Park, C. W. Bielawski and R. S. Ruoﬀ, Chem. Soc. Rev.,
2010, 39, 228.
52. F. Bernat-Quesada, J. C. Espinosa, V. Barbera, M. A´lvaro, M. Galimberti,
S. Navalo´n and H. Garcı´a, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 17443.
53. Y. Yoon, H. Oh, Y. T. Ahn, M. Kwon, Y. Jung, W. K. Park, T. M. Hwang,
W. S. Yang and J. W. Kang, Catal. Today, 2017, 282, 77.
54. X. Duan, H. Sun, Z. Ao, L. Zhou, G. Wang and S. Wang, Carbon, 2016,
107, 371.
55. C. D. Vecitis, T. Lesko, A. J. Colussi and M. R. Hoﬀmann, J. Phys. Chem.
A, 2010, 114, 4968.
162
Chapter 5

56. Y. Wang, X. Duan, Y. Xie, H. Sun and S. Wang, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 13383.
57. M. Acik and Y. J. Chabal, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 50, 070101.
58. F. Banhart, J. Kotakoski and A. V. Krasheninnikov, ACS Nano, 2011,
5, 26.
59. W. Yuan, Y. Zhou, Y. Li, C. Li, H. Peng, J. Zhang, Z. Liu, L. Dai and
G. Shi, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2248.
60. A. Shen, Y. Zou, Q. Wang, R. A. W. Dryfe, X. Huang, S. Dou, L. Dai and
S. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 10804.
61. P. P. Sharma, J. Wu, R. M. Yadav, M. Liu, C. J. Wright, C. S. Tiwary,
B. I. Yakobson, J. Lou, P. M. Ajayan and X. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.,
2015, 54, 13701.
62. S. T. Skowron, I. V. Lebedeva, A. M. Popov and E. Bichoutskaia, Chem.
Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 3143.
63. L. Dai, Y. Xue, L. Qu, H.-J. Choi and J.-B. Baek, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 4823.
64. R. Garg, N. K. Dutta and N. R. Choudhury, Nanomaterials, 2014, 4, 267.
65. D. Usachov, A. Fedorov, O. Vilkov, B. Senkovskiy, V. K. Adamchuk,
L. V. Yashina, A. A. Volykhov, M. Farjam, N. I. Verbitskiy, A. Gru¨neis,
C. Laubschat and D. V. Vyalikh, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4982.
66. O. S. G. P. Soares, R. P. Rocha, A. G. Gonçalves, J. L. Figueiredo,
J. J. M. O´rfa˜o and M. F. R. Pereira, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 192, 296.
67. X. Liu and L. Dai, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16064.
68. W. Li, Y. Gao, W. Chen, P. Tang, W. Li, Z. Shi, D. Su, J. Wang and D. Ma,
ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 1261.
69. L. Zhang, Y. Shi, Y. Wang and N. R. Shiju, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1902126.
70. X. Kong, Q. Chen and Z. Sun, Chem. Phys. Chem., 2013, 14, 514.
71. L. Yang, S. Jiang, Y. Zhao, L. Zhu, S. Chen, X. Wang, Q. Wu, J. Ma, Y. Ma
and Z. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7132.
72. J. P. Paraknowitsch and A. Thomas, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2839.
73. X. Ma, G. Ning, Y. Wang, X. Song, Z. Xiao, L. Hou, W. Yang, J. Gao and
Y. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 269, 83.
74. S. Yang, L. Zhi, K. Tang, X. Feng, J. Maier and K. Mu¨llen, Adv. Funct.
Mater., 2012, 22, 3634.
75. M. Wu, C. Cao and J. Z. Jiang, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 505202.
76. B. Dai, K. Chen, Y. Wang, L. Kang and M. Zhu, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 2541.
77. Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, L. H. Li, T. Xing, Y. Chen, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao,
ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5290.
78. G. Pacchioni, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 1737.
79. G. Pacchioni and H.-J. Freund, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 8474.
80. Y. Wang, Y. Xie, H. Sun, J. Xiao, H. Cao and S. Wang, J. Hazard. Mater.,
2016, 301, 56.
81. H. Terrones, R. Lv, M. Terrones and M. S. Dresselhaus, Rep. Prog. Phys.,
2012, 75, 062501.
82. Y. Wang, Z. Ao, H. Sun, X. Duan and S. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2016,
198, 295.
83. W. Qi, W. Liu, B. Zhang, X. Gu, X. Guo and D. Su, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.,
2013, 52, 14224.
Catalytic Ozonation over Nanocarbon Materials
163

84. S. Zhu, X. Huang, F. Ma, L. Wang, X. Duan and S. Wang, Environ. Sci.
Technol., 2018, 52, 8649.
85. U. von Gunten, Water Res., 2003, 37, 1443.
86. B. Kasprzyk-Hordern, M. Ziolek and J. Nawrocki, Appl. Catal., B, 2003,
46, 639.
87. B. Kasprzyk-Hordern, M. Zio´"ek and J. Nawrocki, Appl. Catal., B, 2003,
46, 639.
88. T. Du, A. S. Adeleye, T. Zhang, N. Yang, R. Hao, Y. Li, W. Song and
W. Chen, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2019, 6, 2484.
89. M. Sa´nchez-Polo, U. von Gunten and J. Rivera-Utrilla, Water Res., 2005,
39, 3189.
90. P. M. Alva´rez, J. F. Garcı´a-Araya, F. J. Beltra´n, I. Gira´ldez, J. Jaramillo
and V. Go´mez-Serrano, Carbon, 2006, 44, 3102.
91. F. J. Beltra´n, F. J. Rivas, L. A. Ferna´ndez, P. M. A´lvarez and
R. Montero-de-Espinosa, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2002, 41, 6510.
92. Z. Liu, J. Ma, Y. Cui, L. Zhao and B. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 101, 74.
93. Y. Yoon, J. Moon, M. Kwon, Y. Jung, S. Kim and J.-W. Kang, Ozone: Sci.
Eng., 2014, 36, 465.
94. A. G. Gonçalves, J. L. Figueiredo, J. J. M. O´rfa˜o and M. F. R. Pereira,
Carbon, 2010, 48, 4369.
95. Y. Zhang, Q. Li, Y. Long, J. Zou, Z. Song, C. Liu, L. Liu, F. Qi, B. Xu and
Z. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 254, 569.
96. J. Bing, C. Hu and L. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 202, 118.
97. F. J. Beltra´n, B. Acedo, F. J. Rivas and O. Gimeno, Ozone: Sci. Eng., 2005,
27, 159.
98. R. C. Martins and R. M. Quinta-Ferreira, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 90, 268.
99. X. Liu, Z. Zhou, G. Jing and J. Fang, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2013, 115, 129.
100. Q. Dai, J. Wang, J. Yu, J. Chen and J. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 144, 686.
101. A. Ikhlaq, S. Waheed, K. S. Joya and M. Kazmi, Catal. Commun., 2018,
112, 15.
102. Z. Ma, L. Zhu, X. Lu, S. Xing, Y. Wu and Y. Gao, Sep. Purif. Technol.,
2014, 133, 357.
103. T. Zhang, W. Li and J.-P. Croue´, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 9339.
104. S. Zhang, X. Quan and D. Wang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 52, 8701.
105. Y. Wang, Y. Xie, H. Sun, J. Xiao, H. Cao and S. Wang, Catal. Sci.
Technol., 2016, 6, 2918.
106. Y. Nosaka and A. Y. Nosaka, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 11302.
107. A. D. Bokare and W. Choi, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2015, 49, 14392.
108. Y. Wang, H. Sun, X. Duan, H. M. Ang, M. O. Tade´ and S. Wang, Appl.
Catal., B, 2015, 172, 73.
109. X. Duan, H. Sun, Y. Wang, J. Kang and S. Wang, ACS Catal., 2015,
5, 553.
110. J. Xiao, Q. Han, H. Cao, J. Rabeah, J. Yang, Z. Guo, L. Zhou, Y. Xie and
A. Bru¨ckner, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 8852.
111. H. Zhao, J. Joseph, H. Zhang, H. Karoui and B. Kalyanaraman, Free
Radical Biol. Med., 2001, 31, 599.
164
Chapter 5

112. G. V. Buxton, C. L. Greenstock, W. P. Helman and A. B. Ross, J. Phys.
Chem. Ref. Data, 1988, 17, 513.
113. T. Turan-Ertas and M. D. Gurol, Chemosphere, 2002, 47, 293.
114. J. Xiao, Y. Xie, H. Cao, Y. Wang, Z. Guo and Y. Chen, Carbon, 2016,
107, 658.
115. J. Ma and N. J. D. Graham, Water Res., 2000, 34, 3822.
116. F. Nawaz, H. Cao, Y. Xie, J. Xiao, Y. Chen and Z. A. Ghazi, Chemosphere,
2017, 168, 1457.
117. F. Nawaz, Y. Xie, J. Xiao, H. Cao, Z. A. Ghazi, Z. Guo and Y. Chen, Catal.
Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 7875.
118. A. Ikhlaq, D. R. Brown and B. Kasprzyk-Hordern, Appl. Catal., B, 2013,
129, 437.
119. F. Nawaz, Y. Xie, H. Cao, J. Xiao, Y. Wang, X. Zhang, M. Li and F. Duan,
Catal. Today, 2015, 258, 595.
120. J. Zhang, Y. Wu, C. Qin, L. Liu and Y. Lan, Chemosphere, 2015, 141, 258.
121. E. Mvula and C. von Sonntag, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2003, 1, 1749.
122. P. Bilski, K. Reszka, M. Bilska and C. F. Chignell, J. Am. Chem. Soc.,
1996, 118, 1330.
123. R. Poupko and I. Rosenthal, J. Phys. Chem., 1973, 77, 1722.
124. T. A. Konovalova, J. Lawrence and L. D. Kispert, J. Photochem. Photo-
biol., A, 2004, 162, 1.
125. F. E. Scully and J. Hoigne´, Chemosphere, 1987, 16, 681.
126. E. A. Betterton and D. Craig, J. Air Waste Manage. Assoc., 1999, 49, 1347.
127. J. Catala´n, C. Dı´az and L. Barrio, Chem. Phys., 2004, 300, 33.
128. A. Jawad, X. Lu, Z. Chen and G. Yin, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2014, 118, 10028.
129. C. Schweitzer and R. Schmidt, Chem. Rev., 2003, 103, 1685.
130. H. Goto, Y. Hanada, T. Ohno and M. Matsumura, J. Catal., 2004,
225, 223.
131. H. Wu, Q. Song, G. Ran, X. Lu and B. Xu, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem.,
2011, 30, 133.
132. K. Naito, T. Tachikawa, M. Fujitsuka and T. Majima, J. Phys. Chem. C,
2008, 112, 1048.
133. S. Gong, Z. Xie, W. Li, X. Wu, N. Han and Y. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2019,
241, 578.
134. W. Li, G. V. Gibbs and S. T. Oyama, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 9041.
135. J. Wu, T. Su, Y. Jiang, X. Xie, Z. Qin and H. Ji, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017,
412, 290.
136. W. Ren, G. Nie, P. Zhou, H. Zhang, X. Duan and S. Wang, Environ. Sci.
Technol., 2020, 54, 6438.
137. L. Tang, Y. Liu, J. Wang, G. Zeng, Y. Deng, H. Dong, H. Feng, J. Wang
and B. Peng, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 231, 1.
138. S. Zhu, X. Li, J. Kang, X. Duan and S. Wang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2019,
53, 307.
139. J. J. Wu, M. Muruganandham and S. H. Chen, J. Hazard. Mater., 2007,
149, 218.
Catalytic Ozonation over Nanocarbon Materials
165

CHAPTER 6
UVA Photocatalytic Ozonation
of Water Contaminants
F. J. BELTRA´N* AND O. GIMENO
Departamento de Ingenierı´a Quı´mica y Quı´mica Fı´sica, Instituto
Universitario de Investigacio´n del Agua, Cambio Clima´tico y
Sostenibilidad, Universidad de Extremadura, 06006 Badajoz, Spain
*Email: fbeltran@unex.es
6.1
Introduction
At the end of the 1980s, the significant improvement of analytical equipment
allowed the identification of many organic compounds (pesticides, poly-
nuclear aromatics, etc.) in diﬀerent water environments.1–3 Previously, in the
1970s, other potentially toxic compounds such as trihalomethanes or halo-
carboxylic acids were detected in finished drinking water.4,5 More recently, as
a result of their extensive use for therapeutic purposes or personal care, nu-
merous pharmaceuticals and hygienic products were identified in municipal
wastewater treatment plants.6–8 The immediate consequence of all these
findings was that scientists started the search for technologies able to remove
these compounds from water. Toward this end, technologies such as ad-
vanced
oxidation
processes
(AOP)
were
appearing
to
clean
water
environments.9–11 AOPs are usually a combination of one, two or three agents
(chemical oxidants, radiation, catalysts, etc.) to generate hydroxyl free radicals,
short-lived species with high oxidizing power only below that of fluorine and
atomic oxygen.12 Two of these AOPs are ozonation and UV photocatalytic
oxidation. Applied separately, they can generate hydroxyl radicals, with an
Chemistry in the Environment Series No. 8
Advanced Ozonation Processes for Water and Wastewater Treatment: Active Catalysts and
Combined Technologies
Edited by Hongbin Cao, Yongbing Xie, Yuxian Wang and Jiadong Xiao
r The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry, www.rsc.org
166

intensity (or concentration) that depends on such experimental conditions as
pH and organic content of the water, among others. This chapter deals with
these two technologies when used together to constitute a third one called UV
photocatalytic ozonation (PhCatOz). This chapter focuses on the use of radi-
ation sources of wavelengths between 300 and 400 nm, which is currently
called UVA radiation. In the next two sections, a brief introduction of both
AOPs, individually considered, is first presented.
6.2
Ozonation of Water Contaminants
Ozone is an allotropic form of oxygen with three atoms linked to form
a hybrid in resonance having a variable electronic distribution in the
molecule. This allows ozone to react with organics in diﬀerent ways such as
1,3-dipolar addition to a carbon double bond (Criegge mechanism),13 con-
stituted by a mechanism initiated by the simultaneous attack of oxygen at
the edges of the ozone molecule positively and negatively charged or by
substitution reactions on groups negatively or positively charged, such as the
known electrophilic aromatic substitution reactions. These latter ways of
action are significantly important when aromatic compounds with activating
substituents groups (hydroxyl in phenols, amine in aniline, etc.) are present
in the water to be treated as, for instance, in the case of many pharma-
ceuticals. However, ozone has another way of reaction through hydroxyl
radicals that are formed from its decomposition when there are no fast re-
acting compounds in water or when these compounds are in a very low
concentration (at ppb level or less), as is the case of pharmaceuticals in
municipal wastewater. This is why ozonation is an AOP. However, the initial
reaction of the ozone decomposition mechanism has a low rate constant, 70
or 140 M1 s1, depending on diﬀerent authors,14,15 which makes ozonation
a weak AOP because of the low concentration of hydroxyl radicals it gener-
ates by itself. The first reactions of the ozone mechanism are:
O3 þ OH-HO 
2
þ O2
(6.1)
In reaction (6.1), no free radicals are formed, but hydrogen peroxide re-
sults as shown next. In 1987, Glaze and coworkers9 reported their studies on
the combinations of ozone and hydrogen peroxide or UVC radiation (per-
ozone and photolytic ozone processes, respectively). The initial reactions of
these AOP are:
O3 þ HO2
-HO2 þ O3

(6.2)
and
O3 þ H2O !
hn H2O2 þ O2
(6:3)
Hydrogen peroxide generated in reaction (6.2) continues with reaction
(6.1) and with the photolysis of hydrogen peroxide:
H2O2 !
hn 2OH
(6:4)
UVA Photocatalytic Ozonation of Water Contaminants
167

Therefore, from ozone photolysis, hydroxyl radicals are formed through two
routes, though reaction (6.2) always predominates in the photolytic ozone
process.16 Then O3/H2O2 and O3/UV were the first two ozone-combined AOPs
investigated. In photolytic processes, in addition to pH, the importance of
parameters such as the quantum yield and absorption coeﬃcient of ozone
and hydrogen peroxide have to be kept in mind. Radiations of wavelength
higher than 325 nm are useless since ozone does not absorb at these wave-
lengths, but with UVA of higher energy (lo325 nm), UVB and especially UVC,
the generation of hydroxyl radicals significantly increases.17 Something
similar applies to hydrogen peroxide photolysis.18 In ozonation systems,
ozone decomposition is accelerated by the increase of pH to form more
hydrogen peroxide and increase the rate of reaction (6.2), the true initial re-
action of ozone processes. Substances present in water play three diﬀerent
roles in an ozone system: initiators, promoters and scavengers of ozone de-
composition.14 An initiator is hydrogen peroxide since when it reacts with
ozone directly, it generates free radicals, specifically the hydroperoxide and
ozonide ion radicals as shown in reaction (6.2). These free radicals eventually
lead to the formation of hydroxyl radicals, especially at a pH higher than 4.8, a
pK of equilibrium between HO2 and the superoxide ion radical O2
. In
addition to hydrogen peroxide, other organics act as initiators, such as di-
clofenac, one of the most abundant pharmaceuticals identified in municipal
wastewater.19 Promoters are compounds that, while reacting with the hydroxyl
radical, form the hydroperoxide radical or some peroxy radicals that propa-
gate the mechanism chain. Finally, scavengers are substances whose reaction
with hydroxyl radicals terminates the mechanism chain. Natural scavengers
are, for example, carbonates. Scavengers are one of the disadvantages of using
AOPs because their presence reduces the hydroxyl radicals available to react
with micropollutants. Another ozone AOP is catalytic ozonation, wherein the
presence of catalysts accelerates the decomposition of ozone through diﬀer-
ent mechanisms that depend on the type of catalyst and organics to be re-
moved.20 This kind of ozone process, however, cannot always be cataloged as
an AOP since reactions responsible for organic removal can be direct reactions
through complex formation.21 Also, combinations of ozone with ultrasound
(which in fact is another sort of photolytic ozonation) or with a catalyst and
light (photocatalytic ozonation) are more recent AOPs. The last one is the
object of this review. In spite of being an old process (it harkens to the end of
the nineteenth century), the importance of ozonation is shown in the multiple
works published in the last 30 years. According to the Scopus data base, nearly
3000 papers on water ozonation have been published just from 2015.
6.3
Photocatalytic Oxidation of Water Contaminants
Studies on photocatalytic oxidation started in the 1960s with the works of Fu-
jishima and coworkers on the conversion of solar energy by photoelectrical
cells.22 They used TiO2 since, in addition to being a cheap and stable material,
this
semiconductor
is
recommended
for
processes
of
photoinduced
168
Chapter 6

hydrophilicity. Both processes can simultaneously develop on the same TiO2
surface, although, depending on composition and processing, only one of them
can be favored. Returning to the first step of photoelectrical cells, Fujishima
et al.23 tried to reproduce the natural photosynthesis of plants that oxidizes
water to produce oxygen and to reduce carbon dioxide to produce hydrogen.
They called their process solar photoelectrolysis of water splitting that consisted
of one TiO2 electrode connected to a counter-electrode of Pt. Both electrodes
were submerged in cells separated by an ionic conductor.24 The TiO2 electrode
was exposed to solar light, and the following reactions developed:
TiO2 excitation:
TiO2 !
2hn 2hþ þ 2e
(6:5)
Oxygen formation at the TiO2 electrode:
H2O þ 2h1-0.5O2 þ 2H1
(6.6)
Hydrogen formation at the Pt electrode:
2H1 þ 2e-H2
(6.7)
Fujishima et al.23 observed that this process developed, regardless of ra-
diation intensity provided the energy of the incident radiation was higher
than that of the band gap of the catalyst. The excitation of the catalyst is the
initial step of photocatalytic oxidation. In this AOP, hydroxyl radicals are
mainly formed in the valence band of the catalyst when holes from reaction
(6.5) oxidize water to give hydroxyl radicals. The process depends on the
band gap of the catalyst, the energy of incident radiation and the energy of
the valence and conduction bands of the catalyst. Thus the energy of the
valence band must be more positive than the one of the OH/H2O system
(2.27 eV), and the energy of the conduction band more negative than the one
of O2/O2
 system (0.28 eV). A few catalysts, TiO2 among them, fulfill these
requirements. Thus TiO2 presents energies of þ2.53 eV and 0.52 eV in its
valence and conduction bands, respectively. The problem is its high band
gap: 3.2 eV makes visible light useless in exciting TiO2. However, the energy
of radiation lower than 385 nm, that is, UVA, UVB and UVC radiation, is valid
for the process. In addition to reaction (6.5), with previous requirements, the
main reactions of the photocatalytic oxidation system are the oxidation of
adsorbed water or hydroxyl groups to form hydroxyl radicals.
TiO2  H2O(OH  ) þ h1-TiO2  OH
(6.8)
and oxygen reduction by capturing electrons:
O2 þ e-O2

(6.9)
The superoxide ion radical formed in reaction (6.9) leads to hydrogen
peroxide:
O2
 þ H1-HO2
(6.10)
UVA Photocatalytic Ozonation of Water Contaminants
169

and
2HO2-H2O2 þ O2
(6.11)
though these last two reactions depend on the organic composition of water,
since the superoxide ion radical also has some oxidizing power. Another
important negative step in photocatalytic oxidation is the electron–hole re-
combination that inhibits the reaction rate:
h1 þ e-TiO2 þ energy
(6.12)
As indicated for ozonation, photocatalytic oxidation is another AOP of
high use in water environmental studies. The Scopus data base reports
nearly 1000 publications (most of them research papers) in the last five
years. Radiation sources, the nature of catalysts, the influence of variables
such as organic concentration, pH, intensity of radiation are the basis of
most of these publications.25,26
6.4
Photocatalytic Ozonation
As can be deduced from the main reactions of ozonation and photocatalytic
oxidation mechanisms, the simultaneous presence of ozone, radiation and a
semiconductor catalyst with the right properties related to valence and
conduction band energies and band gap should increase the rate of hydroxyl
radical formation with new initial steps. First, when TiO2 is the catalyst, in
addition to oxygen, ozone and hydrogen peroxide can also trap electrons
from the conduction band of TiO2 since the redox potential of H2O2/H2O and
O3/H2O is more positive, 1.35 and 2.07 eV, respectively, than the energy of
the conduction band of TiO2, 0.52 eV. This means there are similar re-
actions to reaction (6.9) between oxygen and electrons:
O3 þ e-O3

(6.13)
H2O2 þ e-OH þ OH
(6.14)
and the ozonide ion radical to eventually yield more hydroxyl radicals:
O3
 þ H1-HO3
(6.15)
HO3-OH þ O2
(6.16)
Note that hydrogen peroxide is a key oxidant in ozone systems. In pho-
tocatalytic ozonation of organic compounds there is no need to add hydro-
gen peroxide because this is formed from direct ozone reactions, as happens
with diclofenac ozonation27 as an example. In fact, when the organics are
initiators of ozone decomposition, hydrogen peroxide is formed, and hence
reaction (6.14) is another means of hydroxyl radical formation.
Now that the mechanism of photocatalytic ozonation has been described,
one can better understand why this AOP is more eﬀective than single ozo-
nation and photocatalytic oxidation systems and why there is a synergism
between these two processes. Some works have already checked this
170
Chapter 6

synergism, simply by determining the pseudo first-order rate constants of
the three processes and observing that the ratio of the rate of photocatalytic
ozonation was higher than the sum of the rates of single ozonation and
photocatalytic oxidation (see Section 6.5.7).
Although the number of publications about photocatalytic ozonation is
lower than those of the single processes (Scopus reports nearly 150 during
the last five years), this AOP still attracts the attention of many researchers,
especially in preparing catalysts that can be easily separated from water or be
active under visible light. On the other hand, the higher energy of UVB and
UVC radiations makes the oxidation rates of micropollutants more eﬃcient
when using ozone and catalysts. However, in this chapter only UVA radiation
is reviewed focusing on works reported in the last five years since other re-
viewing works have been published in 2015 and earlier.28–30 The reason for
the preferential study of UVA radiation photocatalytic ozone processes is the
lower cost of UVA lamps against the more expensive UVC lamps and also the
possibility of using UVA LEDs as the radiation source, minimizing the cost of
the process regarding duration and maintenance.31–33
6.5
UVA Photocatalytic Ozonation
In this process, lamps or light-emitting diodes (LEDs) are the source of
radiation. UVA radiation extends from about 300 to 400 nm, and radiations
with wavelengths between 300 and 325 nm activate not only TiO2 but also
ozone and hydrogen peroxide that still undergo photolysis to generate
more hydroxyl free radicals. Also, solar radiation reaching Earth belongs to
this category though only about 5% falls in the UVA range. In any case, for
catalysts such as TiO2, solar radiation specifically falls in the UVA photo-
catalytic ozonation category since TiO2 is not active under visible light.
Because the mechanism of this process has already been explained in
previous sections, here the review deals with diﬀerent aspects of the process
such as catalyst nature, radiation source, organics treated, influence of
variables, kinetics, etc. This work reviews research articles of the last five
years because the literature already reports reviews published before 2015.
These works are listed with their main characteristics in Table 6.1.
6.5.1
Catalysts
Catalysts, radiation source and ozone are the main agents of UVA PhCatOz.
There are two types of UVA photocatalytic ozonation depending on the
catalyst used: dissolved in water or as a solid material. For the first group,
homogeneous photocatalytic ozonation, as far as we know, in the last five
years, only one work has been published.90 In this case, the catalyst was iron
sulfate applied with ozone and UVC radiation to treat hospital wastewater
containing 83 target pharmaceutical contaminants. Homogeneous photo-
catalysis presents the problem of catalyst separation, though when iron salts
are used, the inconvenience is minimized due to the high permissible
UVA Photocatalytic Ozonation of Water Contaminants
171

Table 6.1
Works on UVA photocatalytic ozonation of water contaminants.a
Catalysts
Target pollutants
Reactor and radiation
source
Ozonation conditions
Process performance
Ref.
TiO2 nanotubes
Ccat ¼ 0.1–0.3 g L1
PAHs in oﬀshore water
(1–10 mg L1)
Agitated Amber bottle
(500 mL)
UVA LED 365 nm
0.12 L min1
0.6–1.8 O3 mg min1
pH0 ¼ 7.68
4.25 mW cm2 at
34 V and 9.93 mW cm2
at 36 V
In 10 min total phenol
removal
In 40 min total PAH removal
Intermediates, toxicity,
biodegradability
34
TiO2 nanotubes
supported on Ti
foils
Parabens (UP and MWW)
(1 mg L1 each)
2 L semibatch tank with
quartz tubes for UVA
lamps 365 nm and
Sunlight
Gas flow: 0.2 L min1
pH ¼ 7.2
5.75  107
Einstein1 Ls1
In 15 min total paraben
removal with O3
In 10 min total paraben
removal with O3/cat/light
TOD. Toxicity
35
TiO2/Fe3O4/activated
carbon composite
Ccat ¼ 0.4 g L1
Pharmaceuticals (2 mg L1
each)
SEMWW and synthetic
wastewater
Solar box. Xe lamp.
l: 300–800 nm 550
W m2
Semibatch reactor
V ¼ 300 mL
pH0 ¼ 7.5–7.8
20 L h1 flowrate,
10 mg L1 O3
3.86  10–7
Einstein1 L s1
Total removal of
pharmaceuticals in less than
30 min with PhCatOz. 40%
removal with O2/Light/cat
PhCatOz: 45–50% DOC
removal in 2 h
O2/Light/cat: 35–40% DOC
removal in 2 h
36
P25 TiO2 1 g L1
Methylene blue (3.5  105 M)
in sea water with 20%–30%–
40% salt concentration
Medium pressure Hg
lamp 1.27 L semibatch
column
30–60 mg L1 O3 in gas
94 mW cm2
PhCatO3: 93% MB removal in
40 min
O3: 90 and 75% MB removal
in 40 min (UP and sea water
Synergism eﬀect. Pseudo first-
order kinetics
37
TiO2/Fe3O4
0.1–2 g L1
Ceftazide (CFT) 10–50 mg L1
1 L semibatch column
with recirculated water
30 W UVA lamp
O3: 1.7 to 3.7 mg min1
15 min: CFT removal: 100%
TOC: 75% PhCatOz; 50.6%
O3; 34.6% O2/UVA/Cat at
pH ¼ 11 (best pH)
Pseudo first-order kinetics.
Scavenger eﬀects
38
172
Chapter 6

10% N–TiO2
70–140 mg L1
5 Paraben mixture (50 mg L1)
River and SMWW
2 L semibatch tank with
quartz tubes for UVA
lamps 365 nm
Gas flow: 0.2 L min1
pH ¼ 7.2
5.75  107
Einstein1 L s1
Eﬀects of salts and water
matrix
TOD, Phytotoxicity
39
P25 TiO2
10–500 mg L1
Primidone (PRM)
13 mg L1
Semibatch tank plus
UVA led (365 nm)
cylindrical reactor with
recirculation
pH: 5–6
10 mg L1 O3; gas
flowrate: 15 L h1
3.92105
Einstein1 L s1
Non-ideal flow study.
Mechanism and kinetic
modeling for TOC removal
TOC removal: 90% PhCatOz;
20% O3
40
Fe3O4/TiO2/
Graphene
0.5 g L1
Cotinine in UPW and mixture
of pharmaceuticals
(0.5 mg L1 each) in
SEMWW
Solar box. 1500 W Xe
lamp. l: 300–800 nm
Semibatch reactor
V ¼ 500 mL
pH 5
30 L h1, 10 mg L1 O3
550 W m2
PhCatOz: 65 min: 100% CTN
and 2 h: 80% TOC removals
In SEMWWM: 65% TOC
removal. Measurements of
RHOO3, RCT. Catalyst reuse
and stability
41
gFe2O3/AC
0.5 g L1
Azo dye: Ponceau 4R
50 mg L1
500 mL semibatch tank.
Sunlight
3.33 mg min1 O3
35.4 W m2
Pseudo first-order kinetics.
Influence of water matrix.
Best AOPs for color removal:
PhCatOz þ H2O2, O3: 100%
removal in 60 min
42
Me–TiO2: 0.7 g L1
Me: Au, Ag, Pt, Pd
Parabens mixture
10 mg L1 each
Semibatch tanks with
UVC, UVA lamps and
sun light with CPC
reactor
0–8 mg L1 O3
0–70 mg L1 H2O2
UVC:1.06  105 UVA:
5.75  107 and solar
light: 2.6104
units: Einstein1 L s1;
Mineralization,
biodegradability and toxicity
and cost assessment. Pseudo
first-order kinetics. Diﬀerent
AOPs
43
0.35–0.52% TiO2/
Glass Raschig ring
1.26–3.08% TiO2/
Ceramic foams
DEET (20 mg L1 in UPW and
1 mg L1 in SEMWW)
Solar box. Xe lamp.
l: 300–800 nm
Semibatch reactor
V ¼ 170 mL
15 L h1 15 mg L1 O3
pH0 ¼ 6
550 W m2
100 min 100% DEET removal
and 40% DOC removal with
PhCatOz UPW. Eﬀects of
salts. Catalyst reused.
44
TiO2/Glass beads
Organics in seawater
aquarium
Fixed bed photocatalytic
reactor and 350–400
nm UVA black light
lamp
8 L h1
1.5 mg min1 O3
24 W m2
Growth of the hard and soft
corals and the
disappearance of most of
cyanobacteria from the rear
wall with PhCatOz
Bromate control. PhCatOz
cycles
45
UVA Photocatalytic Ozonation of Water Contaminants
173

Table 6.1
(Continued)
Catalysts
Target pollutants
Reactor and radiation
source
Ozonation conditions
Process performance
Ref.
WO3/spongy alginate
beads
Textile wastewater
COD: 1970 mg L1 BOD: 540
mg L1 TD ¼ 11 300 mg L1
Membrane reactor/
semibatch
photocatalytic reactor
(5 L). 16 W visible light
1–5 mg h1 O3
Residence time: 2–5 h
pH0 ¼ 8.2 pHf ¼ 7.9
Membrane flux and fouling.
Color and COD removal
(95% PhCatOz). Sludge
eﬀect. Higher membrane
flux with PhCatOz
46
Magnetic
nanoparticles/
Carbon
0.5 g L1
Oxamic acid, blue dye5,
aniline, metolachlor
Between 89,05 and 283 mg L1
Semibatch reactor
Medium pressure Hg
lamp (365, 405, 436,
546, 578 nm)
9 L h1
50 mg L1 O3
Oxamic acid only nearly 90%
removed with PhCatOz.
Presence of carbon in
catalyst improved the
removal.
TOC from other organics
removed 80%–90% with
PhCatOz
47
P25 TiO2
0.1 g L1
Acetamiprid (0.1 mg L1)
in 4 SEMWW with
COD: 14.9 – 70.5 mg L1
DOC: 13.3–21.7 mg L1
1.5 L Semibatch reactor;
3 black light lamps
(350–400 nm)
18 L h1
10 mg L1
pH ¼ 7.7–8.0
5,47 mW cm2
Determination of TOD and
RHOO3. Two mass transfer
steps. Lower cost in PhCatOz
processes.
48
TiO2/carbon dots
1 g L1
Ciprofloxacin 10 mg L1
Semibatch rotary
reactor. 350 W Xe lamp
(290 nm) simulating
solar light
0.9 L h1
4.7 mg L1 O3
pH0 ¼ 7
6% C in catalyst best
composite for PhCatOz.
Mechanism and
intermediates detected.
Eﬀects of salts
49
Cd–ZnO
0–1 g L1
Textile dyeing WW
COD: 1120–1480 mg L1
BOD3: 98–130 mg L1
Semibatch reactor. 15 W
365 nm UVA lamp
0 to 9.5 mg min1 O3
pH0 ¼ 7 (buﬀered)
0.2 g L1 best catalyst
concentration. TOC removal
in 4 h: 90% with PhCatOz,
30% with O3 or Cat/light.
Poor reusability
50
0.16% TiO2/glass
Raschig rings
12 Pharmaceuticals in
SEMWW
mg L1 and ng L1 levels
DOC: 22–26 mg L1
IC: 70–74 mg L1
Continuous flow packed
bed reactor with water
recirculation and 4 10
W UVA LED (360 nm)
15 mL min1
20 mg L1 O3
pH ¼ 7.6
Non ideal flow study. Fast
removal of organics. Direct
ozonation: most important
oxidation way.
51
174
Chapter 6

TiO2/Fe3O4/AC
0.375–0.75 g L1
COD: 12.2 mg L1 Industrial
WW, 2.1 mg L1 SEMWW
Biological tank followed
by semibatch AOP
reactor with 1500 W Xe
lamp (300–800 nm)
20 L h1
20–30 mg L1 O3
pH0 ¼ 7.5
550 W m2
Biological tank: 50% COD
removal (7 h)
Intermediates detected.
Toxicity. Biodegradability
enhanced by AOP processes.
COD removal in 5 h: 48%
PhCatOz, 23% O3. Good
catalyst reusability
52
TiO2 (80–240 mgL1),
Fe(III) (2.5–7 mg L1)
Pharmaceuticals in SEMWW
0.01–0.1 mg L1 each
DOC: 13 mg L1
200 L pilot plant CPC
solar reactor
0.57 L min1
1.2 mg L1 O3
5% H2O2/Fe(III)
pH0 ¼ 7.9; 38.2 W m2
Diﬀerent solar AOP. Removal
of organics: 0.7–1.1,0.9–1.0,
1.1–1.3, and 1.4–1.9
mgO3 mg1 DOC for
antibiotics, estrogens, and
acidic and neutral
pharmaceuticals,
respectively. Higher TOC
removal with PhCatOz.
Toxicity
53
P25 TiO2/Fe(III)
0.2 g L1
Phenol, oxalic acid
100 mg L1 each
0.5 L semibatch reactor
and Xe lamp
(200–400 nm)
6.9 L h1
27 mg L1 O3
320 mW cm2
Intermediate identification.
TOC removal (phenol): 90%
PhCatOz; 32% in sequential
O3 þ PhCat. For oxalic acid
removal: Only PhCatOz in
10 min. Mechanism,
synergism.
54
Various TiO2
(4.13%–5.36%) on
foamed Al2O3
2 Surfactants (32–4 mg L1),
1 textile dye and phenol
(25 mg L1 each) in
UP and WW
Semibatch packed bed
photoreactor with 3
UVA lamps (360 nm)
1.4 mg L1 Dissolved O3
pH0 ¼ 4.9
4 mW cm2
Total TOC removal between
2 (dye) and 3 h (surfactants)
with PhCatOz. 90% TOC
removal in WW with
PhCatOz. Synergism.
55
P25 TiO2
0.25 g L1
Carbamazepine
200 mg L1
4 L Semibatch reactor in
a black wooden box
and 4 black light lamps
(350–400 nm)
35 L h1
13 mg L1 O3
1.4  106 Einstein s1
Light inhibition V. Fischeri.
Mortality/immobility and
chronic reproduction
bioassays of D. Magna
56
UVA Photocatalytic Ozonation of Water Contaminants
175

Table 6.1
(Continued)
Catalysts
Target pollutants
Reactor and radiation
source
Ozonation conditions
Process performance
Ref.
Me–TiO2
Me ¼ Au, Ag, Pd,
Pt 70 mg L1
5 parabens
10 mg L1 each
2 L Semibatch reactor
with 3 UVA lamps
(365 nm)
O3 data given as TOD
5.75107
Einstein1 Ls1
Toxicity with V. Fischeri and
C. fluminea (clams). Best and
worst catalysts: Ag/TiO2 and
Au/TiO2, respectively. TOD
measurements.
Intermediates. Energy
consumption
57
TiO2 and Me–TiO2
Me ¼ Ag, Cu, Fe
0.1–1 g L1
Waterborne pathogens
(Escherichia coli, Salmonella,
Shigella and Vibrio cholera)
in SEMWW
(COD: 32 mg L1)
0.7 L Semibatch reactor
with UVA lamp
(366 nm)
1 tube solar CPC
20.83 mg L1 min1 O3
Bacterial inactivation
eﬃciency, post-disinfection
regrowth and synergism
studies. Bacterial cells
irreparably damaged with
PhCatOz. Ag–TiO2 best
catalyst
58
Cellullose fibers/
TiO2 (4 g)/zeolite/
Silica
Flumequine and
Claritromycine
10 to 40 mg L1
Falling (staircase) film
reactor with 3 UVA
lamps (365 nm) with
water recirculation
Water: 70–150 L h1
0–6 mmol L1 H2O2
O3 conc. and gas flow
rate not given
14.5–28 W m2
Eﬀect of UVA intensity.
Langmuir kinetics.
Scavenger eﬀect. Slight rate
increases by adding H2O2
(UVA/cat/H2O2) and ozone
(PhCatOz) and both.
Intermediate identification.
59
C3N4 and
nanostructured
C3N4 (100 mg L1)
Oxalic acid, Melamine,
phenol, tiophene (1 mM),
BPA 50 mg L1)
0.4 L semibatch reactor
with simulated solar
light
6 L h1
45 mg L1 O3
0.42 W cm2
DFT study. ROS
determination. Catalyst
stability. Measurements of
TOC, NO3
 with and without
organics presence
60
gC3N4/FeVO4
gC3N4/FeO4/Fe@NH2
Biochar
0.5 g L1
Methyl-paraben,
o-chlorophenol
20 mg L1 each
0.5 L batch reactor
exposed to sunlight
pH0 ¼ 3–11
104 M initial
dissolved O3
Lower band gap than TiO2.
Catalyst reusability.
Cytotoxicity. Adsorption
kinetics. Pseudo first-order
kinetics for AOP.
Measurements of H2O2
61
176
Chapter 6

formed. Scavenger eﬀect.
Mechanism of reactions.
TiO2, MWCNT, P25
TiO2/MWCNT
0.5 g L1
Aniline
1 mM
0.25 L semibatch reactor
with medium-pressure
mercury lamp and
glass filter (366, 436
and 546 nm
9 L h1
50 mg L1 O3
43 mW cm1;
1.61  107
Einstein1 L s1
Pseudo first-order kinetics.
100% removal in 9 min with
PhCatOz and CatOz. Similar
mineralization with
diﬀerent catalysts in
PhCatOz and much higher
than O3 or CatOz
62
TiO2/glass beads
180 L coral reef aquarium
water with small marine
organisms and 34 g L1
sea salts
Semibatch recirculated
reactor with black light
lamp (350–400 nm)
10 L h1
24 W m2
Cycles of ozonation and
photocatalysis: bromate
reduction, organics removal.
63
TiO2, Me–TiO2
Me: Cu, Ag, Fe
0.5 g L1
Phenol in UPW and SEMWW
5 mg L1
0.7 L Semibatch
cylindrical
photoreactor with UVA
lamp and 1 tube CPC
solar photoreactor
20.8 mgL1min1 O3 gas
Electrical energy per order,
average oxidation state,
cytotoxicity. Better figures
for PhCatOz. Better catalysts
Ag or Fe/TiO2: 7–8
kW m3 order1. Slight
decrease in catalyst activity.
64
0.16% TiO2/Glass
Raschig rings
Diﬀerent bacteria in Surface
water and MWW
COD: 29–95 mg L1
BOD: 5–25 mg L1
Continuous (0.9 L h1)
Semibatch flow packed
bed reactor with water
recirculation (5.4
L h1) and 2 UVA LED
(382 nm)
9 L h1
50 mg L1 O3 gas
450 W m2
Bacteria present in regrowth
after disinfection with Oz,
UVA and PhCatOz. Eﬀects on
DNA. Similar structure of
bacterial community after
3 days storage of treated
samples.
65
TiO2 nanotubes
2,4-D and MCPA pesticides
20 mg L1
1.5 L semibatch ozone
reactor followed by a
tubular fixed bed UVA
LED (365 nm)
photoreactor
30–120 L h1
4.7 mg L1 dissolved O3
after 3 min
pH0 ¼ 5.4 (2,4-D), 8.5
(MCPA)
17.3 mW cm2
60 min: 100% 2,4D removal by
PhCatOz, 80% Oz, 30%
PhCat. 90%–95% removal in
commercial pesticide in 2 h
by PhCatOz. MCPA: 60 min
100% removal by PhCatOz
and Oz. 40% by PhCat
66
TiO2/glass beads
0.1 g TiO2
Nitrophenol (NP) in saline
wastewater with diﬀerent
metal ions
0.05–1.16 g L1 and
33 g L1 NaCl
Semibatch ozone reactor
plus a Cylindrical fixed
bed 125 W UVA LED
(365 nm) photoreactor
12.3 L h1
0.095–1.65 mgL1 O3 gas
Langmuir adsorption kinetics.
Similar NP removals due to
Oz and PhCatOz. Total
removal of NP with PhCatOz
þ AC adsorption. Synergism
67
UVA Photocatalytic Ozonation of Water Contaminants
177

Table 6.1
(Continued)
Catalysts
Target pollutants
Reactor and radiation
source
Ozonation conditions
Process performance
Ref.
WW TOC: 74–100 mg L1
(plus GAC column in
some case)
eﬀects depend on the ratio
between the rate of PhCatOz
and amount of AC.
TiO2, Me–TiO2
Me: Cu, Ag, Fe
0.5 g L1
Phenol (5 mg L1) in SEMWW
DOC: 20 mg L1
COD: 42 mg L1
0.7 L Semibatch
cylindrical
photoreactor with 150
W UV lamp and 1 tube
CPC solar reactor
pH 6
20.8 mgL1min1 O3 gas
UV lamp: 70 mW cm2
Langmuir kinetics. Synergism
eﬀect. Phenol removal: 5%,
15% and 95% by Oz, PhCat
and PhCatOz, respectively,
in 60 min. Fe–TiO2 best
catalyst for mineralization:
90% in 2 h
68
TiO2/Carbon
supported on PTFE
membrane
2 mg TiO2 cm2
Methylene blue
3  105–9  105 M
Continuous tubular
membrane
photoreactor externally
exposed to UVA light
(365 nm)
0.12 L h1
O3 gas concentration
not given
Light intensity: 5–10
mW cm2
MB removal 25 min: approx.
98%, 73% and 42% with
PhCatOz, Oz and PhCat,
respectively. Release of
SO4
2. Pseudo first-order
kinetics
69
TiO2 nanotube
electrode
Textile wastewater
COD: 153 mg L1
OC: 550 mg L1
Color: 1080 mgPtCo L1
Semibatch
photochemical reactor
with UV lamp (315 nm)
DSA cathode in some
case
60–240 L h1
1.11–2.91 gO3 h1
pH0 ¼ 8
0.128 mW cm2
Photoelectrochemical
catalytic ozonation
performed better than the
other AOP included
PhCatOz. Synergism and
electrical energy per order
estimation
70
P25 TiO2, TiO2 and
TiO2/MWCNT
Tert-buthylazine
5 mg L1
Solar box. Xe lamp.
l: 300–800 nm
0.25 L Semibatch reactor
V ¼ 170 mL
20 L h1
10 mg L1 O3 gas
pH0 ¼ 6.1
581 W m2 (UV–Vis)
62 W m2 (UVA)
Freundlich isotherm analysis.
AC bed breakthrough curves.
Results also with UVC lamp.
Organic removal in 40 min:
80% Oz, 93% Sun/Oz, 100%
PhCatOz (P25 and TiO2 cat),
90% PhCatOz (TiO2/
MWCNT) but mainly due to
adsorption. Loss of activity
in reused TiO2/MWCNT cat.
RCT, mechanism and
intermediates.
71
178
Chapter 6

0.16% TiO2/glass
Raschig rings
Priority pollutants, CECs and
bacteria in MWW and
Surface Water
Diﬀerent concentrations from
mg L1 to ng L1
Continuous (0.9 L h1)
semibatch flow packed
bed reactor with water
recirculation (5.4
L h1) and 2 UVA LED
(382 nm)
0.9 L h1
50 mg L1 O3 gas
Removal of micropollutants.
Antibiotic resistance
genes(ARG) and antibiotic
resistance bacteria (ARB).
qPCR analysis. Microbial
inactivation and
reanimation. PhCatOz the
most eﬃcient AOP to remove
organics and microbial
loads including ARG.
72
Fe(III): 2.8 mg L1
Fe3O4: 150 mg L1
P25 TiO2: 0.25 g L1
Nine pharmaceuticals (200
mg L1 each) in PEMWW
Biological oxidation
reactor (HRT ¼ 7 h)
followed by 5 L CPC
solar reactor
34.8 L h1
13 L h1 O3 gas
pH 3 for Fe catalyst runs
pH 7 for TiO2 runs
30–40 kJ L1
accumulated energy
Biological oxidation: Partial
remove of some
pharmaceuticals. Total
removal of caﬀeine and
acetominophen: AOP:
PhCatOz best AOP for TOC
removal. In Fenton
processes, H2O2 is not added
but generated.
73
2 gC3N4 catalysts
1 g L1
Oxalic acid
1 mM
0.45 L Semibatch reactor
exposed to UV light
(200–400 nm) and also
with visible light (420–
800 nm)
6 L h1
5–60 mg L1 O3 gas
365 mW cm2
Catalyst optical properties.
Eﬀects of scavengers. Oxalic
acid removal: 0% CatOz,
20% PhCat (UV light), 100%
PhCatOz (UV light). Poorer
results with visible light.
74
nanoTiO2 coated on
quartz tubes
0.393 g L1
Tire cord wastewater
COD ¼ 450–500 mg L1
BOD5 ¼ 80–100 mg L1
TSS ¼ 120–360 mg L1
Continuous cylindrical
reactor with a UVA
lamp (365 nm)
300 L h1
H2O2: 10 mM
pH 3, 7, 11
60 mW cm2
2.3 gO3 gCOD1. Response
surface method applied with
COD, reaction time and
initial pH as variables.
Cycles of aeration and
ozonation. BOD/COD.
ANOVA results.
Intermediates. Eﬀect of
adding H2O2
75
UVA Photocatalytic Ozonation of Water Contaminants
179

Table 6.1
(Continued)
Catalysts
Target pollutants
Reactor and radiation
source
Ozonation conditions
Process performance
Ref.
TiO2 on
montmorillonite
0.005–0.08 g L1
Ciprofloxacin
5–25 mg L1
Semibatch cylindrical
reactor with 8W UVA
lamp (315–400 nm) in
axially situated
1–6 L h1
5 mg L1 O3 gas
Comparison with other
AOP: Removal in 30 in:
90% PhCatOz, 70% UVA/Cat,
70% O3. Synergism.
Scavenger eﬀect.
Intermediates. Mechanism.
Reusability. Eﬀect of water
matrix
76
P25 TiO2
0.005–0.5 g L1
Clopyralid, picloram, triclopyr
5 and 20 mg L1
1 L cylindrical reactor
with 4 external UVA
black lamps
(350–400 nm)
30 L h1
50 mg L1
1–14  107
Einstein1 Ls1
Comparison with other AOP.
Better process: PhCatOz.
Kinetics of UVC/H2O2.
Influence of variables.
Chloride and nitrate
determination. Reusability.
Eco-toxicity bioassays with
Daphnia parvula and Culex
pipiens larvae
77
P25 TiO2
0.5 g L1
Amoxicilin and diclofenac
(0,1 mM each) and 35
micropollutants in real
MWW at mg L1 and ng L1
level
Semibatch cylindrical
reactor with UVA/
visible lamp
(l4300 nm)
9 L h1
50, 70, 90 mg L1
Little diﬀerences for remove
DCF and AMX with O3,
PhCatOz. Important
diﬀerences in TOC removal
with phCatOz as better
process. Growth inhibition
of Escherichia coli DSM 1103
and Staphylococcus aureus
DSM 1104
78
MWCN–TiO2
0.2 g L1
Four pharmaceuticals
10 mg L1
1 L semibatch glass
cylindrical reactor and
solar chamber and Xe
lamp (l4300 nm)
20 L h1
6 mg L1 O3 gas
pH 3 to 9
Lamp: 550 W m2
Catalyst characterization.
Mineralization measured as
TOC and inorganic anions
(F, Cl, NO3
, NH4
1, SO4
¼.
Some adsorption noted.
TOC removal: 63% in
PhCatOz. Catalyst
reusability.
79
180
Chapter 6

Fe(III)(2.8 mg L1)
and TiO2 (0.2 g L1)
Six pharmaceuticals
(0.2 mg L1 each) in
SEMWW(COD: 59
BOD5: 10 mg L1)
5 Tube CPC reactor with
solar light
40 L h1
13 mg L1 O3 gas
pH 3 (Fenton processes)
Solar light: 33 kJ L1
accumulated energy
AOP comparison. Pseudo first-
rate constants. Time for 99%
organic removal. Phenolics
intermediates. Ecotoxicity.
Energy cost.
Biodegradability. Hydroxyl
radical exposure.
80
Fe(III) (2.8 mg L1)
and Fe3O4
(0.15 g L1)
BPA and five pharmaceuticals
(0.1 mg L1 each) in
synthetic WW (TOC: 20,
COD: 56 BOD5: 14 mg L1)
Semibatch agitated tank
with two external UVA
black light lamps
(365 nm)
35 L h1
13 mg L1 O3 gas
pH 3 (buﬀered) and
pH 7
Lamps: 7.05  105
Einstein1 Ls1
Direct ozonation as main
oxidation way. RCT to
predict organic
concentration with time.
TOC and COD % removals of
80 and 90, respectively, with
PhCatOz. Biodegradability
increase after ozone
processes. Ecotoxicity
81
TiO2, (P25), Nb2O5,
SnO2, WO3, Fe2O3,
In2O3, and BiVO4,
2 g L1
Oxalic acid: 10 mM
Semibatch agitated tank
with Xe lamp
(360–470 nm)
32 L h1
14 mg L1 O3 gas
pH 2.1
200 mW
TOC removal: Eﬃcacy of
catalysts with PhCatOz:
TiO24WO3 4 In2O3
4 BiVO4 4 SnO2PNb2O5
4 Fe2O3
With visible light: WO3 best
catalyst
82
TiO2/ceramic plates
on the four walls of
photoreactor
Phenazopyridine (PzP)
25 mg L1
2 L semibatch
rectangular glass
reactor with UVA lamp
(354 nm)
1–10 L h1
0.3–5 mg L1
dissolved O3
pH 7
Influence of variable on PzP
removal. Mechanism.
Synergism. Formation of
H2O2. Scavengers.
Intermediates. Ecotoxicity
83
As in [73]
Three pharmaceuticals
As in [73]
As in [73]
Central composite design.
Mechanism. Intermediates.
84
As in [71]
As in [71]
As in [71]
[71]
AOP comparison, synergism,
ozone demand, energy
requirements. Kinetics.
85
0.5%–0.8% B–TiO2
Four pesticides
As in [71]
10 L h1
86
UVA Photocatalytic Ozonation of Water Contaminants
181

Table 6.1
(Continued)
Catalysts
Target pollutants
Reactor and radiation
source
Ozonation conditions
Process performance
Ref.
0.33 g L1
5 mg L1 each
5 mg L1 O3 gas
550 W m2
Catalyst characterization. AOP
comparison: Better
eﬃciency of B-TiO2 than
TiO2. No diﬀerences in
ozone processes to remove
the organics. TOC removal
%: 20 in O3, 45 in PhOz and
70–80 in PhCatOz.
Reusability.
CeO2
0.25 g L1
N,N-Diethyl-meta-toluamide
5 mg L1
As in [71]
15 L h1
10 mg L1 O3 gas
pH0 ¼ 6
550 W m2
Catalyst characterization. AOP
comparison: DEET: no
removal with PhCat and
similar removal rate in
ozone processes. TOC
removal, %: 19 in O3, 24 in
CatOz, 47% SolarCatOz and
80% in PhCatOz. H2O2
formation.
87
P25 TiO2 and WO3
0.25 g L1
Primidone
0.5 mg L1 in UPW
0.5 mg L1 in SEMWW
(COD: 47, BOD5: 11, TOC: 14
in mg L1)
As in [71]
20 L h1
10 mg L1 O3 gas
pH0 ¼ 6
550 W m2
Organic removal similar in
both water matrices. WO3
poor catalytic eﬀect in
SEMWW. AOP comparison:
TOC removal increase with
PhCatOz. Scavengers study.
Intermediates. Mechanism.
Ecotoxicity
88
MOF ¼ MIL-100(Fe)
1 g L1
Three pharmaceuticals and
one pesticide
As in [71]
0.25–2.5 g H2O2/gMOF
0–0.25 gO3/gMOF
Catalyst characterization.
Activity and stability in
diﬀerent oxidizing
conditions (solar light,
ozone, H2O2). Fast organics
degradation but organic part
of catalyst leaches. Not
recommended for water
treatment.
89
aFrom 2015.
182
Chapter 6

concentration of this metal in water, about 0.3 mg L1. This chapter is ad-
dressed to heterogeneous photocatalytic ozonation, where catalysts of diﬀer-
ent natures or compositions have been used. In all these works, an important
part is dedicated to characterizing the catalyst. Characterization techniques
allow catalyst properties to be known. These properties are related to crystal
phases present and aspects such as crystallinity; crystal size (X-ray refraction
spectrometry, XRD); textural characteristics of external and internal areas,
pores size distribution, etc. (N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms, N2-AD,
mercury porosimetry); morphological features and microstructure (scanning
and transmission electron microscopies, SEM, TEM, or their high-resolution
means: HRSEM, HRTEM, the former used, in some cases, to energy
disperse X-ray spectroscopy, EDS, for elemental composition of catalysts and
its elements); atomic surface composition or chemical state of elements (X-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy, XPS); optical properties such as wavelength range
of absorbed radiation and band gap (UV–visible diﬀuse reflectance spec-
troscopy, UV–vis DRS); surface-active functional groups in catalysts (Fourier
transform infrared spectroscopy, FTIR); thermal catalyst stability (thermo-
gravimetric analysis, TA); magnetic properties (superconducting quantum
interference device magnetometer, SQUID); adsorption potential (pH of point
of zero charge, pHpzc); thickness of metal catalysts on support (wavelength
dispersive X-ray fluorescence, WDXRF); eﬀectiveness of coating technique
(atomic force microscopy, AFM); elemental composition (elemental analyzer,
EA); C hybridization in carbon materials (Raman spectroscopy, RM); metal
determination (inductive coupled plasma with mass spectrometry, ICP MS);
and photochemical charge separation and transfer process (electrochemical
impedance spectroscopy, EIS). Table 6.2 shows the number of works quoted in
Table 6.1 that have used these techniques. As can be seen, XRD, SEM, N2-AD
Table 6.2
Catalyst characterization techniques and number of UVA
photocatalytic ozonation works that have used them.
Characterization techniques
Number of works quoted in Table 6.1
XRD
25
SEM
25
N2-AD
22
XPS
18
UVvisDRS
13
TEM, HRTEM
11
SEM-EDS
8
FTIR
8
SQUID
6
pHpzc
6
TA
6
WDXRF
4
AFM
3
EA
2
RM
2
ICP MS
2
EIS
1
UVA Photocatalytic Ozonation of Water Contaminants
183

and XPS are the most used of these techniques due to the important prop-
erties they allow to be identified. These properties are intimately related to the
activity, stability and selectivity of catalysts.
Among catalysts, TiO2 is the most common material (see Table 6.1). Several
reasons have already been reported many times, such as low cost, high sta-
bility, capability of being linked to other metals, non-metals, metal oxides,
carbon materials, etc. As a consequence, nearly all researchers have focused
their attention on heterogeneous PhCatOz and TiO2 as catalyst, used in dif-
ferent forms: in powder,40 as nanotubes,34 fibers,59 doped with some other
metal such as Au, Ag, Pt43,54,57 or non-metal such as nitrogen,39 linked to other
metal oxides,38 supported on other materials such as glass, aluminum foam,
activated carbon, membranes,36,51,55,65,69 or being part of metal organic
frameworks,89 etc. These TiO2 catalysts were prepared for two main reasons:
First is to make TiO2 active under visible light; due to the high band gap that
TiO2 presents (3.2 eV), only radiations lower than 385 nm can be valid to excite
it. Second, it can be magnetized or supported on some porous or non-porous
materials36,38,52 to facilitate its separation from water once used. Some im-
portant aspects of these works are highlighted here. Very recently, TiO2 na-
notube arrays have been prepared for application in photocatalytic oxidation.
According to Ye et al.,91 this catalyst organization presents large surface area
and high stability, and it can easily be recovered for subsequent reuse. After
being first applied on the photocatalytic oxidation of metoprolol, a pharma-
ceutical beta-blocker, it was used to remove hazardous compounds such as
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons from oﬀshore produced water.34 These na-
notubes present diameters between 75 and 100 nm and a thickness of about
42 nm. This tube structure facilitates the charge transfer reducing the
electron–hole recombination reaction and increasing the quantum yield of the
catalyst.92 A composite of TiO2 and multi-wall carbon nanotube (MWCNT) has
been used to remove aniline.62 According to Orge et al.,62 the role of the
MWCNT phase in the composite catalyst can be due to three possible routes:
(1) dispersing media for TiO2 nanoparticles, (2) co-adsorbent, and (3) photo-
sensitizer. The first means of action is promoted when TiO2 particles are
simultaneously generated during the synthesis of the composite catalyst so
that chemical groups at the surface of the CNT may act as anchoring points to
TiO2 nanoparticles. In this way, electron–hole recombination is reduced, and
photosensitization is promoted. In other works,43,54,57 metals (Ag, Pt, Pd, Au,
Cu and Fe) were doped to TiO2. These works report that indirect/direct band
gaps of pure TiO2 (3.27 eV/3.38 eV) were reduced to 3.00 eV from 3.22 eV, to
2.74 eV from 3.23 eV, to 2.59 eV from 3.19 eV and to 2.5 eV from 3.13 eV for
TiO2–Ag, TiO2–Pt, TiO2–Au and TiO2–Pd (all 0.5 wt%), respectively, from pure
TiO2, thus enhancing the absorption of visible light.
For catalyst synthesis, some diﬀerent methods were followed. In some of
them, TiO2–Pt, TiO2–Pd and TiO2–Ag were prepared by UV reduction of
chloride salts of Pt41, Pd21 and Ag1 in TiO2 (P25) suspension, while, in
others, TiO2–Au was prepared by the sol–gel method43 or UV-reduction of
Pt41, Pd21 and Ag1 ions in a titanium dioxide suspension through
184
Chapter 6

photodecomposition.57 Another form of improving TiO2 absorption of light
is doping with non-metals. These dopants also interact with the electronic
molecular orbitals and reduce the band gap to increase the absorption of
TiO2 in the visible or solar spectrum range. As an example, Fernandes et al.39
used a N–TiO2 catalyst to increase the removal of parabens. They prepared
their catalyst from titanium(IV) isopropoxide (97%) and ammonium hy-
droxide as a titanium precursor and doping agent, respectively, to finally
obtain a ratio of 10% (w/w) of N. Another group of important TiO2-derived
catalysts are those incorporating a magnetic material.36,38,47,49 Represen-
tative of this group is the work of Cha´vez et al.36 The catalyst used was based
on a magnetically activated carbon material (Fe3O4/AC). The carbon part
provides high surface area that makes these catalysts suitable for AOP. In
Cha´vez’s work,36 TiO2 (anatase) was incorporated into the Fe3O4/AC struc-
ture to yield hybrid materials with high photocatalytic performance under
solar radiation. The synthesis method is shown in detail by Quin˜ones et al.93
Figure 6.1 shows a typical XRD pattern of the magnetic catalyst.
Another example is TiO2-based catalysts as supported catalysts.41,44,51,71,75
The material supporting the catalyst should be porous to increase the spe-
cific surface, but its main function is to serve for easy separation from water.
A specific example of this type of catalyst is the work of Rodriguez et al.,44
wherein a TiO2/alumina foam and TiO2/glass ring materials were used to
remove DEET from water. Another similar work was reported by Cha´vez
et al.,51 wherein TiO2 was also supported on glass Raschig rings to remove
contaminants of emerging concern (pharmaceuticals) from a real secondary
urban wastewater eﬄuent (see Section 6.5.3). Other materials used as sup-
port were montmorillonite (MMT)76 and ceramics.83,84 The first material
allows a high dispersion of TiO2 particles into layered MMT structures that
lead to the stabilization of TiO2 particles and allows for many molecules to
have easier access to the surface of TiO2 crystals. Other ceramics used were
obtained through sol–gel dip-coating procedures to immobilize TiO2 nano-
particles on ceramic plates.83 Thus organically modified silica (ormosil) was
used as hydrophobic binder. The coating solution (constituted by methanol,
TiO2 nanoparticles and methyltrimethoxysilane) was adjusted to achieve the
required TiO2/ormosil weight ratio of 0.240.
Recently, a new TiO2 composite is being investigated: graphene oxide/TiO2
(GO/TiO2).94 Graphene discovered in 2004 can be considered a 2D material
that can be formed from strong oxidation of graphite95 that first yields
graphite oxide. This oxide still keeps the 3D form of graphite, but it contains
numerous oxygen groups such as carboxylic, hydroxyl, epoxide, etc.96 In a
second step, graphite oxide is exfoliated with ultrasound radiation to form a
similar oxide but containing fewer than ten layers of a honeycomb structure
of sp2 carbon atoms. This oxide is called graphene oxide. In PhCatOz, among
the many properties GO presents, electrical conductivity is used to avoid the
electron–hole recombination process, thus increasing the formation rate of
hydroxyl radicals. Some molecular orbital of GO presents potential redox
between those of the valence and conduction bands of TiO2, facilitating the
UVA Photocatalytic Ozonation of Water Contaminants
185

transition of electrons to this GO orbital and then being conducted away to
avoid recombination (see reaction (6.12) and Figure 6.197). Because GO/TiO2
composites are prepared for visible light PhCatOx or PhCatOz, this AOP
process is not commented in this chapter.
In relation to catalysts diﬀerent from TiO2, graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4
composites), other metal oxides,46,50,82,88 magnetite,42,47 Cd/ZnO or metal/
ZnS, graphene/Fe3O4
41,50 can be cited. Likely, gC3N4 composites60,61,74 deserve
special consideration due to their activity as metal-free photocatalysts. These
catalysts can easily be synthesized through direct polymerization of cheap
feedstocks. They present a very narrow band gap of 2.7 eV, which permits the
absorption of visible light.98 Also, g-C3N4 exhibits high thermal and chemical
stability due to the presence of a tri-s-triazine ring structure. For instance, Xiao
et al.74 prepared GCN-T and GCN-D composites by direct polycondensation of
dicyandiamide and thiourea, respectively. They were applied to both UV and
visible light photocatalytic ozonation of oxalic acid (OA) and p-hydroxybenzoic
acid (PHBA). The work was aimed to show a high synergy between ozonation
and photocatalytic oxidation (see later Section 6.5.7). Another group of
Figure 6.1
XRD patterns of the AC support and some TiFeC catalysts. Crystalline
phases detected: anatase (A), magnetite/maghemite (M), graphite (G),
quartz (Q), cristoballite (C). TiFeC-3* represents catalyst TiFeC-3 after
being used in ten consecutive photocatalytic ozonation runs. Repro-
duced from ref. 93 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2014.
186
Chapter 6

catalysts tested in photocatalytic ozonation are metal organic frames which
are materials based on the coordination of metal ions or clusters and organic
linkers. These components make possible the synthesis of composites with
tunable properties valid for diﬀerent applications.99 Properties such as a well
developed and ordered porous structure, large surface areas, flexible frame-
work or UV–visible light response make some of them good for water purifi-
cation both with adsorption or with diﬀerent advanced oxidation processes
(AOPs).100 However, their stability in water or in the presence of strong oxi-
dants is a matter of controversy. In a recent paper, Cha´vez et al.89 studied this
problem with MIL-100Fe composed of iron nodes and 1,3,5-benzene-
tricarboxylate (H3BDC or trimesic acid, TMA) as a bridging ligand (chemical
formula Fe3O(H2O)2(F/OH){C6H3(COO)3}2nH2O with nB14.5). It was observed
that stability depended on the conditions of use. At high doses of ozone or
hydrogen peroxide with radiation, a large mass loss of the catalyst was ob-
served, and moderate stability was obtained in less severe conditions. How-
ever, in any case, MIL-100(Fe) presented surface oxidation/decarboxylation.
Figure 6.2 shows how this catalyst is eﬀective in PhCatOz processes to remove
a series of emerging contaminants and simultaneously to release the organic
linker, trimesic acid. The final conclusion is that this material is not very
appropriate for PhCatOz processes.
The stability of catalysts is linked to their activity, and this property is
often studied by researchers carrying out repetitive runs with the same
amount of catalyst and fresh solutions of the organics studied. In most
cases, high activity is reported, regardless of the catalyst used, organics
treated and radiation source.
6.5.2
Radiation Sources
UVA PhCatOz works mainly using three types of radiation sources emitted
between 300 and 400 nm: UVA lamps, UVA LEDs, solar simulators (with Xe
lamps provided with filters) and solar radiation. Solar simulators are also
used without visible light filter so that an electromagnetic radiation spec-
trum similar to that of the Sun is applied.
Regarding the use of lamps, for example, Oropesa et al.56 used four 15 W
black light lamps (Lamp 15 TBL HQ Power TM Vellemans) placed in the
corners inside a 503030 cm black wooden box. These lamps emit radi-
ation in the range of 350–400 nm centered atB370 nm with an incident
photon flux of 1.4106 Einstein s1. Mecha et al.58,68 worked with a
medium-pressure mercury lamp (Heraeus TQ 150W), placed axially in a
quartz immersion tube with a light intensity of 70 m Wcm2. Gmurek et al.43
applied to their reacting system three black light, blue glass lamps, with the
maximum emission of 365 nm with an incident intensity of 5.75107
Einstein L1 s1 (8.9 W m2).
UVA LEDs are used for their lower cost and energy consumption compared
to lamps due to long duration and being more environmentally attractive
(they are mercury-free devices). Examples of the use of UVA LED can be seen
UVA Photocatalytic Ozonation of Water Contaminants
187

in several works.34,40,51,72 For instance, Moreira et al.40,72 and Cha´vez et al.51
used two 10 W UV LEDs (15.5 mm23 mm), with main emission at 382 nm
and long service life (intensity remains above 70% after 10 000 h work).
According to the authors, 382 nm was chosen as a compromise between the
cost of LEDs (increasing when the emission wavelength decreases) and the
possibility of achieving an overlap between the LED’s main emission wave-
length and the TiO2 absorption spectrum. In a more recent work, Liu et al.34
Figure 6.2
(a) Removal of CECs and TMA released into the reaction medium by
diﬀerent ozonation processes using MIL-100(Fe)-OW as catalyst. (b) TOC
removal by diﬀerent ozonation processes. Experimental conditions:
V ¼ 0.25 L; pH0 ¼ 4.8 (free); T ¼ 25–40 1C; simulated solar irradiance (if
applied) ¼ 550 W m2; gas flow rate (O2/O3) ¼ 10 L h1; gas inlet O3
concentration ¼ 6 mg L1; initial CECs concentration ¼ 10 mg L1 each;
initial TOC concentration ¼ 26 mg L1; MOF dose (if applied) ¼ 0.2 g L1.
Reproduced from ref. 89 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2021.
188
Chapter 6

used ten UV-LEDs mainly emitting at 365 nm. Light intensity was between
4.25 mW cm2 and 9.93 mW cm2. Figueredo et al.40 used six 3 W LEDs
(LZ4-04UV00), each with maximum emission at 365 nm. The photon flux per
unit volume, in this case, was 3.92105 Einstein L1 s1. As can be de-
duced, wavelengths of about 390 nm are approximately the limit above
which TiO2 is non-active as a catalyst due to its large band gap.
However, the most used radiation source is solar simulator or direct solar
light with diﬀerent reactor configurations (see Section 6.5.3). Regarding solar
simulators, in nearly all cases a Xe lamp, the literature reports many
works.41,49,52,58,68,74,82 For instance, Mano et al.82 used a 300 W Xe lamp with an
IR cutoﬀfilter. The incident light power was about 200 mW covering a wave-
length range of 360 nmolo470 nm. They also worked with visible light ir-
radiation with a second cutoﬀfilter (l4410 nm). In another work,74 the same
system was used but this time without UVB–UVC filter so that the wavelength
of radiation extended from 200 to 400 nm. In this case, the aqueous solution
was irradiated with an average radiant flux of 365 mWcm2. Cha´vez et al.41,52
and Alvarez et al.71 irradiated their solutions with a solar box (Suntest CPS,
Atlas) provided with a 1500 W Xe lamp and cutoﬀfilters (l ¼ 300–800 nm, ir-
radiation intensity 550 W m2). Zeng et al.49 simulated solar light with a 350 W
xenon lamp with 290 nm cut-oﬀfilters. Xiao et al.60 simulated sunlight with an
AM 1.5G solar simulator that supplied a 0.42 W cm2 light intensity.
Direct solar radiation is also one of the most used radiation sources in UVA
PhCatOz (see Table 6.1). In Section 6.5.3, more details about the experimental
reactor solar system are given. In some cases, data about the radiation intensity
are given with coordinates of the place where experiments were done,42 with
the latitude,53,73,80,85 the time of year43 or the average irradiance.43,58
6.5.3
Reactor Type
The third important factor of UVA PhCatOz is the reactor type. This depends
on the radiation source to be applied, i.e. lamps, LEDs or directly from the
sun, and how the catalyst is charged. In most cases, the reactors work in a
semi-batch way by continuously feeding mixtures of ozone–oxygen or ozone–
air and with the water to be treated charged or recirculating by a pump
through another tank to ensure good mixing conditions.35,38,40 When lamps
are used, the simplest form of photoreactor was a tank provided with the
necessary inlets and outlets for gas, sampling, etc., a quartz plate as a tap and
a lamp above the tank.83 However, the main reactor configuration utilized is
the cylindrical tank provided with a borosilicate or quartz well axially situ-
ated in the center where the lamp is placed.39,47,76 This well can also have a
jacket in which water or a filtering solution is run to avoid some radiation
wavelength from the lamp reaching the water problem or simply for ther-
mostatic purposes. In some cases, regardless of the presence of the inside
lamp, the reactor was also surrounded by some other lamps to reinforce the
intensity of the light.56,77,81 In other cases, the inside walls were coated with
the catalyst, as in Fathinia and Khataee83 and Fathia et al.,84 where four
UVA Photocatalytic Ozonation of Water Contaminants
189

ceramic plates were installed on the four walls of the reactor with the surface
of the ceramic plates coated with TiO2 nanoparticles. In some other cases,
the reactor tank without any central lamp was situated inside a box, and the
inside box walls were covered with aluminum foil to increase light reflection
back to the tank.56 The tanks worked as slurry reactors when the catalyst was
charged in powder form37,40,48,50,56,74 or as a catalytic fixed bed when, for
instance, the catalyst was supported on some materials such as glass beads
or rings.45,67 A variation of this type of reactor was constituted by three lamps
equidistantly inserted in their corresponding wells inside the cylindrical
tank and around a positioned foam Al2O3 monolith with immobilized
TiO2.55 Another configuration of the cylindrical tank with the inside lamp
axially centered is the one provided with a series of quartz tubes surrounding
the lamp well and containing the catalyst (TiO2) coated on glass beads.75
An interesting type of reacting system is that combining photocatalysis,
ozone and membranes. An example of this kind is the optofluidic membrane
microreactor.69 This is a parallelepipedic chamber where two opposing walls
are polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) covers. Inside the chamber, a membrane
facing both PDMS walls and prepared from carbon paper divided the chamber
in the liquid reaction zone and the gas reaction zone. TiO2 impregnated the
membrane facing the liquid zone, while the other membrane side had been
treated with PTFE to ensure the hydrophobicity of the membrane favoring the
gas–liquid separation. The lamp is located in front of the PDMS cover in
contact with the liquid reaction zone. In this way, the ozone gas circulates
through one of the compartments while diﬀusing through the membrane to
the liquid reaction zone. In this zone, radiation incises and excites the TiO2
supported on the membrane69 while reacting with ozone.
Another type of reactor of increasing importance is one that allocates LEDs.
In this group, there are also diﬀerent possible configurations: LEDs are sub-
merged and situated in glass columns inside the reactor tank,34 or the tank is
placed inside a box with UVA LED placed in the box wall.51 Also, reacting
systems are constituted by a sequential reactor consisting of a perfectly mixed
ozonation tank followed by an UVA LED photoreactor tube.40 In this latter
case, the glass photoreactor tube was above a platform where LEDs oriented
toward the tube were equidistantly situated, as shown in Figure 6.3.
Similar to this was a sequential ozonation tank and LED photoreactor tube
where the catalyst was a TiO2 fixed bed.66 Another, UVA LED reactor con-
figuration was used here,51 consisting of a glass-packed bubble column fil-
led with glass rings (coated with TiO2), a recirculating loop and eight 10 W
UVA LEDs positioned along the column as shown in Figure 6.4.
Photoreactors used with solar simulation or when direct solar radiation is
used constituted another important group. With solar-simulated radiation,
the photochemical reactor, a tank of diﬀerent geometrical forms, with inlet
and outlet for the gas and a sampling port, is placed inside a chamber or solar
simulator where a Xe lamp is also situated above the tank (Figure 6.5).
The lamp is surrounded by a transparent film filter to avoid radiation lower
than 300 nm to reach the tank so that only UVA–visible radiation is
190
Chapter 6

used.36,79,86–88 The spectrum of this Xe lamp radiation is practically coincident
with that of the Sun reaching the Earth’s surface,36 as shown in Figure 6.6.
When direct solar radiation is used, the simplest configuration is the tank or
tube exposed to the Sun.61 In these cases, a reactor tube is usually utilized.
However, a better configuration that is used is constituted by the photoreactor
tube provided with some gas inlet, a tank as water reservoir connected to a gas
separation unit and a pump that recirculates the water problem through the
system. In most cases, the photoreactor section consists of several tubes
connected in series and placed above anodized aluminum reflectors usually
oriented to the south and tilted at an angle equal to the latitude of the place.
The system is also provided with a broadband UV radiometer tilted at the same
angle as that of the photoreactor tubes to measure the instantaneous solar and
accumulated UV light absorbed. This kind of system is called a compound
parabolic collector (CPC) and has been used in some works.53,73,80 Figure 6.7
shows an example of this solar photoreactor.
Finally, another interesting reacting system that can be used with solar
radiation or UVA lamps has been reported.41 The reactor is called the falling
film photoreactor since it is formed by a staircase where the falling water
forms a thin film while receiving radiation from above from UVA lamps or
the Sun. Six regular steps of the same dimensions (depth/height/width:
6 cm/6 cm/25 cm) are covered with the TiO2 (0.18 m2: 72 cm25 cm cor-
responding approximately to 4 g of catalyst). The system allows high catalyst
surface and improves oxygenation of the waste solution.
6.5.4
Organics Studied and Water Matrices
A high variability of organic compounds have been treated with UVA
PhCatOz, as Table 6.1 shows. This is likely due to the high oxidation power
Figure 6.3
Experimental setup of a UVA LED photocatalytic ozonation reacting
system. Reproduced from ref. 40 with permission from the Royal Society
of Chemistry.
UVA Photocatalytic Ozonation of Water Contaminants
191

of hydroxyl radicals and ozone. The first one reacts unselectively with or-
ganics regardless of their molecular structure, and the second one due to its
selective capacity to attack compounds with specific functional groups in
their molecules.101 For instance, phenols and many pharmaceutical com-
pounds present in their molecules are candidate groups for removal from
water by means of the sole action of ozone reactions.
The compounds named in Table 6.1 have been studied because they entail
environmental issues so that the nature of the water matrix where they are
usually found is also studied. Particularly, due to the unselective character of
hydroxyl radical oxidation, studies of the PhCatOz of organics in a real water
matrix results fundamentally in discerning the scavenging eﬀect of other
Figure 6.4
UVA LED photoreactor system with a packed bed column (TiO2 sup-
ported on glass Raschig rings) and a recirculating system: (1) reservoir,
(2) magnetic stirrer, (3) ozone generator, (4) ozone analyzer, (5) ceramic
diﬀuser, (6) box of LEDs, (7) fan, (8) loop column, (9) packed column,
and (10) glass-coated or uncoated rings. From A.M. Cha´vez, A.R. Ribeiro,
N.F.F. Moreira, A.M. T. Silva, A. Rey, P.M. A´lvarez and F.J. Beltra´n,
‘‘Removal of Organic Micropollutants from a Municipal Wastewater
Secondary Eﬄuent by UVA-LED Photocatalytic Ozonation,’’ Catalysts
2019,
9,
472.
Reproduced
from
ref.
51,
https://doi.org/10.3390/
catal9050472, under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
192
Chapter 6

non-targeting substances present in the water. Carbonates are a clear example
of this because they consume hydroxyl radicals, and their presence decreases
or even inhibits real contaminant oxidation (see Section 6.5.6). Therefore,
works dealing with surface water,72 groundwater,76 aquacultural water,45,69
seawater45,67 and municipal35,36,44,48,53,72,73 and industrial46,50,58,64,65,70,75,79–81
wastewater have been the subject of study.
Among organics, the most treated are contaminants of emerging concern, that
is, pharmaceuticals and personal care products.35,36,38–40,43,49,51,53,57,59,72,79–81 As
far as personal care products are concerned, parabens removal is of the highest
interest.35,39,43,57,61 Parabens are widely used as antimicrobial and preservatives
in many pharmaceutical and personal care products, and their toxic character
and carcinogenic potential have also already been tested.102,103 They have also
been classified as potential endocrine disruptor compounds since they can
Figure 6.5
Experimental setup used for catalytic tests: (1) oxygen bottle, (2) ozone
generator, (3) flow meter, (4) ozone inlet analyzer, (5) ozone outlet analyzer,
(6) solar box, (7) reactor, (8) magnetic stirrer, (9) sampling port. Reproduced
from ref. 36 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2020.
Figure 6.6
Natural and simulated solar radiation (blue and red lines, respectively).
Cumulative irradiance and photon flux at given wavelength regions.
Reproduced from ref. 36 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2020.
UVA Photocatalytic Ozonation of Water Contaminants
193

Figure 6.7
Scheme of CPC photoreactor. Reproduced from ref. 85 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2015.
194
Chapter 6

interfere with animal and human hormonal systems.104 Also, herbicides,76,77
phenols54,61,64,68 and dyes47,55,69 constitute another group that has attracted the
attention of researchers, although to a lesser extent. Finally, other less studied
contaminants have been detergents55 and polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons.34
Low-molecular-weight carboxylic acids, such as oxalic, formic or oxamic acids,
have also been selected because they are simple molecules and usually final
products of ozonation and AOP.74,82 With the PhCatOz of these simple mol-
ecules, the presence of intermediates is avoided, and the activity of some new
synthesized catalysts can be better clarified as well as the mechanism steps of the
process. Another issue of relevance, as far as disinfection by-products formation
is concerned, is the presence of bromide ions in water that, while being ozo-
nated, leads to bromate formation, a suspected carcinogenic. Then Parrino
et al.105 studied the possibility PhCatOz to improve the oxidation rate and to
reduce bromate formation. In their work, they used formic acid as the model
compound to check this possibility. Finally, another issue treated in PhCatOz
studies is the problem of antibiotic resistant bacteria (ARB), antibiotic resistant
genes (ARG)72 and pathogen removal and regrowth.58,65 In these works,58,65,72
the importance of PhCatOz to improve disinfection processes and the removal of
ARB and ARG is developed under diﬀerent experimental conditions. For in-
stance, Moreira et al.72 checked the importance of PhCatOz to remove diﬀerent
groups of cultivable microorganisms and housekeeping (16S rRNA) and anti-
biotic resistant or related genes (intI1, blaTEM, qnrS, sul1). Becerra-Castro
et al.65 observed the bacterial community composition of secondarily treated
urban wastewater and of surface water collected in a drinking water treatment
plant by comparing results before and three days after disinfection with ultra-
violet radiation, ozonation or photocatalytic ozonation. In their work they as-
sessed the dynamics of the bacterial communities during regrowth after
disinfection. Finally, Mecha et al.58 treated PhCatOz to inactivate waterborne
pathogens (Escherichia coli, Salmonella sp., Shigella sp. and Vibrio cholerae) in
synthetic water and secondary municipal wastewater eﬄuents (see more about
disinfection in Section 6.5.11.3).
6.5.5
AOP Comparison, Influence of Variables
Diﬀerent variables govern the performance of UVA PhCatOz—concentration of
catalyst, ozone and organics, intensity of incident radiation and wavelength or
energy supplied to the catalyst and ozone, etc.—but the first step to check the
benefits of this process is carrying out a comparison with other AOPs. This is
often what papers dealing with UVA PhCatOz first do. For that reason, before
beginning the functional evaluation of influence of variables, there is a com-
parison of several treatment processes: Photolysis, adsorption, ozonation,
photolytic ozonation, catalytic ozonation, photocatalytic oxidation and photo-
catalytic ozonation to degrade organic contaminants.36,66,71,76 When comparing
diﬀerent AOPs, especially considering their application in large-scale water
treatment, degradation eﬃciency is among the most crucial parameters. It re-
lates the required energy, oxidant or catalyst dose to the eﬃcacy of the treatment.
UVA Photocatalytic Ozonation of Water Contaminants
195

Amongst the various processes, as a rule of thumb, adsorption and pho-
tolysis have no significant contribution in the removal of contaminants; low
degradation rates are observed with PhCatOx (in the absence of ozone),
while PhCatOz presents the highest rates.66 Ozone-based processes generally
achieve complete conversion of some pollutants, as is the case of many
contaminants of emerging concern (CECs)36,79 (see Figure 6.8).
As far as mineralization is concerned, despite the higher degradation rates of
individual organics with ozone technologies, PhCatOz and single ozonation lead
to the highest and lowest TOC removal, respectively36,43,54,66,79 (see Figure 6.9).
Such improvement in oxidation eﬃciency is thought to be primarily due to the
increase of OH exposure since ozone is capable of trapping photocatalytically
generated electrons more eﬃciently than oxygen, avoiding, therefore, the re-
combination of electron–hole pairs. The mineralization of recalcitrant organic
compounds is the final goal of AOPs. The importance of the mineralization of
organic pollutants arises from the fact that occasionally intermediates formed
during degradation processes have higher toxicity than the parent compounds.
Furthermore, combining ozone and photocatalysis processes improves toxicity
removal.43 PhCatOz is, among the technologies studied by several authors, the
one that usually presents the highest rate of mineralization and toxicity removal.
Main experimental conditions of UVA PhCatOz involve the aspects
discussed next.
6.5.5.1
Photocatalyst Dosage
The photocatalyst dose for optimal operation is a parameter that is thor-
oughly evaluated in research articles. It is evident that this parameter is
Figure 6.8
Removal of CECs from SE (secondary eﬄuent) and SSE (synthetic
secondary eﬄuent) by diﬀerent treatment processes. Experimental con-
ditions: volume ¼ 0.75 L; pH ¼ 7.5–8.5; T ¼ 35 40 1C; simulated solar
irradiance (if applied) ¼ 550 W m2; catalyst dose (if applied) ¼ 0.4 g L1;
ozone dosage (if applied) ¼ 3.3 mg min1. Reproduced from ref. 36 with
permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2020.
196
Chapter 6

directly related to capital amounts in terms of the cost of semiconductor
materials required for water purification. As a rule of thumb, the increase of
catalyst dosage produces an enhancement in the degradation eﬃciency up
to a certain value. Then removal rates slightly decrease, in consonance with
the existence of an optimum concentration (as experimental observations
suggest).68,76 High loading of catalysts can increase solution opacity and
significantly decrease light penetration depth. This eﬀect may induce dead
zones where the catalyst is not photoactivated due to light hindering. Fur-
ther, the excessive mass of catalysts may induce particle aggregation, which
significantly diminishes the active surface area.
6.5.5.2
Role of pH
The pH of the solution is one of the most important parameters in photo-
catalytic reactions because it may aﬀect the surface charge properties of the
semiconductor, the substrate structure and consequently the equilibrium ad-
sorption (adsorption of contaminants onto photocatalyst surfaces is a key step
in photocatalytic processes). Therefore, this parameter is usually chosen as one
of the main process variables investigated in the UVA PhCatOz process. The
eﬀect of the initial pH on the degradation eﬃciency of organics in PhCatOz is
studied normally in the pH 3–11 range,68,76 though research eﬀorts have arrived
at diﬀerent results in some cases. Working at a pH where ozone is mostly in
molecular form usually leads to the best results. In this way, ozone is capable of
extracting electrons from the conduction band of the catalyst, thereby reducing
the unsuccessful electron–hole recombination. Nevertheless, a near neutral pH
has been the most recommended to improve PhCatOz performance.68
Figure 6.9
DOC removal from SE (secondary eﬄuent) and SSE (synthetic secondary
eﬄuent) by diﬀerent treatment processes. Experimental conditions:
volume ¼ 0.75 L; pH ¼ 7.5–8.5; T ¼ 35–40 1C; simulated solar irradiance
(if applied) ¼ 550 W m2; catalyst dose (if applied) ¼ 0.4 g L1; ozone
dosage (if applied) ¼ 3.3 mg min1. Reproduced from ref. 36 with per-
mission from Elsevier, Copyright 2020.
UVA Photocatalytic Ozonation of Water Contaminants
197

6.5.5.3
Initial Pollutant Concentration
Generally, the degradation rates of organic contaminants are increased
when the initial concentration is augmented. The increase in the oxidation
rates can be attributed to the quantitative increase of collisions among the
generated hydroxyl radicals and organic molecules when their concen-
trations increase.76,83
6.5.5.4
Eﬀect of Influent Ozone Gas Concentration
According to the related literature data, the increase in the ozone concen-
tration in the inlet gas results in a more eﬀective removal of organic com-
pounds in both PhCatOz and ozonation.83 Thus the eﬀect of influent ozone
gas concentration on PhCatOz of organic pollutants was investigated by
several authors at a fixed pH and at constant concentrations of organics and
catalyst. Results show that the PhCatOz degradation rate of contaminants
increases as the initial ozone gas concentration rises66 as a consequence of
the enhanced absorption of ozone molecules. Stabilization of the photo-
generated positive holes on the photocatalyst surface was a result of PhCa-
tOz, which favors the reaction between photogenerated electrons and
adsorbed ozone molecules and the adsorption of pollutants on the positively
charged photocatalyst surface.76
6.5.6
Ozone Consumption, Rct, RHOO3, Scavengers
Related to studies of mechanism and kinetics are those aspects concerning
the presence of scavengers, hydroxyl radical and ozone exposures and ozone
consumption. Information from them can be of importance to establish
some steps of the mechanism and then the kinetics of the UVA PhCatOz
process. Some of these aspects are represented by parameters such as RCT or
RHOO3.106–108 In this section, a brief resume is presented about what litera-
ture reports on these parameters. More information can be found in works
listed in Table 6.1.
Among ozone processes (ozonation alone or single ozonation, catalytic
ozonation, photolytic ozonation and photocatalytic ozonation), the amount
of ozone consumed per unit of organic carbon consumed is always lower in
UVA PhCatOz process, indicating that, in spite of being a system with more
agents to add or feed, it presents lower cost for the use of ozone.41,85 Another
parameter in a similar role is the transfer of ozone dose (TOD), which is
obtained from eqn (6.17):106,107
TOD ¼
ðt
o
vg
V CO3ge  CO3go


dt
(6:17)
where V is the reactor volume, vg is the gas flow rate and CO3ge and CO3go the
concentrations of ozone in the gas at the entrance and exit of the reactor,
respectively. TOD has been calculated as a way of measuring the
198
Chapter 6

concentration of hydroxyl radicals as indicated next.41,48,57 The concen-
tration of hydroxyl radicals results are fundamental to estimating the im-
portance of the free radical oxidation pathway or as a tool to measure the
synergism of PhCatOz (see Section 6.5.7). Also, the kinetic rate term of any
compound subjected to an advanced oxidation process contains this con-
centration, which has to be known in order to solve the corresponding mass
balance of the kinetic model (see Section 6.5.9). It could be said that the
classical way of measuring the hydroxyl radical concentration is through the
hydroxyl radical exposure, which can be obtained from eqn (6.18):108
ð
CHOdt ¼
ln
M
Mo


kHOM
(6:18)
where the left side of this equation is the hydroxyl radical exposure. The
right term represents the ratio between (1) the logarithm of remaining di-
mensionless concentration of a probe compound M that does not directly
react with ozone or absorb radiation of the wavelength emitted by the ra-
diation source and (2) the rate constant of the reaction between this com-
pound and hydroxyl radicals. The values of this integral are estimations of
the hydroxyl radical concentration.41,80 For instance, Cha´vez et al.41 calcu-
lated the hydroxyl radical exposure for diﬀerent ozone processes by using
cotinine, an alkaloid found in tobacco and main metabolite of nicotine that
fulfills the indicated requirements when UVA–visible radiation is applied.
Also, the concentration of hydroxyl radicals at any time can be obtained from
numerical derivation of eqn (6.18). Figure 6.10 shows as an example the
changes of hydroxyl radical exposure and hydroxyl radical concentration
with the corresponding times41 for some ozone processes, including UVA
PhCatOz using a solar simulator with a Xe lamp and a magnetic graphene
titania catalyst.
As can be seen from Figure 6.10, UVA PhCatOz presents the highest values
of both parameters, confirming that it is the most powerful AOP among the
processes studied.41
The ratio between the hydroxyl radical and ozone exposures, called RCT
after Elovitz and von Gunten,108 represents the yield of hydroxyl radicals,
another parameter usually obtained in ozone processes to estimate the im-
portance of the free radical oxidation way:
RCT ¼
Ð t
0CHOdt
Ð t
0CO3dt
(6:19)
In Cha´vez et al.,41 values of RCT for PhCatOz were 13- to 38-fold those of
single ozonation, confirming PhCatOz as a more powerful oxidation process.
RCT, however, depends on the ozone dose applied, and the values can change
with diﬀerent conditions of ozone supply. To solve this, Kwon et al.106 and
UVA Photocatalytic Ozonation of Water Contaminants
199

then Cruz-Alcalde et al.107 proposed the RHO,O3 concept, which is the hy-
droxyl radical exposure per TOD:
RHOO3 ¼
Ð t
0CHOdt
TOD
(6:20)
For instance, in Cha´vez et al.,41 RHOO3 values were 3.37–7.6 times higher in
PhCatOz than in single ozonation for the systems of Figure 6.10.
In order to clarify or establish the action of some radical oxygen species
(ROS), the hydroxyl radicals included, or the eﬀect on the specific surface
area of the photocatalyst, during studies of ozonation processes such as
PhCatOz, some substances are fed to the aqueous solution being investi-
gated. These substances are called scavengers since they react with some of
these ROS or adsorb on the catalyst surface, diminishing the number of
active sites where ozone or compounds can be adsorbed to react and in-
hibiting the oxidation rate of pollutants or organics present in the water.
Carbonates and phosphates are usually applied scavengers belonging to
both groups. Table 6.3 presents a list of scavenging substances and their role
(reacting with some ROS or reducing the catalyst surface area) that have
recently been used in PhCatOz studies.
Among scavengers, t-butanol is likely the most used to trap hydroxyl rad-
icals, since it is practically inert to ozone attack and does not absorb UVA–
visible radiation. However, its role as hydroxyl radical scavenger has been
questioned because its presence decreases the surface tension of the water
and then increases the specific surface area of ozone–oxygen or ozone–air
Figure 6.10
Evolution with (a) time of the hydroxyl radical exposure and (b) its
concentration for diﬀerent technologies combining simulated sunlight,
ozone and the photocatalyst 10-MG1-Ti. Dashed gray line: sum of
photolytic
and
catalytic
ozonation.
Experimental
conditions:
volume ¼ 500 mL; pH ¼ free (initially 5.7  0.4); QGAS ¼ 30 L h1;
CO3inlet ¼ 10 mg L1 (if required); C10-MG1-Ti ¼ 0.5 g L1 (if required);
CCTN, 0 ¼ 10 mg L1. Reproduced from ref. 41 with permission from
Elsevier, Copyright 2020.
200
Chapter 6

bubbles during ozonation processes when applied at high concentration
(4102 M).109 This increase means that the volumetric mass transfer of ozone
from the gas to the water also increases, favoring the absorption rate of ozone
and the amount of available dissolved ozone. Thus, on one hand, t-butanol
reacts with hydroxyl radicals decreasing the pollutant reaction rate when the
hydroxyl radical oxidation is important as in PhCatOz. On the other hand, if
supplied at high concentration, it increases the pollutant oxidation rate since
more ozone is available to be decomposed in hydroxyl radicals.
6.5.7
Synergism
It is well-known that the combination of various advanced oxidation pro-
cesses (AOPs) may result in an enhanced generation of oxidative species and
consequently in accelerating the degradation and mineralization of re-
fractory organic pollutants. As said previously, single photocatalysis and
single ozonation have great potential in wastewater treatment. Nevertheless,
when used individually, these processes have some drawbacks that limit
their eﬀectiveness in the degradation of organic pollutants. Photocatalysis is
a relatively slow process because of its low oxidation rate. Ozonation, in spite
of its two means of oxidation, leads to a partial oxidation to mineralize the
organic content of the water (1) by molecular ozone reactions, highly se-
lective, and (2) by hydroxyl radicals coming from ozone decomposition that
results in a low concentration of these species. Partial oxidation leads to the
formation of carboxylic acids as end products that cannot be further oxi-
dized; therefore, complete mineralization is not achieved. These disadvan-
tages make the individual application of these processes to treat polluted
water economically undesirable. PhCatOz has appeared to overcome these
shortcomings.68 Therefore, coupling heterogeneous photocatalysis and
ozonation produces hydroxyl radicals more successfully than ozonation or
photocatalytic oxidation, resulting in higher reaction rates and avoiding the
formation of toxic by-products.67 As a result, the degradation rate of PhCatOz
is higher than the sum of the degradation rates of ozonation and PhCatOx,
indicating the presence of a synergistic eﬀect between these two processes.
Table 6.3
Scavengers often used in PhCatOz processes.
Scavenger name and reference
Short live species undergoing
reaction or step aﬀected
CO3,2–36,41,48 EDTA59
Hydroxyl radical
PO4H2
,76 NO3
,76 Cl76,83
t-Butanol,38,60,61,76,83 Isopropanol59
F-,76,83 SO4
276
Adsorption
SO4,2–76 NO3
,76 Cl,76,83 I76
Holes
Oxalate38,49
EDTA61,76
I-,76 CrO4,2–49 CCl4
59
Electrons
Benzoquinone,49,76 L-ascorbic acid,76 CHCl3,76 N2,38
4-hydroxy-2,2, 6,6-tetramethylpiperidinyloxy61
Superoxide ion radical
UVA Photocatalytic Ozonation of Water Contaminants
201

This synergism is due to an increased generation of the reactive oxygen
species (ROS), mainly hydroxyl radicals, which is probably the result of the
following: (1) photocatalytically induced decomposition of ozone in non-
selective hydroxyl radicals, (2) the decreased recombination rate of electrons
and positive holes on the photocatalyst surface and (3) the action of dis-
solved ozone as an electron acceptor (ozone is a more powerful oxidant than
oxygen, and it can quickly capture the strong reducing electrons upon CB of
the photocatalysts). The synergism notably reduces the time needed for the
degradation and mineralization of pollutants, which is an important factor
to make the process practically viable.66 Therefore, photocatalytic ozonation
can be considered a truly desirable candidate for diﬀerent practical appli-
cations, such as aquaculture and waste and drinking water treatment.
6.5.8
Mechanisms of Reactions
Two types of mechanisms are explained or developed in understanding how
UVA PhCatOz works: the basic mechanism involving the initiation, propagation
and termination reactions of free radical chains, as presented in a simplified
manner in Sections 6.2–6.4, and the mechanism of formation and removal of
intermediates detected through chromatographic techniques (HPLC/MS,
GC/MS, etc.). Although the fundamentals of the free radical mechanism are well
understood, many works still deal with it in an attempt to justify the results they
have obtained,38,76 the role of catalysts they have used,49,76 the intermediates
they identified,83 the action of scavengers38,49,57,76 upon the removal of organics
treated and the improvement of reaction rates observed compared to ozone-free
photocatalytic oxidation.76,77 Also, in some works the authors attempt to
deepen and clarify some steps.49 An important conclusion highlighted in some
of these works derived from the radical chain mechanism is the number of
electrons needed to produce one hydroxyl radical, which is one in the PhCatOz
process against three in the PhCatOx process.77 In Hassani et al.,76 the steps
concerning the reactions of superoxide ion radicals with electrons in the metal
network of montmorillonite that allows the increase in the rate of ciprofloxacin
removal, the compound studied, are included in the classical mechanism. In
Yang et al.,110 electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR), in addition to some
classical scavengers, was used to deduce the action of ROS such as the hydroxyl
radical, superoxide ion radical and singlet oxygen. In the experiments, 5,5-di-
methyl-1-pyrroline (DMPO) and 2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-4-piperidinol (TEMP) were
chosen as spin trapping agents, respectively. Xie et al.,54 while studying the
PhCatOz of phenol and oxalic acid with Fe31/TiO2 catalyst, proposed diﬀerent
steps involving iron species to complete the radical chain PhCatOz process and
explain their evolution in water. Zeng et al.,49 in their work with TiO2–carbon
dots, concluded that electrons on the surface of carbon dots are trapped by
ozone and oxygen in order to generate ROS that eventually led to HO radicals to
remove ciprofloxacin. Their main conclusions are the three roles of carbon
dots: (1) increase light absorption, (2) very high electron transfer and (3) elec-
tron storage capacity.
202
Chapter 6

Intermediates identified in some works,54,57,62,83,84 on the other hand,
facilitated the establishment of a mechanism of molecular species and the
nature of the reactions between steps. For instance, in Gomes et al.,57
PhCatOz of parabens was studied with diﬀerent metal noble titania cata-
lysts. From intermediates formed, the authors proposed hydroxylation as the
most significant reaction pathway and hydroquinone, 4-HBA, 3,4-diHBA and
2,4-diHBA as the most commonly identified by-products from reactions with
ozone, hydroxyl radical and photocatalytic oxidation. In Yang et al.,110 from
intermediate identification and the aid of scavengers, a mechanism of re-
actions involving parent compound and intermediates was proposed. Fa-
thinia et al.,84 from the identification of intermediates of the PhCatOz of
three pharmaceuticals, reported that the oxidation process is initiated by the
simultaneous demethylation and hydroxylation of parent compounds, fol-
lowed by formation of first identified intermediates. Subsequent steps are
the non-selective attack of HO to yield carboxylic acids such as acetic acid
and low-molecular-weight compounds such as carbodiimide. The final
products are carbon dioxide and water. In the case of PhCatOz of phena-
zopyridine with TiO2–ceramic plates and UVA light, Fathinia and Kathaee83
report that the formation of intermediates can be justified by the break of
the azo bond followed by a subsequent opening of benzene rings to form
compounds such as pentadecanoic acid or methyl formamide, compounds
that are not detected during single ozonation. With this, the authors re-
inforce the importance of PhCatOz versus ozonation. Orge et al.,62 by
studying aniline removal with TiO2/carbon composites, focused on the for-
mation of recalcitrant oxamic and oxalic acids. They also discussed the
formation of nitrogen compounds, NO3
 and NH4
1, which are formed in
higher concentration during PhCatOz compared to the other oxidation sys-
tems applied. As a final example, Lou et al.,59 in their work on PhCatOz of
flumequine and clarithromycin, report the breaking of one N-containing
ring to yield intermediates that remain more than 2 h in the aqueous me-
dium. They also report decarboxylation as a main initial step which is due to
the reaction of an RCOO group with generated holes in the valence band of
TiO2 to form one carbon dioxide molecule.
6.5.9
Kinetics
The ultimate step of studying processes such as AOP is the establishment of
a kinetic model that predicts the level of degradation that any pollutant in
water can reach under certain experimental conditions. However, due to the
complex nature of a wastewater mixture, this study usually applies to global
parameters that characterize water contamination as the chemical oxygen
demand (COD) or total organic carbon (TOC). The proposal of a kinetic
model previously requires the knowledge about a mechanism of reactions to
derive the rate equation of the main species present in water. These rate
equations contain the rate constants of the reaction mechanism steps, and,
in ozonation systems, the volumetric mass transfer coeﬃcient, liquid
UVA Photocatalytic Ozonation of Water Contaminants
203

holdup of the gas–liquid contactor used, the gas–liquid equilibrium and
perfect law constants. In the presence of light and catalysts, quantum yields
of pollutants and catalysts and adsorption equilibria data are also needed.
For these reasons, some papers have, among their objectives, determined
these rate constant parameters. In the presence of UVA light, pollutants such
as most pharmaceuticals do not absorb light, so there is no worry about their
quantum yields. Ozone and even hydrogen peroxide, however, do absorb and
photolyze, though weakly, in radiation with wavelengths between 300 and
335 nm. Then, in PhCatOz, the main agent that absorbs radiation is the
catalyst. The energy of radiation it absorbs is limited by the corresponding
band gap (3.2 eV for anatase TiO2, which means an active catalyst until ra-
diations of about 385 nm). To make more active TiO2, for example with
visible light, some doping materials are used such as some containing N, S,
noble metals or combined with other oxides such as WO3, carbon materials
such as C3N4, etc. These PhCatOz processes in the exclusive presence of
visible light will be treated in another chapter. In addition to quantum
yields, the dispersion and absorption coeﬃcients of catalysts are also ne-
cessary.111,112 With all this information and the geometry of the reactor, a
radiation transfer equation113,114 has to be solved and the results applied to
the kinetic model of PhCatOz. In spite of the importance of these radiation
parameters, as far as we know, there is scarce information in literature with
only a few works working on photocatalytic oxidation115 kinetic modeling.
Regarding PhCatOz, in most of the papers that address the kinetics limit,
their study is to determine apparent pseudo first-order rate constants just to
show how much higher they are compared to those of single ozonation or
photocatalytic oxidation. For instance, Zeng et al.,49 in spite of presenting a
mechanism of reactions similar to that treated in Section 6.5.8, limited their
kinetic study to calculate pseudo first-order rate constants in PhCatOz of
ciprofloxacin at diﬀerent pH values and in the presence of diﬀerent salts,
scavengers, etc. With these rate constants, they showed the importance of
some steps of the mechanism and the action of reacting oxygen species.
Kumar et al.61 worked on adsorption, followed by photocatalytic oxidation
and PhCatOz of methyl paraben (MP) and orthochlorophenol (oCP) with
some g-C3N4/FeVO4 catalysts and solar radiation. They first studied the ad-
sorption isotherms with Langmuir and Freundlich equations, and finally the
kinetics of AOP processes studied was reduced to fitting experimental con-
centrations of MP and oCP to apparent pseudo first-order kinetics. Values of
the first-order rate constants showed the apparent importance of the ozone-
photocatalytic system compared to the other ozone-free oxidation or ad-
sorption systems. Mecha et al.68 reportd results on the PhCatOz of a sec-
ondary wastewater eﬄuent with TiO2 and noble metal–doped TiO2 catalysts
with solar radiation and UV lamp emitting radiation at diﬀerent wavelengths
from UVC to UVA. They used the Langmuir–Hinshelwood equation to model
the photocatalytic degradation of phenol doped to the wastewater that fi-
nally reduced to simple pseudo first-order kinetics. Also, TOC was taken as a
lumped parameter for the kinetic study. They also indicated that the
204
Chapter 6

apparent rate constant was the sum of the contributions of direct ozone
reaction, hydroxyl free radical reaction, photocatalytic reaction due to pho-
tons and direct photolysis. However, only the total apparent rate constant
was reported. Orge et al.62 studied the removal of aniline by PhCatOz with
diﬀerent catalysts (see Table 6.1) and a medium-pressure mercury vapor
lamp. They also assumed pseudo first-order kinetics for the diﬀerent AOP
studied. Catalytic ozonation resulted in the best AOP applied since it leads to
higher first-order rate constants for all catalysts used except when using P25
TiO2. For this case, PhCatOz was the faster oxidation process to remove
aniline from water.
In other works, a more rigorous kinetics was presented combining non-
ideal flow and kinetic studies. In this sense, Quin˜ones et al.85 published
results of the AOP of a mixture of six pharmaceuticals doped to a secondary
municipal wastewater in the presence and absence of sunlight. The AOP
studied involve Fe31/H2O2/ozone/solar light (pH 3) and TiO2/ozone/solar
light (pH 7) and their corresponding simpler processes such as single ozo-
nation, TiO2/solar light photocatalytic oxidation, etc. Their oxidation system
was a CPC reactor fed with ozone and connected to a tank for recirculation
purposes. A perfectly mixed flow was adopted, and the kinetic model was
applied to TOC as a lumped parameter. They applied rate equations with
diﬀerent contributing terms for direct photolysis, direct ozone reaction,
hydroxyl radical reactions due to free radicals coming from ozone reactions
and from the Fenton reaction. The kinetic model for TOC removal in both
PhCatOz systems was:85
For Fe31/H2O2/ozone/solar light at pH 3:
 dTOC
dt
¼ kT2CFeðIIIÞCH2O2 þ kDCO3 þ kT3CO3


TOC
(6:21)
where first, second and third terms of the right-hand side of eqn (6.21)
correspond to the photo-Fenton reaction, TOC–ozone direct reaction and
indirect TOC–ozone reaction, due to the fraction of hydroxyl radicals that
comes from ozone decomposition initiation–promotion steps, respectively.
For TiO2/ozone/solar light at pH 7:
 dTOC
dt
¼
kUV þ
kiCO3
1 þ P
i
KiCi
þ kDCO3 þ kT3CO3
2
64
3
75TOC
(6:22)
where the first and second terms of the right-hand side of eqn (6.22) corres-
pond to the contributions of direct TOC photolysis (usually negligible) and
ozone photocatalytic reaction on the catalyst surface considering a Langmuir
kinetics, respectively. The authors explain that after some transformation and
at the conditions they investigated, both TOC mass balance equations reduce
to first-order kinetics. Also, eqn (6.21) and (6.22) were applied to single pro-
cesses such as ozonation alone or solar photo-Fenton oxidation, and their
UVA Photocatalytic Ozonation of Water Contaminants
205

corresponding second-order rate constants were also obtained. For example,
apparent second-order rate constants for solar photo-Fenton (pH 3), single
ozonation, photolytic ozonation and TiO2/ozone/solar light (the three latter at
pH 7) were found to be 4.34105, 7.39102, 1.13104 and 1.3104 M1
min1, respectively. For TiO2/solar light a value of 4.28103 min1 was found
for the apparent pseudo first-order rate constant. In another work, Figueredo
et al.40 first studied the type of flow through the photocatalytic system, a glass
borosilicate tube externally illuminated with UVA LEDs (see Figure 6.3). The
tube was connected to a perfectly mixed tank where water was ozonated and
recirculated with a pump through the tube. The non-ideal flow study indicated
that the residence time distribution function of the tubular photoreactor
corresponded to one of a series of four equally sized perfectly mixed tanks.
The authors studied the ozonation, photolytic ozonation and photocatalytic
ozonation of primidone by assuming a mechanism of reactions. They mod-
eled the time variation of TOC, as surrogate parameter, ozone concentrations
in the gas and water and hydrogen peroxide. Because of the diﬀerent reactivity
of compounds formed during ozonation, they assumed four diﬀerent TOCs.
The corresponding TOC values were changing with time so that some reaction
steps of the mechanism were proposed to justify the removal and formation of
these TOCs with time. The actual TOC was the sum of the four TOCs assumed.
On this basis, mass balance equations, corresponding to the four perfectly
mixed tanks in series, were established in accordance with the non-ideal flow
of the reacting system. In these equations, some parameters were initially
unknown and later obtained after fitting experimental and calculated results
of TOCs and concentrations of ozone (gas and water) and hydrogen peroxide.
The model predicts that the direct ozone reactions were mainly responsible
for TOC removal. Another example can be seen in the work of Cha´vez et al.,51
who conducted the PhCatOz of real municipal secondary wastewater where
concentrations of pharmaceuticals were at mg L1 level (ciprofloxacin was the
compound identified at the highest concentration, 4.25 mg L1). The reacting
system consisted of a fix bed of TiO2 supported on Raschig rings illuminated
with external UVA LEDs connected to a second column for recirculation
purposes (see Figure 6.4). In this case, tracer experiments permitted the
determination of the residence time distribution function which allowed
the reacting system to be assumed as an ideal perfectly mixed reactor. The
authors applied concepts of the kinetics of gas–liquid reactions and deter-
mined the Hatta number of the direct reactions of ozone with the pharma-
ceuticals.101 Values of Ha were always lower than 1, indicating that the kinetic
regime of the direct ozonation was slow and that a possible competition with
hydroxyl free radical oxidation could be at play. With rate constant values of
hydroxyl radical–pharmaceutical reactions, they established the conditions of
PhCatOz so that the process could be controlled by direct or hydroxyl radical
reactions. The presence of natural scavengers in wastewater, such as carbon-
ates, was a key factor so that the higher the scavenger concentration was, the
lower the importance of the free radical mechanism was to remove pharma-
ceuticals at their actual concentration in wastewater. For instance, for the
206
Chapter 6

secondary wastewater eﬄuents they treated, they reported scavenging factors
(the product of the rate constant of hydroxyl radical–scavenger reaction and
scavenger concentration) of 6.7105 and 8.2105 s1, and they concluded that
compounds such as bezafibrate, isoproturon, metoprolol, tramadol and
venlafaxine could be better removed with PhCatOz compared to single
ozonation if the mass transfer coeﬃcient were at least of 0.12 s1.51 For
compounds such as carbamazepin, fluoxetin, clarithromycin, diclofenac,
among others, the direct ozone reaction is the main oxidation step so that
single ozonation is enough to remove these compounds from water under the
conditions investigated.
6.5.10
Energy and Cost
Other important questions are those concerning the use of energy and cost
analysis, as commented on in this section.
6.5.10.1
Energy Use
Energy consumption is a critical parameter to analyze the viability of the
photocatalytic treatment, and it is closely related to the wattage of the lamp.
In order to determine energy requirements, figures-of-merit on the use of
electrical energy recommended by IUPAC were employed by researches
working on UVA- and solar-based processes.64 The most important design
parameter in AOP systems is the amount of energy applied to produce en-
ough hydroxyl radicals. The figures of merit assume that contaminants
undergo pseudo first-order kinetics, due to their low concentration.
For the energy eﬃciency of AOPs, electrical energy per order (EEO) is often
chosen as a figure of merit. EEO is defined as the electrical energy in kW h
required to remove a pollutant by one order of magnitude in a unit of vol-
ume, i.e. 90%, in 1 m3 of water. EEO can be calculated from eqn (6.23) for
batch or from eqn (6.24) for flow-through operation:
EEO ¼
Pt1000
V log
Ci
Cf
  ; kw hm3order1
(6:23)
EEO ¼
P1000
Q log
Ci
Cf
  ; kwhm3order1
(6:24)
where P is the rate power in kW to the AOP system, t is the time of treatment in
h, V is the volume of treated aqueous solution in L, Q is the flow rate in m3 h1,
and Ci and Cf are the concentrations of contaminant at the initial time and
time t, respectively, for batch systems and entrance and outlet concentrations
for flow systems, respectively. Also, 1000 is a conversion factor (1000 L m3). In
the case of UVA PhCatOz, the power input is the sum of the energy input of the
ozone generation, the UVA lamp or LEDs and the power supply.70
UVA Photocatalytic Ozonation of Water Contaminants
207

For solar-driven systems, the cost is dominated by the capital investment
in the collector, and the eﬃciency is best described in terms of irradiated
area. Collector area per order, ACO (m2 m3 order1), is the collector area
needed to obtain one-order-magnitude degradation of a given contaminant
per unit of volume receiving a ‘‘standardized’’ incident solar fluence rate of
1000 W m2 over a period of 1 h. It is calculated from eqn (6.25):64
ACO ¼
AtES
V log Ci
Cf
(6:25)
where At is the collector area, and Es is the average solar irradiance over the
time for a given treatment.
Another standard figure of merit estimated in several studies is electrical
energy per mass (EEM), which is defined as the electric energy in kWh that
brings about the degradation of a unit mass (e.g. 1 kg) of a contaminant in
polluted water.116 The EEM is also necessary for the comparison and
evaluation of the electric-energy-driven AOPs:
EEM ¼ rCO3Q þ P
F gi  gf
ð
Þ
(6:26)
where r is the energy requirement for mass of O3 production from oxygen;
CO3 is the gas ozone concentration in the influent gas (mg L1); Q is the flow
rate of the influent gas (L min1); F is the flow rate of the water (m3 h1); gi
and gf are the organic concentrations in the influent and eﬄuent (mg L1)
water, respectively; and P is the power of UV lamp.
Gmurek et al. 201943 calculated the specific energy consumption (SEC),
that is, the amount of electrical energy consumption (kWh) per unit mass
of COD (in lab scale). In ozone-based processes, SEC is calculated with
eqn (6.27):
SECO3 ¼
Pt þ rTOC
V CODi  CODf
ð
Þ
(6:27)
where P is the nominal electric power (kW) of the photochemical system, t is
the reaction time (h), r is the energy requirement per mass for O3 production
(15 kW h kg1 O3)117 and V is the volume (L) of the solution in the reactor.43
In case of oxidants or catalysts, the ‘‘stored electric energy’’ of a compound
can be calculated based on prices for electric energy (price per kW h) and the
respective compound (price per kg).
6.5.10.2
Process Cost Analysis
Cost evaluation is an important step when deciding the industrial imple-
mentation of a treatment technology. When choosing the best method for
wastewater treatment, some significant factors should be taken under
208
Chapter 6

consideration including economy, eﬄuent quality goals, ongoing regulatory
framework and operationality, among others. In real AOP applications, the
economic issue is often seen as the most relevant factor since these tech-
nologies are electric-energy-intensive. Accordingly, electric energy tends to
account for the main operating cost.70 Therefore, economic analysis must be
considered before process development and scale-up.
To evaluate the possibility of using this technology in further studies with
real industrial eﬄuents, it is important to perform a cost analysis of the
process to determine whether it is applicable in a real case scenario. Several
authors have followed a simple methodology performed by Gagol and co-
workers118 to determine the chemicals and energy cost. The cost of eﬄuent
treatment by UVA PhCatOz depends on a number of factors, including the
volume of an eﬄuent, the kind and concentration of contaminants or the
desired eﬀectiveness of degradation. These calculations include the treat-
ment time needed for complete oxidation, cost of oxidants/or catalysts used
and cost of electric energy. Also, equipment and maintenance cost per year,
respectively, were summed.119 Quin˜ones et al.80 presented this simplified
economic comparison of operating costs, taking into account experimental
conditions used throughout their investigation. Thus two criteria were used:
(1) operating costs to reach complete removal of pollutants and (2) operating
costs to remove 20% of the TOC of the secondary eﬄuent.70
6.5.11
Other Aspects
In addition to the items discussed in previous sections, other aspects con-
cerning the PhCatOz of water pollutants are toxicity, the bromate issue and
disinfection problems.
6.5.11.1
Toxicity
One important aspect about the application of AOPs is the possible for-
mation of toxic intermediates or by-products that could be even more toxic
than the compounds initially present in the samples. Thus several research
works reported the significance of analyzing the relationship between
intermediates formed during UVA PhCatOz and the overall toxicity of the
wastewater treated eﬄuent. Based on these relationships, the main toxic
compounds could be identified so that eﬄuent toxicity is diminished ef-
fectively before the eﬄuent is discharged to the water environment.34
To cover a wide range of trophic levels, diﬀerent species such as Vibrio
fischeri (bacteria), Corbicula fluminea (clam) and Lepidium sativum (plant)
were used.57 Additional toxicity bioassays employed by some authors are
assessed by using acute Daphnia magna (microcrustacean)56,80 and the
marine bacterium Photobacterium phosphoreum53 where the toxicity unit was
correlated to the EC50. Garcı´a-Cambero et al.120 proved the zebrafish model
for toxicity evaluations. According to these authors, the initial stages
(embryos) have been used in various applications including toxicity tests of
UVA Photocatalytic Ozonation of Water Contaminants
209

individual or mixtures of emerging contaminants, sediment and sediment
extracts and evaluations of complex mixtures like sewage eﬄuents. The
introduction of ozone significantly reduced the acute toxicity of wastewater.
The integration of UVA photocatalysis showed a better detoxication than
ozonation.34 As a rule, the toxicity of samples increased at the beginning of
the photocatalytic treatment, likely as a consequence of the accumulation of
by-products or toxic intermediates, and then decreased. This result is in
agreement with that reported for the removal of other organic pollutants by
ozonation and solar photocatalytic oxidation with TiO2.80
6.5.11.2
Bromate Issue
Ozone has been extensively used in water treatment for a long time due to its
great oxidizing power, which enables it to selectively oxidize many organic
and inorganic species in aqueous solution. The reactions between ozone and
organic compounds, however, usually lead to the formation of intermedi-
ates, many of which are recalcitrant to ozone attack and therefore accumu-
late in water.121 Further, one of the main drawbacks of ozonation is the
induced oxidation of bromide to bromate ions, which is one ozonation by-
product of main concern (reaction (6.28)) and which is suspected to be
carcinogenic.105
Br þ 3O3-BrO3
 þ 3O2
(6.28)
Furthermore, other pathways have been reported in which bromate for-
mation occurs by the action of the hydroxyl radicals produced by ozone
decomposition. This latter mechanism is non-negligible only at relatively
high pH values.105 On the contrary, in the presence of bromide ions, pho-
tocatalysis does not induce the formation of bromate ions. In fact, the oxi-
dation of bromide by
OH radicals produces intermediates such as
hypobromite ions, which are reconverted to bromide by photogenerated
electrons according to reaction (6.29):45
BrO þ 2e þ H2O-Br þ 2OH
(6.29)
When performed concurrently with ozonation, photocatalytic ozonation
reduces the formed bromate ions to innocuous bromide ions (reaction
(6.30)) at a rate that increases with the concentration of oxidized compounds
(i.e. organic matter):45
BrO3
 þ 6H1 þ 6e-Br þ 3H2O
(6.30)
Reaction (6.30) is of great importance because ozonation of bromide ions
(reaction (6.28)) can produce unacceptable amounts of bromate if control of
their formation is not eﬀective. Thus the benefits of coupling photocatalysis
and ozonation are not limited to the increase of the oxidation rate but also
include the control of bromate ions. Indeed, as bromide ions are ubiquitous
in ground and surface water, carcinogenic bromate ions may be almost
quantitatively produced if the sole ozonation is used for purification
210
Chapter 6

purposes.63 This aspect is of paramount importance for marine aquaculture
applications as bromide concentration in seawater is about 67 mg L1, and
the high amount of bromate ions produced may be lethal for the living or-
ganisms. This is so by considering, for instance, that the suggested exposure
safety value to protect aquatic organisms from long-term adverse eﬀects is
3 mg L1. In this sense, it can be seen that PhCatOz oﬀers the possibility of
controlling bromate, the ozonation by-product of main concern.45,63,105
6.5.11.3
Disinfection
Disinfection processes aim at reducing the number of viable cells through
the generation of damages in diﬀerent cellular structures and molecules.
The use of photocatalytic ozonation also has great potential in pathogen
inactivation.
Bacterial
inactivation
using
photocatalytic
ozonation
is
achieved through disrupting normal cellular functions by the reactive oxy-
gen species (ROS), especially the OH radicals. These reactions result in
oxidative damage to cellular components that lead to the loss of membrane
potential, thereby leading to the death of the microorganisms.58,65 In add-
ition, when the stress conditions imposed by the water treatment processes
are relieved, biological contaminants have the potential to regrow, and
microbiological indicators should be monitored during storage of the trea-
ted wastewater. It has been shown that bacterial regrowth does occur after
photocatalytic disinfection or disinfection by ozone. This is a major limi-
tation in the individual application of these processes. Mecha et al.58 dem-
onstrated the synergistic eﬀects of the combined photocatalytic ozonation
process on the disinfection of municipal wastewater. Furthermore, this
synergy led to a 50%–75% reduction in the contact time required for pho-
tocatalytic ozonation compared to photocatalysis or ozonation alone. Also,
following the recovery period (24 h and 48 h in the dark), no bacterial re-
growth is detected, showing that photocatalytic ozonation processes had
caused irreversible damage to the bacterial cells.
6.6
Conclusions
From the review of works presented in this chapter, some conclusions can be
drawn about UVA photocatalytic ozonation:
 It is an incipient AOP based on a strong synergism between ozonation
and photocatalytic oxidation.
 However, for many cases, single ozonation has enough oxidizing power
to remove many organics, especially those named as being of emerging
concern (pharmaceuticals), that is without the contributing eﬀect of
catalyst and light.
 The synergism between both oxidation processes is clearly seen when
the objective of the process is the removal of TOC or mineralization of
the water content.
UVA Photocatalytic Ozonation of Water Contaminants
211

 There are up to five possible routes of hydroxyl radical formation during
PhCatOz: (1) ozone decomposition in solution that can be accelerated
with the formation of hydrogen peroxide after direct ozonation of or-
ganics, (2) ozone adsorption and decomposition on the catalyst surface,
(3) electron–ozone reactions in the conduction band of the catalyst, (4)
reactions of ozone with the superoxide ion radical formed from
electron–oxygen reactions at the conduction band of the catalyst and (5)
adsorption of water or hydroxyl anions on the catalyst surface and
subsequent oxidation with positive holes at the valence band of the
catalyst.
 The main material used is TiO2 alone or combined with other non-
metal, metal, metal oxides or carbon materials, such as MWCN, AC,
carbon dots or graphene oxide.
 The intensity of oxidation increases with the decrease of the wavelength
of incident radiation, but for environmental sustainability, radiation
belonging to the UVA region (330–400 nm) or solar light is encouraged.
 Kinetic modeling of PhCatOz still has some gaps that need further
investigation.
 Photoreactor geometry and catalyst separation are also still questions to
be solved for the PhCatOz process to be of practical application.
 PhCatOz is also a way of increasing the disinfection of water and
avoiding the formation of bromate in water containing bromide ions.
Facing these advantages, PhCatOz still presents the problems related to
catalyst–water separation and to increasing the catalysts’ absorption of
photons. Therefore, studies on the synthesis of new catalysts that overcome
these drawbacks are recommended.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the Spanish State Agency of Investigation (project:
PID2019/104429RB-I00/AEI/10.13039/501100011033)
for
their
economic
support.
References
1. J. De-bska, A. Kot-Wasik and J. Namies´nik, Crit. Rev. Anal. Chem., 2004,
34, 51.
2. S. A. Snyder, P. Westerhoﬀ, Y. Yoon and D. L. Sedlak, Environ. Eng. Sci.,
2003, 20, 449.
3. K. Ku¨mmerer, Chemosphere, 2001, 45, 957.
4. J. J. Rook, A. A. Gras, B. G. V. der Heijden and J. D. Wee, J. Environ. Sci.
Health A, 1978, 13, 91.
5. W. H. Glaze, Environ. Health Perspect., 1986, 69, 151.
6. T. A. Ternes, A. Joss and H. Siegrist, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2004,
38, 392A.
212
Chapter 6

7. O. A. H. Jones, N. Voulvoulis and N. Lester, Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci.
Technol., 2007, 35, 401.
8. S. Mompelat, B. Le Bot and O. Thomas, Environ. Int., 2009, 35, 803.
9. W. H. Glaze, J. W. Kang and D. H. Chapin, Ozone: Sci. Eng., 1987, 9, 335.
10. P. R. Gogate and A. B. Pandit, Adv. Environ. Res., 2004, 8, 501.
11. A. Vogelpohl and S. M. Kim, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2004, 10, 33.
12. M. Dore´, Chimie des oxydants et traitement des eaux, Technique et
Documentation-Lavoisier, Paris, 1989.
13. R. L. Kuczkowski, In 1,3, Dipolar Cycloaddition Chemistry, John Wiley
and Sons., New York, 1984, vol. 2A, pp. 197–277.
14. J. Staehelin, R. E. Buhler and J. Hoigne´, J. Phys. Chem., 1984, 88, 5999.
15. H. Tomiyasu, H. Fukutomi and A. Gordon, Inorg. Chem., 1985, 24, 2962.
16. F. J. Beltra´n, Ozone: Sci. Eng., 1997, 19, 13.
17. G. R. Peyton and W. H. Glaze, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1988, 22, 761.
18. J. H. Baxendale and J. A. Wilson, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1957, 53, 344–356.
19. F. J. Beltra´n, A. Aguinaco and J. F. Garcı´a-Araya, Appl. Catal., B, 2010,
100, 289.
20. B. Kasprzyk-Hordern, M. Zio´"ek and J. Nawrocki, Appl. Catal., B, 2003,
46, 639.
21. F. J. Beltra´n, J. Rivas and V. Montero-de-Espinosa, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res.,
2003, 42, 3218.
22. A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37.
23. A. Fujishima, K. Kobayakawa and K. Honda, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1975,
122, 1487.
24. A. Fujishima, T. N. Rao and A. D. Tryk, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2000,
1, 1.
25. S. Malato, J. Blanco, A. Vidal and C. Richter, Appl. Catal., B, 2002, 37, 1.
26. M. NanChong, B. Jin, C. W. K. Chow and C. Saint, Water Res., 2010,
44, 2997.
27. M. M. Sein, M. Zedda, J. Tuerk, T. C. Schmidt, A. Golloch and
C. von Sonntag, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 6656.
28. J. Xiao, Y. Xie and H. Cao, Chemosphere, 2015, 121, 1.
29. M. Mehrjouei, S. Mu¨ller and D. Mo¨ller, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 263, 209.
30. K. Tanaka, K. Abe and T. Hisanaga, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1996,
101, 85.
31. G. Matafonova and V. Batoev, Water Res., 2018, 132, 177.
32. I. Fuentes, J. L. Rodrı´guez, T. Poznyak and I. Chairez, Environ. Sci.
Pollut. R., 2014, 21, 12241.
33. E. K. Radwan, L. Yu, G. Achari and C. H. Langford, Environ. Sci. Pollut.
R., 2016, 23, 21313.
34. B. Liu, B. Chen, B. Zhang, X. Song, G. Zeng and K. Lee, J. Hazard. Mater.,
2021, 402, 123456.
35. J. Gomes, J. Lincho, P. Mazierski, M. Miodyn´ska, A. Zaleska-Medynska
and R. C. Martins, Sci. Total Environ, 2020, 743, 140831.
36. A. M. Cha´vez, D. H. Quin˜ones, A. Rey, F. J. Beltra´n and P. M. A´lvarez,
Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 398, 125642.
UVA Photocatalytic Ozonation of Water Contaminants
213

37. C. C. Tsoi, X. Huang, P. H. M. Leung, N. Wang, W. Yu, Y. Jia, Z. Li and
X. Zhang, J. Water Proc. Eng., 2020, 37, 101501.
38. E. Asgari, M. Farzadkia, A. Esrafili, M. Y. Badi, S. F. Jokandan and
H. R. Sobhi, Optik Internat, J. Light Electron Opt., 2020, 212,
164667.
39. E. Fernandes, R. C. Martins and J. Gomes, Sci. Total Environ, 2020,
718, 137321.
40. M. Figueredo, E. M. Rodrı´guez, J. Rivas and F. J. Beltra´n, Environ. Sci.:
Water Res. Technol., 2020, 6, 1176.
41. A. M. Cha´vez, R. R. Solı´s and F. J. Beltra´n, Appl. Catal., B, 2020,
262, 118275.
42. D. H. Quin˜ones-Murillo, A. A. Ariza-Reyes and L. J. Ardila-Ve´lez, Desalin.
Water Treat., 2019, 170, 61.
43. M. Gmurek, J. F. Gomes, R. C. Martins and R. M. Quinta-Ferreira, En-
viron. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2019, 26, 37174.
44. E. M. Rodrı´guez, A. Rey, E. Mena and F. J. Beltra´n, Appl. Catal., B, 2019,
254, 237.
45. G. Camera-Roda, V. Loddo, L. Palmisano and F. Parrino, Appl. Catal., B,
2019, 253, 69.
46. U. S. Keerthi, M. Nithya and N. Balasubramanian, J. Environ. Manage.,
2019, 246, 768.
47. C. A. Orge, O. Salome´, G. P. Soares, P. S. F. Ramalho, M. F. R. Pereira
and J. L. Faria, Catalysts, 2019, 9, 703.
48. D. B. Silva, A. Cruz-Alcalde, C. Sans, J. Gime´nez and S. Esplugas, Appl.
Catal., B, 2019, 249, 211.
49. Y. Zeng, D. Chen, T. Chen, M. Cai, Q. Zhang, Z. Xie, R. Li, Z. Xiao, G. Liu
and W. Lv, Chemosphere, 2019, 227, 198.
50. L. Pandian, R. Rajasekaran and P. Govindan, Mater. Res. Express, 2019,
6, 85513.
51. A. M. Cha´vez, A. R. Ribeiro, N. F. F. Moreira, A. M. T. Silva, A. Rey,
P. M. A´lvarez and F. J. Beltra´n, Catalysts, 2019, 9, 472.
52. A. M. Cha´vez, O. Gimeno, A. Rey, G. Pliego, A. L. Oropesa, P. M. A´lvarez
and F. J. Beltra´n, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 361, 89.
53. F. Almomani, R. Bhosale, A. Kumar and M. Khraisheh, Sol. Energy,
2018, 172, 128.
54. Y. Xie, Y. Chen, J. Yang, C. Liu, H. Zhao and H. Cao, Chin. J. Chem. Eng.,
2018, 26, 1528.
55. M. Kete, O. Pliekhova, L. Matoh and U. L. Sˇtangar, Environ. Sci. Pollut.
Res., 2018, 25, 20453.
56. A. L. Oropesa, F. J. Beltra´n, A. M. Floro, J. J. Pe´rez-Sagasti and P. Palma,
Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2018, 25, 1670.
57. J. F. Gomes, I. Leal, K. Bednarczyk, M. Gmurek, M. Stelmachowski,
M. Diak, M. E. Quinta-Ferreira, R. Costa, R. M. Quinta-Ferreira and
R. C. Martins, Sci. Total Environ, 2017, 609, 329.
58. A. C. Mecha, M. S. Onyango, A. Ochieng and M. N. B. Momba, Sci. Total
Environ, 2017, 601–602, 626.
214
Chapter 6

59. W. L. A. Kane, D. Wolbert, S. Rtimi and A. A. Assadi, Chem. Eng. Process.,
2017, 122, 213.
60. J. Xiao, Q. Han, Y. Xie, J. Yang, Q. Su, Y. Chen and H. Cao, Environ. Sci.
Technol., 2017, 51, 13380.
61. A. Kumar, A. Kumar, G. Sharma, M. Naushad, F. J. Stadler, A. A. Ghfar,
P. Dhiman and R. V. Saini, J. Cleaner Prod., 2017, 165, 431.
62. C. A. Orge, J. L. Faria and M. F. R. Pereira, J. Environ. Manage., 2017,
195, 208.
63. F. Parrino, G. C. Roda, V. Loddo and L. Palmisano, Lect. Notes Civil Eng.,
2017, 4, 319.
64. A. C. Mecha, M. S. Onyango, A. Ochieng and M. N. B. Momba,
Chemosphere, 2017, 186, 669.
65. C. Becerra-Castro, G. Macedo, A. M. T. Silva, C. M. Manaia and
O. C. Nunes, Sci. Total Environ, 2016, 573, 313.
66. E. K. Radwan, L. Yu, G. Achari and C. H. Langford, Environ. Sci. Pollut.
Res., 2016, 23, 21313.
67. S. Cataldo, A. Iannı`, V. Loddo, E. Mirenda, L. Palmisano, F. Parrino and
D. Piazzese, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2016, 171, 101.
68. A. C. Mecha, M. S. Onyango, A. Ochieng, C. J. S. Fourie and
M. N. B. Momba, J. Catal., 2016, 341, 116.
69. X. He, R. Chen, X. Zhu, Q. Liao, L. An, X. Cheng and L. Li, Ind. Eng.
Chem. Res., 2016, 55, 8627.
70. J. C. Cardoso, G. Garcia-Bessegato and M. V. Boldrin-Zanoni, Water
Res., 2016, 98, 39.
71. P. M. Alvarez, D. H. Quin˜ones, I. Terrones, A. Rey and F. J. Beltran,
Water Res., 2016, 98, 334.
72. N. F. F. Moreira, J. M. Sousa, G. Macedo, A. R. Ribeiro, L. Barreiros,
M. Pedrosa, J. L. Faria, M. F. R. Pereira, S. Castro-Silva, M. A. Segundo,
C. M. Manaia, O. C. Nunes and A. M. T. Silva, Water Res., 2016, 94, 10.
73. O. Gimeno, J. F. Garcı´a-Araya, F. J. Beltra´n, F. J. Rivas and A. Espejo,
Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 290, 12.
74. J. Xiao, Y. Xie, F. Nawaz, S. Jin, F. Duana, M. Li and H. Cao, Appl. Catal.,
B, 2016, 181, 420.
75. M. Habibi, A. A. L. Zinatizadeh and M. Akia, Desalin. Water Treat., 2016,
57, 916.
76. A. Hassani, A. Khataee, S. Karaca and M. Fathinia, RSC Adv., 2016,
6, 87569.
77. R. R. Solı´s, F. J. Rivas, O. Gimeno and J. L. Pe´rez-Bote, J. Chem. Technol.
Biotechnol., 2016, 91, 51.
78. N. F. F. Moreira, C. A. Orge, A. R. Ribeiro, J. L. Faria, O. C. Nunes,
M. F. R. Pereira and A. M. T. Silva, Water Res., 2015, 87, 87.
79. L. Yu, D. Wang and D. Ye, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 96896.
80. D. H. Quin˜ones, P. M. A´lvarez, A. Rey and F. J. Beltra´n, Sep. Purif.
Technol., 2015, 149, 132.
81. A. Espejo, F. J. Beltran, F. J. Rivas, J. F. Garcia-Araya and O. Gimeno,
J. Environ. Sci. Health, Part A: Toxic, 2015, 50, 553.
UVA Photocatalytic Ozonation of Water Contaminants
215

82. T. Mano, S. Nishimoto, Y. Kameshima and M. Miyake, Chem. Eng. J.,
2015, 264, 221.
83. M. Fathinia and A. Khataee, Appl. Catal., A, 2015, 491, 136.
84. M. Fathinia, A. Khataee, A. Naseri and S. Aber, Spectrochim. Acta A,
2015, 136, 1275.
85. D. H. Quin˜ones, P. M. A´lvarez, A. Rey, S. Contreras and F. J. Beltra´n,
Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 260, 399.
86. D. H. Quin˜ones, A. Rey, P. M. A´lvarez, F. J. Beltra´n and G. LiPuma, Appl.
Catal., B, 2015, 178, 74.
87. E. Mena, A. Rey, E. M. Rodrı´guez and F. J. Beltra´n, Catal. Today, 2017,
280, 74.
88. M. A. Figueredo, E. M. Rodrı´guez, M. Checa and F. J. Beltran, Molecules,
2019, 24, 1728.
89. A. M. Cha´vez, A. Rey, J. Lo´pez, P. M. A´lvarez and F. J. Beltra´n, Sep. Purif.
Technol., 2021, 255, 117660.
90. F. S. Souza, V. V. Da Silva, C. K. Rosin, L. Hainzenreder, A. Arenzon,
T. Pizzolato, L. Jank and L. A. Feris, J. Environ. Sci. Health, Part A: Toxic,
2018, 53, 213.
91. Y. Ye, Y. Feng, H. Bruning, D. Yntema and H. H. M. Rijnaarts,
Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 220, 171.
92. Y. Zhao, N. Hoivik and K. Wang, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 728.
93. D. H. Quin˜ones, A. Rey, P. M. A´lvarez, F. J. Beltra´n and P. K. Plucinski,
Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 144, 96.
94. F. J. Beltra´n, P. M. A´lvarez and O. Gimeno, Molecules, 2019, 24, 3438.
95. S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, R. D. Piner, K. A. Kohlhaas, A. Kleinhammes,
Y. Jia, Y. Wu, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoﬀ, Carbon, 2007, 45, 1558.
96. D. R. Dreyer, S. Park, C. W. Bielawski and R. S. Ruof, Chem. Rev., 2010,
39, 228.
97. M. Checa, M. Figueredo, A. Aguinaco and F. J. Beltra´n, J. Hazard. Mater.,
2019, 369, 70.
98. Y. Wang, X. C. Wang and M. Antonietti, Ang. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012,
51, 68.
99. S. T. Meek, J. A. Greathouse and M. D. Allendorf, Adv. Mater., 2011,
23, 249.
100. V. K. Sharma and M. Feng, J. Hazard. Mater., 2019, 372, 3.
101. F. J. Beltra´n, Ozone Reaction Kinetics for Water and Wastewater Systems,
Lewis Publishers, Boca Raton, USA, 2004.
102. M. Bilal and H. Iqbal, Cosmetics, 2020, 7, 24.
103. M. Bilal and H. M. Iqbal, Sci. Total Environ, 2019, 670, 555.
104. G. Pojana, A. Gomiero, N. Jonkers and A. Marcomini, Environ. Int.,
2007, 33, 929.
105. F. Parrino, G. Camera-Roda, V. Loddo, V. Augugliaro and L. Palmisano,
Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 178, 37.
106. M. Kwon, H. Kye, Y. Jung, Y. Yoon and H. Kang, Water Res., 2017,
122, 172.
107. A. Cruz-Alcalde, S. Esplugas and C. Sans, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 170, 1092.
216
Chapter 6

108. M. S. Elovitz and U. von Gunten, Ozone: Sci. Eng., 1999, 21, 239.
109. M. D. Gurol and S. Nekouinaini, J. Water Pollut. Control Fed, 1985,
57, 235.
110. T. Yang, J. Peng, Y. Zheng, X. He, Y. Hou, L. Wu and X. Fu, Appl. Catal.,
B, 2018, 221, 223.
111. A. Tolosana-Moranchela, A. Manassero, M. L. Satuf, O. M. Alfano,
J. A. Casas and A. Bahamonde, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 246, 1.
112. F. J. Beltra´n, M. Checa, J. Rivas and J. F. Garcı´a-Araya, Catalysts, 2020,
10, 1256.
113. A. E. Cassano and O. M. Alfano, Catal. Today, 2000, 58, 167.
114. A. Brucato, A. E. Cassano, F. Grisafi, G. Montante, L. Rizzuti and
G. Vella, AIChE J., 2006, 52, 3882.
115. A. Tolosana-Moranchel, J. A. Casas, J. Carbajo, M. Faraldos and
A. Bahamonde, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 200, 164.
116. Z. Wang, Y. Zhang, K. Li, Z. Sun and J. Wang, J. Hazar. Mater., 2020,
391, 122194.
117. A. Katsoyiannis, S. Canonica and U. von Gunten, Water Res., 2011,
45, 3811.
118. M. Ga˛gol, A. Przyjazny and G. Boczkaj, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2018,
45, 257.
119. A. Fernandes, M. Ga˛gol, P. Makos´, J. A. Khan and G. Boczkaj, Sep. Purif.
Technol., 2019, 224, 1.
120. J. P. Garcı´a-Cambero, F. J. Beltra´n, A. Encinas, F. J. Rivas and
A. L. Oropesa, Environ. Sci.: Water Res. Technol., 2019, 5, 2269.
121. A. M. Cha´vez, A. Rey, F. J. Beltra´n and P. M. A´lvarez, J. Hazard. Mater.,
2016, 317, 36.
UVA Photocatalytic Ozonation of Water Contaminants
217

CHAPTER 7
Visible-light-driven
Photocatalytic Ozonation of
Aqueous Organic Pollutants
JIADONG XIAO,a ZHUANG GUO,b HONGBIN CAOc AND
YONGBING XIE*c
a Research Initiative for Supra-Materials, Interdisciplinary Cluster for
Cutting Edge Research, Shinshu University, Nagano 380-8553, Japan;
b Beijing Institute of Aerospace Test Technology, Beijing 100072, China;
c Division of Environment Technology and Engineering, Institute of
Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
*Email: ybxie@ipe.ac.cn
7.1
Introduction
Since the first establishment of a UV/O3/TiO2 system by Keiichi Tanaka in
1996,1 photocatalytic ozonation (light/O3/photocatalyst) has been developed
for over 20 years and has demonstrated itself as a robust advanced oxidation
process (AOP).2–6 The primary advantage of this process is its strong oxi-
dation power, surpassing the sum of photocatalytic oxidation and ozonation.
As a result, it leads to eﬃcient mineralization of a wide variety of organic
contaminants (aliphatic acids, phenols, dyes, pesticides, pharmaceuticals,
etc.) and real organic eﬄuents.2–6 This has been clarified and showcased in
Chapter 6, discussing the UVA photocatalytic ozonation of water con-
taminants. The other advantage is the feasible utilization of sunlight and
oxygen in air as the source of energy and O3, respectively. Since visible light
Chemistry in the Environment Series No. 8
Advanced Ozonation Processes for Water and Wastewater Treatment: Active Catalysts and
Combined Technologies
Edited by Hongbin Cao, Yongbing Xie, Yuxian Wang and Jiadong Xiao
r The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry, www.rsc.org
218

(ca. 42%) takes a significantly larger portion of sunlight in energy compared
to UV light (ca. 4%), visible-light-driven photocatalytic ozonation (vis/O3/
photocatalyst) is of greater interest and significance for achieving the ul-
timate goal of scalable sunlight- and air-based wastewater treatment plants.
Hence, this chapter will focus on the visible-light photocatalytic ozonation
process and particularly discusses the history of catalyst development, the
reaction mechanism of the process, as well as the property–performance
relationship and stabilities of the most representative catalysts. Finally, the
present state and challenges for the practical application of this advanced
oxidation process (AOP) are discussed.
7.2
Overview of the Catalysts and Their Performances
The types and numbers of catalysts reported for visible-light photocatalytic
ozonation are quite limited due to its very short research history since 2010.
Scheme 7.1 briefly illustrates the catalyst development history, and Table 7.1
lists the most representative catalysts and their main provenances. The first
example of visible-light photocatalytic ozonation was given in 2010, in which
WO3
7 and Au/Bi2O3 nanorods8 were used by Nishimoto et al. and Anandan
et al., respectively. They found significantly enhanced removal of organic
contaminates and total organic carbon (TOC) in visible-light photocatalytic
ozonation (vis/O3/cat.) systems as compared to the ozonation or photo-
catalytic oxidation (vis/O2/cat.) systems.7,8 Since then, the coupling of ozone
with visible light by a visible-light-responsive photocatalyst has been the
research frontier of this field, and the exploration of active visible-light-
responsive catalysts evolved as a focus for the scientists of this field.
The most widely studied metal-oxide-type catalyst so far has been WO3
with a bandgap value of around 2.7 eV. As shown in Table 7.2, Mano and
coworkers studied visible-light photocatalytic ozonation over diﬀerent metal
oxide photocatalysts for the mineralization of oxalic acid (OA), a refractory
degradation intermediate of a wide variety of organic pollutants,40,41 and
Scheme 7.1
Catalyst development history involving the representative visible-light
photocatalytic ozonation catalysts and achievements.
Visible-light-driven Photocatalytic Ozonation of Aqueous Organic Pollutants
219

found that WO3 significantly outperformed other metal oxides with almost
100% TOC removal at 2 h. Follow-up with WO3, BiVO4 and In2O3 also
showed considerable performance. Nishimoto et al. investigated the min-
eralization of aqueous phenol, a nonbiodegradable and light-stable pollu-
tant,
by
visible-light
photocatalytic
ozonation
using
mixed-phase
(monoclinic
and
triclinic)
WO3
catalyst.7
As
shown
in
Figure
7.1,
Table 7.1
Representative visible-light photocatalytic ozonation cata-
lysts reported in the literature.
Catalyst
Reference
g-C3N4-based
9–24
WO3-based
7,25–30
Modified TiO2
31–35
BiVO4
30,36,37
Au/Bi2O3
8
BiFeO3
38
LaFeO3
39
Table 7.2
Comparison of activities of various metal oxide catalysts in visible-light
photocatalytic ozonation for oxalic acid mineralization. Adapted from
ref. 30 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2014.
Catalyst
Bandgap (eV)
SBET (m2 g1)
TOC removal by vis/O3/cat. (%)
60 min
120 min
240 min
WO3
2.7
3.6
62
99
—
BiVO4
2.3
1.7
31
62
94
In2O3
2.8
7.6
28
60
82
SnO2
3.6
54.1
17
46
95
Fe2O3
2.0
12.2
11
20
42
TiO2
3.1
52.3
8
22
45
Nb2O5
3.1
2.1
9
19
37
Figure 7.1
(a) TOC removal in a phenol solution (TOC0 ¼ 130 mg L 1) by diﬀerent
processes. (b) Repetitive TOC removal by vis/O3/WO3 process. Adapted
from ref. 7 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2010.
220
Chapter 7

photocatalytic ozonation (vis/O3/WO3) showed significantly higher mineral-
ization eﬃciency compared to photocatalytic oxidation (vis/O2/WO3) or
(catalytic) ozonation (O3(/WO3)). The vis/O3/WO3 system removed about
100% TOC after 120 min of treatment, whereas 15%–20% of the initial TOC
still remained in the vis/O3, O3 and O3/WO3 systems after 360 min. The
remaining TOC in the latter systems were ozone-refractory compounds
(e.g. pyruvic acid, ketomalonic acid and oxalic acid).7 The worst of all is the
vis/O2/WO3 system that was incapable of removing any total organic carbon
(TOC), indicating extremely weak oxidizing power.
The vis/O3/WO3 system also demonstrated its eﬃciencies in the mineral-
ization of emerging contaminants with increasing environmental concern,
such as pharmaceutical and personal care products (PPCPs).26,28,29 For ex-
ample, Mena et al. studied the mineralization of N,N-diethyl-meta-toluamide
(DEET), an active compound in insect repellents, under vis/O3/WO3 con-
ditions.26 Their best WO3 catalyst completely removed DEET in less than
20 min with a mineralization level up to 70% in 2 h. Furthermore, a lumped
kinetic model based on the reactions between TOC and hydroxyl radicals
(OH) was developed to simulate DEET, intermediates and short-chain or-
ganic acids evolution.28 This simplified approach can be useful for under-
standing the mineralization kinetics of DEET by
OH formed in the
photocatalytic ozonation process.
Recently, graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) has become the most actively
studied material in this field since the first example of vis/O3/g-C3N4 was given
by Liao et al. in 2014.16 g-C3N4 is typically a melon-based, two-dimensional,
polymeric semiconductor, composed of intralayer heptazine (tri-s-triazine)
units connected by bridging NH/NH2 groups that form hydrogen bonds
(Figure 7.2a),42,43 and has attracted great attention since its first appearance as
a visible-light-responsive photocatalyst (bandgapE2.7 eV) in 2009.42 Com-
pared to WO3, its advantages as a visible-light photocatalytic ozonation cata-
lyst lies in (1) metal-free composition of nontoxic and earth-abundant C and N
elements, (2) easy synthesis from direct calcination of cheap feedstocks such
as urea,16,17 thiourea,10,11 dicyandiamide10,12 or melamine9,13 and (3) very
negative conduction band edge potential (1.3 VNHE theoretically), which is
considered as a beneficial property for photocatalytic ozonation.6,16
As shown in Figure 7.2b–d, g-C3N4 with diverse morphologies showed
excellent performance for the mineralization of OA, a refractory degradation
intermediate of a wide variety of organic pollutants,40,41 and p-hydro-
xybenzoic acid (PHBA), a common pollutant in agroindustrial wastewater
refractory to anaerobic biological treatment.44 As shown in Figure 7.2b, 95%
of initial OA molecules were decomposed in 20 min by a vis/O3/bulk g-C3N4
system, while the vis/O2/bulk g-C3N4 or O3/bulk g-C3N4 processes caused
negligible OA removal even up to 1 h. Note that vis/O3 is incapable of
decomposing OA because the ozone photolysis that generates hydroxyl
radicals (OH) occurs only under UV light well below 300 nm4 and
that
g-C3N4
is
catalytically
inert
for
decomposing
ozone
into
OH
(Figure 7.2b). The pseudo zero-order degradation rate constant of OA by
Visible-light-driven Photocatalytic Ozonation of Aqueous Organic Pollutants
221

vis/O3/bulk g-C3N4 (4.79102 mM min1) was 95.8 times higher than the
sum of the rate constants in vis/O2/bulk g-C3N4 (5.00104 mM min1) and
ozonation (B0 mM min1),12 demonstrating the supersynergism between
photocatalytic oxidation and the ozonation trigger by g-C3N4 as a catalyst.
The bulk g-C3N4 outperformed, under the same experimental conditions
WO3 (2.89102 mM min1), the most widely studied metal oxide catalyst of
this AOP. This is the case because bulk g-C3N4 exhibits significantly more
negative conduction band maximum (CBM) potential than WO3 (0.93 eV in
comparison to 0.3 eV),12 benefiting electron capture by O3, a crucial step for
separating surface electron–hole pairs as well as decomposing ozone in
photocatalytic ozonation.6 The vis/O3/bulk g-C3N4 process was found to
be more robust than some well-known carbocatalytic ozonation systems like
O3/reduced graphene oxide (2.86102 mM min1) and O3/multiwalled
carbon nanotubes (3.86102 mM min1) under the same operational
conditions.12 Nanosheet (NS) g-C3N4 made by exfoliating bulk g-C3N4 via a
thermal oxidation etching method was found to be more active than the bulk
Figure 7.2
(a) Chemical structure of g-C3N4; (b–d) selected examples to show the
eﬃciencies of visible-light photocatalytic ozonation for the mineraliza-
tion of diﬀerent organic pollutants with diﬀerent g-C3N4 catalysts.
(b) Bulk g-C3N4, OA; (b) g-C3N4 nanosheet, OA; (c) nanoporous g-C3N4,
PHBA. Adapted from ref. 6 with permission from American Chemical
Society, Copyright 2020.
222
Chapter 7

counterpart, as reflected by the larger degradation rate constant of OA on
NS g-C3N4 (Figure 7.2c).13 This is mainly due to the upshift of CBM by
0.10 eV.13
Figure 7.2d shows the mineralization eﬃciencies of PHBA by diﬀerent
(catalytic) oxidation methods using honeycomb-like nanoporous (NP) g-C3N4
as the catalyst.11 Negligible total organic carbon (TOC) was removed under
vis/O2/nanoporous (NP) g-C3N4 conditions, indicating the very poor min-
eralization ability of the photocatalytic oxidation method. Ozonation caused
the removal of TOC by about 48% at 15 min, but no further TOC removal
was achieved afterward. This is due to the formation and accumulation of
O3-refractory intermediates such as OA.11 Notably, photocatalytic ozonation
(vis/O3/NP g-C3N4) led to steady and robust removal of TOC, due to direct
ozonation reactions with the initial pollutant and intermediates and, more
importantly, to the in situ formation of OH that further reacted with ozone-
refractory intermediates until complete mineralization.11 The mineral-
ization pathway of PHBA was revealed by time-dependent electrospray
ionization-mass spectrometry (ESI-MS) and is illustrated in Scheme 7.2a.
This result is in agreement with the TOC removal behaviors in phenol
Scheme 7.2
(a) Mineralization pathway of PHBA by vis/O3/nanoporous g-C3N4 pro-
cess. Adapted from ref. 11 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright
2016. (b) Rule for the mineralization of aromatic compounds by
diﬀerent oxidation methods.
Visible-light-driven Photocatalytic Ozonation of Aqueous Organic Pollutants
223

mineralization by diﬀerent oxidation processes using WO3 as catalyst
(Figure 7.1a). Hence, the rule for mineralizing aromatic compounds by dif-
ferent oxidation methods could be summarized in Scheme 7.2b.
7.3
Reaction Mechanism
Hydroxyl radicals (OH, E0 ¼ 2.80 VNHE), the most powerful reactive oxygen
species (ROS), are able to unselectively and completely oxidize organic pol-
lutants in atmosphere and water, of which the yield produced in situ governs
the oxidation capacity of AOPs.45 It is well-known that indirect oxidation by
OH plays an essential role in photocatalytic ozonation rather than the direct
oxidation by O3. It is also generally accepted that the synergism between
photocatalytic oxidation and ozonation arises from the more eﬃcient
photoelectron capture by O3 than by O2, which promotes not only charge
separation
upon
charge
transfer
to
the
surface
but
also
ozone
decomposition.2–5 This preliminary understanding is mainly based on the
rate constants of related elementary reactions studied by the pulse radiolysis
technique in the 1980s and quenching experiments mainly using tert-butyl
alcohol (TBA) as a OH scavenger.20,22,30 However, it remains insuﬃcient
particularly concerning the tiny details of how the electron transfer and re-
active oxygen species (ROS) evolve in the presence of dissolved ozone.
To promote fundamental understanding, in situ electron paramagnetic
resonance (EPR) spectroscopic study of vis/O3/g-C3N4 as a model reaction
was carried out in the group of Angelika Bru¨ckner.13 The in situ EPR spec-
troscopic setup (Figure 7.3) was mainly composed of an ozone generator, an
ozone analyzer, a 300 W Xe-arc lamp equipped with a cutoﬀfilter GG420, a
Bruker EMX CW-micro X-band EPR spectrometer equipped with an
ER4119HS-WI high-sensitivity optical resonator, a specially designed flat cell
(0.5 mm inner distance) and fused silica capillaries as the gas channel. Also,
a self-modified syringe was used for the developed online DMPO (5,5-di-
methyl-1-pyrroline N-oxide) spin trapping technique. With this method, the
photoexcitation of electrons (CB-e) from the valance band (VB) to the
conduction band (CB) of g-C3N4 and their further reaction with dissolved O2
and O3 to form ROS could be monitored under realistic aqueous con-
ditions.13 For example, the change in the relative number of CB-e inside
aqueous g-C3N4 suspensions with visible-light irradiation and under N2, O2
and O3 (2.1 mol% in O2) saturated conditions (Figure 7.4a) or under con-
secutive bubbling of N2, O2 and O3 (Figure 7.4b) can be semi-quantitatively
measured. It was found that a mixture of O3/O2 (2.1 mol% O3 in O2) gas can
trap
approximately
double
to
triple
the
number
of
CB-e
in
an
aqueous g-C3N4 suspension than pure O2. This is the case because the redox
potential (1.03 VNHE versus
0.18 VNHE
46) and water solubility (ca.
109 mg L1 versus 8 mg L1 at 1 atm and 298 K47) of O3 are much higher.
Furthermore, an online DMPO spin trapping technique was developed to
probe the ROS evolution under photocatalytic ozonation (vis/O3/g-C3N4)
conditions in comparison with under photocatalytic oxidation (vis/O2/g-C3N4)
224
Chapter 7

conditions.13 Figure 7.4c and d show the EPR spectra of DMPO–OH and
DMPO–OOH (the adducts of DMPO with OH and O2
, respectively) species
under these two conditions, with and without OA (model pollutant). On the
basis of the semi-quantitative analyses using the EasySpin/Matlab toolbox and
double integration calculation,13 the authors found that DMPO–OOH con-
stituted almost 80% of the DMPO spin trapping adducts formed in vis/O2/g-
C3N4, while around 90% of the DMPO adducts in vis/O3/g-C3N4 were DMPO–
OH. This indicates that O2
 and OH are the dominant ROS in vis/O2/g-C3N4
and vis/O3/g-C3N4 processes, respectively. Specifically, the yield of OH in vis/
O3/bulk g-C3N4 is about 18 times higher than that in vis/O2/bulk g-C3N4, and.
likewise, the vis/O3/NS g-C3N4 system generated six times more OH than the
vis/O2/NS g-C3N4 system. These results demonstrate that feeding just a small
portion of O3 (e.g. 2.1 mol% O3 in O2) into a photocatalytic oxidation system
could significantly improve the overall yield of ROS as well as the selectivity
for OH formation.
OH were produced from the 1-electron reduction of O3 under vis/O3/
g-C3N4 conditions, i.e. CB-e capture by O3 via the intermediate formation of
O3
 (eqn (7.1)) and HO3 radicals (eqn (7.2)) that rapidly decompose into
OH (eqn (7.3)). E0(O3aq/O3
) (1.03 VNHE
17) is theoretically much higher than
Figure 7.3
(a) In situ EPR spectroscopic setup. (b) Flat cell loaded with bulk g-C3N4
suspension under O3 bubbling (0.5 mL min 1). (c) Self-modified syringe.
Reproduced from ref. 13 with permission from American Chemical
Society, Copyright 2017.
Visible-light-driven Photocatalytic Ozonation of Aqueous Organic Pollutants
225

E0(O2aq/O2
) (0.18 VNHE
17), so O3 can easily take an electron from O2

(eqn (7.4)) with an approximate rate constant of 1.5109 M1 s1 49 and
further convert it into OH via the O3
-mediated route (eqn (7.2)–(7.3)),
rather than via the original H2O2-mediated 3-electron reduction of O2 (eqn
(7.5)–(7.8)).
O3 þ CB-e-O 
3
(7.1)
O3
 þ Hþ  !
pK ¼ 8:2 HO
3
(7:2)
HO3-O2 þ OH
(7.3)
O3 þ O2
-O3
 þ O2
(7.4)
O2 þ CB-e-O 
2
(7.5)
Figure 7.4
(a) Relative number of photoexcited CB-e in N2-, O2- or O3-saturated
aqueous suspension of bulk and NS g-C3N4, respectively. (b) Time-
dependent change of the relative number of photoexcited CB-e in
aqueous suspensions of bulk and NS g-C3N4 under consecutive bubbling
of N2 (20 min), O2 (20 min) and O3 (20 min) and irradiation of visible
light. Comparison of DMPO spin trapping EPR spectra of (c) bulk and
(d) NS g-C3N4 suspensions in the presence of O2, O3 or O3/OA under
visible-light irradiation. Reproduced from ref. 13 with permission from
American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020.
226
Chapter 7

O
2 þ Hþ  !
pK ¼ 4:8 HO
2
(7:6)
HO2 þ H1 þCB-e-H2O2
(7.7)
H2O2 þCB-e-OH þ OH
(7.8)
The authors also found that the DMPO–OOH signal intensity reflecting
the O2
 number decreased with an increase in the DMPO–OH number
upon switching from vis/O2/g-C3N4 to vis/O3/g-C3N4. In keeping with this, the
formation of H2O2 [a necessary intermediate for the three-electron reduction
of O2 (eqn (7.5)–(7.8))] was greatly inhibited, upon introduction of O3 (2.1
mol% in O2) into a vis/O2/g-C3N4 system.13 These observations point to the
conversion of O2
 into OH in the presence of O3, which is the additional
way for enhanced OH production. In the presence of OA (i.e. under the vis/
O3/g-C3N4/OA conditions, Figure 7.4c and d), the EPR signal intensity of
DMPO–OH greatly dropped (Figure 7.4c and d), indicating the rapid reaction
between OA and OH, which is in line with the predicted high reaction rate
between oxalate and OH.48 Moreover, a complete inhibition of OA degrad-
ation in the presence of tert-butyl alcohol (TBA, a well-known OH scav-
enger49) was observed.13 All these findings verified OH as the sole oxidant
able to decompose OA. OA oxidation by OH directly produces CO2 and H2O
since no stable intermediates were detected.13 Hence, the removal of OA by
OH is equal to complete mineralization.
In summary, the key reason for the high oxidation ability of visible-light-
driven
photocatalytic
ozonation
is
that
ozone
traps
and
converts
photoelectrons into OH far more eﬃciently than oxygen, via a 1-electron
reduction pathway (O3-O3
-HO3-OH), and reacts with O2
 to form
O3
 that generates further OH (Figure 7.5a). It is due to the fast electron
capture by O3 and further eﬃcient conversion into OH that CB-e can be
Figure 7.5
(a) Proposed pathways of OH generation in vis/O3/g-C3N4. (b) Relative
number of DMPO–OH as a function of the number of trapped CB-e.
Adapted from ref. 13 with permission from American Chemical Society,
Copyright 2020.
Visible-light-driven Photocatalytic Ozonation of Aqueous Organic Pollutants
227

more adequately utilized for producing OH with a high yield and selectivity
in photocatalytic ozonation (Figure 7.5b). It should be mentioned that the
OH formation pathway in g-C3N4 is somewhat diﬀerent from that in WO3
due to their diﬀerent band structures. For WO3, OH forms via both CB-e
reduction by O3 and direct oxidation of H2O by VB-h1.29 Unlike WO3, VB-h1
in g-C3N4 cannot oxidize H2O directly to OH as proven by the experimental
fact that no DMPO–OH signal was observed under vis/N2/g-C3N4 conditions.13
This is in line with the significantly lower VB edge potential of g-C3N4 com-
pared with E0(OH, H1/H2O).50 However, the 1-electron reduction of O3
dominates the g-C3N4 photocatalytic ozonation process and produces OH
far more eﬃciently, so g-C3N4 behaves more actively than WO3. VB-h1
in g-C3N4 reacted with OA extremely slowly,15 and thus the main con-
sumption of the surviving VB-h1 could be their reaction with H2O directly to
O2, since their redox potential is more positive than E0(O2, H1/H2O).51 In
order to confirm this, a further isotope experiment using H2
18O would be
required since the feed gas contains O2.
7.4
Structure–Performance Relationship of Catalysts
7.4.1
WO3
There are very limited studies on the structure–performance relationship of
WO3, though WO3 is the most widely investigated metal-oxide catalyst in
visible-light photocatalytic ozonation. Mena et al. compared commercial and
own-made WO3 catalysts (Table 7.3) with diﬀerent morphologies (spherical
and irregular) and crystalline structures (orthorhombic, monoclinic and
hexagonal)
in
photocatalytic
ozonation
of
N,N-diethyl-meta-toluamide
(DEET) (Figure 7.6), an active compound in insect repellents.26 They found
that the monoclinic and/or orthorhombic structure of WO3 and the presence
Table 7.3
Selected properties of the studied WO3. Adapted from ref. 26 with
permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2014.
Catalyst
Synthesis
WO3 phase
SBET (m2 g1)
W-c
Commercial
Monoclinic
9.8
W1-500
Sol–gel; T ¼ 500 1C
Orthorhombic
9.0
W1-600
Sol–gel; T ¼ 600 1C
Monoclinic
8.1
W1-700
Sol–gel; T ¼ 700 1C
Monoclinic
5.3
W2
Hydrothermal
Hexagonal
82.0
W2-t
Hydrothermal; treated (O3 þ hn)
Hexagonal
93.7
W2-500-t
Hydrothermal; T ¼ 500 1C; treated
(O3 þ hn)
Monoclinic
8.2
W2-600
Hydrothermal; T ¼ 600 1C
Monoclinic
5.8
W2-600-t
Hydrothermal; T ¼ 600 1C; treated
(O3 þ hn)
Monoclinic
9.6
W2-700-t
Hydrothermal; T ¼ 700 1C; treated
(O3 þ hn)
Monoclinic
9.4
228
Chapter 7

of reduced W species were favorable properties, while a larger specific sur-
face area (SBET) was not important at all. The champion WO3 catalyst led to a
complete removal of DEET in less than 20 min with a mineralization level up
to 70% in 2 h (Figure 7.6). Likewise, Rey et al. found that monoclinic crys-
talline structure, together with the presence of oxygen vacancies in WO3,
promoted electron migration on the catalyst surface to some extent, thus
accelerating the photocatalytic ozonation reactions under visible-light ir-
radiation.27 The specific surface area (SBET) was found to be of no import-
ance to the activity either.27
Yang et al. synthesized three kinds of WO3 materials (M-100, M-001
and H-100) with diﬀerent morphologies, crystal phases and band structures,
and compared their activities in visible-light photocatalytic ozonation of OA
and cephalexin (a macromolecular antibiotic compound commonly found in
pharmaceutical wastewater).29 In keeping with the findings mentioned
above,26,27 monoclinic WO3 (M-100 and M-002) were more active than the
Figure 7.6
(a) DEET dimensionless concentration. (b) TOC dimensionless concen-
tration during photocatalytic ozonation with diﬀerent WO3 catalysts
listed in Table 7.3 (dotted lines show single ozonation results). Adap-
ted from ref. 26 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2014.
Visible-light-driven Photocatalytic Ozonation of Aqueous Organic Pollutants
229

hexagonal WO3 (H-100) (Figure 7.7), and SBET was not an impacting factor
either. Moreover, they demonstrated that the intrinsic charge separation
ability of WO3 particles (probed by the photoluminescence spectroscopy) is
not of relevance to the photocatalytic ozonation performance, though it is
important for photocatalytic oxidation. This does not mean that the charge
separation is not crucial for photocatalytic ozonation. Rather, it does play a
vital role, but the eﬃciency of charge separation should be assessed under
realistic conditions, i.e. in the presence of reagents that actively aﬀect the
surface charge separation. Considering the role of ozone as a powerful
electron trap, its presence causes the eﬃcient separation of charge carriers
upon diﬀusion to the catalytic particle surface, making the intrinsic charge
separation property at a photocatalyst surface less important for the pho-
tocatalytic ozonation performance. The activity diﬀerence between M-100
and M-002 was assigned to their diﬀerent band structures, particularly to the
diﬀerent CB edge positions.29 CB-e formed upon M-100 had a larger re-
ducing power due to its more negative CB edge potential (Figure 7.7a), and
this causes more eﬃcient electron capture by O3, resulting in improved
Figure 7.7
(a) Band structures of diﬀerent WO3. (b) Degradation of OA. (c) Mineral-
ization of cephalexin in photocatalytic oxidation, ozonation and photo-
catalytic ozonation under visible-light irradiation. Adapted from ref. 29
with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2018.
230
Chapter 7

surface charge separation and ozone decomposition. As a consequence, M-100
outperformed M-002 in the degradation of OA (Figure 7.7b) and mineral-
ization of cephalexin (Figure 7.7c).
7.4.2
g-C3N4
The structure–performance relationship studies of g-C3N4 in visible-light
photocatalytic ozonation are few, and the dominant contribution is
from us in cooperation with the group led by Angelika Bru¨ckner.15
In
Figure
7.2,
the
performance
of
g-C3N4
follows
the
order
of
nanosheet g-C3N44bulk g-C3N44nanoporous g-C3N4, with the CB edge
potential varying from the most to the least negative.9,11,13 Also, it was due to
the upshift of the CB edge by around 0.10 eV that bulk g-C3N4 synthesized by
thermopolymerization of dicyandiamide outperformed that synthesized
from thiourea.10 In line with the studies on WO3,26,27 SBET was of negligible
importance to the activity of g-C3N4 in the photocatalytic ozonation of
OA.9–11,15 This was the case because OH formation was not adsorption
limited, and OA oxidation by OH occurred in the liquid phase rather than
on the g-C3N4 surface. The latter was supported by two facts: (1) OA ad-
sorption on the g-C3N4 samples was negligible, and (2) tert-butyl alcohol
(TBA, a liquid-phase OH scavenger that is scarcely adsorbed on low-polarity
carbon surfaces52) completely blocked the decomposition of OA.13,15 In
keeping with WO3,29 the suppression of radiative electron–hole recombin-
ation within g-C3N4 itself was also excluded as a factor, as g-C3N4 with less
pronounced radiative charge recombination (reflected by lower photo-
luminescence intensity) was less active.15 All these findings indicate that the
band structure, i.e. the VB and CB edge positions and the corresponding
bandgap, could be the main factor governing the photocatalytic ozonation
activity of g-C3N4.
In order to reveal the relationship between band structure and catalytic
performance, in situ electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy
was used to explore the number and reactivity of photoexcited charge car-
riers in various g-C3N4 specimens with well-tailored band structures for
producing OH radicals, as well as the eﬃciency of OH in the degradation of
OA used as a model pollutant.15 As shown in Figure 7.8a and b, the OA re-
moval rate constants under both photocatalytic ozonation (vis/O3/g-C3N4,
Figure 7.8a) and photocatalytic oxidation (vis/O2/g-C3N4, Figure 7.8b) con-
ditions were closely linked to the conduction band edge potential (CBEP)
and bandgap values. The OA removal rate increased with the negative shift of
CBEP and the enlargement of bandgap, reaching a maximum for the sample
Ar-640-Air-550, but decreased further upon the sample Ar-640-Air-570.
The entire photoexcited CB-e as well as the reactive CB-e that can be
trapped by O2 or O3 inside the selected g-C3N4 catalysts (i.e. bulk, Ar-640, Ar-
640-Air-550 and Ar-640-Air-570 in Figure 7.8) under realistic aqueous con-
ditions, were semi-quantified.15 Furthermore, the formed OH in these
samples were also semi-quantified by using the EPR intensity of DMPO–OH
Visible-light-driven Photocatalytic Ozonation of Aqueous Organic Pollutants
231

Figure 7.8
Relation of OA removal rate constant to CBEP and bandgap of g-C3N4
under (a) vis/O3/g-C3N4 and (b) vis/O2/g-C3N4 conditions. Relation of
relative numbers of (c) reactive CB-e and (d) DMPO-OH to the CBEP and
bandgap of selected g-C3N4. (e) Relative number of DMPO-OH adducts.
(f) OA removal rate constant as a function of the relative number of
reactive CB-e under vis/O3/g-C3N4 and vis/O2/g-C3N4 conditions. Repro-
duced from ref. 15 with permission from American Chemical Society,
Copyright 2020.
232
Chapter 7

adducts as a measure. The plot of the relative number of reactive CB-e as a
function of the band structure (Figure 7.8c) showed the same trend as that of
the relative number of DMPO–OH (Figure 7.8d) and of the OA de-
composition rate constant (Figure 7.8a and b), under both vis/O3/g-C3N4 and
vis/O2/g-C3N4 conditions. This indicates that it is the interplay between the
bandgap and CBEP of g-C3N4 that governs the number of reactive CB-e,
which is itself directly proportional to the yield of OH (Figure 7.8e) and to
the rate of OA degradation (Figure 7.8f). This rule is independent of the type
of the primary oxidant (i.e. the CB-e trap; O2 or O3) used.
Scheme 7.3 summarizes the relationship between the band structure, type
of CB-e trap and photocatalytic performance of g-C3N4. An optimum bal-
ance between the number and reducing power of CB-e is a key factor for the
catalytic performance of g-C3N4, and this depends on the interplay between
the bandgap and CB edge potential. The authors proposed a new concept,
the ‘‘number of reactive charge carriers’’ (CB-e in the present case,
Scheme 7.3), to describe the collective eﬀects of the bandgap and CB/VB
edges. It should be noted that this concept virtually reflects the charge
separation eﬃciency in the presence of reactants and under realistic con-
ditions because reactive charge carriers refer to the CB-e/VB-h1 that are
separated and directly used for the photocatalytic reaction.
7.4.3
Future Design and Optimization of g-C3N4
Scheme 7.4 summarizes five main research directions for further improvement
of the g-C3N4-based catalysts. First of all, three catalytic particle engineering
strategies are suggested on the basis of the structure–performance relationship
studies: (3) narrowing the bandgap and raising the CB edge (Scheme 7.4a), so
as to increase the number of reactive CB-e in g-C3N4; (2) forming a Z-scheme
heterojunction53 with another visible-light-responsive semiconductor (S-II, e.g.
WO3,54 modified BiVO4,55 modified TiO2,56 etc.) (Scheme 7.4b) having a VB
edge potential more positive than E0(OH, H1/H2O), so as to enable direct H2O
oxidation by VB-h1 from S-II (New Pathway I) for OH production; (3) designing
Scheme 7.3
The relationship among band structure, type of CB-e trap and photo-
catalytic activity. Reproduced from ref. 15 with permission from Ameri-
can Chemical Society, Copyright 2020.
Visible-light-driven Photocatalytic Ozonation of Aqueous Organic Pollutants
233

a bifunctional catalyst (Scheme 7.4c) by compositing g-C3N4 with other ma-
terials (e.g. MnO2,57 ZnO,58 carbon nanotube,12 reduced graphene oxide,49 etc.)
that can catalytically decompose surplus ozone into OH (New Pathway II), so
as to take full advantage of ozone for OH production. Note that there may exist
competition between the present pathway and new pathways for OH pro-
duction and that some modification strategies (e.g. foreign element doping)
may impact two or more reaction pathways, resulting in opposite outcomes.
Therefore, great eﬀorts are required to study the interplay between the present
and additional
OH production pathways, so as to achieve an ideal
cooperation.
At the same time, it is important to explore useful co-catalysts to extract
more CB-e/VB-h1 from the catalyst bulk and to oﬀer catalytically active
sites for desired surface reactions, as well as to suppress unwanted charge
recombination or side reactions. In addition, to harvest a larger portion of
solar energy, active photocatalytic ozonation catalysts with narrower
bandgaps are to be developed. To this end, it is suggested to have a sys-
tematic and careful examination of the widely studied narrow-band-gap
semiconductors (e.g. (oxy)nitrides, (oxy)sulfides, etc.) in visible-light pho-
tocatalytic ozonation reactions. In terms of practical applications, the
catalyst must be assembled into a shaped or immobilized form. Therefore,
the other two strategies aim to explore and fabricate active-shaped catalyst
granules (Scheme 7.4d) and catalyst sheet/film (Scheme 7.4e) using the
optimized catalyst powder. These two such catalyst forms have never been
examined in the field of photocatalytic ozonation. In terms of the prepar-
ation and assembling processes, we suggest to follow the work from
Kazunari Domen’s group.59,60
Scheme 7.4
Proposed directions for future optimization and design of g-C3N4-based
catalysts. Adapted from ref. 15 with permission from American Chem-
ical Society, Copyright 2020.
234
Chapter 7

7.5
Stability of g-C3N4 Catalysts
The chemical and working stability of g-C3N4, the most actively studied
visible-light photocatalytic ozonation catalyst, was studied by our group,14
while there is, to the best of our knowledge, no such studies for other
catalysts in photocatalytic ozonation. g-C3N4 was found to be chemically
stable with O3 or O2
; in contrast, OH could tear the heptazine units
from g-C3N4 to form cyameluric acid and further release NO3
 into the
aqueous environment (Scheme 7.5). Due to the high yield of OH under
photocatalytic ozonation conditions, TOC and NO3
 were detected, which
gradually accumulated in initially ultra-pure water. In line with this, the
fragmentation of g-C3N4 nanosheets (observed by TEM), as well as decreased
surface C and N contents (analyzed by XPS), were found.14 After treatment
for 10 h, the ratios of released nitrogen from nanosheet-structured
(NS) g-C3N4 and bulk g-C3N4 that finally existed in the form of NO3

reached 9.5 and 6.8 mol% in initially ultra-pure water, respectively. The
decomposition of nanosheet g-C3N4 was more pronounced than that of
bulk g-C3N4 because (1) more OH were formed on NS g-C3N4, and (2) less
layer stacking in the nanosheet g-C3N4 decreased its structural stability.14
Fortunately, in the presence of organic pollutants that compete against g-C3N4
for OH, the g-C3N4 decomposition was completely or partially blocked.14 OH
reacted with OA, benzene, phenol and thiophene in preference to g-C3N4 but
attacked BPA, valproate or quinizarin with almost equal preference to g-C3N4.
The degree of this protection eﬀect varied from pollutant to pollutant, most
likely due to the diﬀerence in structural stabilities between the organic pollutant
and g-C3N4. This diﬀerence is minor for macro-molecular organics (bisphenol A,
valproate and quinizarin) as compared with the micromolecular ones (OA,
benzene, phenol and thiophene), so a pinch of OH still reacted with NS g-C3N4
in the presence of the former. To sum up, organic pollutants in wastewater
protect g-C3N4 from decomposition by OH, so the high activity of g-C3N4 is
maintained while treating a model pollutant or wastewater.6,12
Scheme 7.5
Chemical stabilities of g-C3N4 toward O3, O2
 and OH. Adapted from
ref. 14 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright
2017.
Visible-light-driven Photocatalytic Ozonation of Aqueous Organic Pollutants
235

7.6
Present State and Challenges for Practical
Application
A pilot-scale plant (Figure 6.7) of solar photocatalytic ozonation was estab-
lished in Badajoz, Spain (3815204300N, 615801500W) in 2014, which successfully
treated real-world wastewater using natural sunlight and air (source of
ozone).61,62 The system was mainly composed of a 45-degree-tilted com-
pound parabolic collector (CPC) reactor equipped with 4 borosilicate glass
tubes (32 mm external diameter, 1.4 mm thickness, 750 mm length), a
broadband UV radiometer, an air compressor, an ozone generator and
analyzer, gas flow controllers, tubes etc. The total collector surface was
0.25 m2 and the volume of illuminated wastewater was 1.8 L. Ozone was
generated from dry air by an ozone generator and fed through two porous
plates located at the entrance of the tubes into the reactor. The gas flow rate
and ozone concentration were controlled at about 45 L h1 and 20 mg L1,
respectively. The wastewater to be treated was kept recirculating at a rate of
300–400 L h1. Such a system successfully treated the pharmaceutical
compounds-containing secondary eﬄuent from a municipal wastewater
treatment plant, with high eﬃciencies of organics mineralization (B85%)
and toxicity removal (B90%).61
This was a good start and demonstrated the great potential of
solar photocatalytic ozonation for scalable applications. However, TiO2,
the catalyst used in the systems,61,62 absorbs only UV light (ca. 4% of
sunlight in energy), and the catalyst form of particulate suspension is not
realistic for large-scale applications. Therefore, there are still many chal-
lenges on the way to the practical application of solar photocatalytic
ozonation.
First of all, active bifunctional particulate catalyst (e.g. g-C3N4/S-II/O3-cat,
Scheme 7.4c) is to be made, which is the precondition for achieving the
goal. Only with such a catalyst can OH be produced regardless of the
weather or time. Under sunlight (i.e. during a sunny day), OH would be
produced via photocatalytic and catalytic ozonation pathways; in the ab-
sence of sunlight (i.e. during a cloudy day or at night), OH would be
produced via catalytic ozonation. Secondly, active catalyst granules
(Scheme 7.4d) or immobilized catalyst sheet/film (Scheme 7.4e) are to be
fabricated using the optimized catalyst powder. At the same time, the de-
sign and fabrication of devices, reactors and equipment related to the solar
photocatalytic ozonation system are required to maximize photon ab-
sorption and the mass transfer of redox species under pilot-scale con-
ditions. In this regard, in parallel with lab-scale experiments, outdoor
wastewater treatment plants are to be established, and research on catalyst
improvement, device/equipment manufacture and optimization of oper-
ational conditions should be carried out in these plants. We look ahead
one day to a natural sunlight- and air-based wastewater treatment plant, as
illustrated in Scheme 7.6, by continuous research and cooperation among
scientists and engineers around the globe.
236
Chapter 7

7.7
Conclusions
This chapter summarizes the representative catalysts, the state-of-the-art
understanding of the reaction mechanism and the catalyst structure–
performance relationship and stability in visible-light photocatalytic ozo-
nation, and discusses the future directions for catalyst improvement and
how to advance the practical application of solar photocatalytic ozonation.
The key reason for the robust oxidation power of visible-light photo-
catalytic ozonation lies in the high yield of OH. In this AOP, ozone plays a
crucial role because it traps and converts photoelectrons into OH far more
eﬃciently than oxygen, via a 1-electron reduction pathway (O3-O3
-
HO3- OH), and reacts with O2
 to form O3
, which generates further
OH. g-C3N4 has emerged as the most actively studied catalyst recently and
has exhibited multiple advantages over WO3, the second most popular
catalytic material of this field. Band structure has been found to be the
decisive factor to the activity of pristine g-C3N4 because it aﬀects the
number of reactive charge carriers, which is directly proportional to the
yield of OH. g-C3N4 is chemically stable with ozone and O2
 but can be
oxidatively decomposed by OH. Fortunately, the decomposition of g-C3N4
could be inhibited in wastewater treatment because of the protection eﬀect
of organic pollutants that compete with g-C3N4 for OH. Therefore, g-C3N4
photocatalytic ozonation treatment of wastewater remains robust and
steady.
Scheme 7.6
Sunlight- and air-based water treatment plant combining solar photo-
catalytic ozonation and catalytic ozonation processes. Adapted from
ref. 6 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright
2020.
Visible-light-driven Photocatalytic Ozonation of Aqueous Organic Pollutants
237

Further improvement of g-C3N4-based particulate catalysts is necessary. The
main directions include (1) narrowing the bandgap and shifting up the CB
edge of g-C3N4, (2) forming a Z-scheme heterojunction with another visible-
light responsive semiconductor, whose VB-h1 can directly oxidize H2O to OH,
(3) building a bifunctional catalyst by compositing with materials that can
catalytically decompose ozone into OH, and (4) loading suitable co-catalysts
to promote desired reactions while suppressing unwanted side reactions. To
advance the scalable applications, active catalyst granules or immobilized
catalyst sheets/films are to be fabricated. Also, fabrication of innovative de-
vices, reactors and equipment is required to maximize photon absorption and
the mass transfer of redox species, and outdoor pilot-scale examinations are
also important in parallel with lab-scale experiments. Therefore, we need keep
moving forward toward the ultimate goal, the establishment of sunlight- and
air-based scalable wastewater treatment plants.
Acknowledgements
The authors appreciate the financial support from the National Science
Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars of China (51425405) and the Beijing
Natural Science Foundation (8172043).
References
1. K. Tanaka, K. Abe and T. Hisanaga, J. Photochem. Photobiol. A, 1996, 101,
85–87.
2. T. E. Agustina, H. M. Ang and V. K. Vareek, J. Photochem. Photobiol. C,
2005, 6, 264–273.
3. M. Mehrjouei, S. Mu¨ller and D. Mo¨ller, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 263, 209–219.
4. J. Xiao, Y. Xie and H. Cao, Chemosphere, 2015, 121, 1–17.
5. F. Beltra´n and A. Rey, Molecules, 2017, 22, 1177.
6. J. D. Xiao, Y. B. Xie, J. Rabeah, A. Bruckner and H. B. Cao, Acc. Chem.
Res., 2020, 53, 1024–1033.
7. S. Nishimoto, T. Mano, Y. Kameshima and M. Miyake, Chem. Phys. Lett.,
2010, 500, 86–89.
8. S. Anandan, G. J. Lee, P. K. Chen, C. Fan and J. J. Wu, Ind. Eng. Chem.
Res., 2010, 49, 9729–9737.
9. J. D. Xiao, Y. B. Xie, H. B. Cao, Y. Q. Wang and Z. J. Zhao, Catal. Com-
mun., 2015, 66, 10–14.
10. J. D. Xiao, Y. B. Xie, F. Nawaz, S. Jin, F. Duan, M. J. Li and H. B. Cao, Appl.
Catal., B, 2016, 181, 420–428.
11. J. D. Xiao, Y. B. Xie, F. Nawaz, Y. X. Wang, P. H. Du and H. B. Cao, Appl.
Catal., B, 2016, 183, 417–425.
12. J. D. Xiao, Y. B. Xie, H. B. Cao, Y. X. Wang, Z. Guo and Y. Chen, Carbon,
2016, 107, 658–666.
13. J. D. Xiao, J. Rabeah, J. Yang, Y. B. Xie, H. B. Cao and A. Bruckner, ACS
Catal., 2017, 7, 6198–6206.
238
Chapter 7

14. J. D. Xiao, Q. Z. Han, Y. B. Xie, J. Yang, Q. Z. Su, Y. Chen and H. B. Cao,
Environ. Sci. Technol., 2017, 51, 13380–13387.
15. J. Xiao, Q. Han, H. Cao, J. Rabeah, J. Yang, Z. Guo, L. Zhou, Y. Xie and
A. Bru¨ckner, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 8852–8861.
16. G. Z. Liao, D. Y. Zhu, L. S. Li and B. Y. Lan, J. Hazard. Mater., 2014, 280,
531–535.
17. G. Z. Liao, D. Y. Zhu, C. C. Li, B. Y. Lan and L. S. Li, Ozone: Sci. Eng., 2016,
38, 312–317.
18. J. Yin, G. Z. Liao, D. Y. Zhu, P. Lu and L. S. Li, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A,
2016, 315, 138–144.
19. Y. Ling, G. Z. Liao, W. H. Feng, Y. Liu and L. S. Li, J. Photochem. Pho-
tobiol., A, 2017, 349, 108–114.
20. Y. Ling, G. Z. Liao, P. Xu and L. S. Li, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2019, 216, 1–8.
21. Y. X. Huang, Y. F. Yang, J. W. Jiang, Z. H. Xu, C. L. Zhu and L. Li,
J. Environ. Eng., 2018, 144, 04018063.
22. M. Jourshabani, J. A. Dominic, G. Achari and Z. Shariatinia, Chem. Eng.
Sci., 2019, 209, 115181.
23. Z. Liu, C. Y. Lu, Q. C. Mo, Q. Z. Yan, J. L. Li and W. S. Guan, Desalin.
Water Treat., 2020, 202, 355–363.
24. C. A. Orge, M. J. Sampaio, J. L. Faria, M. F. R. Pereira and C. G. Silva,
J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 104172.
25. T. Mano, S. Nishimoto, Y. Kameshima and M. Miyake, J. Ceram. Soc. Jpn.,
2011, 119, 822–827.
26. E. Mena, A. Rey, S. Contreras and F. J. Beltran, Catal. Today, 2015, 252,
100–106.
27. A. Rey, E. Mena, A. M. Chavez, F. J. Beltran and F. Medina, Chem. Eng.
Sci., 2015, 126, 80–90.
28. E. Mena, A. Rey, E. M. Rodriguez and F. J. Beltran, Appl. Catal., B, 2017,
202, 460–472.
29. J. Yang, J. D. Xiao, H. B. Cao, Z. Guo, J. Rabeah, A. Bru¨ckner and Y. B. Xie,
J. Hazard. Mater., 2018, 360, 481–489.
30. T. Mano, S. Nishimoto, Y. Kameshima and M. Miyake, Chem. Eng. J.,
2015, 264, 221–229.
31. Z. H. Pan, Q. H. Cai, Q. Luo and X. W. Li, Synth. React. Inorg., Met.-Org.,
Nano-Met. Chem., 2015, 45, 447–450.
32. S. Maddila, V. O. Ndabankulu and S. B. Jonnalagadda, Global Nest J.,
2016, 18, 269–278.
33. M. Sheydaei, H. R. K. Shiadeh, B. Ayoubi-Feiz and R. Ezzati, Chem. Eng.
J., 2018, 353, 138–146.
34. M. Sheydaei, D. Soleimani and B. Ayoubi-Feiz, Environ. Technol. Innov-
ation, 2020, 17, 100512.
35. L. Wu, Z. Zhao, H. Yu, M. Wang, G. Li, H. Li and J. Yan, Catal. Sci.
Technol., 2020, 10, 7481–7485.
36. J. Yang, X. Liu, H. Cao, Y. Shi, Y. Xie and J. Xiao, Front. Chem. Sci. Eng.,
2019, 13, 185–191.
37. X. L. Liu, Z. Guo, L. B. Zhou, J. Yang, H. B. Cao, M. Xiong, Y. B. Xie and
G. R. Jia, Chemosphere, 2019, 222, 38–45.
Visible-light-driven Photocatalytic Ozonation of Aqueous Organic Pollutants
239

38. J. Yin, G. Z. Liao, J. L. Zhou, C. M. Huang, Y. Ling, P. Lu and L. S. Li, Sep.
Purif. Technol., 2016, 168, 134–140.
39. J. L. Li, W. S. Guan, X. Yan, Z. Y. Wu and W. D. Shi, Catal. Lett., 2018,
148, 23–29.
40. K. Sehested, N. Getoﬀ, F. Schwoerer, V. Markovic and S. O. Nielsen,
J. Phys. Chem., 1971, 75, 749–755.
41. P. C. C. Faria, J. J. M. O´rfa˜o and M. F. R. Pereira, Appl. Catal., B, 2008, 79,
237–243.
42. X. Wang, K. Maeda, A. Thomas, K. Takanabe, G. Xin, J. M. Carlsson,
K. Domen and M. Antonietti, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 76.
43. Y. Wang, X. Wang and M. Antonietti, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51,
68–89.
44. J. Beltran-Heredia, J. Torregrosa, J. R. Dominguez and J. A. Peres, Che-
mosphere, 2001, 42, 351–359.
45. S. Gligorovski, R. Strekowski, S. Barbati and D. Vione, Chem. Rev., 2015,
115, 13051–13092.
46. W. H. Koppenol, D. M. Stanbury and P. L. Bounds, Free Radical Biol.
Med., 2010, 49, 317–322.
47. http://www.ozonesolutions.com/ (last accessed July 2021).
48. G. V. Buxton, C. L. Greenstock, W. P. Helman and A. B. Ross, J. Phys.
Chem. Ref. Data, 1988, 17, 513–886.
49. Y. X. Wang, Y. B. Xie, H. Q. Sun, J. D. Xiao, H. B. Cao and S. B. Wang, ACS
Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 9710–9720.
50. X. Dang, X. Zhang, W. Zhang, X. Dong, G. Wang, C. Ma, X. Zhang, H. Ma
and M. Xue, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 15052–15058.
51. K. Maeda, X. Wang, Y. Nishihara, D. Lu, M. Antonietti and K. Domen,
J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 4940–4947.
52. Z.-Q. Liu, J. Ma, Y.-H. Cui and B.-P. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 92, 301–306.
53. P. Zhou, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4920–4935.
54. D. Robert, Catal. Today, 2007, 122, 20–26.
55. K. Ding, B. Chen, Y. Li, Y. Zhang and Z. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2,
8294–8303.
56. D. Zhang, M. Wen, S. Zhang, P. Liu, W. Zhu, G. Li and H. Li, Appl. Catal.,
B, 2014, 147, 610–616.
57. F. Nawaz, H. Cao, Y. Xie, J. Xiao, Y. Chen and Z. A. Ghazi, Chemosphere,
2017, 168, 1457–1466.
58. H. Jung and H. Choi, Appl. Catal., B, 2006, 66, 288–294.
59. T. Hisatomi and K. Domen, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 387–399.
60. Q. Wang, T. Hisatomi, Q. X. Jia, H. Tokudome, M. Zhong, C. Z. Wang,
Z. H. Pan, T. Takata, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, Y. B. Li, I. D. Sharp,
A. Kudo, T. Yamada and K. Domen, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 611–615.
61. G. Ma´rquez, E. M. Rodrı´guez, F. J. Beltra´n and P. M. A´lvarez, Chemo-
sphere, 2014, 113, 71–78.
62. D. H. Quin˜ones, P. M. A´lvarez, A. Rey, S. Contreras and F. J. Beltra´n,
Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 260, 399–410.
240
Chapter 7

CHAPTER 8
Catalytic Peroxone Process and
the Coupled Processes
ZHUANG GUO,a YONGBING XIEb,c AND HONGBIN CAO*b,c
a State Key Laboratory of Environmental Criteria and Risk Assessment,
Chinese Research Academy of Environmental Sciences, Beijing 100012,
China; b Chemistry & Chemical Engineering Data Center, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China; c Beijing Engineering
Research Center of Process Pollution Control, Institute of Process
Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
*Email: hbcao@ipe.ac.cn
8.1
Introduction
In 1982, Staehelin and Hoigne first proposed the peroxone process, generating
hydroxyl radicals (OH) through the reaction between O3 and H2O2 to realize
the eﬃcient removal of refractory organics.1 As it has the advantages of
simplicity, rapid generation of radicals, low operation cost and negligible
secondary pollution, this process has quickly become a hot pot.2 However, the
peroxone process mainly relies on the reaction between O3 and HO2
 (the
deprotonated form of H2O2) to produce reactive oxygen species (ROS), and
the high pKa of H2O2 leads to the limited reaction rate under the acidic so-
lution.3,4 As a result, the application of the peroxone process is limited to
acidic wastewater treatment. The establishment of the catalytic peroxone
process using a catalytic material is a promising means of overcoming this
long existing shortfall, and thus the application scope could be extended.5
This chapter summarizes various homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysts
Chemistry in the Environment Series No. 8
Advanced Ozonation Processes for Water and Wastewater Treatment: Active Catalysts and
Combined Technologies
Edited by Hongbin Cao, Yongbing Xie, Yuxian Wang and Jiadong Xiao
r The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry, www.rsc.org
241

in the field, as well as their eﬃciencies for water contaminant removal and
catalytic mechanism. In addition, some peroxone-coupled processes, including
combination with photolysis, photocatalysis, ultrasonication and plasma, are
summarized, which can enhance the treating eﬃciencies of peroxone process.
8.1.1
Mechanism
The peroxone process is comprised of several completed chain reactions.
The reaction mechanism is gradually revealed with in-depth research; for
example, HO2
 can act as the initiator instead of H2O2. In general, the de-
velopment of the mechanism has been divided into three phases: mech-
anism 1, mechanism 2 and mechanism 3.
Mechanism 1
Electron transfer is deemed the initial reaction between O3 and H2O2, which
generates HO2 and O3
. HO2 can spontaneously decompose into O2
.
Relying on the fast reaction rate between O2
 and O3 (k ¼ 1.5109 M1 s1),
it produces O3
. In final, OH is generated by the protonation and dis-
sociation process of O3
 (eqn (8.1)–(8.5)).6
O3 þ HO2
-O3
 þ HO2
(8.1)
HO22O2
 þ H1
(8.2)
O2
 þ O32O2 þ O3

(8.3)
O3
 þ H1-HO3
(8.4)
HO32OH þ O2
(8.5)
According to these chemical equations, it is found that the stoichiometry
of O3 and OH reaches 1 : 1; in other words, O3 can be completely converted
into OH (eqn (8.6)).
2O3 þ H2O2-3O2 þ 2OH
(8.6)
Mechanism 2
In 2004, Lesko proposed that the hydrogen transfer reaction was conducted
first between O3 and HO2
 to produce HO3
 (eqn (8.7)–(8.8)), according to
the results of the kinetic isotope eﬀect (KIE).7 In the research, it was found
that the KIE value of the peroxone process was only 19.6  4.0, which was
significantly lower than that of the formation process of radicals (eqn (8.1)).
Therefore, the original chain reactions couldn’t happen. However, this
mechanism was quickly denied by Sein.8 The reason was that the product
H2O3 didn’t have any characteristics of active radicals and couldn’t match
242
Chapter 8

the performance of OH. Ultimately, it was confirmed to be an experimental
illusion in KIE research.
O3 þ HO 
2 -O2 þ HO 
3
(8.7)
HO 
3 þ H1-H2O3
(8.8)
Mechanism 3
According to the KIE data, Sein proposed that HO5
 adduct was the initial
product in the peroxone process (eqn (8.9)). Fischbacher found that the
consumption of O3 in the peroxone process was almost two times more than
that in g-radiolysis based on the same treatment eﬃciencies, when the or-
ganics in water were 4-chlorobenzoic acid, 4-nitrobenzoic acid or atrazine.4 It
is generally known that O3 is completely converted into OH in g-radiolysis.
Therefore, the OH yield per O3 is only 50% in the peroxone process. Con-
sidering the reaction paths, the HO5
 adduct decomposes into O3
 and
HO2 in competition with O2 and OH (eqn (8.10)–(8.13)). Although there is
a big diﬀerence in the free energy of thermodynamics for the two reaction
paths (eqn (8.10) G0 ¼ 13.2 kJ mol1, eqn (8.11) G0 ¼ 197 kJ mol1), the
former only involves the fracture of single bond, and the latter includes the
fracture and rearrangement of several bonds. Considering thermodynamics
and quantum mechanics, it is rational to believe that the two reactions occur
with a 50% probability, respectively.9 So far, mechanism 3 has been widely
recognized in the peroxone process.
O3 þ HO2
-HO5

(8.9)
HO5
-O3
-HO2
(8.10)
HO5
-23O2 þ OH
(8.11)
O3
2O2 þ O
(8.12)
O þ H2O2OH þ OH
(8.13)
8.1.2
Application
Over the past decades, the applied field of the peroxone process has been
expanded from river water containing simple organic substances to chemical
and pharmaceutical wastewater including a large amount of refractory or-
ganics. Witte et al. treated the ciprofloxacin with the peroxone process,
which exhibited an obviously higher eﬃciency than the ozonation process.10
Moreover, the eﬀects of O3 inlet concentration, H2O2 concentration, cipro-
floxacin concentration, temperature and pH were explored. The results show
that pH and the ratio of O3 and H2O2 greatly aﬀect the eﬃciencies, while the
influence of temperature (6.0–62.0 1C) is negligible. Specifically, the
Catalytic Peroxone Process and the Coupled Processes
243

eﬃciencies are reduced with decreasing pH, and excessive H2O2 causes
the competitive eﬀect of promoting radical formation versus scavenging
radicals. The oxidation of simazine, one of the herbicides with moderate
toxicity, by the peroxone treatment was investigated.11 It realized a high
TOC removal rate of up to 82% under a O3/H2O2 ratio of 0.6 and pH of 11.
In addition, organic sulfurated compounds, potential hazards for atmos-
phere and water, were eﬃciently treated by the peroxone process.12 The re-
sults showed that in the dibutylsulfide (DBS) oxidation process, the DBS
degradation rate increased with the increase of H2O2 concentration (ranging
from 0.1 to 1 mol L1) at pH 9, whereas it exhibited a slight change when the
H2O2 concentration was lower than 0.1 mol L1. Therefore, appropriate op-
erational parameters are vital for the treatment eﬃciency of the peroxone
process.
It also can eﬀectively improve the biodegradability of wastewater by in-
creasing the concentration of assimilable organic carbon (AOC) with the role
of O3 and H2O2.13 Additionally, the process is used to disinfect bacteria and
degrade their secretion sustainably. Oh proved that the peroxone process not
only eliminated the Escherichia coli but also removed the endotoxin released
from Escherichia coli.14 This study compared the degradation eﬃciencies of
endotoxin by O3 alone, UV/H2O2 and O3/H2O2. Only 8% and 30% of the
initial endotoxin were degraded, respectively, by O3 alone and by UV/H2O2
under optimal conditions, whereas the removal ratio under O3/H2O2 con-
ditions was 70%. The outstanding performance of the peroxone process
confirms its potential in biological applications.
Peroxone process is considered to be an alternative for reverse osmosis
(RO) in the treatment of secondary eﬄuents. Wu applied the peroxone
process in a direct potable water reuse research treatment system.15 The
results showed that the Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD) value of secondary
eﬄuent could be reduced to less than the detection limit under optimized
conditions (O3 dosages44.6 mg L1 h1 and O3/H2O2 mass ratio of 3.4–3.8).
The secondary eﬄuent is purified completely by the peroxone process. In
comparison with RO, the peroxone process satisfies the permanent min-
eralization without extra processes and without the consumption needed for
solving the membrane fouling and corrosion problems.
The peroxone process can be used to degrade the volatile organic com-
pounds (VOCs) that are widely present at various industrial facilities. Fer-
nandes compared the degradation eﬃciencies of 16 kinds of VOCs,
including benzene, toluene, 2-ethylthiophene, phenol and so on, under O3,
H2O2 and O3/H2O2 (peroxone process) conditions, respectively.16 The results
showed that the peroxone process significantly outperformed the processes
involving O3 or H2O2 alone, with complete degradation of the total organics
in a short time. A basic economic evaluation on its cost was performed
(Table 8.1). The study of the chemical and energy costs demonstrated that
peroxone process (0.01$ L1) was cheapest, compared with O3 (0.3$ L1) or
H2O2 (0.12$ L1), without considering the treatment time. Taking into ac-
count the expensive prices of Na2S2O8, the cost of persulfate (PS) increases by
244
Chapter 8

Table 8.1
Treatment cost calculations of O3, UV/H2O2 and peroxone process. Reproduced from ref. 13 with permission from Elsevier,
Copyright 2019.
Methods
Oxidant amount
(min)
T
(1C)
Eﬀective time
(min)
Eﬀective
amount (g)
Chemical
cost ($)
Energy
demand (kJ)
Energy
cost ($)
Total cost
($)
Treatment cost
($L–1)
H2O2
62
40
181.5
62.23
0.09
871.2
0.03
0.12
0.02
O3
70
40
357.6
69.38
–
9655.2
0.30
0.30
0.06
O3/H2O2
O3 61.5H2O2
127.5
40
30
O3 5.82H2O2
12.05
0.02
954
0.03
0.05
0.01
Na2S2O8
 436
40
181.5
435.59
17.75
871.2
0.03
17.77
3.55
Catalytic Peroxone Process and the Coupled Processes
245

two orders of magnitude to 17.77$. Therefore, the implementation of per-
oxone process is viable in a real-world case scenario.
8.1.3
Drawbacks
The degradation eﬃciencies of organics in the peroxone process are aﬀected
seriously by the pH of the solution. The eﬃciencies are reduced with de-
creasing pH values. Because HO2
 as the initiator reacts with O3 in the
peroxone process and the pKa of H2O2 is up to 11.8, only limited quantities of
HO2
 are produced under acidic solution, thus restricting the rate constant
seriously.17 According to the equation of apparent rate constant, a huge
diﬀerence in rate constants under alkaline and acidic conditions is observed
(eqn (8.14)).18
k ¼ kHO2 1O310(pHpKa)
(8.14)
The k values are 9.6106 and 0.01 M1 s1 at pH of 11.8 and 3, respect-
ively, with a diﬀerence of nine orders of magnitude. In addition, carboxylic
acids are unavoidably generated as the degradation intermediates of re-
fractory organic compounds, lowering the solution pH and thus limiting the
mineralization eﬃciency. Therefore, it is an urgent problem to solve the
ineﬃciencies of the technology in acidic solutions, which is of great im-
portance in broadening the application scope of the peroxone process.
8.2
Catalysts in Peroxone Process
Catalytic processes are the most eﬀective methods to promote the peroxone
process. Due to the complexity of this process including the two kinds of
active oxidants, only limited kinds of catalysts have been developed so far.
According to the diﬀerence in catalytic components and mechanisms, the
catalysts are divided into traditional metal catalysts and single-atom
catalysts.
8.2.1
Traditional Metal Catalysts
(1) Fe0 Catalyst
Fe0 catalyst is comprised of Fe0 powders (98%, 200 mesh). When the Fe0
catalyst was introduced in the peroxone process for the treatment of landfill
leachate, the treatment eﬃciencies were conspicuously enhanced.19 Con-
cretely, the COD, UV254 and CN removal eﬃciencies were improved from
22.5%, 42% and 24% to 43.4%, 59.5% and 93.2%, respectively.
According to XRD and XPS analyses, iron oxides were formed after the
reaction. Based on the previous research in which Fe0 was used to catalyze O3
and also to react with H2O2 to form a Fenton-like system, it is believed that
the Fe0 catalyst promoted the peroxone process by catalytic activation of O3
and H2O2 individually.
246
Chapter 8

The catalytic mechanisms of Fe0 are deemed to be as follows: (1) Fe0 reacts
with O3 to generate Fe21 in the presence of O3/H2O2, (2) Fe21 catalyzes the
decomposition of O3 and H2O2, (3) the iron oxides (Fe2O3, Fe3O4 and FeOOH)
are formed and further catalyze O3 and H2O2 to promote the generation of
reactive oxygen species (eqn (8.15)–(8.21)).
Fe þ 2O3-Fe21 þ 2O 
3
(8.15)
Fe21 þ O3-Fe31 þ O 
3
(8.16)
Fe21 þ H2O2 - þ OH þ OH þ Fe31
(8.17)
H1 þ O 
3 -HO3-OH þ O2
(8.18)
Fe21 þ O3-(FeOH)21 þ O2
(8.19)
(FeO)21 þ H2O-Fe31 þ OH þ OH
(8.20)
Fe31 þ O3 þ H2O-(FeO)21 þ OH þ O2 þ H1
(8.21)
Strictly speaking, Fe0 power can’t be regarded as the catalyst of the per-
oxone process because it catalytically activates O3 and H2O2 individually. In
addition, Fe0 catalyst gives rise to the problem of iron sludge due to the
oxidation of Fe0 and precipitation.
(2) Ti(IV) catalyst
The Tong Group found that Ti(IV) ions could accelerate the degradation of
acetic acid in the peroxone system.20 Only an acetic acid degradation eﬃ-
ciency of 5.6% was caused by the peroxone process due to the acidic con-
dition (pH ¼ 2.8). The addition of Ti(IV) can significantly increase the
eﬃciency up to 52%, while negligible increased eﬃciencies were observed in
the processes, including Ti(IV)/O3 and Ti(IV)/H2O2. These results indicate that
Ti(IV) ions had a catalytic activity in the peroxone process. The Rct values
reflecting the OH generation eﬃciency in the Ti(IV)-free peroxone system
and Ti(IV)/O3/H2O2 system were 5.548109 and 2.128107 respectively.
The obviously increased Rct value in Ti(IV)/O3/H2O2 system indicated that
Ti(IV) can promote the generation of OH in the peroxone process.
The catalytic mechanism of Ti(IV) has been revealed in analyses of ex-
perimental phenomena and physical characterization. First, Ti(IV) reacts
with H2O2 to form complex (Ti2O5
21). This complex, as the initiator, can
promote the decomposition of O3 to produce the OH continuously (eqn
(8.22)–(8.24)).
O3(Ti2O5
21)-O3

(8.22)
O3
 þ H3O1-HO3 þ H2O
(8.23)
HO3-OH þ O2
(8.24)
Ti(IV) ion catalysts eased the low eﬃciency problem of the peroxone pro-
cess in an acidic solution to some extent, but the recovery of Ti ions is dif-
ficult, restricting its practical application. An eﬀective way around the
drawback is to prepare the heterogeneous catalysts by immobilizing the
Catalytic Peroxone Process and the Coupled Processes
247

Ti ions on substrates. The TS-MCM-41 and TS-1 catalysts, the typical tita-
nium silicon molecular sieves, have been used to promote the peroxone
process.21,22 These catalysts possess a large specific surface area, with stably
fixed Ti ions. However, it was found that the treatment eﬃciencies of TS-
MCM-41 or TS-1 catalysts clearly decreased in comparison with Ti(IV) ions
catalyst in reality. The decrease of Ti(IV) ions on catalysts and extra side re-
actions may directly or indirectly aﬀect the treatment process. Therefore,
developing Ti-containing catalysts with a balance between the density of
active sites (Ti(IV) ions) and structural stability has become a research topic.
(3) SO4
2/ZrO2–Fe2O3 catalyst
Iron oxide–promoted sulfated zirconia catalyst (SO4
2/ZrO2–Fe2O3, ab-
breviated as SZF), discovered by the Tong Group, exhibited stable catalytic
performance in the peroxone process even under strong acidic conditions.23
Sulfated zirconia (SO4
2/ZrO2, abbreviated as SZ) is one kind of solid su-
peracid that has higher acidity than that of 100% sulfuric acid. Compositing
iron oxide with the sulfated zirconia can increase the surface area and Lewis
and/or Brønsted acidity, which is favorable for catalytic activity. X-ray dif-
fraction (XRD) characterization of the catalyst showed that the ZrO2 and
Fe2O3 existed in amorphous forms, indicating that the components inter-
acted with each other in the SZF catalyst.
In the degradation experiment of acetic acid, the SZF catalyst exhibited
limited activities for catalyzing the activation of O3 or H2O2 individually.
When O3 and H2O2 exist simultaneously, SZF catalyst can markedly enhance
the degradation eﬃciency, which is much higher than the sum of the eﬃ-
ciencies in the SZF/O3 process and the SZF/H2O2 process. In addition, the
experimental results showed that SZF catalyst exhibited a higher catalytic
activity
in
comparison
with
titanium
catalysts,
with
an
order
of
SZF4Ti(IV)4SZ 4 TS-1.
There was a positive correlation between pH values and the degradation
eﬃciencies of acetic acid in the SZF/O3/H2O2 process (Figure 8.1). These
results demonstrated that the SZF catalyst widened the pH range of
Figure 8.1
(a) and (b) Degradation rates of acetic acid in the SZF/O3/H2O2 process at
diﬀerent pH values. Reproduced from ref. 19 with permission from
American Chemical Society, Copyright 2016.
248
Chapter 8

wastewater treatable by the peroxone process. However, the SZF catalyst was
not applicable to all cases. For example, it had a negligible eﬀect when the
acidity of solution was above 10% (mass fraction of H2SO4).
It was proposed that the SZF catalyst promoted the generation of OH in
the peroxone process by the S–Fe(III) peroxo complex (S–[FeIIIOOH]21)
formed from the reaction between the catalyst and H2O2. The multi-
functional complex not only produced some active species under light but
could also initiate the decomposition of O3 to generate OH. Moreover, the
existing Lewis and/or Brønsted acidity on the catalyst was considered to
accelerate the O3 decomposition. Therefore, the discovery of the SZF catalyst
advances the treatment of strong acidic wastewater by the catalytic peroxone
process.
(4) CeO2 catalyst
CeO2 is a rare earth material with the features of widely available sources,
low price, environmental friendliness and easy synthesis. So far, CeO2
has been extensively applied in numerous fields because of its unique
Ce31/Ce41 redox couple and the formed oxygen vacancies, which contribute
to the occurrence of several inert reactions. Meanwhile, CeO2 also exhibits
good adsorption abilities and stability in water, making it feasible in was-
tewater treatment.24
In comparison with the catalysts discovered previously, CeO2 exhibited the
highest degradation eﬃciencies of acetic acid in the peroxone process
(Figure 8.2). Moreover, there was a negligible contribution from individual
catalytic processes by CeO2/O3 and CeO2/H2O2. This indicated that CeO2 had
an excellent catalytic activity for the peroxone process.
The performance of CeO2 is due to its distinctive oxygen vacancies. The
presence of oxygen vacancies is demonstrated by the coexistence of Ce31 and
Ce41 in CeO2. Typically, the Ce31 has a positive orrelation with oxygen
Figure 8.2
Degradation rates of acetic acid in the O3/H2O2 process with diﬀerent
catalysts including CeO2, SZF, Ti-MCM-41 and TS-1. Reproduced from
ref. 20 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2018.
Catalytic Peroxone Process and the Coupled Processes
249

vacancies. The increased ratio of Ce31 ions to the total Ce for the CeO2
catalyst used indicates that the oxygen vacancies have been the potential
active sites, according to the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectra
of fresh CeO2 and used CeO2. Subsequently, the emerging peak in Raman
spectrum, which is assigned to the stretching vibration of peroxide-like
species, confirmed the interaction between oxygen vacancies and H2O2.
With the aid of oxygen vacancies, H2O2 can be absorbed on the surface of
CeO2 to form Ce(III)-H2O2 as a HO2-like species, promoting the de-
composition of O3 to form Ce(III)–OH and Ce(III)–HO2. The former can
directly react with the organics, and the latter can be converted into OH by
the chain reactions. Meanwhile, the active sites are recovered to maintain
the catalytic stability. In a word, these catalysts are characterized by the
formed peroxide intermediates, which can accelerate the decomposition of
O3 instead of HO2
 (Figure 8.3).
However, the CeO2 catalyst was not always active in all acidic solutions,
and its performance decreased with decreasing pH of the reaction solution.
Ding discovered the N-graphene–CeO2 catalyst, which could significantly
improve the treatment eﬃciencies at a pH value of 1.25 By studying the
change of CeO2 after incorporation of N-graphene, it was found that the ratio
of Ce31 ions increased from 10.28% to 30.21%. This confirmed the im-
portance of oxygen vacancies in CeO2 and indicated that compositing carbon
materials with CeO2 may be a feasible way to increase the amounts of
Ce31 ions.
8.2.2
Single-atom Catalysts
In recent years, single-atom catalysts (SACs), which are prepared by the
uniform deposition of isolated metal atoms on a substrate via coordination
bonds, have been a research focus owing to their utmost metal utilization,
Figure 8.3
Catalytic mechanism of CeO2 in the O3/H2O2 process. Reproduced from
ref. 20 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2018.
250
Chapter 8

excellent catalytic activity and structural stability. The optimized electronic
property of metal atoms on SACs, benefiting from the strong interaction
between metal atoms and substrate, may result in improvement of selectivity
in a variety of reactions and may enable SACs to outperform their cluster and
nanoparticle forms. Therefore, the use of SACs to promote the formation of
OH by the catalyzing peroxone process is promising. Guo discovered a Mn
SAC (abbreviated as C3N4–Mn) that is characterized by atomically dispersed
active Mn–N4 sites on graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4), which significantly
enhances the treatment eﬃciencies of organics in acidic wastewater.5
The C3N4–Mn was prepared by thermal condensation. Mn SAC showed
structural information that is similar to g-C3N4 material, and no character-
istic peaks of Mn chlorides or oxides were observed in the XRD spectrum.
The as-obtained C3N4–Mn exhibited the typical block multilayer morphology
of g-C3N4. The bright dots of atomic size in a high-angle annular dark-field
Figure 8.4
(a) Degradation curves of OA in ozonation, H2O2 process and peroxone
process with or without the C3N4–Mn catalyst. (b) Corresponding H2O2
decay curves in diﬀerent processes. (c) Corresponding outlet O3 concen-
tration in diﬀerent processes. (d) EPR spectra of DMPO-OH adduct in
diﬀerent processes. Reproduced from ref. 22 with permission from
American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019.
Catalytic Peroxone Process and the Coupled Processes
251

scanning transmission electron microscopy image (HAADF-STEM) con-
firmed the atomically dispersed Mn species.
The catalytic activity of the C3N4–Mn was investigated in the degradation
of oxalic acid (OA), which is a common refractory intermediate in various
advanced oxidation processes. The peroxone process caused a degradation
eﬃciency of 28% after 60 min, while the initial OA was degraded com-
pletely within 40 min, when C3N4–Mn was added. In comparison, the ratios
of removed OA were 0% and 50% after 60 min under H2O2/C3N4–Mn and
O3/C3N4–Mn systems, respectively (Figure 8.4a). Moreover, H2O2 and O3
were both gradually consumed according to the detection of H2O2 and
outlet O3 concentrations (Figure 8.4b–c). The electron paramagnetic
resonance (EPR) measurements with 5,5-dimethyl-1-pyrroline N-oxide
(DMPO) as a spin-trapping agent revealed a strong DMPO–OH signal in the
C3N4–Mn/O3/H2O2 process (Figure 8.4d). These results confirmed that
C3N4–Mn had excellent catalytic activity in the peroxone process.
Mn–N4 sites played an important part in the catalytic cycle. It could adsorb
H2O2 to form the HOO–Mn–N4 species and then reacted with O3 molecules
to produce HO2 and O3
. As a conjugated base of HO2, a small amount of
O2
 would react with O3 to generate O3
. O3
 would combine with H1 in
acidic solution to form HO3, which was quickly converted into OH. The
introduction of C3N4–Mn eliminated the restriction of HO2
 as the essential
initiator in the conventional peroxone reaction (Figure 8.5). Therefore, the
discovery of C3N4–Mn paved a new way to explore novel catalysts for eﬃcient
water remediation based on the peroxone process.
8.3
Enhancement by Other Processes
Besides the catalysts just mentioned, the peroxone process can be enhanced
by integration with other processes (e.g., electrochemistry, UV light, ultra-
sonication, plasma, etc.) to promote the generation of OH. The combined
technique of peroxone with electrochemical processes will be introduced in
the following chapter. Here, we summarize the results of the integrated
processes of peroxone with photocatalysis, sonolysis and plasma.
Figure 8.5
The catalytic mechanism of C3N4–Mn catalyst for peroxone process.
Reproduced from ref. 22 with permission from American Chemical
Society, Copyright 2019.
252
Chapter 8

8.3.1
Photolysis and Photocatalysis
As highly active oxidants, O3 and H2O2 can be radiated under UV light to
produce reactive oxygen species (eqn (8.25)–(8.27)). O is produced quickly
by the decomposition of O3 under UV light and then combines with H2O to
form OH. The fast conversion rate can obviously enhance the oxidation
eﬃciencies of organics in comparison with the single ozonation process.
Also, the O–O bonds of H2O2 are fractured to form OH under UV light, in
which the ratio of H2O2 to OH reaches 1 : 2, which is twice as high as that in
the traditional Fenton process.26 However, the conversion rate of H2O2 is
relatively low because of the low molar absorption coeﬃcient of H2O2
(e254 ¼ 19.6 M1 cm1).
O3 þ hn-O þ O2
(8.25)
O þ H2O-2OH
(8.26)
H2O2 þ hn-2OH
(8.27)
With the help of UV light, the respective photolytic processes of O3 and
H2O2 will improve the generation rate of OH in the peroxone process. In
addition, introducing semiconductor materials, such as TiO2 and ZnO, will
further promote the generation of OH. When TiO2 is irradiated under UV
light, photogenerated electrons (e) transfer from the valence band (VB) of
TiO2 to the conduction band (CB), leaving behind positive holes (hVB
1) in the
VB. The photogenerated electron-hole pairs can initiate the decomposition
of O3, H2O2 and H2O, which accelerate the generation of OH (eqn (8.28)–
(8.31)).
h þ
VB þ H2O-OH þ H1
(8.28)
h þ
VB þ OH-OH
(8.29)
O3 þ e

CB þ H2O-OH þ OH þ O2
(8.30)
H2O2 þ e

CB -OH þ OH
(8.31)
The adsorbed H2O on the TiO2 will be oxidized by photogenerated holes.
Simultaneously, O3 and H2O2, as e acceptors, react with photogenerated
electrons to generate OH. Andre´ Fernandes thoroughly summarized the
mechanism of the photocatalytic process of TiO2/UV/O3/H2O2 in the treat-
ment of VOCs (Figure 8.6).27 The combination of TiO2 and UV formed
additional generation paths for OH generation in the peroxone system,
which had a positive influence on the treatment of VOCs.
The results showed that the degradation eﬃciencies of VOCs were im-
proved by adding TiO2 and UV light in the peroxone system, but negligible
improvement in eﬃciency was observed with the increase of TiO2 concen-
tration, demonstrating that TiO2 had a limited contribution to make to the
process. Owing to the numerous generation paths of radicals, the com-
petition aﬀected the production of OH in the TiO2/UV/O3/H2O2 system.
Catalytic Peroxone Process and the Coupled Processes
253

Therefore, its degradation eﬃciency was lower than that in the UV/O3/H2O2
system. In the TiO2/UV/O3/H2O2 system, it was important to design rational
reactors to give full play to the synergies of various processes.
8.3.2
Sonolysis
An ultrasonic wave is a kind of sound wave whose frequency is more than
20 000 Hz. Ultrasonic technology has been a novel water treatment process
because of the formation of the cavitation eﬀect at a high frequency. The
collapse of cavitation bubbles can release a large amount of energy and in-
stantaneously construct a high-temperature and high-pressure environment.
These not only contribute to the decomposition of H2O to form H and OH
but also help in the degradation of some organics.
Introducing an ultrasonic wave into the peroxone process has markedly
improved the generation rate of radicals by means of the cavitation eﬀect
and its physicochemical eﬀect. It has been speculated that the generation of
radicals is not dependent on the complex chain reaction but on the direct
decomposition of O3 and H2O2 under the cavitation eﬀect. The sonoperox-
one process has been used to treat olive mill wastewater.28 The addition of
an ultrasonic wave could improve TOC removal eﬃciency and biodegrad-
ability in the peroxone system. However, this technology is still at the
laboratory-scale stage at present, and there is a long way to go to realize its
industrial applications.
Figure 8.6
Mechanism of photocatalysis in O3/H2O2 process. Reproduced from ref.
24 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019.
254
Chapter 8

8.3.3
Plasma
Plasma is the fourth state of matter, which diﬀers from solid, liquid and gas.
Non-thermal plasma technology is a novel water treatment process. With the
help of a high-voltage discharge in gas–liquid environments, it can generate
a great amount of highly reactive species, including several radicals (OH,
HO2, O, H), ions (O1, O, H1) and molecules (O3 and H2O2). Concomi-
tantly, UV irradiation is also formed in the excited-state transitions of spe-
cies. Because of the in situ generation of O3 and H2O2, plasma technology
has been deemed an enhanced peroxone process.
In the degradation of atrazine, non-thermal plasma technology exhibited
the most eﬀective processing capacity in comparison with the UV/O3 and
UV/O3/H2O2 processes.29 As expected, 1 mg L1 O3 and 500 mmol L1 H2O2
were detected in the plasma experiments, confirming their in situ gener-
ation. The degradation eﬃciency of the peroxone process was less than half
of that in the plasma process using the same concentrations of O3 and H2O2.
The continuous generation of radicals and wide reaction space (including
the plasma chamber and the solution reservoir) contributed to the
enhancement.
Given the high-voltage discharge in the non-thermal plasma technology,
the significantly increased treatment cost has to be considered. However, the
practical cost was acceptable by evaluating the electrical energy per order
(EE/O) values, which represented the electrical energy in kilowatt hours
(kW h) required to degrade a certain contaminant by one order of magnitude
in 1 m3 of water.29 The results showed that the EE/O of O3/H2O2, UV/O3,
UV/O3/H2O2 and plasma processes were 5.96, 65.3, 44.1 and 19.8 kW h m3,
respectively. It was thus clear that the treatment cost of the plasma process
was obviously lower than that of UV-based processes. In addition, the mass
transfer improvement would enhance the treatment eﬃciencies in non-
thermal plasma technology, leading to further reductions in treatment costs.
8.4
Conclusions
Peroxone process has been deemed the ideal water and wastewater treat-
ment technology because of its simplicity, high eﬃciency and negligible
secondary pollution. The key problem, i.e. the ineﬃciency under acidic
conditions, could be solved by the use of catalysts, including Fe0, Ti(IV),
SO4
2/ZrO2–Fe2O3, CeO2, and C3N4–Mn single-atom catalysts. The combin-
ation with other techniques, such as photolysis, photocatalysis, ultra-
sonication and plasma, could further increase the yield of OH, making the
peroxone-coupled systems more competitive with the various advanced
ozonation processes for water purification and wastewater treatment. It is
anticipated that the design and fabrication of active catalysts in the near
future will substantially improve the eﬃciencies of peroxone and peroxone-
coupled processes in a wide pH scale range, eventually to the level required
for scalable applications.
Catalytic Peroxone Process and the Coupled Processes
255

References
1. J. Staehelln and J. Holgne, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1982, 16, 676–681.
2. J. Cerkovnik and B. Plesnicar, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 7930–7951.
3. C. von Sonntag, Water Sci. Technol., 2008, 58, 1015–1021.
4. A. Fischbacher, J. von Sonntag, C. von Sonntag and T. C. Schmidt,
Environ. Sci. Technol., 2013, 47, 9959–9964.
5. Z. Guo, Y. Xie, J. Xiao, Z. Zhao and Y. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141,
12005–12010.
6. R. E. Buehler, J. Staehelin and J. Hoigne´, J. Phys. Chem., 1984, 88, 2560–
2564.
7. T. M. Lesko, A. J. Colussi and M. R. Hoﬀmann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004,
126, 4432–4436.
8. M. M. Sein, A. Golloch, T. C. Schmidt and C. von Sonntag, Chem. Phys.
Chem., 2007, 8, 2065–2067.
9. G. Merenyi, J. Lind, S. Naumov and C. v. Sonntag, Environ. Sci. Technol.,
2010, 44, 3505–3507.
10. B. De Witte, J. Dewulf, K. Demeestere and H. Van Langenhove, J. Hazard.
Mater., 2009, 161, 701–708.
11. E. C. Catalkaya and F. Kargi, J. Environ. Eng., 2009, 135, 1357–1364.
12. S. Popiel, T. Nalepa, D. Dzierz˙ak, R. Stankiewicz and Z. Witkiewicz,
J. Hazard. Mater., 2009, 164, 1364–1371.
13. P. A. Hacker, C. Paszko-Kolva and M. H. Stewart, Ozone: Sci. Eng., 1994,
16, 197–212.
14. B. T. Oh, Y. S. Seo and D. Sudhakar, J. Hazard. Mater., 2014, 279,
105–110.
15. T. Wu and J. D. Englehardt, Water Res., 2015, 73, 362–372.
16. A. Fernandes, P. Makos´, J. A. Khan and G. Boczkaj, J. Cleaner Prod., 2019,
208, 54–64.
17. M. M. Sein, M. Zedda, J. Tuerk, T. C. Schmidt, A. Golloch and
C. von Sonntag, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 6656–6662.
18. C. Von Sonntag and U. Von Gunten, Chemistry of Ozone in Water and
Wastewater Treatment: From Basic Principles to Applications, IWA
Publishing, 2012.
19. F. Wang, Y. Luo, G. Ran and Q. Li, Sci. Total Environ., 2020, 699, 134371–
134380.
20. W. Li, P. Liu, H. Zhang, R. Shi, S. Tong and C. Ma, CIESC J, 2010, 61,
1790–1795.
21. R. Peng, T. Shen, S. Tong and C. Ma, Ozone: Sci. Eng., 2016, 38, 194–203.
22. Y. Chen, R. Peng, T. Shen, S. Tong and C. Ma, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2015,
151, 269–275.
23. Q. Wang, T. Shen and S. Tong, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2016, 55, 10513–
10523.
24. Y. Ding, J. Wang, S. Xu, K. Lin and S. Tong, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2018, 207,
92–103.
256
Chapter 8

25. Y. Ding, H. Bao, R. Qian, T. Shen and S. Tong, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2019,
225, 80–87.
26. G. Wang, S. Hsieh and C. Hong, Water Res., 2000, 34, 3882–3887.
27. A. Fernandes, M. Ga˛gol and P. Makos´, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2019, 224,
1–14.
28. M. R. Khani, H. Kuhestani and L. R. Kalankesh, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. E,
2019, 97, 47–53.
29. N. Wardenier, Z. Liu and A. Nikiforov, Chemosphere, 2019, 234, 715–724.
Catalytic Peroxone Process and the Coupled Processes
257

CHAPTER 9
Promising Electrocatalytic
Ozonation Processes for Water
and Wastewater Treatment
HUIJIAO WANG,a,b WEIKUN YAO,a JUHONG ZHAN,a GANG YUa
AND YUJUE WANG*a
a School of Environment, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China;
b School of Chemical and Environmental Engineering, China University of
Mining and Technology (Beijing), Beijing 100083, China
*Email: wangyujue@tsinghua.edu.cn
9.1
Introduction
Electrochemical technologies have been extensively investigated as ap-
pealing advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) for water and wastewater
remediation.1–3 During electrochemical treatment, contaminants can be
degraded via direct electron transfer at the electrode and/or indirect reaction
with various reactive species in situ generated in the treatment system. For
instance, reactive oxidants such as the hydroxyl radical (OH), chlorine (Cl2),
ozone (O3) and sulfate radical (SO4) can be electrogenerated at the anode
(eqn (9.1)–(9.4)) during electrochemical processes, while hydrogen peroxide
(H2O2) can be electrogenerated from cathodic oxygen (O2) reduction at the
cathode (eqn (9.5)).3–6 These electrogenerated species can then participate in
reactions leading to pollutant removal. For example, the electrogenerated
H2O2 can react with ferrous ion (Fe21) via the Fenton reaction (eqn (9.6)–
(9.7)) to generate
OH for pollutant oxidation.7,8 Major advantages of
Chemistry in the Environment Series No. 8
Advanced Ozonation Processes for Water and Wastewater Treatment: Active Catalysts and
Combined Technologies
Edited by Hongbin Cao, Yongbing Xie, Yuxian Wang and Jiadong Xiao
r The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry, www.rsc.org
258

electrochemical technologies include mild reaction conditions, the use of
clean electricity as an energy source, easy operation and automation.
Therefore, electrochemical technologies have been widely applied to abate
organic pollutants, such as phenols, dyes and pharmaceuticals, in water and
wastewater treatment.1,9–14
H2O-OH þ H1 þ e
(9.1)
2Cl-Cl2 þ 2e
(9.2)
3H2O-O3 þ 6H1 þ 6e
(9.3)
SO4
2-SO4 þ e
(9.4)
O2 þ 2H1 þ 2e-H2O2
(9.5)
H2O2 þ Fe21-Fe31 þ OH þ OH
(9.6)
Fe31 þ e-Fe21
(9.7)
However, for the practical implementation of electrochemical processes,
some limitations still need to be improved.15 Due to the development of the
stagnant boundary layer at the electrode surface, direct electron transfer is
often limited by the mass transfer of pollutants to the electrode surface
during the electrochemical process. This limitation results in slow kinetics,
low current eﬃciency and high energy consumption for pollutant abatement
by electrolysis. To improve the process eﬃciency, electrodes with high
electrocatalytic activity and good stability (e.g. boron-doped diamond (BDD))
are desired. Nevertheless, these potent electrodes are expensive (e.g.
12 000–18 000h m2 for BDD) and thus hardly applicable for large-scale ap-
plications.16 Moreover, the formation of chloride-derived oxidation by-
products (OBPs), e.g. chlorate, perchlorate and chlorinated organics, is
also a major concern of electrochemical processes since chloride is ubi-
quitously present in all water matrices at concentrations of mg L1 to
g L1.17–22 Due to their toxicity and harmful eﬀects on human health and
ecosystems, these chloride-derived OBPs are strictly regulated in drinking
water standards and/or wastewater discharge standards in many countries
and should be eﬀectively mitigated during electrochemical treatment.23,24
To enhance water treatment performance, electrochemical processes have
been increasingly integrated with other technologies such as coagulation,
membrane, ultraviolet (UV) and sonication.1,25–29 Among these hybrid pro-
cesses, the combination of electrochemical processes with ozonation (re-
ferred to as electrocatalytic ozonation hereafter) has shown great synergy
and thus has been considered a promising alternative to the conventional
electrochemical process for water and wastewater treatment.30–36
The first study on ozone electrochemistry dates back to the late 1960s,
during which Johnson et al. investigated the reaction mechanism of elec-
trochemical reduction of O3 in acid media (eqn (9.8)).37 In the following
decades, studies mainly focused on the cathodic reduction of O3 in acid or
alkaline electrolytes.38–40 In 2005, the research group of Kishimoto proposed
Promising Electrocatalytic Ozonation Processes for Water and Wastewater Treatment 259

electrolysis–ozonation technology by combining ozonation with single
electrolysis for water treatment.33 During the electrolysis–ozonation treat-
ment, metal electrodes (e.g. stainless steel and titanium) are used as the
cathode, and the reduction of O3 (E0 ¼ 2.07 V versus SHE) to O3
 at the
cathode can lead to the more powerful oxidant OH (E0 ¼ 2.80 V versus
SHE, eqn (9.9) and (9.10)). Therefore, the electrolysis–ozonation process
considerably enhanced the removal of O3-refractory pollutants such as
1,4-dioxane and p-chlorobenzoic acid (p-CBA).32,33,41–46 However, it was also
found that when current density at the cathode exceeded 10 mA cm2, the
electroreduction of O3 to O3
 (eqn (9.9)) would be limited by O3 mass
transfer, which decreases the eﬃciency of OH generation and pollutant
degradation by the process.33 Moreover, the electrolysis–ozonation process
generates considerable amounts of potentially carcinogenic bromate during
the treatment of bromide-containing water, which is undesired in water and
wastewater treatment.47
O3 þ 2H1 þ 2e-O2 þ H2O
(9.8)
O3 þ e-O 
3
(9.9)
O 
3 þ H2O-OH þ O2 þ OH
(9.10)
To overcome the drawbacks of the electrolysis–ozonation process, Wang’s
research group developed a novel electro-peroxone (E-peroxone) process by
combining ozonation with in situ generation of H2O2 from cathodic O2 re-
duction (eqn (9.5)) in 2013 (see Figure 9.1).48 Unlike the electrolysis–
ozonation process, the E-peroxone process uses carbon-based cathodes to
electrogenerate
H2O2
from
O2
present
in
excess
in
ozone-based
processes.49–51 The in situ generated H2O2 can then diﬀuse into the bulk
solution and react with dissolved O3 via the peroxone reaction to yield OH
(eqn (9.11)) in the bulk solution, which avoids the mass transfer limitation of
pollutants on their degradation during electrolysis.30,31,52–54 Furthermore,
the in situ generated H2O2 can quickly reduce hypobromite (BrO) and
hypochlorite (ClO) to bromide (Br, eqn (9.12)) and chloride (Cl,
Figure 9.1
Schematic of the E-peroxone process.
260
Chapter 9

eqn (9.13)), respectively.17,18,55 Therefore, the E-peroxone process can
eﬀectively inhibit the formation of bromide- and chloride-derived harmful
by-products (e.g. bromate and chlorinated organics),18,47 which has been a
major concern associated with ozone-based and electrochemical processes
for water and wastewater treatment.19,56 These promising results demon-
strate that the E-peroxone process can overcome the main drawbacks of
conventional ozone-based and electrochemical processes and thus oﬀer a
superior electrochemical advanced oxidation process (EAOP) for water and
wastewater remediation.30,31,54
2O3 þ 2H2O2-OH þ HO2
 þ 3O2 þ H2O
(9.11)
BrO þ H2O2-H2O þ O2 þ Br
k ¼ 7.6108 M1 s1
(9.12)
ClO þ H2O2-H2O þ O2 þ Cl
k ¼ 3400 M1 s1
(9.13)
Because of its outstanding performance, the E-peroxone process has at-
tracted increasing attention worldwide and been tested for various treatment
purposes, e.g. the degradation of refractory organic pollutants (e.g. dyes,
oxalate, diuron, and diethyl phthalate),22,48–50,53,57–69 abatement of emerging
contaminants (ECs, e.g. pharmaceuticals, pesticides, biocides, and tastes
and odors),21,31,70–86 control of harmful OBPs (e.g. perchlorate, bromate,
chlorinated organics and polymers),17,18,47,85,87,88 regeneration of spent ac-
tivated carbon,74,89–92 and reduction of bacteria and antibiotic resistance
genes.86,93,94 Furthermore, the E-peroxone process has been increasingly
integrated with other technologies (e.g. UV and membrane) to enhance water
treatment performance, develop more eﬀective processes for specific appli-
cations (e.g. industrial wastewater treatment) and extend the application
areas.6,34–36,60,70,71,74,86,93,95–101 Simultaneously with the lab-scale investi-
gations, eﬀorts have been devoted to scale up the E-peroxone process for
practical applications. In 2018, a pilot-scale E-peroxone system with a
treatment capacity of 3 m3 d1 was developed and tested for micropollutant
abatement in drinking water and municipal wastewater.102 In addition,
demonstration-scale E-peroxone equipment that could process B200 m3 of
wastewater per day has been established for advanced wastewater treatment
in full-scale facilities in 2020. These observations indicate that the E-per-
oxone process has emerged as an excellent alternative to the conventional
AOPs for water and wastewater treatment and is now under fast development
toward real applications.
This chapter aims to describe the mechanisms of electrocatalytic ozona-
tion, review its recent progress, discuss the challenges that need to be
overcome for its practical applications, and identify its niche applications in
water and wastewater treatment systems. The main focus has been placed on
the E-peroxone process because of its great potential for practical water and
wastewater treatment applications.
Promising Electrocatalytic Ozonation Processes for Water and Wastewater Treatment 261

9.2
Mechanisms of Electrocatalytic Ozonation
9.2.1
Mechanisms of OH Generation
During conventional ozonation, OH are mainly generated from natural O3
decomposition with OH-generating water constituents, e.g. electron-rich
aromatic components of dissolved organic matter (DOM).103,104 The OH
yield (moles of OH generated per mole of O3 consumed) from natural O3
decomposition is onlyB10%–30% during conventional ozonation of natural
water and wastewater.81,104 To enhance the OH yield for eﬃcient abatement
of ozone-resistant pollutants, ozonation can be combined with electro-
chemical processes (i.e. electrocatalytic ozonation) to enhance the transfor-
mation of O3 to OH.30
Depending on the materials used to make the cathode, which plays a
determining role in the mechanisms of
OH formation, electrocatalytic
ozonation can be generally classified into two categories: (1) the electrolysis–
ozonation process33 and (2) the E-peroxone process.48 During the electrolysis–
ozonation process, metal (e.g. stainless steel) electrodes are used as the
cathodes. Compared with conventional ozonation, the electrolysis–ozonation
process can enhance OH formation via two pathways: (1) O3 decomposition
under the high local pH near the cathode and (2) cathodic O3 reduction to O3

(eqn (9.9)),90 which then gives rise to OH (eqn (9.10)).33,104 Nevertheless,
because the reaction of O3 with OH is relatively slow (k ¼ 70 M1 s1),105
the contribution of pathway (1) to OH generation can typically be neglected
during electrocatalytic ozonation.104 For instance, Kishimoto et al. reported
that pathway (1) contributed only 0.1% to the enhanced OH formation
during the electrolysis–ozonation process, while pathway (2) contributed
99.9%.33
It should be noted that in parallel with cathodic O3 reduction to O3
, O3
can also be reduced to O2 at the cathode (eqn (9.14)).37 Because the standard
potentials of reactions (9.9) and (9.14) are nearly the same (1.23 V versus NHE
and 1.25 V versus NHE, respectively), it has been estimated that the two re-
actions will proceed simultaneously at similar rates at the cathode.33 Con-
sequently, only about 50% of the O3 reduced at the cathode can lead to OH,
while the other 50% is wasted to generate O2. This is a considerable waste of
energy as electricity is consumed to produce O3 from O2 feed gas in ozone
generators and then consumed again to reduce O3 back to O2 at the cathode.31
O3 þ H2O þ 2e-O2 þ 2OH
(9.14)
Unlike the electrolysis–ozonation process, the E-peroxone process uses
carbon-based materials as the cathodes, e.g. carbon black,34,35,48,57,59,78–81,101
carbon fiber,50,52,91,92,94,106,107 graphite or graphite fiber,65,66,86,93 vitreous
carbon49,71 and carbon nanotubes.51,74,82,84 In contrast to metallic cathodes,
where the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) proceeds via the four-electron
reduction pathway to H2O (eqn (9.15)), carbon-based cathodes favor the two-
electron ORR pathway to H2O2 (eqn (9.16)).108,109 The reaction of H2O2 with O3
262
Chapter 9

(eqn (9.11)) can produce OH with a yield of B50%, which is considerably
higher than those from natural O3 decomposition in water. Thus, by utilizing
O2 that is always available at high concentrations in ozone-based processes to
produce H2O2, the E-peroxone process can substantially enhance the OH
production from O3 decomposition compared to conventional ozonation,
especially during the treatment of water matrices that have insuﬃcient OH-
generating moieties (e.g. electron-rich aromatic components).81
During the E-peroxone process, other reactions may occur simultaneously
with ORR at the cathode, e.g. further reduction of electrogenerated H2O2 to
H2O (eqn (9.17)), hydrogen (H2) evolution (eqn (9.18)) and O3 reduction
(eqn (9.9) and (9.14)).52 These side reactions will decrease the current
eﬃciency of H2O2 electrogeneration and thus should be minimized during
the E-peroxone process.52,110 Fortunately, carbon materials generally have a
low catalytic activity for H2O2 decomposition and high overpotentials for
hydrogen (H2) evolution.7,50,52 Therefore, the side reactions of H2O2
reduction
(eqn
(9.17))
and
H2
evolution
(eqn
(9.18))
are
generally
negligible at the carbon-based cathodes when suﬃcient O2 is available in the
cathode diﬀuse layer to accept the electrons transferred at the cathode.52
Furthermore, by optimizing applied currents and O3 doses, cathodic O3
reduction can be controlled under mass-transfer limited conditions.52 Under
such conditions, O3 reduction will be a negligible cathodic reaction as
compared with ORR to H2O2.52 Overall, the results of previous studies have
demonstrated that by carefully selecting electrodes and optimizing the
reaction conditions, side reactions such as H2O, H2O2 and O3 reduction can
be minimized at the cathode, thus allowing H2O2 to be eﬃciently produced
during the E-peroxone process.
O2 þ 2H2O þ 4e-4OH
(9.15)
O2 þ H2O þ 2e-HO2
 þ OH
(9.16)
HO2
 þ H2O þ 2e-3OH
(9.17)
2H2O þ 2e-H2 þ 2OH
(9.18)
Once electrogenerated at the cathode, H2O2 can diﬀuse into the bulk
solution and then react with dissolved O3 via the peroxone reaction to yield
OH (eqn (9.11)).52,53,104 The second-order rate constant for the reaction of O3
with H2O2 is pH dependent (eqn (9.19)) and approximately 150–4800 M1 s1
within the typical pH range (7–8.5) of water and wastewater treatment.
Therefore, electrogenerating H2O2 can remarkably accelerate the transfor-
mation of O3 to OH during the E-peroxone process.
kobs ¼ k HO
2 þO3
ð
Þ  10 pHpKa
ð
Þ
(9:19)
where k HO
2 þO3
ð
Þ is the second-order rate constant of HO2
 with O3, kobs is
the obvious second-order rate constant of the peroxone reaction at diﬀerent
pH, and the pKa of H2O2 is 11.8.
Promising Electrocatalytic Ozonation Processes for Water and Wastewater Treatment 263

9.2.2
Mechanisms of Pollutant Abatement
During electrocatalytic ozonation, pollutants can be abated via mainly three
mechanisms: anodic oxidation, O3 oxidation and OH oxidation.81 There-
fore, the kinetics of pollutant abatement can usually be reasonably simu-
lated using the chemical kinetic model of eqn (9.20).33,81
 d½P
dt ¼ kO3 O3
½
 P
½  þ kOH
OH
½
 P
½  þ kE P
½ 
(9:20)
where kO3 and kOH are the second-order rate constants of pollutant [P] with
O3 and OH, respectively; kE is the pseudo first-order rate constant during
single anodic oxidation; [O3] and [OH] are the concentration of O3 and OH
in the treatment system.
Several studies have shown that due to the mass transfer limitation of
pollutants to the electrode surface, the rate of pollutant abatement by anodic
oxidation is usually significantly slower than that by O3 and/or OH oxi-
dation.31,81 Thus the contribution of anodic oxidation to pollutant abatement
can typically be neglected during electrocatalytic ozonation.33,53,79 In addition,
the results indicate that for pollutants with high ozone reactivity (e.g.
kO3Z1000 M1 s1), they are mainly abated by the direct oxidation with O3
during electrocatalytic ozonation, whereas pollutants with low ozone reactivity
(e.g. kO3r100 M1 s1) are primarily abated by OH oxidation (see Figure 9.2).
Due to the higher OH yield from O3 decomposition with H2O2 (B50%)
than with
OH-generating water constituents, e.g. 24–43% for phenols,
8–17% for alkoxybenzenes, 15% for tertiary amine and 28–30% for ani-
lines,81,85,111,112 more OH can be produced from the same O3 dose during
the E-peroxone process than during conventional ozonation. Therefore, the
adaption of conventional ozonation to the E-peroxone process can usually
increase the abatement eﬃciencies of ozone-resistant pollutants during
water and wastewater treatment (see Figure 9.2).
9.3
Cathode Studies During the E-peroxone Process
9.3.1
Cathode Materials
Electrogenerating H2O2 eﬃciently and stably at the cathodes is vital for the
E-peroxone process.31,113 Due to their abundance, low cost, high selectivity for
two-electron ORR to H2O2, nontoxicity and other favorable properties, carbon-
aceous materials are the most commonly used electrocatalysts for H2O2 pro-
duction in electrochemical processes for water treatment, e.g. the electro-Fenton
and electro-peroxone processes.7,27,31,114,115 A variety of carbon-based electrodes
have been tested in the E-peroxone process for water treatment, for example
carbon black-polytetrafluoroethylene (carbon-PTFE),34,35,48,57,59,78–81,101 carbon
fiber
(CF),50,52,91,92,94,106,107
graphite,65,66,86,93
reticulated
vitreous
carbon
(RVC)49,71
and
carbon
nanotube
(CNT).74,82,116
They
generally
showed good stability and catalytic activity for H2O2 production. In addition, the
264
Chapter 9

results show that electrodes with higher electrocatalytic activity for H2O2
generation can usually achieve better pollutant removal performance during
the E-peroxone process.49,116 Therefore, carbon-PTFE electrodes, which usually
show the highest current eﬃciency for H2O2 generation among the various
carbon-based electrodes, are currently the most used cathodes in the E-peroxone
process.
To further enhance OH generation, several researchers have recently tested
modifying carbon-based electrodes (e.g. CNT) with ferrite, copper ferrite and
nitride materials to induce catalytic O3 decomposition and/or Fenton-like
reactions during the E-peroxone process.61,63,82,84 For instance, Guo et al.
composited diﬀerent kinds of graphitic carbon nitride materials with a multi-
wall CNT (e.g. C3N4/CNT and C3N4-Mn/CNT).61,63 Results show that because of
the high pyrrolic-N content modified on the CNT surface and its high surface
area, the C3N4/CNT composite exhibited relatively high activity for catalytic
ozonation. Meanwhile, the high electron transfer ability of C3N4/CNT bene-
fited the electroreduction of both O2 and O3 during the E-peroxone process.61
In addition, Mn coordinated with nitrogen was deduced to be the active site
for the peroxone reaction. Therefore, the use of C3N4-Mn/CNT composite as a
heterogeneous catalyst in the E-peroxone process substantially promoted the
peroxone reaction and pollutant removal in acid solution.63
9.3.2
Cathode Configuration
For the E-peroxone process, the carbon-based electrodes are conventionally
used in two general setups: (1) submerged and aerated electrode (SAE) and
Figure 9.2
(a) Abatement of pharmaceuticals with diﬀerent O3 reactivities. (b)
Contribution fraction of O3 and OH oxidation to pharmaceutical abate-
ment during ozonation and the E-peroxone process. Reaction condi-
tions: groundwater, 150 mg L1 for each pharmaceutical, solution
volume ¼ 250 mL, specific O3 dose ¼ 1.5 mg O3 (mg DOC)1, and
current ¼ 30 mA for E-peroxone. Reproduced from ref. 81 with permis-
sion from Elsevier, Copyright 2018.
Promising Electrocatalytic Ozonation Processes for Water and Wastewater Treatment 265

(2) gas diﬀusion electrode (GDE), which diﬀers mainly in the way of oxygen
supply.48,113 The SAEs are directly submerged in the water where an O2 and
O3 gas mixture (i.e. ozone generator eﬄuent) is aerated. O2 in the aerated
gas is first dissolved in the solutions and then transferred from the bulk
solution to the cathode surface, where it is reduced to H2O2.48 In contrast,
the GDEs are usually assembled electrodes that consist of a carbon-based
electrode (typically carbon-PTFE), gas chamber, gaskets and other parts.
During the E-peroxone process, O2 is first fed to the gas chamber, and then
it diﬀuses through the porous carbon-PTFE structure to the other side of
the electrode in contact with electrolytes, where it reacts with H1/H2O and
electrons to form H2O2.113 In contrast to the SAEs, which can directly ex-
ploit O2 in the aerated ozone generator eﬄuent to produce H2O2, the GDEs
require an extra oxygen source (e.g. O2 in the oﬀ-gas of the ozone con-
tactor). Moreover, the operation of GDEs is more complicated than that of
SAEs. For example, the gas pressure and flow rates have to be carefully
managed to prevent water flooding of the GDE cell.113,117 Overall, because
of the eﬀective oxygen transfer in GDEs, high current densities can be
applied to accelerate H2O2 production during electrolysis with the GDE
cathodes; the current eﬃciencies for H2O2 production are usually higher
than 85%.34,101,113 Nevertheless, more studies are still needed to improve
the GDE design and gas–water management for stable operation in long-
term applications.
Compared with the GDEs, the SAEs have a simpler configuration and are
easier to operate. Therefore, they are currently the most commonly used
electrode setup in the E-peroxone process.31 Nevertheless, due to the low
solubility of O2, the rate of H2O2 production is prone to be limited by the
mass transfer of dissolved O2 (DO) to the ORR active sites of SAE cath-
odes.7,52 To enhance oxygen mass transfer, carbonaceous materials with
large surface area (e.g. CF and RCV) can be used to make the SAE cath-
ode.49,50 In addition, our recent study shows that when superaerophilic
electrodes (e.g. carbon-PTFE) are used as the SAEs, they can directly adsorb
oxygen microbubbles aerated in the water, which greatly enhances oxygen
mass transfer compared with DO diﬀusion.118 Therefore, relatively high
current densities (e.g. 10–20 mA cm2) can be applied to accelerate H2O2
production during the E-peroxone process with carbon-PTFE cathodes.53
In addition to the conventional GDEs and SAEs, flow-through electrodes
made of porous carbon materials (e.g. graphite felt and RVC) have recently
been used for the E-peroxone process.71,86 During the treatment, a mixed
stream of water and O2/O3 gas is forced to pass through the flow-through
electrodes. Due to the favorable mass transport conditions inside the porous
structure of the electrodes, large amounts of H2O2 can be eﬃciently
electrogenerated from ORR to enhance O3 transformation to
OH.71
Consequently, the flow-through E-peroxone process can considerably in-
crease the abatement eﬃciency of ozone-resistant pollutants (e.g. ibuprofen)
compared to conventional ozonation.71,119 In addition, the flow-through
E-peroxone process has been shown to be an eﬀective way of disinfection due
266
Chapter 9

to the synergy of the diﬀerent microbial inactivation mechanisms (e.g. O3
disinfection, OH oxidation and electrochemical disinfection).86
9.3.3
Cathode Stability
For practical applications, the electrodes must be able to maintain high
stability over long-term operation and varying conditions. Due to the strong
oxidizing conditions in the E-peroxone system, the concern was that the
carbon-based cathodes might be progressively oxidized by the oxidants
introduced into or generated within the system (e.g. O3, H2O2 and OH).
However, the results of several studies have suggested that because of the net
electrons accumulated on the cathode surface upon cathodic polarization,
the oxidation of carbon-based cathodes is usually insignificant during the
E-peroxone process.91,92,106,113 Nevertheless, the formation of mineral scale
(e.g. CaCO3(s)) on the cathode surface may gradually decrease the electrode
eﬃciency for H2O2 production during long-term operation.113 For instance, a
recent study shows that during electrochemical H2O2 production in
groundwater, calcium ions continuously precipitated on the cathode surface
due to the high local pH of the cathode. Because of the covering of the
cathode surface by the precipitations, the current eﬃciencies of H2O2 pro-
duction decreased gradually fromB95% toB80% over the 1000 h operation,
while energy consumption increased from B8.3 to 9.8 kW h kg1 H2O2 (see
Figure 9.3).113 Moreover, the precipitation of CaCO3 reduced the hydro-
phobicity of the carbon-PTFE electrode. As a result, water began to penetrate
the GDE into the gas chamber after B1000 h, resulting in a quick deterior-
ation of H2O2 production performance in the following 4 days.113
Figure 9.3
Evolution of apparent current eﬃciency and energy consumption during
electrochemical H2O2 production with a GDE cathode. Reaction condi-
tions: water flow rate¼ 20 mLmin1, hydraulic residence time¼ 20 min,
electrolyte¼ 0.1
M
Na2SO4,
and
current
density ¼ 40
mAcm2.
Reproduced from ref. 113 with permission from Springer Nature,
Copyright 2021.
Promising Electrocatalytic Ozonation Processes for Water and Wastewater Treatment 267

Overall, although several studies have already evaluated the stability of
carbon-based electrodes for H2O2 production and pollutant removal during
the E-peroxone process, the time frame of most studies is usually just several
to several tens of hours, which is too short a period to draw convincing
conclusions on the long-term stability of the cathodes for practical appli-
cations. Additional studies are needed to assess the long-term stability of the
electrodes under varying operation conditions.
9.4
Water and Wastewater Treatment by the
E-peroxone Process
9.4.1
Removal of Organic Pollutants
The E-peroxone process has been applied to abate a broad range of organic
pollutants in various water matrices, including industrial chemicals, pesti-
cides and herbicides, pharmaceuticals and personal care products, taste and
odor compounds, and natural organic matter in drinking water, municipal
wastewater, and industrial wastewater.30,31,54 In general, the E-peroxone
process shows high kinetics and energy eﬃciency for the abatement of the
various pollutants. The results of representative studies are summarized in
Table 9.1.
During the E-peroxone process, pollutants with high and moderate O3
reactivity can be eﬃciently abated by direct O3 oxidation, whereas pollutants
with low O3 reactivity are mainly abated by OH oxidation.81 Due to the
enhanced OH production from H2O2-induced O3 decomposition, higher
abatement eﬃciencies can usually be obtained for O3-resistant pollutants
during the E-peroxone process compared to conventional ozonation. In
addition, compared with other conventional ozone-based AOPs (e.g. the
UV/O3 process), the E-peroxone process consumes significantly less amounts
of energy because electrogeneration of H2O2 is energy eﬃcient.80,102
Furthermore, conventional ozonation systems can be easily retrofitted for
the E-peroxone process by installing low-cost electrodes in ozone con-
tactors.47,102 Therefore, the E-peroxone process has been considered an at-
tractive option to upgrade existing ozonation systems to enhance pollutant
removal in water and wastewater treatment.
9.4.2
Control of Harmful Oxidation By-products
A prominent advantage of the E-peroxone process is that it can substantially
reduce the formation of bromide- and chloride-derived harmful by-products
(e.g. bromate, perchlorate and chlorinated organics) during water and was-
tewater treatment compared to conventional ozonation and electrochemical
processes (e.g. anodic oxidation).17,18,47,102 Chloride and bromide are two
ubiquitous halide ions in various water matrices.120 During ozone-based and
electrochemical AOPs, chloride and bromide can be chemically or electro-
chemically oxidized to hypochlorite and hypobromite, which can then react
268
Chapter 9

Table 9.1
Applications of the E-peroxone process for water and wastewater treatment (an updated literature review since 2018).
Research objects
Cell configuration
Reaction conditions
Major results
Removal of refractory pollutants in industrial wastewater
Phenol50
Semi-batch reactor with
continuous O3/O2 sparging,
polyacrylonitrile-based
carbon fiber cathode, and
Ti/IrO2 anode
Volume ¼ 1 L, [Na2SO4] ¼ 0.1 M,
[phenol]0 ¼ 200 mg L1,
current ¼ 400 mA, gaseous O3
concentration ¼ 90 mg L1, and
gas flow rate ¼ 0.4 L min1
After 30 cycles of
the E-peroxone treatment
(2 h per cycle), the carbon
fiber cathode kept eﬃcient
on H2O2 electrogeneration,
and complete phenol
mineralization can be stably
maintained.
Phenol101
Batch reactor with in situ
generation of O3 and H2O2,
CNTs/carbon-PTFE cathode,
and nickel-antimony doped
tin oxide (NATO) anode
Volume ¼ 200 mL, [Na2SO4] ¼ 0.1 M,
[phenol]0 ¼ 200 mg L1, and
current density ¼ 10 mA cm2
O3 was in situ generated at the
NATO anode to drive the
in situ peroxone process.
Complete phenol and 95%
TOC removal can be
achieved, with 35.7% less
energy being consumed
during the process.
Acid orange 765,66
Continuous circular flow
reactor, and graphite as
cathode and anode, with
electrodes placed in a
circular arrangement
[Na2SO4] ¼ 0.1 M,
[dye]0 ¼ 500 mg L1, pH ¼ 7.7,
current ¼ 500 mA, gaseous O3
concentration ¼ 25 mg L1, gas
flow rate ¼ 0.8 L min1, and water
flow rate ¼ 8.5 L min1
The E-peroxone process was
able to remove 99% of the
Acid Orange 7 after 10 min
treatment at optimal
conditions, with an energy
demand of 8 kW h kg1 dye.
After 99 min E-peroxone
treatment, TOC and COD
were removed by 92% and
99%, respectively.
Diuron64
Semi-batch reactor with
continuous O3/O2 sparging,
reticulated vitreous carbon
cathode, and Pt anode
Volume ¼ 100 mL, [Na2SO4] ¼ 0.05
M, [diuron]0 ¼ 40 mg L1,
current ¼ 25 mA, and gaseous O3
flow rate ¼ 17.4–260 mg L1 h1
Compared with ozonation,
the E-peroxone process can
promote the decomposition
of O3 and thus the
degradation of diuron.
Promising Electrocatalytic Ozonation Processes for Water and Wastewater Treatment 269

Table 9.1
(Continued)
Research objects
Cell configuration
Reaction conditions
Major results
Leachate concentrates34
Batch reactor with in situ
generation of O3 and H2O2,
CNTs/carbon-PTFE GDE
cathode, and Ti/SnO2-Sb2O5
anode
Volume ¼ 200 mL,
[TOC]0 ¼ 246 mg L1, and current
density ¼ 10–40 mA cm2
The in situ E-peroxone process
can save 17.7%–23.2%
energy for eﬀective
treatment of leachate
concentrates.
Pharmaceutical wastewater90
Semi-batch reactor with
continuous O3/O2 sparging,
three-dimensional (3D)
electrodes, i.e. GAC loaded
between metal electrodes
Volume ¼ 500 mL,
[TOC]0 ¼ 13 475 mg L1, current
density ¼ 21 mA cm2, gaseous O3
concentration ¼ 118 mg L1, and
gas flow rate ¼ 0.4 L min1
The combined 3D-ozonation
process considerably
enhanced TOC removal from
23% and 43% during
ozonation and 3D-
electrolysis, respectively, to
71% after 6 h treatment.
Oil field fracturing flowback
water125
Semi-batch reactor with
continuous O3/O2 sparging,
3D electrodes, i.e. GAC
loaded between metal
electrodes
Volume ¼ 150 mL,
[COD]0 ¼ 6750 mg L1,
current ¼ 0–1000 mA, gaseous O3
concentration ¼ 0–80 mg L1, and
gas flow rate ¼ 0.15 L min1
The combined 3D-ozonation
process considerably
enhanced COD removal
from 17% and 37% during
ozonation and 3D-
electrolysis, respectively, to
78% after 3 h treatment.
COD removal can be stably
maintained at 460% after
multiple cycles.
Shale gas fracturing flowback
water (SGFFW)36
Semi-batch reactor with
continuous O3/O2 sparging,
carbon-PTFE cathode, and Al
anode
Volume ¼ 150 mL,
current ¼ 200–600 mA, gaseous O3
concentration ¼ 8.25 mg L1, and
gas flow rate ¼ 0.6 L min1
Electrocoagulation was
combined with E-peroxone
for SGFFW treatment. This
process can eﬀectively
enhance removal of COD
and degradation of
intermediates with large and
medium molecular weight
than individual
electrocoagulation.
270
Chapter 9

Shale gas fracturing flowback
water (SGFFW)126
Divided semi-batch reactor
with continuous O3/O2
sparging, carbon-PTFE
cathode, and Al anode
Volume ¼ 300 mL for each chamber,
current ¼ 200–600 mA, for cathode
chamber: gaseous O3
concentration ¼ 20–80 mg L1, and
gas flow rate ¼ 0.5 L min1
The combined
electrocoagulation-E-
peroxone (EC-EP) process in
divided reactor eﬀectively
removed B95% of SGFFW
TOC, with a specific energy
consumption of 0.11–0.21
kW h g1 TOC removed,
which was more eﬀective
and energy-eﬃcient than
single EC, EP, and undivided
EC-EP processes.
Oxalic acid63
Semi-batch reactor with
continuous O3/O2 sparging,
graphite cathode, and Pt
anode
Volume ¼ 250 mL, [oxalic acid]0 ¼ 2
mM, [Na2SO4] ¼ 0.05 M, pH ¼ 3,
current ¼ 20 mA, C3N4–Mn/CNT
catalyst dosage ¼ 0.1 g L1,
gaseous O3 concentration
¼ 30 mg L1, and gas flow
rate ¼ 0.1 L min1
The C3N4–Mn/CNT catalyst in
the E-peroxone process can
obviously enhance oxalic
acid removal at acid pH
from 15% after 60 min
treatment without catalyst to
B100% within 30 min
treatment.
Sodium oxalate61
Semi-batch reactor with
continuous O3/O2 sparging,
graphite cathode coated
with n-C3N4/CTN composite
and Pt anode
Volume ¼ 250 mL, [oxalic acid]0 ¼ 2
mM, [Na2SO4] ¼ 0.05 M, pH ¼ 9,
current ¼ 20 mA, gaseous O3
concentration ¼ 60 mg L1, and
gas flow rate ¼ 0.1 L min1
The n-C3N4/CNT composite
during the E-peroxone
treatment exhibited the
highest eﬃciency on oxalate
degradation.
Nitrobenzene107,127
Electrocatalytic membrane
contactor (ECMC),
composite membrane
cathode, and RuO2/Ti anode
Volume ¼ 120 mL,
[Nitrobenzene]0 ¼ 30 mg L1,
[Na2SO4] ¼ 0.05 M, current
density ¼ 0.4–3 mA cm2, gaseous
O3 concentration ¼ 0–70 mg L1,
and gas flow rate ¼ 0.02–0.1
L min1
Electrocatalytic membrane
was combined with
the E-peroxone to enhance
O2 and O3 mass transfer.
After 120 min treatment, the
combined process removed
85% of nitrobenzene, which
was much higher than those
by membrane contact
ozonation and electrolysis
(55% and 23%, respectively).
Promising Electrocatalytic Ozonation Processes for Water and Wastewater Treatment 271

Table 9.1
(Continued)
Research objects
Cell configuration
Reaction conditions
Major results
Benzophenone-383
Continuous flow reactor,
carbon cloth cathode, Pt
anode, and PVDF membrane
fixed under cathode
[Na2SO4] ¼ 0.05 M, river water,
[benzophenone-3]0 ¼ 10 mg L1,
voltage ¼ 0–4 V, inlet O3
concentration ¼ 0–48.6 mg L1,
and gas flow rate ¼ 0.2 L min1
The E-peroxone process was
more eﬃcient than
ozonation and electrolysis
on pollutant degradation
and thus membrane fouling
mitigation during the
following microfiltration
process.
Metanil yellow dye,
benzotriazole, 4-
chlorophenol, carmoisine
and tetracycline95
Semi-batch reactor with
continuous O3/O2 sparging,
graphite felt cathode, and Pt
anode
Volume ¼ 300 mL, [Na2SO4] ¼ 0.1 M,
[dye]0 ¼ 50 mg L1, UV
density ¼ 1.51 mW cm2,
current ¼ 100–400 mA, catalyst
dose ¼ 20-150 mg L1, gaseous O3
concentration ¼ 11.4–43.7 mg L1,
and gas flow rate ¼ 0.2 L min1
A hybrid photoelectron-
peroxone/zero valent ion
(PEP/ZVI) process was
developed for organic
pollutant removal. The PEP/
ZVI process was eﬀective for
removal of metanil yellow
and other contaminants.
Yellow F3R dye, and real field
textile wastewater98
Semi-batch reactor with
continuous O3/O2 sparging,
graphite cathode, and Ti/
TiO2 anode
Volume ¼ 1 L, [Na2SO4] ¼ 0.1 M,
[Yellow F3R]0 ¼ 50 mg L1,
pH ¼ 2–9, UV lamp ¼ 6 W,
current ¼ 300 mA, gaseous O3
concentration ¼ 2 g h1, and gas
flow rate ¼ 12 L min1
The PEP process could
achieve 97.66% color and
84.64% TOC removal of the
dye solution, which were 14
and 1.4 times greater than
photolysis and E-peroxone,
respectively.
Abatement of ECs from aquatic environment
Diclofenac, naproxen,
gemfibrozil, bezafibrate,
ibuprofen, clofibric acid,
chloramphenicol, p-CBA and
bromate102
Continuous flow pilot system,
carbon-PTFE cathode, and
RuO2/IrO2-Ti anode
Three real waters (groundwater,
surface water, and secondary
eﬄuent), water flow rate ¼ 28–113
L h1,150 mg L1 for each EC,
[Br] ¼ 150-180 mg L1,
current ¼ 50–200 mA, and specific
Compared with ozonation,
the E-peroxone process can
enhance abatement of O3-
refractory ECs by 30–40%,
shorten the hydraulic
retention time by 50%–75%,
272
Chapter 9

O3 dose ¼ 1.0–2.0 mg O3 mg1
DOC
and reduce energy demand
by 10%–50% at optimal
reaction conditions.
Furthermore, bromate
formation was significantly
reduced to below the
10 mg L1 drinking water
standard during
the E-peroxone process.
Levofloxacin70
A filter-press flow cell, 3D air-
diﬀusion cathode (graphite
felt and carbon cloth-PTFE),
and Ti/IrSnSb-oxide anode
[Na2SO4] ¼ 0.05 M, pH ¼ 3,
[TOC]0 ¼ 20 mg L1, water flow
rate ¼ 2 L min1, current
density ¼ 20 mA cm2, gaseous O3
mass flow rate ¼ 17.5 mg min1
The E-peroxone achieved 63%
removal of TOC with a
specific energy consumption
of 0.27 kW h (g TOC)1.
Thiamethoxam80
Semi-batch reactor with
continuous O3/O2 sparging,
carbon-PTFE cathode, and
Pt anode
Volume ¼ 780 mL, groundwater and
surface water,
[thiamethoxam]0 ¼ 500 mg L1,
current ¼ 100 mA, gaseous O3
concentration ¼ 14 mg L1, and
gas flow rate ¼ 0.35 L min1
At a transferred O3 dose of
5 mg L1, thiamethoxam can
be abated by 16–32%,470%,
and 100% from two real
waters by
ozonation, E-peroxone, and
UV/O3 processes,
respectively. The energy
demand to abate 90%
thiamethoxam was
comparable for E-peroxone
and ozonation (0.14  0.03
kW h m3), but higher for
UV/O3 process (0.21–0.22
kW h m3).
Fluconazole82
Semi-batch reactor with
continuous O3/O2 sparging,
CNTs-PTFE cathode, and Pt
anode
Volume ¼ 500 mL, [Na2SO4] ¼ 0.05
M, [fluconazole]0 ¼ 20 mg L1,
catalyst dose ¼ 0.1–0.8 g L1,
current density ¼ 10–60 mA cm2,
Copper ferrite modified
carbon nanotubes (CuFe2O4/
CNTs) were employed as
adsorbents/catalysts to
Promising Electrocatalytic Ozonation Processes for Water and Wastewater Treatment 273

Table 9.1
(Continued)
Research objects
Cell configuration
Reaction conditions
Major results
gaseous O3 concentration
¼ 7.2–29.7 mg L1, and gas flow
rate ¼ 0.2 L min1
assist the E-peroxone
treatment, and this can
enhance fluconazole
removal by B10%
than E-peroxone without
catalyst.
Ibuprofen113
Continuous flow reactor,
carbon-PTFE GDE cathode,
and Pt anode
[Na2SO4] ¼ 0.1 M, groundwater,
[ibuprofen]0 ¼ 100 mg L1, current
density ¼ 40 mA cm2, gaseous O3
concentration ¼ 18.7 mg L1, gas
flow rate ¼ 0.25 L min1, water
flow rate 1.2 m3 d1
During a lifetime of 46 days,
the GDE cathode can
electrogenerate H2O2 at high
current eﬃciencies (470%)
with an overall cost of 0.88$
kg1 H2O2. The
electrogenerated H2O2
considerably enhanced
ibuprofen removal from 7%
during ozonation to 43%-
59% during the E-peroxone
process.
Ibuprofen71
A flow-through E-peroxone
reactor, RVC cathode, and
Ti/RuO2/IrO2 anode
[Na2SO4] ¼ 0.05 M,
[ibuprofen]0 ¼ 2.5 mg L1, current
density ¼ 2.83–14.15 mA cm2,
gaseous O3
concentration ¼ 8 mg L1, gas flow
rate ¼ 0.25 L min1, water flow rate
30–300 mL min1
Ibuprofen removal can be
considerably enhanced from
59% and 64% by electrolysis
and ozonation to B100% by
the E-peroxone process. At
optimal conditions, the
energy demand
during E-peroxone was only
14.3% of that during
ozonation.
5 antibiotics, 7 biocides, and 2
benzotriazoles78
Semi-batch reactor with
continuous O3/O2 sparging,
Volume ¼ 250 mL, synthetic water
and secondary wastewater
eﬀulent,10 mg L1 for each EC,
Most of the biocides studied
are moderately reactive or
non-reactive with O3, and
274
Chapter 9

carbon-PTFE cathode, and
Pt anode
current ¼ 35 mA, gaseous O3
concentration ¼ 4.5 mg L1, and
gas flow rate ¼ 0.35 L min1
the E-peroxone process can
accelerate the removal of O3-
refractory ECs than
ozonation.
Carbamazepine35
Semi-batch reactor with
continuous O2 sparging,
carbon-PTFE cathode, and
Ti/SnO2–Sb anode
Volume ¼ 100 mL, [Na2SO4] ¼ 0.05
M, [carbamazepine]0 ¼ 10 mg L1,
current density ¼ 30 mA cm2, and
O2 gas flow rate ¼ 0.1 L min1
O3 and H2O2 were in situ
generated at current
eﬃciency ofB7% andB70%,
respectively. Consequently,
the removal of
carbamazepine and TOC
reached 99.8% and 97.6%
after 15 and 90 min of
in situ E-peroxone treatment,
respectively, with the
treatment eﬃciencies
remaining stable after
multiple cycles.
Diclofenac, gemfibrozil,
bezafibrate, ibuprofen,
clofibric acid and p-CBA79,81
Batch reactor with addition of
O3 stock solution, carbon-
PTFE cathode, and Pt anode
Volume ¼ 250 mL, three real waters
(groundwater, surface water, and
secondary eﬄuent), 150 mg L1 for
each EC, current ¼ 30 mA, and
specific O3 dose ¼ 0.5–1.5 mg O3
mg1 DOC
Compared with ozonation,
abatement eﬃciencies of O3-
refractory ECs by
the E-peroxone process were
evidently enhanced in
groundwater (up to 14%–
18%), moderately enhanced
in surface water (up to 6%–
10%), and negligibly
enhanced in secondary
eﬄuent.
Inhibition of harmful or toxic OBPs
Trichloromethane (TCM),
chloroacetic acids (CAAs)
and 8 ECs
Semi-batch reactor with
continuous O3/O2 sparging,
carbon-PTFE cathode and
RuO2/IrO2–Ti anode
Volume ¼ 600 mL, surface water,
150 mg L1 for each EC,
[Cl1] ¼ 100 mg L1, current
density ¼ 1.25–5 mA cm2, gaseous
Compared with ozonation,
the E-peroxone process
accelerated the abatement of
O3-refractory ECs.
Promising Electrocatalytic Ozonation Processes for Water and Wastewater Treatment 275

Table 9.1
(Continued)
Research objects
Cell configuration
Reaction conditions
Major results
O3 concentration ¼ 7 mg L1, and
gas flow rate ¼ 0.15 L min1
Meanwhile, formation of
TCM and CAAs was
significantly mitigated by
converting electrolysis
to E-peroxone.
Bromate, and 8 ECs73
Batch reactor with addition of
O3 stock solution, carbon-
PTFE cathode, and Pt anode
Volume ¼ 230 mL, groundwater,
100 mg L1 for each EC,
[Br] ¼ 176 mg L1, current ¼ 30
mA, and specific O3
dose ¼ 0.5–1.5 mg O3 mg1 DOC
Abatement eﬃciencies of O3-
refractory ECs were enhanced
byB10%–40%, and bromate
formation was considerably
reduced by converting
ozonation to peroxone
or E-peroxone process, with
the E-peroxone being a more
convenient, flexible and safer
operational means than
peroxone.
Trihalomethanes, haloacetic
acids, bromate, and
brominated OBPs88
Semi-batch reactor with
continuous O3/O2 sparging,
carbon-PTFE cathode, and
RuO2/IrO2-Ti anode
Volume ¼ 500 mL, synthetic surface
water, [Cl1] ¼ 51 mg L1,
[Br1] ¼ 150 mg L1, current ¼ 90
mA, gaseous O3
concentration ¼ 7.4 mg L1 and
gas flow rate ¼ 0.24 L min1
Both ozonation and
the E-peroxone process
substantially reduced the
formation of
trihalomethanes and
haloacetic acids during post-
chlorination. Compared to
ozonation, the E-peroxone
process can eﬀectively
suppress bromide
transformation to bromate,
but it may lead to higher
formation of brominated
OBPs during post-
chlorination.
276
Chapter 9

Reduction of bacteria and ARGs
ARGs in simulated hospital
wastewater94
Semi-batch reactor with
continuous O3/O2 sparging,
activated carbon fiber
cathode, and Pt anode
Volume ¼ 2 L, simulated hospital
wastewater, [Na2SO4] ¼ 0.05 M,
current ¼ 400 mA, gaseous O3
concentration ¼ 2–5 g h1, and gas
flow rate ¼ 1 L min1
E-peroxone pre-treatment
could largely reduce the
numbers and contents of
ARGs produced in the
following biological
treatment unit.
Escherichia coli (E. coli) and
trihalomethanes (THMs)93
Continuous flow reactor,
modified graphite felt
cathode and dimension
stable anode
Water flow rate 7–52.5 mL min1,
simulated ballast water,
[E. coli]0 ¼ 6103–107 CFU mL1,
current ¼ 20–150 mA, and aeration
rate ¼ 0.02–0.15 L min1
The E-peroxone process
exhibited higher inactivation
of E. coli than ozonation and
electrolysis, with an energy
consumption of 0.12–0.33
kW h m3. Besides,
formation of THMs during
the E-peroxone process can
meet the WHO drinking
water standard.
Escherichia coli (E. coli),
tetracycline, and
trihalomethanes (THMs)86
Continuous flow reactor,
modified graphite felt
cathode and dimension
stable anode
Water flow rate 7–52.5 mL min1,
[Na2SO4] ¼ 0.05 M,
[tetracycline]0 ¼ 700 mg L1,
[E. coli]0 ¼ 103 CFU mL1,
current ¼ 50 mA, and aeration
rate ¼ 0.02–0.11 L min1
The E-peroxone could achieve
simultaneous removal of
tetracycline and
disinfection, with the
disinfection by-products
THMs meeting the WHO
drinking water standard.
Promising Electrocatalytic Ozonation Processes for Water and Wastewater Treatment 277

with organics in the water matrix to form toxic chlorinated and brominated
organics, e.g. trihalomethanes (THMs) and haloacetic acids (HAAs).19,120
Moreover, hypochlorite and hypobromite can also be further oxidized to
higher oxychlorine and oxybromine species, such as chlorate, perchlorate
and bromate. Due to their harmful and toxic eﬀects on human health, these
chloride- and bromide-derived by-products are strictly regulated in the
drinking water standards of many countries, for example 10 mg L1 for
bromate, 80 mg L1 for THMs, and 60 mg L1 for HAAs.23,121,122 Therefore, the
formation of bromide- and chloride-derived by-products has been a major
concern associated with conventional ozone-based and electrochemical
processes, especially for drinking water treatment.
Interestingly, while the E-peroxone process is a combined process of
ozonation and electrolysis, it generates insignificant amounts of chloride-
and bromide-derived by-products during the treatment of chloride- and
bromide-containing water (see Table 9.1).17,18,47 This improvement can be
mainly attributed to the fact that during the E-peroxone process, the in situ
generated H2O2 can quickly reduce hypochlorite and hypobromite back
to chloride and bromide (eqn (9.12) and (9.13)),123,124 thus blocking
the formation pathways of higher oxychlorine and oxybromine species,
as well as chlorinated and brominated organics.17,18,47 Consequently, the
E-peroxone process can provide a safe AOP option for water and wastewater
treatment.
9.4.3
Disinfection and Removal of Antibiotic Resistance
Genes (ARGs)
In addition to pollutant abatement, the E-peroxone process can also be used
for disinfection in water and wastewater treatment (see Table 9.1).86,93,94
Recently, Zhang et al. (2018) developed a flow-through E-peroxone process
by using carbon-PTFE-modified graphite felt as the cathode and perforated
DSA electrode as the anode.93 During water treatment, the flow-through
E-peroxone process eﬀectively eliminated tetracycline in the inflow water.86
Meanwhile, it achieved one order of magnitude higher inactivation of E. coli
than conventional ozonation and electrolysis, indicating that there is a sig-
nificant synergy between chemical and electrochemical inactivation for
disinfection.86,93 These results demonstrate that the E-peroxone process can
provide an eﬀective method for simultaneous disinfection and pollutant
abatement in water treatment.
In addition, the E-peroxone process has been tested as a pretreatment of
biological process for the treatment of hospital wastewater.94 It was found
that the E-peroxone pretreatment eﬀectively reduced the numbers and
contents of ARGs production in the following sequencing batch reactor
(SBR). Consequently, the probability of ARGs proliferation and horizontal
gene transfer during biological treatment of hospital wastewater can be
largely reduced. Furthermore, the E-peroxone pretreatment increased
microbial abundance and reduced functional genus inhibition in the SBR,
278
Chapter 9

which led to enhanced treatment performance and stability of subsequent
biological treatment. These results suggest that the E-peroxone process can
be used as a viable pretreatment to reduce the risks of ARGs proliferation
and to enhance wastewater treatment performance of the biological process.
9.4.4
Pilot-scale Study
In 2018, a pilot-scale E-peroxone system was developed and compared with
conventional ozonation and UV/O3 process for micropollutant abatement
and bromate control in drinking water and wastewater treatment (see
Figure 9.4).102 Both the E-peroxone and UV/O3 processes considerably en-
hanced the abatement eﬃciencies of ozone-resistant micropollutants and
decreased bromate formation compared with conventional ozonation.
However, the E-peroxone process is significantly more energy-eﬃcient than
the UV/O3 process. Due to its high energy eﬃciency, the E-peroxone process
reducedB10%–50% of the energy consumption that is required to abate the
concentrations of micropollutants by Z90% in the tested water matrices
compared to conventional ozonation. In contrast, the UV/O3 process con-
sumed approximately one order of magnitude higher energy to achieve the
same degree of micropollutant abatement. In addition, the E-peroxone
process is also more eﬀective at mitigating bromate formation than the
UV/O3 process. Bromate was almost undetected in the eﬄuents of the
E-peroxone process but was sometimes detected at concentrations higher
than the drinking water standard (10 mg L1) in the eﬄuents of the UV/O3
Figure 9.4
(a) Pharmaceutical abatement eﬃciency. (b) Energy consumption to
abate selected pharmaceuticals by Z90%. (c) Bromate formation during
ozonation, E-peroxone and UV/O3 process at pilot-scale. Reaction con-
ditions: groundwater and 5 min hydraulic residence time for (a) and (b),
surface water and 20 min hydraulic residence time for (c), 150 mg L1 for
each pharmaceutical, 150–180 mg L1 for initial Br1 concentration,
specific O3 dose ¼ 1.5 mg O3 (mg DOC)1, and current ¼ 150 mA for
E-peroxone. Reproduced from ref. 102 with permission from Elsevier,
Copyright 2018.
Promising Electrocatalytic Ozonation Processes for Water and Wastewater Treatment 279

process. Overall, the pilot-scale study confirms the feasibility and superiority
of the E-peroxone process for micropollutant abatement and bromate con-
trol in water and wastewater treatment.
9.5
Integration of the E-peroxone Process with Other
Technologies
To further enhance water and wastewater treatment performance, several
research groups have developed novel hybrid processes by integrating the
E-peroxone process with other technologies. The recent progress on these
hybrid processes is described next.
9.5.1
Combination with UV Photolysis
In 2016, Frangos et al. proposed combining the E-peroxone process with UV
photolysis and developed the photoelectro-peroxone (PEP) process (see
Figure 9.5).96 During the PEP process, H2O2 is electrogenerated at carbon-
based cathodes in the same way as during the E-peroxone process (eqn
(9.16)). The in situ generated H2O2 then goes through UV-induced photolysis
(eqn (9.21)) and/or the peroxone reaction with O3 (eqn (9.11)) to yield OH.96
In addition, UV photolysis of O3 can also generate OH (eqn (9.22)).99,128 Due
to the multiple mechanisms of OH production, the PEP process signifi-
cantly accelerates pollutant removal compared to the individual ozonation,
electrolysis and UV process and their binary combinations. In addition,
during the PEP process, pollutants can be degraded by many pathways, in-
cluding electrochemical oxidation, O3 and OH oxidation and UV photolysis.
Therefore,
the
PEP
process
maintains
high
and
stable
pollutant
Figure 9.5
(a) Schematic of the photoelectro-peroxone process. (b) TOC mineraliza-
tion from substituted benzene mixture solution by ozonation, UV, elec-
trolysis, UV/O3, E-peroxone, and photoelectro-peroxone (PEP) processes.
Reaction conditions: 10 mg L1 for initial concentration of nitrobenzene,
chlorobenzene and benzaldehyde, solution volume ¼ 700 mL, sparging gas
flow rate¼ 0.25 L min1, inlet O3 gas phase concentration¼ 110 mgL1,
current ¼ 400 mA, and UV fluence rate¼ 0.87 mWcm2. Reproduced from
ref. 96 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2016.
280
Chapter 9

mineralization eﬃciency under varying conditions that are unfavorable for
the other processes.95–100 The PEP process can thus serve as an eﬀective and
robust technology for the treatment of refractory wastewater, especially when
other technologies are ineﬀective.
H2O2 þ hv-2OH
(9.21)
3O3 þ hv-2OH
(9.22)
9.5.2
Combination with Adsorption
In addition to being used as the electrodes of electrocatalytic ozonation,
carbon-based materials are also commonly used as adsorbents in water
and wastewater treatment. Therefore, an increasing number of studies in
recent years are aimed at combining the E-peroxone and adsorption
process.74,89–92,106 In 2016, Zhan et al. tested the regeneration of spent ac-
tivated carbon fiber (ACF) by the E-peroxone process (see Figure 9.6).91 After
the ACF was saturated with phenolic compounds, it was attached to the
carbon-PTFE cathode. The E-peroxone process was then initiated to drive
both the cathodic desorption of adsorbed phenols and the bulk oxidation
of desorbed phenols simultaneously. The results show that during the
E-peroxone regeneration, the preloaded phenols can be quickly desorbed
from the ACF and then mineralized by O3 and OH oxidation in the bulk
solution. The E-peroxone process can thus achieve the goal of adsorbent
regeneration and pollutant mineralization simultaneously. In addition, due
Figure 9.6
(a) Schematic of the E-peroxone regeneration of p-nitrophenol (PNP)
saturated activated carbon fiber (ACF). (b) TOC evolution and regener-
ation eﬃciencies for ozone, cathodic, and E-peroxone regeneration.
Reaction conditions: 400 mL of 0.05 M Na2SO4 electrolyte, 0.25 g ACF,
current ¼ 400 mA, inlet O3 gas phase concentration ¼ 65 mg L1, spar-
ging gas flow rate ¼ 0.4 L min1, and regeneration time ¼ 3 h. Repro-
duced from ref. 91 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2016.
Promising Electrocatalytic Ozonation Processes for Water and Wastewater Treatment 281

to the cathodic protection eﬀect, the oxidation of ACF by O3 and OH is
negligible during the E-peroxone regeneration. Therefore, the ACF can retain
high adsorption capacity and be reused for many cycles of adsorption and
regeneration (see Figure 9.6). Compared with the conventional oxidation-
based regeneration processes (e.g. ozone regeneration), the E-peroxone
process can thus considerably extend the lifetime of ACF for adsorption
applications.
9.5.3
Combination with Membrane
To enhance O3 mass transfer and decomposition to OH, a novel electro-
catalytic membrane contactor has recently been designed (Figure 9.7).107,127
The electrocatalytic membrane is prepared by compositing carbon fiber
paper on a PTFE hydrophobic flat sheet membrane. The electrocatalytic
membrane is then used to construct the GDE cathode for electrocatalytic
ozonation, with the hydrophobic PTFE layer in contact with the gas phase
and the catalytic layer of carbon fiber contacting the aqueous solution.
During water treatment, an O3/O2 gas mixture is fed into the gas chamber of
the GDE, which then diﬀuses through the membrane into the liquid phase.
During the diﬀusion, O2 in the O2/O3 mixture is electroreduced to H2O2 (eqn
(9.16)), whereas O3 will pass through the membrane and then react with
electrogenerated H2O2 in the liquid phase to yield OH (eqn (9.11)). Due to
the enhanced O3 decomposition by electrogenerated H2O2, O3 mass transfer
was increased twofold during the electrocatalytic ozonation process com-
pared to membrane contact ozonation. Consequently, nitrobenzene removal
eﬃciencies were substantially increased from 23% and 55% during indi-
vidual electrolysis and membrane contact ozonation to 85% during the
electrocatalytic ozonation process.107
Figure 9.7
Example of combination of membrane with the E-peroxone process.
Reproduced from ref. 107 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright
2020.
282
Chapter 9

In addition, the E-peroxone process has been integrated with membrane
technologies to mitigate membrane fouling and to enhance pollutant re-
moval during filtration.83 During microfiltration with the PVDF membrane,
a carbon cloth was fixed above the membrane and used as the cathode for
the E-peroxone process. Due to the enhanced OH production and the
introduced electrostatic repulsion force, the E-peroxone process mitigated
membrane fouling more eﬀectively and resulted in415% higher fluxes than
ozonation and electrolysis. Meanwhile, the removal of benzophenone-3 was
also enhanced in the E-peroxone-assisted microfiltration process. These re-
sults suggest that electrocatalytic ozonation may oﬀer a viable assistive
method for membrane filtration.
9.5.4
Combination with Electrocoagulation
The E-peroxone process has also been combined with electrocoagulation
(EC) in diﬀerent configurations recently (see Figure 9.8).36,126 In 2019,
Kong et al. developed a so-called ECP process by combining EC with the
E-peroxone process in an undivided electrochemical reactor and tested its
performance for organic removal in shale gas fracturing flowback water.36
During the ECP process, an aluminum (Al) or iron (Fe) anode is used to
generate Al31 or Fe21 from anodic oxidation and thus to drive the electro-
coagulation process. Meanwhile, a carbon-based cathode is used to produce
H2O2 from O2 in the aerated O2/O3 gas mixture and thus drive the E-perox-
one process. The results show that during the ECP process, high-molecular-
weight (HMW) organics in the shale gas fracturing flowback water could be
quickly
removed
by
coagulation,
while
low-molecular-weight
(LMW)
organics that resist coagulation could be eﬃciently mineralized by OH
generated in the system. Therefore, the ECP process considerably enhanced
organic removal in the fracturing flowback water compared to the individual
EC and E-peroxone process.
However, it was also found that, in the undivided reactor, the EC and
E-peroxone process can have some negative eﬀects on each other.126 For
Figure 9.8
Combination of electrocoagulation with the E-peroxone process in (a)
undivided and (b) divided reactor.
Promising Electrocatalytic Ozonation Processes for Water and Wastewater Treatment 283

example, the oxidation of HMW organics by O3 and OH consumes a sig-
nificant fraction of the oxidants and generates smaller and more hydrophilic
transformation products that are diﬃcult to be removed by coagulation.
To avoid these side eﬀects, Zhang et al. proposed to combine the EC and
E-peroxone process in a divided reactor as the EC-EP process, where the
anodic and cathodic compartments are separated by a cation exchange
membrane (Figure 9.8b).126 During the EC-EP process, wastewater is first
treated in the anodic compartment to remove HWM organics by EC.
The supernatant from the anode chamber is then further treated in the
cathodic compartment to remove LWM organics that resist coagulation by
oxidation. The results demonstrate that the EC-EP process can avoid
the mutual negative eﬀects of the two processes on each other and thus
further improve wastewater treatment performance compared to the
previous ECP process. During the EC-EP process, electricity is eﬃciently
utilized to drive both the anodically induced EC and cathodically induced
E-peroxone process. In addition, the merit of the EC and E-peroxone
process for the removal of HMW and LMW organics is well integrated in the
EC-EP process. Therefore, the EC-EP process may provide an energy-eﬃcient
and cost-eﬀective way to remove various organic pollutants in real
wastewater.
9.6
Challenges and Prospects
9.6.1
Challenges
While many promising results have been reported for the E-peroxone pro-
cess in laboratory-scale studies, more eﬀorts are still needed for the scale-up
of the process for practical applications. In particular, more attention should
be paid to overcome the challenges that might be encountered during
scaling up the electrodes for large-scale and long-term applications. For
example, for practical applications, the rate of H2O2 production must be
able to meet the required H2O2 doses in water and wastewater treatment (see
eqn (9.23)). As shown in eqn (9.24), the rate of H2O2 production is directly
proportional to the applied current density and current eﬃciency for H2O2
production. Therefore, high current density and eﬃciency are prerequisite
for reducing the cathode surface area to construct compact electrochemical
reactors for practical applications.
r ¼ DH2O2QW
s
 103
(9:23)
r ¼ 122400 j Z
n F
(9:24)
where r is the mass of H2O2 produced per unit time and per unit cathode
area (mg h1 cm2), DH2O2 is the required H2O2 dose for water treatment
(mg L1), QW is the flow rate of water that needs to be treated (m3 h1), S is
284
Chapter 9

the cathode area (cm2), j is the current density (mA cm2), Z is the apparent
eﬃciency for H2O2 electrogeneration (%), n is the number of electrons
consumed for H2O2 production (2 electrons), and F is the Faraday constant
(96 485 C mol1).
Currently, most lab-scale studies on the E-peroxone process employed
SAEs for H2O2 production because of their simple configuration and oper-
ation. However, due to the slow mass transfer of oxygen to SAEs, the rate of
H2O2 production becomes mass transport limited at relatively low applied
current densities (e.g. o10 mA cm2).113,129 Therefore, a large electrode
surface area will be needed to produce suﬃcient H2O2 doses when scaling up
the E-peroxone process with SAEs for practical applications. For example,
it is estimated that with an applied current density of 10 mA cm2, at least
a 1.6 m2 cathode surface area will be needed to produce 10 mg L1 H2O2 in a
10 m3 h1 water flow (calculated according to eqn (9.23) and (9.24),
assuming 100% current eﬃciency for H2O2 production). The requirement
for a large electrode surface makes it problematic to construct compact
electrochemical reactors for large-scale applications. Therefore, the SAE
configuration may be applicable only in small applications, such as
decentralized water treatment at a household level.
On the other hand, while GDEs allow higher current densities to be
applied to accelerate H2O2 production and thus reduce electrode surface
area required for water treatment, more studies are needed to evaluate the
long-term stability of GDE, especially under conditions simulating real water
and wastewater treatment. In a recent (2021) study, Li et al. found that the
current eﬃciency of a GDE for H2O2 production decreased gradually from
initially B95% to B85% after 1000 h operation in groundwater. Moreover,
water began to penetrate the GDE into the gas chamber after B1000 h, re-
sulting in flooding of the GDE gas chamber.113 It has been suggested that
this deterioration is probably mainly caused by the continuous precipitation
of calcium carbonate on the GED, which decreases the active sites of ORR
and the hydrophobicity of the electrode. As a result, water progressively
seeps into the pores of GDE under cathodic polarization conditions and
eventually penetrates into the gas chamber. These observations suggest that
future work should be carried out to investigate the mechanisms and control
strategies of electrode fouling and thus extend the lifetime of GDEs for long-
term applications.
9.6.2
Prospects
In general, the results obtained to date have clearly demonstrated the
superiority and significant potential of the E-peroxone process for water and
wastewater treatment. By electrogenerating H2O2 during conventional ozo-
nation, the E-peroxone process can improve the overall treatment perform-
ance in many aspects, as compared with conventional ozone-based and
electrochemical processes. For example, due to the significant OH pro-
duction from the reaction of sparged O3 with electrogenerated H2O2, the
Promising Electrocatalytic Ozonation Processes for Water and Wastewater Treatment 285

E-peroxone process can considerably enhance the abatement kinetics and
eﬃciency of pollutants, especially for ozone-resistant pollutants, compared
to conventional ozonation and electrolysis. In addition, the formation of
bromate and chlorinated by-products, which is a major concern associated
with conventional ozonation and electrochemical processes, respectively,
can be eﬀectively inhibited during the E-peroxone process. During the
E-peroxone process, H2O2 can be electrochemically produced from ORR with
generally similar or even lower energy consumption compared to the sales
price of H2O2 stock solutions. The E-peroxone process can thus not only
eliminate the risks associated with the transport and storage of concentrated
H2O2 stocks but also reduce the operation cost of water and wastewater
treatment. Furthermore, the E-peroxone process can be easily retrofitted
from conventional ozonation systems that are commonly used in water and
wastewater facilities by installing low-cost carbon electrodes. Compared
with other conventional ozone-based AOPs (e.g. O3/H2O2 and UV/O3), the
E-peroxone process is thus a more convenient and cost-eﬀective way to
upgrade existing ozonation systems to enhance the performance of water
and wastewater treatment.
As an electricity-driven process, the E-peroxone process is highly flexible
and amenable to automation. In addition, during the E-peroxone process, all
oxidants (O3 and H2O2) can be produced on site and on demand using O2 in
the air, which avoids the transportation and storage of chemicals. These
favorable characteristics make the E-peroxone process particularly suitable
for decentralized treatment systems that are expected to be a vital com-
ponent of future urban water systems. Furthermore, based on the combin-
ation of E-peroxone and other technologies, a variety of hybrid processes
have been developed recently with the aim of further enhancing treatment
performance in specific applications. Therefore, it is expected that the
E-peroxone process will play an increasingly important role in future water
treatment systems.
Acknowledgements
We appreciate the financial support from the NSFC (National Natural Science
Foundation of China) project (51878370) and Tsinghua University–INDITEX
Sustainable Development Fund (TISD201906).
References
1. E. Brillas and C. A. Martı´nez-Huitle, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 166–167,
603–643.
2. B. P. Chaplin, Environ. Sci.: Processes Impacts, 2014, 16, 1182–1203.
3. C. A. Martı´nez-Huitle, M. A. Rodrigo and O. Scialdone, in Electro-
chemical Water and Wastewater Treatment, Butterworth-Heinemann,
2018, pp. 183–187.
286
Chapter 9

4. D. Bejan, E. Guinea and N. J. Bunce, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 69,
275–281.
5. S. Trasatti, Electrochim. Acta, 2000, 45, 2377–2385.
6. R. Amadelli, L. Samiolo, A. De Battisti and A. B. Velichenko, J. Elec-
trochem. Soc., 2011, 158, P87–P92.
7. E. Brillas, I. Sires and M. A. Oturan, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 6570–6631.
8. P. V. Nidheesh and R. Gandhimathi, Desalination, 2012, 299, 1–15.
9. Y. J. Wang, X. Y. Li, L. M. Zhen, H. Q. Zhang, Y. Zhang and C. W. Wang,
J. Hazard. Mater., 2012, 229, 115–121.
10. S. L. Ambuludi, M. Panizza, N. Oturan, A. Ozcan and M. A. Oturan,
Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2013, 20, 2381–2389.
11. A. Y. Bagastyo, J. Radjenovic, Y. Mu, R. A. Rozendal, D. J. Batstone and
K. Rabaey, Water Res., 2011, 45, 4951–4959.
12. C.
Barrera-Dı´az,
P.
Can˜izares,
F.
Ferna´ndez,
R.
Natividad
and
M. Rodrigob, J. Mex. Chem. Soc., 2014, 58, 256–275.
13. J. Wang, D. Zhi, H. Zhou, X. He and D. Zhang, Water Res., 2018, 137,
324–334.
14. X. P. Zhu, S. Y. Shi, J. J. Wei, F. X. Lv, H. Z. Zhao, J. T. Kong, Q. He and
J. R. Ni, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2007, 41, 6541–6546.
15. B. P. Chaplin, in Electrochemical Water and Wastewater Treatment,
Butterworth-Heinemann, 2018, pp. 451–494.
16. P. Can˜izares, A. Beteta, C. Saez, L. Rodriguez and M. Rodrigo, J. Environ.
Eng. Manage., 2008, 18, 183–191.
17. Z. Lin, W. Yao, Y. Wang, G. Yu, S. Deng, J. Huang and B. Wang, Water
Res., 2016, 88, 691–702.
18. W. Yao, J. Fu, H. Yang, G. Yu and Y. Wang, Water Res., 2019, 157,
209–217.
19. J. Radjenovic and D. L. Sedlak, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2015, 49, 11292–
11302.
20. J. Radjenovic, A. Bagastyo, R. A. Rozendal, Y. Mu, J. Keller and
K. Rabaey, Water Res., 2011, 45, 1579–1586.
21. W. Yao, X. Wang, H. Yang, G. Yu, S. Deng, J. Huang, B. Wang and
Y. Wang, Water Res., 2016, 88, 826–835.
22. Z. X. Li, S. Yuan, C. C. Qiu, Y. J. Wang, X. J. Pan, J. L. Wang, C. W. Wang
and J. A. Zuo, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 102, 174–182.
23. USEPA, National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Disinfectants and
Disinfection Byproducts-final Rule, 1998.
24. USEPA, Interim Drinking Water Health Advisory for Perchlorate, 2008.
25. D. Haaken, T. Dittmar, V. Schmalz and E. Worch, Water Res., 2014, 52,
20–28.
26. A. M. Zaky and B. P. Chaplin, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2013, 47, 6554–
6563.
27. P. Frangos, W. H. Shen, H. J. Wang, X. Li, G. Yu, S. B. Deng, J. Huang,
B. Wang and Y. J. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 291, 215–224.
28. Y. Zhang, H. Wang, Y. Li, B. Wang, J. Huang, S. Deng, G. Yu and
Y. Wang, Water Res., 2020, 183, 116115.
Promising Electrocatalytic Ozonation Processes for Water and Wastewater Treatment 287

29. E. Fockedey and A. Van Lierde, Water Res., 2002, 36, 4169–4175.
30. Y. Wang, Handb. Environ. Chem., 2018, 61, 57–84.
31. Y. Wang, G. Yu, S. Deng, J. Huang and B. Wang, Chemosphere, 2018,
208, 640–654.
32. N. Kishimoto, Y. Morita, H. Tsun and Y. Yasuda, Water Environ. Res.,
2007, 79, 1033–1042.
33. N. Kishimoto, Y. Morita, H. Tsuno, T. Oomura and H. Mizutani, Water
Res., 2005, 39, 4661–4672.
34. C. Qu, S. Lu, D. Liang, S. Chen, Y. Xiang and S. Zhang, J. Hazard. Mater.,
2019, 364, 468–474.
35. B. Yang, J. Deng, G. Yu, S. Deng, J. Li, C. Zhu, Q. Zhuo, H. Duan and
T. Guo, Electrochem. Commun., 2018, 86, 26–29.
36. F.-X. Kong, X.-F. Lin, G.-D. Sun, J.-F. Chen, C.-M. Guo and Y. F. Xie,
Chemosphere, 2019, 218, 252–258.
37. D. C. Johnson, D. T. Napp and S. Bruckenstein, Anal. Chem., 1968, 40,
482–488.
38. C. Fabjan, Monatsh. Chem., 1975, 106, 513–528.
39. C. Fabjan, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1977, 76, 91–99.
40. C. Fabjan and R. Movahedi, Electrochim. Acta, 1977, 22, 185–189.
41. N. Kishimoto and N. Matsuda, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 2054–
2059.
42. N. Kishimoto, T. Matsutani, Y. Yasuda, M. Asano and H. Mizutani,
Ozone: Sci. Eng., 2008, 30, 282–289.
43. N. Kishimoto, T. Nakagawa, M. Asano, M. Abe, M. Yamada and Y. Ono,
Water Res., 2008, 42, 379–385.
44. N. Kishimoto, T. Nakagawa, H. Okada and H. Mizutani, Ozone: Sci. Eng.,
2011, 33, 463–469.
45. N. Kishimoto, Y. Yasuda, H. Mizutani and Y. Ono, Ozone: Sci. Eng.,
2007, 29, 13–22.
46. C. C. Qiu, S. Yuan, X. Li, H. J. Wang, B. Bakheet, S. Komarneni and
Y. J. Wang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2014, 280, 644–653.
47. Y. K. Li, W. H. Shen, S. J. Fu, H. W. Yang, G. Yu and Y. J. Wang, Chem.
Eng. J., 2015, 264, 322–328.
48. S. Yuan, Z. X. Li and Y. J. Wang, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 29, 48–51.
49. M. Hou, Y. Chu, X. Li, H. Wang, W. Yao, G. Yu, S. Murayama and
Y. Wang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2016, 319, 61–68.
50. G. Xia, H. Wang, J. Zhan, X. Yin, X. Wu, G. Yu, Y. Wang and M. Wu,
Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 396, 125291.
51. D. Wu, G. Lu, R. Zhang, Q. Lin, Z. Yan, J. Liu and Y. Li, Environ. Sci.
Pollut. Res., 2015, 22, 15812–15820.
52. G. Xia, Y. Wang, B. Wang, J. Huang, S. Deng and G. Yu, Water Res.,
2017, 118, 26–38.
53. H. Wang, S. Yuan, J. Zhan, Y. Wang, G. Yu, S. Deng, J. Huang and
B. Wang, Water Res., 2015, 80, 20–29.
54. O. Turkay, Z. G. Ersoy and S. Barisci, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164,
E94–E102.
288
Chapter 9

55. U. Von Gunten and Y. Oliveras, Water Res., 1997, 31, 900–906.
56. U. von Gunten, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 52, 5062–5075.
57. B. Bakheet, S. Yuan, Z. Li, H. Wang, J. Zuo, S. Komarneni and Y. Wang,
Water Res., 2013, 47, 6234–6243.
58. L. Castaneda, O. Cornejo and J. L. Nava, in Electrochemical Engineering
General Session -and- Characterization of Electrochemical Reactors: Fluid
Dynamics and Current Distribution, 2018, ed. J. A. Staser, D. Riemer and
J. L. Nava, 86, 129–138.
59. H. Wang, B. Bakheet, S. Yuan, X. Li, G. Yu, S. Murayama and Y. Wang,
J. Hazard. Mater., 2015, 294, 90–98.
60. X. Li, S. Sun, X. Zhang, G. Liu, C. R. Zheng, J. Zheng, D. Zhang and
H. Yao, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2017, 178, 189–192.
61. Z. Guo, H. Cao, Y. Wang, Y. Xie, J. Xiao, J. Yang and Y. Zhang,
Chemosphere, 2018, 201, 206–213.
62. Z. Guo, Y. Xie, Y. Wang, H. Cao, J. Xiao, J. Yang and Y. Zhang, Chem.
Eng. J., 2018, 337, 733–740.
63. Z. Guo, L. B. Zhou, H. B. Cao, Y. B. Xie, J. D. Xiao, J. Yang and Y. Zhang,
Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 8, 6241–6251.
64. I. Bavasso, D. Montanaro, L. Di Palma and E. Petrucci, Electrochim.
Acta, 2020, 331, 135423.
65. M. Ghalebizade and B. Ayati, Chemosphere, 2019, 235, 1007–1014.
66. M.
Ghalebizade
and
B.
Ayati,
Sep.
Purif.
Technol.,
2020,
251,
117350.
67. L. Liu, K. Li, L. Xu, J. Wang, Q. Qin and J. Wang, Technol. Water Treat.,
2019, 45, 89–93, 102.
68. O. Turkay, S. Barisci, B. Ozturk, H. Ozturk and A. Dimoglo, J. Electro-
chem. Soc., 2017, 164, E180–E186.
69. O. Turkay, S. Barisci and M. Sillanpaa, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2017, 5,
4282–4290.
70. O. M. Cornejo and J. L. Nava, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2021, 254, 117661.
71. X. Cui, Z. Lin, H. Wang, G. Yu and Y. Wang, China Environ. Sci., 2019,
39, 1619–1626.
72. W. Q. Guo, Q. L. Wu, X. J. Zhou, H. O. Cao, J. S. Du, R. L. Yin and
N. Q. Ren, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 52695–52702.
73. Y. Guo, E. Zhao, J. Wang, X. Zhang, H. Huang, G. Yu and Y. Wang,
J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 389, 121829.
74. Q. Huang, S. Deng, D. Shan, Y. Wang, B. Wang, J. Huang and G. Yu,
J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 488, 142–148.
75. X. Li, B. Wang, Y. Wang, K. Li and G. Yu, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 360,
1111–1118.
76. X. Li, Y. Wang, S. Yuan, Z. Li, B. Wang, J. Huang, S. Deng and G. Yu,
Water Res., 2014, 63, 81–93.
77. X. Li, Y. Wang, J. Zhao, H. Wang, B. Wang, J. Huang, S. Deng and G. Yu,
J. Hazard. Mater., 2015, 300, 298–306.
78. H. Wang, M. Mustafa, G. Yu, M. Ostman, Y. Cheng, Y. Wang and
M. Tysklind, Chemosphere, 2019, 235, 575–585.
Promising Electrocatalytic Ozonation Processes for Water and Wastewater Treatment 289

79. H. Wang, L. Su, S. Zhu, W. Zhu, X. Han, Y. Cheng, G. Yu and Y. Wang,
Molecules, 2019, 24, 2638.
80. H. Wang, J. Zhan, L. Gao, G. Yu, S. Komarneni and Y. Wang, J. Hazard.
Mater., 2020, 390, 122180.
81. H. Wang, J. Zhan, W. Yao, B. Wang, S. Deng, J. Huang, G. Yu and
Y. Wang, Water Res., 2018, 130, 127–138.
82. D. Wu, G. Lu, J. Yao, C. Zhou, F. Liu and J. Liu, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 370,
409–419.
83. D. Wu, C. Zhou, G. Lu, Y. Zhou and Y. Shen, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2019,
227, 115715.
84. D. H. Wu, G. H. Lu, R. Zhang, Q. H. Lin, J. J. Yao, X. H. Shen and
W. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 236, 389–398.
85. W. Yao, Q. Qu, U. von Gunten, C. Chen, G. Yu and Y. Wang, Water Res.,
2017, 108, 373–382.
86. Y. Zhang, S. Zuo, Y. Zhang, G. Ren, Y. Pan, Q. Zhang and M. Zhou,
J. Hazard. Mater., 2019, 368, 771–777.
87. B. Bakheet, C. C. Qiu, S. Yuan, Y. J. Wang, G. Yu, S. B. Deng, J. Huang
and B. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2014, 252, 17–21.
88. Y. Mao, D. Guo, W. Yao, X. Wang, H. Yang, Y. F. Xie, S. Komarneni,
G. Yu and Y. Wang, Water Res., 2018, 130, 322–332.
89. S. T. Liu, Y. J. Wang, B. Wang, J. Huang, S. B. Deng and G. Yu, J. Cleaner
Prod., 2017, 168, 584–594.
90. J. Zhan, Z. Li, G. Yu, X. Pan, J. Wang, W. Zhu, X. Han and Y. Wang, Sep.
Purif. Technol., 2019, 208, 12–18.
91. J. H. Zhan, H. J. Wang, X. J. Pan, J. L. Wang, G. Yu, S. B. Deng, J. Huang,
B. Wang and Y. J. Wang, Carbon, 2016, 101, 399–408.
92. J. H. Zhan, Y. J. Wang, H. J. Wang, W. H. Shen, X. J. Pan, J. L. Wang and
G. Yu, Carbon, 2016, 109, 321–330.
93. Y. Zhang, S. Zuo, Y. Zhang, M. Li, J. Cai and M. Zhou, Chem. Eng. J.,
2018, 348, 485–493.
94. H. S. Zheng, W. Q. Guo, Q. L. Wu, N. Q. Ren and J. S. Chang, Environ.
Int., 2018, 115, 70–78.
95. M. Ahmadi and F. Ghanbari, J. Environ. Manage., 2018, 228, 32–39.
96. P. Frangos, H. J. Wang, W. H. Shen, G. Yu, S. B. Deng, J. Huang,
B. Wang and Y. J. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 286, 239–248.
97. N. Jaafarzadeh, G. Barzegar and F. Ghanbari, Process Saf. Environ., 2017,
111, 520–528.
98. A. C. Joy, R. Gandhimathi, S. V. Niveditha, S. T. Ramesh and
P. V. Nidheesh, Sep. Sci. Technol., 2020, 55, 2550–2559.
99. W. H. Shen, Y. J. Wang, J. H. Zhan, B. Wang, J. Huang, S. B. Deng and
G. Yu, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 310, 249–258.
100. N. Bensalah and A. Bedoui, Environ. Technol., 2017, 38, 2979–2987.
101. C. Qu, G. S. Soomro, N. Ren, D. W. Liang, S. F. Lu, Y. Xiang and
S. J. Zhang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 384, 121398.
102. W. Yao, S. W. Ur Rehman, H. Wang, H. Yang, G. Yu and Y. Wang, Water
Res., 2018, 138, 106–117.
290
Chapter 9

103. M. S. Elovitz and U. von Gunten, Ozone: Sci. Eng., 1999, 21, 239–260.
104. C. von Sonntag and U. von Gunten, Chemistry of Ozone in Water and
Wastewater Treatment: From Basic Principles to Applications, IWA Pub-
lishing, 2012.
105. J. Staehelin and J. Hoigne, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1982, 16, 676–681.
106. X. K. Zhang, Y. Zhou, C. Zhao, Z. H. Sun, Z. G. Zhang, Z. A. Mirza,
G. Saylor, J. Zhai and H. L. Zheng, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 304, 129–133.
107. K. Li, Y. Zhang, L. Xu, L. Liu, Z. Wang, D. Hou, Y. Wang and J. Wang,
Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 264, 118512.
108. S. Yang, A. Verdaguer-Casadevall, L. Arnarson, L. Silvioli, V. Cˇolic´,
R. Frydendal, J. Rossmeisl, I. Chorkendorﬀand I. E. L. Stephens, ACS
Catal., 2018, 8, 4064–4081.
109. Z. Lu, G. Chen, S. Siahrostami, Z. Chen, K. Liu, J. Xie, L. Liao, T. Wu,
D. Lin, Y. Liu, T. F. Jaramillo, J. K. Nørskov and Y. Cui, Nat. Catal., 2018,
1, 156–162.
110. C. Paliteiro, A. Hamnett and J. B. Goodenough, J. Electroanal. Chem.
Interfacial Electrochem., 1987, 233, 147–159.
111. T. Nothe, H. Fahlenkamp and C. von Sonntag, Environ. Sci. Technol.,
2009, 43, 5990–5995.
112. Y. Lee, D. Gerrity, M. Lee, A. E. Bogeat, E. Salhi, S. Gamage,
R. A. Trenholm, E. C. Wert, S. A. Snyder and U. von Gunten, Environ.
Sci. Technol., 2013, 47, 5872–5881.
113. Y. Li, Y. X. Zhang, G. S. Xia, J. H. Zhan, G. Yu and Y. J. Wang, Front.
Environ. Sci. Eng., 2021, 15, 1–15.
114. S. O. Ganiyu, M. Zhou and C. A. Martı´nez-Huitle, Appl. Catal., B, 2018,
235, 103–129.
115. E. C. Paz, L. R. Aveiro, V. S. Pinheiro, F. M. Souz, V. B. Lima, F. L. Silva,
P. Hammer, M. R. V. Lanza and M. C. Santos, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 232,
436–445.
116. A. R. Khataee, M. Safarpour, M. Zarei and S. Aber, J. Electroanal. Chem.,
2011, 659, 63–68.
117. F. C. Moreira, R. A. R. Boaventura, E. Brillas and V. J. P. Vilar, Appl.
Catal., B, 2017, 202, 217–261.
118. G. Xia, Y. Tian, X. Yin, W. Yuan, X. Wu, Z. Yang, G. Yu, Y. Wang and
M. Wu, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 299, 120655.
119. Q. Yang, H. Huang, K. Li, Y. Wang, J. Wang and X. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J.,
2021, 415, 127618.
120. U. von Gunten, Water Res., 2003, 37, 1469–1487.
121. WHO, Guidelines for Drinking-Water Quality, Geneva, 2011.
122. European Union, Council Directive 98/83/EC of 3 November 1998 on the
Quality of Water Intended for Human Consumption, 1998.
123. M. S. Siddiqui, Water Res., 1996, 30, 2160–2170.
124. U. von Gunten and J. Hoigne, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1994, 28, 1234–
1242.
125. Y. Zhang, X. Cui, S. Liu, W. Zhu, X. Han and Y. Wang, China Environ.
Sci., 2020, 40, 2270–2275.
Promising Electrocatalytic Ozonation Processes for Water and Wastewater Treatment 291

126. Y. Zhang, E. Zhao, X. Cui, W. Zhu, X. Han, G. Yu and Y. Wang, Sep.
Purif. Technol., 2021, 265, 118496.
127. K. Li, L. Xu, Y. Zhang, A. Cao, Y. Wang, H. Huang and J. Wang, Appl.
Catal., B, 2019, 249, 316–321.
128. O. Legrini, E. Oliveros and A. M. Braun, Chem. Rev., 1993, 93, 671–698.
129. W. Zhou, X. Meng, J. Gao and A. N. Alshawabkeh, Chemosphere, 2019,
225, 588–607.
292
Chapter 9

CHAPTER 10
Catalytic Ozonation with
Ultrasound
LEI ZHAO
School of Civil Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology, 202 Haihe
Road, Nangan District, Harbin City 150090, People’s Republic of China
Email: zhaolei999999@126.com
10.1
Introduction
During the last 20 years, we have witnessed an amazing increase in the
application of ultrasound in diﬀerent fields of science. In the field of en-
vironmental engineering, ultrasound is also widely used in the removal of
organic matter in water. The removal of organic pollutants in water by the
synergistic eﬀect of ultrasound and ozone has a good eﬀect.
Catalytic ozonation is a water treatment technology that can oxidize most
organic compounds. Ozone is an important disinfection gas for drinking
water treatment and is a suitable replacement for chlorination in that it
reduces disinfection byproducts.1 It is an unstable trioxygen molecule (O3)
that easily releases oxygen atoms in aqueous solutions and that sub-
sequently reacts with hydrogen ions in water, leading to increased levels of
hydroxyl radicals (OH) in the medium.2 In addition, as an emerging method
of industrial wastewater treatment and advanced oxidation process, ultra-
sound has been widely used. Its degradation conditions are mild, degrad-
ation rate is fast, and it is also known as an environmentally friendly
technology.
Chemistry in the Environment Series No. 8
Advanced Ozonation Processes for Water and Wastewater Treatment: Active Catalysts and
Combined Technologies
Edited by Hongbin Cao, Yongbing Xie, Yuxian Wang and Jiadong Xiao
r The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry, www.rsc.org
293

Previous investigations have found the combination of ozone and ultra-
sonic irradiation to be eﬀective at enhancing the degradation and mineral-
ization of various organic solutes in aqueous solution.3 Oxidation treatment
combining ozone and ultrasound ensures the ozone is fully dispersed, re-
ducing the applied amount of ozone and improving its oxidation capacity
and, with the help of the ultrasonic cavitation eﬀect and physicochemical
action to strengthen the decomposition of ozone, generating a large number
of free radicals; the combination of ozone and ultrasound showing a syn-
ergistic eﬀect.
10.2
Fundamental Characteristics of Ultrasound
10.2.1
Generation of Ultrasound
Ultrasound is a kind of sound wave, its vibration frequency is very high,
higher than 2000 Hz. As a form of energy transmission, ultrasound and
audible sound are the same in essence. In the generation process of ultra-
sound, the high-frequency oscillation signal from the ultrasound generator
is converted into high-frequency mechanical oscillation by the transducer
and propagated to the medium.
Ultrasonic waves create pressure diﬀerences within a solution for the en-
hancement of physical (mechanoacoustic) and chemical (sonochemical)
processes. This occurs at frequencies beyond the audible range, typically be-
tween 20 and 1000 kHz. Ultrasound is generated by either piezoelectric or
magnetostrictive transducers. Piezoelectric transducers are more commonly
used today and manipulate the piezoelectric property of some ceramics. The
piezoelectric material will respond to an alternating current with mechanical
vibrations to produce ultrasound of a characteristic frequency. This creates a
pressure wave, leading to the phenomenon that the bubbles in a sonication
solution are subject to collapse during compression of the wave. This collapse
is almost adiabatic and can result in localized temperatures of around 5000 K
and pressures of 1000 atm. The collapse results in the formation of radicals
through the dissociation of the molecules within and around the bubbles,
luminescence due to excited molecules formed losing energy and microjets
shooting out of the bubbles of speeds in the realm of hundreds of km h1.4
Ultrasound waves typically contain compression and expansion cycles.
Positive pressure can push molecules together in the compression cycle, and
the expansion cycle generates cavities because of a large negative pressure that
overcomes the liquid’s tensile strength.5 With the ultrasonic processing pro-
gresses, the cavities keep absorbing acoustic energy. Upon reaching their
critical size, the cavities implode, release high energy, generate a high-pressure
condition (up to 50 MPa) and heat surroundings to an extremely high tem-
perature (up to 5500 1C). Since ultrasonic waves are mechanical waves, strong
agitation, shear stress and turbulence are also characterized during ultrasound
processing.6 Such a unique environment generated in ultrasound is favored by
the food industries as a means of processing, cleaning and sanitizing.
294
Chapter 10

Four types of ultrasound are classified according to frequency and
intensity. Scientists normally define a frequency higher than 500 kHz as
high-frequency ultrasound and an intensity higher than 1 W cm2 as high-
intensity ultrasound. High-frequency ultrasound is normally utilized for soft
tissue surgery (using high-frequency and high-intensity focused ultrasound)
or for diagnostic imaging, increased drug delivery and simulation of tissue
regeneration (using high-frequency and low-intensity ultrasound).7 With a
suﬃciently low intensity of ultrasound, stable cavitation is produced without
the violent collapsing of bubbles during the compression cycle. When the
intensity of ultrasound is high enough, cavities implode after absorbing
suﬃcient energy. The sudden reversal in the motion of the bubble wall
produces a shock wave and high temperature that can fragment water and
other molecules into free radicals.8
10.2.2
Typical Reactors Applied
In the field of water treatment, ultrasound combined with ozone can im-
prove the oxidation capacity of the system notably. In order to achieve better
degradation of pollutants, many researchers have designed diﬀerent re-
actors. In this book, all reactors are divided into two categories: ultrasonic
bath and ultrasonic probe.
10.2.2.1
Ultrasonic Bath
Figure 10.1 shows a typically ultrasonic bath. Researchers use it to produce
ultrasound and then deliver O3 into the degradation reactor inside the bath.
In the process of ultrasound and ozone designed for the degradation of
the X-3B, ozone was generated by electrical discharge using oxygen in a la-
boratory ozone generator. Ozone was continuously bubbled into the solu-
tion, and the flux rate was kept unchanged. Therefore, the concentration of
the ozone could be kept constant. Furthermore, the suitable ozone flux could
be obtained by adjusting a glass rotameter. The ozone was placed in contact
with the solution for reaction. At the same time, sonication was performed
by an ultrasonic generator, which was equipped with a titanium probe
Figure 10.1
Device diagram of ultrasonic bath.
Catalytic Ozonation with Ultrasound
295

transducer. After sampling, the residual ozone was terminated by sodium
sulfite (Na2SO3) so that the concentration of the target could be determined.
Finally, the residual ozone in the oﬀ-gas was released into the KI absorption
bottle and was absorbed by the mass fraction of 2% KI solution9
(Figure 10.2).
The ultrasonic bath used in the work consisted of a single transducer with
a frequency of 36 kHz and a rated power output of 150 W and was fitted
longitudinally at the bottom of the reactor. The energy to this transducer was
supplied by a generator. Using calorimetric studies, the actual power dissi-
pated to the system at an operating capacity of 7 L was found to be 78.3 W,
giving energy eﬃciency at 52.2%. It is important to understand that the
energy eﬃciency of this configuration is much better than the one observed
for the conventional design of ultrasonic horn.10
The ozone (O3) treatment used was similar to the one reported in previous
work, which is schematically illustrated in Figure 10.1. In short, 700 mL of
starch suspension (10% m/m, wet basis) in distilled water was placed in a
glass reactor and processed for 15 min at 25 1C. The ozone was generated
from industrial oxygen (95% purity; constant flow at 1 L min1) using an
ozone generator unit. The gas (O2 þ O3) stream, with an ozone concentration
of 42 mg O3 L1 of mixture, was introduced in the reactor, being bubbled in
the starch suspension. After processing, the water was separated from the
sample, and an air circulation oven (at 35 1C) was used to dry the starch (until
B12% of moisture content). The samples were sieved (250 mm) before the
analyses.
To perform the physical modification using ultrasound (US), a starch
suspension in distilled water (700 mL, 10% w/w) was prepared inside a glass
beaker and processed in an ultrasonic bath. The US conditions were pro-
cessing time of 8 h, temperature of 24–26 1C, frequency of 25 kHz and
volumetric power of 72 W L1. The temperature was controlled using a heat
exchanger inside the US bath (the recirculating water was provided by an
Figure 10.2
Device diagram of ultrasonic reactor with multifields.
296
Chapter 10

external water bath). The ideal location of the samples inside the US bath
was evaluated according to the good practices described in the literature,
ensuring homogeneity and the exposure of the sample to the highest US
intensity. The bath was filled with 6 L of distilled water mixed with 15 drops
(B0.5 g) of dishwashing detergent, to decrease the surface tension of the
solvent. To prevent decantation of the starch granules during the treatment,
a mechanical stirrer was used. After processing, the water was separated
from the sample, and an air circulation oven (at 35 1C) was used to dry the
starch (until B12% of moisture content). The samples were sieved (250 mm)
before the analyses.11
There’s a system like the ultrasound bath in principle that doesn’t have a
water bath but instead puts the ultrasonic transducer at the bottom of the
reactor. A large-scale water treatment device from Ultrasonic Systems Gmbh,
Thierhaupten, Germany, was employed to deliver ultrasound and ozone for
water treatment using a technology known as US/O3. The system consisted of
an ozone generator, 20 ultrasonic transducers at maximum power setting
(100 W each/[612 kHz]), a mixer and an external pump that was capable of
treating up to a maximum capacity of 4 m3 h1 ¼ 66.67 L min1. Internally,
the system consisted of long steel tubes with a diameter of 108.3 mm,
L ¼ 3.02 m, V ¼ 28 L ¼ 0.028 m3 and retention time ¼ 0.8 min. The bacterial
suspension was pumped into the USO3 kit using an external pump (flow
rate, 35 L min1). Experiments were performed at a constant flow rate of
35 L min1, delivering a constant ozone supply capable of generating a
concentration that accumulated to 1 mg L1. The aqueous suspension of the
bacteria was treated at this flow rate in a recycling system for 16 min with
pulsed ultrasonic treatment on for 5 s and oﬀfor 5 s. The ozone concen-
tration was measured using the indigo colorimetric method.12
Preliminary experiments with ozone alone were carried out in 250 mL
glass chambers to estimate the ozone mass transfer coeﬃcient at varying pH
levels (3.0, 6.5 and 9.0) and ozone flow rates (3, 6 and 12 mg min1, cor-
responding to inlet concentrations of 2, 4 and 8 g m3, respectively). Ozone
was generated onsite using an Ozonelab-100 Model generator and dry pure
oxygen flowing at 1.5 L min1. Single experiments with solid catalysts alone
were carried out at pH 3.0 and 6.5 to assess the degree of IBP adsorption and
the extent of solids leaching into the sample solutions. The concentration of
IBP, the mixing rate and the contact time were 50 M, 250 rpm and 24 h,
respectively. The catalyst dose in each test was adjusted so as to maintain
5 mg L1 Fe in all samples.
Catalytic experiments with Fe-bearing species were run with 50 M IBP
(10 mg L1) and 5 mg L1 Fe-equivalent of each catalyst during a gas flow rate
of 12 mg min1 for 1 h at pH 6.5 unless stated otherwise. The experiments
with ultrasound were carried out in a high-frequency plate-type ultrasonic
reactor (500 mL) equipped with a 120 W generator (operated at 90% of
capacity) and a piezoelectric transducer (22 cm2) emitting 861 kHz. The
reactor was operated at a specific power of 0.23 W mL1, cooled by
circulating water to maintain constant temperature (20  0.5 1C) and
Catalytic Ozonation with Ultrasound
297

occupied by a sample volume of 250 mL. The flow rate of O3 into the reactor
was 12 mg min1 throughout the reaction time.13
The experiments were performed in a semicontinuous ultrasonic reactor
depicted schematically in Figure 10.2, which was made entirely of stainless
steel with a breadth of 11.5 cm, a depth of 11.5 cm and a height of 26.8 cm.
The four flattened sides of the reactor were respectively mounted with the four
same piezoelectric transducers, each of which was arranged on one side of the
reactor and all of which were driven at 28 kHz (A, B, C and D fields). The
emitting system was connected to a frequency generator and a power supply.
The emphasis of the present study is located on the relationship investigation
between accelerating OH initiation and increasing the number of multiple
ultrasonic fields under the same total ultrasonic power input condition; i.e.
the total ultrasonic power input was controlled at 120 W either individually
(A, the same as B, C or D field) or in combinations (AB [60 W þ 60 W], ABC
[40 W þ 40 W þ 40 W] or ABCD [30 W þ 30 W þ 30 W þ 30 W] field). Therefore,
typical power intensity and power density were same for the entire individual
or combined multiple field, which were 0.39 W L1 and 38.5 W L1, respect-
ively, according to the method described by the previous study.14
10.2.2.2
Ultrasonic Probe
The ultrasonic probe is immersed directly into the sample container in this
system. There are two diﬀerences between the ultrasonic probe and the
ultrasonic bath: One is that the reactor is immersed in an ultrasonic bath,
whereas an ultrasonic probe is immersed directly into the sample container;
the other is that the ultrasonic probe can deliver much higher ultrasonica-
tion intensity (100 times greater) than the ultrasonic bath. The probe is
generally used to attain eﬀects that cannot be achieved with the ultrasonic
bath. More and more researchers use the ultrasonic probe as the reaction
system.
Figure 10.3 shows a typical system of the ultrasonic probe. The ultrasonic
horn is the core in the ultrasonic probe. The frequency of the ultrasonic is
Figure 10.3
Device diagram of ultrasonic probe.
298
Chapter 10

20 kHz, power dissipation is 120 W, tip diameter is 2.1 cm, depth into the
liquid is 1 cm and the duty cycle is 80%. All the experiments have been
performed in a glass beaker of capacity 250 ml. The beaker was always im-
mersed in a water bath for maintaining a constant temperature (around
32  2 1C), which was measured using a thermometer.
An ozone generator was used to generate ozone from air. Ozone was
bubbled into the reactor as required using a bubble diﬀuser at a flow rate of
400 mg h1. To regulate the ozone flow into the reactor, a two-way bypass
valve attached to the pipe was used as a controller. The calibration of ozone
output was done using the standard iodometric titration method.15 (see
Figure 10.3).
There is a system that combines US and O3. In this system, semibatch
experiments were performed in a rectangular air-lift reactor made of plexy
glass. The reactor consists of a square column (50 mm50 mm) with the
height of 120 mm, divided into a riser and a downcomer section by a plexy
glass baﬄe (width: 50 mm; thickness: 4 mm; total height: 50 mm). The riser-
to-downcomer cross-sectional area ratio is 1.3. The baﬄe was located at a
distance of 12 mm from the bottom of the reactor. The gas distributor at the
bottom of the riser was a perforated tube with six orifices of 1 mm diameter
each. Ozone was generated by electric discharge using 99.9% oxygen in a
laboratory ozone generator. A magnetic stirrer provided complete mixing of
the solution in the reactor.
Sonication was performed with an ultrasonic generator equipped with a
titanium probe transducer. The tip of the probe was 1 cm in diameter and
was placed 1.5 cm into the liquid layer. The sonication was administered in a
pulse mode of 2.5 s on and 2.1 s oﬀ. The acoustic power was determined
calorimetrically. At preselected time intervals, samples were taken by a
syringe and filtered through 0.45 cm membranes before the tetracycline
concentration was measured.16
Some researchers investigated the scheme of ultrasound combined with
ozone treatment on waste activated sludge (WAS). The ultrasonic apparatus
was an ultrasonic homogenizer Autotune 950W that worked with a probe
with a diameter of 8 mm and an operating frequency of 21 kHz. The ultra-
sonic probe was dipped 10 mm into the sludge. The ultrasonic energy output
was adjusted between 40 and 600 W under various test conditions; ozone
was generated from pure oxygen using an ozone generator, and ozone was
released to the sludge by a microporous diﬀuser. The gas flow rate was ad-
justed from 1 to 4 L min1 under various experimental conditions. For each
batch experiment, 400 ml sludge was filled in a 7 cm25 cm (diame-
terheight) bottle.17
The US/O3 pretreatment was performed using the combined ozonation
and sonolysis experimental set up as in Figure 10.3, but the ozone generator
relied on a UV irradiation system. It produced ozone by splitting the oxygen
molecules of the airflow provided by a compressor. The airflow containing
ozone was introduced into the glass reactor containing the spiked solution;
the exhaust gas was extracted from the reactor and forced to a trap, where a
Catalytic Ozonation with Ultrasound
299

2% KI solution captured the residual ozone, which could be determined by
titration according to the Standard.
The ultrasonic device was equipped with a titanium horn with a 1.3 cm
diameter tip and a temperature probe to monitor the temperature. The
ultrasonic probe was positioned about 4 cm into the solution and fixed at the
center of the reactor. The pretreatment was applied in batches, as an oﬄine
process prior to the membrane bioreactor (MBR) system.18
The experimental setup for treatment is comprised of an ultrasonic horn
and a 250 mL beaker containing the pharmaceutical industry eﬄuent (PIE)
sample. The titanium horn with 2.1 cm tip diameter operates at a frequency
of 22 kHz, with a maximum power output of 250 W, and was fitted with
single piezoelectric ceramic material (PZT) transducer at the tip of the horn.
The tip of the probe was dipped to a certain depth (typically 2 mm) below the
surface level of the PIE sample in the beaker. The beaker was kept in a water
bath with ice pellet introduction at regular intervals so as to maintain a
constant temperature of the PIE sample throughout the experiment.19
All advanced oxidation process experiments were carried out in a high-
frequency plate-type ultrasonic reactor equipped with a 120 W generator and
a piezoelectric transducer emitting optionally at 577, 861 or 1145 kHz. The
reactor was operated at 861 kHz and a specific power and was cooled by
circulating water to maintain a constant temperature. Ozone was injected at
a flow rate of 1.5 L min1, and the aqueous concentration of the gas was
maintained at 2, 4 or 8 mg L1 depending on the operating conditions. The
UV lamp was immersed vertically along the center of the reactor and turned
on only in UV-combined applications.20
10.3
Reactivity of Compounds
The organic pollutants in water can be removed eﬀectively by catalytic ozone
in water treatment. The ultrasound, with ozone processes, can generate
more OH and can improve the degradation of organic pollutants. As an
attractive and promising AOP, ultrasound catalytic ozonation has been
found to be eﬀective for the degradation of a variety of environmentally
hazardous pollutants. This combined process overcomes the drawbacks of
ozonation alone and ultrasound alone, including high cost, only partial
oxidation of contaminants and lesser extent of mineralization. The reactivity
of compounds was divided into four categories in this book: phenols, aro-
matic, dyes and others.
10.3.1
Phenols
Phenol, commonly known as ArOH, is an aromatic compound in which the
hydrogen on the aromatic hydrocarbon ring is substituted by the hydroxyl
group (–OH). Phenolic compounds refer to the compounds formed when the
hydrogen atoms on the benzene ring are replaced by hydroxyl groups in
aromatic hydrocarbons.
300
Chapter 10

Phenols are essential chemicals that are widely used in the chemical and
allied industries. They are released in wastewater by the industries that
handle, manufacture or use them. Phenolic wastewater is one of the most
harmful and widely polluted industrial wastewater in the world. It is an
important source of water pollution in the environment. In many industrial
fields, such as gas, coking, oil refining, metallurgy, machinery manu-
facturing, glass, petrochemical industry, wood fiber, chemical organic syn-
thesis industry, plastics, medicine, pesticides, paint and other industrial
eﬄuents contain phenol. This wastewater can pollute the air, water, soil and
food if it is directly discharged and irrigated to farmland without further
treatment.
Phenols abatement is possible by oxidation processes such as wet-air
oxidation, ozonation, wet-peroxide oxidation and photocatalytic oxidation.
Although individual oxidation processes are incomplete and impractical, the
combination of ultrasonic and ozone oxidation technology can remove it
eﬀectively.
According to the reports in the literature, the application of ultrasound
and ozone, operated individually and in combination with a catalyst (ZnO
and CuO), establishes possible synergistic eﬀects for the degradation of 2,4-
dichlorophenol. The dependency of the extent of degradation on the oper-
ating parameters, like temperature (over the range of 30B36 1C), initial pH
(3B9), catalyst as ZnO (loading of 0.025–0.15 g L1) and CuO (loading of
0.02–0.1 g L1) and initial concentration of 2,4-DCP (20B50 ppm), has been
established to maximize the eﬃcacy of ultrasound-induced degradation.
Using only US, the maximum degradation of 2,4-DCP obtained was 28.85%
under optimized conditions of initial concentration at 20 ppm, pH of 5 and
temperature of 34 1C. The study of the eﬀect of the ozone flow rate for the
ozone-only approach revealed that maximum degradation was obtained at
400 mg h1 ozone flow rate. The combined approaches, such as US þ O3,
US þ ZnO,
US þ CuO,
O3 þ
ZnO,
O3 þ
CuO,
US þ O3 þ ZnO
and
US þ O3 þ CuO, have been subsequently investigated under optimized con-
ditions and observed to be more eﬃcient as compared to individual ap-
proaches. The maximum extent of degradation for the combined operation
of US þ O3 (400 mg h1) þ ZnO (0.1 g L1) and US þ O3 (400 mg h1) þ CuO
(0.08 g L1) has been obtained as 95.66% and 97.03%, respectively. The
degradation products of 2,4-DCP have been identified using GC–MS analy-
sis, and toxicity analysis has also been performed based on the antimicrobial
activity test (agar well diﬀusion method) for the diﬀerent treatment strat-
egies. The present work has conclusively established that the combined
approach of US þ O3 þ CuO was the most eﬃcient treatment scheme, re-
sulting in nearly complete degradation of 2,4-DCP with production of less
toxic intermediates.10
Relevant experiments related to combining sonolysis and ozonation were
performed at 10 ppm p-nitrophenol concentration and O3 mixture (O3 þ O2)
flow rate of 25 mL s1. The concentration of ozone in the ozone-oxygen
mixture was 10% by volume. It has been observed that the combined
Catalytic Ozonation with Ultrasound
301

operation results in 98.3% degradation, which clearly confirms that the
combination approach is much better as compared to the use of ultrasonic
or ozone alone. The extent of mineralization for 10 ppm p-nitrophenol was
obtained to be 36% for the combined operation.
Similar results of enhancement of the extent of degradation of organic
pollutants using a combination of ozone and ultrasound can be observed in
the literature. Weavers studied the degradation of diﬀerent aromatic com-
pounds like nitrobenzene, 4-nitrophenol and 4-chlorophenol using the
combination technique of sonolysis and ozonolysis. It has been reported
that the degradation rates for the combination technique for nitrobenzene,
4-nitrophenol and 4-chlorophenol were all higher as compared to the indi-
vidual operation. Weavers also obtained similar results with the degradation
of pentachlorophenol.
Since phenol is a hydrophilic solute, the destruction pattern during com-
bined ozonation and sonolysis is expected to be governed by OH-mediated
oxidation in the bulk liquid, although it may also react directly with molecular
ozone and hydrogen peroxide. The probability of thermal and radical de-
composition in the bubble–liquid interface is low but is likely to occur at high
concentrations. In any case, the rate-limiting step is the mass transfer of
ozone in solution and the diﬀusion of OH into the bulk liquid.
A comparison of phenol destruction in single and combined operations of
ozonation and sonolysis was done at three pH levels. The negligible rate of
decay by US at pH 10 is due to the relatively high distribution of phenolate
ion in this condition, which remains far away from the bubble–liquid
interface (due to extreme hydrophobicity), where OH are at a maximum.21
In addition, He et al. inspected the mineralization of p-aminophenol (PAP)
by coupling sonolysis with ozonation. They noticed that the mineralization
rate of PAP was enhanced in the coupled experiments (88% and 99% at 10
and 30 min, respectively) than that observed using individual techniques
(72% and 90% eﬃciency in the presence of O3 alone and 3% and 4% in the
presence of US alone at 10 and 30 min).22
Using GC/MS, they detected intermediates such as 4-iminocyclo-hexa, 2-5-
dien-1-one, phenol but also 2-enedioic acid and acetic acid. Destaillats et al.
performed a reduction of the total organic carbon (TOC) with the coupled
accomplishment of ultrasound and ozone quantities to elucidate the
chemical synergism. They chose two rather persistent by-products, namely
nitrobenzene and benzoquinone, which are formed upon sonolysis of azo-
benzene and methyl orange by the combined eﬀect of sonolysis with ozone.
The decomposition was slow in the presence of ozone alone. A further
advantage of coupling sonolysis with ozonolysis may exclude the formation
of poisonous intermediates by the active species that provided an additional
mineralization route. Many researchers have shown that ozonation coupled
with ultrasonic irradiation is more eﬃcient for the destruction of various
pollutants.23 For example, Martins et al. studied the combination and in-
dividual techniques (ozonation and/or sonolysis) for the degradation of
pararosaniline colorant. They illustrated that the reaction follows the
302
Chapter 10

second-order rate for the mineralization of pararosaniline. In addition, they
also mentioned that sonolytic ozonation produces various intermediates
compared to the individual ozonation process, which illustrates that min-
eralization by ozonation is a complex process.24
10.3.2
Aromatics
An aromatic is usually a hydrocarbon with a benzene ring structure in the
molecule. It’s one of the closed-chain classes. It has the basic structure of a
benzene ring. Aromatics are toxic substances that can harm the human re-
spiratory tract and skin. Consuming too many aromatics over a long period
of time may cause cancer.
Sonolysis, ozonolysis and a combination process are used to remove
aromatics in water treatment. The combination of ultrasound and ozone is
used to investigate the degradation of nitrobenzene, BTA, nitroaromatics
and so on.
Lei Zhao used the process of ozonation alone to remove nitrobenzene. The
results indicated that 22.3% degradation eﬃciency of nitrobenzene is ob-
served. The degradation eﬃciency of nitrobenzene increased to 95.4% by the
combination of ultrasound and ozone. From the data mentioned, the work
concluded that the introduction of ultrasound can enhance ozonation for
the degradation of nitrobenzene, producing the synergetic eﬀect between
ozone and ultrasound. The total organic carbon (TOC) also exhibited the
same trend of the enhancement on nitrobenzene degradation. That is to say,
the introduction of ultrasound advanced the degradation eﬃciency of
nitrobenzene as well as mineralization into carbon dioxide and water.14
A study investigated the degradation eﬃciency of benzotriazole (BTA)
using a combination of ultrasound and ozone. The results showed that the
highest removal eﬃciency was reached at neutral pH, ozone ¼ 6.8 mg L1,
PMS ¼ 1.5 mM and US power ¼ 200 W. Under these conditions, 40 mg L1
of BTA was completely degraded within 60 min, leading to almost 85% of
chemical oxygen demand removal, 75% of TOC removal and 73.3% of or-
ganic nitrogen removal. Based on the scavenging tests, it was found that the
hydroxyl radical was the main oxidizing agent in the system.25
The removal of nitroaromatics from polluted water is diﬃcult due to their
high stability in conventional treatment methods. Some researchers have
used the application of ultrasound and ozonation in the electrochemical
reaction. This system allows virtually complete destruction of the com-
pounds in a short time. The eﬀect is attributed to the ultrasonic enhance-
ment of the electrochemical process, which gives intermediates that are
susceptible to ozone oxidation.26
10.3.3
Dyes
Dyes are widely used in textile dyeing operations, but a significant portion of
these dyes is wasted with spent dyebaths. The wasted dyes are mixed with
Catalytic Ozonation with Ultrasound
303

the rest of the dyeing mill eﬄuent to be processed in the treatment facilities.
However, most of the dyes are not removed entirely and are transmitted into
receiving water bodies with properties of unesthetic color and a potential to
produce carcinogenic amines.27,28
Although ozonation is one of the most common advanced oxidation
processes for dye degradation, the mass transfer rate of ozone in the solution
is the limiting parameter. Therefore, the combined operation of ultrasonic
and ozone renders synergistic eﬀects in dye degradation and accelerates
the mass transfer of ozone in the solution due to ultrasonic eﬀects. In the
process of combining ultrasound and ozone, a part of the dissolved ozone
may react directly with the dye molecules, and then the major part of
the dissolved ozone is eﬃciently decomposed by ultrasound irradiation. The
system produces OH, O2 and O2H radicals so that the dyes and the by-
products can be decomposed and mineralized.
The eﬀect of dyes decomposing is influenced by many factors, such as the
initial dye concentration, the pH of system, the ozone concentration and the
frequency of ultrasound. According to the literature, the US/O3 combined
oxidation process is less responsive to an increase in dye concentration in
the higher ranges. The dye degradation rate also increases as the pH values
increase to a value of 8–10; ozone decomposition kinetics are not influenced
by acidity in the pH range of 2.58–5.93 for dye degradation. Even so, some
studies imply that the sonolytic ozonation process at acidic or basic pH le-
vels shows no diﬀerence in the dye degradation rate. Similarly, ozone con-
centration and the frequency of ultrasound are also an important parameter
in the sonolytic ozonation process; the removal of dyes increases with the
increase of ozone concentration and the frequency of ultrasound within
certain ranges.
The eﬀectiveness of ozone combined with ultrasound techniques in de-
grading Reactive Red X-3B is evaluated. A comparison among ozone, ultra-
sonic, ozone/ultrasonic (US/O3) for the degradation of Reactive Red X-3B has
been performed. Results show that the US/O3 system was the most eﬀective
and that the optimally synergetic factor reaches 1.42 in the US/O3 system.
The cavitation of ultrasound plays an important role during the degradation
process. It is found that 99.2% of dye is degraded within 6 min of reaction at
the initial concentration of 100 mg L1, pH of 6.52, ozone flux of 40 L h1
and ultrasonic intensity of 200 W L1. Ozonation reactions in conjunction
with sonolysis indicate that the decomposition followed pseudo first-order
reaction kinetics but that the degradation eﬃciencies are aﬀected by oper-
ating conditions, particularly initial pH and ultrasonic intensity. In addition,
the main reaction intermediates, such as p-benzoquinone, catechol, hydro-
quinone, phthalic anhydride and phthalic acid, are separated and identified
using GC/MS and a possible degradation pathway is proposed during the
US/O3 process.9
The degradation of a reactive dye by combined sonolysis (520 kHz) and
ozonation was studied using CI Reactive Black 5 as a model dye. It was found
that the joint action of ultrasound and ozone induced a synergistic eﬀect on
304
Chapter 10

both the decolorization of the dye and the overall degradation process. Due
to the ineﬃciency of ultrasonic irradiation by itself to render any significant
degradation under the conditions employed, the synergy was attributed
mainly to the mechanical eﬀects of ultrasound to enhance the mass transfer
of ozone in solution. The radical chain reactions taking place during ther-
molysis of water and ozone in collapsing cavities may also have contributed
chemically to the synergy by providing additional decomposition pathways
for ozone and an excess of electron-deficient chemicals in solution.29
10.3.4
Antibiotics
An antibiotic is a kind of drug with inhibitory and killing eﬀects on bacteria.
It is a kind of pharmaceutical active compound (PhAC) with wide distri-
bution range and high detection frequency in the environment. It has played
an important role in the prevention and treatment of human and animal
diseases for a long time. Although the application of antibiotics has brought
great convenience to human beings, the vast majority of drugs will enter the
environment with human and animal excrement, which poses a great threat
to human health and the ecological environment.30
The results showed that the antibiotic was degraded by ultrasound en-
hanced catalytic ozonation. The antibiotics removal rate increased with in-
creasing gaseous ozone concentration, pH, gas flow rate and power density
(ultrasound-enhanced catalytic ozonation of tetracycline in a rectangular air-
lift reactor). Sulfamethoxazole (SMX) degradation was investigated using US,
O3 and US/O3. It was proved that ultrasound significantly enhanced SMX
ozonation by assisting ozone in producing more OH in US/O3.31 The anti-
biotics tetracycline (TC) was degraded by US-enhanced catalytic ozonation
using goethite catalyst (US/goethite/O3).16 The degradation of tetracycline
was investigated using the ultrasound-enhanced magnetite catalytic ozona-
tion process (US/Fe3O4/O3).32 It was proved that ultrasound significantly
enhanced SMX ozonation by assisting ozone in producing more OH UOOP.
In these researches, it was proved that ultrasound significantly enhanced the
antibiotic ozonation by assisting ozone in producing OH in the ultrasound/
ozone oxidation process.
10.3.5
Industrial Wastewater
Tremendous population growth and industrial development are responsible
for the generation of a large quantity of wastewater containing toxic pollu-
tants, which in turn increase the overall pollution load.33 Treatment of ac-
tual industrial wastewater is a challenging task, and the combination of
ultrasound and ozone is an eﬃcient process for the treatment of industrial
wastewater.
According to the literature, when using ultrasound alone, the frequency of
ultrasound must be higher than 300 kHz, showing a reduction in chemical
oxygen demand (COD, 18% reduction) and biological oxygen demand (BOD,
Catalytic Ozonation with Ultrasound
305

50% reduction). Combining ultrasound with ozone, on the contrary, led to a
significant decrease in COD (44%) and BOD (78%) removal for the three
frequencies under study. So we know that the combination of ultrasound
and ozone can greatly increase the removal of COD and BOD.
10.4
Reaction Kinetics
The reaction kinetics is a subject in which the rate of a reaction is studied as
certain parameters are varied, and it reflects how fast the chemical reaction
is going on. The reaction kinetics rate constants of some pollutants in the
process of combination of ultrasound and ozone are3,9,10,16,25,34 are as seen
in Table 10.1).
10.5
Influencing Factors
There are many influencing factors in the process of ultrasound and ozone,
such as ultrasonic power density, the frequency of ultrasound, the concen-
tration of ozone, the pH of system, the temperature of system and so on. The
remove rate of the organic pollutants is greatly aﬀected by these factors.
10.5.1
Ultrasonic Power Density
Ultrasonic power density is an important parament of ultrasound and an
important influencing factor in the process of ultrasound and ozone. As we
set an optimal condition and investigate the influence of ultrasonic power
density, we find that with an increase in power intensity, the rate of deg-
radation of the pollutants increases, and maximum degradation is observed
at optimum power. According to the literature, the observed increase in
pollutants reduction with an increase in power is attributed to the higher
quantum of cavitation bubbles and hence enhanced cavitational activity. At
higher power dissipation levels up to the optimum, the quantum of OH is
higher due to an increase in cavitational activity, and hence a greater extent
of pollutants reduction is obtained. Beyond optimum power, the rate of
oxidation decreases due to acoustic decoupling eﬀects obtained based on
the formation of too many bubbles at the tip of the horn. Due to the de-
coupling, the magnitude of energy transferred is lowered, reducing the ca-
vitational activity and hence less degradation is seen.35
10.5.2
Frequency
Frequency is the special property of ultrasound itself, and its settings in-
fluence the nature and severity of the ultrasonic eﬀects. Studies looking for
mass transfer improvement generally opt for the lower frequency range, and
higher frequencies are used for increased sonochemical activity. At lower
frequencies (under 100 kHz), the bubbles have more time to grow, and
therefore the cavitational collapses are more violent. At higher frequencies,
306
Chapter 10

Table 10.1
The reaction kinetics rate constants of some pollutants under diﬀerent conditions in the combination process of ultrasound and
ozone.
Pollutant
Reaction
order
Rate
Density
power
Frequency
Concentration
of O3
Concentration
of pollutant
pH
Temperature
H2C2O4
0
2.8105
100
358
340 mM
0.9 mM
3
15
6.75106
83
150 mM
2.34105
83
350 mM
Procion Red MX-
5B-(24h)
1
0.8069
200
313
40 L h1
100 mg L1
6.52
25
Methyl tert-butyl
ether
1
3.32105
200
205
0.30
0.01 mM
6.6
20
3.13105
0.31
0.05 mM
1.49105
0.32
0.25 mM
1.22105
0.34
0.50 mM
0.63105
0.26
1.00 mM
Tetracycline
1
0.096
0
20
13.8 mg L1
100 mg L1
3
20
0.115
85.7
20
13.8 mg L1
3
20
2,4-Dichlorophenol
1
4.2103
150W
36
100 mg h1
20 ppm
7
30
8.1103
200 mg h1
1.5102
300 mg h1
2.23102
400 mg h1
Benzotriazole
1
0.0044
200 W
—
6.8 mg L1
250 mg L1
7
25
Catalytic Ozonation with Ultrasound
307

more bubbles are produced, which collapse, producing more radicals.
The inverse eﬀects of frequency were demonstrated with ultrasonic treat-
ment of polyphenylene ether and through iodide dosimetry. At even higher
frequencies, such as in the megahertz range, the rarefaction of the wave
becomes too short for cavitation to occur. The studies shows that high-
frequency conditions promote more oxidizing radicals, and low-frequency
conditions promote the physical eﬀects of ultrasound; however, both the
physical and chemical eﬀects are present across the frequency range gen-
erally used in ultrasound.4,36
10.5.3
The Concentration of Ozone
The concentration of ozone is the most important influencing factor in the
process of ultrasound and ozone. The studies have shown that the degrad-
ation and mineralization of IBP were found to accelerate with increasing O3
flow rates in the process of water treatment13 and that the removal of COD
increased with the increasing of the ozone concentration in the process of
wastewater treatment.13 The increase in the concentration of ozone im-
proved the mass transfer of O3 and increased the area of the gas–liquid
interface, which resulted in an increase of ozone concentration and the
formation of the free radicals in the solution.37
10.5.4
pH
During ozonation in liquid media, there are two decomposition rates: a low
O3 decomposition rate at pHo7 and a lower O3 decomposition rate at
pHo4. But there is a high O3 decomposition rate at pH47. The studies
show that oxidation can occur through direct reaction involving molecular
O3 and via an indirect pathway through
OH formed during O3 de-
composition. That is, at pH values between 4 and 8, both OH and molecular
O3 take part in the oxidation process of compounds when O3 is applied.
At pH values above 8, OH is the main oxidizing agent, while at pH values of
4 or below, molecular O3 is the leading agent in compound removal. During
the present study, an increase in pH from 6.7 to 7.9 does not significantly
aﬀect OH generation.38
10.5.5
Temperature
It was observed that pollutants reduction increases with an increase in
temperature in general. In a couple of works, the increased rate of the
degradation is attributed to two points. On the one hand, the activation
energy for the degradation of chemicals was independent of the change of
temperature within a limited range. The higher the temperature was, the
more energy was generated, and the more target molecules were de-
composed. On the other hand, although the ozone concentration decreased
as the temperature rose and its water solubility decreased with the increase
308
Chapter 10

of reaction temperature, the system also generated more OH as temperature
went up because of the cavitation eﬀect of US.9 But in another theory, it was
observed that pollutants reduction increases with an increase in tempera-
ture up to an optimum temperature. A marginal decrease in pollutants re-
duction was observed for a further increase in temperature. The enhanced
degradation rate at the optimum temperature is due to the optimum balance
between the cavitational activity and kinetic rates, but beyond the optimum
temperature, the decreased rate of the degradation is attributed to the
dominant negative eﬀect of lower cavitational activity due to the cushioned
collapse of cavities.15
10.6
Combined Processes
The combination of ultrasound and ozone can be conducted with a variety of
other treatments. Based on the state of the reaction process in this book, the
treatments are divided into two types: homogeneous and heterogeneous.
10.6.1
Homogeneous
10.6.1.1
UV
The combined operation of ultrasound, ozone and UV light was the most
eﬀective method of pollutants decay. The advantage over both of the dual
combinations (US/O3 and US/UV) arises from the reaction of ozone in the
presence of UV irradiation to yield singlet-state oxygen, which is readily
converted to hydrogen peroxide and OH:21
O3 þ UV-O(1D) þ O2
(10.1)
O(1D) þ H2O-H2O2-2OH
(10.2)
10.6.1.2
H2O2
The increase in the extent of pollutants reduction in the combined operation
of ultrasound, O3 and H2O2, as compared to the combination of ultrasound
with only O3/H2O2, is due to the combined eﬀect of O3 and H2O2. The
introduction of H2O2 increases the probability of reaction of O3 with H2O2 to
generate OH. OH is a powerful oxidant, and has the potential to oxidize
most organic pollutants. The increased rate of generation of OH can also be
due to the fact that ultrasonic irradiations result in turbulence, which
further increased the mass transfer rate of O3 and hence its utilization.1 The
reported illustration confirms the beneficial contribution of adding hydro-
gen peroxide and ozone to give the enhanced quantum of OH.19
Catalytic Ozonation with Ultrasound
309

10.6.1.3
PMS
This study investigated the degradation eﬃciency of pollutants using a
combination of US, peroxymonosulfate (PMS) and ozone. Based on the
scavenging tests, it was found that OH was the main oxidizing agent in the
oxidation of pollutants by the PMS/ozone/US process. The PMS/ozone/US
process was compared to US/peroxone, and the results showed the import-
ance of US irradiation in both systems. Accordingly, the PMS/ozone/US
process could be considered as an eﬃcient and promising process for water
treatment.35
10.6.2
Heterogeneous
The combination of the US and O3 approach with a metallic oxide catalyst in
separate experiments was applied for water treatment. Further improvement
of the degradation rate was observed with the addition of the catalyst.
Ultrasound in homogeneous systems is often used for sonochemical eﬀects
such as bond breakage and radical formation, which leads to chemical re-
actions. Conversely in heterogeneous systems, ultrasound is utilized for
the enhancement of mass transport, erosion and mixing. Additionally, the
augmentation of rates and yields is also explained by a chemical eﬀect of the
ultrasound in heterogeneous systems.4 In part of the studies, it was observed
that the only marginal synergetic eﬀect of sonocatalysis using CuO or TiO2 as
the catalyst was mostly attributed to dominant oxidation by ozone.15 In other
studies, it can be said that TiO2 and CuO gives better degradation of 37.2%
compared to 30.5% using CuO at a similar loading from the results obtained
for TiO2 and CuO in combination with ultrasound and ozone. The observed
trends can be attributed to the fact that the presence of CuO and TiO2
provides an activated surface area in addition to providing nuclei for cavi-
tation; these activated surface areas can accelerate the reactivity and gen-
eration of
OH by possible decomposition of the generated hydrogen
peroxide in the system.39 Above all, we can conclude that the degradation
eﬀect of organic pollution was enhanced with the addition of catalyst.
10.7
Enhanced Mechanism
According to the literature, the enhanced mechanism is divided into three
parts in the process of combining ultrasound and ozone.
A part of the pollutants can be decomposed by ultrasound because of the
energy of ultrasound. The ultrasound irradiation of aqueous solutions re-
sults in the formation and quasi-adiabatic collapse of vapor bubbles formed
from preexisting bubble nuclei.
The OH is generated by sonolysis alone through substrate pyrolysis inside
the bubble or by reaction with the acoustically generated OH. Then the OH
reacts with the pollutants to remove them from the water or wastewater.
310
Chapter 10

Meanwhile, the radical reactions by ultrasound produce other oxidizing
species such as the hydroperoxyl radical HO2 and superoxide O2.
In the absence of ultrasound, ozonation can produce the OH by means of
aqueous reactions, the produced OH could react with the pollutants, and
the pollutants would be removed.
In the combination of ultrasound and ozone, ultrasound enhances the
ozone mass transfer and improves the O3-dissolved concentration. Sub-
sequently, the O3 is decomposed under the ultrasound and produces the
OH and O2 simultaneously. Although O2 lose their oxidizing power, the OH
react with the pollutants and decompose them. On the other hand, soni-
cation enhances the mass transfer of O3, which may result in additional O3
being transferred to solution and decomposed. Thanks to its high solubility
in water, O3 at high concentrations in the aqueous phase may act as a
quencher of active cavitation formation due to the high degree of bubble
coalescence. This may be the reason for which negative synergy between US
and O3 was reported in many cases. Thus the threshold [O3], above which
there is no inertial cavitation, should not be exceeded. The reaction of O3
with the acoustically generated H2O2 in the aqueous phase is another pos-
sible pathway for increasing US/O3 performance. Note that the occurrence of
OH is to a great extent aﬀected by operating conditions, that is, frequency,
power and O3-dissolved concentration, which control all the physical and
chemical eﬀects of acoustic cavitation.40
References
1. U. von Gunten, Water Res., 2003, 37, 1469.
2. A. Pascual, I. Liorca and A. Canut, Food Sci. Technol., 2009, 18, S29.
3. C. D. Vecitis, T. Lesko, A. J. Colussi and M. R. Hoﬀmann, Phys. Chem. A,
2010, 114, 4968.
4. M. J. Bussemaker and D. Zhang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2013, 52, 3563.
5. H. Yua, Y. X. Seowa, P. K. C. Onga and W. Zhou, Food Chem., 2018, 269, 628.
6. H. Yua, Y. X. Seowa, P. K. C. Onga and W. Zhou, Ultrason. Sonochem.,
2017, 34, 154.
7. M. Erriu, C. Blus, S. Szmukler-Moncler, S. Buogo, R. Levi, G. Barbato,
D. Madonnaripa, G. Denotti, V. Piras and G. Orru`, Ultrason. Sonochem.,
2014, 21, 15.
8. H. Yu, Y. Liu, L. Li, Y. H. Guo, Y. F. Xie, Y. L. Cheng and W. R. Yao, Trends
Food Sci. Technol., 2020, 96, 91.
9. Y. J. Shen, Q. H. Xu, R. R. Wei, J. L. Ma and Y. Wang, Ultrason. Sonochem.,
2017, 38, 681.
10. A. J. Barik and P. R. Gogate, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2017, 36, 517.
11. N. Castanha, D. C. Lima, M. D. M. Junior, O. H. Campanella and
P. E. D. Augusto, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2019, 139, 63.
12. A. M. Al-Hashimi, T. J. Mason and E. M. Joyce, Environ. Sci. Technol.,
2015, 49, 11697.
13. A. Ziylan and N. H. Ince, Catal. Today, 2015, 240, 2.
Catalytic Ozonation with Ultrasound
311

14. L. Zhao, W. C. Ma, J. Ma, G. Wen and Q. L. Liu, Ultrason. Sonochem.,
2015, 22, 198.
15. S. D. Ayare and P. R. Gogate, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2019, 51, 69.
16. Y. Wang, H. Zhang and L. Chen, Catal. Today, 2011, 175, 283.
17. G. H. Xu, S. H. Chen, J. W. Shi, S. M. Wang and G. F. Zhu, J. Hazard.
Mater., 2010, 180, 340.
18. M. Iba´nez, E. Gracia-Lor, L. Bijlsma, E. Morales, L. Pastor and
F. Herna´ndez, J. Hazard. Mater., 2013, 260, 389.
19. S. Chandak, P. K. Ghosh and P. R. Gogate, Process Saf. Environ. Prot.,
2020, 137, 149.
20. A. Ziylan and N. H. Ince, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 220, 151.
21. R. Kidak and N. H. Ince, Chem. Eng. J., 2007, 146, 630.
22. Z. Q. He, S. Song, H. P. Ying, L. J. Xu and J. M. Chen, Ultrason. Sonochem.,
2007, 14, 568.
23. S. Anandana, V. K. Ponnusamyb and M. Ashokkumar, Ultrason.
Sonochem., 2020, 67, 105130.
24. A. O. Martins, V. M. Canalli, C. M. N. Azevedo and M. Pires, Dyes Pigm.,
2006, 68, 227.
25. F. Ghanbari, M. Khatebasreh, M. Mahdavianpour and K. A. Lin,
Chemosphere, 2020, 244, 125326.
26. V. O. Abramov, O. V. Abramov, A. E. Gekhman, V. M. Kuznetsov and
G. J. Price, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2006, 13, 303.
27. N. H. Ince, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2018, 40, 97.
28. R. Ganesh, G. D. Boardman and D. Michelsen, Water Res., 1994, 28, 1367.
29. N. H. Ince and G. Tezcanli, Dyes Pigm., 2001, 49, 145.
30. N. Liu, X. W. Jin, C. L. Feng, Z. J. Wang, F. C. Wu, A. C. Johnson,
H. X. Xiao, H. Hollert and J. P. Giesy, Environ. Int., 2020, 136, 105454.
31. W. Q. Guo, R. L. Yin, X. J. Zhou, J. S. Du, H. O. Cao, S. S. Yang and
N. Q. Ren, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2015, 22, 182.
32. L. W. Hou, H. Zhang, L. G. Wang and L. Chen, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 229, 557.
33. S.
Ibrahim,
M.
A.
El-Liethy,
A.
L.
K.
Abia,
M.
Abdel-Gabbar,
A. M. A. Zanaty and M. M. Kamel, Total Environ., 2020, 703, 134786.
34. J. W. Kang and M. R. Hoﬀmann, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1998, 32, 3194.
35. S. D. Ayarea and P. R. Gogate, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2020, 233, 115979.
36. N. M. Navarro, T. Chave, P. Pochon, I. Bisel and S. I. Nikitenko, J. Phys.
Chem. B, 2011, 115, 2024.
37. H. Destaillats, A. J. Colussi, J. M. Joseph and M. R. Hoﬀmann, J. Phys.
Chem. A, 2000, 204, 8930.
38. P. Alfonso-Muniozguren, M. H. Bohari, A. Sicilia, C. Avignone-Rossa,
M. Bussemaker, D. Saroj and J. Lee, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2020, 64, 104986.
39. K. P. Mishra and P. R. Gogate, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2012, 51, 1166.
40. S. Merouani and O. Hamdaoui, Curr. Opin. Green Sustainable Chem.,
2019, 18, 98.
312
Chapter 10

CHAPTER 11
Hybrid Ceramic Membrane
Catalytic Ozonation
ZILONG SONG, RUIJUN REN, YUTING ZHANG, AO LI, JING LIU
AND FEI QI*
Beijing Key Laboratory for Source Control Technology of Water Pollution,
Beijing Forestry University, No. 35 Qinghua East Road, Beijing 100083,
P.R. China
*Email: qifei@bjfu.edu.cn
11.1
Introduction
Generally, catalytic ozonation has shown good application potentials in
drinking and wastewater purification in the removal of micropollutants or
refractory organics. However, the reported powder active catalyst cannot be
used directly in a water treatment plant due to the loss in the eﬄuent. This
loss not only increases the cost but also decreases the quality of eﬄuent due
to the presence of the powder, especially for the TSS and heavy metal ex-
posure risk. Even though there were many methods to make powder catalyst
by granulation, the catalytic activity is lost to a certain degree. Therefore, the
granulation of powder catalyst is a limitation problem for the application of
catalytic ozonation.
Recently, membrane filtration was also used widely in drinking and was-
tewater purification to remove particulates and bacteria. The application of
membrane filtration in drinking water shortened the water treatment process
and safely reclaimed water from municipal eﬄuent. However, membrane
fouling is an important problem for its application and the cost reduction.
Chemistry in the Environment Series No. 8
Advanced Ozonation Processes for Water and Wastewater Treatment: Active Catalysts and
Combined Technologies
Edited by Hongbin Cao, Yongbing Xie, Yuxian Wang and Jiadong Xiao
r The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry, www.rsc.org
313

Therefore, ozonation is an eﬃcient pretreatment for membrane filtration,
among all the reported methods. However, while polymeric membrane has
shown worse chemical resilient property with ozone, ceramic membrane has
shown more stability, longer life and higher physical integrity. In the litera-
ture, the combination of ozonation and ceramic membrane filtration has
exhibited better performance in refractory organic degradation, the precursor
degradation of disinfection by-products and membrane fouling migration.
This coupling technology has been used for drinking water purification when
alga-rich water was used as the source in a wastewater reclaiming process.
Due to the inorganic components in ceramic membrane, such as Al2O3,
ZrO2 and TiO2, ceramic membrane showed potential catalytic ozonation
activity. The bromate elimination in the coupling of ceramic membrane with
ozonation confirmed this idea. On the other hand, ceramic membrane is a
good supporter for active powder catalyst in catalytic ozonation. If this is
achieved, the interface catalytic ozonation is able to remove refractory or-
ganic or microcontaminants and to degrade natural organic matter (NOM),
achieving disinfection by-product (DBPs) precursor degradation and mem-
brane fouling migration.
In this chapter, the application of the combination of ozonation and
ceramic membrane is described first, and the key point is the membrane
fouling migration mechanism derived by ozonation. After that, the progress
of the catalytic ceramic membrane and its coupling with the interface of
catalytic ozonation is shown, including novel catalytic ceramic membrane
fabrication, its performance on refractory organics and DBP precursor deg-
radation, membrane fouling migration.
11.2
Coupling of Ceramic Membranes with Ozonation
Membrane filtration integrated with ozonation has proven to be the most
promising
technique
for
purifying
drinking
water
and
wastewater
treatment,1–3 especially for removing natural organic matter (NOM),4
emerging micro-organic pollutants5 and disinfection by-product (DPB)
precursors.6 Ozone is a powerful oxidant with a redox potential of 2.07 V7
and is able to reduce membrane fouling caused by NOM, secondary eﬄu-
ent organic matter (EfOM) and microorganisms in eﬄuent by changing
their molecular sizes or other characteristics.6,8 For instance, Wei et al.
reported that pre-ozonation-filtration (pre-O/F) with ceramic membranes
mitigated hydraulically reversible fouling but could not alleviate irrevers-
ible fouling because of the selective oxidation of high-MW substances,2
which was also reported by Tang et al.9 In in-situ-ozonation filtration
(in-situ-O/F), oxidized organic foulants deposited on the membrane surface
improved filterability.10 In drinking water and wastewater treatment, in-
situ-O/F eﬀectively mitigated reversible and irreversible fouling10–12 that
could not be alleviated by pre-O/F.10 Song et al. reported that in-situ-O/F
outperformed pre-O/F in terms of irreversible membrane fouling because
the dissolved ozone and the resultant hydroxyl radical (OH) oxidized
314
Chapter 11

irreversible membrane fouling deposited on the membrane surface and in
the membrane pores in situ.13
However, membrane fouling is a complex phenomenon that typically in-
cludes inorganic, organic and biofouling layers.14 The role of ozonation in
mitigating membrane fouling had been studied by Song et al.15 in more detail
to guide the application of coupled ozonation and ceramic membrane fil-
tration, including coupling running modes such as in-situ-O/F and pre-O/F.
11.2.1
Eﬀect of Ozone Coupling Mode on EfOM Removal
It has been found that the filtration removed 47.06% of chemical oxygen
demand (COD), 40.79% of UV254 and 42.34% of total organic carbon (TOC).
Ozonation removed more COD (55.88%), UV254 (72.36%) and TOC (50.67%)
than filtration when the contact time was 40 min. The combination of ozo-
nation and filtration performed best, depending on the reaction time. In pre-
O/F mode, the removal performance for COD, UV254 and TOC increased to
64.71%, 40.89% and 53.93%, after pre-ozonation for 8 min, while for in-situ-O/
F, these removal performances were 55.88%, 42.85% and 55.12%, respectively.
Fluorescence excitation and emission matrix (EEM) spectra were used to
characterize the EfOM in the eﬄuent of a wastewater treatment plant (WWTP)
and ozonation and in the permeates obtained from filtration. Coupling ozo-
nation and filtration improved the removal eﬃciency of EfOM, which was
further enhanced by increasing the reaction time from 8.0 to 40 min. When
reaction time was 8 min in pre-O/F mode, the removal eﬃciency followed the
order fulvic-acid-like substances (rejection eﬃciency was 43.16%)4humic-acid-
like substances (41.89%)4soluble microbial products (36.29%)4aromatic
protein substances (18.97%). These removal eﬃciencies were higher than those
observed for either ozonation or filtration alone, but no cooperative or syn-
ergistic eﬀects were observed. For example, filtration had a 15.71% rejection
eﬃciency for aromatic protein substances, while ozonation had a 3.56% re-
moval eﬃciency. The pre-O/F removal eﬃciency was simply the sum of the
removal eﬃciencies of filtration and ozonation (18.97%).
However, in in-situ-O/F mode, the order of the removal eﬃciencies of
the
components
of
EfOM
changed
to
humic-acid-like
substances
(63.47%)4fulvic-acid-like substances (44.07%)4soluble microbial products
(40.37%)4aromatic protein substances (20.85%). In-situ-O/F mode rejected
more EfOM than pre-O/F mode, especially for humic-acid-like and fulvic-acid-
like substances. The performance of in-situ-O/F mode was obviously better
than that of either filtration or ozonation alone. Unlike in pre-O/F mode,
synergistic eﬀects were clearly observed in in-situ-O/F mode including between
oxidation and membrane rejection. Simultaneous oxidation and filtration
enhanced the interfacial mass transfer and led to improved EfOM removal.16
Overall, coupling filtration and ozonation resulted in higher EfOM re-
moval eﬃciency than either filtration or ozonation alone. In-situ-O/F per-
formed better than pre-O/F in removing protein-like substances that easily
clogged the membrane pores.
Hybrid Ceramic Membrane Catalytic Ozonation
315

11.2.2
Eﬀects of Pre-O/F and In-situ-O/F on Membrane
Fouling
The specific flux (J/J0) was employed to evaluate membrane permeate flux
and membrane fouling. In pre-O/F mode, J/J0 gradually decreased in the
initial 20 min as the ozonation time increased. When the pre-ozonation
times were 8, 20 and 40 min, the values of J/J0 were 1.16, 1.42 and 2.18 times
the value for filtration alone, respectively. In in-situ-O/F mode, the value of
J/J0 decreased rapidly even after the introduction of ozone. Because of the
shorter contact time in in-situ-O/F mode, the EfOM cannot be oxidized
completely. However, after 20 min, in-situ ozonation gradually began to de-
crease the quantity of membrane fouling. This eﬃciency increased with the
in-situ ozonation time. In summary, the flux in pre-O/F mode was higher
than in in-situ-O/F mode, suggesting that the former performed better in
mitigating fouling.
In addition, after filtration, the thickness of the layer formed from the
foulants was 38.2  1.21 mm based on SEM cross-sectional images of the
tubular ceramic membranes (TCMs). This value decreased to 9.58  1.09 mm
in pre-O/F because of the ozonation. The foulant layer formed after com-
bined ozonation and filtration had more loose fragments than that obtained
from filtration alone. These loose fragments can be flushed away more easily
by crossflow to mitigate membrane fouling [33]. The reduction of the
fouling load before filtration was the primary mechanism of membrane
fouling mitigation in pre-O/F mode. In in-situ-O/F mode, the thickness of
the foulant layer was 16.67  0.47 mm, which was thicker than that obtained
in pre-O/F mode and which resulted in poor flux recovery in this mode.
11.2.3
Membrane Fouling Mitigation Mechanism
The membrane fouling layer formed in the filtration mode was mainly
composed of inorganic, organic and biofouling fouling layers. Among them,
the organic and biofouling layers were classified either as reversible mem-
brane fouling, such as protein-like substances in EfOM and extracellular
polymeric substances (EPS) or microbes in biofouling fouling layers, or as
irreversible membrane fouling, such as humic-acid-like substances in EfOM
and EPS or microbes in biofouling fouling layers (Figure 11.1).
For inorganic membrane fouling, three aspects should be considered: (1)
The degradation and structural transformation of EfOM in ozonation de-
creased the precipitation of Ca/Mg on the membrane surface. (2) The ozo-
nation made the fouling layer smoother, which led to the hard formation of
inorganic membrane fouling on the surface. (3) The eﬀect of concentration
polarization decreased, and the inorganic membrane fouling was mitigated
substantially when the crossflow velocity increased.
For organic membrane fouling, in pre-O/F mode, EfOM was degraded or
transformed in pre-ozonation, which decreased the EfOM load in filtration
and eliminated membrane fouling. In in-situ-O/F mode, organic membrane
316
Chapter 11

Figure 11.1
Mechanism of membrane fouling mitigation in (a) filtration, (b) pre-O/F and (c) in situ O/F. Reproduced from ref. 15 with
permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2020.
Hybrid Ceramic Membrane Catalytic Ozonation
317

fouling mitigation was mainly the consequence of lower adhesion between
irreversible membrane fouling and the pores/surfaces of the TCMs. At the
same time, part of the organic fouling was destroyed by in-situ ozonation.
For biofouling, in pre-O/F mode, the structures of a-polysaccharides,
proteins and b-polysaccharides were destroyed and the microorganisms in
the eﬄuent were killed by ozonation. This phenomenon was also observed
in in-situ-O/F mode. Microorganisms on the surface of the membrane were
also killed by ozonation, and the adhesion between the biofouling foulants
and membrane channels or pores was destroyed by in-situ ozonation.
The quantity of biofouling foulants clogging the membrane pores also
diminished.
11.3
Coupling of Catalytic Ceramic Membranes
with Ozonation
11.3.1
Kinds of Catalytic Ceramic Membranes and
Corresponding Fabrication Methods
11.3.1.1
Physical Coating Techniques
(i) Physical Vapor Deposition
Physical vapor deposition (PVD) includes a variety of deposition
methods in which the target material is evaporated from a condensed
phase to vapor and then transmitted to an ambient substrate for
condensation under a vacuum in a low-pressure gas or plasma
environment. PVD is a versatile technique to prepare thin films of
pure metals, alloys or compounds.17 As for catalyst immobilization,
this technique has been primarily utilized to prepare palladium (Pd)
or Pd alloy membranes for hydrogenation and dehydrogenation
processes.18 For example, Lin et al. used the magnetron sputtering
technique to coat a g-Al2O3 membrane with 75% Pd–25% Ag alloy and
Pd(II) acetylacetonate,19 which is atomized by collisions of Ar plasma
and deposited on the ceramic membrane. The catalyst film thickness
on the porous substrates was adjusted by changing substrate tem-
perature (25–400 1C), plasma power (10–60 W) and coating time
(5–20 min). By contrast, Dittmeyer et al. prepared Pd composite
membranes by evaporating Pd in a vacuum chamber and sub-
sequently condensing it on porous stainless steel tubes inside a
vacuum chamber.20
(ii) Dip Coating
Dip coating involves the immersion of a membrane substrate into a
solution containing coating substances, followed by removal and
drying of the coated substrate. The dip coating technique can be
normally divided into five separate steps: immersion, start-up,
deposition, drainage and evaporation, with the first three steps
sequential and last two concomitant. The coating layer thickness can
318
Chapter 11

be controlled by adjusting diﬀerent process parameters such as
immersion time, withdrawal speed, solution composition, dipping
cycles. For example, the photocatalytic membranes were fabricated by
dip-coating a TiO2 sol onto a filtration membrane, followed by cal-
cination to achieve a desired TiO2 crystalline phase.21 Dionysious
et al. prepared a TiO2/Al2O3 composite photocatalytic membrane by
dip coating organic/inorganic sol containing isopropanol, acetic acid,
Tween 80 and titanium tetraisopropoxide, followed by calcination at
500 1C.22
Organic catalysts such as Amberlyst 15,23 styrene–divinylbenzene
copolymer,24 and perfluorosulfonic acid25 have also been successfully
immobilized on membrane substrate by dip coating. For example,
Benes et al. prepared a dip coating suspension with Amberlyst 15,
Aculyn (as rheology modifier) in water, which was used to immerse
(16 mm s1) a pre-wetted PVA pervaporation membrane for 2 min
before drying in air at 90 1C for 2 h.23 An Amberlyst 15 layer (B25 mm
of thickness) was coated on the PVA membrane surface. This layer
oﬀered catalytic activity on conventional pervaporation membranes
and simultaneously enabled esterification catalysis and water re-
moval for superior ester yield.
(iii) Spin Coating
The spin coating technique uses centrifugal forces to spread uni-
formly thin films on flat substrates. In particular, a small amount of
coating substances in a liquid form is applied on the substrate center,
which is fixed on a spinning device, followed by a high-speed rotation
of the substrate to spread the coating substances. A number of
studies have successfully used the spin coating technique for catalytic
membrane fabrication.26 For example, Godbert et al. fabricated a
porous TiO2/a-alumina membrane by first spin coating a TiO2 pre-
cursor solution at 1000 rpm for 1 min on an a-Al2O3 membrane,27
followed by calcination at over 350 1C. A uniformly TiO2-coated alu-
mina surface was obtained, facilitating a promoted pollutant ad-
sorption on the membrane surface (a key requirement for enhanced
catalytic degradation). The membrane showed eﬀective methylene
blue degradation under sunlight. In a more recent example, Ma et al.
prepared a CuFe2O4-decorated ceramic membrane for treating humic
acid via peroxymonosulfate (PMS) activation.28
(iv) Casting
Casting is one of the most commonly used techniques to produce
flat polymeric membranes29 and has also been extensively applied for
catalyst coating on dense or porous membrane substrates. A number
of studies utilized the casting technique to coat homogeneous cata-
lysts on membrane substrates.30 For instance, Li et al. developed a
catalytically active composite membrane for esterification enhance-
ment in pervaporation reactors.30 They cast a catalytic solution con-
taining poly (styrene sulfonic acid) (catalyst) and poly (vinyl alcohol)
Hybrid Ceramic Membrane Catalytic Ozonation
319

(hosting polymer) onto a traditional pervaporation membrane and
evaporated it in atmosphere at room temperature to form the cata-
lytic membrane via a vapor-induced phase separation mechanism.
The dense composite membrane combined the catalytic activity and
pervaporation separation functions and enhanced the reactant (pro-
pionic acid) conversion rate to 92.8% within 12 h. Alternatively, the
casting technique can also be used to immobilize heterogeneous
catalyst such as solid acid24 and enzymes.31 For example, Qing et al.
cast a solution with lipase suspension, poly (vinyl alcohol) (PVA) and
glutaraldehyde (act as cross-linking agent) onto a PVA pervaporation
membrane32 and immersed the solution into a coagulation bath (an
ammonium sulfate aqueous solution) for nonsolvent-induced phase
separation.
(v) Filtration
Filtration for catalyst immobilization refers to the process where a
catalyst-loaded solution or suspension is filtrated through a porous
membrane, during which the catalysts are attached on the membrane
surface33 or the inner channel.34 Either covalent bonding or non-
covalent bonding (hydrophobic/hydrophilic or electrostatic inter-
actions) exists between the catalyst and the membrane surface. Owing
to its facile and straightforward operation, filtration has widely been
applied to immobilize either homogeneous or heterogeneous cata-
lysts on both inorganic and polymeric porous membranes for water
treatment. For example, Molinari et al. deposited photocatalysts
(TiO2) on a flat sheet polyacrylonitrile membrane by filtrating the
TiO2 aqueous suspension.33 The resulting membrane removed
40 mg L1 4-nitrophenol after 5–6 h in a membrane photoreactor.
However, poor mechanical stability was also evidenced due to non-
covalent bonding of the photocatalyst with the polyacrylonitrile
membrane. Likewise, Qi et al. filtrated a Cu-MOF nanosheets catalyst
suspension onto a commercial nylon porous membrane,35 followed
by reducing the membrane with an aqueous NaBH4 solution to form
a Cu/Cu2O/nylon composite catalytic membrane for continuous p-
nitrophenol reduction. The membrane eﬃciently converted 495% of
p-nitrophenol to p-aminophenol in 8 h without obvious membrane
structure changes or catalyst deactivation.
(vi) Layer-by-layer Assembly
Layer-by-layer (LBL) assembly was first proposed by R. K. Iler to
prepare multilayered films via alternating coatings of oppositely
charged colloidal particles36 and now has evolved to be a pervasive
technique for coating substrates with nanoparticles, colloids, poly-
mers, biomolecules with superior versatility and controllability.37 LBL
assembly has also been widely used to fabricate catalytic membrane
for a variety of applications, including energy production,38 water
treatment39 and chemical synthesis.40 Remarkably, several studies
explored the use of LBL assembly to fabricate membrane electrodes
320
Chapter 11

for membrane fuel cell applications. Membrane electrodes have at-
tractive features in the facile incorporation of conductive nanofillers,
high ionic contents, conformal coating of surfaces with any complex
geometry and nanoscale control of film thickness and porosity. Dif-
ferent nanoparticles (Au,41 Pt,42 Pd,43 SiO2,44 ZrO2
45) carbon nano-
tubes (single wall46 and multiwall47) have been successfully employed
on Nafion membranes through LBL assembly for promising proton
exchange membrane fuel cell development.
11.3.1.2
Chemical Coating Techniques
(i) Coupling Agents
‘‘Coupling agents’’ refers to any chemicals that can act as ‘‘mo-
lecular bridges’’ to establish strong chemical binding or adhesion
between dissimilar coating materials and substrate materials.48
Polydopamine (PDA) is the most notable coupling agent in recent
years for catalyst coating.49 PDA is a novel bio-inspired material
containing catechol, amine and imine functional groups, which of-
fers attractive mussel-like adhesive properties and can firmly attach
to diﬀerent substrates with robust binding strength. PDA was first
reported by Messersmith et al.,50 who reported that dopamine
mimics the composition of adhesive proteins and is able to self-
polymerize in water to form adhesive PDA thin films. The PDA film
from this pioneering work provides a versatile platform for secondary
reaction and has attracted considerable research interest for surface
modification.51
Silane coupling agent (SCA) has a general formula, RnSiX(4-n),
where R is a non-hydrolytic organic group that reacts with diﬀerent
polymers,52 and X is a hydrolytic group with good reactivity with
hydroxyl groups on inorganic surfaces such as metals, ceramics,
oxides and semiconductors. The binding principle follows three basic
steps: First is hydrolysis of the X group into hydroxyl group, which
then forms a hydrogen bond with a hydroxyl group on the inorganic
surface or is dehydrated into an ether bond. Finally, the R group is
bonded to the organic materials. Sun et al. coated goethite (a-FeOOH)
catalysts on a zirconia/titanium-aluminum membrane with the bis-
(3-[trimethylsilyl]-propyl]-tetrasulfide coupling agent to prepare a
photo-Fenton ceramic membrane.53 The results showed that the
photo-Fenton reaction slowed down membrane fouling. At the same
time, the degradation rate of HA and BSA in the light Fenton flat
ceramic membrane in 60 min were 76% and 86%, respectively.
(ii) Sol–Gel Method
The solution–gelation (sol–gel) technique is a well-studied techni-
que to synthesize solid materials from small molecules, which gen-
erally starts with the hydrolysis of a liquid precursor (sol), which
undergoes poly-condensation to form a gel.54 A typical sol–gel process
Hybrid Ceramic Membrane Catalytic Ozonation
321

consists of four stages: (1) hydrolysis, (2) monomers condensation to
form chains and ions, (3) growth of particles and (4) tight aggregation
of the polymer.55 For example, Mamane et al. coated N-doped TiO2
photocatalytic film on commercial a-Al2O3 photocatalytic membranes
using the sol–gel technique for concurrent bottom-up filtration and
photocatalytic oxidation.56 About eighty percent of the membrane
surface was covered by the N-doped TiO2 film, which unfortunately
reduced over 50% of the permeability for membrane substrates.
(iii) Chemical Vapor Deposition
Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) is a popular surface coating
technique for a variety of applications, during which a volatile coating
precursor is vaporized in an inert atmosphere by heat, light and/or
plasma discharge and is then reacted on a solid substrate surface to
produce a desired deposit.57 CVD has been one of the most promising
and well-studied methods for deposition of catalysts onto mem-
branes.58 For example, noble metal catalytic films including pal-
ladium, rhodium, ruthenium, iridium and platinum acetylacetonates
were deposited on porous inorganic membranes for various re-
actions,17 such as methane steam reforming,59 hydrogenation and
dehydrogenation,60
hydroxylation
of
benzene,61
and
water–gas
shift.62 Itoh et al. reported a catalytic palladium membrane fabri-
cated by CVD for reductive oxidation of benzene to phenol.61
(iv) Surface Grafting
Surface grafting is a chemical coating method that involves the
covalent conjugation of polymer chains (in some cases a small mo-
lecular chain) to a target surface to change its surface properties. For
example, Szekely et al. reported the surface covalent grafting of organ
catalysts on nanofiltration (NF) membranes for synthesis-separation
coupling.63 They first synthesized an azido-derivatized cinchona
squaramide bifunctional catalyst for asymmetric Michael additions
and then grafted it on a polybenzimidazole- (PBI-) based NF mem-
brane through an azide–alkyne cycloaddition. The catalysis/separ-
ation integrated membrane realized 98% product recovery and 99%
unreacted substrate recovery, respectively, for the asymmetric Mi-
chael and azaMichael reactions of 1,3-dicarbonyl and pyrazole, indole
and triazole derivatives to b-nitrostyrene.
(v) In-situ Growth
In-situ growth of coating materials on specific substrate surfaces has
become increasingly popular due to the generation of uniform surface
coating with tunable properties (thickness, porosity and catalyst
morphology). It inherently eliminates the daunting aggregation prob-
lem that most heterogeneous catalysts (especially small particles) face
in many other coating processes. In-situ growth is generally realized by
surface chemical reactions (e.g. hydrothermal, catalytic initiation and
anodic oxidation), during which a growth center (seed) is usually re-
quired as a core on the surface followed by crystallization on the
322
Chapter 11

matrix. For example, Zhang et al. deposited titanium silicalite-1 zeolite
films on porous a-Al2O3 tubes using nano-sized silicalite-1 particles as
seeds by a hydrothermal growth technique.64 The catalytic membrane
was successfully used in a phenol hydroxylation reaction. More re-
cently, Zhan et al. synthesized Mn3O4 nanodots (Mn(CH3COO)24H2O
as precursor) on graphitic carbon nitride membrane support through
hydrothermal synthesis for catalytic degradation of 4-chlorophenol.65
11.3.2
Reaction Mechanism
The reaction mechanism of catalytic membrane is closely related to the type
of catalytic membrane, such as metal-based catalytic membrane, carbon-
based catalytic membrane and so on. But in the final analysis, the reaction
mechanism of catalytic membrane is still the electron transfer mechanism,
leading to the formation of reactive oxygen species (ROS). For instance, Lee
et al. proposed the reaction mechanism of heterogeneous catalytic ozonation
by cerium oxide–modified CM. In the presence of water, the surface of the
metal oxides is generally covered with surface hydroxyl groups (S–OH) due to
the interaction between water molecules and the metal oxide surface. The
protonated surface hydroxyl groups (S–OH2
1) could serve as Brønsted acid
sites for reaction with O3(aq) and H2O (eqn (11.1) and (11.2)) to produce HO
and HO3. The HO generated could further react with O3 and initiate the
chain reactions (eqn (11.3)–(11.5)) in bulk solution to generate O2. The
O2 could then react with O3 and H1 to generate HO3 (eqn (11.6) and
(11.7)), whereby the HO3 generated could further self-decompose into HO
(eqn (11.8)). Besides, cerium oxide exhibited high oxygen storage capacity
with rapid formation and elimination of oxygen vacancy defects. The O3(aq)
could be adsorbed and accept electron transferred from the surface Ce31,
producing O3 as a precursor of HO generation (eqn (11.7) and (11.8)).
Then the Ce41 could be reduced back to Ce31 via electron transfer from Olat,
creating oxygen vacancies for oxygen species adsorption.8
S–OH2
1 þ O3-S–OH1 þ HO3
(11.1)
S–OH1 þ H2O-S–OH2
1 þ OH
(11.2)
HO þ O3-HO4
(11.3)
HO4- HO2 þ O2
(11.4)
HO22H1 þ O2

(11.5)
O2
 þ O3-O3
 þ O2
(11.6)
O3 þ H12HO3
(11.7)
HO32HO þ O2
(11.8)
In addition, Song et al. proposed the reaction mechanism of carbon-based
catalytic membrane.66
Hybrid Ceramic Membrane Catalytic Ozonation
323

(1) The role of oxygen-containing functional groups (eqn (11.9)–(11.16)):
6Carbon–(HCQO) þ 2O3-6Carbon–(COOH)
(11.9)
2Carbon–(COOH) þ O3 þH2O-2Carbon þ2H2O2 þ 2O2
(11.10)
O3 þ Carbon–OH-O3–Carbon þ HO
(11.11)
O3–Carbon-O–Carbon þ O2
(11.12)
O3 þ O–Carbon-O2
 þ Carbon þ O2
(11.13)
Carbon-p þ 2H2O-Carbon–H3O1 þ OH
(11.14)
O3 þ OH-HO2 þ O2

(11.15)
HO2-O2
 þ H1
(11.16)
(2) The role of free electrons (as shown in eqn (11.17)–(11.19)):
O3 þ e-O3

(11.17)
O3
 þ H1-HO3
(11.18)
HO3-O2 þ HO
(11.19)
As shown in Figure 11.2, these formed ROS could eﬀectively increase the
removal eﬃciency of target pollutants, resulting in reduced eﬄuent toxicity.
Meanwhile, these formed ROS could eﬀectively eliminate the formation
membrane fouling. For inorganic membrane fouling, the degradation and
structural transformation of EfOM by these formed ROS decreased the
precipitation of Ca/Mg on the catalytic membrane surface. Also, the fouling
Figure 11.2
Reaction mechanism of catalytic membrane.
324
Chapter 11

layer became smoother after ROS treatment, which led to the hard formation
of inorganic membrane fouling on the surface. The crossflow velocity also
increased, which led to the decrease of concentration polarization, and the
inorganic membrane fouling was mitigated substantially (Figure 11.3).
For organic membrane fouling, high exposure to the catalytic layer on the
CM surface led to the formation of considerable amounts of OH via rapid
catalytic ozone decomposition, and the fouled membrane was cleaned
in situ. This superior in-situ interfacial catalytic activity enhanced the ozo-
nation eﬃciency in reversible membrane fouling, and OH species formed
close to contaminants were more likely to attack these molecules. This en-
hanced the alleviation of reversible membrane fouling. The OH species
produced in-situ on the CM surfaces/pores promoted in-situ attack of ir-
reversible foulants, which led to their release and degradation. Therefore,
irreversible membrane fouling was greatly decreased (Figure 11.4).
11.3.3
Fe-based Catalytic Ceramic Membranes
11.3.3.1
Preparation and Performance of Membranes
Park et al.67 proposed the active ceramic membrane (RM) was synthesized by
dipping titanium-dioxide-and-zirconia-mixed ceramic membrane into dis-
persed iron oxide nanoparticle (IONS) solution and sintering at high tem-
perature. To evaluate catalytic ozonation in the hybrid ceramic membrane
process, pCBA removal tests were conducted using pCBA (1 mg L1) by a
hybrid ceramic membrane process with RM and CM. Using the crossflow
membrane filtration system, the system temperature was maintained at
20  1 1C, and the transmembrane pressure (TMP) and feed flow rate were
kept at 0.8 bar and 0.02 L min1, respectively. The RM-ozonation process
showed the highest pCBA removal eﬃciency (C/C0 ¼ 0.54) compared to those
in CM with ozonation process (C/C0 ¼ 0.72) and without ozonation process
(C/C0 ¼ 0.92), indicating that the surface-catalyzed reaction of ozone in the
presence of IONs on RM generates hydroxyl radicals. Cle´mentine et al.68
proposed that a ceramic commercial nanofilter with a very low molecular
weight cutoﬀof 200 Da was functionalized by sol–gel deposition of a me-
soporous maghemite (g-Fe2O3) thin layer. Preliminary experiments deter-
mined that the maximum temperature was usable for the thermal
strengthening of the catalytic layer without significant permeance change.
Permeation measurements were done both on pristine and on functiona-
lized membranes, with a transmembrane pressure equal to 10 bar and
continuous weighting of the collected permeate during 1 h. Experiments
were carried out with pCBA ([pCBA] ¼ 2 mmol L1) in the feed tank. The
concentration of the injected gaseous ozone wasB28 g Nm3. The dissolved
concentration of ozone in the transfer reactor and in all the experimental
setup was B3.5 mg O3 L1. To quantify the catalytic performance of the
functional membrane, the Rct value was determined by plotting the pCBA
elimination as a function of O3 exposure; as a reference, a configuration
Hybrid Ceramic Membrane Catalytic Ozonation
325

Figure 11.3
Mechanism of inorganic membrane fouling elimination. Adapted from ref. 15 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2020.
326
Chapter 11

without membrane was also implemented. In such a case, Rct was quite low
(2.581010). With the pristine membrane, the value of Rct increased to
4.261010. The pristine membrane thus exhibited a weak catalytic activity.
These results undoubtedly demonstrated the significant enhancement of the
catalytic ozonation due to the presence of the added mesoporous maghemite
thin layer.
11.3.3.2
Removal of DBP Precursors
Karnik et al.69 utilized the layer-by-layer technique to coat the membranes,
which made a ceramic membrane with catalytic performance by impreg-
nating the titanium dioxide ceramic membrane in ferric chloride solution
and subjecting it to calcination at 500 1C or 900 1C. The experiments were
performed with a membrane crossflow velocity of 0.6 m s1; a constant water
temperature of 20 1C was maintained using a recirculating water bath. The
ozonation–membrane filtration experiments were carried out at TMP 0.5 bar
and with gaseous ozone concentration and flow rate kept at 2.5 g m3 and
100 mL min1. Water samples were dosed with a chlorine concentration that
ensured a residual chlorine concentration in the range of 0.5 mg L1 after
48 h of incubation at room temperature. The concentrations of total triha-
lomethanes (THMs) and haloacetic acids (HAAs) were reduced by up to 90%
and up to 85%, respectively, with ozonation combined with an iron oxide–
coated 5 kDa membrane. With the use of a 5 kDa MWCO (molecular weight
cutoﬀ) membrane, coated 20 times and sintered at 900 1C, the concen-
trations of TTHMs and HAAs after chlorination were approximately 25–30
mg L1 and 20–25 mg L1, respectively. Even better-quality water was achieved
using a 5 kDa MWCO membrane, coated 40 times and sintered at 900 1C.
Figure 11.4
Mechanism of organic membrane fouling elimination. Adapted from
ref. 15 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2020.
Hybrid Ceramic Membrane Catalytic Ozonation
327

After chlorination, the concentration of TTHMs was approximately 15–20
mg L1, and the concentration of HAAs was approximately 7–15 mg L1. Byun
et al. prepared the active ceramic membranes by the layer-by-layer assembly
method to deposit iron oxide nanoparticles according to previous reports69
and proposed that the removal of the trihalomethanes (THMs) and HAAs
precursors by the hybrid ozonation filtration system be studied to gain a
better understanding of how the coating of the membrane aﬀected the
performance of the system.70 Simulated distribution system (SDS) THMs and
SDS HAAs were measured after chlorination to simulate the formation of
these DBPs in the distribution system. Water samples were dosed with
chlorine at a concentration ensuring that the residual chlorine concen-
tration was in the range 0.5–2 mg L1 after 48 h incubation at room tem-
perature. With the use of a 5 kDa MWCO membrane, coated 40 times and
sintered at 900 1C, the addition of ozone significantly enhanced the removal
of THMS precursors, and the removal eﬃciency was improved by nearly 10%
compared with the ceramic membrane without iron oxide nanoparticle
coating. At the same time, compared with the uncoated ceramic membrane,
the ceramic membrane coated with iron oxide particles improved the HAA
removal eﬀect by about 50%. Karnik et al. proposed that the membrane be
coated with colloidal iron oxide, prepared by Sorum’s method and used for
coating the membranes following the layer-by-layer technique developed by
the previous research reported. The membranes were coated with 40 layers
of iron oxide nanoparticles and sintered at 900 1C. A fresh stock solution of
SA (20 mg L1) was prepared daily for the experiments, under the operating
conditions with TMP of 5104 Pa, water temperature of 20 1C and ozone gas
flow rate of 2.5 g m3. The concentrations of the by-products are reported as
a total by-products concentration derived by adding up the molar concen-
trations of the individual compounds. The ratio of the concentration of the
by-products formed to the initial salicylic acid (SA) concentration (CBy-pro
ducts/CSAacid) represents the generation of by-products. At pH 2.5–3.0, SA by-
products were not detected in the treated water from either ozonation or
membrane filtration alone. However, with the hybrid process, SA by-
products were formed at low concentrations with CBy-products/CSAacido0.2.
This supports the proposed hypothesis that the decomposition of ozone on
the membrane surface leads to the formation of hydroxyl radicals, which
react with SA to form the observed by-products. With the hybrid process
using uncoated/unsintered or coated/sintered membranes, the CBy-products/
CSAacid ratio wasB0.55 andB0.75 after 240 min, respectively. With ozonation
alone at pH 8.1, the ratio was B0.33.
11.3.3.3
Membrane Fouling
P. Hosik et al.67 designed flux decline tests that were conducted using Su-
wannee River NOM (SRNOM) contained in water by hybrid ceramic mem-
brane processes with reactive ceramic membrane (RM) and CM to observe
the changes in the permeate flux against filtration time. A flat-sheet-type of
328
Chapter 11

cell for crossflow filtration was used in this study. The flux of a CM process
without ozonation using SRNOM as a feed water source decreased by 30% of
the initial flux during 360 min of filtration. However, there was a noticeable
enhancement in the membrane flux when continuous ozonation was ap-
plied to the hybrid ceramic membrane process (CM-ozonation process: 25%,
RM-ozonation process: 15%); thus it is clear that the hybrid ceramic mem-
brane process was found to be very eﬀective in controlling NOM fouling.
These results indicate that the hybrid ceramic membrane process with
continuous ozonation reduced fouling through the decomposition/min-
eralization of NOM and also by altering the characteristics of NOM due to
the reaction of NOM with ozone and/or hydroxyl radicals produced by the
catalytic decomposition of ozone by IONs on the RM surface. The fouling
behavior of membrane surface was further studied by Byun et al.70 The fo-
uled membranes were cleaned with DDI water using ozonation filtration
with 10 g m3 gaseous ozone at a flow rate of 10 mL min1 for 3–5 h until the
initial clean water flux was restored. Experiments were conducted with and
without ozone under the conditions of feed TOC of 10.4 mg C L1, TMP of
1.24 bar, with the initial flux 90  4 L m2 h1, crossflow velocity of
0.47 m s1, temperature of 22.3 1C and ozone dosage 1.67 mg O3 s1. In all
cases, the flux rapidly declined over the first 1–2 h due to fouling. No re-
covery of the permeate flux was observed without ozone. In the presence of
ozone, the permeate flux begins to increase after approximately 2 h. This
recovery is believed to be due to the catalytic ozonation of the foulants at the
membrane surface.
11.3.4
Mn-based Catalytic Ceramic Membranes
11.3.4.1
Preparation and Performance of Membranes
Ceramic membranes can be used in combination with ozone, as they are
resistant to ozone.71 Coating the ceramic membranes with catalytic ma-
terials has been shown to enhance their performance when used in com-
bination with ozone. Manganese-containing catalysts have been shown to
increase the rate of decomposition of ozone. Manganese oxide is also known
to catalyze the oxidation of organic compounds by ozone.72 Thus coating a
membrane with manganese oxide is expected to produce a catalytic surface,
which in the presence of ozone will reduce fouling. Corneal et al.73 prepared
manganese oxide (MnOx) nanoparticles via the ozonation of MnCl2 or the
mixing of KMnO4 and allylamine hydrochloride, then used a novel layer-by-
layer (LbL) technique to coat the ceramic membranes with MnOx nano-
particles. The results indicated that when the membranes were used in a
hybrid ozonation and membrane filtration system, the coated membrane
removed 56% of the organic carbon (OC), whereas the uncoated membrane
only removed 43% of the OC. Similarly, Byun et al.74 also employed the LbL
technique to produce catalytic membranes by coating commercial ceramic
ultrafiltration membranes with MnOx nanoparticles. The performance of the
Hybrid Ceramic Membrane Catalytic Ozonation
329

manganese oxide–coated membrane was superior to that of the other
membranes tested. It showed the least degree of fouling and the greatest
reduction of TOC in the permeate. The low degree of fouling observed with
this membrane is due to the fact that its surface is negatively charged.
In Cheng et al.’s study,75 commercial available MnO2 (C-MnO2), KMnO4
(M-MnO2) and Na2S2O3 (S–MnO2) were utilized to prepared MnO2, respect-
ively, and three types of MnO2 incorporated ceramic membranes were fur-
ther synthesized by vacuum drying, which was employed in catalytic
ozonation system toward p-chloronitrobenzene removal. And the 48.6%,
51.7%, 61.5% and 68.0% of the p-CNB removal eﬃciencies were achieved in
the virgin, C-MnO2, M-MnO2 and S–MnO2 incorporated membranes in the
hybrid ozone-membrane process, respectively. Obviously, the presence of
MnO2 enhanced the catalytic ozonation performance of p-CNB degradation.
In addition, a kind of citrate sol–gel-assisted wet impregnation method was
utilized by Lee et al.8 to deposit MnOx nanocatalyst into the ceramic mem-
branes (CMs). Subsequently, the performance of the obtained catalytic cer-
amic membranes (CCMs) that were used in a custom-made hybrid oxidation
separation technology (HOST) system was investigated by comparing the
degradation of bisphenol A (BPA). There were relatively low adsorptions of
MPs (o5%) with insignificant TOC removal observed for the original CM.
However, Mn-CCM was able to remove up to 55% BPA by adsorption
throughout 1 h of operation, resulting in 11% TOC removal.
Nowadays, asymmetric multichannel tubular ceramic membranes domin-
ate over other membrane geometries. Flat-sheet ceramic membranes are
mostly configured in immersed units for industrialization, facilitating the
replacement of the membrane elements and membrane cleaning through air
sparging.76 Flat disk membranes find limited applications in the laboratory
due to their low packing density; thus their configuration needs further design
and improvement. He et al.77 integrated 3D MnO2 hollow microsphere ozone
catalysis with flat-plate membrane filtration. In their work, the polyvinylidene
fluoride (PVDF) flat-plate membrane module was submerged in the slurry
catalytic ozonation reactor to form a heterogeneous catalytic ozonation/
membrane filtration (HCOMF) reactor for treating wastewater containing bi-
sphenol A (BPA). The influences of permeation flux and humic acid (HA) on
BPA degradation eﬃciency were analyzed. Here, 15 L m2 h1 was selected as
the optimal permeation flux after considering combined factors such as water
treatment capacity and treatment cost. Compared to the BPA degradation
eﬃciency of the ozonation/membrane filtration (OMF) system (68.3%), the
final degradation eﬃciency of BPA in HCOMF system was 92.2%, with an
increase of 23.9%. Furthermore, the presence of HA in HCOMF system could
enhance the degradation eﬃciency of BPA.
11.3.4.2
Removal of DBP Precursors
Since chlorine residual must be provided in the distribution system to
control the biostability of water, the formation of disinfection by-products
330
Chapter 11

(DBPs), undesired compounds, is unavoidable. Among several hundred of
DBP compounds, THMs and HAAs are two major groups found in drinking
water.78 Byun et al.74 has evaluated the formation of THMs and HAAs in the
permeate samples under conditions that simulate those typically found in
water distribution systems. The addition of ozone clearly enhanced the re-
moval of THM precursors, except in the case of the uncoated (TiO2) mem-
brane. The greatest removal of THM precursors was observed for the
membrane coated 20 times with MnOx nanoparticles. The removal of HAA
precursors was greatest for the membrane coated 40 times with MnOx
nanoparticles. And in this study, although up to 39% removal of THM pre-
cursors and 55% removal of HAA precursors were achieved, Byun et al. did
not meet the regulatory limits for THMs and HAAs after chlorination using
the membrane.
11.3.4.3
Membrane Fouling
One of the most significant challenges to the operation of membrane fil-
tration for the treatment of surface water is the fouling of membranes by
natural organic matter. Manganese oxides are also an eﬀective catalyst for
the decomposition of ozone and the oxidation of organic compounds by
ozone. As such, the application of a manganese oxide coating to a mem-
brane should produce a membrane that is capable of degrading foulants
when used in a hybrid ozonation-membrane system. Corneal et al.79 fab-
ricated Mn oxide–coated catalytic membranes for hybrid ozonation-
membrane filtration and studied the eﬀect of the number of coating lay-
ers on the structure of the resulting catalytic coating and the filtration
performance of the coated membrane. They reported that when the coated
membranes were used in the hybrid system, the initial flux decrease that
occurred over the first hour was followed a steady recovery of the flux. The
membrane coated with 20 layers achieved approximately a 95% recovery
after 5.5 h, while the membrane coated with 30 layers achieved approxi-
mately an 85% recovery after 5.5 h, and the membrane coated with 40
layers achieved approximately an 80% recovery after 5.5 h. The improved
flux recovery for the coated membranes, as compared to the uncoated
membrane, is the result of the catalytic activity of the coating, which results
in the improved oxidation of the foulants deposited on the membrane
surface. Moreover, the phenomena of membrane fouling in the membrane
filtration (MF) and HCOMF system was also studied by He et al.77 It could
be seen that the membrane resistance caused by the membrane itself (Rm),
caused by pore (Rp) and caused by cake layer (Rc) in a membrane filtration
(MF) system was calculated to be 2.97, 0.15 and 0.6108 m1, respectively,
accounting for 80%, 4% and 16% of the total membrane resistance (Rt)
respectively. By contrast, in a HCOMF system, the membrane resistance
of Rp and Rc decreased to 0.03 and 0.11108 m1, respectively, with a
proportion of 1% and 4% to Rt, respectively. The results reveal that mem-
brane fouling can be solved in the HCOMF system. Simultaneously, the
Hybrid Ceramic Membrane Catalytic Ozonation
331

contact angle of PVDF membrane after treatment in an MF system and
MnO2-PVDF membrane after treatment in a HCOMF system were 69.41 and
55.91, respectively, revealing that the hydrophilicity of MnO2-PVDF mem-
brane was enhanced confirming the preferable property of membrane
fouling control.
11.3.5
Ce-based Catalytic Ceramic Membranes
11.3.5.1
Preparation and Performance of Membranes
In Jie et al.,8 cerium oxide (CeOx) was deposited on catalytic ceramic mem-
branes (CCMs) that were fabricated via citrate a sol–gel-assisted wet im-
pregnation method. Ce-CCM was selected to study the eﬀect of catalyst
loading on MP degradation, owing to its better mineralization ability and
stability. The removals of individual MPs and their combined TOC were
removed by the hybrid process with HRT of 13.7 s. There were relatively low
adsorptions of MPs (o5%) with insignificant TOC removal observed for both
the original CM and 1Ce-CCM. 1Ce-CCM exhibited stronger mineral-
ization capability with B38% TOC removal with 13.7 s contact time,
throughout 1 h of operation. It has been reported that Ce/MCM-41 was more
active than Mn/MCM-41 in oxalic acid degradation via catalytic ozonation in
a batch study conducted by Jeirani and Soltan.80 By repeating the impreg-
nation cycle, higher catalyst loadings of Ce-CCMs were obtained, which
introduced higher densities of surface-active sites across the Ce-CCMs for
catalytic reaction. The O3(aq) decomposition was improved from 86% to
complete decomposition when increasing the number of impregnation cycle
from 1 to 5.
11.3.5.2
Membrane Fouling
Furthermore, AFM was used to characterize the topography and surface
roughness of the CCMs. The three-dimensional AFM surface images were
made of the outer surface of CCMs, and the results showed that Ce-CCMs
surface topographies were similar to that of the original CM. The average
surface roughness obtained from AFM also showed no statistical diﬀerence
in the surface roughness before and after impregnation. These results
demonstrated that the impregnation of metal oxides did not significantly
alter the membrane surface morphologies and porous structure. Notably,
both metal oxide–impregnated CCMs showed improved surface hydro-
philicity over the original CM as the water contact angles decreased in both
cases. Furthermore, with the increase in catalyst loading of Ce-CCM from 1
to 5 impregnation cycles, the surface hydrophilicity of Ce-CCM was en-
hanced, whereby the water contact angle decreased from 26.0 to 23.3 1C.
Meanwhile, the permeability of the 1Ce-CCM was maintained at 495% of
the initial permeability in each filtration cycle, indicating insignificant
membrane fouling during the hybrid process.
332
Chapter 11

11.3.6
Cu-based Catalytic Ceramic Membranes
11.3.6.1
Preparation and Performance of Membranes
Scaratti et al.81 prepared the CuO suspension and deposited the CuO layer
into the CM with a vacuum pump. The catalytic ceramic membrane of
stable CuO deposition was further synthesized on the ceramic membrane
by heat treatment. The aim was to evaluate 1,4-dioxane mineralization on
applying an innovative hybrid treatment coupling catalytic ozonation and
ultrafiltration using a CuO-coated ceramic membrane. The tests were
performed in a closed (deadend filtration with recirculation) or open sys-
tem (deadend filtration with no recirculation). The operation pressure was
0.25 bar. The TOC and 1,4-dioxane removal (municipal water containing
1,4-dioxane) using the 0.90 mg cm2 CuO-coated CM or CM in the presence
of ozone. As expected, the CuO coating promoted both the mineralization
and 1,4-dioxane removal, since the noncatalytic ozonation of this organic
compound is slow at acid pH values.82 In addition, the catalyst loading
influenced the performance significantly, and the CM coated with 0.9 mg
cm2 of CuO showed the best performance due to the increase in the active
component content. The 0.9 mg cm2 coated CM increased the mineral-
ization and 1,4-dioxane degradation eﬃciency by 11.4% and 45%, re-
spectively, when compared with the CM. The pseudo first-order kinetics
constants of 1,4-Dioxane were determined; the pseudo first-order kinetics
constants for 1,4-dioxane degradation and mineralization increased by
factors of 4.21 and 2.98, respectively, when compared with the uncoated
hybrid process. When comparing the results obtained for 1,4-dioxane di-
luted in the WTP water and in deionized water, it was noticed that the
highest 1,4-dioxane removal was obtained for the 1,4-dioxane solution in
deionized water after 360 min of reaction. When the ozone concentration
reached the steady state, the reactions followed second-order kinetics; the
second-order kinetic constants for 1,4-dioxane removal and TOC removal
increased by factors of 8.19 and 5.78, respectively, when compared with the
uncoated CM-hybrid process. An increase in the catalyst load on the CM
surface favored the decomposition of ozone as shown by the lower equi-
librium concentration of ozone in the system. The enhanced production of
free radicals increased the removal of 1,4-dioxane and its products in CO2
and water.
11.3.6.2
Membrane Fouling
Further, the eﬀect of ozone on the permeate flux for the hybrid system using
the uncoated CM and CuO-coated CM in a closed system was studied. In the
absence of ozone, the permeability declined rapidly during the first 180 min
for the uncoated CM and the 0.9 mg cm2 CuO-coated CM, with no sig-
nificant diﬀerence between them. In this stage, a fouling cake begins to form
at the membrane surface. After 180 min, in a closed system, all of the fou-
lants are attached to the membrane. The total amount of foulant reduced the
Hybrid Ceramic Membrane Catalytic Ozonation
333

flux to 60% of the initial value. Modifying CM with CuO did not change the
CM permeability, in agreement with reports in the literature. Meanwhile, the
eﬀect of the ozone flow rate (0.064 m3 h1) on the permeate flow was also
researched. Initially, the permeate flux through CuO-coated or uncoated
membrane decreases due to the fouling eﬀect. However, the permeate flow
through the 0.9 mg cm2 CuO-coated CM was completely reestablished after
60 min (J/J0 ¼ 1), while reestablishing the permeate flow of the uncoated CM
is not complete even after 360 min. These results confirmed that the fouling
caused by NOM and 1,4-dioxane in the municipal water is eﬃciently avoided
and or decreased by applying ozone dissolved in the water. In addition,
the permeation flux and fouling resistance of coated and uncoated films in
the absence and presence of ozone were compared in the open system. The
membrane fouling in the continuous experiment was expected to be more
serious than that of the closed system. However, the values of J/J0 after
180 min and absence of ozone in the closed system (J/J0 ¼ 0.625) are quite
similar to that measured in the open system (J/J0 ¼ 0.633), within the ex-
perimental error (5%). In the absence of ozone, the permeability declined
rapidly during the first 180 min for the uncoated and 0.9 mg cm2 CuO-
coated CM, with no significant diﬀerence between them. However, when the
ozone generator was turned on, the permeate flux recovered faster for the
0.9 mg cm2 CuO-coated CM when compared with the uncoated CM.
11.3.7
Hybrid Metal-oxide-based Catalytic Ceramic
Membranes
11.3.7.1
MnO2–Co3O4 Coated Ceramic Membrane
Guo et al. used a layer-by-layer technology to coat the surface of ceramic
membrane with hybrid MnO2–Co3O4 nanoparticles.83 The uncoated ceramic
membrane showed only slight activity as increased eﬃciency as 4.2%,
compared with sole ozonation. The combination of coated ceramic mem-
brane with ozonation significantly increases the removal eﬃciency of BP-3
over sole ozonation (47.4%) and the process with an uncoated ceramic
membrane (51.6%). The coating times influenced the performance signifi-
cantly, and ceramic membrane coated with MnO2–Co3O4 nanoparticles 80
times (74.8%) shows the highest performance over that coated 30 times
(61.0%), 40 times (69.4%) and 60 times (72.3%). Increasing the coating times
increased the content of active components, resulting in the development of
the performance.
The researchers also investigated the eﬀects of process parameter and
water quality on BP-3 removal eﬃciency. BP-3 cannot be eﬃciently removed
at the ozone concentration of 0.5 mg L1, and its removal eﬃciency was only
55.8%. When the initial ozone concentration increased to 2.0 mg L1, the
degradation of BP-3 was significantly improved to 92.0%. The removal eﬃ-
ciency of BP-3 decreased as the initial concentration of BP-3 continually
increased over the range of 0.5–3.0 mg L1. The degradation of BP-3
334
Chapter 11

increased as water pH increased from 2 to 10. Both nitrate and phosphate
were not the quenchers of radicals, but they can be adsorbed on the surface
of metal oxide by the surface hydroxyl group.84 Phosphate and nitrate
have diﬀerent complexation aﬃnities for Men1 on the surface of metal
oxides. As the anion complexion capacity increased, the negative eﬀect on
catalytic ozonation increased. Generally, the adsorption capacity of metal
oxides for nitrate was much lower than that for phosphate as the pH varies
from 7 to 8,85,86 which might explain the insignificant influence on the
performance in the presence of nitrate. As the anion complexion capacity
increased, the negative eﬀect increased. The inhibiting eﬀect of phosphate
or nitrate on membrane catalytic ozonation indicates that the surface hy-
droxyl group of coated ceramic membrane plays a role in the catalytic ozo-
nation of BP-3. Additionally, the pore size of membrane aﬀected BP-3
degradation. The removal eﬃciency of BP-3 decreased from 76.0% (F30-19-
4-20) to 69.5% (F30-19-4-50), when membrane with pore size from 50.0 nm
to 20.0 nm was used. Smaller membrane pore size meant fewer MnO2–Co3O4
nanoparticles coating on ceramic membrane. The decreasing of activity
component resulted in the poor performance.
The stability and safety of MnO2–Co3O4 nanoparticles coating on a
ceramic membrane were estimated. No remarkable change was observed on
the catalytic activity of the MnO2–Co3O4 nanoparticles coating on the
ceramic membrane, after being used several times and the BP-3 removal
eﬃciency was the most decreased by only 6.0%, and the performance kept
similar after being used for successive seven runs. Moreover, the concen-
trations of leached metal irons from membrane into the solution along with
the successive runs were investigated. Only alumina, manganese and cobalt
ions leaching were observed. Alumina was not the dominating active com-
ponent and came from the support of the ceramic membrane. During the
first use, the concentration of leached ions showed the maximum and de-
creased as reaction time passed. However, the leached ions were too low
compared with the coated MnO2–Co3O4 nanoparticles. All concentrations of
leached ions were lower than the National Standards for the Integrated
Wastewater Discharge Standard in China (CMno 2 mg L1 and no limitation
for alumina and cobalt ions),87 indicating that the leaching of ions did not
show the negative eﬀect on the safety of membrane catalytic ozonation.
More importantly, the leached manganese and cobalt irons suggested no
catalytic activity for removing BP-3. The results suggested that the interface
reaction was the dominant one in the membrane catalytic ozonation pro-
cess. The leached ions did not show a homogeneous catalytic reaction.
Guo et al. also measured the acute toxicity of the BP-3 and the solution
after sole ozonation, as well as membrane catalytic ozonation process with
uncoated or coated ceramic membrane. The unicellular green microalgae
Chlorella vulgaris (C. vulgaris) was used to assay algae toxicity. The toxicity
assessment for EC50–72h of BP-3 (2.0 mg L1) without any oxidation was
64.73%. After sole ozonation, membrane catalytic ozonation with uncoated
or coated ceramic membrane, the EC50–72h value increased to 70.97%,
Hybrid Ceramic Membrane Catalytic Ozonation
335

71.99% and 74.99%, respectively. This increase of the EC50–72h value
indicated a decrease in toxicity. The membrane catalytic ozonation process
with
coated
ceramic
membrane
showed
the
best
detoxification
performance.
11.3.7.2
CuMn2O4 Coated Ceramic Membrane
Guo et al. coated CuMn2O4 particles on ceramic membrane and estimated
the eﬀect of the coating quantity of CuMn2O4 particles on BP-3 removal in
CMCO.88 The BP-3 removal eﬃciency with MCO using the virgin CM in-
creased by 4.2% as compared with that achieved with ozonation alone
(47.4%). The removal eﬃciency of BP-3 increased when the soaking time of
CM in CuMn2O4 precursor solution increased. The BP-3 removal increased
to 76.6% with the soaking time of 180 min. A longer soaking time led to
more active component adsorption onto the CM surface and a higher BP-3
removal.
The stability of the BP-3 degradation performance during lengthy re-
cycling was evaluated. The modified membrane coated with CuMn2O4 par-
ticles (f30-19-4-50) was reused 30 times (30 min per cycle). There were small
fluctuations in BP-3 removal eﬃciency, ranging from 75.3% to 68.8%. Ions
leaching results showed that alumina ions were relatively low and that the
concentration was stable at 11.0–12.0 mg L1. Leaching of the two active
components (i.e. copper and manganese ions) was higher, and their leaching
equilibrium concentrations were approximately 32.0 and 230.0 mg L1, re-
spectively. However, no catalytic activity and interfacial reactions dominated
BP-3 degradation in CMCO. From the AFM images and the roughness data, it
was clearly indicated that the CM membrane surface was smoother and that
the average roughness of used CM was slightly decreased from 187  17 nm
to 155  9 nm. These results all suggested that the modified CM with
CuMn2O4 particles could maintain a high BP-3 removal eﬃciency and
showed lower metal ion leaching and stable structure during lengthy oper-
ation. The cute toxicity of BP-3 and its solution after diﬀerent treatments
were compared to evaluate the detoxification ability of CMCO, showing that
coating CM with CuMn2O4 particles for catalytic ozonation significantly re-
duced the aqueous toxicity of BP-3 to the microorganisms.
Guo et al. also evaluated membrane fouling through normalized permeate
fluxes (J/J0), when the eﬄuent of a WWTP was used as the matrix
(Figure 11.5). Results showed that the normalized permeate fluxes (J/J0) of
the virgin and modified CM decreased significantly to 34.2% and 36.1%,
respectively, in the first operation cycle. The membrane fouling was
significantly reduced by adding ozone to the reaction. The normalized per-
meate flux of the virgin CM over 120 min stabilized at about 65.9%, indi-
cating that membrane fouling was well eliminated by the introduction of
ozone. This eﬀect was greater when CuMn2O4-coated CM was used, as the
normalized permeate flux was 95.8%. Eﬄuent organic matter (EfOM) in the
eﬄuent of WWTP could be degraded or changed by sole or catalytic
336
Chapter 11

ozonation; this decreased the fouling of virgin CM. The surface coating of
CuMn2O4 on CM greatly reduced membrane fouling because of surface
catalytic ozonation by CuMn2O4. A higher normalized permeate flux and
shorter recovery time were achieved with CuMn2O4-modified CM, suggesting
a greater enhancement in the antifouling ability.
PPCPs (2-hydroxy-4-methoxybenzophenone [BP-3], benzotriazole [BZA], 2-
phenylbenzimidazole-5-sulfonic acid [PBSA]) removal was investigated in
WWTP eﬄuent (Figure 11.5). The removal eﬃciencies of BP-3, BZA and PBSA
were 66.0%, 60.1% and 54.6%, respectively, in the sole ozonation process,
which increased to 74.5%, 70.1% and 65.1%, respectively, when the virgin
CM was combined with ozonation. The performance was significantly im-
proved as the modified CM was used. BP-3 and BZA could be completely
degraded. The removal eﬃciency of PBSA was 89.5% using modified CM
Figure 11.5
Performance of CMCO on water quality development (organic removal,
UV254 and DOC reduction) and permeate flux of the modified mem-
brane, in which the eﬄuent of the wastewater treatment plant was used
as
the
matrix.
Reaction
conditions:
[O3]0 ¼ 2.0
mg L1,
[BP-
3]0 ¼ 0.5 mg L1, [BZA]0 ¼ 0.5 mg L1, [PBSA]0 ¼ 0.5 mg L1, F30-19-5
and pH ¼ 7.11  0.19. Reproduced from ref. 5 with permission from
Elsevier, Copyright 2018.
Hybrid Ceramic Membrane Catalytic Ozonation
337

with ozonation after 120 min. Thus CuMn2O4-modified CM showed higher
catalytic ozonation ability due to the promotion of OH.
Furthermore, UV254 and DOC in permeate samples were used to evaluate
the performance of CMCO in EfOM degradation (Figure 11.5). Sole ozona-
tion did not eﬀectively degrade UV254 and DOC. The reductions in UV254 and
DOC obtained with the modified CM were slightly better than those ob-
tained with the unmodified membrane, indicating that surface coating with
CuMn2O4 particles did not improve the filtration performance. Adding
ozone into filtration showed a positive eﬀect on the reduction of UV254. The
removal eﬃciencies of UV254 in CMCO with virgin and modified CM were
69.9% and 81.1%, respectively. Use of a combination of ozone and the CM
coated with CuMn2O4 particles enhanced the degradation of EfOM con-
taining unsaturated groups from the large-molecular-weight compounds to
the small ones. The improvement in DOC removal achieved using the virgin
CM was insignificant. About 10% reduction of DOC was observed in the
modified CM. The combination of the ozone and surface particles coating
improved the removal of trace organic chemicals and EfOM.
11.3.8
Carbon-based Catalytic Ceramic Membranes
11.3.8.1
GO/rGO-based Catalytic Ceramic Membrane
Nitrogen-doped
reduced
graphene
oxide
(N-rGO)
is
a
type
of
two-
dimensional (2D) large-sized lateral-layered nanoporous carbon material.
In principle, this unique structural characteristic can reduce the influence of
the coating catalytic layer on CM permeability.89 Owing to diﬀerences in
electronegativity, incorporating nitrogen into the carbon framework results
in the redistribution of charge density and allows tailoring of the band
structure of sp2 carbons.90 This induces N-rGO to exhibit superior catalytic
performance without metal ion leaching. Furthermore, theoretical calcula-
tions have confirmed that edge quaternary N and adjacent C atoms exhibit
superior
adsorption
energy
(Eads,
eV)
toward
ozone
molecules.91
Therefore, N-rGO-based catalytic membranes show potential for improved
performance. A high-activity N-rGO was assembled uniformly by Song et al.92
and firmly on the surface of CM using pneumatic and vacuum suction
methods. N-rGO was coated on the inner or outer surfaces of the CM (N-rGO-
CM-I and N-rGO-CM-O, respectively) using pneumatic93 or vacuum suction
method,94 respectively.
(i) MPs Degradation
The formation of OH from the molecular ozone decay was sup-
ported by the degradation results for p-CBA, which is known to react
rapidly with OH (5109 M1 s1) but slowly with molecular ozone
(0.15 M1 s1).95 As expected, less than 90% of p-CBA was destroyed
by sole ozonation after 30 min (Figure 11.6). The extent of p-CBA
degradation after ozonation in the presence of CM was slightly higher
338
Chapter 11

than that obtained by conventional ozonation. This result indicated
that the presence of the CM did not significantly improve oxidation
eﬃciency. There was 97.72% or 99.83% p-CBA removed in catalytic
ozonation by rGO-CM-O and rGO-CM-I within 30 min; the mineral-
ization eﬃciency of p-CBA was enhanced from 39.5% to 51% or
55.8% after 2 h, respectively. N-doping significantly enhanced cata-
lytic activity. N-rGO-CM-O showed greater catalytic activity in catalytic
ozonation than rGO-CM-O, resulting in a p-CBA removal eﬃciency of
98.71% within 15 min and 70% of TOC mineralization after 2 h.
Complete p-CBA removal was observed at 10 min in N-rGO-CM-I
catalytic ozonation and the corresponding mineralization eﬃciency
was 77.8% after 2 h, suggesting N-rGO-CM-I eﬀectively activated
ozone molecules to generate reactive species. In summary, the OH
productive capacity was in the order N-rGO-CM-I 4 N-rGO-CM-
O4rGO-CM-I4rGO-CM-O.
Another toxic and nonbiodegradable molecule, BZA, was used to
evaluate the superior catalytic performance of the as-synthesized
Figure 11.6
(a) DMPO spin trapping EPR spectra of sole ozonation, and rGO
and N-rGO with ozone ([ozone gas] ¼ 20 mg L1, [O3] ¼ 2 mg L1,
[DMPO] ¼ 10 mM [catalyst] ¼ 0.25 g L1). (b) p-CBA and (c) BZA removal
by sole ozonation, and CM, rGO-CM-O, rGO-CM-I, N-rGO-CM-O,
and N-rGO-CM-I with ozone ([ozone gas] ¼ 20 mg L1, [O3] ¼ 2 mg L1,
TMP ¼ 0.3
bar,
crossflow
velocity ¼ 1200
mL min1,
[BZA] ¼ [p-
CBA] ¼ 0.084 mM). (d) Diagrammatic representation of clustering eﬀect
of free electrons. (e) Mechanism of interfacial catalytic reaction. Repro-
duced from ref. 66 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2021.
Hybrid Ceramic Membrane Catalytic Ozonation
339

catalytic membrane (Figure 11.6). Predictably, the best BZA removal
performance and mineralization were achieved by N-rGO-CM-I, which
aﬀorded 99.89% removal eﬃciency of BZA within 15 min and 77.2%
of mineralization eﬃciency after 2 h. The other three catalytic mem-
branes showed removal performances in the order N-rGO-CM-
O4rGO-CM-I4rGO-CM-O, which was consistent with the order of
OH production capacity.
(ii) Synergistic Self-Cleaning Process Induced by Interfacial Catalytic
Reaction
Without ozone dosing, the flux of CM or catalytic membrane de-
clined sharply initially and then tended to decline more slowly and
stably afterward during one filtration cycle (a ‘‘fast–slow decline’’
pattern). The flux decreased to 51.19%, 62.25% and 62.19% of the
initial values in CM, rGO-CM-O and rGO-CM-I without ozone dose,
and
the
normalized
water
permeance
(J/J0)
of
N-rGO-CM-O
and N-rGO-CM-I remained at 69.64% and 74.40%, respectively. An
increase in hydrophobicity was an important reason for these dif-
ferences.96 Uniformly inlayed N-rGO regulated the inherent interface
properties of CM to provide better antifouling activity, which was
important for permeate stability. Furthermore, the rejection eﬃ-
ciencies of SA in N-rGO-CM-O and N-rGO-CM-I were 53.21% and
51.18% after processing for 30 min. However, rGO-CM showed a
significantly greater rejection ability than N-rGO-CM, resulting in
58.49% (rGO-CM-O) and 56.11% (rGO-CM-I) rejection eﬃciency of SA,
owing to the physical sieving of membrane. This performance was
further enhanced by the thicker rGO catalytic layer.89
The J/J0 values of CM, rGO-CM-O and rGO-CM-I with ozone ap-
peared to decline continuously, with reductions of 30.29%, 19.81%
and 18.80%, respectively, while the J/J0 values of N-rGO-CM-O
and N-rGO-CM-I with ozone remained at 91.81% and 97.29%, re-
spectively. Therefore, N-rGO-CM-I exhibited the best self-cleaning
performance, when combined with ozone. The SA removal eﬃ-
ciency was the most direct evidence of this self-cleaning performance.
The SA mineralization eﬃciency of CM with ozone was 23.16%, which
increased to 39.25% and 37.38% for rGO-CM-I and rGO-CM-O with
ozone, respectively. N-rGO-CM-I clearly showed the best SA mineral-
ization eﬃciency (69.98%) when ozone was introduced, followed
by N-rGO-CM-O (59.02%). This superior property should be primarily
due to the high exposure of doped N atoms on the catalytic mem-
brane surface, which results in the generation of more considerable
amounts of OH via rapid catalytic decomposition of ozone to oxidize
and mineralize membrane fouling in-situ. The higher SA oxidation
and mineralization capacity led to the further reduction of TOC in the
permeate.
(iii) Eﬀect of Interface Characterization of N-rGO Catalytic Membrane on
Performance
340
Chapter 11

The interface characteristics (such as thickness, roughness and
hydrophilicity) of the skin layer determined the synergistic perform-
ance of the catalytic membrane, comprising MP degradation and self-
cleaning in-situ. N-rGO-CM-I containing skin layers with diﬀerent
interface characteristics were fabricated by varying the number of
coatings from 1 to 3. The results indicated that the N-rGO layer
thickness was well controlled by simple number manipulation. In-
creasing the number of coatings from 1 to 3 caused a notable in-
crement in the average surface roughness from 249.6  6.5 to
531.2  16 mm. The surface hydrophobicity of N-rGO-CM-I was also
enhanced,
with
the
water
CA
increasing
from
66.6  0.11
to
75.9  0.11, owing to the coverage of interfacial –OH groups on the
surface of CM by adequate N-rGO.97,98
To study the impact mechanisms of interface characteristics
on N-rGO-CM-I catalytic activity and self-cleaning performance,
multiple linear relationships were established. The kobs values of p-
CBA and BZA improved almost linearly when increasing the pre-
ceding three interface characteristics (thickness, roughness, and hy-
drophobicity), indicating that they contributed to interface catalytic
activity. A thicker catalytic layer in N-rGO-CM introduced more in-
tricate electronic states and spin features of the covalent carbon
system,99 leading to OH enrichment (p-CBA removal results illustrate
this well from catalytic ozone decomposition). However, these results
were contrary to the theory published by Byun et al.,100 where a higher
catalyst loading (Mn oxide) did not significantly improve the catalytic
activities of CM. This result indicated that no more active sites were
exposed to derive increased probe degradation. These studies also
found no statistically significant change in roughness after increasing
the loading amount of powder catalyst, suggesting that the newly
coated catalytic layer completely covered the original active sites.
Therefore, there was no performance enhancement. In contrast, in
the present study, increased roughness indicated intricate surfaces
with more exposed active sites, such as doped N, which helped im-
prove catalytic activities. Therefore, the thickness and the roughness
exhibited a synergistic eﬀect on the regulation of catalytic activities
for N-rGO-CM-I. Furthermore, the more hydrophobic N-rGO-CM-I
surface was favorable for p-CBA or BZA adsorption;101 moreover, the
amount of p-CBA
(Log
Kow
of p-CBA
was
2.3)
adsorbed on
hydrophobic N-rGO-CM-I surface was slightly more than that of BZA
(Log Kow of BZA was 1.44), also confirming this conclusion. Therefore,
the interface adsorption shortened the distance between target mol-
ecules and oxidants, resulting in increased catalytic activity,102 which
depended on the hydrophobicity of the target probe.
Antifouling activity was another manifestation of catalytic mem-
brane synergistic performance. The results showed that J/J0 was
negatively
correlated
with
the
preceding
three
interface
Hybrid Ceramic Membrane Catalytic Ozonation
341

characteristics in N-rGO-CM-I without ozone, suggesting that in-
creasing
these
interface
characteristics
in
the
as-obtained
novel N-rGO-CM-I had a negative eﬀect on the antifouling activity.
The thicker and denser catalytic layer led to increased mass transfer
resistance between water and SA, causing reduced antifouling activ-
ity. Our previous studies showed that a smoother surface decreased
contaminant accumulation on the CM surface and reduced mem-
brane fouling.103,104 Therefore, the rougher surface of N-rGO-CM-I led
to decreased antifouling activity. Interestingly, previous studies
showed that increasing membrane hydrophobicity was expected to
reduce fouling caused by the adsorption of hydrophilic SA on the
membrane surface.96 Therefore, the expected result was a positive
correlation between hydrophobicity and J/J0. This contradiction was
attributed to the decrease in antifouling activity, which was caused by
the increase in both layer thickness and roughness being larger than
that in hydrophobicity, at least for the catalytic membrane and ex-
perimental conditions investigated herein.
When ozone was introduced, a higher J/J0 was observed compared
with N-rGO-CM-I without ozone. Herein, most SA molecules were
transported onto the surface of the N-rGO catalytic layer by a flowing
stream and then were decomposed by ozone and formed
OH.
Therefore, this process also significantly alleviated membrane fouling.
When N-rGO-CM-I and ozone were combined, a decrease in J/J0 was
still observed with increasing thickness, roughness and hydro-
phobicity. The eﬀects of both catalytic layer thickness and roughness
were still stronger than that of increased hydrophobicity. The im-
proved eﬃciency of in-situ N-rGO-CM-I self-cleaning performance with
catalytic ozonation was speculated to be insuﬃcient to overcome the
negative influences of increased mass transfer resistance caused by the
thicker catalytic layer and easier accumulation, which contaminated
the rough CM surfaces, under these test conditions ([O3] ¼ 2.0 mgL1).
Notably, the slope value of N-rGO-CM-I with ozone was lower than that
of N-rGO-CM-I without ozone. Although catalytic ozonation was unable
to completely overcome these negative eﬀects on self-cleaning per-
formance, it did achieve a reduction. Therefore, the permeate flux
in N-rGO-CM-I with ozone could be controlled by maintaining a suf-
ficiently high ozone concentration in the retentate.
(iv) Synchronous Removal of Multiple MPs and Elimination of Toxic By-
products
In wastewater treatment, inorganic anions and NOM are widely
present at various concentrations, leading to competitive reactions
with reactive species against target MPs that result in decreased de-
composition eﬃciency.105 Eight MPs (BZA, ACLV, SMX, CBZ, ABEE, p-
CBA, PTA and BP-4) were eﬃciently removed by N-rGO-CM-I with
ozone. However, CM with ozone failed to achieve complete degrad-
ation of SMX, CBZ, and p-CBA. This result indicated that N-rGO-CM
342
Chapter 11

overcame the insuﬃcient abatement of ozonation refractory MPs.106
Meanwhile, the apparent energy consumption of MPs removal (EC,
kW h mM1) was calculated, N-rGO-CM-I with ozone could reduce
energy consumption to 1.119, 1.032 and 0.787 kW h mM1 for the
removal of SMX, CBZ and p-CBA, respectively, from 1.543, 1.427 and
1.490 kW h mM1 in CM with ozone. The self-cleaning performance
of N-rGO-CM-I with ozone was 2.2 times that of CM with ozone.
Similarly, apparent energy consumption of permeation fluxes (EL,
kW h L1) was also calculated. The EL of CM with ozone was 0.069
kW h L1, while the EL of N-rGO-CM-I with ozone was notably de-
creased by 55.07%. In conclusion, N-rGO-CM-I could eﬀectively re-
duce energy consumption while achieving higher permeation flux
and better removal eﬃciency of MPs.
Introducing ozone increased the synergistic decontamination and
self-cleaning performance of membranes but might have increased
the formation of toxic by-products (such as ketoaldehydes).107 The
sum concentration of 14 kinds of ketoaldehydes identified as being
formed after sole ozonation was 746.87 mg L1 when using WWTP
eﬄuent
as
the
matrix.
The
dominant
by-products
were
FA
(183.21 mg L1), Ace (292.71 mg L1) and But (111.27 mg L1), followed
by Hex (42.85 mg L1) and Cyclo (71.18 mg L1). These five ketoalde-
hydes together constituted 490% of this class of by-products. Both
Gly (1.29 mg L1) and Mgly (11.33 mg L1), possible mutagenic com-
pounds,108 were also identified. A substantial decrease in the for-
mation of ketoaldehydes ([total ketoaldehydes] ¼ 243.90 mg L1) was
observed for N-rGO-CM-I with ozone, owing to the advanced inter-
facial catalytic performance of N-rGO-CM-I. This decrease was pre-
dominantly driven by reductions of B98.5% in Hex, B97.7% in Ace,
B62.1% in But, and B60.0% in Cyclo.
Halogenated DBP formation following the disinfection of WWTP
eﬄuent was identified, with sum concentrations of 100.57 mg L1 for
all identified halogenated hydrocarbons and 1628.24 mg L1 of HAAs.
CM with ozone clearly decreased the formed halogenated hydro-
carbons (total concentration of 37.07 mg L1) and HAAs (total con-
centration of 624.58 mg L1), owing to the removal of DBP precursors,
such as fulvic-like or humic-like substances, from the EfOM.109 The
greatest removal eﬃciency for identified DBP precursors was ob-
served for N-rGO-CM-I with ozone. The formation potentials of
halogenated hydrocarbons and HAAs were reduced by 96.37% and
99.11%, respectively, and highly toxic TCAN, DCAN and DCAcAm
were not detected after using N-rGO-CM-I with ozone, owing to the
increased oxidation power of this novel N-rGO-CM-I.
(v) N-rGO-CM-I Maintained Long-Term Operational Stability
N-rGO-CM-I exhibited superior stability for both MP removal and
membrane self-cleaning. N-rGO-CM-I, used 18 times, still retained
high self-cleaning performance (485% of initial water flux) and491%
Hybrid Ceramic Membrane Catalytic Ozonation
343

BZA removal eﬃciency. After backwashing with water, the water flux
of N-rGO-CM-I recovered to almost the initial flux from the first use
(497% of initial water flux), providing high water flux in the next
filtration cycle. The catalytic activity toward MP degradation was
mostly recovered (495% of BZA removal performance) after back-
washing, owing to the removal of degradative products adsorbed by
active sites in the backwash.110 Furthermore, the fastness between
the catalytic layer and CM could not be neglected. The SEM image
allowed for observing the preservation of N-rGO, with no apparent
variation in the thickness of catalytic layer compared with the virgin
sample identified. Therefore, N-rGO-CM-I showed stable and eﬃcient
synergistic performance in MP removal and membrane self-cleaning,
indicating its practicability for tackling contaminants in advanced
wastewater treatment sustainably, while toxic by-products formation
was strictly mitigated during treatment by N-rGO-CM with ozone.
11.3.8.2
Hybrid Metal Oxides and Carbon-based Catalytic
Ceramic Membranes
The combination of membrane filtration with catalytic ozonation was es-
tablished in this study in order to develop in-situ self-cleaning of membrane
fouling and micropollutants degradation. Herein, a novel CuMn2O4/g-C3N4
catalytic ceramic membrane (CG/CM) was fabricated via the vacuum nega-
tive pressure method, and a catalytic ozonation membrane reactor was es-
tablished. The active catalytic ceramic membrane was fabricated, where the
thickness, roughness and hydrophilicity/hydrophobicity of CuMn2O4/g-C3N4
deposition on CG/CM was adjustable by changing the number of coating
procedures. As for increasing the coating times, the thickness increased, but
the roughness and hydrophobicity decreased, as first reported in the cata-
lytic membrane synthesis process; this has become the favored for interface
catalytic ozonation. SEM characterization showed the surface and cross-
section of CM and CG/CM with diﬀerent numbers of coating (CG-1/CM, CG-
2/CM and CG-3/CM). After being coated by CMO/g-C3N4 particles, the
membrane surface appeared smoother, and surface particles were more
densely packed compared with uncoated CM. This smoother surface will
greatly enhance retention ability and membrane antifouling.111 A ZrO2 filter
layer (thickness, 15.31 mm) was observed in CM, and its thickness was un-
changed after CMO/g-C3N4 particles were coated on the surface. The particle
catalyst layer (CMO/g-C3N4) thickness varied from 9.75 to 29.30 mm, ac-
cording to the number of surface coatings. As the number of coatings in-
creased, the thickness of the active layer increased, with a linear relationship
observed between them. This result confirmed that the thickness of the
active layer could be adjusted by changing the number of coatings. Fur-
thermore, Al2O3 (JCPDS#10-0173) and ZrO2 (JCPDS#49-1642) were observed
in samples of both CM and CG-3/CM as the membrane matrix. The XRD
344
Chapter 11

peak at 28.51 of CG-3/CM matched with CMO/g-C3N4 powder. This indicated
the presence of CMO/g-C3N4 on the CM inner surface. However, no obvious
crystalline peak of CMO/g-C3N4 was detected in samples of CG-1/CM and
CG-2/CM, which might be due to the greater intensity of the Al2O3 and ZrO2
layer masking the presence of CMO/g-C3N4 loaded on the membrane. Three-
dimensional AFM surface images showed that CM with a CMO/g-C3N4 par-
ticle coating was smoother than the original CM. The roughness parameter
of each sample was calculated for five diﬀerent AFM scanning areas of
5.0 mm5.0 mm, showing a strong dependence on the number of coatings
and the active layer thickness. Coating with CMO/g-C3N4 particles decreased
the average roughness from 321  160.5 nm to 97.3  22.2 nm, implying that
particles filled the pores in the filter layer and valleys on the membrane
surface. This was consistent with SEM results. Furthermore, the smoother
surface will decrease foulant accumulation in valleys on the rough mem-
brane surface, thus reducing membrane fouling, which enables a constant
permeate flux and better catalytic ozonation performance on deposited
foulants and MPs on the membrane surface.112 With an increasing number
of coatings, the membrane water contact angle gradually decreased from
39.88  0.591 to 01, which was attributed to the enhanced hydrophilicity of
CMO/g-C3N4. Development of the hydrophilic properties of CG/CM will
greatly aﬀect membrane flux. More adsorbed water molecules will eﬀectively
inhibit the adhesion of pollutants to the membrane surface, making it easier
to remove pollutants in filtration and leading to less flux decline. These
results were in accordance with the work of Zhao, who postulated that the
repulsion force from the hydrated layer on the membrane surface was
conducive to mitigating pollutant adsorption.113
All CG/CMs were used to investigate the synergetic performance of the
combination of separation and catalytic ozonation in COMR. The concen-
tration of ozone and transmembrane pressure (TMP) showed a significant
influence on CG/CM performance. Compared with ozone concentration and
TMP, the membrane surface velocity had little eﬀect on CG/CM perform-
ance. When ozone was absent, BP-4 removal eﬃciency was only approxi-
mately 20%, as provided by filtration. When ozone concentration was
5 mg L1, the degradation performance of BP-4 was increased to 86.1%. As
ozone concentration continued to increase, the degradation performance of
BP-4 improved significantly. When ozone concentration was 30 mg L1, the
kobs value was 8.8 times that obtained without ozone. Furthermore, higher
ozone concentration resulted in greater BrO3
 formation in the permeate,
which was consistent with a previous study.114 However, BrO3
 concen-
tration formed in the COMR was much lower than that observed in sole
ozonation. As for TMP, the removal eﬃciency of BP-4 increased first when
the TMP was increased from 0.05 to 0.1 bar and then decreased as the TMP
was further increased from 0.10 to 0.30 bar. Increasing the TMP might form
a thicker foulant layer covering the catalytic active layer of CG-2/CM, leading
to decreasing catalytic performance. When the TMP was 0.1 bar, the best BP-
4 degradation performance was achieved. CF velocity has a slight influence
Hybrid Ceramic Membrane Catalytic Ozonation
345

on BP-4 removal eﬃciency. The kobs value of BP-4 degradation eﬃciency
increased from 0.33 to 0.39 min1 when the CF velocity ranged from 0.026 to
0.106 m s1. When the CF velocity was 0.085 m s1, the best BP-4 degrad-
ation performance was obtained.
Furthermore, the concentration eﬀects of SA on performance were stud-
ied. In CM filtration, the flux was 131.82 LMH when the SA concentration
was 30 mg L1, which decreased to 86.75 LMH when CG-2/CM was used. The
J/J0 value of CM under these conditions was 0.45 and reached 0.48 when CG-
2/CM was used, which indicated that CG-2/CM was less likely to be blocked
than CM during the filtration of the SA solution. This was an advantage of
this catalytic CM. Meanwhile, when the SA concentration increased from 6.0
to 60 mg L1, the flux of CG-2/CM decreased from 117.61 to 29.50 L m2
h1(LMH), and the J/J0 value of CG-2/CM decreased from 0.65 to 0.16. This
downtrend trend for J/J0 may be due to the membrane surface being blocked
by the increase in SA at a higher concentration. Surface catalytic ozonation
in the COMR reasonably improved the normalized flux. When SA concen-
tration was 30 mg L1, the J/J0 value of CG-2/CM in the COMR was 0.87,
which was much higher than that in the filtration with CM (J/J0 ¼ 0.45), CG-
2/CM (J/J0 ¼ 0.48), or CM-O3 (J/J0 ¼ 0.48). In this process, the molecular ozone
and formed ROS depolymerized SA molecules by reacting with glycosidic
linkages,115 which converted high-MW SA fractions into smaller molecules
(such as monosaccharides). When CG-2/CM was used, CMO/g-C3N4 on the
ceramic membrane surface helped derive more ROS to take part in the re-
action. Therefore, the interface catalytic ozonation in the COMR eﬀectively
prevented cake/gel formation on the membrane surface and mitigated
membrane fouling. However, when SA was high, its presence inhibited
interface catalytic ozonation in the COMR. Therefore, when SA concen-
tration increased from 6 mg L1 to 60 mg L1, the J/J0 value of CG-2/CM in
the COMR decreased from 1.00 to 0.71. This result favored in-situ self-
cleaning performance, which improved from 53.84% to 343.75% and which
depended on SA concentration. This result was significantly better than re-
ported values in other catalytic ceramic membranes, which were also in-
fluenced by reaction parameters. BP-4 degradation eﬃciency increased
slightly in the first 7.0 min with increasing the SA concentration from 6.0 to
30 mg L1, and the pseudo first-order reaction kinetic constant increased
from 0.36 to 0.39 min1. The competitive reaction between BP-4 and SA did
not result in reduced catalytic activity, indicating that interface catalytic
ozonation in the COMR was very strong for organics degradation.
11.4
Conclusions and Outlook
In 2005, Karnik et al. firstly fabricated a CM with catalytic ozonation prop-
erties using a layer-by-layer method to deposit iron oxide particles on a
titania-coated membrane.69 Research focuses on the application of these
membranes in a combined ozonation-ultrafiltration process to remove DBPs
and their precursors. A series of subsequent studies focused on the removal
346
Chapter 11

of DBPs by metal oxide modified CM coupled with ozonation, such as Fe
oxide CM,116 Mn oxide CM,103 Ti oxide CM100 and so on. After that, a number
of researchers began to focus on NOM removal performance and the
mechanism of catalytic ozone membranes.67,100 For example, Choi et al.
studied the membrane fouling mitigation mechanisms by analyzing the
structural transformation mechanism of NOM on the surface of a catalytic
membrane.67 In 2016, Guo et al. fabricated a novel CM coated with MnO2–
Co3O4
nanoparticles
by
catalytic
ozonation
for
the
degradation
of
benzophenone-3, a typical MP, from water.83 After that, most studies focused
on the preparation of novel catalytic membranes for MPs removal.8,88,117
However, many studies tend to simplify and pay too much attention to the
preparation of new membrane materials, where only the removal eﬃciency
of MPs as the evaluation index of catalytic ozonation membrane was selected
and the membrane cleaning eﬃciency was ignored. In a catalytic ozonation
membrane reactor, the transformation of membrane fouling components
and the mitigated mechanism of membrane fouling is still unclear. As a
result, it is necessary to develop new NOM characterization techniques to
resolve the membrane fouling mitigation mechanism, such as microscope-
infrared
spectroscopy
(microFTIR)
analysis,
microscope-Raman
spec-
troscopy (microRaman) analysis, matrix-assisted laser desorption (MALDI)-
TOF-MS and so on.
In addition, the influence of the inorganic membrane fouling upon the
mitigation of catalytic membrane fouling has been neglected: for example,
after Ca21/Mg21 complexation with organic fouling, whether the active sites
of the catalytic membrane would be masked, resulting in the decline of
catalytic performance. Furthermore, the influence mechanism of particu-
lates on catalytic membrane has not been revealed, especially for new
catalytic membrane in the drinking water treatment process. Based on the
classical membrane fouling model, the membrane fouling model of catalytic
ozone membrane also needs to be developed to predict the formation type of
membrane fouling, which will facilitate the development of membrane an-
tifouling strategies.
Acknowledgements
We thank the Beijing Natural Science Foundation (Grant Nos. L182027,
L160006 and 8132033), the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(Grant Nos. 51878047 and 22076012), the National Key Research and De-
velopment Program of China (2021YFE0100800), and the Beijing Forestry
University Outstanding Young Talent Cultivation Project (2019JQ03008) for
financial support.
References
1. S. Tang, Z. Zhang and X. Zhang, J. Membr. Sci., 2018, 555, 30.
2. D. Wei, T. Yi, Z. Zhang and X. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 294, 157.
Hybrid Ceramic Membrane Catalytic Ozonation
347

3. J. Zhang, T. Lin and W. Chen, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 325, 160.
4. B. Harman, H. Koseoglu, N. Yigit, M. Beyhan and M. Kitis, Desalination,
2010, 261, 27.
5. Y. Guo, Z. Song, B. Xu, Y. Li, F. Qi, J. P. Croue and D. Yuan, J. Hazard.
Mater., 2018, 344, 1229.
6. S. Byun, J. S. Taurozzi, A. L. Alpatova, F. Wang and V. V. Tarabara, Sep.
Purif. Technol., 2011, 81, 270.
7. V. Camel and A. Bermond, Water Res., 1998, 32, 3208.
8. W. J. Lee, Y. Bao, X. Hu and T.-T. Lim, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 378, 121670.
9. S. Tang, Z. Zhang and X. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 314, 670.
10. S. Tang, Z. Zhang, J. Liu and X. Zhang, J. Membr. Sci., 2017, 533, 112.
11. X. Fan, Y. Tao, L. Wang, X. Zhang, Y. Lei, Z. Wang and H. Noguchi,
Desalination, 2014, 335, 47.
12. D. Wei, Y. Tao, Z. Zhang, L. Liu and X. Zhang, J. Membr. Sci., 2016, 498, 116.
13. S. Jia, Z. Zhang and X. Zhang, J. Membr. Sci., 2017, 538, 50.
14. L. Zheng, D. Yu, G. Wang, Z. Yue, C. Zhang, Y. Wang, J. Zhang, J. Wang,
G. Liang and Y. Wei, J. Membr. Sci., 2018, 563, 843.
15. Z. Song, Y. Li, Z. Wang, M. Wang and F. Qi, Chem. Eng. J., 2020,
394, 124935.
16. M. Kukuzaki, K. Fujimoto, S. Kai, K. Ohe, T. Oshima and Y. Baba, Sep.
Purif. Technol., 2010, 72, 347.
17. S. Yun and S. T. Oyama, J. Membr. Sci., 2011, 375, 28.
18. J. J. Conde, M. Maron˜o and J. M. Sa´nchez-Herva´s, Sep. Purif. Rev., 2017,
46, 152.
19. G. Xomeritakis and Y. Lin, J. Membr. Sci., 1997, 133, 217.
20. P. Quicker, V. Ho¨llein and R. Dittmeyer, Catal. Today, 2000, 56, 21.
21. X. Zhang, D. K. Wang and J. C. D. da Costa, Catal. Today, 2014, 230,
47.
22. H. Choi, E. Stathatos and D. D. Dionysiou, Appl. Catal., B, 2006, 63, 60.
23. T. A. Peters, N. E. Benes and J. T. Keurentjes, Appl. Catal., A, 2007,
317, 113.
24. W. Zhang, W. Qing, N. Chen, Z. Ren, J. Chen and W. Sun, J. Membr. Sci.,
2014, 451, 285–292.
25. X.-H. Ma, Z.-L. Xu, Y. Liu and D. Sun, J. Membr. Sci., 2010, 360, 315.
26. S.-L. Chen, A.-J. Wang, C. Dai, J. B. Benziger and X.-C. Liu, Chem. Eng. J.,
2014, 249, 48.
27. T. F. Mastropietro, C. Meringolo, T. Poerio, F. Scarpelli, N. Godbert,
G. Di Profio and E. Fontananova, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2017, 56, 11049.
28. Y. Zhao, D. Lu, C. Xu, J. Zhong, M. Chen, S. Xu, Y. Cao, Q. Zhao,
M. Yang and J. Ma, Water Res., 2020, 171, 115387.
29. E. Drioli and L. Giorno, Encyclopedia of Membranes, Springer, 2018,
pp. 1–72.
30. S. Han, Y. Li, S. Bai, L. Zhang, W. Li and W. Xing, J. Appl. Polym. Sci.,
2018, 135, 46514.
31. Z. Cao, C. Xia, W. Jia, W. Qing and W. Zhang, J. Membr. Sci., 2020,
595, 117485.
348
Chapter 11

32. W. Zhang, W. Qing, Z. Ren, W. Li and J. Chen, Bioresour. Technol., 2014,
172, 16.
33. R. Molinari, L. Palmisano, E. Drioli and M. Schiavello, J. Membr. Sci.,
2002, 206, 399–415.
34. X. Cao, J. Luo, J. M. Woodley and Y. Wan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces,
2016, 8, 30511.
35. X.-J. Bai, D. Chen, Y.-N. Li, X.-M. Yang, M.-Y. Zhang, T.-Q. Wang,
X.-M. Zhang, L.-Y. Zhang, Y. Fu and X. Qi, J. Membr. Sci., 2019, 582, 30.
36. R. Iler, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1966, 21, 569.
37. J. J. Richardson, J. Cui, M. Bjo¨rnmalm, J. A. Braunger, H. Ejima and
F. Caruso, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 14828.
38. S. Wang, M. Hou, Q. Zhao, Y. Jiang, Z. Wang, H. Li, Y. Fu and Z. Shao,
J. Energy Chem., 2017, 26, 168.
39. Y. Gao, M. Hu and B. Mi, J. Membr. Sci., 2014, 455, 349.
40. M. Liu, X. Zhu, R. Chen, Q. Liao, D. Ye, B. Zhang, J. Liu, G. Chen and
K. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 354, 35.
41. S. Mu, H. Tang, Z. Wan, M. Pan and R. Yuan, Electrochem. Commun.,
2005, 7, 1143.
42. L. Li, Z. Liu, M. Pan and H. L. Tang, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2005,
8, A574.
43. H. Tang, M. Pan, S. Jiang, Z. Wan and R. Yuan, Colloids Surf., A, 2005,
262, 65.
44. H. Tang, Z. Wan and M. Pan, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 2003.
45. K. Li, G. Ye, J. Pan, H. Zhang and M. Pan, J. Membr. Sci., 2010, 347, 26.
46. M. Michel, A. Taylor, R. Sekol, P. Podsiadlo, P. Ho, N. Kotov and
L. Thompson, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3859.
47. D. Wang and S. Lu, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2058.
48. D. Kregiel, Food Control, 2014, 40, 32.
49. Q. Huang, J. Chen, M. Liu, H. Huang, X. Zhang and Y. Wei, Chem. Eng.
J., 2020, 387, 124019.
50. H. Lee, S. M. Dellatore, W. M. Miller and P. B. Messersmith, Science,
2007, 318, 426.
51. N. Li, G. Chen, J. Zhao, B. Yan, Z. Cheng, L. Meng and V. Chen,
J. Membr. Sci., 2019, 591, 117341.
52. A. Idris, Z. Man, A. S. Maulud, H. A. Mannan and A. Shafie, Polym. Test.,
2019, 73, 159.
53. S. Sun, H. Yao, W. Fu, L. Hua, G. Zhang and W. Zhang, Water Res., 2018,
144, 690.
54. J. Livage and D. Ganguli, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2001, 68, 365.
55. S. Dervin and S. C. Pillai, in Sol-Gel Materials for Energy, Environment
and Electronic Applications, Springer, 2017, pp. 1–22.
56. I. Horovitz, D. Avisar, M. A. Baker, R. Grilli, L. Lozzi, D. Di Camillo and
H. Mamane, J. Hazard. Mater., 2016, 310, 98.
57. H. Demiral and _I. Demiral, Adv. Powder Technol., 2018, 29, 3033.
58. G. L. Puma, A. Bono, D. Krishnaiah and J. G. Collin, J. Hazard. Mater.,
2008, 157, 209.
Hybrid Ceramic Membrane Catalytic Ozonation
349

59. G. Barbieri, V. Violante, F. P. Di Maio, A. Criscuoli and E. Drioli, Ind.
Eng. Chem. Res., 1997, 36, 3369.
60. T. Ioannides and G. Gavalas, J. Membr. Sci., 1993, 77, 207.
61. N. Itoh, S. Niwa, F. Mizukami, T. Inoue, A. Igarashi and T. Namba,
Catal. Commun., 2003, 4, 243.
62. A. S. Augustine, in Supported Pd and Pd/Alloy Membranes for Water-gas
Shift Catalytic Membrane Reactors, Doctoral Dissertations, 2013.
63. C. Didaskalou, J. Kupai, L. Cseri, J. Barabas, E. Vass, T. Holtzl and
G. Szekely, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 7430.
64. X. Wang, X. Zhang, H. Liu, K. L. Yeung and J. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2010,
156, 562.
65. C. Chen, M. Xie, L. Kong, W. Lu, Z. Feng and J. Zhan, J. Hazard. Mater.,
2020, 390, 122146.
66. Z. Song, J. Sun, W. Wang, Z. Wang, Y. Zhang, B. Xu and F. Qi, Appl.
Catal., B, 283, 119662.
67. H. Park, Y. Kim, B. An and H. Choi, Water Res., 2012, 46, 5861.
68. C. Mansas, L. Atfane-Karfane, E. Petit, J. Mendret, S. Brosillon and
A. Ayral, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 104043.
69. B. S. Karnik, S. H. Davies, M. J. Baumann and S. J. Masten, Environ. Sci.
Technol., 2005, 39, 7656.
70. S. Byun, S. H. Davies, A. L. Alpatova, L. M. Corneal, M. J. Baumann,
V. V. Tarabara and S. J. Masten, Water Res., 2011, 45, 163.
71. S. Lee, K. Lee, W. M. Wan and Y. Choi, Desalination, 2005, 178, 287.
72. X. Cheng, D. Wu, H. Liang, X. Zhu, X. Tang, Z. Gan, J. Xing, X. Luo and
G. Li, Water Res., 2018, 145, 39.
73. L. M. Corneal, S. J. Masten, S. H. R. Davies, V. V. Tarabara, S. Byun and
M. J. Baumann, J. Hazard. Mater., 2010, 360, 292.
74. S. Byun, S. H. Davies, A. L. Alpatova, L. M. Corneal, M. J. Baumann,
V. V. Tarabara and S. J. Masten, Water Res., 2011, 45, 163.
75. X. Cheng, H. Liang, F. Qu, A. Ding, H. Chang, B. Liu, X. Tang, D. Wu
and G. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 308, 1010.
76. C. Li, W. Sun, Z. Lu, X. Ao and S. Li, Water Res., 2020, 175, 115674.
77. Z. He, D. Xia, Y. Huang, X. Tan, C. He, L. Hu, H. He, J. Zeng, W. Xu and
D. Shu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2018, 344, 1198.
78. M. A. Shannon, P. W. Bohn, M. Elimelech, J. G. Georgiadis,
B. J. Marinas and A. M. Mayes, Nature, 2008, 452, 301.
79. L. M. Corneal, M. J. Baumann, S. J. Masten, S. H. R. Davies,
V. V. Tarabara and S. Byun, J. Membr. Sci., 2011, 369, 182.
80. Z. Jeirani and J. Soltan, J. Water Process Eng., 2016, 12, 127.
81. G.
Scaratti,
A.
De
Noni
Junior,
H.
J.
Jose
and
R. D. F. Peralta Muniz Moreira, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2020, 27, 22144.
82. W. Shen, Y. Wang, J. Zhan, B. Wang, J. Huang, S. Deng and G. Yu,
Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 310, 249.
83. Y. Guo, B. Xu and F. Qi, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 287, 381.
84. A. Ikhlaq, D. R. Brown and B. Kasprzyk-Hordern, Appl. Catal., B, 2015,
165, 408.
350
Chapter 11

85. H. Jiang, P. Chen, S. Luo, X. Tu, Q. Cao and M. Shu, Appl. Surf. Sci.,
2013, 284, 942.
86. A. Sowmya and S. Meenakshi, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2014, 69, 336.
87. Y. Jiang, B. Cheng, M. Liu and Y. Nie, Bull. Environ. Contam. Toxicol.,
2016, 96, 186.
88. Y. Guo, Z. Song, B. Xu, Y. Li, F. Qi, J.-P. Croue and D. Yuan, J. Hazard.
Mater., 2018, 344, 1229–1239.
89. Q. Zhang, S. Chen, X. Fan, Y. Haiguang and Q. Hongtao, Appl. Catal., B,
2018, 224, 204–213.
90. Z. Song, Y. Zhang, C. Liu, B. Xu, F. Qi, D. Yuan and S. Pu, Chem. Eng. J.,
2019, 357, 655.
91. Y. Wang, L. Chen, C. Chen, J. Xi and S. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019,
254, 283.
92. Z. Song, J. Sun, Z. Wang, Y. Zhang, B. Xu and F. Qi, Appl. Catal., B, 2020,
283, 119662.
93. K. Huang, J. Yuan, G. Shen, G. Liu and W. Jin, Chin. J. Chem. Eng., 2017,
25, 752.
94. M. Zhang, K. Guan, S. Jie, G. Liu and W. Jin, AIChE J., 2017, 63, 5054.
95. Y. Yuan, G. Xing, S. Garg, J. Ma, X. Kong, P. Dai and T. D. Waite, Water
Res., 2020, 115785.
96. M. Sun, I. Zucker, D. M. Davenport, X. Zhou, J. Qu and M. Elimelech,
Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 52, 8674.
97. F. Xu, M. Wei, X. Zhang, Y. Song, W. Zhou and Y. Wang, Res., 2019,
2019, 2581241.
98. B. Liu, R. Wu, J. A. Baimova, H. Wu, A. W.-K. Law, S. V. Dmitriev and
K. Zhou, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 1886.
99. H. Sun, S. Liu, G. Zhou, H. M. Ang, M. O. Tade´ and S. Wang, ACS Appl.
Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 5466.
100. S. Byun, S. Davies, A. Alpatova, L. Corneal, M. Baumann, V. Tarabara
and S. Masten, Water Res., 2011, 45, 163–170.
101. Y. Wang, Z. Ao, H. Sun, X. Duan and S. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2016,
198, 295.
102. L. Yu, G. Zhang, C. Liu, H. Lan, H. Liu and J. Qu, ACS Catal., 2018,
8, 1090.
103. L. M. Corneal, S. J. Masten, S. H. Davies, V. V. Tarabara, S. Byun and
M. J. Baumann, J. Membr. Sci., 2010, 360, 292.
104. H. Song, J. Shao, Y. He, B. Liu and X. Zhong, J. Membr. Sci., 2012,
405, 48.
105. R. Yuan, S. N. Ramjaun, Z. Wang and J. Liu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2011,
196, 173.
106. L. Xing, Y. Xie, H. Cao, D. Minakata, Y. Zhang and J. C. Crittenden,
Chem. Eng. J., 2014, 245, 71.
107. H. Vatankhah, A. Szczuka, W. A. Mitch, N. Almaraz, J. Brannum and
C. Bellona, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2019, 53, 2720.
108. H. Matsuda, Y. Ose, T. Sato, H. Nagase, H. Kito and K. Sumida, Sci.
Total Environ., 1992, 117, 521.
Hybrid Ceramic Membrane Catalytic Ozonation
351

109. Y. Zhang, Y. An, C. Liu, Y. Wang, Z. Song, Y. Li, W. Meng, F. Qi, B. Xu
and J.-P. Croue, Water Res., 2019, 115026.
110. P. Duan, T. Ma, Y. Yue, Y. Li, X. Zhang, Y. Shang, B. Gao, Q. Zhang,
Q. Yue and X. Xu, Environ. Sci. Nano, 2019, 6, 1799.
111. L. M. Corneal, S. J. Masten, S. H. R. Davies, V. V. Tarabara, S. Byun and
M. J. Baumann, J. Membr. Sci., 2010, 360, 292.
112. H. Song, J. Shao, Y. He, B. Liu and X. Zhong, J. Membr. Sci., 2012,
405–406, 48–56.
113. Q. Zhao, D. Lu, H. Jiang, Y. Zhao, Y. Sun, Z. Li, M. Yang, P. Wang and
J. Ma, J. Membr. Sci., 2019, 573, 210.
114. M. Moslemi, S. H. Davies and S. J. Masten, Water Res., 2011, 45, 5529.
115. Y. Wang, R. I. Hollingsworth and D. L. Kasper, Carbohydr. Res., 1999,
319, 141.
116. B. S. Karnik, S. H. Davies, M. J. Baumann and S. J. Masten, Environ. Eng.
Sci., 2007, 24, 852.
117. X. Cheng, H. Liang, F. Qu, A. Ding, H. Chang, B. Liu, X. Tang, D. Wu
and G. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 308, 1010.
352
Chapter 11

CHAPTER 12
Ozonation Nanobubble
Technology
XIAONAN SHI, TAHA MARHABA AND WEN ZHANG*
John A. Reif Jr., Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, New
Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, New Jersey 07102, United States
*Email: wen.zhang@njit.edu
12.1
Introduction to Water Disinfection and
Ozonation Disinfection
12.1.1
Principles of Ozonation Disinfection
Ozone, due to its potential oxidizing capacity, has widely been used to in-
activate bacteria, fungi, viruses, protozoa and bacterial or fungal spores.1,2
Ozone generally exhibits strong antimicrobial eﬀects without inducing mi-
crobial resistance.3,4 Ozonation is also commonly used in pharmaceutical,5
food,6,7 cosmetic8 and medical treatment of skin/nails/dental infections4,9,10
and surgical site infections.11 For example, both gaseous and aqueous forms
of
ozone
are
clinically
used
to
kill
oral
pathogens
or
endodontic
infections.12–14 Ozone therapy considerably reduces the growth of common
pathogens in chronic periodontitis Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans,
P. gingivalis and T. forsythia.15,16
The oxidation power of ozone is contributed to by molecular ozone
and/or reactive radical species formed during the self-decomposition or
Chemistry in the Environment Series No. 8
Advanced Ozonation Processes for Water and Wastewater Treatment: Active Catalysts and
Combined Technologies
Edited by Hongbin Cao, Yongbing Xie, Yuxian Wang and Jiadong Xiao
r The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry, www.rsc.org
353

decay of ozone.17 The ozone oxidation half-reactions of ozone in water
include:
O3 þ 2H1 þ 2e-O2 þ H2O (E0 ¼ 2.076 V)
O3 þ H2O þ e-O2 þ 2OH (E0 ¼ 1.24 V)
Besides this direct electron transfer or acquisition, indirect ozone re-
actions may involve ozone decay and the production of various reactive
oxygen species such as superoxide radicals (O2
), hydroperoxide radicals
(HO2) and ozonide radicals (O3
) that may also react with water
pollutants:18–23
O3 þ OH-HO2 þ O2
 (k1 ¼ 70 mol s1)
O3 þ OH-HO2
 þ O2 (k2 ¼ 40 mol s1)
O3 þ HO2
-HO2 þ O3
 (k3 ¼ 2.2106 mol s1)
The eﬃciency of microbial inactivation generally depends on the sus-
ceptibility of the specific microbes, contact time and concentrations of
ozone or radicals.24 Ozone can disrupt the cell membrane (disruption of
carbon–nitrogen bonds of proteins leading to depolymerization) and key
components such as lipoproteins and polysaccharides, resulting in the
rupture and damage of bacterial wall.24 Ozone could then oxidize the in-
terior cytoplasm such as nucleic acid and protein and ultimately disable the
metabolic and reproductive capabilities of bacteria.11,25,26 As opposed to
chlorine, ozone has many advantages. First, ozone has high oxidation po-
tential and is more reactive on disinfectant and is a more eﬀective bacteri-
cide and viricide at comparable doses.27 Second, ozone leaves far less
residual products than chlorination, which causes formation of chlorinated
DBPs.17
12.1.2
Limitations of Traditional Ozonation Disinfection
Despite the advances, ozone disinfection still has some disadvantages,27 such
as high capital, operation and maintenance costs (ca., 10 kW kg1 O3) in many
ozonation contacting systems (e.g. bubble columns, injectors, spray chambers
or diﬀusers), the corrosive nature of ozone and safety concerns for human
health, and formation of bromate and N-nitrodimethylamine (NDMA).28,29
Also, the large footprint treatment unit and limited transfer or dispersion
eﬃciencies of O3 bubbles in water,30 largely due to relatively poor solubility
and stability,31 are drawbacks. Thus enhancing the ozone–water mass transfer
is necessary and often achieved by designing diﬀerent reactor configurations
or operations such as increasing the stirring,32 surface areas33 and exposure
time.34 For instance, oscillatory flow reactors (OFRs) were demonstrated to
intensify multiphase mixtures with high eﬃciency,34–37 by forcing the fluid to
oscillate with variable geometric baﬄes and thus increasing retention and
contact time.36
354
Chapter 12

Another major limitation is the short life of ozone in water (e.g. the half-
life is only about 20 min).38 This rapid decay often results in relatively low
concentrations of dissolved ozone (e.g. less than 10 mg L1 at 25 1C when
injecting 3% ozone gas into water) and therefore reduced performance. The
decay of ozone results from direct reactions of ozone with other compounds
in water and from indirect reactions of self-decay that converts ozone into
hydroxyl radicals and oxygen. The decay of ozone can be described in the
following general form (eqn (12.1)):39
 d½O3
dt
¼ kd  ½O3n
(12:1)
where O3 is the concentration of ozone in water (mol L1) at reaction time,
t (s); the exponent n is a reaction order, and kd is the ozone decay constant
(e.g. s1 when n is 1 and in mol L1 s1 when n is 2).
Ozone decay kinetics in water has been reported to depend on many
factors, such as the dissolved ozone concentration,40,41 solution tempera-
ture,42 pH,39 alkalinity,42 hydrodynamic conditions,43 light exposure39,44 and
the presence of organic and inorganic carbons.39,41,44 For example, high
solution pH could speed up ozone decay.39 Inorganic carbons act as a
scavenger for hydroxyl radicals and thus increase ozone decay.44 Yurteri and
Gurol proposed eqn (12.2) to estimate the decay rate constant (s1) that
considers the eﬀects of pH, DOC and alkalinity.45 Laplanche et al. further
incorporated the UV absorbance that speeds up the destruction of ozone in
eqn (12.3).46
log kd ¼  7.116 þ 0.66  pH þ 0.61  log[DOC]  0.42  log[0.1  ALK]
(12.2)
log kd ¼  3.93 þ 0.24  pH þ 0.7537  log[UV254]
þ 1.08  log[DOC]  0.19  log[ALK]
(12.3)
where DOC is the concentration of dissolved organic carbon (mg L1), UV254
is the UV absorbance at 254 nm (dimensionless) and ALK is alkalinity ex-
pressed as mg of CaCO3 L1.
12.2
Nanobubbles and Generation Principles of
Ozone Nanobubbles
12.2.1
Nanobubbles and Their Applications
Nanobubbles (NBs) are ultrafine bubbles with a size or diameter typically
smaller than 1 mm,47 which exhibit valuable characteristics (e.g. long resi-
dence times in water due to their low buoyancy, high stability against co-
alesces, collapse or burst).48,49 Thus NBs are expected to have a higher
Ozonation Nanobubble Technology
355

eﬃciency of mass transfer compared to bulk scale bubbles (macrobubbles)
due to the high specific surface areas.48,50,51 NBs have proven useful in many
industrial and engineering applications, such as emulsion technology for
chemical processing, detergent-free cleaning,52 intracellular drug delivery,53
water and wastewater treatment,54–56 as well as agricultural fields (pathogen
control and irrigation).57–60
12.2.2
Ozone Nanobubble Generation Methods
Most ozone NB generation combines diﬀerent NB generation systems and
ozone generation to generate ozone NBs.4,31,61–63 Generation of NBs can be
achieved with a wide range of hydrodynamic methods, such as spiral liquid
flow (also known as rotary liquid flow) via Venturi nozzles, pressurization–
depressurization, porous-membranes, ultrasonication and laser or optical
ablation.64 For example, Figure 12.1(a) shows that in a spiral liquid flow
generator, water is pumped through a side hole to produce a tangent flow in
the cylinder.65–67 The tangent flow sucks in the gas through an orifice on the
bottom of the cylinder and converts it into fine bubbles at the second orifice
due to the centrifugation eﬀect.
Ejectors in Figure 12.1(b) consist of a cylindrical channel that water flows
through to produce high-pressure fluctuations.67,68 Gas is sucked in where
the channel expands and consequently the pressure is reduced. A high
number of micro/nanobubbles are generated due to cavitation.68,69 In a
pressurization–depressurization method (Figure 12.1(c)),70 gas solubility is
first enhanced by increasing the gas pressure and then rapidly decreasing it
to induce micro/nanobubbles in liquid similar to ejectors.71–73 However, this
method usually does not produce a monodisperse bubble size distribution,
due to the dynamic and nonuniform rate of pressure change in the
solution.70
Figure 12.1(d) shows the Venturi nozzle–based generation, where water is
presaturated with gas to form millibubbles (i.e. bubbles with diameters of a
few millimeters).74 This presaturated water goes through the throat of
Venturi tube and undergoes a drastic pressure variation that results in
millibubble collapse and formation of NBs.49,74–76
Lastly, ultrasonication is the most common method to produce NBs by
using ultrasound waves to induce cavitation in water.77,78 Kim et al. em-
ployed an ultrasonic cleaner as shown in Figure 12.1(e) to produce a bimodal
distribution of NBs using 42 kHz and 70 W.79 The study indicates the de-
pendence of bubble size on the solution pH. For pH 12, over 50% of bubbles
had diameters under 100 nm (in the range of 50–90 nm), whereas for pH 3
most of bubble diameters were in the range 150–350 nm. Moreover, when
surfactants were used, the bubble sizes were reduced to the decrease of the
solution surface tension.
As shown in Figure 12.1(f),80,81 NBs may also be produced on the mem-
brane surface when the pressurized gas permeates the membrane pores, a
356
Chapter 12

process called membrane ozonation. The water surface tension and ad-
hesion between bubbles and membrane surface largely prevent bubble de-
tachment from the membrane surface. The size of NBs will grow until the
buoyancy and or the built-up pressures overcome the forces of surface ten-
sion and adhesion.82,83 The recent studies reported by Zhang’s group indi-
cate that the size of generated bubbles is governed by the gas–liquid–solid
contact angles, the surface hydrophobicity of the membrane pores and li-
quid solvent, and the injection pressure of the gas.80
Figure 12.1
Schematic examples for diﬀerent nanobubble generators. (a) Spiral
liquid flow generator. (b) Ejector-type generator. The figure is
reproduced from (c) Pressurization–depressurization generation pro-
cess.
(d)
Venturi-type
generator.
(e)
Ultrasonication
generator.
(f) Formation process of NBs through the hydrophobized ceramic
membranes’ pores by injection of a pressurized gas. (b), (c), (d) and
(e) reproduced from ref. 68 with permission from Elsevier, Copy-
right 2013; ref. 70 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2016;
ref. 74, https://doi.org/10.5277/ppmp170220, under the terms of
the CC BY 4.0 license https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/;
and
ref.
79
with
permission
from
Elsevier,
Copyright
2000,
respectively.
Ozonation Nanobubble Technology
357

12.3
Ozone Nanobubble Properties and Applications
12.3.1
Stability and Disinfection Characteristics of Ozone
Nanobubbles
Ozone NBs, a new form of dispersion in water (besides dissolved ozone or
nondissolved ozone gas), could potentially increase the longevity and sta-
bility of ozone as well as the eﬀective dissolved ozone concentration com-
pared to regular dissolved ozone. Due to its complex internal states (e.g.
pressures and phases), it remains largely debatable in the scientific com-
munity whether and how NBs are stabilized in liquid.84–88 To date, diﬀerent
stability mechanisms have been proposed to explain its existence and sta-
bility by accounting for diﬀerent potential factors including formation of
surface barriers,89–91 high zeta potentials,92,93 electric double layer94,95 and
high-density mechanisms.96,97 However, it remains unclear how the internal
gas pressure and solution temperature aﬀect the NBs’ properties such as
bubble size and stiﬀness. As illustrated in Figure 12.2, NBs may act as a
storage package of gas molecules that may progressively release or leach the
gaseous molecules via dissolution and collapse. Besides pressure waves and
heat, the collapse of NBs may generate radical species and degrade the
contaminants.51,98–100 The high concentration of dissolved ozone in aqueous
solution (either acidic or alkaline) leads to the formation of OH radicals.100
Generation of free radicals through the collapse of the NBs has been ob-
served by electron spin resonance spectroscopy.101 Meanwhile, the type of
gases aﬀects the quantity or quality of free radicals that are generated. For
example, oxygen NBs promote the formation of OH radicals compared to
inert gases such as nitrogen NBs.102
Although the oxidizing power of ozone (2.07 eV) is lower than that of OH
radicals (2.85 eV), ozone still yields higher reactivity and selectivity toward
organic compounds103 than other common oxidants such as hydrogen per-
oxide (1.77 eV) and hypochlorous acid (1.49 eV).104 Recent applications of
NBs in ozonation entail water treatment,105 oral treatment106–108 and
food processing.109 Previous studies showed the application of ozone
Figure 12.2
Schematics of membrane-based ozonation process.
358
Chapter 12

micro/nanobubbles for disinfection of various kinds of microorganisms in-
cluding
Fusarium
oxysporum,
Pectobacterium
carotovorum
subsp.
car-
otovorum,110 Coliform group,111 and Bacillus subtilis spores,112 demonstrating
that ozone NBs were eﬃcient for use as a disinfectant against those micro-
organisms. In addition, exposure to ozone NBs in water for 0.5 min reduced
the bacterial counts below the lower limit of detection (o10 CFU mL1).38
Some researchers reported that NBs could accelerate the formation of
OH radicals in ozonation processes.113,114 Specifically, NBs could increase
the mass transfer of ozone, and hence promote utilization rate and
oxidation reactions of pollutants in water and wastewaters.115 Enhancing
ozone utilization will potentially reduce the supplied ozone dose and the
oﬀ-gas ozone concentration, which reduces energy consumption and safety
concerns.116
12.3.2
Mass Transfer of Ozonation
Mass transfer of ozone into water and its stability in liquid determine the
reactivity and performance of ozonation for water disinfection and other
reactions. Dissolved ozone concentrations in water often reduce rapidly
since ozone is an unstable molecule, especially at higher temperatures,
leading to lower reaction eﬃciencies and reduced disinfection eﬃcacy. Also,
ozone is about 12 times less soluble in water than chlorine, which limits its
eﬀectiveness at equivalent doses against target water pollutants or persistent
microorganisms, such as persistent bacterial spores or cysts. Clearly, ozo-
nation with NBs holds great promising potential to address these technical
barriers for full commercialization or industrialization of NB-based ozona-
tion.38 Due to the small bubble sizes, ozone NBs are expected to significantly
increase the mass transfer eﬃciencies of ozone, oxygen and other reacting
species such as hydrophobic pollutants that adsorb to and migrate at the
bubble–liquid interface.117
The mass-transfer coeﬃcient (kaqa, min1) in liquid can be calculated by
eqn (12.4):
dO3
dt ¼ kaq  a  O3*  O3
ð
Þ  kd  O3
(12:4)
where O3* and O3 are the steady-state dissolved ozone concentrations
(mg L1) and at time t, respectively.35 kd is the first-order decay rate constant
of dissolved ozone (min1). kaqa (s1) is the mass transfer rate constant or
volumetric liquid mass transfer coeﬃcient that can be then determined by
multiplying the mass transfer coeﬃcient (kaq, m s1) with the geometric
surface area (a) of the ozone bubble per volume of solution (m1), which is
calculated by eqn (12.5):
a ¼ Total surface area
Total volume
¼ N  4  p  r2
N  4
3  p  r3 ¼ 3
r
(12:5)
Ozonation Nanobubble Technology
359

where N is the total number of ozone NBs in liquid, and r is the radius of the
ozone bubble. This formula assumes a uniform size or radius of ozone NBs
in water and thus enables this simplified calculation of this geometric sur-
face area (a). The kaqa level is aﬀected by the ozone concentration in the gas
phase, the feed gas flow rate, liquid temperature and pH, as well as the
ozone bubble characteristics such as bubble size and concentrations. The
reported kaqa values varied from 0.2103 s1 to 25103 s1 in water.118,119
kaqa was shown to slight decrease from 6.9103 s1 to 4.3103 s1 when
the solution pH increased from 1.5 to 9.118 One of the plausible reasons of
the improved reactivity of ozone NBs is that, due to the bubble shrinkage
and surface tension force at the water–gas interface, ozone NBs may present
high internal pressures, which significantly elevate the gas solubility and the
level of O3*.66 Moreover, the mass transfer coeﬃcient (kaq) does not change
with the forms or sizes of ozone bubbles or NBs, as kaq is a measure of the
mass transport rate of the gaseous molecules across the liquid and gas film
layers (two-film theory) and a characteristic that is governed by the prop-
erties of gas and liquid or the gas–liquid interface. Thus the second reason is
clearly owing to the geometric surface area (a) that increases with the re-
duced bubble size of ozone.
The mass transfer eﬃciency (MTE), which is a ratio of the mass of ozone
that is transferred to the liquid from the gas phase, can be calculated in eqn
(12.6):
MTE ¼ QL  O3
½
L
QG  O3
½
G
 100 %
(12:6)
where QL is the input liquid flow rate (mL min1), QG is the input gas flow
rate (cm3 min1), and [O3]L and [O3]G are the ozone concentrations in liquid
Table 12.1
Summary of the literature-reported membrane ozonation systems.
Membrane materials
Pore size
Ozone bubble
diameter (nm)
Reported or
calculated MET
Ref.
Shirasu porous glass
(SPG) membranes
510 nm
Bubbleless
0.1% (hydrophilic)
0.3% (hydrophobic)
121
PVDF membrane
420 nm
Bubbleless
0.21%
122
PVDF membrane
0.1–1 mm
Bubbleless
NA
123
PVDF membrane
0.2 mm
Bubbleless
NA
124
PVDF membrane/Ni
foam
0.2 mm
Bubbleless
NA
125
Non-porous PDMS
Membrane
NA
Bubbleless
0.35%
126
Polytetrafluoroethylene
(PTFE)
0.2–1 mm
10–90 mm
NA
127
Alumina capillary
membrane
0.6 mm
100 mm
NA
128
Al2O3 ceramic
membranes
100–900 nm Bubbleless
NA
129
360
Chapter 12

and gaseous phases (mg L1), respectively. As mentioned, a rationale ozone
contactor or reactor design is important for improving mass transfer. As
Table 12.1 shows, very few studies report or provide suﬃcient data to
calculate the MET values, which was found to be around 0.1%–0.3%.
Previous studies indicated that the MTE for oxygen36,120 and ozone34,37 in
OFRs are several orders of magnitude higher than in other contactors. The
ozone–water mass transfer in the OFR under continuous flow was found to
increase with the increasing oscillatory frequencies and amplitudes. This
oscillation is expected to increase kLa as ultrafine bubbles may evolve, which
provides larger surface areas for mass transfer.35
12.3.3
Enhanced Reactivity of Ozone Nanobubbles
Enhanced reactivity and the oxidation power or duration of ozone NBs may
be attributed to the continuous release of ozone molecules from NBs and
radical formation from bubble collapse. Moreover, the improved degrad-
ation of water pollutants may also be attributed to the high adsorption
capability and mass transfer of NBs oﬀering a large surface area to facilitate
the reaction. For example, NBs were combined with vacuum ultraviolet
(VUV) irradiation (185–254 nm) to enhance the degradation of the sodium
dodecylbenzenesulfonate (SDBS) surfactant in aqueous solution.130 The
penetration of the incident 185 nm UV light in water is very short because of
its high absorption coeﬃcient in water (1.8 cm at 298 K).131 Thus the rate-
determining step in VUV reactor is the diﬀusion of the SDBS to the UV-
irradiated reaction site, where both OH radicals and direct photolysis result
in the surfactant degradation. The presence of NBs allows surfactants to
rapidly diﬀuse to the interface of bubbles from bulk solution.130 Moreover,
the degradation rate of surfactants (SDBS) was found faster than that of
nonsurfactants (e.g. benzene sulfonate) with the presence of NBs under UV
irradiation, possibly because surfactants can eﬀectively adsorb at the water–
gas interface of micro/nanobubbles and then stabilize the micro/nano-
bubbles as degradation reaction sites.132
12.3.4
Applications of Ozone Nanobubbles
The worldwide market for ozone generation technology is expected to grow
at a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of approximately 6.0% over the
next five years and will reach US$20 million in 2024, from US$14 million in
2019, according to a new research study. As a result of the need to destroy
and avoid the formation of substances of concern, typically enforced with
recent legal regulations, the International Ozone Association (IOA) predicted
that the U.S. market for oxygen/ozone used in drinking water applications is
accelerating exponentially. Global ozone CAPEX spending is a significant
part of overall disinfection technology spending, which is at US$6.14 billion
for 2019.
Ozonation Nanobubble Technology
361

Ozonation is a common advanced oxidation process (AOP) that is applied
mostly for enhancing degradation of target substances (e.g. refractory pol-
lutants, microbial pathogens, color and odor) in air, drinking water, in-
dustrial water, wastewater, medical applications and food treatment or
processing.1,2 With improved solubility and stability of ozonated water,
ozone micro/nanobubbles have a great potential as a disinfectant for water
treatment,105 for oral cleaning or teeth treatment106–108 and for food pro-
cessing.109 Both oxygen and ozone NBs were shown to reduce COD,133 de-
colorize the wastewater from the textile industry,134 and reduce the
concentration of pesticides.135 Ozone microbubbles caused 99.99% in-
activation of E. coli cells with a lower ozone dose and a smaller volume of the
water disinfection systems.99,136 In addition, ozone NBs are eﬀective against
other types of bacteria such as Bacillus subtilis spores and Cryptosporidium
parvum.137 The persistent pathogens such as norovirus in oysters or E. coli
bacteria in frozen vegetables (e.g. spinach or listeria) pose catastrophic
health implications around the world. During food disinfection or storage,
chemical treatments are often not desirable or practical as they may nega-
tively aﬀect the taste and quality of the food products. Ozone and oxygen NBs
are thus considered holding potential to make a change. For example, ozone
NBs may largely reduce the dosage of ozone, oﬀ-gas consumption and
human exposure. Moreover, ozone NBs in water, after application on food,
are expected to sustain disinfection power much longer than regular ozo-
nated water. The surface coating of food by negatively charged NBs help
remove and destroy most organics and pathogens from the surface of the
food. Bacteria inactivation and removal are also anticipated due to the for-
mation of hydroxyl radicals or other reactive species by ozone NBs (e.g.
during collapse or burst).137,138 Furthermore, combinations of NBs with UV
irradiation or ultrasonication may boost radical formation and improve the
disinfection power of NBs.51,139,140
12.4
Future Research Directions
12.4.1
Industrialized Ozone Nanobubble Generator
Development
In the research areas of enhancing the transfer eﬃciency of gases into li-
quids, developing a highly scalable nanobubble (NBs) production method
that enables the eﬃcient, industrial-scale production of saturated ozone NB
solutions is still at infancy stage. Early commercial deployment has dem-
onstrated the value and potential of NBs as a hypereﬃcient gas transfer and
chemical-free water quality remediation method in a broad set of new and
existing processes including surface water remediation, horticulture, aqua-
culture and water treatment applications.
Further, industry standard ozone injection methods such as Venturi
nozzles or contact bubble chambers often ineﬃciently transfer ozone, re-
sulting in oﬀ-gassing. Oﬀ-gassed ozone reduces ozone utilization rates and
362
Chapter 12

creates a health and safety hazard for drinking water operators due to the
low exposure limits. Conversion into ozone NBs may present the opportunity
to minimize or eliminate ozone oﬀ-gassing resulting in increased utilization
rates and to reduce health and safety concerns. Increased ozone utilization
rates directly impact the capital and operational costs of ozone injection,
reducing the cost of ozone treatment. However, due to the lack of suitable
instrumentation for the characterization of NBs and inadequate knowledge
in the formation and stability of NBs in water, there are many notable bar-
riers for commercialization or industrialization of ozone NB technology.
Novel experimental and model approaches need to be integrated to evaluate
the promising properties of ozone NBs widely claimed in the literature:
enhanced reactivity (e.g. higher radical generation and higher dissolved
ozone levels) and the resulting higher potency in pollutant degradation or
disinfection. For example, stability of bubble size and distribution, con-
centrations and zeta potentials of ozone NB water must be rigourously
examined to evaluate water chemistry changes after injection of ozone NBs
into environmentally relevant water matrixes, to characterize reactive radical
species generation and concentrations and to establish a new modeling and
experimental assessment framework for ozone NB stability and collapse
dynamics.
12.4.2
Safety Concerns of Ozone Nanobubbles
The development and industrialization of ozone NBs in the drinking water
matrix will be critical for guiding dose control and application strategies
(spatial and temporal) to ensure suﬃcient NBs for specific treatment goals.
NB ozonation represents a potentially game-changing water treatment and
disinfection technology that significantly increases contaminant degrad-
ation eﬃciencies and the sustainability of ozone treatment. It combines the
benefits of ozone, as a highly powerful oxidant capable of removing some of
the most intractable emerging contaminants and of leaving no chemical
residual after treatment, with the various benefits of nanobubble gas in-
jection. For the disinfection and remediation of drinking water plants, ozone
NBs are poised to yield greater eﬃcacies of pollution and pathogen removal
than regular ozonation (with fine and coarse bubbles in contact chambers).
It is also very important to develop a nanobubble generator specifically
designed for ozone NB generation in drinking water treatment applications.
Core technology research is critical to maximize ozone NB production while
eliminating the oﬀ-gassing of ozone and to minimize the liquid pumping
requirements (the primary source of electrical consumption) of NB pro-
duction to ensure market-competitive operational cost. As part of maxi-
mizing NB production, the elimination of larger coarse bubble production is
essential to maximize ozone transfer eﬃciency and ozonation utilization and
to eliminate process safety hazards. It is required to characterize the ad-
vantages of ozone and NB oxidation by comparing the eﬀectiveness of dis-
solved ozone and NB-suspended ozone on common target contaminants in
Ozonation Nanobubble Technology
363

clean water and real-world water matrices. Model contaminants such as
perfluorinated substances, taste and odor compounds, natural organic
matter (NOM) and medicinal substances will be used to compare the ef-
fectiveness of dissolved ozone and ozone NBs and inform a go-to-market
strategy based on contaminant removal performance. Systematic and in-
tensive study of ozone NBs will need to be conducted, ranging from la-
boratory proof-of-concept studies, the design and field validation of a
modular ozone NB generator designed for drinking water disinfection and
other broad applications.
Lastly, ozone is a known phytotoxic gas, and its ecological risk has been
well-known in agricultural and food-related applications.141–143 Overhead
spray irrigation of aqueous ozone (3 mg L1 and 6 mg L1) was shown to
negatively aﬀect plant growth,143 while low ozone concentrations (up to
1.5 mg L1) did not present measurable risk. Thus it is also imperative de-
termine the upper tolerance limits of foliar spray so that peak pathogen
control eﬃcacy is achieved without posing significant adverse risks on
ecological systems and even human health.
Acknowledgements
This research is partially supported by the United States Department of
Agriculture (USDA), the National Institute of Food and Agriculture, AFRI
project [2018-07549] and the United States Environmental Protection Agency
(US EPA) under Assistance Agreement No. 83945101 and 84001901 (EPA P3
phase I and II). The USDA and the EPA have not formally reviewed this study.
The views expressed in this document are solely those of authors and do not
necessarily reflect those of the agencies. The USDA and EPA do not endorse
any products or commercial services mentioned in this publication.
References
1. M. V. Selma, A. M. Iba´n˜ez, M. Cantwell and T. Suslow, Food Microbiol.,
2008, 25, 558–565.
2. A. Pe´rez, T. Poznyak and I. Chairez, Ozone: Sci. Eng., 2015, 37, 119–126.
3. J.-G. Kim, A. E. Yousef and S. Dave, J. Food Prot., 1999, 62, 1071–1087.
4. S. Hayakumo, S. Arakawa, Y. Mano and Y. Izumi, Clin. Oral Invest.,
2013, 17, 379–388.
5. J. Bing, C. Hu and L. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 202, 118–126.
6. V. Prabha, R. D. Barma, R. Singh and A. Madan, Trends Biosci., 2015, 8,
4031–4047.
7. R. Pandiselvam, S. Sunoj, M. Manikantan, A. Kothakota and K. Hebbar,
Ozone: Sci. Eng., 2017, 39, 115–126.
8. J. Tessier, P. N. Rodriguez, F. Lifshitz, S. M. Friedman and E. J. Lanata,
Acta Odontol. Latinoam., 2010, 23, 84–89.
9. P. Barone, Ozone Ther., 2017, 2, 19–25.
10. R. Manjunath, D. Singla and A. Singh, J. Adv. Oral Res., 2015, 6, 5–9.
364
Chapter 12

11. M. T. Buhmann, D. Abt, S. Altenried, P. Rupper, P. Betschart,
V. Zumstein, K. Maniura-Weber and Q. Ren, Front. Microbiol., 2018,
9, 1470.
12. K. C. Huth, M. Quirling, S. Maier, K. Kamereck, M. Alkhayer,
E. Paschos, U. Welsch, T. Miethke, K. Brand and R. Hickel, Int. Endod.
J., 2009, 42, 3–13.
13. R. Hems, K. Gulabivala, Y. L. Ng, D. Ready and D. Spratt, Int. Endod. J.,
2005, 38, 22–29.
14. M. Arita, M. Nagayoshi, T. Fukuizumi, T. Okinaga, S. Masumi,
M. Morikawa, Y. Kakinoki and T. Nishihara, Oral Microbiol. Immunol.,
2005, 20, 206–210.
15. K. C. Huth, M. Quirling, S. Lenzke, E. Paschos, K. Kamereck, K. Brand,
R. Hickel and N. Ilie, Eur. J. Oral Sci., 2011, 119, 204–210.
16. K. C. Huth, F. M. Jakob, B. Saugel, C. Cappello, E. Paschos, R. Hollweck,
R. Hickel and K. Brand, Eur. J. Oral Sci., 2006, 114, 435–440.
17. K. Verma, D. Gupta and A. Gupta, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2016, 4,
3021–3032.
18. K. Ikehata and Y. Li, in Advanced Oxidation Processes for Waste Water
Treatment, Elsevier, 2018, pp. 115–134.
19. S. Jasim, M. Uslu, R. Seth and N. Biswas, Ozone: Sci. Eng., 2020, 42,
461–468.
20. K. Loganathan, Desalin. Water Treat., 2016, 59, 65–71.
21. G. Ponnusamy, L. Francis, K. Loganathan, O. O. Ogunbiyi, S. Jasim and
J. Saththasivam, J. Water Supply: Res. Technol.--AQUA, 2019, 68,
655–665.
22. M. Schneider and L. Bla´ha, Environ. Sci. Eur., 2020, 32(1), 1–24.
23. C. Wei, F. Zhang, Y. Hu, C. Feng and H. Wu, Rev. Chem. Eng., 2017, 33,
49–89.
24. J. Alexander, G. Knopp, A. Do¨tsch, A. Wieland and T. Schwartz, Sci.
Total Environ., 2016, 559, 103–112.
25. J. Zheng, C. Su, J. Zhou, L. Xu, Y. Qian and H. Chen, Chem. Eng. J., 2017,
317, 309–316.
26. N. Miranda, E. Oliveira and G. Silva, Water Sci. Technol., 2014, 70,
108–113.
27. C. Somerlot and D. Davis, Clearwaters, 2015, 45, 18.
28. L. W. Gassie and J. D. Englehardt, Water Res., 2017, 125, 384–399.
29. J. Hollender, S. G. Zimmermann, S. Koepke, M. Krauss, C. S. McArdell,
C. Ort, H. Singer, U. von Gunten and H. Siegrist, Environ. Sci. Technol.,
2009, 43, 7862–7869.
30. K. L. Rakness, Ozone in drinking water treatment: process design,
operation, and optimization, American Water Works Association,
2011.
31. H. He, L. Zheng, Y. Li and W. Song, Ozone: Sci. Eng., 2015, 37,
78–84.
32. Y. Qiu, C.-H. Kuo and M. E. Zappi, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2001, 35,
209–215.
Ozonation Nanobubble Technology
365

33. N. F. Moreira, J. M. Sousa, G. Macedo, A. R. Ribeiro, L. Barreiros,
M. Pedrosa, J. L. Faria, M. F. R. Pereira, S. Castro-Silva and
M. A. Segundo, Water Res., 2016, 94, 10–22.
34. A. Al-Abduly, P. Christensen, A. Harvey and K. Zahng, Chem. Eng.
Process. Process Intensif., 2014, 84, 82–89.
35. C. A. Graça, R. B. Lima, M. F. R. Pereira, A. M. Silva and A. Ferreira,
Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 389, 124412.
36. A. Ferreira, J. A. Teixeira and F. Rocha, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 262,
499–508.
37. M. S. Lucas, N. M. Reis and G. L. Puma, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 296,
335–339.
38. S. Hayakumo, S. Arakawa, M. Takahashi, K. Kondo, Y. Mano and
Y. Izumi, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2014, 15, 055003.
39. D. Gardoni, A. Vailati and R. Canziani, Ozone: Sci. Eng., 2012, 34,
233–242.
40. L. V. Tkhi, V. Tarasov and Y. I. Popov, Theor. Found. Chem. Eng., 2009,
43, 846.
41. I. Fa´bia´n, Pure Appl. Chem., 2006, 78, 1559–1570.
42. C. Gottschalk, J. A. Libra and A. Saupe, Ozonation of water and waste
water: A practical guide to understanding ozone and its applications, John
Wiley & Sons, 2009.
43. E. Paul and H. Debellefontaine, Ozone: Sci. Eng., 2007, 29, 415–427.
44. J. Hoigne´ and H. Bader, Water Res., 1994, 28(1), 45–55.
45. C. Yurteri and M. D. Gurol, Ozone: Sci. Eng., 1988, 10(3), 277–290.
46. A. Laplanche, M. T. Orta de Velasquez, V. Boisdon, N. Martin and
G. Martin, Ozone: Sci. Eng., 1995, 17(1), 97–117.
47. M. Alheshibri, J. Qian, M. Jehannin and V. S. Craig, Langmuir, 2016, 32,
11086–11100.
48. T. Uchida, S. Oshita, M. Ohmori, T. Tsuno, K. Soejima, S. Shinozaki,
Y. Take and K. Mitsuda, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2011, 6, 1.
49. F. Y. Ushikubo, T. Furukawa, R. Nakagawa, M. Enari, Y. Makino,
Y. Kawagoe, T. Shiina and S. Oshita, Colloids Surf., A, 2010, 361,
31–37.
50. W. W. Bowley and G. L. Hammond, Ind. Eng. Chem. Process Des. Dev.,
1978, 17, 2–8.
51. A. Agarwal, W. J. Ng and Y. Liu, Chemosphere, 2011, 84, 1175–1180.
52. J. Zhu, H. An, M. Alheshibri, L. Liu, P. M. Terpstra, G. Liu and
V. S. Craig, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 11203–11211.
53. Z. Gao, A. M. Kennedy, D. A. Christensen and N. Y. Rapoport,
Ultrasonics, 2008, 48, 260–270.
54. O. C. Thomas, R. E. Cavicchi and M. J. Tarlov, Langmuir, 2003, 19,
6168–6177.
55. M. Z˙ bik and R. G. Horn, Colloids Surf., A, 2003, 222, 323–328.
56. T. Marui, The 14th World Multi-Conference on Systemics, Cybernetics and
Informatics, International Social Science Council, Orlando, 2010.
366
Chapter 12

57. A. K. A. Ahmed, X. Shi, L. Hua, L. Manzueta, W. Qing, T. Marhaba and
W. Zhang, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2018, 66, 5117–5124.
58. S. Liu, S. Oshita, Y. Makino, Q. Wang, Y. Kawagoe and T. Uchida, ACS
Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2015, 4, 1347–1353.
59. S. Liu, S. Oshita, S. Kawabata and D. Q. Thuyet, Langmuir, 2017, 33,
12478–12486.
60. S. Liu, S. Oshita, S. Kawabata, Y. Makino and T. Yoshimoto, Langmuir,
2016, 32, 11295–11302.
61. S. Aluthgun Hewage, J. H. Batagoda and J. N. Meegoda, Environ. Eng.
Sci., 2020, 37, 521–534.
62. K. Chiba and M. Takahashi, US Pat., US8137703B2, 2012.
63. J. H. Batagoda, S. D. A. Hewage and J. N. Meegoda, J. Environ. Eng. Sci.,
2019, 14, 130–138.
64. R. Parmar and S. K. Majumder, Chem. Eng. Process. Process Intensif.,
2013, 64, 79–97.
65. H. Li, L. Hu and Z. Xia, Materials, 2013, 6, 3676–3687.
66. L. Hu and Z. Xia, J. Hazard. Mater., 2018, 342, 446–453.
67. K. Terasaka, A. Hirabayashi, T. Nishino, S. Fujioka and D. Kobayashi,
Chem. Eng. Sci., 2011, 66, 3172–3179.
68. Y. Nakatake, S. Kisu, K. Shigyo, T. Eguchi and T. Watanabe, Energy,
2013, 59, 233–239.
69. Y. Nakatake, T. Watanabe and T. Eguchi, J. Energy Power Eng., 2013,
7, 827.
70. A. Azevedo, R. Etchepare, S. Calgaroto and J. Rubio, Miner. Eng., 2016,
94, 29–37.
71. R. Etchepare, A. Azevedo, S. Calgaroto and J. Rubio, Sep. Purif. Technol.,
2017, 184, 347–353.
72. R. Etchepare, H. Oliveira, M. Nicknig, A. Azevedo and J. Rubio, Miner.
Eng., 2017, 112, 19–26.
73. Q. Wang, H. Zhao, N. Qi, Y. Qin, X. Zhang and Y. Li, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 1–9.
74. Z. Pourkarimi, B. Rezai and N. Noaparast, Physicochem. Probl. Miner.
Process., 2017, 53, 920–942.
75. Y. Xiong and F. Peng, Int. J. Min. Sci. Technol., 2015, 25, 523–529.
76. F. Maoming, T. Daniel, R. Honaker and L. Zhenfu, Min. Sci. Technol.,
2010, 20, 1–19.
77. T. Makuta, F. Takemura, E. Hihara, Y. Matsumoto and M. Shoji, J. Fluid
Mech., 2006, 548, 113–131.
78. T. Makuta, R. Suzuki and T. Nakao, Ultrasonics, 2013, 53, 196–202.
79. J.-Y. Kim, M.-G. Song and J.-D. Kim, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2000, 223,
285–291.
80. A. K. A. Ahmed, C. Sun, L. Hua, Z. Zhang, Y. Zhang, W. Zhang and
T. Marhaba, Chemosphere, 2018, 203, 327–335.
81. A. Khaled Abdella Ahmed, C. Sun, L. Hua, Z. Zhang, Y. Zhang,
T. Marhaba and W. Zhang, Environ. Eng. Sci., 2018, 35, 720–727.
82. M. Kukizaki and Y. Baba, Colloids Surf., A, 2008, 326, 129–137.
Ozonation Nanobubble Technology
367

83. W. B. Zimmerman, V. Tesar, S. Butler and H. C. Bandulasena, Recent
Pat. Eng., 2008, 2, 1–8.
84. K. Ulatowski, P. Sobieszuk, A. Mro´z and T. Ciach, Chem. Eng. Process.
Process Intensif., 2019, 136, 62–71.
85. S. H. Oh, J. G. Han and J.-M. Kim, Fuel, 2015, 158, 399–404.
86. J. H. Weijs and D. Lohse, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2013, 110, 054501.
87. A. Marchand, J. H. Weijs, J. H. Snoeijer and B. Andreotti, Am. J. Phys.,
2011, 79, 999–1008.
88. P. S. Epstein and M. S. Plesset, J. Chem. Phys., 1950, 18, 1505–1509.
89. A. A. Kalmes, S. Ghosh and R. L. Watson, J. Am. Coll. Cardiol., 2013,
61, E106.
90. X. Zhang, X. Liu, Y. Zhong, Z. Zhou, Y. Huang and C. Q. Sun, Langmuir,
2016, 32, 11321–11327.
91. J. H. Weijs, J. R. Seddon and D. Lohse, Chem. Phys. Chem., 2012, 13,
2197–2204.
92. S. H. Oh and J.-M. Kim, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 3818–3823.
93. J. C. Millare and B. A. Basilia, ChemistrySelect, 2018, 3, 9268–9275.
94. A. Srinivas and P. Ghosh, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2011, 51, 795–806.
95. A. Khaled Abdella Ahmed, C. Sun, L. Hua, Z. Zhang, Y. Zhang,
T. Marhaba and W. Zhang, Environ. Eng. Sci., 2017, 720–727.
96. T.-W. Huang, S.-Y. Liu, Y.-J. Chuang, H.-Y. Hsieh, C.-Y. Tsai, W.-J. Wu,
C.-T. Tsai, U. Mirsaidov, P. Matsudaira and C.-S. Chang, Soft Matter,
2013, 9, 8856–8861.
97. M. Zhang, Y.-S. Tu and H.-P. Fang, Appl. Math. Mech., 2013, 34,
1433–1438.
98. T. Kimura and T. Ando, Ultrason. Technol., 2002, 14, 7–8.
99. M.
Sumikura,
M.
Hidaka,
H.
Murakami,
Y.
Nobutomo
and
T. Murakami, Water Sci. Technol., 2007, 56, 53–61.
100. S. Khuntia, S. K. Majumder and P. Ghosh, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2015,
98, 231–239.
101. M. Takahashi, K. Chiba and P. Li, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 1343–
1347.
102. P. Li, M. Takahashi and K. Chiba, Chemosphere, 2009, 75, 1371–1375.
103. M. S. Lucas, J. A. Peres and G. L. Puma, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2010, 72,
235–241.
104. T. A. Kurniawan, W.-H. Lo and G. Chan, Chem. Eng. J., 2006, 125, 35–57.
105. S. Saijai, V. Thonglek and K. Yoshikawa, Int. Plasma Environ. Sci.
Technol., 2019, 12, 55–58.
106. M. Seki, T. Ishikawa, H. Terada and M. Nashimoto, In Vivo, 2017, 31,
579–583.
107. K. Hayashi, T. Onda, H. Honda, N. Ozawa, H. Ohata, N. Takano and
T. Shibahara, Biochem. Biophys. Rep., 2019, 20, 100697.
108. S. Arakawa, M. Sugisawa and A. Leewananthawet, Dentistry, 2017, 7,
1–5.
109. Y. Inatsu, T. Kitagawa, N. Nakamura, S. Kawasaki, D. Nei, M. L. Bari
and S. Kawamoto, Food Sci. Technol. Res., 2011, 17, 479–485.
368
Chapter 12

110. F. Kobayashi, H. Ikeura, S. Ohsato, T. Goto and M. Tamaki, Crop Prot.,
2011, 30, 1514–1518.
111. A. Tekile, I. Kim and J.-Y. Lee, Korean Soc. Water Wastewater, 2017, 31,
481–490.
112. W. Ding, W. Jin, S. Cao, X. Zhou, C. Wang, Q. Jiang, H. Huang, R. Tu,
S.-F. Han and Q. Wang, Water Res., 2019, 160, 339–349.
113. M. Takahashi, K. Chiba and P. Li, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111,
11443–11446.
114. L.-B. Chu, S.-T. Yan, X.-H. Xing, A.-F. Yu, X.-L. Sun and B. Jurcik,
Chemosphere, 2008, 72, 205–212.
115. T. Zheng, Q. Wang, T. Zhang, Z. Shi, Y. Tian, S. Shi, N. Smale and
J. Wang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2015, 287, 412–420.
116. P. Li and H. Tsuge, J. Chem. Eng. Jpn., 2006, 39, 1213–1220.
117. H. Li, L. Hu, D. Song and A. Al-Tabbaa, Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health,
2014, 11, 473–486.
118. R. Ratnawati, D. A. Kusumaningtyas, P. Suseno and A. Prasetyaningrum,
MATEC Web of Conferences, 2018.
119. G. Tiwari and P. Bose, Chem. Eng. J., 2007, 132, 215–225.
120. N. Reis, R. N. Pereira, A. A. Vicente and J. A. Teixeira, Ind. Eng. Chem.
Res., 2008, 47, 7190–7201.
121. M. Kukuzaki, K. Fujimoto, S. Kai, K. Ohe, T. Oshima and Y. Baba, Sep.
Purif. Technol., 2010, 72, 347–356.
122. J. Phattaranawik, T. Leiknes and W. Pronk, J. Membr. Sci., 2005, 247,
153–167.
123. R. Jansen, J. De Rijk, A. Zwijnenburg, M. Mulder and M. Wessling,
J. Membr. Sci., 2005, 257, 48–59.
124. T. Leiknes, J. Phattaranawik, M. Boller, U. Von Gunten and W. Pronk,
Chem. Eng. J., 2005, 111, 53–61.
125. K. Li, L. Xu, Y. Zhang, A. Cao, Y. Wang, H. Huang and J. Wang, Appl.
Catal., B, 2019, 249, 316–321.
126. G. A. Zoumpouli, R. Baker, C. M. Taylor, M. J. Chippendale,
C. Smithers, S. S. Ho, D. Mattia, Y.-M. Chew and J. Wenk, Water, 2018,
10, 1416.
127. B. Wang, X. Xiong, Y. Shui, Z. Huang and K. Tian, Chem. Eng. J., 2019,
357, 678–688.
128. S. Heng, K. L. Yeung, M. Djafer and J.-C. Schrotter, J. Membr. Sci., 2007,
289, 67–75.
129. S. K. Stylianou, M. Kostoglou and A. I. Zouboulis, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res.,
2016, 55, 7587–7597.
130. T. Tasaki, T. Wada, Y. Baba and M. Kukizaki, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2009,
48, 4237–4244.
131. W. Han, P. Zhang, W. Zhu, J. Yin and L. Li, Water Res., 2004, 38, 4197–4203.
132. M. Kukizaki and M. Goto, Colloids Surf., A, 2007, 296, 174–181.
133. S. Kutty, F. Winarto, S. Gilani, A. Anizam, W. Karimah and M. Isa, Waste
Management and the Environment V, Southampton, UK, 2010: WIT Press,
pp. 415–423.
Ozonation Nanobubble Technology
369

134. L.-B. Chu, X.-H. Xing, A.-F. Yu, Y.-N. Zhou, X.-L. Sun and B. Jurcik,
Chemosphere, 2007, 68, 1854–1860.
135. H. Ikeura, F. Kobayashi and M. Tamaki, J. Food Eng., 2011, 103,
345–349.
136. L. Mezule, S. Tsyfansky, V. Yakushevich and T. Juhna, Desalination,
2009, 248, 152–159.
137. T. Temesgen, T. T. Bui, M. Han, T.-I. Kim and H. Park, Adv. Colloid
Interface Sci., 2017, 40–51.
138. K.-K. Chen, US Pat., US7488416B2, 2009.
139. Y. Ikeda-Dantsuji, L. B. Feril, K. Tachibana, K. Ogawa, H. Endo,
Y. Harada, R. Suzuki and K. Maruyama, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2011, 18,
425–430.
140. T. Zheng, T. Zhang, Q. Wang, Y. Tian, Z. Shi, N. Smale and B. Xu, RSC
Adv., 2015, 5, 77601–77609.
141. A. C. Hill and N. Littlefield, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1969, 3, 52–56.
142. J. Fuhrer and F. Booker, Environ. Int., 2003, 29, 141–154.
143. T. Graham, P. Zhang, Y. Zheng and M. A. Dixon, HortScience, 2009, 44,
774–780.
370
Chapter 12

Subject Index
activated carbon-based materials
activated carbon-supported
metal oxides
bimetallic oxides, 98–101
single-metal oxides,
95–98
adsorption or catalysis
AC catalytic ozonation, 86
intermediates, ad-
sorption of, 88–89
target organic compound,
adsorption of, 86–88
TOC removal, 86–87
biochar-based materials
biochar, 101–104
biochar-supported metal
oxides, 104–107
chemical properties, texture
characteristics and impur-
ities, 89–90
practical applications, 116–117
reaction mechanisms
adsorption
mechanism, 107
direct ozonation, 108
free radicals, 108
hydrogen peroxide for-
mation, 110–111
hydroxyl radical for-
mation, 109–110
hydroxyl radical mech-
anism, 111–116
superoxide radical for-
mation, 108–109
water matrix, influence of
activated carbon, de-
activation of, 93–94
activated carbon, re-
generation of, 94–95
bicarbonate and carbon-
ate, 92–93
chloride and sulfate, 91
activated carbon-supported metal
oxides
bimetallic oxides, 98–101
single-metal oxides
cerium oxide, 95–96
iron oxide, 96–98
metal oxides, 98–99
advanced oxidation processes
(AOPs), 57, 187, 201, 258
aluminum oxides, 11–12
antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs),
195, 278–279
antibiotic resistant bacteria (ARB), 195
AOPs. See advanced oxidation pro-
cesses (AOPs)
aqueous organic pollutants, visible-
light-driven photocatalytic ozona-
tion of, 237–238
application, 236–237
catalysts and performances
g-C3N4, 221–222
metal-oxide-type catalyst,
219–220
nanosheet (NS) g-C3N4,
222–223
TOC removal, 220, 223
vis/O3/bulk g-C3N4,
221–222

aqueous organic pollutants, visible-
light-driven photocatalytic
ozonation of (continued)
catalysts, structure–performance
relationship of
design and optimization
of g-C3N4, 233–234
g-C3N4, 231–233
WO3, 228–231
primary advantage, 218
reaction mechanism
DMPO–OH and DMPO–
OOH, 225, 227
DMPO spin trapping
technique, 224–225
in-situ EPR spectrometer,
224–225
O3/O2, 224
OH, 225–228
stability of g-C3N4
catalysts, 235
ARB. See antibiotic resistant bacteria
(ARB)
ARGs. See antibiotic resistance genes
(ARGs)
benzotriazole (BZA), 133
biochar-based materials
biochar
biomass materials, 101
HNO3 and NaOH, 102–103
hydroquinone degrad-
ation eﬃciency, 103
pollutant, ozonation of,
101–102
sludge-based biochar, 103
surface hydroxyl groups,
101–107
biochar-supported metal
oxides, 104–107
bisphenol A (BPA), 3, 330
BMPO. See 5-tert-butoxycarbonyl-
5-methyl-1-pyrroline-N-oxide
(BMPO)
BPA. See bisphenol A (BPA)
BZA. See benzotriazole (BZA)
carbon nanotubes (CNTs), 124
catalytic ceramic membranes
(CCMs), 330, 332
carbon-based
GO/rGO-based, 338–344
hybrid metal oxides and
carbon-based, 344–346
Ce-based
membrane fouling, 332
membrane, preparation
and performance of, 332
Cu-based
membrane fouling,
333–334
membrane, preparation
and performance of, 333
Fe-based
DBP precursors, removal
of, 327–328
membrane fouling,
328–329
membrane, preparation
and performance of,
325, 327
Mn-based
DBP precursors, removal
of, 330–331
membrane fouling,
331–332
membrane, preparation
and performance of,
329–330
catalytic ozone processes (COPs), 30
catalytic peroxone process and
coupled processes, 241–242, 255
application, 243–246
drawbacks, 246
mechanism 1, 242
mechanism 2, 242–243
mechanism 3, 243
photolysis and photocatalysis,
253–254
plasma, 255
SACs
C3N4–Mn, 251–252
Mn–N4 sites, 252
372
Subject Index

sonolysis, 254
traditional metal catalysts
CeO2 catalyst, 249–250
Fe0 catalyst, 246–247
SO4
2–/ZrO2–Fe2O3 cata-
lyst, 248–249
Ti(IV) catalyst, 247–248
CBM. See conduction band maximum
(CBM)
CCMs. See catalytic ceramic mem-
branes (CCMs)
a-CD. See a-cyclodextrin (a-CD)
CECs. See contaminants of emerging
concern (CECs)
ceramic membranes (CMs), 330
cetyltrimethylammonium bromide
(CTAB), 4
chemical oxygen demand (COD), 3,
86, 88, 203
chemical vapor deposition
(CVD), 322
4-chlorophenol (4-CP), 5
CMA. See copper–oxygen–manganese/
g-alumina (CMA)
CMs. See ceramic membranes (CMs)
CNTs. See carbon nanotubes (CNTs)
cobalt oxides, 7–8
COD. See chemical oxygen demand
(COD)
composite metal oxides
composite materials, 57
direct reaction by ozone, 56–57
heterogeneous catalytic
ozonation, 57
natural minerals, 78–79
application of, 71, 75
ceramic
honeycomb, 74, 76
goethite (FeOOH)
mineral, 77
Lewis acidic sites, 76
zeolites, 74–75
oxide composites, diﬀerent
types of, 58
ozone-based treatment
processes, 57
perovskite-type catalysts, 78
BiFeO3, 63–64
B-site transition metal
element, 59
inorganic compounds,
59
LaCoO3, 64
mesoporous materials, 63
A or B cations, 59
in water and wastewater,
catalytic ozonation of
pollutants, 59–62
spinel-like oxides-type cata-
lysts, 64–73, 78
aluminate spinels, 71
CuFe2O4, 65
DBP, 65
ferrite spinel oxides cata-
lysts, 70–71
mixing metal oxides, 65
NiFe2O4, 65
pollutants in water and
wastewater, catalytic
ozonation of, 65–69
compound parabolic collector (CPC),
191
conduction band maximum (CBM),
222
contaminants of emerging concern
(CECs), 196
copper–oxygen–manganese/g-alumina
(CMA), 37
COPs. See catalytic ozone processes
(COPs)
4-CP. See 4-chlorophenol (4-CP)
CPC. See compound parabolic col-
lector (CPC)
CTAB. See cetyltrimethylammonium
bromide (CTAB)
CVD. See chemical vapor deposition
(CVD)
a-cyclodextrin (a-CD), 137
DBP. See di-n-butyl phthalate (DBP)
DBPs. See disinfection by-products
(DBPs)
Subject Index
373

DEET. See N,N-diethyl-meta-toluamide
(DEET)
density functional theory (DFT),
44, 149
DFT. See density functional theory
(DFT)
diﬀuse reflectance infrared Fourier
transform spectroscopy
(DRIFTS), 155
5,5-dimethyl-1-pyrroline N-oxide
(DMPO), 40, 109, 202, 252
5,5-dimethyl-2-oxo-pyrroline-1-oxyl
(DMPOX), 139
dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), 40
di-n-butyl phthalate (DBP), 65
disinfection by-products (DBPs),
314, 330–331
dissolved organic matter (DOM), 262
DMPO. See 5,5-dimethyl-1-pyrroline
N-oxide (DMPO)
DMPOX. See 5,5-dimethyl-2-oxo-pyr-
roline-1-oxyl (DMPOX)
DMSO. See dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)
DOM. See dissolved organic matter
(DOM)
DRIFTS. See diﬀuse reflectance in-
frared Fourier transform spec-
troscopy (DRIFTS)
EAOP. See electrochemical advanced
oxidation process (EAOP)
EEM. See excitation and emission
matrix (EEM)
EEO. See electrical energy per order
(EEO)
eﬄuent organic matter (EfOM), 88
EfOM. See eﬄuent organic matter
(EfOM)
electrical energy per order (EEO), 207
electrocatalytic ozonation processes
for water and wastewater treat-
ment, 284–286
electrochemical technologies,
258–259
electrolysis–ozonation
treatment, 260
enhance water treatment
performance, 259
E-peroxone process, 260–261
adsorption, 281–282
ARGs, disinfection and
removal of, 278–279
cathode configuration,
265–267
cathode materials, 264–265
cathode stability, 267–268
combination with UV
photolysis, 280–281
electrocoagulation,
283–284
harmful oxidation by-
products, control of,
268, 278
membrane, 282–283
organic pollutants, re-
moval of, 268–278
pilot-scale study, 279–280
OH generation, mechanisms
of, 262–263
pollutant abatement, mech-
anisms of, 264
electrochemical advanced oxidation
process (EAOP), 261
electron paramagnetic resonance
(EPR), 129, 155, 202, 224, 252
electron spin resonance (ESR),
109, 155
electrospray ionization-mass spec-
trometry (ESI-MS), 223
E-peroxone process, 260–261
ARGs, disinfection and re-
moval of, 278–279
cathode configuration,
265–267
cathode materials, 264–265
cathode stability, 267–268
combination with
adsorption, 281–282
electrocoagulation,
283–284
membrane, 282–283
UV photolysis, 280–281
374
Subject Index

pilot-scale study, 279–280
water and wastewater
treatment
harmful oxidation by-
products, control of,
268, 278
organic pollutants,
removal of, 268–278
EPR. See electron paramagnetic
resonance (EPR)
ESI-MS. See electrospray ionization-
mass spectrometry (ESI-MS)
ESR. See electron spin resonance
(ESR)
EXAFS. See extended X-ray ab-
sorption fine structure (EXAFS)
excitation and emission matrix
(EEM), 315
extended X-ray absorption fine
structure (EXAFS), 34
FFA. See furfuryl alcohol (FFA)
flat-sheet ceramic membranes, 330
fluorescence microscopy image
(FMI), 151
fluorine (F), 128
FMI. See fluorescence microscopy
image (FMI)
furfuryl alcohol (FFA), 158
g-C3N4. See graphitic carbon nitride
(g-C3N4)
GO/rGO-based catalytic ceramic
membranes
interface characterization,
eﬀect of, 340–342
MPs degradation, 338–340
N-rGO-CM-I, 343–344
synchronous removal, 342–343
synergistic self-cleaning
process, 340
graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4),
221
HAAs. See haloacetic acids (HAAs)
haloacetic acids (HAAs), 278, 327
heteroatom dopants
B-doping/P-doping, 146
N-doping, 145–146
S-doping/F-doping, 146–147
heterogeneous catalytic ozonation
catalytic ozonation process, 1
catalytic reaction mechanisms
catalytic active sites,
identification of,
42–45
radical and non-radical
pathways, circum-
stance of, 39–42
theoretical calculation,
mechanism analysis
by, 44, 46–47
cobalt oxides, 7–8
iron oxides
4-CP, 5–6
FeOOH, 5
homogeneous catalytic
ozonation, 7
magnetic property, 6
ozone, transformation
process of, 5
redox transformation, 6
SMX, 6
manganese oxides
acidic pH, 3
catalytic activity of, 2–3
mesoporous a-MnO2, 4
petal-like d-MnO2 micro-
spheres, 3–4
single ozonation, 3
tunneling structures, 3
mechanism of
Brønsted acid sites, 9
oxygen vacancy, 10
surface hydroxyl
groups, 9
transition metal oxides,
8–9
mixed metal oxides
mechanism of, 22–23
perovskites, 18–20
spinel oxides, 20–22
Subject Index
375

heterogeneous catalytic ozonation
(continued)
operation parameters, eﬀects of
catalyst dosage, 37
contaminants, initial
concentration of, 37–38
initial pH, 35–36
ozone dosage, 36–37
reaction temperature, 38
water, coexisting ions in,
38–39
practical applications
application case, 48–49
lower reuse rate, 50–51
mineralization, lower
eﬃciency of, 48, 50
solution pH,
dependent on, 51
single metal oxides
aluminum oxides, 11–12
magnesium and calcium
oxides, 14–16
reaction mechanism dis-
cussion, 16–18
titanium oxides, 13–14
supported metal oxides
metal oxides/Al2O3, 30–31
metal oxides/TiO2, 31–32
metal oxides/zeolites,
32–34
porous materials, 34–35
highest occupied molecular orbital
(HOMO), 44
HOMO. See highest occupied
molecular orbital (HOMO)
hybrid ceramic membrane catalytic
ozonation, 313–314, 346–347
carbon-based
GO/rGO-based, 338–344
hybrid metal oxides and
carbon-based, 344–346
Ce-based
membrane fouling, 332
membrane, preparation
and performance
of, 332
chemical coating techniques
coupling agents, 321
CVD, 322
in-situ growth, 322–323
sol–gel method, 321–322
surface grafting, 322
Cu-based
membrane fouling,
333–334
membrane, preparation
and performance
of, 333
Fe-based
DBP precursors, removal
of, 327–328
membrane fouling,
328–329
membrane, preparation
and performance of,
325, 327
hybrid metal-oxide-based
CuMn2O4 coated ceramic
membranes, 336–338
MnO2–Co3O4 coated cer-
amic membranes,
334–336
in-situ-O/F, 314
membrane fouling mitigation
mechanism, 316–318
Mn-based
DBP precursors, removal
of, 330–331
membrane fouling,
331–332
membrane, preparation
and performance of,
329–330
ozone coupling mode on EfOM
removal, 315
physical coating techniques
casting, 319–320
dip coating, 318–319
filtration, 320
LBL assembly, 320–321
PVD, 318
spin coating, 319
376
Subject Index

pre-O/F and in-situ-O/F, mem-
brane fouling, 316
reaction mechanism
catalytic membrane, 324
free electrons, role of, 324
inorganic membrane
fouling, 325–326
organic membrane foul-
ing elimination, mech-
anism of, 325, 327
oxygen-containing func-
tional groups, role
of, 324
surface hydroxyl groups,
323
hydroxyl radical mechanism
bulk solution reaction, 111–112
surface and bulk solution
reactions
7-hydroxycoumarin,
114–115
metal oxide-supported
catalysts, 116
OH scavenging eﬃciency,
113–114
Pd/CeO2 surface, 113
tBA, adsorption of,
112–113
IBP. See ibuprofen (IBP)
ibuprofen (IBP), 3
in-situ-O/F. See in-situ-ozonation fil-
tration (in-situ-O/F)
in-situ-ozonation filtration (in-situ-O/F),
314
IONS. See iron oxide nanoparticle
(IONS)
IPMP. See 2-isopropyl-3-
methoxypyrazine (IPMP)
iron oxide nanoparticle (IONS), 325
iron oxides
4-CP, 5–6
FeOOH, 5
homogeneous catalytic ozona-
tion, 7
magnetic property, 6
ozone, transformation process
of, 5
redox transformation, 6
SMX, 6
2-isopropyl-3-methoxypyrazine
(IPMP), 11
ketoprofen (KTP), 140
KTP. See ketoprofen (KTP)
LaMn4Ox. See lanthanum manganite
perovskites composites
(LaMn4Ox)
lanthanum manganite perovskites
composites (LaMn4Ox), 64
layer-by-layer (LBL) assembly, 320–321
LBL assembly. See layer-by-layer
(LBL) assembly
LEDs. See light-emitting diodes (LEDs)
LIB. See lithium-ion battery (LIB)
light-emitting diodes (LEDs), 171
lithium-ion battery (LIB), 132
manganese-containing catalysts, 329
manganese oxides
acidic pH, 3
catalytic activity of, 2–3
mesoporous a-MnO2, 4
petal-like d-MnO2 micro-
spheres, 3–4
single ozonation, 3
tunneling structures, 3
metal-free nanocarbon catalyzed
ozonation, oxidation pathways in
critical issues, 159
nonradical oxidations
1O2, 153
engineering outlooks of,
154–155
surface-adsorbed
activated species, 153
radical-based oxidations
O2
 mediated oxidations,
151
OH-based oxidations,
149–151
Subject Index
377

metal-free nanocarbon catalyzed
ozonation, oxidation pathways in
(continued)
ROS and evaluation of roles,
types of
1O2, 157–158
HO2/O2
, 157
OH, 155–157
surface-adsorbed species,
158–159
2-methylisoborneol (MIB), 12
MIB. See 2-methylisoborneol (MIB)
mixed metal oxides
mechanism of, 22–23
perovskites, 18–20
spinel oxides, 20–22
MMT. See montmorillonite (MMT)
montmorillonite (MMT), 185
multiwall carbon nanotubes
(MWCNTs), 124, 184
MWCNTs. See multiwall carbon
nanotubes (MWCNTs)
nanobubbles (NBs), 355–356
nanocarbon materials, 159–160
active sites on nanocarbons,
147–149
carbon nanotube-based metal-
free nanocarbons
catalytic activities of,
124–125
EPR, 129
F-CNTs-0.45, 129
fluorine, 128
heteroatom doping,
126–127
MWCNTs, 124–125
physical and chemical
properties, 125–126
SWCNTs, 124
TBA, 125
to synthesize N-doped
CNTs, 127
graphene-based metal-free
nanocarbons
carbon atoms, 129
catalytic ozonation
activities, 133
environmental
remediation, 129
LIB-rGO, 132
metal-free heteroatoms,
doping of, 132
MWI-rGO, 131–132
non-metallic hetero-
atoms, doping of, 130
N-rGO, P-rGO and B-rGO,
133–134
oxidation of, 130
PHBA, 131
pyrolysis process, 130
Raman spectroscopy, ID/IG
value in, 130–131
rGO, 130
metal-free nanocarbon cata-
lyzed ozonation, oxidation
pathways in
critical issues, 159
nonradical oxidations,
152–155
radical-based oxidations,
149–151
ROS and evaluation of
roles, types of, 155–159
metal-free nanocarbons, active
sites on
carbon framework and
dimensional eﬀect,
141–142
edging and structural de-
fects, 143–144
heteroatom dopants,
145–147
surface oxygen function-
alities, 142–143
metal-free nanocarbons, types of
a-CD, 137
b-cyclodextrin and mela-
mine, 135
DMPO–OH, 139
electron-mobility
region, 140
378
Subject Index

EPR experiments and
quenching tests,
138–139
g-C3N4, catalytic activity
of, 140–141
KTP, 139–140
M-g-C3N4, 141
N3C-1100, 135
N-doping, 135
p-BQ, 137
Raman spectra, 136
supported nanocarbons, active
sites on, 147
nanofiltration (NF), 322
natural organic matter (NOM), 314
NBs. See nanobubbles (NBs)
NBT. See nitro blue tetrazolium
(NBT)
N-doped rGO (NGO), 132
NF. See nanofiltration (NF)
NGO. See N-doped rGO (NGO)
nitro blue tetrazolium (NBT), 40
4-nitrophenol (4-NP), 132
N,N-diethyl-meta-toluamide
(DEET), 221
NOM. See natural organic matter
(NOM)
4-NP. See 4-nitrophenol (4-NP)
O3. See ozone (O3)
OBPs. See oxidation byproducts
(OBPs)
OMF system. See ozonation/mem-
brane filtration (OMF) system
oxidation by-products (OBPs), 259
ozonation/membrane filtration
(OMF) system, 330
ozonation nanobubble technology
industrialized ozone nano-
bubble generator develop-
ment, 362–363
nanobubbles and applications,
355–356
enhanced reactivity, 361
ozonation, mass transfer
of, 359–361
ozone nanobubbles, ap-
plications of, 361–362
stability and disinfection
characteristics of,
358–359
ozone nanobubble generation
methods, 356–357
safety concerns, 363–364
water disinfection and ozona-
tion disinfection
limitations of, 354–355
principles of, 353–354
ozone (O3), 56
para-benzoquinone (p-BQ), 137
para-hydroxylbenzoic acid
(PHBA), 131
p-BQ. See para-benzoquinone (p-BQ)
PCBA. See p-chlorobenzoic acid
(PCBA)
p-chlorobenzoic acid (PCBA), 133
PDA. See polydopamine (PDA)
PDMS. See polydimethylsiloxane
(PDMS)
P-doped rGO (PGO), 132
perovskites, 18–20
peroxymonosulfate (PMS)
activation, 319
PGO. See P-doped rGO (PGO)
PHBA. See para-hydroxylbenzoic acid
(PHBA)
physical vapor deposition (PVD), 318
plasma, 255
PMS activation. See peroxy-
monosulfate (PMS) activation
polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS), 190
polydopamine (PDA), 321
poly (vinyl alcohol) (PVA), 320
PVA. See poly (vinyl alcohol) (PVA)
PVD. See physical vapor deposition
(PVD)
QSAR. See quantitative structure–
activity relationship (QSAR)
quantitative structure–activity rela-
tionship (QSAR), 134, 148–149
Subject Index
379

reactive oxygen species (ROS), 3, 202,
224, 241
reduced graphene oxide (rGO), 130
reverse osmosis concentrated
(ROC), 87
rGO. See reduced graphene oxide
(rGO)
ROC. See reverse osmosis concen-
trate (ROC)
ROS. See reactive oxygen species
(ROS)
SA. See salicylic acid (SA)
SACs. See single-atom catalysts
(SACs)
salicylic acid (SA), 328
SCA. See silane coupling agent (SCA)
SDBS. See sodium dodecyl benzene
sulfonate (SDBS)
SDS. See simulated distribution sys-
tem (SDS)
silane coupling agent (SCA), 321
simulated distribution system
(SDS), 328
single-atom catalysts (SACs)
C3N4–Mn, 251–252
Mn–N4 sites, 252
single metal oxides
aluminum oxides, 11–12
magnesium and calcium
oxides, 14–16
reaction mechanism dis-
cussion, 16–18
titanium oxides, 13–14
single-wall carbon nanotubes
(SWCNTs), 124
SMT. See sulfamethazine (SMT)
SMX. See sulfamethoxazole (SMX)
sodium dodecyl benzene sulfonate
(SDBS), 4, 361
solution–gelation (sol–gel) techni-
que, 321–322
sonolysis, 254
specific surface area (SSA), 124
spinel oxides, 20–22
SSA. See specific surface area (SSA)
sulfamethazine (SMT), 71
sulfamethoxazole (SMX), 6, 132
supported metal oxides
metal oxides
Al2O3, 30–31
TiO2, 31–32
zeolites, 32–34
porous materials, 34–35
surface grafting, 322
surface oxygen functionalities
carboxyl groups, 143
hydroxyl/phenolic groups,
142–143
ketone groups/quinone
groups, 143
SWCNTs. See single-wall carbon
nanotubes (SWCNTs)
TBA. See tert-butyl alcohol (TBA)
TCA. See 2,4,6-trichloroanisole (TCA)
TCMs. See tubular ceramic mem-
branes (TCMs)
TEMP. See 2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-4-
piperidinol (TEMP)
5-tert-butoxycarbonyl-5-methyl-1-
pyrroline-N-oxide (BMPO), 129
tert-butyl alcohol (TBA), 125, 224
2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-4-piperidinol
(TEMP), 129, 202
THMs. See trihalomethanes (THMs)
TiO2. See titanium dioxide (TiO2)
titanium dioxide (TiO2), 13
titanium oxides, 13–14
TMP. See transmembrane pressure
(TMP)
TOC. See total organic carbon (TOC)
TOD. See transfer of ozone dose
(TOD)
TOF. See turnover frequency (TOF)
total organic carbon (TOC), 4, 32, 76,
86, 131, 203, 223
transfer of ozone dose (TOD), 198
transmembrane pressure (TMP), 325
2,4,6-trichloroanisole (TCA), 12
trihalomethanes (THMs), 278,
327–328
380
Subject Index

tubular ceramic membranes (TCMs),
316
turnover frequency (TOF), 136–137
ultrasonication, 356
ultrasound, catalytic ozonation with,
293–294
compounds, reactivity of
antibiotic, 305
aromatic, 303
dyes, 303–305
industrial wastewater,
305–306
phenol, 300–303
enhanced mechanism,
310–311
generation of, 294–295
heterogeneous, 310
homogeneous
H2O2, 309
PMS, 310
UV, 309
influencing factors
frequency, 306, 308
ozone, concentration
of, 308
pH, 308
temperature, 308–309
ultrasonic power
density, 306
reaction kinetics, 306–307
ultrasonic bath
catalytic experiments, 297
multifields, ultrasonic
reactor with, 296
USO3, 297
ultrasonic probe, 298–300
vacuum ultraviolet (VUV), 361
VUV. See vacuum ultraviolet (VUV)
wastewater treatment plant
(WWTP), 315
water contaminants, UVA photo-
catalytic ozonation of, 171–182,
211–212
AOP, 167–168
influent ozone gas con-
centration, eﬀect of, 198
initial pollutant
concentration, 198
photocatalyst dosage,
196–197
pH, role of, 197
treatment processes, 195
bromate issue, 210–211
catalysts
catalyst synthesis, 184
characterization techni-
ques, 183
g-C3N4, 186
MMT, 185
MWCNT, 184
PhCatOz processes, 187
TiO2, 184–185
disinfection, 211
energy use, 207–208
free radical oxidation, 199
hydrogen peroxide, 167
hydroxyl radicals, 167–168, 199
kinetics, 203–207
O3/H2O2 and O3/UV, 168
organics studied and water
matrices, 192–195
ozone decomposition, 168
ozone mechanism, 167
PhCatOz, RCT for, 199–200
photocatalytic oxidation,
168–170
photocatalytic ozonation,
170–171
process cost analysis, 208–209
radiation sources, 187–189
reactions, mechanisms of,
202–203
reactor type
catalytic tests, 190, 193
CPC photoreactor, 191, 194
LEDs, 190
natural and simulated
solar radiation,
191, 193
Subject Index
381

water contaminants, UVA
photocatalytic ozonation of
(continued)
PDMS, 190
photoreactors, 190
UVA LED photoreactor
system, 190, 192
RHO,O3, 200
scavengers, 200–201
synergism, 201–202
t-butanol, 200
toxicity, 209–210
WWTP. See wastewater treatment
plant (WWTP)
382
Subject Index

