
Volume 39
History of Mechanism and Machine
Science
Series Editor
Marco Ceccarelli
Department of Industrial Engineering, University of Rome Tor Vergata,
Rome, Italy
This bookseries establishes a well-deϐined forum for Monographs and
Proceedings on the History of Mechanism and Machine Science (MMS).
The series publishes works that give an overview of the historical
developments, from the earliest times up to and including the recent
past, of MMS in all its technical aspects.
This technical approach is an essential characteristic of the series.
By discussing technical details and formulations and even
reformulating those in terms of modern formalisms the possibility is
created not only to track the historical technical developments but also
to use past experiences in technical teaching and research today. In
order to do so, the emphasis must be on technical aspects rather than a
purely historical focus, although the latter has its place too.
Furthermore, the series will consider the republication of out-of-
print older works with English translation and comments.
The book series is intended to collect technical views on historical
developments of the broad ϐield of MMS in a unique frame that can be
seen in its totality as an Encyclopaedia of the History of MMS but with
the additional purpose of archiving and teaching the History of MMS.
Therefore. the book series is intended not only for researchers of the
History of Engineering but also for professionals and students who are
interested in obtaining a clear perspective of the past for their future

technical works. The books will be written in general by engineers but
not only for engineers. The series is promoted under the auspices of
International Federation for the Promotion of Mechanism and Machine
Science (IFToMM).
Prospective authors and editors can contact Mr. Pierpaolo Riva
(publishing editor, Springer) at: pierpaolo.riva@springer.com
Indexed by SCOPUS and Google Scholar.
More information about this series at
http://www.springer.com/series/7481

Danilo Capecchi
Epistemology and Natural Philosophy
in the 18th Century
The Roots of Modern Physics
1st ed. 2021

Danilo Capecchi
Ingegneria Strutturale e Geotecnica, Sapienza Università di Roma,
Roma, Italy
ISSN 1875-3442
e-ISSN 1875-3426
History of Mechanism and Machine Science
ISBN 978-3-030-52851-5
e-ISBN 978-3-030-52852-2
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-52852-2
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the
Publisher, whether the whole or part of the material is concerned,
speciϐically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations,
recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microϐilms or in any other
physical way, and transmission or information storage and retrieval,
electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar
methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks,
service marks, etc. in this publication does not imply, even in the
absence of a speciϐic statement, that such names are exempt from the
relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general
use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the
advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate
at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or the
editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the
material contained herein or for any errors or omissions that may have
been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional
claims in published maps and institutional afϐiliations.

This Springer imprint is published by the registered company Springer
Nature Switzerland AG
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham,
Switzerland

To my wife

Preface
At the beginning of the modern era, what is now called science was
spread out among various disciplines: theology, handcrafts, magic,
alchemy, astrology, medicine, natural philosophy, and mixed
mathematics (that is optics, astronomy, mechanics, music, etc). In the
18th century, these disciplines had already broken up and became
recomposed into an organization of science of the natural world that
was similar to the modern one. The most important transformation was
that affecting natural philosophy, which was considered, at least in the
academic world, the most noble and by far the most important form of
knowledge. It ceased to be a philosophy in the canonical sense, merging
with other forms of knowledge and giving raise to disciplines such as
physics, natural history, chemistry, medicine, and engineering, names
which, while not initially fully shared, were established in the 19th
century and are still used today. The new philosophers of nature were
no longer canonical philosophers, although they continued to think
about philosophy. They were rather mathematicians in the broad sense,
namely, scholars who were interested in more than just pure
mathematics. In some cases, this is particularly true for the new
branches of physics such as electricity and magnetism, and they were
also simply educated gentlemen, gifted with intelligence and curiosity.
The present book aims to document this process of transformation,
concentrating on the 18th century, a century that in the past had been
considered uninteresting for the history of science. It would represent
the transition from the age of genius and the birth of modern science, in
the 17th century, to the age of prodigious development, in the 19th
century. This view does not stand up to thorough analysis. The 18th
century, the century of Enlightenment and reason, as will be clear from
the present book, was rather a century of great ferment and novelty.
To make the narrative practicable for a single individual, no great
emphasis has been placed on the precise genesis of the various
concepts and methods developed in scientiϐic enterprises, except when
this was necessary to make them clear. I have been content to take
snapshots of situations by taking a look at discrete intervals of time. In
several situations, reference is made to the authors who are famous
today, such as Newton, the Bernoullis, Euler, d’Alembert, Lagrange,

Lambert, Volta, etc. Not so much because they were the most creative
and original minds, but mainly because their writings represent a
synthesis of contemporary and previous studies. The above names
should, therefore, be considered more labels of a period than references
to real historical characters. The history of science was not made up of
isolated heroes, but by an entire community and its legacy, by teachers,
anonymous collaborators of celebrities, playing this role often only as a
result of their social status. It is true that in the 18th century scientiϐic
research was carried out by a handful of scholars; though small, it was
still an army, however, whose generals are only representative of the
victories carried out by the soldiers. Referring only to the great
characters of science has in any case an advantage that there is no need
entering the merits of their acquisitions because well documented by
historians, thus leaving room for other aspects.
This book intends to answer these three fundamental questions:
1.
Was the transformation of ancient natural philosophy into
(modern) science due to an internal evolution or an external
appropriation?
 
2.
What was the role of mechanical and experimental
philosophies in this transformation?
 
3.
What was the role of the newly born inϐinitesimal mathematics
(Calculus)?
 
The answers come as follows:
1.
It was a conquest from the outside by mathematicians
(broader sense). They were able to extend the approach of
mixed mathematics to the study of most phenomena.
 
2.
Mechanical philosophy was crucial. It aroused interest in
natural philosophy in many not canonical philosophers—
including mathematicians—because its argumentations were
much simpler than those offered by canonical philosophy,
imbued with metaphysics. A similar argument holds good for
experimental philosophy.
 

3. The role of Calculus was twofold. On the one hand, its great
fecundity made it possible to solve very complex problems,
thus giving mathematics more appeal in the approach of
philosophy of nature. As regards to applications, on the other
hand, the need to refer to regular functions deϐined on
continua meant that nature was seen through glasses with
thick lenses, which inϐluenced its interpretation.
 
Before going further, a nomenclature should be established because
many of the terms in use in the past and still in use today have changed
their meaning, and thus a stipulation is necessary:
Canonical natural philosophy. Study of nature under the concepts
of matter, cosmos, and causation. Examples of canonical natural
philosophies are the Aristotelean, the Platonic, the mechanicistic;
but not Newton’s and the approach to nature after him, even
though the term natural philosophy is retained also in such cases.
Mixed mathematics. Mathematics related to physical problems—
that somehow joins quality to quantity—as they were established
in the early modern era, such as astronomy (physical or
positional), surveying, fortiϐication, ballistic, mechanics,
hydrodynamics, pneumatics, and so on. A category quite distinct
from that of subalternate sciences of Aristotelian mould that
sometimes are considered as the canon of mixed mathematics.
Canonical philosophers (or simply philosophers). Scholars that
besides natural philosophy considered also and in a systematic
way metaphysics and either logic, or ethic, or theology.
Mathematical practitioners (or mathematicians broad meaning or
more simply mathematicians). People with a more or less
important training in theoretical mathematics who were also
involved in practical activities (note that the idea of pure
mathematicians is quite modern; until at least the end of the 18th
century more or less all mathematicians were involved in practical
activity or at least wrote about practical use of mathematics). The
term Mathematical practitioners was introduces as a historical
category in 1954 by the English geographer and historian of
science Eva Germaine Rimington Taylor (1879–1966), but it is
used here quite freely.

Philosophy
Mathematics
Of course one can envision a spectrum between canonical
philosophers and mathematical practitioners. The columns of the
following table show the possible main combinations, ranging from
canonical philosophers with a very limited interest in mathematics
(ϐirst column) to skilled artisans who knew little of philosophy and
mathematics (last columns). H means high involvement and L means
low or medium involvement.
H H L L
L H H L
16th Century. The birth of Greek rationality represented a
fundamental step for the change in the form of the western knowledge
of the natural world. But in the 16th century the change was possibly
more radical when mathematicians began to widen the ϐields of
classical mixed mathematics—which had ϐlourished in Hellenistic
Greece and remained vital in the Middle Ages—certainly pressed by
demands of technology from a rapidly expanding society, by
appropriating of parts of the canonical natural philosophy.
17th Century. The process of appropriation became more evident
as the century progressed. Traditional mixed mathematics, optics,
astronomy, music, mechanics, ϐlanked by many other disciplines that in
previous centuries had been studied only in natural philosophy, such as
acoustics, meteorology, and hydrodynamics, were given a new and
fundamental acquisition: dynamics (term introduced by Leibniz).
Success obtained in this ϐield by the mathematical (and experimental)
approach due to the contribution of many scholars, including Galileo,
Torricelli, Cavalieri, Huygens, Mariotte, Roberval, Descartes, Borelli,
Leibniz, and eventually Newton, had a fundamental role in the process
of erosion of the old philosophy of nature by (mixed) mathematicians.
Because of this success, with the greater interest in experimentation to
clarify and discover new “facts”, and the interest in applications, natural
philosophy was seen differently than in the past. Less attention was
paid to traditional issues concerning nature, essence, and properties
appropriate to all bodies—the so-called physica generalis—and more
attention was paid to the examination and discussion of the particular
bodies—the so-called physica particularis. Traditional explanations,

both Aristotelian and Cartesian, appeared in some way sterile. Indeed
the theories put forward did not have any element of objectivity; the
same phenomenon could be explained in one way by one scholar, in
another way by another, without an agreement being reached. New
approaches to the study of nature became so appealing because,
despite providing answers in a more restricted range, they had some
kind of objectivity and were able to lead to a consensus of opinion.
Furthermore, together with the explanations, the new approaches also
provided for the prediction of phenomena, which had great utilitarian
value, leading to technological applications.
Skepticism toward canonical natural philosophy led to the birth of
experimental philosophy. It developed in different ways on the
Continent and in England, so that it is stipulated by some historians
that the label experimental philosophy be applied to English
experimentations only, sponsored by the Royal society. The way of
relating to experimentation is attributed by these historians to the
conception of the role of the demiurge and magic in the Creation and,
therefore, in what is called the ordinary course of nature. In England,
more freedom would have been granted to the demiurge than on the
Continent, and this would have given greater freedom to the English,
who were not obliged to subsume experiments under general
necessary laws. As a result, English scholars would have developed a
science that favored phenomenological aspects while continental
academics would have paid more attention to causation.
18th Century. The appropriation of natural philosophy by
mathematicians became substantially complete. This process was aided
by the spreading of Calculus, which made it possible to address many of
yet unsolved problems. The received viewpoint considers the change in
the approach to philosophy of nature to be largely a consequence of the
technical results Newton achieved in the Philosophiae naturalis
principia mathematica and Opticks and his empirical view. Since the
19th century, Newton has generally been seen as the founder of
modern science, in particular of classical mechanics, in the form it has
today. This point of view was also prevalent among modern science
historians, at least until the mid-20th century. The assessment of
Newton by contemporaries was more balanced. He was recognized as a
great mathematician; his results in astronomy were considered

extraordinary, but few saw him as a bringer of revolutionary results,
not even in the fundaments of mechanics. In fact, he was considered
just one of the many. Before him, Huygens, Wallis, and Hooke had
obtained results of no less importance than his. Modern historiography
introduces great variations in the received point of view, giving to
Newton only what is Newton’s.
In mechanics, the old mixed mathematics of Hellenistic origin,
together with statics and Galilean dynamics, changed into a theory that
had the same ambitions of the canonical natural philosophy, namely, to
give a global response to the nature of motion based, however, only on a
mathematical approach. The Bernoullis, Varignon, Euler, and a few
others, explicitly introduced algebra and differential calculus, operating
a non-trivial transformation that invested the very role of mathematics
in the science of nature. Even for the study of the motion of the free
mass point, the treatment of 18th-century mathematicians became
unrecognizable compared to that of Newton. From geometric it became
analytic. Relations of proportionality were replaced by equalities,
overcoming the difϐiculties of dealing with non-homogeneous
quantities, with a reinterpretation of the concept of physical
magnitudes, already started by Descartes. Technological applications,
as well as the curiosity of the mathematicians, required the solution of
more complicated problems than those faced by Newton (essentially
the motion of the free material point) such as those related to systems
of material points, rigid bodies, and deformable continua.
For the other sections of physics, such as optics, electricity,
magnetism, the raising thermology, and meteorology, sometimes
named Baconian sciences, but also some disciplines today classiϐied as
mechanical, such as hydraulics, pneumatics, acoustics, the qualitative
reasoning remained important. The objective was to identify the
phenomena under observation with the greatest clarity. To achieve this
goal it became necessary for mathematicians to take an interest in
natural philosophy, more than it was necessary in mechanics.
Even in these Baconian sciences, however, there was a division,
already found in the 17th century, between people devoted to pure
experimentation and those who preferred a more theoretical approach.
The supporters of a mainly experimental and phenomenological type of
physics made use of reϐined instruments and provided, in some cases,

very accurate measurements, as regards thermal and meteorological
phenomena, for instance, with attempts being made at formulating
mathematical laws; measurements for electricity and magnetism were
more difϐicult. There was considerable progress in measuring devices.
Some were built directly by the scholars who used them. There was
thus, as often in the past, interaction between the mathematician and
the technologist. The most theoretical experimenters often sought
causal explanations. They required the appropriation of natural
philosophy, which was made possible primarily by its transformation
into a mechanicistic form, certainly much more understandable for
people who were well educated but who were not canonical
philosophers. They proposed explanatory models guided by
experience. In some cases, it was a mechanicism à la Descartes or à la
Boyle, where everything was referred to in terms of interactions of
particles by contact. After Newton, interaction between particles could
also take place at a distance and this type of mechanicism became
prevalent.
The 18th century, especially in the second half, saw an impressive
development of technology, named industrial revolution in the 19th
century. The intertwining between this development and that of
science, population growth, agricultural revolution, spread of scientiϐic
culture, and birth of the entrepreneurial and capitalist bourgeoisie is
complex and even extremely interesting, but it is not treated in this
book that is limited to examining the relations between the
development of science and technology, with particular reference to
epistemological aspects.
Seen from this perspective, the key ϐigure of the technological
development is that of the engineer. A ϐigure that at the beginning of the
18th century had blurred connotations that gradually became more
deϐined, and also thanks to the foundation of schools and associations
that took care of his formation. The engineer who emerged in the end
was that of an educated technician who mastered all areas of science
with a particular attention to mathematics (especially on the
Continent).
Summary of Chapters

Chapter 1. Newton’s epistemology is analyzed as the prototype of the
view at the turn of the 18th century, both by studying his ofϐicial
statements in the Principia, Opticks, in other published works and
letters, and his actual way of making science. Newton in mechanics and
optics was linked to tradition. He was the last of the great traditional
mixed mathematicians; with slight exaggeration, one could say, the last
of the ancients. He was a very complex character, involved in many
issues, including alchemy and theology, spending most of his time in
activities that today could hardly be classiϐied as scientiϐic. The chapter
discusses how his being a mathematician inϐluenced all his apparently
non-mathematical interests, canonical natural philosophy included. The
received point of view, that Newtonian science was already mature at
its inception, is also disputed. This, however, has already been attested
in recent historiography. Indeed, it is well established that the
description of 18th-century classical mechanics as Newtonian
mechanics should be considered an anachronism. It was the
developments of 18th-century algebra and Calculus that produced
Newtonian mechanics as we know it today, which was therefore
primarily a creation of 18th-century mathematicians. In the
examination of Newton’s epistemology, I made no use of the modern
categories of the philosophy of science to highlight its most intimate
contradictions. I instead tried to frame Newton historically, giving him,
for example, the label of empiricist, which he attributed to himself and
which many of his contemporaries attributed to him, even if this label
does not stand up to the criticism of a modern epistemology analysis.
Chapter 2. Physica generalis and/or physica particularis of
Aristotelian mould became physics in a nearly modern sense with the
use of a quantitative, experimental method to discover laws governing
the inorganic world. The chapter explains how mathematicians were
successful in replacing canonical philosophers nearly completely in the
study of natural philosophy, both in research and academic contexts
and how they invented an academic discipline that was called simply
physics, concerned only with the study of inanimate matter, excluding
alchemy. The new conception of physics for at least the whole of the
18th century still continued to be called natural philosophy, and even
maintained some of the characteristics of old physics. A typical example
is the explanation and acceptance of the principle of conservation of

living forces and minimum action, typically 18th-century themes. Both
were explained by the metaphysical principles of economy and
simplicity of nature or by God, a type of explication not allowed in
today’s physics. Following the spread of mechanical philosophy in
European universities and colleges, the theoretical explanations of
philosophy of nature were accompanied by experiments, mainly
concerning mechanics, hydraulics, pneumatics (and electricity). Later,
especially in France, teaching began to be supported by mathematics.
This led to tension between the mathematical-physics disciplines (such
as mechanics, for instance), where the use of algebra and Calculus was
possible and massive, and the other disciplines such as electricity,
magnetism, and thermology, where this possibility did not yet exist.
While in teaching, physics was often unitary, in research a split
originated among people mainly interested in mathematics (the
geometers), and others who were keener on experimentation (the
physicists). However, many of them believed in the myth of the exact
measurement, which was considered the prerequisite for mathematical
treatment and, therefore, according to current ideas of the true
scientiϐic method. The complex relationship between experimental and
mechanical philosophies (and the heuristic role of theories) is also
addressed. In principle, experimental philosophy did not require the
knowledge of mechanical philosophy. The latter, however, was helpful
because it suggested explanatory models and made it possible to make
predictions, which if sometimes proved to be false were, however, a
starting point. For this reason, many experimental philosophers
supported mechanical philosophy.
Chapter 3. The evolution of mechanics toward what is now called
classical mechanics is explored in depth. Though 18th century
mechanics saw great successes in theoretical astronomy, namely, the
study of the solar system using the modern techniques of Calculus and
the assumption of the law of the inverse square of distance for the
gravitational forces, it also made tremendous progress in terms of
rationalization and completion. The exposition of fundaments and
applications in various treatises and papers are studied, especially
those of continental scientists and, in particular, the syntheses by Euler
and d’Alembert, who described the way mechanics could be
transformed into a rational discipline, like mathematics, based on

Calculus. Great attention was paid to the justiϐication of the foundations
of mechanics, which required a substantial involvement of metaphysics
and epistemology to discuss fundamental notions: the nature of space
and time, the constitution and the properties of bodies and the nature
of motion. However, this effort was pursued not with the classical and
organic approach of canonical philosophy but with the pragmatism of
mathematicians. Sometimes this philosophical approach was made
explicit and expounded in speciϐic treatises or preliminary parts of
scientiϐic works. At other times, it remained implicit and could only be
brought to light through careful reading. The complete
mathematization of mechanics only occurred at the end of the 18th
century with the Lagrangian synthesis, which kept considerations
about the philosophy of nature to a minimum.
Chapter 4. D’Alembert called physics in general disciplines such
optics, acoustics, positional astronomy, cosmology, magnetism, and
electricity. Optics and positional astronomy were object of in-depth
researches. A good deal of the optical works concerned with the
theories of propagation of light, especially with those of an undulatory
nature. They required complex mathematical treatments and the use of
partial differential equations, and became fertile ground for
mathematical physics. The experience with which the theories were
compared was mostly based on experiments conducted in the 17th
century by Newton and Huygens. Relevant new experimental work, on
a quantitative basis, was carried out only relatively to what is today
known as photometry with Bouguer and Lambert. Positional
astronomy saw a great development made possible by the use of
reϐlecting or refracting telescopes with the introduction of achromatic
lenses, mistakenly considered impossible by Newton and theorized
instead by Euler, as efϐicient instruments of astronomical observation.
Magnetism caught the attention of many mathematicians and
experimental philosophers, but it revealed a too complex topic for the
times.
Electricity was the emerging science of the 18th century. In the
chapter, it plays a paradigmatic role for the development of
experimental sciences. Experimenting in electricity had several
advantages over experimenting in other ϐields of physics. Once research
began in earnest, experimenters quickly discovered new electrical

phenomena, making their work rewarding. The number and quality of
experiments grew dramatically, especially after the 1750s, when the
discovery of the Leyden jar made it possible to accumulate large
charges. After a brief mention of the situation in the 17th century, the
chapter goes on to take a look at the English experimenters, including
Francis Hauksbee, Stephen Gray, John Canton, and those from the
Continent, including Jean Antoine Nollet, Pieter van Musschenbroek,
Ulrich Theodor Aepinus, Giambattista Beccaria, and others.
Chapter 5. Modern technology historians identify the birth of a new
ϐigure in the 18th century, the scientiϐic engineer. His goal was the
rationalization of design and implementation of processes. For this
purpose, he used hypotheses and experimentations, as in the
(mathematical) physical sciences. With its dizzying growth, science
revealed the possibility of applications to areas never thought of before.
However, scientists were dealing with general problems. Their
solutions did not provide for an immediate application of science. Thus,
there was the basic need for an intermediate ϐigure between the
scientist and the ϐinal user. More precisely, there was a need for a
sufϐiciently large body of qualiϐied engineers.
The preparation of these technicians was different from country to
country. In England, one moved with private associations, and in
France, instead, the state was interested in. After general
considerations on the relationship between mathematics, natural
philosophy, new physics, and technology, the chapter goes on to
characterize the engineers of the 18th century. For reasons of space, I
will dwell only on the situation in England where many skilled
engineers operated after the 1750s; I refer here to John Smeaton and
James Watt, not so much because they are the most famous, but
because in them one can observe at the higher degree the interaction
between the scientist and the engineer.
Editorial Considerations
Most ϐigures are redrawn to allow a better reading. They are, however,
as much possible close to the original. Symbols of formulas are those of
the authors, except cases easily identiϐiable. Translations of texts from
various languages are as much as possible close to the original. For the

Latin, Italian of the XVI and XVII centuries a critical transcription has
been preferred. In the critical Latin transcription, some shortenings are
resolved, “v” is modiϐied in “u” and vice versa where necessary, ij in ii,
following the modern rule; moreover, the use of accents is avoided. In
the Italian critical transcription, some shortenings are resolved, “v” is
modiϐied in “u” and vice versa, and a unitary way of writing words is
adopted. Books and papers are always reproduced in the original
spelling. For the name of the different characters, the spelling of their
native language is generally preferred, excepting for the ancient Greeks,
for which the English spelling is assumed, and some medieval people,
for which the Latin spelling is assumed, following the common use.
Through the text I searched to avoid modern terms and expressions
as much as possible while referring to ancient theories. In some cases,
however, I transgressed this resolution for the sake of simplicity.
Danilo Capecchi
Roma, Italy
May 2020

Contents
1 Epistemology and Science at the Turn of the 18th Century
1.1 The Heritage of the 17th Century
1.1.1 Descartes’s Purely Deductive Mixed Mathematics
1.1.2 Pardies’ Mechanics and Theory of Light
1.1.3 Huygens’ Philosophical Mixed Mathematics
1.2 Newton Philosopher, Theologian, Alchemist and Even
Mathematician
1.2.1 Space, Time and Motion
1.2.2 The Concept of Force
1.2.3 Theory of Light
1.2.4 Theological Writings. The Treatise on Apocalypse
1.2.5 A New Form of Mechanicism. The Queries
1.2.6 Newton’s Methodology
1.3 Quotations
References
2 The Birth of Physics as an Academic Discipline
2.1 Mechanical Philosophy
2.2 Experimental Philosophy
2.2.1 The Experimental Philosophy of the Accademia del
Cimento
2.2.2 The Natural Histories of the Royal Society of London
2.3 Mechanical Philosophy, Experimental Philosophy and
Mixed Mathematics
2.4 Robert Boyle, an Experimental and Mechanical Philosopher
2.4.1 Mathematics and Experimental Philosophy
2.4.2 Hypotheses and Matters of Fact

2.4.3 Corpuscular Philosophy and Chemistry. Physical
Chemistry
2.5 Newtonian Philosophy
2.5.1 Inϐluence of Newtonianism on Physicists
2.5.2 Inϐluence of Newtonianism on Chemists
2.6 The Treatises of Experimental Physics
2.7 The Technology of Scientiϐic Instruments
2.8 Quotations
References
3 Classical Mechanics
3.1 Mechanics and Natural Philosophy at the Turn of Century
3.2 The Spreading of Calculus
3.2.1 First Uses in Dynamics
3.3 Scalar Approaches to Mechanics
3.3.1 Johann Bernoulli’s Forces and Energies
3.3.2 Maupertuis and the Role of God in Mechanics
3.4 Euler’s Natural Philosophy and Vector Analysis
3.4.1 Philosophy of Nature
3.4.2 Mechanics and Mathematics
3.4.3 The Apparent Motion and the Observer
3.5 D’Alembert Science and Philosophy
3.5.1 The Way to Knowledge
3.5.2 The Parts of Science
3.5.3 Mechanics as a Mathematical Science
3.6 Epilogue. Lagrangian Synthesis
3.7 Quotations

References
4 Physics in General
4.1 Theories of Light
4.1.1 Projectile Theories
4.1.2 Vibration Theories
4.2 Photometry, a New Field of Optics
4.2.1 Lambert’s Contribution. A Philosopher and a Physicist
4.3 Electricity as a Paradigm of Experimental Sciences
4.3.1 Early Theories About Electricity
4.3.2 Some Elements in the History of Electricity in the 18th
Century
4.3.3 A Representative of British Electricity. Stephen Gray
4.3.4 The Leyden Jar
4.3.5 A Comprehensive Theory of Electricity. Franz Ulrich
Theodosius Aepinus
4.3.6 The Italian School
4.3.7 Giambattista Beccaria
4.3.8 Carlo Battista Barletti
4.3.9 Charles Augustin Coulomb
4.4 Quotations
References
5 The Emergence of the Science of Engineering
5.1 Science, Technology and Engineering
5.1.1 Technology Versus Applied Science
5.1.2 A Historical Perspective
5.2 Scientists or Technologists?
5.2.1 A Civil Engineer: John Smeaton

5.2.2 A Philosophical Engineer. James Watt
5.3 Quotations
References
Index

(1)
 
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
D. Capecchi, Epistemology and Natural Philosophy in the 18th Century, History of Mechanism and
Machine Science 39
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-52852-2_1
1. Epistemology and Science at the Turn
of the 18th Century
Danilo Capecchi1  
Ingegneria Strutturale e Geotecnica, Sapienza Università di Roma,
Rome, Italy
 
Danilo Capecchi
Email: danilo.capecchi@uniroma1.it
Abstract
After a brief excursion of precursors, Descartes, Huygens and a few
others, Newton’s epistemology is analyzed as the prototype of the view
at the turn of the 18th century, both by studying his ofϐicial statements
in the Principia, Opticks, in other published works or letters and his
actual way of making science. Newton was the last of the great
traditional mixed mathematicians; with slight exaggeration, one could
say, the last of the ancients. He was a very complex character, involved
in many issues, including alchemy, theology and management; spending
most of his time in activities that today could hardly be classiϐied as
scientiϐic. The chapter discusses how his being a mathematician
inϐluenced all his apparently not mathematical interests, canonical
natural philosophy included.
1.1 The Heritage of the 17th Century
Most people involved in the early modern science that came after
Galileo and before Newton in the 17th century accepted the mechanical
philosophy. Mechanical philosophy was very useful to the development

of science; it made easier the applications to natural philosophy of
geometric models. For example, a series of spherical or cubic bodies
perfectly hard or elastic. By means of the laws of mechanics a
simulation, a prediction, could be obtained of the phenomenon under
study. If the simulation was in agreement with reality it could be said
that the proposed model is correct and a causal explanation has been
possibly found.
The most meaningful characters of the early modern science after
Galileo and before Newton are usually identiϐied in Descartes and
Huygens. This is however a simpliϐication not necessarily the best one;
the transformations that concerned the scientiϐic knowledge were the
result of collective work, largely due to mathematicians involved in
mixed mathematics. A short list of the most known of them is referred
to in the following Table 1.1.
Table 1.1 Mathematicians operating in the second half of 17th century
Giovanni Battista Baliani (1582–1666)
Italy
Giovanni Alfonso Borelli (1608–1679)
Italy
Bonaventura Francesco Cavalieri (1598–1647) Italy
Giovanni Domenico Cassini (1625–1712)
Italy
Evangelista Torricelli (1608–1647)
Italy
Geminiano Montanari (1633–1687)
Italy
Vincenzo Viviani (1622–1703)
Italy
Gilles Personne de Roberval (1602–1675)
France
Jacques Rohault (1618–1672)
France
Blaise Pascal (1623–1662)
France
Ignace Gaston Pardies (1636–1673)
France
Honoré Fabri (1608–1688)
France
Edme Mariotte (1620–1684)
France
Robert Hooke  (1635–1703)
England
John Wallis (1616–1703)
England
Isaac Barrow (1630–1677)
England
Christopher Wren (1632–1723)
England
Robert Boyle (1627–1691)
England

To them one should add many others teachers of the universities
and members of the new born scientiϐic academies. The purpose of the
present book is not however to document the spread of the process of
transformation of the scientiϐic knowledge but rather to exemplify the
way it occurred. Thus, for the sake of simplicity I will refer, besides
Newton,  mainly to Descartes and Huygens; the former is usually taken
as an example of a philosopher who dealt with mixed mathematics,
while the latter of a mixed mathematician who dealt with philosophy;
this is however a crude simpliϐication.  A few words will however be
devoted to the French Jesuit Ignace Gaston Pardies.
1.1.1 Descartes’s Purely Deductive Mixed
Mathematics
René Descartes (1596–1650) played an important role in the
development of modern science. He contributed in a fundamental way
to the development of mathematics, especially for what concerns
algebra and analytical geometry. He contributed signiϐicantly to the
development of mechanicism also, that was one of the main support to
the mixed mathematics of the second half of the 17th century. He also
gave important technical contributions in statics, hydrostatics,
dynamics (modern meaning), optics, music. But in substance he kept
extraneous to the fundamental idea of the mixed mathematics: the
development of a theory on the basis of a deductive approach starting
from more or less complex principles of empirical nature that were not
questioned.
Descartes remained a canonical natural philosopher, although his
philosophy was strongly modeled on mathematics. His search for
explanations of the world leaded him on a path that at present appears
to be blind, or at least was not followed by the scholars that we qualify
today as scientists. He formulated a method that strived to explain
natural phenomena based on possibly simple and evident notions
and/or observations, drawn from rational reϐlection on concepts or
from everyday experience, about the most fundamental aspects of the
world. These provide the requisite (metaphysical) foundation for his
physics. In other words, he proceeded from clear and distinct
knowledge of general metaphysical objects, such as the material

substance, to derive particular laws. Descartes’s method of conducting
science was thus quite different from the modern approach, where
scholars do not ϐirst engage in a metaphysical search for ϐirst principles.
Yet, the lack of this phase is exactly the criticism Descartes leveled at
Galileo’s physics, that is at modern physics: “I ϐind in general that he
philosophizes much better than the vulgar, in that he leaves the most he
can the errors of the Schools [...] but without having considered the ϐirst
causes of nature, [Galileo] has merely looked for the explanations of a
few particular effects, and he has thereby built without foundations
[28].1
Descartes was involved in mixed mathematics in different period of
his life; the interest was prominent in his early phase however, before
he developed his mature physics and metaphysics. Determinant for
Descartes’s move was his acquaintance with Isaac Beeckman (1588–
1637) who involved him in his studies on hydraulics and acoustics. The
ϐirst Descartes’s published work on mixed mathematics was the
Musicae compendium [26]. Written in 1618, it was published
posthumous in The Netherlands in 1650; there was a second edition in
1653 to which other editions followed. To be noted that, differently
from Mersenne, who largely wrote on music, Descartes never had
acquaintance in any musical circle and possibly he did know of music
only at La Flche and through Beeckman.
Other Descartes’s works on mixed mathematics belong to his
mature period. They were about optics, with the Dioptrique of 1637;
statics, with the letter to Constantijn Huygens of 1637 entitled
Explication des engins par l’ayde desquels on peut, avec une petite force,
lever un fardeau fort pesant [12]2; dynamics, with studies on the
oscillation of composed pendulums, spread on letters to Mersenne in
1646 [13]. Below, for the sake of space, I will deal only with the study
on statics and optics. In these works Descartes assumed principles
based on reason and every day experience, while contrived
experiments played no role.
1.1.1.1 Statics. The Principle of Virtual Work
The conception of statics of Descartes is spread in his correspondence
with Mersenne, but its complete synthesis appeared in the letter of

1637 to Constantijn Huygens already cited [12].3 The whole statics
according to Descartes is based on the following ‘obvious’principle:
The same force that can lift a weight, for example of 100 pounds
to a height of two feet, it can also raise a weight of 200 pounds to
one foot, or a weight of 400 pounds to the height of 1/2 foot, etc.
[28].4 (A.1)
Namely, the force (fatigue, work) needed to raise the weight p to the
height h is the same as that required to raise p/2 to 2h. It is a restricted
formulation of the principle of virtual work.
Descartes’s principle of statics is proved without any explicit
reference to sensible experience, in a simply and ‘convincing’ way. The
proof is associated to a thought experiment. Assume a weight of 200
pounds; it can ideally be decomposed into two weights of 100 pounds.
The thought experiment makes it clear that either raising a weight of
100 pounds to the height of 2 feet or rising two weights of 100 pounds
(that is a weight of 200 pounds) to the hight of 1 foot requires the same
‘fatigue’ or force by an operator, a man for instance. In fact lifting a
weight of 100 pounds to the height of 2 feet can be imagined into two
steps. First bring the weight to the height of 1 foot, then move it again
(as if it were another body) from the height of 1 foot to that of 2 feet.
But this last operation requires the same effort to lift 100 pound from 0
to 1 foot. Thus lifting 100 pounds to the eight of 2 feet is the same as to
lift two weights of 100 pounds (and thus 200 pounds) to the height of 1
foot.
However, the above justiϐication, coinciding with that of Galileo, not
mentioned by Descartes, referred to in [12],5 though ingenious, does
not withstand critical analysis as noted by Mach [73].6 Indeed, the
admission that to raise 100 pounds in two stages is equivalent to raise
200 in one stage only, although intuitive, is not logically necessary and
it is not contradictory to imagine that it is not true. The thought
experiment makes the proof convincing because it incorporates, in an
implicit way, empirical arguments. These are however consideration of
a modern epistemologist; Descartes most probably would not have
shared this opinion and would have considered the proof to be
completely a priori.

1.1.1.2 Optics. The Law of Refraction
The fundamental considerations about optics by Descartes, apart from
some letters, are referred to in the Le monde ou le traité de la lumière
published posthumously in 1664 [27]7 and in the Dioptrique of 1637, a
relatively short treatise of about 150 pages, divided into 10 chapters
(Discourses), planned and written long before its actual publication
[24].8
The most celebrated part of the Dioptrique is the second chapter
where the law of refraction is ‘deduced’. It is preceded by a preliminary
chapter on the nature of light and followed by some chapters of
philosophy of nature concerning the anatomy of the eye, the role of the
brain and the aspects determining vision. The treatise ends with three
chapters, compressively of about 80 pages, of technical content
connected to the use and construction of lenses. Here I will stress the
phenomenon of refraction as described in the second chapter only.
In the ϐirst pages of the treatise Descartes had declared that his
scope was not to inquire the ‘true’ nature of light but only to use some
of its properties, such for instance refraction and colors: “In this I will be
imitating the astronomers [emphasis added], who, although their
assumptions are almost all false or uncertain, nonetheless, because
they agree with many observations that they have made, never cease to
allow the derivation of many very true and well-assured consequences”
[28].9 In any case the true nature of light could not be the object to
empirical veriϐication; it should be decided a priori on the basis of
certain metaphysical reasonings.
According to Descartes light is nothing but, in luminous bodies, than
the propagation of a tendency to motion through particles of the second
of his three elements because of an impulse received by particles of the
ϐirst of his elements, from the sun for instance. Remember that
Descartes distinguished three elements of matter: luminous matter
made up of very thin particles which could assume any shape so as to
exactly ϐill all the angles they ϐind in the bodies they meet; aetherial
matter made up of small rounded particles (notice that some
commentators call aetherial the ϐirst element) and terrestrial matter,
which, because of its greater dimension, cannot be moved like the
others [25].10

Because the particles of aether are perfectly rigid, light propagates
instantaneously. It moves toward our eyes through the air and other
transparent media in the same fashion as the resistance of bodies
encountered by a blind person pass to his hand by the intermediary of
the stick. This example will support—for Descartes and not a modern
physicist—that light can extend its rays in an instant from the sun to us,
that is its speed is inϐinite [28].11 Moreover, light can be imagined to
propagate along rays which could always be assumed to be completely
straight, when they pass through an uniform transparent body. But
when the rays encounter some other bodies, they are subject to being
deϐlected by them, or weakened in the same way as the motion of a ball
or a stone thrown in the air is weakened by the bodies it encounters, as
empirical evidence shows. This give raise to the phenomenon of
refraction [28].12
To explain refraction Descartes considered himself authorized to
simplify his model of light assuming it made of equal perfect
microscopic hard spheres, which actually move and obey the same laws
of macroscopic bodies. Descartes considered analogically each sphere
as a tennis ball launched by someone with a given ϐinite speed. The ball
is imagined to cross a horizontal cloth, representing the surface of
separation between air and water for instance, which was so feeble and
loosely woven that the ball had the force to break it and pass [15].13
After the impact with the cloth the vertical speed of the ball decreases
causing the ball to move farther from the vertical than before the
impact.
Descartes’s analogy of a light-ball in motion, though fascinating
presents inconsistencies. From an empirical point of view, as a matter of
fact, light passing from lower to greater density medium bends toward
the vertical, that is the angle of refraction is lower than the angle of
incidence. The contrary to what expected from the ball analogy. From a
logical point of view, there is no meaning in the assertion that light is
faster or slower in different media, considered that it is transmitted
instantaneously. Of course Descartes suggested answer to these
difϐiculties. In substance he sustained that it is true that light is not
associated to a true motion of particles but only to a transmission of an
impulse of pressure. The motion can however be considered as virtual
and virtual motion behaves much like to true motion. Moreover the

virtual motion is faster in denser medium: “the more the small parts of
a transparent medium are harder and stable the light pass easily”
[28].14 The contrary to what happens to the ball, so the experimental
result is explained.
A reading of the Dioptrique, even careful but without its framing in
the epistemology of the 17th century, leaves the modern reader the
impression of a purely rational approach, where experience has no role
and no experiment was carried out. This impression also is reinforced
by repeated Descartes’s claims of his derivation a priori of the laws of
reϐlection and refraction. As for instance in the letter to Mersenne of 1st
March 1638 “you should know that I demonstrated the refraction
geometrically and a priori in my Dioptrique, and I am amazed that you
still doubt it” [28].15
An aspect that also could point to the substantial purely a priori
approach by Descartes, is the nearly complete absence in the Dioptrique
of measurements of the indices of refraction of the various substances
and thus an experimental veriϐication of the law of refraction. This is
not because Descartes was not interested at all to measurements but
because he made difference between a general explanation of refraction
and the justiϐication of particular instances. The former can be given a
rational explanation, the latter needs experiments whose fulϐillment is
possible with the help of other people and not relevant for a general
theory. He discussed the problem in the Dioptrique. With his words: To
see how different refractions should be measured and to ϐind their
values is necessary the use of experience, because they depend on the
particular nature of the bodies in which they occur. It is nonetheless
possible to do so reasonably certainly and easily, since all refractions
are reduced to the a single measure; indeed it sufϐices to examine a
single ray to know all the refraction over a given surface [28].16
A more in depth reading of the Dioptrique, partially modiϐies the
impression of a purely a priori Descartes. First it must be considered
that a priori according to him could have a different meaning than our
post-Kantian meaning, that of no reference to an empiric evidence. A
priori, with a posteriori, are qualiϐiers of two logical approaches, from
causes to effect or from effect to causes, respectively, also referred to as
synthesis and analysis. In this sense a priori simply means that the
explanandum is deduced from some primitive (and possible simple)

assertions, of which is indifferent whether or not they are derived from
or without—this is Descartes’s opinion—recourse to experience. This
interpretation is also validate by the quotation reported above, see
Sect. 1.1.1.2, according to which the method adopted in the Dioptrique
is that of astronomers, that starts from some hypotheses and derives
their consequences. Descartes’ deduction comes from the property of
lights that are assumed as hypotheses, without questioning their
epistemological status.
1.1.2 Pardies’ Mechanics and Theory of Light
Ignace Gaston Pardies (1636–1673) was born in Pau (France), the son
of an advisor at the local assembly. He entered the Society of Jesus in
1652. After his ordination he taught philosophy and mathematics at a
lycée in Paris; one can thus speak of Pardies as of a mathematician with
interests in natural philosophy and also in metaphysics and therefore
able to increase the mixed mathematics by absorbing from philosophy.
His well known scientiϐic works are the La statique, ou la science des
forces mouvantes of 1673 (herein after simply La statique), De la
connoissance des bestes of 1672 and the Discours du mouvement local of
1670. His most important work is however on optics that remained
unpublished. The ideas of Pardies about the nature of light were
published by his confrere Pierre Ango (1640–1694) in his L’optique
divisée en trois livres of 1682 [2].
In the Discourse du mouvement local, Pardies played the role of the
metaphysician and criticized Descartes for his formulation of the laws
of impact: “Descartes was wrong in six rules over seven” [106].17 He
then went on to describe his own rules of impact for bodies qualiϐied as
hard, which for him meant perfectly elastic. At the basis of Pardie’s laws
there are, ϐirst the principle of inertia, which for Pardies is not a
principle of indifference to motion but rather an internal power, called
impetuosity (impetuosité) [106]18; second the Cartesian law that the
motion in the collision is not lost but transferred from one body to
another.
At a ϐirst sight the rules Pardies formulated appear correct to a
modern reader, who can also accept their justiϐications. The only
remark he [the modern reader] can raise is that Pardies forgot to

specify that the bodies he considered were equal (with the same mass
in modern term). However, the reader realizes soon that Pardies’ was
not a forgetfulness, but an intentional expositive (and strange) choice.
In fact, in paragraph XXXI he clearly stated that the variation in speed in
the impact are the same whether the bodies are equal or if they are
different [106].19
He had provided a justiϐication of this occurrence in the La statique,
asserting that:
It is quite true that in the state we are, we ϐind it more difϐicult to
move a big stone than to move a little one; but there is no one
who does not know that it comes from the resistance caused by
the gravity of these stones. For if the great stone were not
heavier than the little one, there is no doubt that we would urge
it to move with the same facility [107].20 (A.2)
In the La statique Pardies claimed his intention to write a complete
work on mechanics, denomination which included both statics and
dynamics. Pardies said that his treatise is in the footprints of
Wallis’ Mechanica, sive de motu, tractatus geometricus of 1671 [127],
where was ϐirst used the term mechanics to include both statics and
dynamics. Pardies considered it useful to write a new treatise because
that of Wallis was too technical and was also not complete. Indeed La
statique is interesting because his approach to mechanics is more
physical than Wallis’s, which was framed in the rigid schemes of the
classical mixed mathematics, where mathematical demonstrations
largely prevailed over the arguments of natural philosophy, used to
justify the principles assumed.
The concepts of Pardies on the nature of light are summarize in the
premise of the La statique, where it is suggested the analogy between
light and sound; an analogy that had its roots in ancient time but now is
treated with mathematical argumentations. Pardies’s theory of light
was discussed largely by Pierre Ango, in the L’optique divisée en trois
livres of 1682. The basic hypothesis of natural philosophy is the
existence of a matter inϐinitely more subtle than air, liquid in all its
parts, named aether, which ϐills the whole ϐirmament [2].21 The sun
(and the stars) is like a ϐlame without heat. Sun contracts and expands

as the ϐlame of a candle and communicate this motion to the
surrounding aether. The motion of undulation that results, said Ango-
Pardies, is not however a transfer of matter. The reference are the
waves that form when a stone in launched in still water [2]22; this led
him to consider light propagating at ϐinite speed.
Particularly interesting is the explanation and the quantiϐication of
refraction, which is carried out under the assumption that the speed of
light is the greater the lower the density of the medium, being
maximum in the aether alone. It was most probably of inspiration to
Huygens, which assumed a similar treatment. When light encounters a
surface of separation between air and a diaphanous body, according to
Pardies, waves change from spherical to ellipsoidal. Ango-
Pardies explanation is not clear however, also because referring to a
ϐigure (Fig. 1.1) whose littering does not closely correspond to the
description.
Fig. 1.1 Elliptic waves in the refraction of light according to Pardies.
Redrawn from [2], p. 62

More clear is the explanation associated to Fig. 1.2, where a
graphical algorithm to evaluate the direction of the refracted ray is
suggested. Let consider two rays of light AI and aC, very close to each
other to be considered as parallel. They encounter the surface IC of
separation between two media having different density, that of the
lower (medium 2) less than that of the upper (medium 1). Thus the
speed of the light 
 in the medium 2 is greater than the speed 
 in
the medium 1, of 1/3 for instance. The undulation in the direction of
the ray AI reaches ϐirst the surface IC and continues its motion with an
increased speed while the undulation in the direction of aC continues
along cC. Ango-Pardies gave for granted that the ray will continue
starting from the same point I but with a different direction In and that
the front wave (the tangent to the undulation according to Argo-
Pardies) is deϐined by a straight line passing through the point C. With
reference to the half circumference of diameter IC, the point n which
deϐines the direction In of the refracted ray is found by imposing that
the segment I
 is to the segment In as 
 is to 
, being m the
intersection of the half circumference with the extension of AI.
Fig. 1.2 Direction of the refracted ray.
Redrawn from [2], p. 64

1.1.3 Huygens’ Philosophical Mixed
Mathematics
Christiaan Huygens (1629–1695) has been often considered the true
heir of Galileo though a Cartesian. A common view assumes him as an
eclectic scholar, a problem solver who took up yet unsolved problems
and solved them without any apparent search direction. Leibniz, who in
any case greatly estimated him, in a letter to Nicolas Franois
Rémond (1638–1725) wrote in 1714: “he had no taste for metaphysics”
[71].23 These views could do if one considers the published great
treatises only. Here the writing style is rigorous and concise, which
rarely leaves space to imagine the tortuosity of elaboration surely
associated to his researches. Not an uncommon trend, Newton also
moved analogously though to a less extent. Because of the
mathematical rigor Huygens was often referred to as a new
Archimedes. He excelled in the use of mathematics in mechanical
philosophy; more than Descartes who had different interests and
lacked of correct impact rules, and more than Pardies, that was less
good mathematicians, and even he lacked of correct dynamical rules.
A revisiting of Huygens’s works occurred after the 1950s, when the
so big edition of his Oeuvres complètes, started a sixty years before, was
completed. It evidenced in correspondence and in unϐinished papers
that Huygens was not avulse from philosophy and metaphysics, helping
to counteract the usual image of Huygens as a positivist. This is
especially true for his last works, among which the so called Codex
Hugeniorum 7A [81], devoted to motion and space, of which will be
referred to in the following, and the Cosmotheoros [57], referred shortly
below. In any case Huygens accepted fundamental metaphysical
assumptions, those associated to mechanical philosophy.
The Cosmotheoros [57], Huygens’ latest writing, addressed to his
brother Constantijn, is a book atypical in many respects. The decision to
draft this “little treatise on philosophical matters”,24 the only one of
Huygens’s books for which he used the cumbersome adjective
philosophical, was due to several external motivations, among others
the desire to disclose to a wider audience the cosmological
consequences of the Copernican theory. The Cosmotheoros contained
Huygens’ speculations on the construction of the universe and the

habitability of the planets as deduced from his own observations and
those of other astronomers. The publication, though posthumous, had a
remarkable success and was soon translated into several languages;
much probably for the audacity of the matter treated: the existence and
characteristics of the inhabitants of other worlds. Contemporaries
scholars however, with the exception of Leibniz alone, judged with
severity the conjectural nature of the work and felt that its editing had
not increased the fame of the author [81].25
The Cosmotheoros should in any case be considered by modern
historians of science worthy to be read because, besides the
cosmological openings which dominate, it contains important
epistemological observations. Prerequisite to Huygens’ epistemological
discourse is the consideration that the reasons of the Creator remain
impenetrable to us. With very strong accents Huygens emphasized that
the reason of God is “quite other than the ours” and that the power that
we assign him is usually just a confused imitation of the one we
perceive in ourselves; any attempt to understand the divine attributes
is therefore vain. In resuming the thesis of the inϐinite power of God,
however, Huygens did not intend to get rid of the rules established by
the mechanical philosophy which remain completely valid.
Huygens made use of the omnipotence of God especially in order to
reject the claims of metaphysicians and theologians to limit a priori the
variety of creation, which must be established in an experimental way,
and to prevent the extension of our science to hitherto unknown ϐields.
Huygens was anyway mainly a mathematician—very good indeed—
and a supporter of the mechanical philosophy. His most important
results were in mechanics. His studies on the composite pendulum,
collected in the Horologium oscillatorium of 1673, are a milestone of
dynamics. The same holds true for his studies on the impact of (elastic)
bodies in the Motu cororum ex percussione published in 1713 and on
the centrifugal force in De vi centrifuga of 1673. In these studies the
role played by mechanical philosophy was important but not prevalent.
Huygens was instead fully engaged in this philosophy in the study of the
causes of gravity. His conclusions, reported in the Discourse sur la cause
de la pesanteur of 1690, were of qualitative nature even though
mathematics played an important role.

But the problem where Huygens joined the approach typical of
mixed mathematics to the mechanical philosophy was that of light
propagation. According to Huygens, in optics the demonstrations occur
of those kinds which do not produce as great a certitude as those of
geometry and which even differ much therefrom, since whereas
geometers prove their propositions by ϐixed and incontestable
principles, here the principles are veriϐied by the conclusions to be
drawn from them; the nature of these things not allowing of this being
done otherwise.
It is always possible to attain thereby to a degree of probability
which very often is scarcely less than complete proof. To wit,
when things which have been demonstrated by the Principles
that have been assumed correspond perfectly to the phenomena
which experiment has brought under observation; especially
when there are a great number of them, and further, principally,
when one can imagine and foresee new phenomena which ought
to follow from the hypotheses which one employs, and when one
ϐinds that therein the fact corresponds to our prevision. But if all
these proofs of probability are met with in that which I propose
to discuss, as it seems to me they are, this ought to be a very
strong conϐirmation of the success of my inquiry; and it must be
ill if the facts are not pretty much as I represent them. I would
believe then that those who love to know the Causes of things
and who are able to admire the marvels of Light, will ϐind some
satisfaction in these various speculations regarding it, and in the
new explanation of its famous property which is the main
foundation of the construction of our eyes and of those great
inventions which extend so vastly the use of them [56].26 (A.3)
The validation of the principles at the basis of explanations (a theory in
modern term) of a physical phenomena is compared to the validation of
the interpretation of the characters in the decryption of an encrypted
letter.
I feel that in physics there are no other demonstrations than in
deciphering a letter. Here, having made assumptions about some

slight conjectures, if one ϐinds that they are veriϐied in the
following, so that according to these suppositions of letters one
ϐinds coherent words in the letter, one holds with a very great
certainty that the suppositions are true, that there is need of
another proof, even though it is not impossible that there are
others more true [58].27 (A.4)
1.1.3.1 The Role of Philosophy of Nature. The
Traité de la lumière
Huygens joined the approach typical of mixed mathematics to the
mechanical philosophy in a very efϐicient way in the study of light
propagation. His mechanicistic view was for sure inϐluenced by
Descartes  and at least by Hobbes (a philosopher) and Pardies (a
mathematician), of whom Huygens knew the writings for sure, even if
not yet published. In the following I will shortly comment the theories
of Hobbes; that of Pardies and Descartes  have been described in the
previous section.
Thomas Hobbes (1588–1679) proposed a his own theory of light in
his Tractatus opticus of 1644 [1]. According to him light was not a
tendency to motion, but an actual motion, though very small, which is
propagating instantaneously through a not speciϐied medium. Light was
generated by a luminous body which expands and swells into a greater
volume, and then contracts again, continually contracting and swelling
(systolem et diastolem). The motion from the luminous body is
propagated to the eye through a continual pushing outwards of the
contiguous parts of the medium. A characteristic and may be a
drawbacks of Hobbes’ theory is that the entire body of the luminous
body, the sun for instance, expands and contracts together like the
systole and diastole of the heart, so that all the rays of light emanate
radially from the center of the sun rather than in all directions from its
surface as it should be. This is exactly the sort of confusion which would
arise if a theory of light were modeled too closely in an analogy with
sound, as Hobbes’ theory appears to be [117].28
Basic concepts of Hobbes’s theory of light are those of ray and line
of light. A ray is the path through which the motion from the luminous
body is propagated through the medium. It has a thickness and so it is

three dimensional. The line of light is the line from which the sides of a
ray begin. With reference to Fig. 1.3 the ray is the solid ABKI, while the
line of light is the line AB from which sides AI, BK begin. Any one of the
lines which are derived from the line of light by a continual extension
such as CD, EF, etc are lines of light as well.
Fig. 1.3 Rays and lines of light.
Redrawn from [117], p. 149
Using his concepts of ray and line of light Hobbes was able to
explain the refraction from air to glass, assuming that air is less
resistant to motion than glass, contrary to what made by Descartes. He
was conscious that the theory of expansion and contraction demanded
the existence of a vacuum. At the time he wrote the Tractatus opticus he
did not deny this possibility and thus there was no conϐlict. But when
De corpore appeared in 1655, where he discussed about light again,
Hobbes came to deny the existence of a vacuum, and therefore he had
to reject his theory of expansion and contraction.
Huygens published his conceptions on the theory of light in the
Traité de la lumière of 1690. Previous his published works about optics
reduced to the Dioptrica of 1652, a treatise of geometric optics with a
comprehensive theory of refraction and the conϐiguration of lenses in
telescopes. One of the reason that compelled Huygens to start a
mechanist theory of light was the attempt to explain the strange
behavior of the Iceland crystal, that generally exhibits two different
angles of refraction and shows refraction even for vanishing angles of

incidence. This behavior could not be explained with the traditional
geometrical optics and for this reason its treatment was completely
absent from the Dioptrica.
Huygens’ approach to optics was not that of a canonical natural
philosopher tending to explain the causes of the various phenomena
exhibited by light. He restricted the range of his theory to the extent it
could explain the strange refraction of the Iceland crystal and
completely ignored the problems of the nature of colors as well as the
phenomenon of diffraction, though his theory could explain it.
Moreover he remained vague on the nature of the pulses transmitted by
the particles of aether; more precisely he did not assume a periodic
behavior, so that his was not a true theory of wave in modern sense but
simply a pulse or vibration theory. In this section however as
Huygens used the word onde, speaking of wave could be appropriate.
In Chap. 1 of the Traité de la lumière Huygens argued on the ϐinite
speed of light basing on astronomical observations. In particular he
referred to the value obtained by the Danish astronomer Ole Rømer
(1644–1710) who made use of the eclipses suffered by the ‘little
planets’ which revolve around Jupiter and which often enter his
shadow. Rømer found for the speed of light the value of 11 hundred
times a hundred thousand toises (that is 110 000 000 toises) in one
minute.29
The fact that the speed of light is ϐinite is sufϐicient for Huygens to
state that it propagates as spherical pulses: “Now the successive
movement of light being conϐirmed in this way, it follows, as I have said,
that it spreads by spherical waves, like the movement of sound” [56].30
Differently from sound however light does not propagate in air but in
an aetherial matter. This was demonstrated very clearly, according to
him, by the celebrated experiment of Torricelli, in which the tube of
glass from which the quicksilver had withdrawn, remaining void of air,
transmitted light just the same as when air is in it, but it did not
transmit sound. For this proves that a matter different from air exists in
this tube, and that this matter must have penetrated the glass or the
quicksilver, either one or the other, though they are both impenetrable
to air [56].31 Whereas Pardies admitted essentially the same wave
mechanism for light and sound, Huygens believed that the extremely
high speed of light required a speciϐic mechanism.

The model suggested by Huygens considered the universe
completely ϐilled with particles of the aether whose shape, for the sake
of simplicity, was assumed as spherical. The luminous body
communicates to these particles an impulsion that propagates through
them, without any transfer of matter. Let consider, for instance, the row
of equal spheres of elastic matter shown in Fig. 1.4. If against this row
there are pushed from two opposite sides at the same time two similar
spheres A and D, one will see each of them rebound with the same
speed which it had in striking, yet the whole row will remain in its
place, although the pulse has passed along its whole length twice over.
And if these contrary pulses happen to meet one another at the middle
sphere, B, or at some other such as C, that sphere will yield and act as a
spring at both sides, and so will serve at the same instant to transmit
these two movements [56].32 If the spheres were exactly rigid the
transfer of pulses would be instantaneous, as Descartes assumed, but as
the spheres are elastic the transmission of the pressure from a particle
to another will need a ϐinite interval of time; the greater the lower the
stiffness.
Fig. 1.4 Propagation of light in a line.
Redrawn from [56], p. 16
The elasticity of the spheres of aether, is explained by Huygens 
assuming that they, notwithstanding their smallness, were in turn
composed of still smaller parts and that their springiness consists in
the very rapid movement of a subtle matter which penetrates the
spheres from every side and constrains their structure to assume such
a disposition as to give to the subtle matter the most open and easy
passage possible. In any case though one should ignore the true cause
of springiness, in Huygens opinion, he still sees that there are many
bodies which possess this property; and thus there is nothing strange
in supposing that it exists also in little invisible bodies like the particles
of aether. Moreover if one wishes to seek for any other way in which the
motion of light is successively communicated, one will ϐind none which
agrees better. By supposing springiness in the aetherial matter, its

particles will have the property of equally rapid restitution whether
they are pushed strongly or feebly and thus the propagation of light will
always go on with the same speed [56].33
Of course, in the universe the particles of aether are not ranged in
straight lines, as in Fig. 1.4, but each particle touches several others;
this does not hinder them from transmitting their movement and from
spreading it always forward. Indeed there is a law of impact serving for
this propagation and veriϐiable by experiment. It says that when a
sphere, such as A in Fig. 1.5, touches several other similar spheres CCC
and it is struck by another sphere B in such a way as to exert an impulse
against all the spheres CCC, it transmits to the spheres CCC the whole of
its motion and remains motionless after the impact.
Fig. 1.5 Propagation of light in the space.
Redrawn from [56], p. 14
Figure 1.5 shows that any particle of aether transmits the pulse to
all the particles surrounding it and thus it can be said that any particles
becomes the source of (spherical) waves; what is commonly known as
principle of Huygens.
There is the further consideration of these waves, that each
particle of matter in which a wave spreads, ought not to
communicate its motion only to the next particle which is in the
straight line drawn from the luminous point, but that it also
imparts some of it necessarily to all the others which touch it
and which oppose themselves to its movement. So it arises that
around each particle there is made a wave of which that particle
is the center [56].34 (A.5)

The various spherical waves [ondes], to be considered as partial waves
join in a unique (spherical) main wave. Consider Fig. 1.6 where DCEF is
the spherical front wave emanating from the luminous source A, which
is its center. The particle B, one of those comprised within the sphere
DCEF, has originated its partial wave KCL, which touches the front wave
at C at the same moment that the original wave emanating from the
point A has arrived there. It is clear that it is only the part around C of
the wave KCL which touches the wave DCEF, which is in the straight line
drawn from AB. Similarly the other particles, such as bb, dd, etc. make
their own waves. But each of these waves can be inϐinitely feeble only as
compared with the wave DCEF, to the composition of which all others
contribute by the part of their surface which is most distant from the
center A.
Fig. 1.6 Rectilinear rays.
Redrawn from [56], p. 19
Huygens did not deϐine explicitly what is a ray of light, but used the
term as it was well known—that is as a primitive term—coherently
with his assertion that light propagates through straight lines. This
stems from the assumption of spherical waves, but it is also ‘proved’
experimentally. Let reconsider Fig. 1.6 where BG is an opening, limited
by the opaque bodies BH, GI. The wave of light which issues from the
point A will always be terminated by the straight lines AC, AE; the parts
of the partial waves which spread outside the space ACE being too
feeble to produce light there. Huygens added upon: “Now, however

small we make the opening BG, there is always the same reason causing
the light there to pass between straight lines; since this opening is
always large enough to contain a great number of particles of the
aethereal matter, which are of an inconceivable smallness” [56]35 and
concluded that each little portion of the wave necessarily advances
following the straight line which comes from the luminous point. Thus
then one may take the rays of light as if they were straight lines.
Notice that Huygens not only declared that light is propagating
according to straight lines, but also that there is not diffraction. This
last statement is quite strange for an accurate experimenter like him.
Moreover he knew the work on diffraction by Grimaldi from Riccioli’s
Astronomiae reformatae and he was present when Mariotte and La
Hire performed experiments at the Académie des sciences, which
tended to conϐirm Grimaldi’s results [58].36
One of the most marvelous property of the rays of light, according to
Huygens, is that when some of them come from different or even from
opposing sides, they produce their effect across one another without
any hindrance. Whence also it comes about that a number of spectators
may view different objects at the same time through the same opening.
The mechanism of transmission of light through impact of elastic
spheres allows to explain easily why the waves do not destroy nor
interrupt when they cross one another [56].37
1.1.3.2 The Role of Mathematics. Isotropic
Refraction
Chapter 2 of the Traité de la lumière is devoted to reϐlection, which does
not require particular attention. Chapter 4 is devoted to the refraction
in non isotropic media, as the atmosphere for instance. In such a case
Huygens showed that the rays are curved lines. More interesting is
Chap. 3 devoted to refraction. Differently from Descartes and
Newton, Huygens assumed that the speed of light was the lower the
greater the density of the diaphanous medium. Lower in glass than in
air for instance. This lower speed is justiϐied by the detours imposed to
the particle of aether that should move through the pores of ordinary
matter: “And, moreover, one may believe that the progression of these
waves ought to be a little slower in the interior of bodies, by reason of

the small detours which the same particles cause. In which different
speed of light I shall show the cause of refraction to consist” [56].38
By assuming a package of rays it results easy to show that passing
from air to glass for instance, the refraction angle is lower that the
incidence angle, as it is indeed. For the proof assume the setting of
Fig. 1.7. Let the line AC represents a portion of a wave of light and the
centre of the luminous body be supposed so distant that the rays in this
portion may be considered as parallel lines. Let the piece C of the wave
AC, in a certain space of time have advanced following the straight line
CB which consequently cuts AC at right angles. In the same time the
piece A would have come to G along the straight line AG, equal and
parallel to CB and all the portion of wave AC would be at GB if the
matter of the transparent body transmitted the wave as quickly as the
matter of the aether. Let suppose now that the transparent body
transmits this movement less quickly, by one-third, for instance. The
motion then would spread from the point A, in the matter of the
transparent body, for a distance equal to two-thirds of CB, making its
own particular spherical wave. This wave is then represented in Fig. 1.7
by the circumference SNR, the centre of which is A and its semi-
diameter is equal to two-thirds of CB. Then if one considers in order the
other pieces H of the wave AC, it appears that in the same time that the
piece C reaches B they will not only have reached the surface AB, but in
addition, they have generated in the transparent body, from the centers
K, secondary waves, represented by circumferences whose semi-
diameters are equal to two-thirds of the lines KM. Now all these
circumferences have for a common tangent the straight line BN; that is
the same line which is drawn as a tangent from the point B to the
circumference SNR. This line is the propagation (the frontwave) of the
wave AC at the moment when its piece C has reached B [56, 59].39

Fig. 1.7 Refraction of light.
Redrawn from [56], p. 33
The refracted rays being orthogonal to the line BN have the
direction like AN, different from AD; the angle between AD and AD
depending on the difference between the speed of light in the two
media.
1.1.3.3 The Role of Mathematics. Double
Refraction
As already noted, one of the reasons which pushed Huygens to develop
a mechanicistic theory of the propagation of light was the desire to
explain the strange behavior of the so called Iceland crystal, for which
an incident ray originated two refracted rays. To explain this behavior
Huygens assumed that, due the particular molecular arrangement of
the crystal, two different mechanisms of propagation of light subsisted.
The classical one, due to the transmission of pulses through the
particles of aether which ϐilled the pores of the crystal, the other due to
pulses transmitted directly by the ordinary matter of the crystal.
As there were two different refractions, I conceived that there
were also two different emanations of waves of light, and that
one could occur in the aethereal matter extending through the
body of the Crystal.

[...]
As to the other emanation [...] I supposed it would spread
indifferently both in the aethereal matter diffused throughout
the crystal and in the particles of which it is composed [...]. It
seemed to me that the disposition or regular arrangement of
these particles could contribute to form spheroidal waves
(nothing more being required for this than that the successive
movement of light should spread a little more quickly in one
direction than in the other) and I scarcely doubted that there
were in this crystal such an arrangement of equal and similar
particles, because of its ϐigure and of its angles with their
determinate and invariable measure [56].40 (A.6)
The second way of transmission of light is anisotropic, that is it occurs
with different speed in the different directions, so that the waves are
not spherical but ellipsoidal. The ellipsoidal waves allow to explain
easily the double refraction as well as the presence of refraction for
rays incident orthogonally to the free surface of the crystal. One of the
refraction is due to the classical transmission of pulses, the other to the
second way of transmission.
Fig. 1.8 Anisotropic refraction of light.
Redrawn from [56], p. 60

With reference to Fig. 1.8 assume the straight line RC, parallel and
equal to AB, to be a portion of a wave of light, in which inϐinite points
such as RHhhC come to meet the surface AB at the points AKkkB. For
the second way of transmission instead of the hemispherical partial
waves which in a body of ordinary refraction would spread from each of
these last points, there are semi-ellipsoidal waves. The axes of the
ellipsoids are supposed to be oblique to the plane AB, as is AV, which
represents the partial wave coming from the point A. Now taking a
certain interval of time during which the wave SVT has spread from A,
in the same time, waves similar to SVT and similarly situated occur. And
the common tangent NQ of all these semi-ellipsoids would be the
propagation of the wave RC which fall on AB, and would be the place
where this movement occurs in much greater amount than anywhere
else, being made up of arcs of an inϐinity of ellipsoids, the centers of
which are along the line AB [56, 59].
At this point Huygens assumed to have proved that the emerging ray
is not orthogonal to AB but inclined as AN, BQ are, and that the line of
wave (the front wave) and the rays are not orthogonal.41 In Huygens’s
reasoning there are implicit assumptions that though intuitive makes
his argumentation not very stringent. The ϐirst assumption is that the
bundle of rays RHhhC changes in another bundle, the other is that a ray
maintains its identity after the refraction. That is a ray which
terminates in A for instance should continue with another ray which
starts from A.
Chapter 6 of the Traité de la lumière has an essential mathematical
nature, regarding the shape to give to lenses or mirror to satisfy certain
optical requisites. It is a chapter typical of any mixed mathematics
treatise, where the development of a physical theory is the occasion to
start a new mathematical theory. An approach that will characterize the
mathematical physical treatises of the 19th century
1.1.3.4 The Hyper-Physics of Space and Motion
Despite Leibniz’s accusation of poor sensitivity toward metaphysics,
Huygens also payed attention to it when he tried to characterize
motion. He acted as a mathematician with the goal of clarifying those
aspects of the motion that concerned his studies of dynamics in which

motion is deϐined in a precise way through velocity, intended as an
incremental ratio between space and time.
Historians of science individuate three phases in the evolution of
the concept of motion in Huygens. In the ϐirst phase (about 1650–1670)
a young Huygens assumed that both rotational and translational
motions were relative. After his studies, second phase, on centrifugal
force Huygens attributed a character of absoluteness to rotating
motion, while in the last phase, started after his reading of Newton’s
Principia in 1687, he came back to a complete relativistic vision.
Regarding the conception of the space in itself the situation is less clear,
even because Huygens dealt sparingly with the topic.
In the following I will refer to the concepts of motion (and space)
reported by Huygens in some fragments collected in the Codex
Hugeniorum 7A, in the version published by Gianfranco Mormino [81].
The fragments were probably written between 1687 and 1694, that is
in the third phase of Huygens’s reϐlections on motion. They present
repetitions and reworking to testify Huygens efforts in the attempt to
clarify his ideas; I will refer mainly to Fragment 6, which is one of the
most coherent and exhaustive.
Huygens’ space is neither the material space of Descartes nor the
purely relational space of Leibniz. Huygens gave a positive connotation
to space, which is something existing in itself; in that his position is
close to that of Newton. But Huygens’ space cannot be qualiϐied with
rest. Huygens asked himself: “Indeed there is neither motion nor rest if
not of a substance. Thus, how could one attribute the rest to the empty
space, where there is nothing? The argument is not difϐicult from a
mathematical point of view, but from that physical or hyper-physical
(hijperphysice in Latin)” [81].42
The following quotation gives one of the most exhaustive
connotation of space:
I cannot see how this space, considered in itself, without no
body may be conceived at rest, since rest and motion only
concern the bodies and the idea of both originated only from
them. In fact, if one can say that there is a rest or a motion of
space it will be of that space that is occupied or enclosed by a
body, like when we say that the space of an amphora is at rest or

moving together with it. But to that inϔinite and empty space
[emphasis added] cannot be attributed neither the idea nor the
name of motion and rest. Those who say that it is at rest do not
seem to do it for any other reason than because they realize that
it would be absurd to assert its motion, and therefore they
thought it must necessarily be said that it is at rest, when
instead it should have been thought that neither the motion nor
the rest concern in any way that space [81].43 (A.7)
To contrast the possibility of an absolute translation motion,
Huygens assumed a space where there are two bodies only, A and B that
move one with respect to the other. Let then one of them, A for instance,
reduced to nothing; perhaps then B, which continues to exist, will no
longer be in motion? asked Huygens. Certainly not, he replied, because
moving is nothing but changing distance from the other. But here
nothing else exists and the world has no borders or one center with
respect to which B could change position. Maybe then B will be at rest?
Not even, since the rest is relative to another body, respect to which the
same distance and position are maintained. But does not a body have to
be either at rest or in motion? Thus say scholars for whom motion and
rest are something in themselves, without relation to anything else. But,
according to Huygens, there is neither motion nor rest if not with
respect to other bodies, B will not be neither in motion nor at rest but
simply it will exist [81].44
In another point Huygens discussed the relative motion between
free mass points in the space. Consider two bodies A and B free and at
rest with each other. If one pushes A so that A and B are in relative
motion, A certainly receives an impulse; but it cannot be said that it is A
which moves with respect to B, because the opposite is also true. And if
even A is much greater than B, the same effect is achieved either by
moving one or moving the other. Then he concluded in a somewhat
disconcertingly way: “although it takes more effort to move, in this way,
A than B” [81].45
The principle of inertia is formulated by Huygens with reference to
relative and not absolute motion, as Newton did instead. It is
formulated as a motion with respect to other bodies. “If a body moves
freely and without any obstacle with respect to some bodies at rest

between them, it will travel in a straight line with respect to them and
will move in a uniform motion” [81].46 This for Huygens must be taken
as an empirical principle because experience evidently proves it. It can
also be justiϐied on a rational basis; in fact it is consonant with reason
that bodies put into motion one with respect to the other continue to
move without deviating towards any part, if no impediment intervenes,
as bodies at rest persevere in this state if it does not happen nothing
else [81].47
More complex and less convincing is the justiϐication of the
relativity of circular motion, to which Huygens attributed the cause of
the centrifugal force, demonstrated empirically. This justiϐication
affects, for example, the deϐinition of relative rest between two mass
points. According to Huygens, those bodies are at rest between them
that, without being hindered by any constraint or obstacle to move
away freely from one another, nevertheless maintain the same distance
[81].48 This deϐinition of a dynamic nature of rest, serves to exclude that
two bodies that move in a circular motion one around the other are at
rest; in this case to keep the distance unchanged a constraint is
required. Huygens also tried to argue with kinematic considerations
that in the latter case the bodies are not at rest. The arguments of
Huygens, based essentially on analogical reasoning, are not very
convincing and somehow presuppose what he wants to try. Before
going on to examine them, it is worthwhile to report the following
comment:
For a long time I thought that in the circular motion was given
the criterion of true motion, from the consideration of
centrifugal force. In fact, as far as it concerns all other
phenomena, it is the same thing whether a disk or a wheel that
is near me moves circularly or if, being that disk at rest, I turn
along its circumference. But if a stone is placed at the end, when
the disk rotates, it is thrown away. For this I thought that, in this
case, it [the disk] moves and really rotates, even without any
reference to other bodies [81].49 (A.8)
Then, asked Huygens,  can two bodies move relatively without changing
the distance? The positive answer is entrusted to two arguments of an

analogical nature.
In the ϐirst argument, Huygens considered two bodies A and B that
move according to lines parallel to each other in the opposite directions
and equal speed, as shown in Fig. 1.9, implicitly assuming a reference
against which these motions make sense.
Fig. 1.9 Comparison between the relative velocity and variation of distance of two bodies.
Redrawn from [81], p. 212
In a ϐirst time interval A arrives in K starting from C and B arrives in
L starting from E. In a second time interval of the same duration as the
ϐirst, A passes from K to G and B from L to H. It is simple to demonstrate
that the variation in distance between A and B is greater in the ϐirst
interval than in the second. Imagining very small time intervals, one has
that the variation of distance, and therefore the speed along the line
joining the two bodies A and B, decreases until it nulliϐies when the two
bodies pass through the GH line, and then continue to grow. This
according to Huygens means that although the relative distance in GH
does not vary, A and B still have a relative non-zero speed in the
direction of the lines CD and FE. Or reversing the reasoning, if the speed
of moving away two points is zero it does not mean that they are at rest.
In the second argument still reference is made to the two bodies A
and B of Fig. 1.9. It is known that these two bodies are moving with
respect to each other, although it is not known which of them is actually
moving. Assume now a thread that by means of hooks constrains the
distance between the two bodies A and B as soon as they cross the line
GH. Their rectilinear motion will then turn into circular motion and the

thread joining A and B will reveal the fact with its own tension.
Huygens asked rhetorically: “Why before the two bodies met these
hooks it was not known that they moved of true motion and now after
they met them maybe we will know? Can one deϐine how agitated they
are in relation to that inϐinite and immobile space?” [81].50
Even this reasoning is not very convincing however;
Huygens realized the difϐiculty and tried another reasoning:
In free motion, given some bodies at rest [which to refer the
motion], the directions and velocities along these directions are
known with certainty; thanks to them one will explain the
change in distance. The velocity of rotating bodies is also
determined by means of those bodies [at rest]. Once those
bodies are removed, it is more difϐicult to identify such
quantities and velocities in free motions, but the circular motion
of two or more bodies joined by a constraint, or parts of a single
body, is recognized by the centrifugal force. Against those who
maintain that this is a true movement, I afϐirm that it is only
relative. It cannot in fact be said that the center of rotation is at
rest in the world, but only in relation to other bodies [81].51
(A.9)
1.2 Newton Philosopher, Theologian,
Alchemist and Even Mathematician
In the early modern science there have been scholars who excelled both
in practical and in theoretical activities. Isaac Newton (1643–1727;
Gregorian calendar) was one of them and his ϐield of interest was
enormous. From mathematics to natural philosophy, to electricity, to
theology, to Church history, to alchemy, to management, etc. Today, with
the specialization that characterizes the modern sciences this vastness
of interests would be inconceivable and if someone tried to perform
researches in so a vast ϐield, even though he were a genius like
Newton or even superior, he would surely be doomed to failure. This
vastness of interests was instead natural for Newton and for many of
the scholars of the 18th century who should be seen not as scientists in
modern sense but rather as scholars for whom it was a legitimate task

to use a wide variety of materials to reconstruct the uniϐied wisdom of
the creation [78].52
What was exceptional in Newton is the extent to which his papers,
manuscripts and books of his personal library have been preserved.
Newton was a man of his times, he received a scholastic education and
as many students of his time was an avid reader (and collector) of
books, and like them used to summarize the results of his reading in
commonbooks, a humanistic habit. He often relied on compiled lists of
quotations in his discussions on the history of Church and on alchemy,
giving the “impression of a highly erudite man without [actually]
performing the impossible task of reading any source named” [47].53
Presently historians were able to consult in a easy way Newton’s
surviving manuscripts; they contain more or less ten millions of words
which are stored in digital scans and transcriptions (see
Newton project).
We may question whether its preservation is owing to his fame
or to his own meticulous cultivation of his papers, but
regardless, we have in Newton’s documents, now easily
accessible, a remarkable insight into the world of the educated
man of science and letters in late 17th century and early 18th
century England. Portraying Newton as a humanist, an erudite
reader of texts, and a participant in various hermeneutical
communities does not detract from his value to historical
narratives of the development of science. Rather, it shows both
the importance of the history of scholarship to the history of
science and the need to constantly evaluate the historical
categories we apply to individuals from the past [47].54
During the whole 20th century studies on Newton concerned nearly
completely the achievements in the ϐields of mechanics, optics and
mathematics. The focus has now shifted toward what is called the
second Newton, that is the scholar of alchemy, theology and so on; in
[47, 77] an interesting survey, reviews and comments are reported on
these studies. Various are the reasons of this shift; from the one hand
most of Newton’s papers on physics and mathematics are today well
known and commented upon, so it is natural that new ϐields are

explored, even for reasons of an academic career. It is indeed easier that
works not completely known make it easier to be welcome by
reviewers of journals. On the other hand, the examination of Newton’s
non scientiϐic papers—this is a qualiϐication commonly used, but it is
improper because how one can say that the alchemical studies do not
belong to science, for instance; Newton thought they did—would
reveals a much more complex personality than it was supposed.
The variety of Newton’s topics, would suggest that to understand
his physics for example, one should also study, and thus to be an expert
of, his theology, alchemy, etc., because all these ϐields of knowledge are
naturally correlated in his mind. This is only partially true however.
Indeed, Newton himself, I mean the individual Newton, was not a
coherent author in all the ϐields he studied and explicitly
compartmentalized his work and recognized that different subjects
required discipline-speciϐic discursive forms. So also the historian can
compartmentalize his studies, only partially of course; which makes it
possible to explore an aspect of Newton’s though without a complete
patronage of the whole, but also without completely ignoring it [60]. Of
course group work would be desirable.
Newton and his contemporaries were told somehow fortunate
because they found a virgin ϐield ahead. In this regard it is worth
quoting a comment by Lagrange on this fortune, reported by his
biographer Jean-Baptiste Delambre (1749–1822). Lagrange considered
Newton as the greatest genius that had ever existed but also “the most
lucky. In his time the system of the world was still to be discovered”
[22].55
Today no one denies Newton’s greatness as a mathematician or a
physicist and even as an alchemist. Many, however, criticize his
approach to philosophy, seeing him as a crude empiricist, sometimes
naive. Put differently, while today there is a general agreement to treat
for example Descartes, Leibniz, Hobbes and to some extent Gassendi as
philosophers, there is much less agreement with Newton, as well as
with Galileo and Huygens. The criticisms come from modern canonical
philosophers and historians of literary education. I don’t want enter the
merits of the matter, but only to point out that an objective analysis
shows that this image is at least questionable [123–125].

The division between philosophers and not philosophers, is
something we impose on the past and profoundly anachronistic. At the
time all the scholars mentioned above were treated as philosophers
tout court; Locke for instance discussed with Newton on ‘purely’
philosophical matter and was profoundly inϐluenced by him. Even
though it was recognized that some were more specialized in one topics
than in another. The reasons that today push Newton out of the list of
philosophers is his apparent reluctance to deal with canonical
philosophical topics in his published texts and not to write systematic
treatises about metaphysics or ethics. This is certainly true, but in his
published texts there are points, in particular the scholia of the
Principia and the Queries in the Opticks, in which the originality and
importance of his conceptions of philosophy emerge. Newton was more
explicit in his letters and unpublished works.
In the following I will only try to show how the ‘mathematician’
Newton dealt with themes that can undoubtedly be qualiϐied, with a
modern terminology, as philosophical, in his effort to bring back wide
areas of natural philosophy into mixed mathematics. I will limit myself
to report his studies on motion and the nature of light and spend a few
words on his theological studies, I instead have left aside his activity as
a chemist and alchemist, though Newton devoted at least as much time
to alchemical (and theological) studies as to his more ‘scientiϐic’ ones.
The process of dating his manuscripts has shown that Newton worked
regularly on alchemy during his life, paralleling his ‘scientiϐic’
researches; which proves that Newton’s interests for alchemy was not a
hobby of senility, as sometimes it is sustained [40]. Since his youth
Newton had always been interested in metallurgical process. In the
period 1683–1684 he carefully studied Agricola’s work on metals and
the transmutation of metals was his chief interest. But not for mystical
reasons, rather for practical ones. For instance it would have been
useful to change iron into copper, as copper mines at that time were
very few and warfare and casting of cannons demanded much copper.
Some traces of Newton’s alchemical studies can be found in his
famous treatises also. A part from profound general connections, there
is evidence of the direct inϐluence of alchemy in the Query 31 of the
Opticks. In particular the idea of short range forces (a somehow
vitalistic conception of matter) could possibly be inspired by the

Belgian iatrochemist Jean Baptiste van Helmont (1579–1644). Other
inϐluences are commented in [82]. It must be said that alchemical
writings are difϐicult to read for a modern historian trained in
chemistry, much more than the theological ones are for a modern
historian trained in philosophy. Indeed the language of modern
chemistry is much farther from that of alchemy than that of modern
philosophy from that of theology of the 17–18 centuries. This justify the
emergence of a greater number of recent studies on Newton’s theology
than on alchemy.
One more aspect I left aside is the role Newton played as a manager
of the Mint. This job, before as Warden and then as Master, absorbed
him since 1696, after he left Cambridge for London in his ϐifty-four year,
until his death in 1727; that is more than thirty years. The activity at
Mint is substantially ignored by historians of science, considering it as a
hobby, a reward given to Newton because of his fame and his belonging
to the winning party of the Glorious Revolution; on some aspects on
this see [120, 130]. Probably historians should devote some more effort
to understand Newton’s role, considering also that he took seriously it,
as suggested, for instance, by a letter to John Flamsteed (1646–1719):
“I do not love to be printed on every occasion, much less to be dunned
and teased by foreigners about mathematical things, or to be thought
by our own people to be triϐling away my time about them, when I am
about the King’s business”.56
When in 1661 Newton began the study of natural philosophy at
Trinity College, Cambridge, Aristotelianism, broad meaning, was still
the central system of thought in the educational system [21]. One
textbook on natural philosophy was Johannes Magirus’s Physiologia
peripatetica. Magirus dealt with the full sweep of topics proper to
physics of the time: the principles of natural things, place, vacuum,
motion, time; the planets, ϐixed stars, eclipses; the elements, primary,
secondary and occult qualities, mixed bodies; meteors, comets, tides,
winds; metals, minerals, plants, spirits, man, zoophytes; the soul, the
senses, dreams, the intellect, the will. This was the broad agenda for
natural philosophy throughout Newton’s lifetime, unimpaired in his
case by a possible inclination toward the Stoic view [42].57 One more
text at Newton’s disposal was Axiomata philosophica sub titulis XX
comprehensa of 1645 by Daniel Sthal (1589–1654), more philosophical

than Magirus’. From copies pertaining to Newton’s private library it is
possible to reconstruct his reading basing on annotations and
corrections. In [36]58 it is stressed the relevance of the treatise on logic
by Samuel Smith (1587–1620), Aditus ad logicam of 1613, as Newton’s
source for his conception of analysis and synthesis in natural
philosophy.
Newton was involved in metaphysical studies in his youth, even
though he is often charged to have an anti-metaphysical attitude. One of
his more canonical philosophical text, the unpublished manuscript De
gravitatione was concerned with metaphysics. Of uncertain dating it
deals with God and his management of Creation, doctrines of substance,
the nature of mind and body and their interaction and union. In the
Scholium generale of the Principia, added to the second editions, which
for about sixty percent is concerned with theological writings, one ϐinds
the famous passage on God, Lord over all, which has a high
metaphysical and theological content:
The supreme God is an eternal, inϐinite, and absolutely perfect
being [...]. He is eternal and inϐinite, omnipotent and omniscient,
that is, he endures from eternity to eternity, and he is present
from inϐinity to inϐinity; he rules all things, and he knows all
things that happen or can happen. He is not eternity and inϐinity,
but eternal and inϐinite; he is not duration and space, but he
endures and is present. He endures always and is present
everywhere, and by existing always and everywhere he
constitutes duration and space. Since each and every particle of
space is always, and each and every indivisible moment of
duration is everywhere, certainly the maker and lord of all things
will not be never or nowhere [...]. God is one and the same God
always and everywhere. He is omnipresent not only virtually but
also substantially [...]. We know him only by his properties and
attributes and by the wisest and best construction of things and
their ϐinal causes we admire him because of his perfections [...].
This concludes the discussion of God, and to treat of God from
phenomena is certainly a part of natural philosophy [emphasis
added] [90].59 (A.10)

With its natural philosophy, metaphysics and theological apologetics,
the Scholium generale offers an important sample of the interaction
between these ϐields. An interesting analysis of the theological
implications of the scholium can be found in [121] where its different
drafts and related private writings are studied. In particular it is shown
that Newton was much more explicit about his antitrinitarian view in
private writings than in ofϐicial writings, because the denial of Trinity
was prohibited by law.
Newton was a dualist and a libertarian [42],60 a choice whose
defense required a use of metaphysics. There is abundant textual
evidence of Newton’s belief in the motive powers of the will [42].61
Interesting the contrasting view on the role of will between
Newton and Leibniz is referred to in a review of the Commercium
epistolicum, published in the Philosophical Transaction of 1715
(Gregorian calendar), which also gives some hints of Newton’s
mechanical philosophy.
It must be allowed that these two Gentlemen differ very much in
Philosophy. The one proceeds upon the Evidence arising from
Experiments and Phaenomena, and stops where such Evidence
is wanting; the other is taken up with Hypotheses, and
propounds them, not to be examined by Experiments, but to be
believed without Examination. The one for want of Experiments
to decide the Question, doth not afϐirm whether the Cause of
Gravity be Mechanical or not Mechanical: the other that it is a
perpetual Miracle if it be not Mechanical. The one (by way of
Enquiry) attributes it to the Power of the Creator that the least
Particles of Matter are hard: the other attributes the Hardness of
Matter to conspiring Motions, and calls it a perpetual Miracle if
the Cause of this Hardness be other than Mechanical. The one
doth not afϐirm that animal Motion in man is purely mechanical:
the other teaches that it is purely mechanical, the Soul or Mind
never acting upon the body so as to alter or inϐluence its Motions
[110].62
But metaphysics, for Newton, was not just about divinity and will. It
dealt with the deϐinition of the fundamental concepts of the philosophy

of nature, in particular the concepts of space, time and motion.
1.2.1 Space, Time and Motion
Newton elaborated concepts of space and time having in mind both his
needs as a mathematician and those as a philosopher of nature. As a
mathematician he needed a structure to support his laws of motion; as
a philosopher he felt the need to give a sense of reality to his concepts.
In the modern approach of Newtonian mechanics63 the introduction
of the concepts of space and time is relatively simple and not
problematic; the two concepts are uniϐied in one: space-time.  That the
universe be absolute and inϐinite does not create any embarrassment in
a prevalently mathematical theory, as mechanics is considered today,
simply because here there is no reference to ontological aspects. Only
deϐinitions are concerned and as such perfectly legal and thus only
discussion about usefulness are meaningful.
Newton did not proceed in this way because he was part of a
community equipped with a mathematical apparatus less inclusive than
the current one. Newton was a mathematician rooted in the tradition of
mixed mathematicians. They need propositions that are mathematical
in nature but must be extracted from the real world and require
elaboration that had to take place within the natural philosophy of the
time.
Newton’s main problem was the deϐinition of motion, and the
concepts of space and time had to be introduced in such a way as to
explain it. On motion the canonical philosophers of nature had long
disputed; mathematicians a little less. A ϐirst idea of motion the
mathematicians had in geometry in which motion was the basis for the
deϐinition of some fundamental geometric entities, such as the spiral
for instance. But it was a motion in which space and especially time
were purely ideal. Very interesting attempts to deϐine the motion of
bodies, essentially of mass points, occurred in the Renaissance with
Tartaglia and Benedetti. But it was only with Galileo that motion
entered forcefully into mixed mathematics. In particular, to time in
which motion is developed, a physical reality character was attributed
and measurement criteria were also given, with the pulse beats, the
water clock, exploiting the isochronism of the pendulum. Space did not

appear problematic because it was the space that surrounds us, in
which the position of bodies is uncritically referred to the earth’s
surface. Galileo faced the problem to establish whether the reference he
was considering was ϐixed or mobile. And solved the difϐiculties
involved introducing what is today called the Galilean relativity
principle, which he expressed intuitively and with little precision with
the image of an observer performing experiments inside a cabin of a
ship, with the windows darkened so that he cannot notice if the ship is
in motion or at rest. The observer according to Galilei would observe
the same phenomena in both cases.
By introducing a cosmological context the concept of space became
much more challenging. Descartes faced the problem by providing a
solution that appears to us to be twisted, and it appeared so to many of
his contemporaries, probably also because of the Church’s opposition to
considering the earth in motion in space. Descartes, to save his
planetary vortex theory in which the earth is dragged with circular
motion, introduced the deϐinition of philosophical motion, distinct from
vulgar motion, in which he could somehow say that the motion, in a
philosophical sense, of the earth, with respect to the layers of ϐluid that
immediately surrounds it, was at rest [43].64
Newton was very critical of this deϐinition and discussed it at length.
One of Newton’s problems was to give a rational foundation to the
principle of inertia, whose validity is professed on at a cosmological
level. How to say that a body without interactions from the outside
moves in a uniform straight line? For Newton the simplest solution, in
reality the only one he proposed, is to think of an absolute space, a
space that exists in itself, and although inϐinite, it allows in some way to
provide a position and deϐine a motion, which are absolute. Newton’s
choice is not the only one possible. A modern scholar of the
fundamentals of mechanics has clear that Newton asked more than it
was structurally necessary. The laws of his mechanics require a weaker
structure than absolute space-time, they only need one in which
systems in uniform motion with respect to one another are
indistinguishable; in other words it is sufϐicient to assume a Galilean
space-time structure.

Fig. 1.10 Galilean space time structure
A geometrical representation of the Galilean space-time can be
given with reference to Fig. 1.10, where for the sake of simplicity (and
possibility) of representation a two-dimensional space—and thus a
three-dimensional space-time—is considered. The planes, which
represent the space of contemporary events are replicated at each time
interval 
. Lines 1, 2, 3 represent rectilinear trajectories of a mass
point that moves in the space time; the intersections with the planes
give the position of this mass point in space at different instant of time,
a position that is assumed endowed with individuality even if the
positions in space are not countable. If the space time is Galilean, one
cannot say which of the three trajectories is the one, or even too there is
one, that represents rest. From the ϐigure it would seem that 1
represents rest, but this is only due to the impossibility of giving a
geometrical representation of motion of a mass point in the boundary
less space-time; indeed without having introduced an observer or a
reference frame, nothing can be said. If as a time axis (understood in a
general sense as one of the three axes necessary to deϐine the position
of the mass point in space-time) instead of choosing 1, one chooses 2,
or 3, then 2 or 3, represent points at rest.
It is not clear how much Newton in his choice was inϐluenced by
technical reasons, or by philosophy of nature, or metaphysics, or even
theology. As a mathematician there was nothing more natural to

assimilate the physical space to the space of Euclidean geometry.
Moreover in his time there were numerous discussions on the reality of
space among canonical philosophers, including Pierre Gassendi (1592–
1655) and Newton’s friend and colleague Henry More (1614–1687)
[50].
1.2.1.1 A Metaphysical View. The De
gravitatione
The De gravitatione is a text commonly classiϐied as metaphysical;
according to Howard Stein “this fragment deserves to be considered
one of the most interesting metaphysical disquisitions of the
seventeenth century” [122].65 It is written in Latin but some English
translations exist [99, 100, 104, 105].
The text is of controversial dating. Since the 1960s, following work
by A. Rubert Hall and Mary Boas Hall [99], it was assumed to be
composed around 1760s, or a few years later. But in 1991 it was
suggested by Betty Jo Dobbs it was written in early 1685, as part of the
preparation of the Principia [32].66 This position is now prevalent [111]
even though not shared by all [10, 54]. A correct dating of the De
gravitatione, that is establishing if it was an early work or a mature one,
is important to evaluate the evolution of Newton’s thought on force,
space and time. Luckily for the present book this point is not
fundamental.
The De gravitatione is mainly a critique to the Cartesian concepts of
space and motion (the indirect famous controversy with Leibniz is
later); it also refers to topics with a theological background, which have
been the subject of harsh criticism by modern science historians.
Interesting considerations on the concept of force are also included.
The ϐirst part of the De gravitatione is a summary of Descartes’s
doctrine about the nature of motion, carefully supplied with references
to the Principia philosophiae with quotations of passages in which
Descartes  himself contradicts his own position and a series of
arguments demonstrating the utter incoherence of Descartes’s
conceptions as a foundation for the physical theory of motion. After this
summary Newton’s own conception of space is presented, followed by

the introduction of the concept of force. No room is instead left for the
discussion of the nature of time.
The documents starts and ends, in a puzzling way, as an unϐinished
hydrostatic treatise. It begins by stating that the two sciences that deals
with gravity and equilibrium of ϐluids and solids in ϐluids belong to
mixed mathematics, in which the principles are extracted from the
phenomena and ϐinishes with a discussion on elastic ϐluids which lasts
for several pages. In between these hydraulic ‘digressions’ there is the
metaphysical content.
At ϐirst deϐinitions concerning place, body and motion are
introduced:
1.
Place is part of space which things ϐill evenly. 
2.
Body is that which ϐills place.
 
3.
Rest is remaining in the same place.
 
4.
Motion is change of place.
 
Newton paused at length on these deϐinitions, pointing out against
Descartes that there is a difference between place and body. Then he
introduced his conceptions-deϐinitions of extension and space.
Extension is neither substance, nor accident, nor else nothing at all. But
it has its own manner of existing which is proper to it. It is not
substance: on the one hand, because it is not absolute in itself, but is “as
it were an emanative effect of God [tanquam Dei effectus emanativus];
on the other hand, because it is not endowed with the proper affections
that denote substance, namely actions, such as thoughts in the mind
and motions in body” [104].67
1.
In all directions, space can be distinguished into parts whose
common boundaries we usually call surfaces; and these
surfaces can be distinguished in all directions into parts whose
common boundaries we usually call lines; and again these
lines can be distinguished in all directions into parts which we
call points.
 

2.
Space is extended inϐinitely in all directions. For we cannot
imagine any limit anywhere without at the same time
imagining that there is space beyond it.
 
3.
The parts of space are motionless.
 
4.
Space is an affection of being just as being [Spatium est entis
quatenus ens affectio]. No being exists or can exist which is not
related to space in some way [emphasis added]. God is
everywhere, created minds are somewhere and body is in the
space that it occupies; and whatever is neither everywhere nor
anywhere does not exist. Hence it follows that space is an
emanative effect of the ϐirst existing being, for if any being
whatsoever is posited, space is posited.68
 
5.
The positions, distances and local motions of bodies are to be
referred to the parts of space. And this appears from the
properties of space enumerated as 1 and 4 above, and will be
more manifest if one conceives that there are vacuities
scattered between the particles, or if he pays heed to what
formerly said about motion. To this it may be further added
that in space there is no force of any kind that might impede,
assist, or in any way change the motions of bodies [emphasis
added].
 
6.
Lastly, space is eternal in duration and immutable in nature
because it is the emanative effect of an eternal and immutable
being. If ever space had not existed, God at that time would
have been nowhere; and hence he either created space later
(where he was not present himself), or else, which is no less
repugnant to reason, he created his own ubiquity [104].69
 
Two things should be underlined in these deϐinitions. First,
although Newton said (point 4) that space is “as it were an emanative
effect of God”, this passage explicitly does not derive space from
theology. Space is “an emanative effect of the ϐirst-existent thing”,

which, according to Newton’s theology, is indeed God; but the reasoning
holds good even though God is not considered at all, because what does
matter is that “posit any thing [not necessarily God], space is posited”
[122].70 Second, space is declared to be inert (point 5). This constitutes
the empirical foundation of the metaphysics of space. It is drawn from
astronomical observations of the motion of the planets and comets and
from the experiments on pendulum, carefully designed, reported in
Book II of the Principia which showed that if there is an aether its
resistance should be either zero or entirely insensible [aut nulla erit aut
plane insensibilis] [87].71 The requisite of inertness is essential to
exclude space from the list of substances and authorized Newton to
declare that there is void in the open space [104].72
After the deϐinition of space that of body follows. For
Newton, however, the introduction of bodies is more difϐicult, for they
only exist by divine will. He declared himself reluctant to say positively
what the nature of bodies is, but he would rather describe a certain
kind of being similar in every way to bodies (whose concept is given at
the moment assumed as primitive), but not necessarily a body, and
whose creation one cannot deny to be within the power of God, so that
we can hardly say that it is not body [104].73
Thus, said Newton,  suppose that there are empty spaces scattered
through the world, one of which, deϐined by certain limits, happens by
divine power to be impervious to bodies, and by hypothesis it is
manifest that this would resist the motions of bodies and perhaps
reϐlect them, and assume all the properties of a corporeal particle,
except that it will be regarded as motionless. If we should suppose that
impenetrability is not always maintained in the same part of space but
can be transferred here and there according to certain laws, yet so that
the quantity and shape of that impenetrable space are not changed,
there will be no property of body which it does not possess [104].74 In
the same way, if several spaces of this kind should be impervious to
bodies and to each other, they would all sustain the vicissitudes of
corpuscles and exhibit the same phenomena. And so if all of this world
were constituted out of these beings, it would hardly seem to be
inhabited differently. And hence these beings will either be bodies, or
very similar to bodies. One can thus deϐine bodies as determined

quantities of extension which omnipresent God endows with certain
conditions. These conditions are:
1.
That they be mobile and therefore one did not say that they
are numerical parts of space which are absolutely immobile,
but only deϐinite quantities which may be transferred from
space to space.
 
2.
That two quantities of this kind cannot coincide anywhere,
that is, that they may be impenetrable, and hence that
oppositions obstruct their mutual motions and they are
reϐlected in accord with certain laws.
 
3.
That they can excite various perceptions of the senses and the
imagination in created minds, and conversely be moved by
them, which is not surprising since the description of their
origin is founded on this [104].75
 

1.2.1.2 A More Mathematical View. The
Principia
The De gravitatione is characterized by a metaphysical view including
the ultimate ontological status of space and its relation to God. The
Principia, by contrast, has a more restricted domain of entities,
appropriate to mixed mathematics. The treatise saw three editions in
Newton’s life time: in 1687, in 1713 and in 1726; all of them in Latin
[87, 89, 90]. The ϐirst English translation was by Andrew Motte (1696–
1734) in 1729 [93], which was revised by Florian Cajori (1859–
1930) and published posthumous in 1934 [97]. Two modern important
editions exist, one, without an English translation, due to Koyré and
Ierome Bernard Cohen  with the assistance of Anne Withman of 1972
[101], a starting point for any serious research on the Principia, with
critical notes commenting variants and Newton’s annotations; and
another edition completed with the English translation due to Cohen
and Withman of 1999 [103]. In the following all the translations are
drawn from this last edition.
Next to the absolute space (that is the space that has a reality in
itself), “in its own nature, without regard to anything external, remains
always similar and immovable”, in the Principia there is the relative
space, which is “is some movable dimension or measure of the absolute
spaces; which our senses determine by its position to bodies; and
which is vulgarly taken for immovable space” [90].76 At the end of the
scholium in which space and time are introduced, Newton in
controversy with Descartes said that the measure of space must not be
confused with the space itself, otherwise there is the risk of doing
violence to the sacred scriptures:
And if the meaning of words is to he determined by their use,
then by the names time, space, place and motion, their measures
are properly to be understood; and the expression will be
unusual, and purely mathematical, if the measured quantities
themselves are meant. Upon which account, they do strain the
sacred writings, who there interpret those words for the

measured quantities. Nor do those less deϐile the purity of
mathematical and philosophical truths, who confound real
quantities themselves with their relations and vulgar measures
[90].77 (A.11)
An important innovation of the Principia with respect to the De
gravitatione is the introduction of time. Next to the “absolute, true, and
mathematical time [emphasis added], of itself, and from its own nature
ϐlows equably without regard to anything external, and by another
name is called duration”, there is the “relative, apparent, and common
time” which is “some sensible and external (whether accurate or
unequable) measure of duration by the means of motion, which is
commonly used instead of true time; such as an hour, a day, a month, a
year” [90].78
The meaning of the statement according to which time ϐlows
equably seems to presuppose a substratum with respect to which the
ϐlow takes place. This cannot be the case and the phrase “ϐlows
equably” refers not to the ontology of time but rather to its structure.
This should allow to say that it is meaningful to ask of any two events
how much time elapses between their occurrence [39].79
The concept of time is more elusive than that of space and on it
thousands of books and articles have been written by authors of any
education. Since ancient times the idea of absolute space had a
substantial consensus on the part of both philosophers and
mathematicians, while that of time had less. For example, in the De
rerum natura, Lucretius gave a substantially relativistic deϐinition of
time: “Even time exists not of itself; but sense reads out of things what
happened long ago, what presses now, and what shall follow after: No
man, we must admit, feels time itself, disjoined from motion and repose
of things” [72].80 And Aristotle, in the Physica, besides associating
motion with time gave a subjective connotation of it, wondering if its
existence is connected to the human soul [4].81
The absolute concept of time started to afϐirm as the instruments of
its measure were perfected. It is natural to think that they always
measure the same thing and that this thing exists in itself. Said with
Newton, it is natural that time is something absolute and that it always
ϐlows in the same way. Time became not only absolute but also

mathematical with Galileo, who among the ϐirst, took time as a physical
magnitude that intervenes in the formulation of the laws of nature.
Certainly there were difϐiculties in the measurement of time, for which
one had to resort to phenomena observable with the senses, for
example motion. Time was thus measured with some motions which
could be considered uniform, such as the ϐlow of water and the rotation
of celestial bodies. It could happen that these motions, with the
introduction of new physical theories and new measuring instruments,
were downgraded to non-uniform, not always with obvious reason.
Physicists, however, were convinced that they could carry out
increasingly more consistent (absolute) time measurements. Of course
with the theory of relativity everything has changed.
Historians are left with a number of problems regarding Newton’s
concepts. These include questions about Newton’s early ideas about
space and time and their relation to his atomist ideas; questions about
the role of his theory of ϐluxions for fostering his ideas about time in
physics and of course the relationship between the concepts ϐiguring in
his physics and those in his metaphysics [68].82
When Newton wrote on absolute time in the Principia, along with its
correlate, absolute space, he seemed to assume them as something
selfevident. One indication that supports this possibility is that the
discussion on the matter is free of caveats. But not a few scholars
disagreed. Leibniz did not contrasted directly Newton, but exposed his
ideas in the famous correspondence with Samuel Clarke (1675–1729);
his ideas are summarized below83:
As for my own opinion, I have said more than once, that I hold
space to be something merely [purement] relative, as time is;
that I hold it to be an order of coexistences, as time is an order of
successions. For space denotes, in terms of possibility, an order
of things which exist at the same time, considered as existing
together; without enquiring into their manner of existing [17].84
However Leibniz with his conception of relational space offered only
criticisms and not an organic alternative to be used as basis for the
foundation of mechanics. For example there was no reaction to
Newton’s bucket experiment.

The criticisms toward the concepts of absolute space and time
introduced by Newton were also taken up by modern philosophers and
(some) scientists. Howard Stein was among the ϐirst to argue that the
modern critique of these concepts is misdirected and confuses
Newton’s ontological conceptions with those that are actually
deϐinitions. According to Stein Newton did not try to answer the
metaphysical question if space and time are actually absolute or not; on
the contrary, he did not even take for granted that such a question was
well-posed. His primary aim, instead, was to deϐine absolute space,
absolute time and absolute motion for applying the concepts and to
reveal the roles that they play in solving the problems of mechanics.
The corresponding concepts deϐined by his contemporaries, as purely
relative notions, were for any mechanical purpose quite useless [30].85
1.2.2 The Concept of Force
That Newton ‘helped’ to spread the term force in natural philosophy is
a shared opinion. What however he intended with this term has been
the object of heated debates, probably not yet concluded, to which in
the following I will give my contribution. To exemplify the nature of
contention it is enough to cite the opinions of who are among the most
inϐluential interpreters of Newton: Richard Westfall and Ierome
Bernard Cohen. Westfall states that Newton rejected the prevailing
mechanical philosophy by insisting that force must be endowed with
fundamental ontology [129].86 Cohen, on his side, contends that never
Newton even addressed the question of the existence of (true) forces
[20].87
If Newton’s concept of force at his time was the subject of
discussion (by philosophers), its use was (almost) immediately
unquestioned (by mathematicians). With the idea of providing a
measure of force by means of the variation of velocity, or more precisely
by means of acceleration, and therefore of transforming it into a
mathematical magnitude, thanks to the use of Calculus Newton was
able to present a very efϐicient tool in the Principia that allowed the
immediate solution of some problems of the mechanics of the times
and laid the foundation for the solution of all the others.

The concept of force has evolved in Newton, especially in the youth
period. In the following I report his ideas in the essentially deϐinitive
phase. First as he expresses them in the De gravitatione and then in the
Principia and in the Queries of the Opticks.
1.2.2.1 Deϔinition of Force (and Mass) in the De
gravitatione
The De gravitatione besides discussion on space and time left room for
a discussion about forces. They were introduced with the following
main deϐinition:
Deϐinition 5. Force is the causal principle of motion and rest
[emphasis added]. And it is either an external one that
generates, destroys, or otherwise changes impressed motion
[emphasis added] in some body, or it is an internal principle by
which existing motion or rest is conserved in a body, and by
which any being endeavors to continue in its state and opposes
resistance [104].88
Notice that here Newton assumed the existence of two kinds of force,
the external and the internal. The latter is named inertia in deϐinition 8,
reported below.
After Deϐinition 5, other deϐinitions follow which give some
characterization of force:
Deϐinition 6. Conatus [endeavor] is resisted force, or force in so far
as it is resisted.
Deϐinition 7. Impetus is force in so far as it is impressed on a thing.
Deϐinition 8. Inertia is the inner force of a body, lest its state should
be easily changed by an external exciting force.
Deϐinition 9. Pressure is the endeavor [conatus] of contiguous parts
to penetrate into each other’s dimensions. For if they could penetrate
[each other] the pressure would cease. And pressure is only between
contiguous parts, which in turn press upon others contiguous to them,
until the pressure is transferred to the most remote parts of any body,
whether hard, soft, or ϐluid. And upon this action is based the
communication of motion by means of a point or surface of contact.

Deϐinition 10. Gravity is the force in a body impelling it to descend.
Here, however, by descent is not only meant a motion towards the
center of the earth, but also towards any point or region, or even from
any point.
Deϐinition 11. The intension of any of the above mentioned powers
is the degree of its quality.
Deϐinition 12. Its extension is the quantity of space [emphasis added]
or time in which it operates.
Deϐinition 13. Its absolute quantity is the product of its intension
and its extension.
Deϐinition 14. Velocity is the intension of motion, slowness is
remission.
Deϐinition 15. Bodies are denser when their inertia is more intense
and rarer when it is more remiss.
From the last deϐinition it seems that density is a deϐinite (or
secondary) concept and inertia a primitive one, which would be an
approach unusual and contrary to what is usually attributed to
Newton. A reading of the comment to this deϐinition shows however
that things are not so clear and density is also deϐinite in a geometrical
way, as the volume of the matter, once pores are ignored: “so that one
may consider inertia to be remitted by the increase of the pores and
intensiϐied by their diminution, as though the pores, which offer no
inertial resistance to change, and whose mixtures with the truly
corporeal parts give raise to all the various degrees of inertia, bear
some ratio to the parts” [104].89
May be it is only an improper way to express his ideas, but a duality
in the conception of mass as a geometrical magnitude and a dynamical
one (inertia) also occurs in the Principia. According to Cotes these two
deϐinitions are incompatible. In 1712 he wrote to Newton,  commenting
the Proposition 6, Corollary 3 of Book III:
Let us suppose two globes A & B of equal magnitudes to be
perfectly ϐill’d with matter without any interstices of void Space;
I would ask the question whether it be impossible that God
should give different vires inertia to these Globes [...]. Therefore
when You deϐine or assume the quantity of Matter to be
proportionable to its Vis Inertia, You must not at the same time

deϐine or assume it to be proportionable to ye space which it
may perfectly ϐill without any void interstices; unless you hold it
impossible for the 2 Globes A & B to have different Vires Inertia.
Now in the 3rd Corollary I think You do in effect assume both
these things at once [96].90
Newton was reticent to accept Cotes’ conclusions. His commitment to
the homogeneity of matter and the essential, determinate proportion
between extension and inertia was difϐicult to overcome [10].91
Newton assumed moreover that bodies though made of particles
can be considered as continua. To the purpose one can suppose its
parts to be inϐinitely divided and dispersed everywhere throughout the
pores, so that in the whole composite body there is not the least
particle of extension without an absolutely perfect mixture of inϐinitely
divided parts and pores. “Certainly such reasoning is suitable for
contemplation by mathematicians; or if you prefer the manner of the
peripatetics: things seem to be captured differently in physics” [104].92
1.2.2.2 Deϔinition of Force in the Principia
Newton reached a more mature position in the Principia, where he
separated clearly internal and external forces at the ontological level.
The internal force is qualiϐied as inherent (insita):
Deϐinition III. Inherent force [vis insita] of matter is the power of
resisting by which every body, so far as it is able, perseveres in
its state either of resting or of moving uniformly straight
forward [90].93 (A.12)
This is Newton’s comment to the previous deϐinition:
This force is always proportional to the body and does not differ
in any way from the inertia of the mass except in the manner in
which it is conceived [emphasis added]. Because of the inertia of
matter, every body is only with difϐiculty put out of its state
either of resting or of moving. Consequently, inherent force may
also be called by the very signiϐicant name of force of inertia
[emphasis added]. Moreover, a body exerts this force only during

a change of its state, caused by another force impressed upon it,
and this exercise of force is, depending on the viewpoint, both
resistance and impetus: resistance insofar as the body, in order
to maintain its state, strives against the impressed force, and
impetus insofar as the same body, yielding only with difϐiculty to
the force of a resisting obstacle, endeavors to change the state of
that obstacle. Resistance is commonly attributed to resting
bodies and impetus to moving bodies; but motion and rest, in
the popular sense of the terms, are distinguished from each
other only by point of view, and bodies commonly regarded as
being at rest are not always truly at rest [90].94 (A.13)
There are dark sides and many interpretations of the concept of the
inherent force reported in the literature. According to Ierome Bernard
Cohen “Def. 3 is in many ways, the most puzzling of all the deϐinitions in
the Principia” [103].95
Because the vis insita opposes to the exhaustion of motion, or said
in another way, contributes to maintain the motion, it looks like the
medieval impetus, as introduced by Buridan. The assimilation is not
however entirely satisfactory: ϐirstly Newton’s force of inertia is a
substantial property of the bodies; it acts both if the body is at rest and
in motion, unlike the impetus which is deϐined only for a body which
moves. In the second place the vis insita tendency to keep a body in its
state of uniform rectilinear motion, did not exist in the theory of
impetus, which was alien to the concept of direction and which also
justiϐied the uniform circular motion. Whatever the interpretation is
accepted the adoption of the word used by Newton to indicate the force
of inertia represents a concession to the pre-Galilean mechanics.
A very thorough analysis on the concept of vis insita is reported by
Westfall in a still actual book [129], which reconstructs its evolution
from the earliest times. According to Westfall, Newton gradually
changed his thought passing from a conception of vis insita as internal
force to a concept of vis insita as inertia. At the same time gradually he
introduced the concept of force as an external cause of change of
motion. The two concepts of force are incompatible, the latter rejects
inevitably the former, since one conceives the force as the cause of the
perdurance of motion the other as the cause of its variation;

Newton will never be able to fully carry out the separation of the two
concepts, and here and there, also in the Principia, tracks of the vis
insita conceived as internal force remained. Ernan
McMullin concentrated on the role Newton’s attributed to matter and
challenges the synonymy between vis viva and inertia suggested by
Newton and generally accepted by historians [79]. For a textual
reconstruction of Deϐinition 3 see [9].
The external forces, that is the causes of variation of motion, are
characterized by their action on bodies; different kind of forces can give
raise to the same action, or effect:
Deϐinition IV. Impressed force [vis impressa] is the action
exerted on a body to change its state either of resting or of
moving uniformly straight forward.[90].96 (A.14)
The vis impressa, that is the action that determines the change of
motion of a body, differs from the vis insita for two aspects of
ontological type: vis insita is an universal attribute of matter, not
further reducing, it is permanent and always responsible of the
preservation of motion; vis impressa (intended as action) has instead a
transient nature and vanishes when the force (intended as cause) has
ϐinished its work.
This [impressed] force consists solely in the action and does not
remain in a body after the action has ceased. For a body
perseveres in any new state solely by the force of inertia.
Moreover, there are various sources of impressed force, such as
percussion, pressure, or centripetal force [90].97 (A.15)
Similarly to what happened for vis viva, many opinions have been
expressed about the meaning of vis impressa; especially for the
attribute impressed before force—an attribute also found in the
deϐinition of force in the De gravitatione: impressed motion, see
Sect. 1.2.2.1—and Newton has been also accused to be incoherent and
imprecise [33, 34, 108]. Actually this is not the case. Newton took much
care in the use of words and gave a very precise meanings to the terms
he used to indicate ‘force’.

Impressed forces are not forces intended as causes of motion; the
latter may have different nature, as Newton speciϐied: percussion,
pressure and gravity, etc. Of none of them can be assigned a measure
because they are causes. Impressed forces instead are all of the same
nature; they have lost most (all?) of their ontology and can be given a
measure according to the second law of motion with the variation of
quantity of motion (or in modern term by mass times acceleration).
Sometimes Newton seems to confuse the measure of the effect with the
impressed force itself; that is the action of the force is not only
measured by the effect but is identiϐied with it, similarly to d’Alembert.
Focusing on actions rather than on hypostatized forces,
Newton could deal with attraction and centripetal forces in a similar
way as with pressure and percussion, paying attention to mathematical
aspects only. At the beginning of section XI of the ϐirst book, he,
referring to gravity, clearly said that he only was interested in these
aspects of forces:
Up to this point, I have been setting forth the motions of bodies
attracted toward an immovable center, such as, however, hardly
exists in the natural world [...]. For this reason I now go on to set
forth the motion of bodies that attract one another, considering
centripetal forces as attractions, although perhaps – if we speak
in the language of physics – they might more truly be called
impulses. For here we are concerned with mathematics; and
therefore, putting aside any debates concerning physics, we are
using familiar language so as to be more easily understood by
mathematical readers [emphasis added] [90].98 (A.16)
While in the Principia there is no deϐinition of the force of percussion
and pressure, whose grasping is given for granted, the deϐinition of
centripetal force (vis centripeta)—the term was coined by
Newton himself to contrast the well established concept of centrifugal
force [vis centrifuga]—is instead highly developed, the only full
exempliϐication of an impressed force. This for what concerns both
mathematical and physical interpretations. Newton’s approach is partly
explained by the fact the treatise had as one of its main purpose the

study of the orbital motions, partly because this force is the one which
has a greater difϐiculty to be introduced.
Deϐinition V. Centripetal force is the force by which bodies are
drawn from all sides, are impelled, or in any way tend, toward
some point as to a center [90].99 (A.17)
An interesting comment follows Deϐinition V:
One force of this kind is gravity, by which bodies tend toward the
center of the earth; another is magnetic force, by which iron
seeks a lodestone; and yet another is that force, whatever it may
be, by which the planets are continually drawn back from
rectilinear motions and compelled to revolve in curved lines
[90].100 (A.18)
The centripetal force is a cause (a physical entity) which can be seen
under different points of view and given different measurement or
impression [14].101
It is worth quoting one more comment to the deϐinition of
centripetal forces where for the ϐirst time in the history of mechanics
weight is introduced in a completely modern way. The weight of a body
decreases moving away from the earth because the amount of
accelerating force decreases.
An example is weight, which is greater in a larger body and less
in a smaller body; and in one and the same body is greater near
the earth and less out in the heavens. This quantity is the
centripetency, or propensity toward a center, of the whole body,
and (so to speak) its weight, and it may always be known from
the force opposite and equal to it, which can prevent the body
from falling [90].102 (A.19)
Newton drawn a clear distinction between the words attraction and
gravity. This is not seen clearly by browsing the Principa, where the
words having as their roots either gravitas or attractiones are spread
nearly uniformly. But if one distinguishes between harmful and
technical use he ϐinds that things are different. This at least is the

opinion of I Bernard Cohen, for whom the index verborum of the
Principia, would record about 300 instances of the noun attraction (or
other nouns with the same root), of which more than ninety percent in
the ϐirst two books. The noun gravitatis, with its variants, is never used
in the ϐirst two books it would ϐind its natural place in the third book
[19].103
When considering a single body Newton used the word centripetal
force, but when he considered more than one body he used the word
attraction, even if he did not want to give any physical meaning to the
words, he took into account that in the case of more bodies there is no a
single center to refer to, so the centripetal attribute would be
ambiguous. If it were not for the third book, having a more physical
character, Newton’s arguments on the purely mathematical signiϐicance
of the forces impressed would have had a complete plausibility. When
Newton said that he only needed the mathematical expression of the
centripetal forces he ofϐicially distanced himself from a possible charge
of having introduced occult forces or forces at a distance: the word
attraction is not associated with a physical meaning (as instead is for
gravity), it is only a manner of speaking, it only has a purely
mathematically meaning.
In the ϐinal scholium of section XI of the ϐirst book Newton paused
on the nature of the centripetal force:
I use the word attraction here in a general sense for any
endeavor whatever of bodies to approach one another, whether
that endeavor occurs as a result of the action of the bodies either
drawn toward one another or acting on one another by means of
spirits emitted or whether it arises from the action of aether or
of air or of any medium whatsoever—whether corporeal or
incorporeal—in any way impelling toward one another the
bodies ϐloating therein [90].104 (A.20)
1.2.2.3 Gravity and Action at a Distance
In the previous section attention has been focused on the mathematical
interpretations of forces, continuously advocated by Newton; here
some considerations are referred to about the causes of impressed

forces [67]. Quite interesting from this point of view is the reading of
the De mundi systemate, translated into English as A treatise of the
system of the world, written around 1685 as a draft of Book III of the
Principia for people with little expertise in mathematics, using the
traditional discursive language of natural philosophy [91, 92].
A ϐirst step passing from mathematics to physics (and vice versa) is
to assume forces as proximate causes, thus endowing them with a
minimal ontology. Certainly, Newton suggested, this is only a partial
explanation, but it is a good approach to science, otherwise: “no
phenomenon could be rightly explained by its cause, unless the cause of
this cause and the cause of prior cause were to be delivered and so
successively continuously as long as the primary cause were to arrived
in” [36].105 A further step is to look for the causes of the proximate
causes. Newton discussed problems related to this step, for gravity in
particular, and advanced physical explanations, spread here and there
in the Principia, in the Queries of the Opticks, in his letters and
unpublished papers.
He declared quite strongly not to believe in an action at a distance
but rather in some mediation. However he was not taken seriously by
his contemporaries, philosophers and mathematicians. And he is not
believed by modern mechanicians too, who mostly give for granted and
accepted an unexplained action at a distance both at microscopic and
macroscopic levels.
Indeed Newton was not always consistent in the few points where
he discussed the cause of gravity, and many different opinions were
expressed since the issue of the Principia in 1687. Recently the
interpretation of action at a distance and gravity by Newton has
become of renewed interest by historians [35–37, 54, 63, 64, 66, 116], I
must confess without reaching a shared conclusion.
The possibilities that are explored are:
1.
Mechanical agent; the action at a distance is explained with the
action by contact of a material aether.
 
2.
Attribution given by God to the crude matter at the moment of
Creation. That is gravity is substantial to matter.
 
3. Non mechanical but material agent, due to the action of
ti l
f
th
d
d
ith f
t di t
i th
h
t

particles of aether endowed with force at distance in the short
range.
 
4.
Non mechanical and non material mysterious agent, endowed
with not well speciϐied properties.
 
5.
The continuous intervention of God to produce the power of
attraction in the otherwise inert matter.
 
The possibility (1) is explicitly excluded by a mature Newton, as
documented by the following quotation, at the end of the Principia, in
the Scholium generale:
Thus far I have explained the phenomena of the heavens and of
our sea by the force of gravity, but I have not yet assigned a
cause to gravity. Indeed, this force arises from some cause that
penetrates as far as the centers of the sun and planets without
any diminution of its power to act, and that acts not in
proportion to the quantity of the surfaces of the particles on
which it acts (as mechanical causes are wont to do [emphasis
added]) but in proportion to the quantity of solid matter, and
whose action is extended everywhere to immense distances,
always decreasing as the squares of the distances [90].106 (A.21)
Newton excluded mechanical causes (that is impact of particles) in the
explanation of gravity, because they used to act in proportion to surface
and not volume, as gravity do, and also because heavens are
substantially void of matter. However he was not fully explicit in the
point and, in any case, his assertion is not correct because Euler will
show later that mechanical causes can explain the dependence of
gravity with volume; see Sect. 3.4.1.3.
Newton excluded possibility (2) also, because for him it would limit
God’s will and paved way for atheism. To remember that in his preface
to the second edition of the Principia, Roger Cotes (1682–1716) wanted
to introduce gravity as a substantial characteristic of matter, but
Newton modiϐied this thesis, presenting it as a primary quality (an idea
probably not too different). Newton position is clearly expressed in a

famous letter to Richard Bentley of 1693 (Gregorian calendar) where
he clearly denied the possibility of a direct [robust] action at a distance.
Tis inconceivable, that inanimate brute Matter, should (without ye
mediation of something else which is not material), operate upon
& affect other matter without mutual contact [emphasis added];
as it must if gravitation in the sense of Epicurus, be essential &
inherent in it. And this is one reason why I desired you not to
ascribe innate gravity to me. That gravity should be innate
inherent & essential to matter so yt one body may act upon
another at a distance through a vacuum without the mediation
of any thing else & by & through which their action and force
may be conveyed from one to another is to me such an absurdity
that I beleive no man who has in philosophical matters any
competent faculty of thinking can ever fall into it. Gravity must
be caused by an agent acting constantly according to certain
laws, but whether this agent be material or immaterial is a
question I left to ye consideration of my readers [98].107
The possibility of a non mechanical but material agent, point (3), is
suggested by the Queries of the Opticks, in particular Query 21 and
Query 31. Here Newton, seems to assume that force at a distance
existed at a microscopic level. He thought that the physical reality was
made up by atomic hard particles which exchange forces at a distance
of different nature, a mechanicistic vision all considered. The difference
between Newton and classical mechanical philosophers is his decision
to accept the ultimate inscrutability of nature, due to the presence of
mysterious forces.
In Query 31 Newton ϐirst asked whether or not forces at a distance
among particles exist; later he declared his interest in the proximate
causes, leaving open the question of more remote causes.
Have not the small Particles of Bodies certain Powers, Virtues or
Forces, by which they act at a distance, not only upon the Rays of
Light for reϐlecting, refracting and inϐlecting them, but also upon
one another for producing a great part of the Phaenomena of
Nature? For it’s well known that Bodies act one upon another by

the Attractions of Gravity, Magnetism and Electricity; and these
Instances shew the Tenor and Course of Nature, and make it not
improbable but that there may be more attractive Powers than
these. For Nature is very consonant and conformable to herself.
How these Attractions may be perform’d, I do not here consider
[94].108
The two other points (4 and 5) presuppose an immaterial agent. The
former point still maintains the possibility of a natural (if not
mechanical) explanation, the latter requires a continuous intervention
of God and is out of the sensibility of a modern reader, but also possibly
of many Newton’s contemporaries.
Interest of Newton for immaterial agents is rooted in Neoplatonist
British philosophy, in his alchemical studies [31] and in his interest on
ancient science with his commitment on a prisca sapientia which would
have been lost in the years [36, 78]. In some drafts for propositions
from IV to IX of the Principia, composed in the 1690s for a second
edition of this treatise, many references to the thought of Graeco-
Roman antiquity are reported. These writings are today known as
Classical scholia [16]. Here motion and gravity are attributed to God,
gods and some spirits, all immaterial agents.
Quite interesting is the following quotation from the Classica
scholia:
Up to this point I have explained the properties of gravity. I have
not made the slightest consideration about its cause. However I
would like to relate what the ancients thought about this. Quite
apparently the heaven are nearly free of bodies, but nevertheless
ϐilled everywhere with a certain inϐinite spiritus, which they call
God. The bodies, however, move around freely in this spiritus, as
a consequence of its forces and natural efϐiciency they are
constantly thrust toward each other, more or less strongly in
accordance with the harmonic ratio of the distances and gravity
consists in this impact. Some differentiated this spiritus from the
highest God and called it the soul of the world [16].109 (A.22)

A cross reference to the action of spirits appears at the end of the
Principia (eds. 1713 and 1726):
A few things could now be added concerning a certain very
subtle spirit pervading gross bodies and lying hidden in them;
by its force and actions, the particles of bodies attract one
another at very small distances and cohere when they become
contiguous; and electrical [i.e., electriϐied] bodies act at greater
distances, repelling as well as attracting neighboring corpuscles;
and light is emitted, reϐlected, refracted, inϐlected [...]. But these
things cannot be explained in a few words; furthermore, there is
not a sufϐicient number of experiments to determine and
demonstrate accurately the laws governing the actions of this
spirit. [90].110 A.23)
Notice however the absence of any reference to gravity and the
admission of the difϐicult to explain the action of the spirit.
Andrew Janiak has suggested an interesting, even though ‘curious’,
in my opinion, explanation of gravity which is out of the list presented
above. Taking for granted that Newton did not believe both in an action
at a distance and in a mechanical explanation, Janiak calls for the
presence of God in the world, which for Newton necessarily exists and
is always and everywhere. If one assumes the action of God as the cause
of gravity, this action is surely non-mechanical, but it is also not at a
distance because God is close to each body [63].111
1.2.3 Theory of Light
Optics, in ancient times, was among the mixed mathematics that than
more the others was studied with strong reference to natural
philosophy: nature of light, physiology of the eye and explanation of
perceptions. With music, optics made frequent recourse to contrived
experiments, some of which had a rhetorical value only, as those related
to the law of reϐlection, others like those concerning refraction,
presented quantitative aspects also.
Newton ϐitted with this tradition, by integrating it with that of
physico mathematica of the second half of the 17th century, where the
mathematical strictness was introduced in the experimental

philosophy, with the use of an akin deductive approach using the
classiϐication of propositions in principles and theorems. Here
theorems were not always proved with the argumentation of logic, but
were based on experimental results also.
1.2.3.1 Composition of Light and Nature of
Colors
The climax of a long way of Newton’s studies on the nature of light and
colors, whose beginning is to be found in the 1760s, is represented by
the Opticks ϐirst edited in English in 1704. The standard view see it,
besides other Newton’s works on light, as the other side of the
Principia. Though the label of empiric foundation is maintained to both
of them, the latter would be based in the simple observation, the former
in devised experimentation. The latter deeply rooted in geometry, the
former in natural philosophy. Of course there is something true in this
view, but the difference of the two texts is not due to Newton only. He
moved, as any mathematician of the time, in the mainstream of mixed
mathematics where, optics, astronomy, music and mechanics were each
dealt with in different ways.
First researches of Newton on the nature of light should be found
among the entries headed Quaestiones quaedam philosophicae, the
name given to a set of notes Newton kept for himself during his earlier
years in Cambridge, where two experiments on colors were reported.
They seem to date from late 1665 or early 1666 [48]. Studies of
Newton on light however saw their ofϐicial start with the letter of
Newton to Henry Oldenburg, the secretary of the Royal society, in 1672
[84].112 The letter, a paper indeed, was read at the society meeting and
published shortly after in the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society of London containing in the title the expression New theory
about colours and light (Herein after simply New theory), with which
the paper is currently known [84].
The New theory presented the main topics of Newton’s theory of
light; in particular the assertion that light is compounded of colored
rays which can be separated by refraction. The paper describes the
famous experimentum crucis, that according to Newton should prove
the compounded nature of light. This is made without any reference to

illustrations. Let consider, said Newton,  two small tables, and placed
one of them close behind the prism at the window, so that the light
might pass through a small hole made in it [in one of the small table] for
that purpose and fall on the other small table which is placed at about
12 feet (
 m) distance, having ϐirst made a small hole in it also, so
that some of the incident light to pass through. Another prism is placed
behind this second table so that the light projected through both the
tables might pass through that also and is again refracted before it
arrived at the wall. This done, the ϐirst prism is turned slowly about its
axis so much as to make the several parts of the image cast on the
second table, successively pass through the hole in it, so that one might
observe to what places on the wall the second prism would refract
them. It can be seen, by the variation of those places, that the light
tending to that end of the image towards which the refraction of the
ϐirst prism was made, did in the second prism suffer a refraction
considerably greater then the light tending to the other end. “And so the
true cause of the length of that image [the image refracted by one prism
only] was detected to be no other then that light consists of rays
differently refrangible which without any respect to a difference in their
incidence were according to their degrees of refrangibility transmitted
towards divers parts of the wall” [84].113
Figure 1.11 shows a drawing by Newton himself of the period when
the New theory was redacted; it illustrates the experimental set of the
experimentum crucis. The drawing exhibits a writing in Latin which
reads: “Nec variat lux fracta colorem”, that is light does not change color
when refracted. This is what a modern reader expected the
experimentum crucis should reach. But Newton supposed he had not
stringent arguments to explicitly assert the link between refrangibility
and colors, and in his published letter the Latin sentence is not present.

Fig. 1.11 Experimental set of the experimentum crucis [98] (vol.1, after p. 106.)
He had been more explicit in his early works, in particular in a
manuscript known as Of colours, of uncertain dating, to which is
conventionally associate the date of 1666. This manuscript contains a
list of 64 experiments, those connected to the experimentun crucis
being identiϐied with numbers 44 and 45.
44. Refracting the Rays through a Prisme into a darke rome And
holding another Prisme about 5 or 6 yards from the former to
refract the rays againe I found fϐirst that the blew rays did suffer
a greater Refraction by the second Prisme then the Red ones.
45. And secondly that the purely Red rays refracted by the
second Prisme made noe other colours but Red & the purely
blew ones noe other colours but blew ones [83].
A long debate about the role and the experimental consistency of the
experimentum crucis, and more in general on the theory of colors,
followed, which as well known troubled Newton very much [65, 114,
119, 126, 130].

Worth noting a radical criticism of Newton’s experiment brought
forward more than a century after the publication of the New theory.
The author was Johann Wolfgang Goethe (1749–1832) with his Zur
Farbenlehre of 1810 [44, 45]. His criticisms, in some cases well
motivated and interesting, affected not only the experimentum crucis,
but all the theory of light and also the result of the experiments. They
were also the criticisms of a philosopher of nature toward the new
science, rooted in the mixed mathematics. Goethe was not taken very
seriously by the scientists of the time even because he was known as a
poet (actually he was a polymath with good scientiϐic training). His
chief supporters have been philosophers, artists, and physicians; in the
scientiϐic community there has been occasional support from
researchers studying the physiology and psychology of color
perception, especially since the later 19th century [115].
Newton’s experiment was not easy to be replied, because of the lack
of precision with which it was described. It can be said that the English
scholars accepted it more easily than the continental ones. The two
tables below report the results of some replications of the
experimentum crucis.
Table 1.2 Replications of Newton’s experimentum crucis before Opticks. Success is deϐined as
being able to observe unequal refrangibility and color immutability. Adapted from [65], p. 44
Year
Person
Place
Successful Witnesses
1666
Newton
Cambridge Yes
Private
1670–71 Newton
Cambridge No
Students
1672
Gregory
Edinburgh Yes
Private
1672
Flamsteed
London
Yes
Private
1672
Hooke
London
Yes 
–
1674–76 Jesuits
Lige
No
Jesuits
1676
Royal society London
Yes
R.S. members
1676
Lucas
Lige
No
Jesuits
1681
Mariotte 
France
No
Private
Table 1.3 Replications of Newton’s experimentum crucis after Opticks. In Poleni’s case, we only
know that he replicated some experiments. Galiani, wrote of observing color immutability [65], p.
44

Year
Person
Place
Successful Witnesses
Year
Person
Place
Successful Witnesses
1707–14 Whiston
London Yes
Lecture course
1707
Poleni
Venice
–
Private
1707–08 Galiani
Rome
–
Private
1710
Bernoulli
Basel
Yes
Private
1714
Galiani
Rome
Yes
Public
1716
De Marian Beziers Yes
Private
1720’s
Rizzetti
Venice
No
Private, witnesses
In the ϐirst series of experiments the failure of the Jesuits is
probably associated with the nature of the prisms they used, so
imperfect as to prevent from observing anything Newton had observed.
The failure reported by Edme Mariotte (1620?–1684) can be explained
by the different arrangement of the prisms he prepared in the lack of a
precise description by Newton [119].114 Mariotte, then considered a
French leading experimental scientist, published De la nature des
couleurs in 1681 [76]. Here he granted that many experiments agreed
with Newton’s theory, but the experimentum crucis did not. This was his
response on the point: “By this experiment it is evident that the same
portion of light got different colors because of the different
modiϐications, and that the ingenious hypothesis of Mr. Newton should
not be accepted” [76].115
According to [65], the difference of the results between Tables 1.2
and 1.3 depends not only on the difϐiculty of replicating the experiment
but also on sociological grounds. Newton since 1672, the year of New
theory, though well known in England was instead a perfect stranger on
the Continent. After the publication of the Opticks he was then a very
famous and respected character throughout the western world; his
word, that is, had greater prestige than when he was younger, and it
was easier for everyone to accept his conclusions.
Newton’s New theory can be considered as a summary, but non only,
of his Lectiones opticae delivered at Trinity College during the years
1670–1672. Newton intended to publish his lessons shortly after his
letter to Oldenburg, but because of the controversies that followed he
decided to give up. The topics of the Lectiones opticae were taken up in
the Opticks, a twenty years later. Newton began the ϐirst book in 1687

or so and did not complete the last book and its Queries until 1703,
shortly before it appeared in press in the early 1704. Three editions of
Opticks were published before Newton’s death. The English edition of
1704, a Latin edition in 1706, a second English edition in 1718 and a
third English edition in 1721. A fourth English edition was published
shortly after Newton’s death, in 1730, based on Newton’s changes.
The treatise, organized, as then classic in physico mathematica, in
deϐinitions, axioms, propositions is made of three books. Newton’s
methodology is declared at the very beginning of the Book I:
My Design in this Book is not to explain the Properties of Light
by Hypotheses, but to propose and prove them by Reason and
Experiments. In order to which I shall premise the following
Deϐinitions and Axioms [94].116
The purpose of Newton was to rule out modiϐication theories of light;
theories which treated white sun light as a basic homogeneous entity
which can take different colors after interacting with matter, but
essentially stays the same. Thus, devices like prisms only modify the
sunlight.
Immediately after the declaration of the methodology eight
deϐinitions started, among them that of ray is to be cited:
Def.1. By the Rays of Light I understand its least Parts, and those
as well Successive in the same Lines as Contemporary in several
Lines. For it is manifest that Light consists of Parts both
Successive and Contemporary; because in the same place you
may stop that which comes one moment, and let pass that which
comes presently after; and in the same time you may stop it in
any one place, and let it pass in any other. For that part of Light
which is stopt cannot be the same with that which is let pass.
The least Light or part of Light, which may be stopt alone
without the rest of the Light, or propagated alone, or do or suffer
any thing alone which the rest of the Light doth not or suffers
not, I call a Ray of Light [94].117

So the ray of light, at least according to the deϐinition, ceases to be a
purely geometric entity, a continuous line, to assume a physical
connotation, a row of particles. Newton adopted the analogy with
matter theory: the ray is a least part, just as an atom is the least part of
matter. Newton’s deϐinition is sufϐiciently vague, most probably
deliberately, to raise the doubt that the small particle of light may be for
instance simply a portion of space which is active [51],118 or a
geometrical entity, an element of volume. In practice, it remained
however fundamental the geometrical idea of line along which the
minimal particles of light propagate, which reconnects to the classical
deϐinition of ray in the geometrical optics. However, differently than in
classical geometrical optics, Newton’s ray may be a curved line, when
its particles are deϐlected by forces due to the interaction of matter, as it
occurred in the case of diffraction (or inϐlection according Newton’s
nomenclature).
Also def. VII and VIII deserve to be quoted.
Def. VII. The Light whose Rays are all alike Refrangible, I call
Simple, Homogeneal and Similar; and that whose Rays are some
more Refrangible than others, I call Compound, Heterogenal and
Dissimilar. The former Light I call Homogeneal, not because I
would afϐirm it so in all respects; but because the Rays which
agree in Refrangibility, agree at least in all those their other
Properties which I consider in the following Discourse.
Def. VIII. The Colours of Homogeneal Lights, I call Primary,
Homogeneal and Simple; and those of Heterogeneal Lights,
Heterogeneal and Compound. For these are always compounded
of the colours of Homogeneal Lights; as will appear in the
following Discourse [94].119
The deϐinitions, are not simply syntactic as in the modern axiomatic
theories. They are rather real deϐinitions and presuppose the reality of
what is deϐined. For example it is presupposed that a ray may be
compound.
To deϐinitions eight axioms follow. They have an empirical character,
that is they are not evident in themselves. What to a modern may seem
an abuse of language, to name a proposition true but not evident in

itself as an axiom, was indeed a quite common habit in the
experimental philosophy of the 18th century. The eight axioms, a part
some isolated points, are in any case propositions shared by any
scholar of opticks, and in this sense the analogy with axioms of
geometry is not strange even for a modern reader.
Axiom 5 concerns the law of refraction; it is formulated in an
apparently surprising way. That is, it is presented as a law that applies
only approximately: “The Sine of Incidence is either accurately or very
nearly in a given Ratio to the Sine of Refraction” [94].120 Newton’s long
explanation of the statement of this axiom makes it clear how one can
talk about approximate validity. The various colors of light have
different indices of refraction; however the difference is so little that it
needs seldom be considered and the mean value can represent the
refraction as a unique phenomenon. Note however that Newton in the
explanation gave for granted what is still to be proved: different colors
have different index of refraction. Axiom 5 is followed by two axioms
related to ϐlux of homogenous light.
Next to axioms are propositions, classiϐied as in Euclid’s Elements as
theorems and problems. Proposition 1 asserts that “lights which differ
in colour, differ also in degrees of refrangibility” [94].121 This is proved
by showing that it is in agreement with experimental results, or
deduced from phenomena. There are two different proofs based on two
different experimental situations. Below I only refer the one
Newton presented as experiment 1.

Fig. 1.12 Different refraction of lights.
Redrawn from [94], Book I, Par I, Table II, Fig. 11
The slice of paper DE of Fig. 1.12, was distinguished into two equal
parts DG and FE. One of them was painted with a red color and the
other with a blew. This paper was viewed through a prism of solid
glass, whose two sides through which the light passed to the eye were
plane and well polished and formed an angle of about 
 (that is the
triangular base of the prism is equilateral), named the angle of the
prism. The two strips appear split as in dfge or 
 depending on the
rotation of the cylinder about its axis. According to Newton this
depends on the different index of refraction of red and blew lights.
Newton, a very prudent experimenter, speciϐied that from these
experiments it does not follows, that all the light of the blue is more
refrangible than all the light of the red; for both lights are mixed of rays
differently refrangible, so that in the red there are some rays not less
refrangible than those of the blue, and in the blue there are some rays
not more refrangible than those of the red. But these rays, in proportion

to the whole light, are but few, and serve to diminish the event of the
experiment, but are not able to destroy it [94].122
Result of Proposition 1, but the same holds true for most of the
others, is not proved from the axioms and deϐinitions of the theory, as
proposition of geometry are. However axioms and deϐinition made
possible the interpretation Newton gave. The most important concept
that allow to understand Newton’s interpretation is that of compound
ray, only in this way rays with different refrangibility can be conceived.
A modern reader would say that the experiment is compatible with the
hypothesis (a word Newton was reluctant to use) that the rays of light
have different indices of refraction. Newton instead saw the result as an
empirical inductive proof.
But the most important proposition that contains the essence of the
theory of light and colors is Proposition 2, which states that sunlight,
that is light par excellence, is a mixture of colors: “The Light of the Sun
consists of Rays differently Refrangible” [94].123
It was proved by various experiments; of them below are reported
with some detail only the ϐirst (Newton’s Experiment 3) and the fourth
(Experiment 6). Experiment 3 is very simple and reproduces with
greater critical spirit experiments already carried out by other scholars,
among them Descartes  and Boyle, but introducing precise
measurements. In Fig. 1.13, the scheme of the experiment is shown.
Fig. 1.13 Dispersion of sun light [94], Book I, Par I, Table III, Fig. 13

Let XY be the sunlight passing through a small hole F in the window
EG; it is refracted by the prism ABC which projects the light coming out
of it onto the screen MN. Newton observed that rotating the prism
around the prism axis in a certain way the image moves ϐirst upward
then downward. He decided to keep the prism still in the intermediate
position, that of transition of the motion of the image from one verse to
another. Newton noted that since the index of refraction passing from
air to glass through the surface BC of the prism is equal to the inverse of
the index of refraction passing from the glass to the air though the
surface A, the angles between incoming and outgoing rays remain
unchanged and thus the image of PT should be circular as the XY hole
is. This did not happen however; and besides the already known
rainbow effect, Newton highlighted a phenomenon that had never been
observed: the elongation of the image, with the red part in T and the
violet part in P. This can (only?) be explained if the light is composed of
rays with different refractive index.
Fig. 1.14 The elongate image [94], Book I, Par I, Fig. 23
Figure 1.14a shows the elongated image of light. They are seen as
the superposition of many circles (in the ϐigure there are only six for
illustrating purpose). Each circle represents the image there would be if
light were monochromatic. Colors are pure only at the extremity P and
T. In Fig. 1.14b it is reported the situation in case the circles (the images
of the holes) were smaller. Here the circles are more distanced and the
colors less mixed: “Now he that shall thus consider It, will easily
understand that the Mixture is diminished in the same Proportion with
the Diameters of the Circles. If the Diameters of the Circles whilst their

Centers remain the same, be made three times less than before, the
Mixture will be also three times less; if ten times less, the Mixture will
be ten times less, and so of other Proportions” [94] (Fig. 1.14).124
Fig. 1.15 Experimentum crucis.
Redrawn from [94], Book I, Par I, Table IV, Fig. 18
Experiment 6 is what in the New theory was referred to as
experimentum crucis, a locution not found in the Opticks, where the
experiment is simply indicated with a number. The hole F lets a beam of
light pass which is refracted by the prism ABC on the screen where a
hole G is made. The light passing through G meets another screen and
through another hole reaches the prism abc from which it is refracted
on the screen NM. During the execution of the experiment the ϐirst
prism ABC is rotated around its horizontal axis (that is an axis
orthogonal to the plane of the ϐigure) and the position of the image on
the screen NM is observed. The result of the screen is so summarized:
“in that common Incidence some of the Rays were more refracted and
others less. And those were more refracted in this Prism which by a
greater Refraction in the ϐirst Prism were more turned out of the way,
and therefore for their constancy of being more refracted are
deservedly called more refrangible” [94].125
Note that commenting on the second refraction Newton speaks only
of the luminous image but does not say explicitly whether it is made up
of monochromatic light or not. This aspect will be considered in the

second part of Book I, where the following propositions/problems are
proved/solved that associate index of refractions to colors.
1.
The Phaenomena of Colours in refracted or reϐlected
Light are not caused by new Modiϐications of the Light
variously impress’d, according to the various
Terminations of the Light and Shadow.
 
2.
All homogeneal Light has its proper Colour answering
to its Degree of Refrangibility, and that Colour cannot
be changed by Reϐlexions and Refractions.
 
3.
To deϐine the Refrangibility of the several sorts of
homogeneal Light answering to the several Colours.
 
4.
Colours may be produced by Composition which shall
be like to the Colours of homogeneal Light as to the
Appearance of Colour, but not as to the Immutability of
Colour and Constitution of Light. And those Colours by
how much they are more compounded by so much are
they less full and intense, and by too much Composition
they may be diluted and weaken’d till they cease, and
the Mixture becomes white or grey. There may be also
Colours produced by Composition, which are not fully
like any of the Colours of homogeneal Light.
 
5.
Whiteness and all grey Colours between white and
black, may be compounded of Colours, and the
whiteness of the Sun’s Light is compounded of all the
primary Colours mix’d in a due Proportion [94].126
 
Newton used the term colour spectrum for the image of the refracted
sun light, and although the it appears to be continuous, with no distinct
boundaries between the various colors, he chose to divide it into seven
primary colors: red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, and violet.
Newton chose the number seven because of the ancient Greek belief
that seven is a mystical number and seven were the note of the musical

scale of his time, which allowed him to make analogies between light
and music.
1.2.3.2 Fits of Easy Reϔlection and Transmission
Book II of Opticks, part I, describes the appearance of colored rings,
now known as Newton rings, both from reϐlected and refracted rays,
exhibited in thin transparent ϐilms being illuminated with
monochromatic light. The phenomenon is today explained by the
interference of light waves, that is the superimposing of trains of waves
so that when their crests coincide, the light brightens; but when trough
and crest meet, the light is destroyed; light waves being reϐlected from
both top and bottom surfaces of the ϐilm. Rings appear also with white
light, but in these case the phenomenon is much more complex because
of the interaction of the various colors. Newton found that rings also
appeared in thick plates and he discussed the fact in Book II, Part IV.
Newton knew about the rings, exhibited in thin transparent plates
enlightened with white light, under the inϐluence of
Hooke’s Micrographia [55];127 Hooke’s observations have been already
recorded in the Of colours. Newton studied long the problem; here
reference is made mainly to what he wrote in the Opticks; for more
information see [112, 118, 131].
In his experiments with rings Newton constructed a ϐilm of air of
continuously varying thickness, enclosed between the plane surface of
a planoconvex lens and the curved surface of a double convex lens
supporting the ϐirst, as shown in Fig. 1.16c with monochromatic light
coming from above. The occurrence of rings with this arrangement of
lenses is described in the Observation 15 of Book II.
These Rings were not of various Colours like those made in the
open Air, but appeared all over of that prismatick Colour only
with which they were illuminated. [...]. And from thence the
origin of these Rings is manifest. namely that the Air between the
Glasses, according to its various thickness is disposed in some
places to reϔlect and in others to transmit the Light of any one
Colour (as you may see represented in the fourth Figure

[Fig. 1.16d]) and in the same place to reϔlect that of one Colour
where it transmits that of another [emphasis added] [94].128
The explanation given in italic in the above quotation is exactly the
same at that referred to in the Discourse concerning light and colours, a
Newton’s writing which could be dated around 1675 [85].
To justify the phenomenon of rings, both in thin and thick plates,
Newton, as usual, separated the mathematical theory from physical
hypothesis. The former, concerns the proximate causes only and
according to him can be deduced from the experiments, the latter
concern the causae primae, and in the Opticks they have only a
didactical role. The proximate cause of the appearance of the colored
rings was attributed by Newton to ϔits of easy transmission, or simply
ϔits, which are ϐirst introduced in Proposition XII of Book II, part II:
Every Ray of Light in its passage through any refracting Surface
is put into a certain transient Constitution or State, which in the
progress of the Ray returns at equal Intervals, and disposes the
Ray at every return to be easily transmitted through the next
refracting Surface, and between the returns to be easily reϐlected
by it [94].129
and then speciϐied with a deϐinition:
Deϐinition. The returns of the disposition of any Ray to be
reϐlected I will call its Fits of easy Reϐlexion, and those of its
disposition to be transmitted its Fits of easy Transmission, and
the space it passes between every return and the next return,
the Interval of its Fits [94].130

Fig. 1.16 Rings.
Redrawn from [94], Book II, Tab I

Newton’s choice of the term ϔits [paroxysms], quite strange for a
modern reader, is drawn from contemporary medical language. A ϐit is
one of recurrent attacks of a periodic ailment, in particular, of ague or
intermittent fever (today know as malaria). The ϐits of ague have a
number of features in common with ϐits of easy reϐlection and
transmission that make it an apt term. Fits alternate between two
opposite phases, cold and hot, which are alternate bodily states and not
alternations of some bodily substance such as blood. Fits are periodic
and, depending on the type of ague, have periods of return of one, two,
or three days [117].131
Of a certain interest in the deϐinition of ϐits is the introduction of the
concept of the interval (or length) of ϐits. Analysis of previous Newton’s
work and also what is written in the Opticks suggests that this quantity
could be associated to the wave length of some vibratory motion.
Newton arrived at the theory of ϐits after causae primae were looked
for, in a unsatisfactory way indeed. In the previously referred Discourse
concerning light and colours Newton explained the origin of ϐits with
reference to air. In the An hypothesis explaining the property of light
discoursed in my severall papers, more or less of the same period, air
was replaced by aether. And an analogy with a stone that falls in still
water was assumed; just “as stones thrown into water do in its Surface;
and that these vibrations are propagated every way into both the rarer
& denser Mediums, as the vibrations of Air which cause Sound are from
a Stroke, but yet continue Strongest where they began, & alternately
contract & dilate the aether in that Physicali Superϐicies” [98].132
In any case Newton maintained that light was not vibration of the
aether, but it has a different nature and its propagation is simply
associated to aether vibration. Around 1687 in a projected section of
the Opticks Newton introduced an explanation or the rings without
recourse to the vibration of the medium (air or aether) [118].133
Instead he called for the agitation of the particles of refracting and
reϐlection bodies, assuming a periodic motion:
Prop. 12 The motion excited by a ray of light in its passage
through any refracting surface is reciprocal & by its
reciprocations doth alternately increase & decrease the
reϐlecting power of the surface.

[...]
The proper argument for ye truth of this Proposition is the
alternate reϐlections & transmissions of light succeeding one
another in a thin transparent plate accordingly as the thickness
of the plate encreaseth in an arithmetical progression [85].134
An idea which is presented an hypothesis in Book II, Proposition 13 of
the Opticks, which read nearly verbatim as: So the rays of light, by
impinging on any refracting or reϐlecting surface, excite vibrations in
the refracting or reϐlecting medium, and by exciting them agitate the
solid parts of the body, causing it to grow warm or hot. The vibrations
thus excited are propagated in the refracting or reϐlecting medium,
much after the manner that vibrations are propagated in the air for
sound. They move faster than the rays so as to overtake them; so that
when a ray is in that part of the vibration which conspires with its
motion, it easily breaks through a refracting surface, but when it is in
the contrary part of the vibration which impedes its motion, it is easily
reϐlected. By consequence, every ray is successively disposed to be
easily reϐlected, or easily transmitted, by every vibration which
overtakes it [94].135
Newton however ended his explanation by distancing from it “but
whether this hypothesis be true or false I do not here consider. I
content myself with the bare discovery, that the rays of light are by
some causes or other alternatively disposed to be reϐlected or refracted
for many vicissitudes” [94].136
Newton’s theory of ϐits has too many obscurities to be considered
successful from a modern point of view. It is remarkable anyway in the
sense that when a purely corpuscular view proved inadequate to
explain the periodicity of an optical phenomenon, waves were
introduced, for the ϐirst time in the history of physics, to cooperate with
the light particles [112].137
Nothing is said about the actual size of the light particles referred to
in the deϐinition of ray, although violet rays being more refrangible are
considered to be made by smaller particles than those red rays. The
length of the ϐits is calculated for the border between yellow and orange
to be the 1/89000th part of an inch (1/35039 cm).138

1.2.4 Theological Writings. The Treatise on
Apocalypse
In recent years historians have tried to give some explanations of why
one of the world’s greatest scientists should have spent so much time
thinking and writing about religious matters. Even though
paradoxically one can reverse the question: “why did one of the
greatest anti-Trinitarian theologians of the 17th century take time off to
write works on natural science, like the Principia mathematica?”
[49].139
Indeed though provocative the question has some reason to be
raised. Newton wrote on religion and theology from his college days
down to the end of his life. Almost half of the pages that he physically
wrote, most still unpublished, deal with explicating the Bible,
interpreting it, and developing a theory of scriptural and natural
revelation. It must be said, however, that Newton was not alone. In
England, other great mathematicians such as John Wallis and Isaac
Barrow had strong interests in theology. According to [41] this
phenomenon was not conϐined to English puritanism, but also to the
Continent and it is a characteristic of the 17th century.
Galileo and Descartes, Leibniz and Newton, Hobbes and Vico
were either not clergymen at all or did not acquire an advanced
degree in divinity. They were not professional theologians, and
yet they treated theological issues at length. Their theology was
secular also in the sense that it was oriented toward the world,
ad seculum. The new sciences and scholarship, they believed,
made the traditional modes of theologizing obsolete; a good
many professional theologians agreed with them about that.
Never before or after were science, philosophy, and theology
seen as almost one and the same occupation. True, secular
theologians seldom composed systematic theological treatises
for the use of theological faculties; some of them, mainly the
Catholic, pretended to abstain from issues of sacred doctrine;
but they dealt with most classical theological issues–God, the

Trinity, spirits, demons, salvation, the Eucharist. Their
discussions constituted theology inasmuch as they were not
conϐined to the few truths that the “natural light” of reason can
establish unaided by revelation–God’s existence perhaps, or the
immortality of the soul [41].140
There was a melting of language between scientiϐic and theological
propositions, so that physical principles were expressed in theological
terms and viceversa. Newton lived in an era where religion was still at
the basis of society. It is thus not strange he was a religious man, even
though a heretic one. His religious ideas (mainly God omnipotence and
omnipresence) inϐluenced all his life and also his natural philosophy.
The same his temperament, his political conceptions and the fortuitous
events of his life, did. These are difϐicult aspects to analyze and are out
of the scope of the present book. Here interest is focused to see how his
studies on theology inϐluenced his studies on natural philosophy.
In his printed books, in particular in the scholia of the Principia and
in the Queries of the Opticks Newton claimed that arguing on God from
the occurrence of experimental phenomena belongs to natural
philosophy. But he also (post 1710) stated that “religion and philosophy
are to preserved distinct. We are not to introduce divine revelations
into philosophy, nor philosophical opinions into religion [...]. That
Religion & polity or the laws of God & the laws of man are to be kept
distinct. We are not make the commandements of men a part of the
laws of God” [88].
Newton’s religious manuscripts have always enjoyed scant attention
from science historians. No inventory of Newton’s theological
manuscripts has been published, for what I know. Nor any of them was
published in the 18th century; with the exception of some fragments as
Observations upon the prophecies of Daniel and the Apocalypse of St.
John, published in 1733 [95]; its last reprinting was in 1922 [49].141
The text had a good editorial success and was translated into various
languages. Most of the early fundamentalist interpreters, who saw the
American and French Revolutions as fulϐillments of prophecies in this
text, used Newton both as a source and as a theorist explaining why
exact predictions often failed. Newton’s postfacto method of

interpretation allowed for reconsideration and restudying of
prophecies when prediction failed.
Recently it has been edited and published a study on Newton’s
Treatise on apocalypse [102], basing on a manuscript conserved in the
Jewish National and University Library of Jerusalem [102], known as
Newton MS I, to be dated most probably in the ϐirst 1670s [102],142 and
thus predating the Principia. A its reading suggests that Newton gave to
the holy scriptures a value of knowledge not very different from the
scientiϐic one and the same axiomatic approach of the Principia was
used there [74, 75].
This could indicate that Newton’s way of conceiving the philosophy
of nature, his philosophizing rules were ϐirst developed in his
theological writings than in his treatises on natural philosophy. If this is
true it would be necessary to re-direct the studies on Newton’s
methodology by seriously reading theological writings, also because
they are not the result of a schizophrenic malaise or of a love for an
encyclopedic knowledge that explores different branches of knowledge,
opening and closing one drawer at a time.
In the Treatise on apocalypse Newton put the interpretation of the
Scripture and that of nature on the same ground; both are attributable
to God and in both cases the truth is unique and the method to achieve
it the same. According to Newton the language of the Scripture must be
univocal and homogeneous because it refers to realities that are simple
and harmonious. Confusion does not belong to the Scripture:
Truth is ever to be found in simplicity, & not in ye multiplicity &
confusion of things. As ye world, wch to ye naked eye exhibits
the greatest variety of objects, appears very simple in its
internall constitution when surveyed by a philosophic
understanding, & so much ye simpler by how much the better it
is understood, so it is in this vision [102].143
Newton addressed the study of the Apocalypse with the tools that are
most familiar to him; those of mathematics. There are deϐinitions and
propositions and general rules of interpretation (16) that enable the
reader to know when an interpretation is genuine [102].144 One of the
fundamental rule, typical of mathematics, stated not to use synonyms.

“To assign but one meaning to one place of scripture, unless it be by
way of conjecture [For a man cannot be obliged to believe more
meanings of a place the one]” [102].145
In [23] it is suggested that the relationship of mathematics to the
analysis of prophecies is not that close. Newton, with other
contemporary exegetes, considered mathematics and prophecy as quite
different matter and declared that prophetical interpretation was not a
demonstrative science, differently from mathematics [102].146 A
notable exception was represented by More and Cambridge Platonists
who thought that mathematics was able to reveal the truth of
prophecies.
To testify the role of the Apocalypse in the development of a general
methodology for scientiϐic inquires, the following Table 1.4 compares
the famous Regulae philosophandi of the Principia with the Rules for
interpreting the words and language in Scripture of147 the Treatise on
Apocalypse.
Table 1.4 Comparison between the rules from Treatise on Apocalypse and Principia. Adapted
from [74], pp. 398–399
Treatise on Apocalypse
Principia
2 [part I]. To assigne but one meaning to one place of
scripture. 3. To keep as close as may be to the same
sense of words
Regula I (1687) Causas rerum naturalium
non plures admitti debere, quam quae et
verae sint & earum phaenomenis
explicandis sufϐiciant
1. To observe diligently the consent of Scripture. 8. To
choose those constructions which reduce
contemporary visions to the greatest harmony of
their parts. 9. To choose those constructions which
reduce things to the greatest simplicity
Comment to Regula I Natura enim
simplex est & rerum causis superϐluis non
luxuriat
Rules 4, 6, 7, 10, 12, 14, 15
Regula II (1687) Ideoque effectuum
naturalium eiusdem generis eaedem
assignandae sunt causae, quatenus ϐieri
potest
5. To acquiesce in that sense of any portion of
Scripture as the true one which results most freely &
naturally from ye use & propriety of ye Language &
tenor of the context in that & all other places of
Scripture to that sense. 11. To acquiesce in that
construction of the Apocalyps as the true one which
results most naturally & freely from the characters
imprinted [...] for insinuating their connexion
Regula III (1713) Qualitates corporum
quae intendi & remitti nequeunt, quaeque
corporibus omnibus competunt in quibus
experimenta instituere licet, pro
qualitatibus corporum universorum
habendae sunt

Treatise on Apocalypse
Principia
2 [part II]. If two meanings seem equally probable he
is obliged to believe no more then in general ye one of
them is genuine untill he meet with some motive to
prefer one side
Regula IV (1726) In philosophia
experimentalis, propositiones ex
phaenomenis per inductionem collectae,
non obstantibus contrariis hypothesibus,
pro veris aut accurate aut quamproxime
haberi debent, donec alia occurrerint
phaenomena, per quae aut accuratiores
reddantur aut exceptionibus obnoxiae
Notice that the Apocalypse rule 2, which in the table is split into
part I and part II, contains both rule I and IV of the Principia.
The comparison between the two columns suggests that either the
regulae philosophandi of the Principia have their source in the rules of
the Apocalypse or that both of them have the same source, possibly a
not theological one. Mamiani suggests that the two possibilities are not
disjoined and that the common source should be searched, besides the
Discours de la méthode of Descartes, in the studies of logic of
Newton while an undergraduate at Cambridge. In particular in the
Logicae artis compendium by Robert Sanderson [113] of 1618, an
author Newton studied when at Cambridge. In [23]148 this derivation is
considered as possible but not necessary. This difference of opinion
testiϐies to the difϐiculty in interpreting Newton’s complex interaction
between theology and natural philosophy and the need for further
studies; for some of them see [46, 61–63, 74, 98, 121].
1.2.5 A New Form of Mechanicism. The
Queries
In a previous section I commented upon the ϐirst three books of the
Opticks that concern geometric and physical properties of light in
continuity with the optics understood as a mixed mathematical science.
But Opticks became famous not only and perhaps not primarily for the
theory of light reported there, but also for the Queries put at the end of
Book III. The content and number of the Queries, changed over the
various editions, starting from sixteen of the ϐirst edition, concerning
exclusively the nature of light, to the thirty-one of the third edition.
They are not only about optics; other branches of physics are touched,

indicating the topics that for Newton were the most important to be
investigated in the immediate future [3].
The queries will be commented for their methodological aspects in
Sect. 1.2.6.2; here I dwell instead on the aspects of natural philosophy
properly said. In the queries Newton laid the foundations of a new
mechanical philosophy, a philosophy in which the phenomena of nature
are not explained using the laws of kinematics (impact included) but
using the laws of dynamics. The world is seen as a set of corpuscles
(hard) that exchange forces at a distance. On the nature of these forces
Newton was ambiguous. The prevailing position was that they might be
understood in a mathematical sense, that is, they simply expressed the
interaction of bodies whose effects are measurable for example through
the accelerations of reciprocal motion. He considered as possible that
the true causes of these forces could eventually be explained, but for
the moment this explanation did not exist.
If the ontology of interaction forces was the object of discussion
among the new philosophers of nature, what was not in question was
the extreme fertility of this new mechanicism which made it possible to
explain all the physical and chemical phenomena of nature. This
mechanicism was accepted by almost all the scientists since 1750. It
must be said that it was not accepted only for his fertility but also
because proposed by a philosopher of nature who had by then become
an authority of absolute greatness and that among other things with his
Principia had succeeded in explaining the motions of the bodies of the
Heaven.
In addition to some general considerations on Newtonian
‘mechanical’ philosophy, I will focus on an important element of it, the
idea of aether, a name and a concept that has its origins in ancient
Greece but that with Newton took on a new identity and also an aura of
mystery, because even though Newton dedicated many years and
writings to the aether, he hardly ever made it enter into his most
important treatises. Because of space reasons I will only relate to the
ideas that Newton expressed in his ϐinal version of Opticks, the 1730
edition. This is enough considering the aim of this book.
1.2.5.1 Matter and Short Range Forces

The Newtonian mechanical philosophy is exposed in the Query 31 of
the Opticks, the one added in 1718. At the beginning Newton gave for
granted the corpuscular nature of matter. He asked rhetorically: “Have
not the small particles of bodies certain powers, virtues, or forces, by
which they act at a distance, not only upon the rays of light for
reϐlecting, refracting, and inϐlecting them, but also upon one another for
producing a great part of the phaenomena of nature?” [94]:149 And
continued, by noticing that it is well known, that bodies act one upon
another by the attractions of gravity, magnetism and electricity; and
these instances make it not improbable that there may be more
attractive powers than these. How these attractions may be performed,
said Newton, are not considered. What is called attraction may be
performed by impulse, or by some other means. It only signiϐies in
general any ‘force’ by which bodies tend towards one another,
whatsoever be the cause. The attractions of gravity, magnetism, and
electricity, reach to very sensible distances, and so have been observed
by vulgar eyes, but there may be others which reach to so small
distances as hitherto escaped observation; “and perhaps electrical
Attraction may reach to such small distances, even without being
excited by Friction” [94].150
As an example of action of forces other than the known one,
Newton referred to the phenomenon of capillarity, by quoting results
obtained by Francis Hauksbee (1660–1713), the ϐirst to study the
phenomenon in a systematics way in the 1700s, who measured, among
other situations, the rise of water between two glass plates versus their
distance [80]: “Now by some Experiments of this kind (made by Mr.
Hauksbee), it has been found that the Attraction [...] within the same
quantity of attracting Surface, is reciprocally as the distance between
the Glasses. And therefore where the distance is exceeding small, the
Attraction must be exceeding great” [94].151 It must be said that
Hauksbee was cited less that it was due considered that he carried out
many experiments on capillarity very well done, published in the
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society in the years 1711–1713,
after having published his results in the Physico-mechanical experiments
on various subjects of 1709 [53].
Newton could conclude that there are therefore agents in nature
able to make the particles of bodies stick together by short range

forces; they allow Newton to present a his own idea on the constitution
of matter, which is similar to that suggested by Boyle. The smallest
particles of matter may cohere by the strongest attractions and
compose bigger particles of ‘weaker virtue’ [attractive force]; and many
of these may cohere and compose bigger particles whose virtue is still
weaker, and so on for some successions, “until the Progression end in
the biggest Particles on which the Operations in Chymistry, and the
Colours of natural Bodies depend, and which by cohering compose
Bodies of a sensible Magnitude” [94].152
The different bodies may be solid, liquid or aeriform depending on
the arrangement of elementary particles. But there are not attractive
force only. Indeed as in algebra, where positive quantities vanish and
cease, negative ones begin, so in mechanics, where attraction ceases,
there a repulsive force ought to succeed. And that there is such a
repulsive virtue, seems to follow, for instance, said Newton, from the
reϐlexions and inϐlexions [diffractions] of the rays of light. Indeed the
rays are repelled by bodies in both these cases, without the immediate
contact of the reϐlecting or inϐlecting body. It seems also to follow from
the nature of air and vapor. Here “vast contraction and expansion seems
unintelligible, by feigning the particle of air to be springy and ramous,
or rolled up like hoops, or by any other means than a repulsive power”
[94].153 Here the spring of air—and also of aether discussed later—is
attributed, and this is an original position, by Newton to repulsive
forces acting at a distance.
Newton advocated the simplicity of nature which is “very
conformable to her self” [94],154 performing all the great motions of the
heavenly bodies by the attraction of gravity which intercedes those
bodies by some other attractive and repelling powers or active
principles. And the presence of active principles is necessary to justify
the motion in the world. Indeed the vis inertiae is a passive principle by
which bodies persist in their motion or rest, but by this principle alone
there never could have been any motion in the world. Some other
principles are necessary for putting bodies into motion; but also they
are necessary for conserving this motion, because there are causes that
decrease the quantity of motion of bodies and it is very certain that
there is not always the same quantity of motion in the world [94].155
Among the causes Newton considered responsible of the decrease of

motion there are non-elastic impacts and frictions. Thus, he can
conclude, active principles are needed, such as are the cause of gravity,
by which planets and comets keep their motions in their orbs (and the
cause of fermentation, by which the heart and blood of animals are kept
in perpetual motion and heat etc.) [94].156
After these preliminaries Newton speciϐied his mechanical
philosophy with the following statement, which though very well
known is worthy to be quoted one more once:
All these things being consider’d, it seems probable to me, that
God in the Beginning form’d Matter in solid, massy, hard,
impenetrable, moveable Particles, of such Sizes and Figures, and
with such other Properties, and in such Proportion to Space, as
most conduced to the End for which he form’d them; and that
these primitive Particles being Solids, are incomparably harder
than any porous Bodies compounded of them; even so very hard,
as never to wear or break in pieces; no ordinary Power being
able to divide what God himself made one in the ϐirst Creation
[94].157
While the particles remain entire, according to Newton, they may
compose bodies of one and the same nature and texture in all ages. And
therefore, assuming that nature may be lasting, the changes of
corporeal things are to be placed only in the various separations and
new associations and motions of these permanent particles. Compound
bodies being apt to break, not in the midst of solid particles, but where
those particles are laid together and only touch in a few points.
Newton continued by reasserting that these particles have not only
a vis inertiae, accompanied with such passive laws of motion as
naturally result from that force, but also that they, as the macroscopic
bodies, are moved by certain active principles. “These principles I
consider, not as occult qualities, supposed to result from the speciϐic
forms of things, but as general laws of nature, by which the things
themselves are formed; their truth appearing to us by phenomena,
though their causes be not yet discovered” [94].158 According to
Newton,  to derive two or three general principles of motion from
phenomena and afterwards to tell how the properties and actions of all

corporeal things follow from those manifest principles, would be a very
great step in philosophy, though the causes of those principles were not
yet discovered.
1.2.5.2 Mechanical and Non-mechanical Aether
The idea of aether was always present in Newton’s thought but he
discussed it mainly privately. In the Queries of the Opticks the concept
found a public audience however. The idea changed a lot in time; from a
pseudo Cartesian concept of a ϐluid made of inert particles in the
writings before 1680s to an elastic medium made of corpuscles
endowed with active principles (forces at a distance) [109].
The aether was discussed in depth to explain gravity in two letters,
one of 1675 to Oldenburg with the title The hypothesis explaining the
properties of light discovered in my severall papers [98],159 the other in a
letter to Boyle   of 1679 [86]. In the letter to Oldenburg
Newton assumed a kinematic reasoning, according to which material
bodies were carried toward the surface of the earth by the circulation of
the aether which: “For nature is a perpetuall circulatory worker,
generating ϐluids out of solids, and solids out of ϐluids, ϐixed things out
of volatile, & volatile out of ϐixed, subtile out of gross, & gross out of
subtile, Some things to ascend & make the upper terrestriall juices,
Rivers and the Atmosphere; & by consequence others to descend for a
Requitall to the former [...]. And that the vast aethereall Spaces between
us, & the stars are for a sufϐicient repository for this food of the Sunn &
Planets” [98].160
In the letter to Boyle Newton started by arguing that the aether
pervades all gross bodies, but yet so as to stand rarer in their pores
than in free spaces, and so much the rarer as their pores are less. The
rarer aether within bodies and the denser out them, is not terminated
in a mathematical superϐicies but grows gradually into one another: the
external aether beginning to grow rarer and the internal to grow
denser at some little distance from the superϐicies of the body, and
running through all intermediate degrees of density in the intermediate
spaces. This property of aether explain the refraction of light and
cohesion of bodies [86].161

In the previous description of the properties of the aether it is not
fully clear what Newton meant with rarer and denser. Apparently, he
spook of only one type of matter that can be found more or less
thickened. This will be clariϐied later in the letter, when he formulated
the explanation of gravity.
For what the explanation of the diffraction is concerned, let
consider the dense body ABCD of Fig. 1.17a, either opaque or
transparent, EFGH the outside of the uniform aether which is within it,
IKLM the inside of the uniform aether which is outside it. Conceive the
aether which is between EFGH and IKML to pass through all
intermediate degrees of density between that of the two uniform kinds
of aether on either side. This being supposed, the rays of the sun SB, SK,
which pass by the edge of this body between B and K, ought in their
passage through the unequally dense aether there, to receive a ply from
the denser aether which is on that side toward K and thereby to be
scattered through the space PQRST, as by experience they are found to
be.
Fig. 1.17 Diffraction (a) and cohesion (b) [86]
Newton’s aether can explain cohesion. When two bodies approach
one another and come so close as to make the aether between them
start to rarefy, they begin to have a reluctance from being brought
nearer together and endeavor to recede from one another. This
reluctance and endeavor will increase as they come nearer together
because thereby they cause the interjacent aether to rarefy more and
more. But at length, when they come so close that the excess of

pressure of the external aether which surrounds the bodies is so great
as to overcome the reluctance of the bodies from being brought
together, said Newton, that excess of pressure drives them with
violence together and make them adhere strongly to one another.
For instance in Fig. 1.17b when the bodies ED and NP are so close,
the spaces of the aether graduated rarity begin to reach to one another
and meet in the line IK. The aether between the two bodies suffer much
rarefaction and the endeavor which the aether between them has to
return to its former natural state of condensation will cause the bodies
to have an endeavor of receding from one another. But if the bodies
come nearer together so as to make the aether in the mid-way-line IK
grow rarer than the surrounding aether, there will arise from the excess
of density of the surrounding aether a compression of the bodies
towards one another: which when by the nearer approach of the bodies
it becomes so great as to overcome the aforesaid endeavor the bodies
have to recede from one another, they will then go towards one another
and adhere together (Newton reason is not fully sound here. How can
the pressure of the surrounding aether overcame the repulsion of the
two bodies which increases with the decrease of their distance?).
Newton assumed that the variation in density of the aether could
explain gravity also with a play of the pressure around common bodies.
Differently than in the circulatory explanation of the letter to
Oldenburg, in the letter to Boyle the role of aether had a cosmological
character, explaining the gravity of the whole universe. For this end
suppose aether to consist of parts differing from one another in
subtlety by indeϐinite degrees. Thus in the pores of bodies there is less
of the grosser aether in proportion to the ϐiner then in open spaces, and
consequently in the great body of the earth there is much less of the
grosser aether in proportion to the ϐiner then in the regions of the air.
Imagine now any body suspended in the air or lying on the earth; the
aether being by hypothesis grosser in the pores which are in the upper
parts of the body then in those which are in its lower parts, and this
grosser aether being less apt to be lodged in those pores then the ϐiner
aether below, it will endeavor to get out and give way to the ϐiner aether
below, which cannot be without the bodies descending to make room
above for it to go out into. And thus gravity [86].162 A similar
explanation of the cause of gravity will be referred to by Leonhard

Euler in Sect. 3.4.1.3 some years later; where the aether was however
an elastic continuous medium.
In the Queries of Opticks Newton introduced the idea of aether, in
dubitative form as usual. The presence of a medium other than air, is
supposed in Query 18 on the basis of experimental measurements of
temperature in vacuo and in plenum: “And is not this Medium
exceedingly more rare and subtile than the Air, and exceedingly more
elastic and active? And doth it not readily pervade all Bodies? And is it
not (by its elastick force) expanded through all the Heavens?” [94].163
Query 20. The very word aether is introduced in Query 20, where it
is asked: does the aetherial medium in passing out of water, glass,
crystal and other compact and dense bodies into empty spaces, grow
denser and denser by degrees and the gradual condensation of this
medium extend to some distance from the bodies, and thereby cause
the diffraction of the rays of light, which pass by the edges of dense
bodies, at some distance from the bodies? A reasoning in agreement
with that developed in the letter to Boyle.
Query 21. By means of the properties of this aether
Newton suggested an explanation of gravity in Query 21 which is
apparently similar to that referred to in the letter to Boyle  of 1679. But
the aether of Query 21, at a scrutiny, reveals to be very different from
that introduced in the letter to Boyle. Here the aether is a ‘living’ matter,
formed by particles aimed by repulsive forces which give it the
property of elasticity. And the difference in density is due to a greater
or lesser concentration of equal particles; there the aether was an inert
matter and the difference in density was due to grains of different
thickness.
Newton started by asking: “Is not this Medium much rarer within
the dense Bodies of the Sun, Stars, Planets and Comets, than in the
empty celestial Spaces between them? And in passing from them to
great distances, doth it not grow denser and denser perpetually, and
thereby cause the gravity of those great Bodies towards one another,
and of their parts towards the Bodies; every Body endeavoring to go
from the denser parts of the Medium towards the rarer?” [94].164 For if
this medium be rarer within the sun’s body than at its surface and rarer
there than at the orb of Saturn, and though this increase of density may
at great distances be exceeding slow, it may sufϐice to impel bodies from

the denser parts of the medium towards the rarer, with all that power
which we call gravity.
Query 21 ends with the suggestion that the particles of aether repel
each other with a short range force at a distance:
And so if any one should suppose that Aether (like our Air) may
contain Particles which endeavour to recede from one another
(for I do not know what this Aether is) and that its Particles are
exceedingly smaller than those of Air, or even than those of
Light: The exceeding smallness of its Particles may contribute to
the greatness of the force by which those Particles may recede
from one another, and thereby make that Medium exceedingly
more rare and elastick than Air [94].165
Query 22. In Query 22 Newton discussed if his aether does disturb the
motion of planets. He asked: “May not planets and comets, and all gross
bodies, perform their motions more freely, and with less resistance in
this aethereal medium than in any ϐluid, which ϐills all space adequately
without leaving any pores, and by consequence is much denser than
quick-silver or gold? and may not its resistance be so small, as to be
inconsiderable?” [94].166 The answer is yes. Newton did not specify the
way he reached his results, but surely basing on the studies of Book II
of the Principia, according to which the speed of propagation of a pulse
in a medium is proportional to the square root of the ratio between
elastic force (that is in modern term stiffness) and density and because
the very high value of the speed of light, Newton concluded that the
density of the aether should be 700 000 less than that of air (and 600
000 000 of water), and consequently because in the Principia (Book II)
it is proved that the resistance encountered by a body moving in a
medium is proportional to its density (and the square of speed), the
resistance encountered by a planet moving in the aether should be 700
000 times less than that it encountered in air, and thus negligible.
Query 28. In Queries 28 and 29 Newton discussed the nature of light
and the role of aether. In Query 28 he wrote for instance: “Are not all
Hypotheses [the vibration theory] erroneous, in which Light is
supposed to consist in Pressure or Motion, propagated through a ϐluid
Medium? For in all these Hypotheses the Phaenomena of Light have

been hitherto explain’d by supposing that they arise from new
Modiϐications of the Rays; which is an erroneous Supposition” [94].167
And as an example of the defect of the vibration theory he
considered the explanation of ϐits which is hard to accept unless one
might suppose that there are in the world two aethereal vibrating
media, and that the vibrations of one of them constitute light and the
vibrations of the other which are swifter constitute ϐits. “But how two
Aethers can be diffused through all Space, one of which acts upon the
other, and by consequence is re-acted upon, without retarding,
shattering, dispersing and confounding one another Motions, is
inconceivable” [94].168
Query 29. In Query 29 Newton presented his projectile theory, in a
dubitative form but giving it a high probability, specially because the
linear propagation of light. “Are not Rays of Light very small Bodies
emitted from shining Substances? For such Bodies will pass through
uniform Mediums in right Lines without bending into the Shadow,
which is the Nature of the Rays of Light” [94].169
1.2.6 Newton’s Methodology
1.2.6.1 Regulae Philosophandi
Toward the end of his Principia, at the beginning of Book III,
Newton appended his famous Regulae Philosophandi. In the ϐinal
version, as reported in the third edition of 1726, they are:
Rule 1. No more causes of natural things should be admitted than
are both true and sufϔicient to explain their phenomena. As the
philosophers say: nature does nothing in vain, and more causes are
in vain when fewer sufϐice. For nature is simple and does not
indulge in the luxury of superϐluous causes.
Rule 2. Therefore, the causes assigned to natural effects of the same
kind must be, so far as possible, the same. Examples are the [...] the
falling of stones in Europe and America.
Rule 3. Those qualities of bodies that cannot be intended and
remitted [i.e., qualities that cannot be increased and diminished] and
that belong to all bodies on which experiments can be made should
be taken as qualities of all bodies universally.

Rule 4. In experimental philosophy, propositions gathered from
phenomena by induction should be considered either exactly or very
nearly true notwithstanding any contrary hypotheses, until yet other
phenomena make such propositions either more exact or liable to
exceptions. This rule should be followed so that arguments based
on induction may not be nulliϐied by hypotheses [90].170
Rivers of words have been spent about these rules and little can be
added. The content, the denomination and the position of the Regulae
philosophandi varied a lot with the various editions of the Principia,
proving the attention Newton devoted to them. In [11, 38] it is
documented, both in Newton’s published and unpublished works, the
development of the rules from their early inception to the ϐinal form
under which they appeared in 1726.
Rules 1 and 2 are rules of causal simplicity and uniformity of nature,
a position which was accepted by many scholars of the 17th and 18th
centuries, but that for Newton was also suggested by his conception of
God, who has created a world so that man could discover its laws, at
least partially [11].171 Rule 1 says that the cause should be both
sufϐicient (the phenomenon should follow from the cause) and also
necessary (the cause should be implied by the phenomenon). The cause
has to be single because the same phenomenon could not be explained
by more than one true cause. Rule 1 contrasts probabilistic
epistemologies, which allows for various explicative hypotheses
without one could express preference for one of them. Rule 2 is more or
less a corollary of rule 1, and represents a sort of Ockham’s razor.
Rule 3 makes induction the appropriate method of studying physics.
In [8, 36, 38] it is suggested that the rule is not an endorsement of
induction only, but also of a something more sophisticated inference,
which belongs to what is known as transductive inference, a term
introduced in logic by Vladimir Vapnik in the 1990s, to indicate a
reasoning from observed, speciϐic (training) cases to speciϐic (test)
cases. In contrast, induction is reasoning from observed training cases
to general rules, which are then applied to the test cases. With the rule
3, Newton declared that the properties detected experimentally on all
bodies, that is, bodies at a macroscopic level, can also be extended to
unobservable bodies, or atoms. A transductive inference would have

been used in the proof of the Proposition 70, Theorem 30 [90],172 in
which it is proved that a corpuscle placed inside a spherical surface is
acted by gravity forces in any direction. In this case the property of
gravity and the law of the inverse square of distance, which is
undoubtedly universal for all observable bodies (by induction) is also
attributed to bodies of inϐinitesimal dimension, which belong to a
different category of bodies and therefore their property could not be
inferred according to the classical criteria of induction.
Rule 4 is the one currently most discussed by historians and
philosophers of science. It concerns the so called Newtonian method, or
Newtonian style, of investigation for deducing propositions, or laws, of
physics from phenomena. It is an alternative to the approaches put
forward by some scholars of the 17th and 18th century, based on a
probabilistic epistemology, for which one never could reach truth in
physics. What it could be make for them was only to propose, based on
a priori knowledge, more or less probable hypotheses and verify their
validity with experimental observations. Newton was against this
approach because it could explain the empirical evidence of a
phenomenon by proposing many alternative hypotheses, without a
criterion of choice all being able to explain the phenomenon in object.
The only way, according to Newton, to prevent this indeterminacy, is to
avoid the formulation of hypotheses a priori, and formulate them (that
thus are no longer hypotheses but experimental laws) starting from
experimental data.
In an unpublished manuscript, when elaborating on the meaning of
rule 4, Newton wrote this clarifying passage:
For if arguments from hypotheses would be admitted against
inductions, inductive arguments, on which the whole of
experimental philosophy is based, could always be overturned
by contrary hypotheses. If a certain proposition collected by
induction should be not sufϐiciently accurate, it ought be
corrected, not by hypotheses but by phenomena of nature that
are to be more widely and accurately observed [38].173
Newton proposed thus a gradual process of acquisition of the
correctness of a law, by correcting it—if necessary—when new data is

available. To a modern his approach does not seem different from the
hypothetical deductive one of scholars who supported a probabilistic
epistemology, but for Newton this was not the case. Mostly because for
him a theory deduced from the phenomena could be improved by a
better knowledge of the phenomena, but never overturned. While
working by hypotheses, either the ascertainment of new data leads to a
radical change of the explanatory picture, or it does not change
anything because no element intervene to prefer one theory from
another. It is not here the case to discuss if an inductive approach is
possible in physics—this is a debated matter—but only to argue that
Newton was convinced of the fact independently of that according some
historians and philosophers of science, he unconsciously pursued a
hypothetical deductive approach.
The substantial breaking of Newton’s empiricism with Descartes’s
rationalism has possibly part of its roots in the different role they
attributed to God in establishing the laws of nature. Both of them
supposed that these laws were imposed by God to the world making it
regular. Descartes thought they, at least the basic ones or the principles,
were impressed in man’s soul and thus a simple reϐlection would sufϐice
to discover them, without any recourse to experiments [52].
Newton, with the English, thought that the world was a contingent
creation of God and only the observation discovers its laws; and
possibly the ϐirst causes (that is the principles) are very difϐicult to
discover.
As the rules were placed at the beginning of the third book of the
Principia, entitled De systemate mundi, at the end of the deductive part
of the treatise, this means that for Newton they did not have the same
nature of axioms or deϐinitions. The regulae are architectural in nature
and relate to the way in which the principles of natural philosophy
properly intended should be determined. They are thus methodological
criteria and as such contain wide margins of arbitrariness and
indeϐiniteness.
Sometimes, certainly exaggerating, it is said that the regulae
represent Newton’s fundamental legacy to modern science; they were
explicitly considered as a model by many scholars, even in the 19th
century, such as for instance William Whewell (1794–1866) and
Charles Darwin (1809–1882) [11].174 The situation is actually not so

clear. Meanwhile, the rules were presented by Newton in a non-
deϐinitive form only, as will be clariϐied later, in the ϐirst edition of the
Principia of 1687, when he had by then already substantially developed
his mechanics and optics. They therefore represent an explicit
epistemology, that is, an epistemology that Newton wearing the clothes
of the philosopher considered as the correct one, but that when he was
wearing the clothes of the physicists he did not apparently consider. In
fact, Newton referred to his rules explicitly only in very few points of
the Principia. Referring to the third edition of this treatise he used Rule
3 and Rule 4 only once (and only in the third book), respectively while
defending the Proposition III.5 “For the cause of the centripetal force
which retains the moon in its orbit will extend itself to all the planet, by
Rule I, II and IV” [90]175; and III.6 “This is the quality of all bodies
within the reach of our experiments; and therefore (by Rule III) to be
afϐirmed of all bodies whatsoever” [90].176 Rule 2 is cited in support of
Proposition III.5 “For the circumjovial planets about Jupiter [...] and the
circumsolar planets, about the sun, are appearances of the same sort
with the revolution of the moon about the earth; and therefore by rule
II must be owing to the same sort of causes” [90].177 And both Rule 1
and Rule 2 are cited in support of proposition III.4 ( “And therefore, by
rule I and II, the force by which the moon is retained in its orbits is that
very same force which is commonly called gravity” [90],178 and III.5
“Therefore since both these forces, that is, the gravity of heavy bodies
and the centripetal forces of their moons, with respect, they will (by
Rule I and II) one and the same causes” [90],179
Moreover the rules don’t seem particularly original. They represent
a synthesis of medieval theories of knowledge and an explicitness of the
approach followed by the mixed mathematicians since ancient Greece.
In Sect. 1.2.4 their possible derivation from Newton’s theology is
considered; here I limit to note that even Isaac Barrow (1630–1677),
Newton’s mentor, had expressed similar ideas, framing them in an
Aristotelian epistemology.
From which it appears that according to Aristotle, the principles
of all science depend wholly upon the testimony of the senses
and particular experiments [...]. But where any proposition is
found agreeable to constant experience, especially where it

seems not to be conversant about the accidents of things, but
pertains to their principal properties and intimate constitution,
it will at least be most safe and prudent to yield a ready assent to
it. For as we are justly accused of a rash temerity, by suffering
ourselves to be so much as once deceived by our faith, so we are
guilty of the greatest imprudence, if we shew the least distrust,
and do not yield our stedfast assent and obstinately adhere,
when we still ϐind our expectations answered as accurately as
possible (quam accuratissime), after a thousand researches; and
especially when we have the constant agreement of nature to
conérm our assent, and the immutable wisdom of the ϐirst cause
forming all things according to simple ideas, and directing them
to certain ends: which consideration alone is almost sufϐicient to
make us look upon any proposition conϐirmed with frequent
experiments, as universally true (universaliter vera), and not
suspect that nature is inconstant and the great author of the
universe unlike himself. [...] As Aristotle observes and conϐirms
by a most appropriate instance [7].180
The label Regulae philosophandi appeared only from the second edition
of the Principia. In the ϐirst edition the rules went under the name of
Hypotheses, for a total of nine propositions, in the second there were
three rules and in the third four, listed above.
According to Alexandre Koyré the (logical) disorder present in the
ϐirst draft of the rules must be sought in the haste with which the
Principia were drawn up. The commonly accepted motivation for the
change of name from hypotheses to rules is attributed to Newton’s
desire to clearly distinguish his way of philosophizing from Descartes’s,
avoiding the use of hypotheses not justiϐied by experience. It must be
said, however, that in the 17th and 18th centuries the use of the terms
principle, axiom, theorem law, hypothesis, contained large margins of
ambiguity. In particular, there was not made always difference between
purely empirical propositions and arguments derived with geometric
deductions [70].181
Newton had a ϐifth hypothesis to publish, which is found in his
manuscripts.

Whatever is not derived from things themselves, whether by the
external senses or by the sensation of internal thoughts, is to be
taken for a hypothesis. Thus I sense that I am thinking, which
could not happen unless at the same time I were to sense that I
am. But I do not sense that any idea whatever may be innate.
And I do not take for a phenomenon only that which is made
known to us by the ϐive external senses, but also that which we
contemplate in our minds when thinking; such as, I am, I believe,
I understand, I remember, I think, I wish, I am unwilling, I am
thirsty, I am hungry, I rejoice, I suffer, etc. And those things
which neither can be demonstrated from the phenomenon nor
follow from it by the argument of induction, I hold as hypotheses
[70].182 (A.23)
As it can be seen, this rule has a more pronounced metaphysical
character and is clearly anti-Cartesian. The reasons why Newton did
not publish it may be various. Partly in order not to accentuate the
anticartesian polemic, partly because the rule is too speculative and not
suited to a treatise on mixed mathematics like the Principia.
1.2.6.2 Hypotheses Non Fingo
Newton is famous for his empiricist statement Hypotheses non ϔingo
appearing in the Scholium generale of the Principia [87].183 Disputes
have also been raised for its translation into English, without however
helping to clarify the problem [18]. Motte, the ϐirst editor of the
Principia in English, translates: “I frame no hypotheses”. However it
seems that neither Newton, nor the Newtonians such as Richard
Bentley, Henry Pemberton, or Colin Maclaurin gave an ofϐicial approval
to this translation [18].184 Samuel Clarke translated: “Hypoteses I make
not”. Roger Cotes, the editor of the second edition of the Principia left
the sentence in Latin. Recently Koyré suggested to use “feign” for
ϔingere. For him with “hypotheses non ϐingo” Newton meant “I feign no
hypotheses” [69].
In any case, more than the translation of the verb ϐingere, the
interest should be addressed on the name “hypotheses”.

Newton on several occasions distinguished between hypothesis, and
true doctrine, or theory, a term this latter used more rarely. For example
theory is found in the title of A new theory of light and colors of 1672
[84], but in the body of the text only doctrine is used. There is no doubt
that the hypotheses Newton did not approve were those of mechanical
philosophy, in particular in the version given by Descartes, in which the
invention of an elegant mechanism based on the interaction of various
corpuscles, that is an hypothesis, was more important than it empirical
veriϐication.
Newton used hypothesis in the Principia in a very few instances (40
in 1726 edition). In most cases the term is used referring to Descartes
and other scholars; only in three cases the term was given an
apparently technical relevance. In Book II, in the study of the motion of
ϐluids:
HYPOTHESIS.
The resistance arising from the want of lubricity in the parts
of a ϐluid, is, caeteris paribus, proportional to the velocity with
which the parts of the ϐluid are separated from each other
[90].185(A.24)
and two times in Book III:
HYPOTHESIS I.
The center of the system of the world is at rest [Centrum
systemati mundani quiescere]. No one doubts this, although some
argue that the earth, others that the sun, is at rest in the center
of the system. Let us see what follows from this hypothesis
[90].186(A.25)
HYPOTHESIS II.
If the ring discussed above were to be carried alone in the
orbit of the earth about the sun with an annual motion
(supposing that all the rest of the earth were removed from it),
and if this ring revolved at the same time with a daily motion
about its axis, inclined to the plane of the ecliptic at an angle of
23  degrees, then the motion of the equinoctial points would be

Prop 1.
Prop 2.
Prop 3.
Prop 4.
Prop 5.
Prop 6.
Prop 7.
Prop 8.
the same whether that ring were ϐluid or consisted of rigid and
solid matter [90].187(A.26)
In the ϐirst case, Book II, the hypothesis has a similar role of the
hypothesis of astronomer; the second case the hypothesis has a
metaphysical nature and consequently cannot be veriϐied. More
complex is to classify the third hypothesis; to a modern it seems to be
veriϐiable simply inside mathematics, by calculation. But for Newton
this was not probably the case.
If in the Principia the role of hypotheses in Newton appears only in
few, but meaningful points, it is instead more important in his optical
writings and in the letters in which he defended his theory of colors
from the disputes of Leibniz, Huygens, Hooke, Pardies, and others. In
the A new theory of light and colours, Newton distinguished quite well
between his doctrine, derived for him from experiments, and a
hypothetical explanation about the nature of light. The doctrine is
summarized in the following points:  
Colours are not qualiϔications of light derived from refractions
or reϐlections of naturall bodies as ’tis generally beleived, but originall
& connate properties, which in diverse rays are divers.
To the same degree of refrangibility ever belongs the same
colour, & to the same colour ever belongs the same degree of
refrangibility.
The species of colour & degree of refrangibility proper to any
particular sort of rays, is not mutable by refraction.
Yet seeming transmutations of colours may be made where
there is any mixture of divers sorts of rayes
There are therefore two sorts of colours. The one originall &
simple; the other compounded of these.
The same colours in specie with these primary ones may be
also produced by composition.
[Whiteness is] ever compounded and to its composition are
requisite all the aforesaid primary colours mixed in a due proportion.

Prop 9.
Prop 10.
Prop 11.
Prop 12.
Prop 13.
Whiteness is generated if there is a due proportion of the ingredients;
But if any one predominate, the light must incline to that colour.
Since those [rays] which differ in colour proportionally differ
in refrangibility, they by their unequall refractions must be severed and
dispersed into an oblong form in an orderly succession from the least
refracted scarlet to the most refracted violet.
Why the colours of the rainbow appear in falling drops of
rain is also from hence evident. For those drops refract the rays.
Coloured bodies appear in one of colour in one position and
another colour in another position because they are apt to reϐlect one
sort of light and transmit another.
Namely that though they were severally transparent enough
yet both together became opake. For if one transmitted only red, and
the other only blew, no rays could pass through both.
The colours of all naturall bodies have no other origin then
this, that they are variously qualiϐied to reϐlect one sort of light in
greater plenty then another [84].188
The hypothetical explanation is summarized in a few lines:
These thinges being so, it can be no longer disputed whether
there be colours in the dark, nor whether they be the qualities of
the objects wee see, no nor perhaps [emphasis added] whether
light be a body [84].189
Newton was clearer in his replies to Hooke’s criticism, particularly in
his letter to Oldenburg of 11 June 1672. Newton stated that Hooke did
not interpret his hypothesis correctly be expressing them in these
words: “But grant his ϔirst supposition that light is a body, and that as
many colours or degrees thereof as there may be so many bodies there
may be, all which compounded together would make white” [98].190
Indeed it is true that Newton argued the corporeity of light, but he did
it without any absolute positiveness, as the word perhaps, in the above
quotation, intimates, and make it at most but a very plausible
consequence of the doctrine and not a fundamental supposition. And if
it is true that the properties of light can also be explained by Hooke’s

theory, they “were in some measure capable of being explicated non
onely by that, but by many other Mechanicall Hypotheses” [98].191
Newton, ironically apologized, he did not take Hooke’s theory up,
since he did not think necessary to explicate his doctrine by any
Hypothesis at all. For “I can as easily conceive that ye severall parts of a
shining body may emit rays of differing colours & other qualities, of all
wch light is constituted, as that the severall parts of a false or uneven
string, or of unevenly agitated water in a Brook or Cataract, or ye
severall Pipes of an Organ inspired all at once, or all ye variety of
sounding bodies in ye world together, should produce sounds of
severall tones, & propagate them through ye Air confusedly intermixed”
[98].192
The letter to Oldenburg ends with a section entitled “That the
science of colours is most properly a Mathematicall Science” [98],193
which predates what will be written in the Opticks, and clarify
Newton conceptions about mixed mathematics.
I said indeed that the science of colours was mathematical &
certain as any part of optiques; but who knows not that optiques
& many other mathematical sciences depends as well on
physical principles as on mathematical principles. And the
absolute certainty of a science cannot exceed the certainty of its
principles [98].194
Also interesting is the reply to Huygens, in a letter to Oldenburg dated 3
April 1673, which supported the need for a mechanicistic explanation,
even limited to two colors.
But to examin how colours may be thus explained
Hypothetically is besides my purpose. I never intended to show
wherein consists the nature and difference of colours, but onely
to show that de facto they are originall & immutable qualities of
the rays wch exhibit them, & to leave it to others to explicate by
Mechanicall Hypotheses the nature & difference of those
qualities; wch I take to be no very difϐicult matter. But I would
not be understood as if their difference consisted in the different
refrangibility of those rays. For that different refrangibility

conduces to their production no otherwise then by separating
the rays whose qualities they are. Whence it is that the same
rays exhibit the same colours when separated by any other
meanes; as by their different reϐlexibility; a quality not yet
discoursed of [98].195
For Newton however, hypotheses are not necessarily useless if
constructed with common sense. In [128]196 it is suggested that
hypotheses in Newton had two functions:
1.
To illustrate the theory.  
2.
To suggest experiments. 
The ϐirst function of hypotheses was declared by Newton in the
paper entitled An hypothesis explaining the property of light discoursed
in my severall papers, sent to Oldenburg in December 1675, with a cover
letter, and one more paper, The discourse of observations, which is
accessible in the Opticks.
I had formerly purposed never to write any Hypotheses of light
& colours, fearing it might be a means to ingage me in vain
disputes: but I hope a declar’d resolution to answer nothing that
looks like a controversy (unles possibly at my own time upon
some other by occasion) may defend me from yt fear. And
therefore considering that such an Hypothesis would much
illustrate ye papers I promis’d to send you, & having a little time
this week to spare: I have not scrupled to describe one so far as I
could on a sudden recollect my thoughts about it, not concerning
my self whether it shall be thought probable or improbable so it
do but render ye papers I send you, and others sent formerly,
more intelligible [98].197
The second function of hypotheses can be found in some queries
Newton began to report in the correspondence. For example in the
aforementioned letters to Oldenburg of 11 June 1672,
Newton introduced three Queries.  

Q
Q
Q
Whether the unequal refractions made without respect to any
inequality of incidence, be caused by the different refrangibility of
several rays, or by the splitting breaking or dissipating the same ray
into diverging parts.
Whether there be more then two sorts of colours.
Whether whitenesse be a mixture of all colours [98].198
A modern reader would refer to these queries as working hypotheses.
Newton did not adopt this term; for two reasons: (a) it is not a question
of verifying the correctness of a mechanism made up of corpuscles, but
rather the occurrence of certain phenomena. That is, the queries have
an empirical character. (b) Newton had already given an answer to the
queries in his works. In particular, Q  is resolved by the experimentum
crucis. Q  from the fact that in the light there are more than two indices
of refraction and Q  from the fact that the colors appear refracting the
white light and this can be reconstructed by the colored rays.
A greater articulation of queries, can be found in the so-called
Queries paper, a letter to Oldenburg of 6 July 1672.
1.
Whether rays that are alike incident on ye same
Medium have unequall refractions, & how great are the
inequalities of their refractions at any incidence?
 
2.
What is ye law according to wch each ray is more or
lesse refracted, whether it be yt the same ray is ever
refracted according to the same ratio of the sines of
incidence & refraction; & divers rays, according to
divers ratios; Or that the refraction of each ray is
greater or lesse without any certain rule? That is,
whether each ray have a certain degree of refrangibility
according to wch its refraction is performed, or is
refracted without that regularity?
 
3. Whether rays wch are indued with particular degrees
of refrangibility, when they are by any meanes

of refrangibility, when they are by any meanes
separated, have particular colours constantly belonging
to them: viz, the least refrangible, scarlet; the most
refrangible, deep violet; the middle, Sea-green; &
others, other colours? And on the contrary? fraction?
 
4.
Whether the colour of any sort of rays apart may be
changed by refraction?
 
5.
Whether colours by coalescing do really change one
another to produce a new colour, or produce it by
mixing onely?
 
6.
Whether a due mixture of rays, indued with all variety
of colours, produces light perfectly like that of the Sun,
& wch hath all the same properties & exhibits the same
Phaenomena?
 
7.
Whether there be any other colours produced by
refractions then such, as ought to result from the
colours belonging to the diversly refrangible rays by
their being separated or mixed by that refraction [98]?
199
 
Queries will ϐind their natural place, and a technical meaning, in the
Opticks, at the end of the Book 3. It was easy to see that Queries were
not just Cartesian hypotheses under a different name; they were rather
empirical questions that were to be resolved by experiments. While the
early queries, those preceding the Opticks, seemed to be tied to a
speciϐic experimental program and theoretical points of the theory of
light, the queries in the Opticks explored a broader range of ideas.
Though the speciϐic functions were different, there were at least two
general similarities between the early queries and the queries of the
Opticks. First, the former tended to take the form, “whether it is the case
that p?”, while the latter took the form, “is it not the case that p?”. Even
though the latter might be a slightly stronger form of indirect assertion,
they both function in the same way. Second, they shared a general

experimental outlook, concerned with leading the discussion towards
an empirical solution.
It has been argued that many of the queries that appeared in the
ϐirst edition of the Opticks look like contributions to an experimental
natural history [3].200 In the whole however, despite the speculative
content and concern with the nature of light, the Queries were
experimental research programs. Some of them contained lots of
discussion of observation and experiment, others, little or none.
Moreover, the experimental discussion was, for the most part, sketchy
and qualitative [128].201
1.3 Quotations
A.1
La mesme force qui peut lever un poids, par exemple, de
cent, livres a la hauteur de deux pieds, en peut aussy lever
un de 200 livres, a la hauteur d’un pied, ou un de 400 a la
hauteur d’un demi pied, & ainsy des autres.
 
A.2
II est bien vrai que dans l’état où nous sommes, nous avons
plus de peine remuer une grosse pierre, qu’à en remuer une
petite; mais il n’y a personne qui ne sache que cela vient de
la resistance que cause la pesanteur de ces pierre. Car si la
grande pierre n’étoit pas plus pesante que la petite, il n’y a
point de doute que nous la poussions mouvoir avec la m me
facilité.
 
A.3
Il est possible toutefois d’y arriver a un degré de
vraisemblance qui bien souvent ne cede guere à une
evidence entiere. Sçavoir lors que les choses, qu’on a
demontrées par ces Principes supposez, se raportent
parfaitement aux phenomenes que l’experience a fait
remarquer; sur tout quand il y en a grand nombre, & encore
principalement quand on se forme & prevoit des
phenomenes nouveaux, qui doivent suivre des hypotheses
qu’on employe, & qu’on trouve qu’on cela l’effet repond a
nostre attente. Que si toutes ccs preuves de la
vraisemblance se rencontrent dans ce que je me suis
proposé de traiter comme il me semble qu’elles sont ce doit
 

propose de traiter, comme il me semble qu elles sont, ce doit
etre une bien grande conϐirmation du succês de ma
recherche, & il se peut malaisement que les choses ne
soientpeu pres comme je les represente. Je veux donc croire
que ceux qui aiment a connoitre les causes, & qui sçavent
admirer la merveille de la Lumiere, trouveront quelque
satisfaction dans ces diverses speculations qui la regardent,
& dans la nouvelle explication de son insigne proprieté, qui
fait le principal fondement de la construction de nos yeux, &
de ces grandes inventions qui en étendent si fort l’usage.
A.4
Je respons que dans les choses de physique il n’y a pas
d’autres demonstrations que dans le déchiffrement d’une
lettre. Ou ayant fait des suppositions sur quelques légères
conjectures, si l’on trouve qu’elles se vériϐient en suivre, the
sorte que suivant ces suppositions de lettres on trouve des
paroles bien suivies dans la lettre, on tient d’une certitude
trs grande que les suppositions sont vraies, quoy qu’il n’y ait
pas autrement de demonstration, et qu’il ne soit pas
impossible qu’on n’est poisse y avoir d’autres plus véritable.
 
A.5
Il y a encore considerer dans l’émanation de ces ondes, que
chaque particule de la matiere, dans laquelle une onde
s’etend, ne doit pas communiquer son mouvement
seulement Ia particule prochaine, qui est dans la ligne
droite tirée du point lumineux; rnais qu’elle en donne aussi
necessairement toutes les autres qui la touchent, & qui
s’opposent a son mouvement. De sorte qu’il faut qu’autour
de chaque particule il se fasse une onde dont certe particule
soit le centre.
 
A.6
Comme il y avoit deux refractions differentes, je coçnus qu’il
avoit aussi deux differentes emanations d’ondes de lumiere,
& que l’une se pouvoit faire dans la matiere étherée
repandue dans le corps du cristal.
[...] Qant l’autre emanation [qui devoir produire la
refraction irreguliere, je voulus essaier ce que seroient des
ondes Elliptiques, ou pour mieux dire spherodes; lesquelles
[...] je supposay qu’elles s’entendoient indifferemment, tant
d
l
i
́ h
́
d
d
l
l
d
 

dans la matiere étherée repandue dans le crstal, que dans
les particules dont il est composé; suivant la derniere
maniere dont j’ay explique la transparence. Il me sembloit
que la disposition, ou arrangement regulier de ces
particules, pouvoit contribuer a former les ondes
spheroides, (n’estant requis pour cela si non que le
mouvement successif de la lumiere s’etendit un peu plus
viste en un sens qu’en l’autre) & je ne doutay presque point
qu’il n’y eust dans ce cristal un tel arrangement de
particules égales & semblables, cause de sa ϐigure & de ses
angles d’une mesure certaine & invariable.
A.7
Hoc spatium ita solum absque ullo corpore consideratum,
quomodo quiescere intelligi possit non video. Cum quies et
motus non sint nisi corporum, et utriusque idea ab his solis
exorta sit. Nam si spatij quies aut motus esse aliquis dici
potest, illius spatij erunt, quod a corpore occupatur, vel
quod a corpore includitur, ut sis amphorae spatium una
cum amphora quiescere aut moveri dicamus. At spatio illi
inϐinito et inani neque motus neque quietis idea aut
appellatio convenit. Qui vero quiescere ipsum statuunt, non
alia ratione id facere videntur, quam quod animadvertunt
absurdum esse si moveri dicatur, unde m necessaria
quiescere dicendum putarunt. Cum potius cogitare
debuerint nec motum nec quietem ad spatium illud omnino
pertinere.
 
A.8
Diu putavi in circulari motu haberi veri motus 
, ex
vi centrifuga. Etenim ad caeteras quidem apparentias idem
ϐit sive orbis aut rota quaepiam c me juxta adstante
circumrotetur, sive stante orbe illo ego per ambitum ejus
circumferar, sed si lapis ad circumferentiam ponatur,
projicietur circumeunte orbe, ex quo vere tunc et nulla ad
aliud relatione eum moveri et circum gyrari judicari
existimabam. Sed is effectus hoc tantummodo declarat
impressione in circumferentiam facta partes rotae motu
relativo ad se invicem in partes diversas impulsas fuisse.
 
In motu libero praesentibus corporibus inter se

A.9
In motu libero praesentibus corporibus inter se
quiescentibus certo cognoscantur directiones et in his
celeritates per quas mutatio distantiae explicetur et horum
opera etiam circulantium celeritas defmiturw. Illis sublatis
corporibus, difϐicilius hoc cognoscitur in liberis sed motus
circularis duorum vel plurium vinculo conjunctorum, vel
partium unius corporis, deprehenditur ex vi centrifuga.
contra eos qui verum motum hunc esse volunt. dico non
esse nisi respectivum. non enim potes dicere centrum
circulationis quiescere in mundo, sed etiam respective
tantum ad alia corpora.
 
A.10
Deus summus est ens aeternum, inϐinitum, absolute
perfectum [...]. Aeternus est & inϐinitus, omnipotens &
omnisciens, id est, durat ab aeterno in aeternum, & adest ab
inϐinito in inϐinitum: omnia regit; & omnia cognoscit, quae
ϐiunt aut ϐieri possunt. Non est aeternitas & inϐinitas, sed
aeternus & inϐinitus; non est duratio & spatium, sed dura &
adest. Durat semper, & adest ubique, & existendo semper &
ubique, durationem & spatium constituit. Cum unaquaeque
spatii particula sit semper, & unumquodque durationis
indivisibile momentum ubique, certe rerum omnium
fabricator ac dominus non erit nunquam, nusquam. [...] Deus
est unus & idem deu semper & ubique. Omnipraesens est
non per virtutem solam, sed etiam per substantiam [...] Hunc
cognoscimus solummodo per proprietates ejus & attributa,
& per sapientissimas & optimas rerum structuras & causas
ϐinales & admiramur ob perfectiones [...]. Et haec de deo, de
quo unique ex phaenomenis disserere, ad philosophiam
naturalem pertinet.
 
A.11 At si ex usu deϐiniend sunt verborum signiϐicationes; per
nomina illa temporis, spatii, loci & motus proprie
intelligend erunt h mensur sensibiles; & sermo erit insolens
& pure mathematicus, si quantitates mensurat hic
intelligantur. Proinde vim inferunt sacris literis, qui voces
hasce de quantitatibus mensuratis ibi interpretantur. Neque
minus contaminant mathesin & philosophiam, qui
quantitates veras cum ipsarum relationibus & vulgaribus
 

quantitates veras cum ipsarum relationibus & vulgaribus
mensuris confundunt.
A.12
Deϐinitio III. Materiae vis insita est potentia resistendi, qua
corpus unumquodque, quantum in se est, perseverat in
statu suo vel quiescendi vel movendi uniformiter in
directum.
 
A.13
Haec semper proportionalis est suo corpori, neque differt
quicquam ab inertia mass, nisi in modo concipiendi. Per
inertiam materi ϐit, ut corpus omne de statu suo vel
quiescendi vel movendi difϐiculter deturbetur. Unde etiam
vis insita nomine signiϐicantissimo vis Inerti dici possit.
Exercet vero corpus hanc vim solummodo in mutatione
status sui per vim aliam in se impressam facta; estque
exercitium illud sub diverso respectu & resistentia &
impetus: Resistentia, quatenus corpus ad conservandum
statum suum reluctatur vi impress; impetus, quatenus
corpus idem, vi resistentis obstaculi difϐiculter cedendo,
conatur statum obstaculi illius mutare. Vulgus resistentiam
quiescentibus & impetum moventibus tribuit: sed motus &
quies, uti vulgo concipiuntur, respectu solo distinguuntur ab
invicem; neque semper vere quiescunt quae vulgo tanquam
quiescentia spectantur.
 
A.14
Deϐinitio IV. Vis impressa est actio in corpus exercita, ad
mutandum ejus statum vel quiescendi vel movendi
uniformiter in directum.
 
A.15
Consistit hc vis in actione sola, neque post actionem
permanet in corpore. Perseverat enim corpus in statu omni
novo per solam vim inerti. Est autem vis impressa
diversarum originum, ut ex ictu, ex pressione, ex vi
centripeta.
 
A.16 Hactenus exposui motus corporum attractorum ad centrum
immobile, quale tamen vix extat in rerum natura [...]. Qua de
causa jam pergo motum exponere corporum se mutuo
trahentium, considerando vires centripetas tanquam
attractiones quamvis fortasse si physice loquamur verius
 

attractiones, quamvis fortasse, si physice loquamur, verius
dicantur impulsus. In mathematicis enim jam versamur; &
propterea, missis disputationibus physicis, familiari utimur
sermone, quo possimus a lectoribus mathematicis facilius
intelligi.
A.17
Deϐinitio V. Vis centripeta est, qua corpora versus punctum
aliquod, tanquam ad centrum, undique trahuntur,
impelluntur, vel utcunque tendunt.
 
A.18
Hujus generis est gravitas, qua corpora tendunt ad centrum
terr; vis magnetica, qua ferrum petit magnetem; & vis illa,
qucunque sit, qua planet perpetuo retrahuntur a motibus
rectilineis, & in lineis curvis revolvi coguntur.
 
A.19
Uti pondus majus in majore corpore, minus in minore; & in
corpore eodem majus prope terram, minus in coelis. Haec
quantitas est corporis totius centripetentia seu propensio in
centrum, & (ut ita dicam) pondus; & innotescit semper per
vim ipsi contrariam & aequalem, qua descensus corporis
impediri potest.
 
A.20
Vocem attractionis hic generaliter usurpo pro corporum
conatu quocunque accedendi ad invicem: sive conatus iste
ϐiat ab actione corporum, vel se mutuo petentium, vel per
spiritus emissos se invicem agitantium; sive is ab actione
theris, aut aris, mediive cujuscunque seu corporei seu
incorporei oriatur corpora innatantia in se invicem
utcunque impellentis.
 
A.21 Hactenus phaenomena caelorum & maris nostri per vim
gravitatis exposui, sed causam gravitatis nondum assignavi
Oritur utique haec vis a causa aliqua, quae penetrat ad
usque centra solis & planetarum, sine virtutis diminutione;
quaeque agit non pro quantitate superϔicierum
particularum, in quas agit (ut solent causae mechanicae)
sed pro quantitate materiae solidae; & cujus actio in
immensas distantias undique extenditur decrescendo
 

immensas distantias undique extenditur, decrescendo
semper in duplicata ratione distantiarum.
A.22
Hactenus proprietates gravitatis explicui. Causas ejus
minime expendo. Dicam tam en quid Veteres hac de re
senserint. nimirum spiritum quendam per caelos  Nempe
caelos esse corporis prope vacuos (?) sed spiritu tamen
quodam inϐinito quem Deum nuncupant undique impleri:
(?) corpora autem in spiritu illo libere moveri ejus vi et
virtute corpora  naturali ad invicem (impelli) perpetuo
impelli, idque magis vel minus pro ratione harmonica
distantiarum, & in hoc [impulsu] gravitatem consistere.
Hunc spiritum aliqui a Deo summa distinxerunt & animam
mundi vocarunt.
 
A.23
Adjicere jam liceret nonnulla de spiritu quodam
subtilissimo corpora crassa pervadente,& in iisdem latente;
cujus vi & actionibus particulae corporum ad minimas
distantias se mutuo attrahunt, & contiguae factae
cohaerent; & corpora electrica agunt ad distantias majores,
tam repellendo quam attrahendo corpuscula vicina; & lux
emittitur, reϐlectitur, refringitur, inϐlectitur [...]. Sed haec
paucis exponi non possunt; neque adest: sufϐiciens copia
experimentorum, quibus leges actionum. hujus spiritus
accurate determinari & monstrari debent.
 
A.24
Reg. V. Pro hypothesibus habenda sunt quaecunque ex
rebus ipsis vel per sensus externos, vel per sensationem
cogitationum internarum non derivantur. Sentio utique
quod Ego cogitem, id quod ϐieri nequiret nisi simul sentirem
quod ego sim. Sed non sentio quod Idea aliqua sit innata. Et
pro Phaenomenis habeo non solum quae per sensus
quinque externos nobis innotescunt, sed etiam quae in
mentibus nostris intuemur cogitando: Ut quod, Ego sum,
ego credo, doleo, etc. Et quae ex phaenomenis nec
demonstrando nec per argumentum inductionis
consequuntur, pro Hypothesibus habeo.
 

A.25 HYPOTHESIS. Resistentiam, quae oritur ex defectu
lubricitatis partium ϐluidi, caeteris paribus, proportionalem
esse velocitati, qua partes ϐluidi separantur ab invicem.
 
A.26
HYPOTHESIS I. Centrum systemati mundani quiescere.
 
A.27
HYPOTHESIS II. Si annulus praedictus terra omni reliqua
sublata, solus in orbe terree, motu annuo circa solem
ferretur, & interea circa axem suum, ad planum eclipticae in
angulo graduum 
 inclinatum, motu diurno
revolveretur: idem foret motus punctorum aequinoctialium,
sive annulus iste ϐluidus esset, sive is ex materia rigida &
ϐirma constaret.
 
Notes
This is a possible deϐinition:
1.
The space time is a four dimensional afϐine space A , named
universe. The points of the universe are called world points or
events. The parallel displacements of the universe A
constitute a vector space 
.
 
2.
Time is a linear mapping 
 from the vector space of
parallel displacements of the universe to the ‘real time’ axis.
The kernel of the mapping 
 is a three-dimensional linear
subspace R , named space of the contemporary events.
 
3.
The space R  is endowed with a metric structure which makes
it a three dimensional Euclidean space E  [5], p. 5.
 
The space-time A  is named a Galilean space-time if it is invariant
with respect to the Galilean transformations that assuming for the sake
simplicity A  as 
, are deϐined as follows:
Uniform motion with velocity 

Translation of the origin of time (s) and space 
Rotation by means of an orthogonal matrix 
The invariance with respect to the ϐirst transformation states that it is
not possible to distinguish a space from another if they move of
translatory uniform motion one with respect to the other. The
invariance with respect to the second and third transformations says
that the distinction neither occur for a simple translation (homogeneity
of space) nor for a rotation (isotropy of space).
References
1.
Alessio F (1963) Thomas Hobbes: Tractatus opticus. First integral edition. Riv Crit Stor
Della Filos 18(2):147–228
2.
Ango P (1682) L’optique divise en trois livres: Où l’on démontre d’une manière aisée
tout ce qui regarde; La propagation et les proprietez de la lumiere; La vision; La ϐigure
et la disposition des verres qui servent la perfectionner. Michallet, Paris
3.
Anstey PR (2004) The methodological origins of Newton’s queries. Stud Hist Philos Sci
Part 35(2):247–269
4.
Aristotle (2018) Physica. The internet classical archive. Translated into English by
Hardie RP, Gaye RK
5.
Arnold VI (1989) Mathematical methods of classical mechanics. Springer, New York
[Crossref]
6.
Ballard KE (2018) Leibniz’s theory of space and time. J Hist Ideas 21(1):49–65
7.
Barrow I (1734) The usefulness of mathematical learning explained and
demonstrated. Translated into English by Kirkby J. Austen, London
8.
Belkind O (2017) On Newtonian induction. Philos Sci 84(4):677–697
9.
Bertoloni Meli D (2006) Inherent and centrifugal forces in Newton. Arch Hist Exact Sci
60(3):319–335

[MathSciNet][Crossref]
10.
Biener Z (2017) De gravitatione reconsidered: the changing signiϐicance of empirical
evidence for Newton’s metaphysics of space. J Hist Philos 55(4):583–608
11.
Biener Z (2018) Newton’s regulae philosophandi. In: Smeenk C, Schliesser E (eds)
Oxford handbook for Isaac Newton. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp 1–23
12.
Capecchi D (2012) History of virtual work laws. Birchäuser, Milan
[Crossref]
13.
Capecchi D (2014) Attempts by Descartes and Roberval to evaluate the centre of
oscillation of compound pendulums. Early Sci Med 19(3):211–235
14.
Capecchi D (2014) The problem of motion of bodies. Springer, Cham
15.
Capecchi D (2018) The path to post-Galilean epistemology. Springer, Cham
[Crossref]
16.
Casini P (1984) Newton: the classical scholia. Hist Sci 22(1):1–46
17.
Clarke S (1717) A collection of papers which passed between the late learned Mr.
Leibnitz and Dr. Clarke. Knapton, London
18.
Cohen IB (1962) The ϐirst English version of Newton’s hypotheses non ϐingo. Isis
53(3):379–388
[Crossref]
19.
Cohen IB (1980) The Newtonian revolution. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
20.
Cohen IB (1992) The review of the ϐirst edition of Newton’s Principia in the Acta
Eruditorum, with notes on the other reviews. In: Harman PM, Shapiro AE (eds) The
investigation of difϐicult things. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 323–354
21.
Costello WT (1958) The scholastic curriculum at early seventeenth century
Cambridge. Harvard University Press, Cambridge
[Crossref]
22.
Delambre JBJ (1812) Notice sur la vie et les oeuvres de M. le Comte J.L. Lagrange. In:
Serret JA, [Darboux G] (1867–1892) (ed) Oeuvres de Lagrange (14 vols). Gauthier-
Villars, Paris, pp I–LI
23.
Delgado-Moreira R (2006) Newton’s treatise on revelation: the use of a mathematical
discourse. Hist Res 79(204):224–246
24.
Descartes R (1637) La dioptrique. In: Descartes R (1668) Discours sur la methode,
plus la dioptrique et les meteores. Girard, Paris
25.
Descartes R (1644) Principia philosophiae. Ludovicum Elzevirium, Amsterdam
26.
Descartes R (1650) Musicae compendium. Ackersdijck and Zijll, Utrecht
27.

Descartes R (1664) Le monde de Mr. Descartes ou le traité de la lumière et des autres.
Girard, Paris
28.
Descartes R (1964) Oeuvres de Descartes; nouvelle édition complètes (1896–1913)
(11 vols). In: Adam C, Tannery P (eds). Vrin, Paris
29.
Dijksterhuis FJ (2004) Lenses and waves. Christiaan Huygens and the mathematical
science of optics in the seventeenth century. Kluwer, New York
30.
Disalle R (2016) Newton’s philosophical analysis of space and time. In: Iliffe R, Smith G
(eds) The Cambridge companion to Newton. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
pp 34–60
31.
Dobbs BJT (1988) Newton’s alchemy and his “active principles” of gravitation. In:
Scheurer P, Debrock G (eds) Newton’s scientiϐic and philosophical legacy. Kluwer,
Dordrecht, pp 55–80
32.
Dobbs BJT (1991) The Janus faces of genius: the role of alchemy in Newton’s thought.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
33.
Dolby R (1966) A note on Dijksterhuis’ criticism of Newton’s axiomatization of
mechanics. Isis 57(1):108–115
[Crossref]
34.
Dolby R (1996) ‘F 
 ma’ and the Newtonian revolution: an exit from religion through
religion. Hist Sci 34(3):303–346
35.
Ducheyne S (2011) Newton on action at a distance and the cause of gravity. Stud Hist
Philos Sci Part A 42(1):154–159
[Crossref]
36.
Ducheyne S (2012) The main business of natural philosophy. Isaac Newton’s natural-
philosophical methodology. Springer, Dordrecht
37.
Ducheyne S (2014) Newton on action at a distance. J Hist Philos 52(4):675–701
[Crossref]
38.
Ducheyne S (2015) An editorial history of Newton’s regulae philosophandi. Etudios
Filos 51:143–164
39.
Earman J (1989) World enough and space-time. MIT, Cambridge
[zbMATH]
40.
Figala K (2002) Newton’s alchemy. In: Cohen IB, Smith GE (eds) The Cambridge
companion to Newton. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 370–386
[Crossref]
41.
Funkenstein A (1986) Theology and the scientiϐic imagination from the middle ages to
the seventeenth century. Princeton University Press, Princeton
42.
Gabbey A (2016) Newton, active powers, and the mechanical theory. In: Iliffe R, Smith
G (eds) The Cambridge companion to Newton. Cambridge University Press,

Cambridge, pp 421–453
43.
Garber D (1992) Descartes’ metaphysical physics. The University of Chicago Press,
Chicago
44.
Goethe JW (1810) Zur Farbenlehre. 3 vols. Cotta’schen Buchhandlung, Tübingen
45.
Goethe JW (1840) Goethe’s theory of colours. Translated into English by Eastlake CL.
Murray, London
46.
Greenham P (2017) Clarifying divine discourse in early modern science: divinity,
physico-theology, and divine metaphysics in Isaac Newton’s chymistry. Seventeenth
Century 32(2):191–215
47.
Greenham P (2017) Isaac Newton, scholar: an exceptional example of normal
erudition. Hist Compass 15(6):e12389
48.
Guerlac H (1983) Can we date Newton’s early optical experiments? Isis 74(1):74–80
[MathSciNet][Crossref]
49.
Hall RA (1988) Newton’s biblical theology and his theological physics. In: Scheurer
PB, De Brock G (eds) Newton’s scientiϐic and philosophical legacy. Kluwer, Dordrecht,
pp 81–98
50.
Hall RA (1992) Newton and the absolute. In: Harman PM, Shapiro AE (eds) The
investigation of difϐicult things. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 261–286
51.
Hall RA (1993) All was light. Oxford University Press, Oxford
52.
Harrison P (2013) Laws of nature in seventeenth-century England. In: Watkins E (ed)
The divine order, the human order, and the order of nature: historical perspectives.
Oxford Univeristy Press, New York, pp 127–148
53.
Hauksbee F (1709) Physico-mechanical experiments on various subjects containing
an account of several surprizing phenomena touching light and electricity, producible
on the attrition of bodies: with many other remarkable appearances, not before
observ’d: together with the explanations of all the machines, (the ϐigures of which are
curiously engrav’d on copper) and other apparatus us’d in making the experiments.
Brugis, London
54.
Henry J (2011) Gravity and De gravitatione: the development of Newton’s ideas on
action at a distance. Stud Hist Philos Sci Part A 42(1):11–27
[Crossref]
55.
Hooke R (1665) Micrographia. Martyn & Allestry, London
56.
Huygens C (1690) Traité de la lumiere, où sont expliquées les causes de ce qui luy
arrive dans la reϐlexion, & dans la refraction. Et particulierement dans l’etrange
refraction du cristal d’Islande. Vander, Leiden
57.
Huygens C (1698) KO
MO
EORO
, sive de terris coelestibus, earumque ornatu,

conjectura. Moetjens, The Hague
58.
Huygens C (1888–1950) Oeuvres complètes de Christiaan Huygens (22 vols). Nijhoff,
The Hague
59.
Huygens C (1911) Treatise on light. Translated into English by Thompson SP.
MacMillan and Co, London
60.
Iliffe R (2004) Abstract considerations: disciplines and the incoherence of Newton’s
natural philosophy. Stud Hist Philos Sci Part A 35(3):427–454
61.
Iliffe R (2016) The religion of Isaac Newton. In: Iliffe R, Smith G (eds) The Cambridge
companion to Newton. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 485–523
[Crossref]
62.
Iliffe R (2017) Priest of nature: the religious worlds of Isaac Newton. Oxford
University Press, New York
63.
Janiak A (2008) Newton as a philosopher. Cambridge University Press, New York
[Crossref]
64.
Janiak A (2010) Substance and action in Descartes and Newton. The Monist
93(4):657–677
[Crossref]
65.
Kansichik P (2009) Newton’s experimentum crucis from a constructivist point of
view. PhD thesis, Humbolt University of Berlin
66.
Kochiras H (2009) Gravity and Newton’s substance counting problem. Stud Hist Philos
Sci Part A 40(3):276–280
67.
Kochiras H (2013) Causal language and the structure of force in Newton’s system of
the world. HOPOS: J Int Soc Hist Philos Sci 3(2):210–235
68.
Kochiras H (2016) Newton’s absolute time. In: Gerhardt K (ed) Time and tense.
Philosophia. Cambridge University Press, Munich, pp 169–195
69.
Koyré A (1956) L’hypothse et l’expéerience chez Newton. Bull Soc Fr Philos 50(2):59–
79
70.
Koyré A (1965) Newtonian studies. Champan & Hall, London
[Crossref]
71.
Leibniz GW (1685–1690) Die philosophischen Schriften. In: Gerhardt KI (ed) (7 vols).
Weidman, Berlin
72.
Lucretius Carus T (1942) De rerum natura: Libri sex. Translated into English by
Leonard WE and Smith SE. The University of Wisconsin Press, Madison
73.
Mach E (1919) The science of mechanics: a critical and historical account of its
development. Translated into English by McCormack TJ. Open Court, Chicago
74.

Mamiani M (2002) Newton on prophecy and apocalypse. In: Cohen IB, Smith GE (eds)
The Cambridge companion to Newton. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp
387–408
75.
Mamiani M (2004) To twist the meaning: Newton’s regulae philosophandi revisited. In:
Buchwald J, Cohen I (eds) Isaac Newton’s natural philosophy. MIT, Cambridge, pp 3–14
76.
Mariotte E (1681) De la nature des couleurs. Michallet, Paris
77.
Mazzotti M (2007) The two Newtons and beyond. Br J Hist Sci 40(1)
78.
McGuire J, Rattansi P (1966) Newton and the pipes of Pan. Notes Rec R Soc Lond
21(2):108–143
[Crossref]
79.
McMullin E (1978) Newton on matter and activity. University of Notre Dame, Notre
Dame
80.
Millington EC (1947) Studies in capillarity and cohesion in the eighteenth century. Ann
Sci 5(4):352–369
[Crossref]
81.
Mormino G (1993) Penetralia motus. La fondazione relativistica della meccanica in
Christiaan Huygens con l’edizione del Codex Hugeniourum 7A. La Nuova Italia,
Florence
82.
Newman W (2002) The background to Newton’s chemistry. In: Cohen IB, Smith GE
(eds) The Cambridge companion to Newton. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
pp 358–369
[Crossref]
83.
Newton I (1666) Of colours, MS Add. 3975, pp 1–22. The Newton project.
http://www.newtonproject.sussex.ac.uk
84.
Newton I (1671) A letter of Mr. Isaac Newton, professor of the mathematicks in the
university of Cambridge; containing his new theory about light and colors. Philos
Trans R Soc Lond 6(80):3075–3087
85.
Newton I (1675) Discourse concerning light and colous, MS Add. 3970.3, ff. 501r–517
86.
Newton I (1679) Letter from Newton to Robert Boyle, dated 28 February 1678/9, MS
Add. 9597/2/18/62-65. The Newton project. http://www.newtonproject.sussex.ac.uk
87.
Newton I (1687) Philosophiae naturalis principia mathematica. Jussu Societatis Regiae
ac Typis Josephi Streater, London
88.
Newton I (1710) Statements on religion, Keynes Ms. 6, King’s College, Cambridge, UK.
The Newton project.
http://www.newtonproject.ox.ac.uk/view/texts/normalized/THEM00006
89.
Newton I (1713) Philosophiae naturalis principia mathematica, 2nd edn. Crownϐield,
Cambridge

90.
Newton I (1726) Philosophia naturalis principia mathematica, 3rd edn. Innys, London
91.
Newton I (1728) A treatise of the system of the world. Fairam, London
92.
Newton I (1728) De mundi systemate: Liber Isaaci Newtoni. Tonson & Osborn &
Longman, London
93.
Newton I (1729) Isaac Newton’s Principia. Translated into English by Motte A. Adee,
New York
94.
Newton I (1730) Opticks: Or, a treatise of the reϐlections, refractions, inϐlections and
colours. Innys, London
95.
Newton I (1733) Observations upon the prophecies of Daniel and the apocalypse of St.
John. Darbin and Browne, London
96.
Newton I (1850) Correspondence of Isaac Newton and professor Cotes. In: Edleston J
(ed). Parker, London
97.
Newton I (1934) Sir Isaac Newton’s mathematical principles of natural philosophy
and his system of the world. Revised by Cajori Florian. University of California Press,
Berkley
98.
Newton I (1959–1960) The correspondence of Isaac Newton. In: Turnbull HW (ed) (2
vols). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
99.
Newton I (1962) De gravitatione et aequipondio ϐluidorum. In: Hall A, Hall M (eds)
Unpublished scientiϐic papers of Isaac Newton. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, pp 89–156
100. Newton I (1962) De gravitatione et aequipondio ϐluidorum. Translated from Latin into
English by Allan B. http://williambarclayallen.com/translationsDe-Gravitatione-et-
Aequipondio-Fluidorum-translation.pdf
101. Newton I (1972) Isaac Newton’s Philosophiae naturalis principia mathematica.
Assembled and edited by Koyré A and Cohen IB (assisted by Withman A). Harward
University Press, Cambridge
102. Newton I (1994) Trattato sull’apocalisse. In: Mamiani M (ed). Bollati-Boringheri, Turin
103. Newton I (1999) The Principia. Mathematical principles of natural philosophy.
Translated into English by Cohen IB, Withman A (assisted by Budenz J). University of
California Press, Oakland
104. Newton I (2004) De gravitatione. In: Janiak A (ed) Isaac Newton philosophical
writings. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 12–39
[Crossref]
105. Newton I (Unknown) De gravitatione et aequipondio ϐluidorum (selected passages;
translation and interpolated commentary by Howard Stein). Available for download at
http://strangebeautiful.com/other-texts/newton-de-grav-stein-trans.pdf
106.

Pardies IG (1725) Discourse du mouvement local. In: Pardies I (ed) Oeuvres du R. P.
Ignace Gaston Pardies, Bruyset, Lyon, pp 133–183
107. Pardies IG (1725) La statique, ou la science des forces mouvantes. In: Pardies I (ed)
Oeuvres du R. P. Ignace Gaston Pardies, Bruyset, Lyon, pp 211–322
108. Pourciau B (2006) Newton’s interpretation of Newton’s second law. Arch Hist Exact
Sci 60(2):157–207
[MathSciNet][Crossref]
109. Rosenfeld L (1969) Newton’s views on aether and gravitation. Arch Hist Exact Sci
6(1):29–37
[MathSciNet][Crossref]
110. Royal Society of London (1715) An account of the book entituled commercium
epistolicum collinii & aliorum, de analysi promota. Philos Trans R Soc Lond
29(342):173–224
111. Ruffner JA (2012) Newton’s de gravitatione: a review and reassessment. Arch Hist
Exact Sci 66(3):241–264
112. Sakkopoulos S (1988) Newton’s theory of ϐits of easy reϐlection and transmission. Eur
J Phys 9(2):123–126
[Crossref]
113. Sanderson R (1965) Logicae artis compendium. In: Ashworth EJ (ed). CLUEB, Bologna
114. Schaffer S (1989) Glass works: Newtons prisms and the use of experiment. In: Gooding
D, Schaffer S, Pinch T (ed) The use of experiment: studies in the natural sciences.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 67–104
115. Sepper DL (1988) Goethe contra Newton. Polemics and the project for a new science
of color. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
116. Sfectu N (2019) Isaac Newton on the action at a distance and gravity: with or without
God? multiMedia Publishing. https://www.setthings.com/en/e-books/isaac-newton-
on-the-action-at-a-distance-in-gravity-with-or-without-god/
117. Shapiro AE (1973) Kinematic optics. ‘A study of the wave theory of light in the
seventeenth century’. Arch Hist Exact Sci 11(2/3):134–266
118. Shapiro AE (1993) Fits, passions, and paroxysms: physics, method and chemistry and
Newton’s theories of coloured bodies and ϐits of easy reϐlection. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge
119. Shapiro AE (1996) The gradual acceptance of Newton’s theory of light and color,
1672–1727. Perspect Sci 4:59–140
[MathSciNet][zbMATH]
120. Shirras GF, JH C (1945) Sir Isaac Newton and the currency. Econ J 55(218/219):217–
241
121.

1
2
3
Snobelen SD (2001) “God of Gods, and Lord of Lords”: the theology of Isaac Newton’s
general scholium to the Principia. Osiris 16:169–208
122. Stein H (1955) On metaphysics and method in Newton.
http://strangebeautiful.com/other-minds.html#stein
123. Stein H (1977) Some philosophical prehistory of general relativity. In: Glymour C,
Stachel J, Earman J (eds) Foundations of space-time theories. Minnesota studies in the
philosophy of science, vol 8. University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, pp 8–49
124. Stein H (1990) The great Hugenius and the incomparable Mr. Newton. In: Bricker P,
Hughes R (eds) Philosophical perspectives on Newtonian science. MIT, Cambridge, pp
17–47
125. Stein H (1993) On philosophy and natural philosophy in the seventeenth century.
Midwest Stud Philos 18:177–201
[Crossref]
126. Takuwa Y (2013) The historical transformation of Newton’s experimentum crucis:
pursuit of the demonstration of color immutability. Hist Sci 23(2):113–140
127. Wallis J (1671) Mechanica, sive de motu, tractatus geometricus. Godbib, London
128. Walsh KE (2014) Newton’s epistemic triad. PhD thesis, University of Otago, New
Zeland
129. Westfall R (1971) Force in Newton’s physics. The science of dynamics in the
seventeenth century. Neal Watson Academic Publications, New York
130. Westfall R (1980) Never at rest. A biography of Isaac Newton. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge
131. Westfall RS (1964) Isaac Newton’s coloured circles twixt two contiguous glasses. Arch
Hist Exact Sci 2(3):181–196
[MathSciNet][Crossref]
Footnotes
Vol. 2, letter to Mersenne of 11th October 1638, p. 380.
 
pp. 164–173.
 
pp. 164–169.
 

4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
Vol. 2, pp. 435–436.
 
p. 129.
 
p. 84.
 
Chapter XIII.
 
The Dioptrique was published as an appended treatise to the Discours de la methode followed
by the Metéores and the Géometrie, in that order.
 
Vol. 6, p. 83.
 
Part III, 52, pp. 94–95.
 
Vol. 6, p. 84.
 
Vol. 6, pp. 88–89.
 
pp. 514–516.
 
Vol. 6, p. 103.
 
Vol. 2, p. 31.
 
Vol. 6. pp. 101–102.
 

17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
p. 187.
 
p. 144.
 
p. 171.
 
p. 262. Huygens quoted the most ‘ingenious’ Pardies, commenting that “we can deceive
ourselves even when we assume as principles entirely probable ones” [81], p. 288.
 
p. 7.
 
pp. 8–17.
 
Vol. 3, p. 607.
 
Letter to Leibniz, 29th may 1694, Oeuvres, t. X, 60.
 
pp. 124–125.
 
Preface, 2nd-4th pages. English translation in [59].
 
Vol. 7, p. 298.
 
p. 149.
 
Because a toise is 6 feet and a (French) foot about 0.325 m, the speed suggested by
Huygens corresponds to 110 000 000
 214 000 000 m/s, not very far from the
presently accepted value of about 300 000 000 m/s.

30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
 
p. 9.
 
pp. 10–11.
 
p. 11.
 
pp. 12–13.
 
p. 17. English translation in [29].
 
p. 19.
 
Vol. 22, p. 268.
 
Vol. 22, p. 20.
 
p. 30.
 
pp. 33–34.
 
pp. 58–59.
 
pp. 60–61. That the line connecting the center A of the ellipses with N is not orthogonal to NQ
is clear from the ϐigure. It was a known property of the ellipsoids that AN and NQ are conjugate
straight lines.
 

42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
p. 142. In the manuscript “hijperphysice” replaced a preexisting “methaphysice”, erased most
probably because Huygens wanted to distance himself from the traditional metaphysics.
 
p. 232.
 
p. 180.
 
p. 182.
 
p. 210.
 
p. 210.
 
p. 208.
 
p. 236.
 
p. 192.
 
p. 228.
 
p. 138.
 
p. 6.
 
p. 8.
 

55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
p. XX.
 
Quoted from [120], p. 217.
 
p. 423.
 
pp. 33–36.
 
Scholium generale, pp. 528–529. English translation in [103].
 
p. 437.
 
p. 438.
 
p. 224.
 
Newtonian mechanics is a term used in modern times almost as a synonym for classical
mechanics. Thus it is not Newton’s mechanics as developed in the Principia.
 
pp. 156–196.
 
p. 28.
 
p. 141.
 
p. 21.
 

68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
This translation is nearly verbatim the same as that referred to in [122], p. 32.
 
pp. 22–26.
 
p. 32.
 
p. 353.
 
p. 34.
 
p. 27.
 
p. 28.
 
pp. 28–29.
 
p. 6.
 
p. 11. English translation in [103].
 
p. 6.
 
p. 8.
 
Translated into English by Leonard WE, I, 459, 461.
 
IV, 10, 218.

82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
 
p. 18.
 
The correspondence of Clarke and Leibniz has been the object of countless papers; for a
modern interesting comment see [6].
 
III, 4, p. 57.
 
p. 17.
 
p. 377.
 
p. 346.
 
p. 36.
 
p. 38.
 
Letter of Cotes to Newton 16th February 1712. pp. 65–66.
 
p. 19.
 
p. 38.
 
p. 2. English translation in [103].
 
p. 2. English translation in [103].

95
96
97
98
99
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
 
p. 96.
 
p. 2. English translation in [103].
 
p. 2. English translation in [103].
 
p. 160. English translation in [103].
 
p. 3. English translation in [103]. It is worth noting that today the deϐinition of the centripetal
force is something different from the Newtonian one. The centripetal force that acts on a mass
point in motion along a curved trajectory is the component of the force in the direction normal to
the trajectory. Only if the trajectory is circular today’s and Newtonian deϐinition coincide; the
centripetal force of Newton is now qualiϐied just as central force.
 
pp. 3–4. English translation in [103].
 
pp. 249–250.
 
p. 5. English translation in [103].
 
pp. 82–83.
 
p. 6. English translation in [103].
 
p. 23.
 
p. 530. English translation in [103].

107
108
109
110
111
112
113
114
115
116
 
Vol. 3, pp. 253–254.
 
pp. 350–351.
 
p. 45. Gregory ms. 247, f. 14 . English translation in [36].
 
p. 530.
 
pp. 39–40.
 
Attention should payed in reading the date of all English letters and published documents of
the 17th and the ϐirst half of 18th century. In the published Newton’s correspondence the letter to
Oldenburg  it is reported 6 February 1671/2, with an apparent ambiguities in the year [98], vol. 1,
p. 92. This is due to the fact that in 1751 only England adopted the Gregorian calendar (leaving the
Julian calendar), already in use since 1582 in the Continent and at the time the Julian calendar was
ten days less than the Gregorian calendar. Moreover the beginning of the year was different in the
two calendars. Thus between 1st January (Continental new year in the Gregorian calendar) and 25
march (English new year in the Julian calendar) the designation of the English year was one year
(and ten days) less than in the Continent. In the end 6th February 1671, the date of Newton’s letter
in English calendar, designates 16th February 1672 in the continental calendar. If not differently
speciϐied in the following the dates of Gregorian calendar is adopted. With the notable exception:
all the papers of the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London will be identiϐied
using the calendar in use in England (be it Julian or Gregorian) at the time of issue.
 
p. 3079.
 
p. 79.
 
p. 211.
 
p. 2.

117
118
119
120
121
122
123
124
125
126
127
128
129
 
p. 4.
 
p. 94.
 
p. 4.
 
p. 5.
 
p. 16.
 
p. 21.
 
p. 21.
 
p. 56.
 
p. 39.
 
pp. 99–117.
 
pp. 47–67.
 
pp. 186–187.
 
p. 252.

130
131
132
133
134
135
136
137
138
139
140
141
142
 
p. 256.
 
p. 180.
 
Vol. 1, p. 374.
 
p. 172.
 
Quoted from [118], p. 173.
 
pp. 255–256.
 
p. 255.
 
p. 126.
 
The length of ϐits represent actually a half wavelength; modern estimation of the yellow wave
length is of about 1/20000 cm, not very different from Newtons’ value.
 
p. 81.
 
p. 3.
 
p. 91.
 
p. XLIII.

143
144
145
146
147
148
149
150
151
152
153
154
155
 
p. 28.
 
p. 18.
 
p. 20.
 
pp. 34, 36.
 
pp. 398–399.
 
p. 237.
 
Q. 31, p. 350.
 
Q. 31, p. 351.
 
Q. 31, pp. 368–369.
 
Q. 31, p. 370.
 
Q. 31, p. 371.
 
Q. 31, p. 372.
 
Q. 31, p. 373.

156
157
158
159
160
161
162
163
164
165
166
167
168
 
Q. 31, p. 375.
 
Q. 31, pp. 375–376.
 
Q. 31, pp. 376–377.
 
Vol. 1, pp. 362–392.
 
Vol. 1, p. 366.
 
p. 62v.
 
p. 65r.
 
Q. 18, p. 324.
 
Q. 21, p. 325.
 
Q. 21, p. 326.
 
Q. 22, p. 327.
 
Q. 28, p. 336.
 
Q. 28, p. 339.

169
170
171
172
173
174
175
176
177
178
179
180
181
 
Q. 29, p. 345.
 
pp. 387–389. English translation in [103].
 
p. 17.
 
p. 189.
 
p. 157.
 
p. 1.
 
p. 399.
 
p. 399.
 
p. 399.
 
pp. 397–398.
 
p. 398.
 
pp. 73–74.
 
pp. 261–272.

182
183
184
185
186
187
188
189
190
191
192
193
194
 
p. 272.
 
p. 530.
 
p. 379.
 
p. 374.
 
p. 408. English translation in [103].
 
p. 476. English translation in [103].
 
pp. 3081–3084.
 
p. 3085.
 
Vol.1, p. 173.
 
Vol.1, p. 174.
 
Vol.1, p. 177.
 
Vol.1, p. 187.
 
Vol.1, p. 187.

195
196
197
198
199
200
201
 
Vol. 1, pp. 264–265.
 
p. 71.
 
Vol. 1, p. 361.
 
Vol. 1, p. 178.
 
Vol. 1, pp. 209–210.
 
p. 265.
 
pp. 123–124.
 

(1)
 
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
D. Capecchi, Epistemology and Natural Philosophy in the 18th Century, History of Mechanism and
Machine Science 39
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-52852-2_2
2. The Birth of Physics as an Academic
Discipline
Danilo Capecchi1  
Ingegneria Strutturale e Geotecnica, Sapienza Università di Roma,
Rome, Italy
 
Danilo Capecchi
Email: danilo.capecchi@uniroma1.it
Abstract
The chapter deals with the way mathematicians were successful in
replacing canonical philosophers nearly completely in the study of
natural philosophy, both in research and academic contexts and how
they invented an academic discipline that was called simply physics,
concerned only with the study of inanimate matter, excluding alchemy.
The new conception of physics for at least the whole of the 18th
century still continued to be called natural philosophy, and even
maintained some of the characteristics of old physics. Following the
spread of mechanical and experimental philosophies in the European
universities and colleges, the theoretical explanations of natural
philosophy were accompanied by experiments, mainly concerning
mechanics, hydraulics, pneumatics, electricity. Later, especially in
France, teaching began to be supported by mathematics. The complex
relationship between experimental and mechanical philosophies (and
the heuristic role of theories) is also addressed. In principle,
experimental philosophy did not require the knowledge of mechanical
philosophy. The latter, however, was helpful because it suggested
explanatory models and made it possible to make predictions, which if

sometimes proved to be false were, however, a starting point. For this
reason many experimental philosophers supported mechanical
philosophy.
2.1 Mechanical Philosophy
In the ϐirst half of the 17th century a new form of philosophy of nature
emerged, which became gradually dominant: the mechanical
philosophy. It had at its basis a very simple theory of causation. Final
causes were generally not considered, a part from their appearance as
preambles of metaphysical nature. Formal and material causes changed
nature, with the former that assumed the meaning of geometrical
conϐiguration and the latter which referred to a unique kind of matter
assumed divided in particles of different size and shape. There
remained efϐicient causes. All changes in the world was considered due
to the collision of particles that moved in plenum or in vacuum with
varying velocities.
The term mechanical philosophy is today often used as a
synonymous of mechanicism. Notice that in the English literature
instead of mechanicism it is often used the term mechanism; its use is
however avoided here because its polysemic nature; indeed it also may
mean contrivance. In the following the two terms mechanical
philosophy and mechanicism are considered to be distinct. For
mechanicism it is here stipulated to mean the theory for which any
phenomenon should occur and should be explained by means of
mechanical causes, or more generally without a will. This should be
considered both in a methodological sense, for which the explanations
should be looked for by means of the laws of mechanics only and in a
ontological sense, for which the reality of nature is made of entities
endowed with qualities, named primary qualities, as extension, shape
and motion.
Mechanicism (and mechanical) derive from the Greek term 
, the science of machines. It associated nature with a great
machine, a clock. An old concept that in the 17th century replaced the
animistic Renaissance idea of nature as a big animal. A concept that
eliminated psychology from physics, by replacing it with mechanics, the
world of efϐicient causes of material kind, where all is explained by

means of body, motions (and forces). By and large
Pomponazzi’s philosophy which avoided a substantial intervention of
intelligences in the material world, can be classiϐied as mechanicistic.
But the fundamental move to establish mechanicism was due to
Kepler that in the ϐirst years of the 17th century replaced the soul of
planets with natural forces. Very well known is his letter to Johan Hans
Georg Herwart von Hohenburg (1553–1622) of 16th February 1605:
“My aim is to say that the machinery of the heavens is not like a divine
animal but like a clock (and anyone who believes a clock has a soul
gives the work the honor due to its maker) and that in it almost all the
variety of motions is from one very simple magnetic force acting on
bodies, as in the clock all motions are from a very simple weight" [70].1
The passage from macrocosmo to microcosmo was immediate; already
in the1630s Descartes proposed analogies of all natural bodies, the
human body included, with machines.
The term mechanical philosophy has usually a restrict meaning, as
clear from its deϐinition at the beginning of the section. Besides
avoiding the recourse to occult qualities and limiting to apply the laws
of mechanics, it assumes also that matter has a corpuscular nature and
all phenomena in the heaven or in the earth must be explained in terms
of size, shape and motion of such corpuscles. Thus a machine is seen at
a microscopic level.
Broadly it can be said that nearly all the mathematical practitioners
embraced mechanicism (and many of them mechanical philosophy
also) and nearly all more or less canonical philosophers embraced
mechanical philosophy with the aim to replace the whole of old natural
philosophy. This is a simpliϐied view, as tracing a clear division between
mathematicians and philosophers is difϐicult. Using modern categories
one could say that on the one hand there were canonical philosophers
who were mainly devoted to what are today considered as
philosophical problems, and that besides philosophy of nature dealt
also with metaphysics, ethics and logic. On the other hand, there were
mathematical practitioners who, even though have carried out in-depth
philosophical studies, were implied in sectors that today can be
classiϐied as scientiϐic. There were also many characters that did not fall
into any of these classiϐications and there were some that belonged to
both categories.

Among the promoters of mechanical philosophy were prominent
canonical philosophers, such as Henry More, René Descartes, Thomas
Hobbes, Pierre Gassendi, Baruch Spinoza, Nicolas Malebranche,  etc. In
particular More was among the ϐirst to introduce the term mechanical
philosophy with a technical meaning; he used two times the expression
mechanick philosophy and once mechanical philosophy in the preface of
his Immortality of the soul [84] of 1659 [1, 11],2 even though the term
mechanism was used also before at least in the English literature [11].3
But the person that mostly contributed to diffuse the term and the
program of a strict mechanical philosophy was Robert Boyle, who
usually is not considered as a philosopher, or at least is scarcely studied
by modern philosophers. He was a promoter of an irenic approach
toward mechanical philosophy, based on the recognition of ‘essential’
properties of matter that are relevant from a practical point of view. He
aimed to avoid discussions on the possibility of vacuum—which he
personally believed as possible—and the inϐinite divisibility of matter.
So various corpuscular conceptions such as those of Descartes and
Gassendi could be reconciled.
Boyle discussed the meaning of the term mechanical philosophy, in
The origin of forms and qualities according to the corpuscular philosophy
of 1666 [27] for instance. He considered the expression corpuscular
philosophy—a his own denomination—appearing in the title, and
mechanical philosophy, appearing in the body of the text, as
synonymous. And this was also the feeling of his contemporaries. In
this context it is interesting to note that the editor of The philosophical
work of the honourable Robert Boyle, printed in 1725, changed slightly
the title of the referred text, by replacing corpuscular with mechanical,
to give The origin of forms and qualities according to the mechanical
philosophy [27].4 It was clear to Boyle that the two expressions,
corpuscular and mechanical, had two different meanings; one that
referred to the constitution of matter (corpuscularism), the other to the
laws that regulate its motion (mechanicism), but assumed that the two
meanings coalesce.
According to a restrict meaning of the term mechanical philosophy,
that proposed by Boyle, neither Galileo, who applied the laws of
mechanics but was little interested in the explanation in terms of
corpuscles, nor Newton who equipped his corpuscles with action at a

distance, were mechanical philosophers. Nor Beeckman, who had a
complex conception of corpuscles on which matter is based, but used
mechanics to study their motion [61].5 Nor philosophers and
physicians who dealt with chemical processes and had a corpuscular
conception of matter, as Sennert for example, but they made no
important use of the laws of mechanics.
The mechanical philosophy spread rapidly near scholars who had
not received a thorough training in philosophy, or that if they had, at
universities or religious colleges, they were interested more in aspects
related to mathematics (broad meaning), experimentation, medicine or
technology. For them the mechanical philosophy was easier to
understand, both because it was actually less nuanced than the
traditional natural philosophies, in which metaphysical and theological
discourses are difϐicult to follow and because it was carried out by
philosophers who had a similar background to them, with some
contaminations of the mathematical approach.
Most of the followers of mechanical philosophy adopted an
expository style that took the rhetorical form of mathematicians as a
model. After all, mechanical philosophy and mathematics were closely
related; the very notion of corpuscles, their shape and conϐiguration
refer to geometry; the concept of motion also, after the studies of the
Renaissance, refers to geometry. Even when were no explicit
formulations of algebraic equations or geometric theorems, there was
however the stringent language of mathematics, with the effort to limit
synonymy and polysemy, with conclusions that derived from
assumptions clearly speciϐied in advance. However it must be said that
the lexicon presented a great instability and therefore if the use of
synonyms tended to be avoided within a treatise of a given author, it
was not so of treatises of different authors. This also concerns the
naming of fundamental concepts. In a fairly large case study the use of
numerous synonyms for the modern terms is reported: force (11),
particle (10), law (6) velocity (4) [90].6
It is true that the explanations of the mechanical philosophy were
purely hypothetical because they have at their basis unobservable
entities, the corpuscles. But they lend themselves in the form of
geometric (modern meaning) models that allowed not only to explain
but also to predict new phenomena. The congruence between

experiments and theory, if there was any, allowed to attribute some
truth value to the theory; if the veriϐication was not successful, it
nevertheless provided useful information to adjust the model. An
important example of the heuristic power of the mechanical philosophy
is provided by Huygens’ optical studies reported in the previous
chapter. Another example is provided by the explanation of the
electrical phenomena which will be referred to in a later chapter.
The mechanical philosophy of the 18th century was essentially
hegemonic and taught in universities and colleges, it must be said
alongside elements of Aristotelianism that still resisted especially in
schools of religious inspiration. However, it began to assume a different
form from the mechanical philosophy of the previous century. Thanks
to the inϐluence of Newton and the alchemical school, the interaction
between the corpuscles was no longer reduced to the impact. Even
though in a not very explicit way, Newton in the Query 31 of the Opticks,
nearly completely devoted to chemistry, made reference to the
presence of forces of attraction and repulsion among the particles, what
allowed the new mechanical philosophy with a greater heuristic power.
2.2 Experimental Philosophy
In the second half of the 17th century, after the death of Galileo, besides
the traditional speculative approach to natural philosophy represented
by the mechanical philosophy a new approach was born in Europe,
which gave great relevance to empiric observations and contrived
experiments. Some of the protagonist of this approach referred to it as
the experimental philosophy and experimental philosophy has quite
recently became a historiographic category that received a great deal of
attention. To distinguish it from a modern movement known similarly
as experimental philosophy or x-philosophy, the 17th century approach
is sometimes named early modern experimental philosophy.
The term early modern experimental philosophy can be used in a
rather broad sense, to indicate the prevalent use of experience,
especially contrived experiments, in the study of nature; from this point
of view the name philosophy could be replaced by the modern term
science and experimental philosophy become experimental science. By
using this broader meaning the term early experimental philosophy

does not deϐine a signiϐicant historiographic category. Basically
reference is about the history of modern science from Renaissance to
today.
Sometimes the term is used however in a narrower sense to
indicate an approach in which no use at all is made of predeϐined
theories; and even the declared goal of providing theories with an
inductive approach is seen only as a very remote arrival point, to be left
to posterity. The goal is to accumulate as many experimental results as
possible. Some historians, believe that the term experimental
philosophy should be taken according to this narrow meaning, as a
typically English phenomenon carried on by the fellows of the Royal
society of London. For example, this is the position of Peter Dear [46],
who believes that this type of philosophy is characterized by a
historical narrative, that is, a narrative where the reference to the
experiments is carried out according to a historical approach, reporting
in faithful way the results, without generalizations. In such a case one
can speak of Baconian natural history.
The use of the restricted meaning deϐines a historiographic category
that can be used and is used especially by the English writers [5, 6]. The
period of interest is constituted by the second half of the 17th century,
from the foundation of the Accademia del Cimento to the afϐirmation of
Newton’s approach, which was linked to the tradition of mixed
mathematics. Its exhaustion appears determined by the substantial
sterility of an experimental research disconnected from a speculative
analysis.
In the following the term early experimental philosophy is
considered in its broader meaning and restricted to that part dealing
with natural philosophy only, as classically considered in the
Aristotelian tradition, even though later on in the 18th century the
approach of experimental philosophy was extended also to moral
problems [6]. For the sake of simplicity early modern experimental
philosophy will be referred to simply as experimental philosophy.
In the second half of 17th century the term experimental
philosophy spread in England to indicate an approach to natural
philosophy opposed to speculative philosophy, or armchair philosophy.
Boyle composed a work entitled Of the usefulness of speculative &
experimental philosophy to one another, in the1660, though it is no

longer extant [3].7 Hooke in his Micrographia of 1665 distinguished
between experimental philosophy and “philosophy of discourse and
disputation” [65].8 Speculative philosophy was the study of natural
phenomena basing on some a prior assumptions or hypotheses without
a recourse to systematic observations or experiments. Experimental
philosophy involved instead gathering of experimental data that was
supposed to be made independently of any pre-constituted assumption.
The experimental data might be the basis for the individuation of
regularities or laws. Before this dichotomy appeared, natural
philosophy had been considered to be only speculative.
The promoters of this new approach to natural philosophy were not
canonical philosophers; rather they were mathematicians, physicists,
lawyers, naturalists, chemists, architects, technicians, etc. The
speculative philosophy that they fought was not only that of the schools
but also the modern mechanical philosophy as carried out by very
famous canonical philosophers such as Descartes, Hobbes and to some
extent by Gassendi, scarcely interested in experiments.
The origins of the process to favor experimentation were varied and
still object of discussion. The theoretical elaborations of an
experimental philosophy can be rooted in the Aristotelian philosophy.
In the Middle Ages and Renaissance, there were approaches not purely
theoretical, or speculative, to the study of nature. Roger Bacon (1214c-
1294), for instance, is generally considered as the promoter of a
discipline called experimental science (scientia experimentalis), which
should give a mathematical description of natural phenomena, promote
technological applications and prognosticate the future on the basis of
astrological knowledge. It is not clear if the writing of Roger Bacon
were known in the 16th and 17th centuries. There was however
evidence of at least an indirect knowledge. Indeed, a text widely read in
late 16th century England took inspiration from Roger Bacon’s scientia
experimentalis. This was the English scholar John Dee (1527–1608)’s
Mathematical praeface to the English translation of Euclid’s Elements,
ϐirst published in 1570 [5].9
Mathematicians and engineers, had carried out a their own projects,
that were inϐluenced only in part by the work of canonical
philosophers. Science (modern meaning) had its own life.
Mathematicians and engineers had sometimes a deep knowledge of

natural philosophy; of it they chose freely enough the theoretical
approaches that were more congenial to them without getting to a
systematic elaboration work.
There were social and political reasons that brought to give more
attention to facts instead than theories. Theories could pronounce on
important aspects of nature, such for example cosmology, and could
easily get in conϐlict with social ideologies, especially religious ones.
This was partly one of the reasons that inϐluenced Italian scientists
(Academia del cimento and Jesuits). Another reason in between the
epistemological and sociological, was given by the coexistence of
different conceptions of philosophy of nature at odds with each other,
ϐlourished to justify new scientiϐic discoveries. With the birth of
scientiϐic associations such as the Accademia del cimento, the Académie
des sciences de Paris, the Royal society of London, the best way to hold
together scholars of different philosophical backgrounds was to rely on
raw facts. Indeed to the experimental activity was recognized a higher
epistemological status with respect to speculations based on more or
less sophisticated hypotheses.
Of course promoting an experimental philosophy in the 17th
century was a speculative move; the character usually called for as the
major theoretician of experimental philosophy is Francis Bacon  (1561–
1626). Also Niccolò Cabeo and the young John Locke are sometime
named.
Bacon saw natural philosophy divided into speculative and
operative. The speculative component comprehended physics,
metaphysics and natural history. The operative component has a less
deϐined subdivision that evolved in time; it comprehended magic and
mechanics but not only. Bacon discussed natural history in some works
published during his lifetime, such as: Advancement of learning of 1605;
Novum organum of 1620; Historia naturalis et experimentalis of 1622
and the De augmentis scientiarum of 1623. His natural history differed
from the traditional (classiϐicatory) natural history. It was made of
collections of facts and was an undertaking of very great size and
requires great labour and expense, involving many people in its
execution and also comprehended the results of contrived experiments
[2].10

Bacon’s natural history belonged to the speculative side of natural
philosophy but interacted with its operative side and thus considered
also aspects from mechanics and magic. Some considerations on
Bacon’s  conceptions on natural histories as well as science and natural
philosophy can be found in [2, 4, 5]. Figure 2.1 shows the division of
natural philosophy as reported in Bacon’s Advancement of learning of
1605. The main division of natural philosophy is between speculative
and operative. The former is concerned with the acquisition of causes,
the latter with the production of effects. In the Advancement learning of
1605 Bacon considered a subdivision of mathematics into pure
mathematics and mixed mathematics. Pure mathematics are two,
geometry and arithmetic, the one handling continuous quantities and
the other discrete quantities. Mixed mathematics have for subject some
axioms or parts of natural philosophy: “For many parts of Nature can
neither be invented with sufϐicient subtlety, nor demonstrated with
sufϐicient perspicuity, nor accommodated unto use with sufϐicient
dexterity, without the aid and intervening of the mathematics, of which
sort are perspective, music, astronomy, cosmography, architecture,
engineery, and divers others [emphasis added]” [7].11
Fig. 2.1 Classiϐication of natural philosophy in Francis Bacon.
Redrawn from [4], p. 19

The evaluation of the inϐluence attributed to Bacon by historians
has been largely motivated by the evaluation of Bacon himself. For
historians and scientists of the 19th century, when inductivism held as
an account of the success of science, it was natural to consider that
Bacon’s rules about scientiϐic knowledge were applied directly by the
Royal society and many experimental philosophers of the Continent as
well. With the development of the hypothetic-deductive epistemologies
of the 20th century, Bacon’s  role as a philosopher of science receded
and his inϐluence was seen differently. In particular Bacon was seen as a
promoter of a set of general commitments rather than of a strict
research program [76].12 Even though English writers still devote to
Bacon a plenty of attention.
Reference to Bacon as to the theoretician of the experimental
philosophy, I believe also depends on the difϐiculty that exists in
modern philosophy to consider as a philosopher who does not respect
modern standards to be deϐined a philosopher. There is indeed a
tendency to consider philosophy not so much as a form of knowledge
that aims to answer fundamental questions about the world and man,
but rather as an academic discipline carried out by those who belong to
a particular professional category that has self-assigned the
philosopher’s label over the last few centuries. From this point of view
Bacon can be considered a philosopher, though a particular one.
Instead, many experimental philosophers, Boyle included, are to be
considered at most as scientists (using a term that did not exist before
the 19th century) and more often simple practitioners. An if one wants
to look for a promoter of a branch of philosophy, the experimental
philosophy in this case, he looks for a ‘true’ philosophers, thus Bacon.
In the 17th and 18th centuries things were seen differently. Much of
the natural philosophy scholars, regardless of the approach followed,
prized the label of philosopher and were recognized as such even by
those who today are considered ‘true’ philosophers. With some
exceptions. For example, Leibniz and Huygens criticized Boyle, the
champion of the experimental philosophy, for his lack of interest in
speculation. In a letter to Leibniz of 1692, Huygens wrote:
Mr. Boyle is dead, as you will probably already know. He seems
pretty strange that he has not founded anything [any theory] on

so many experiences of which his books make full; but the thing
is difϐicult, and I have never believed him capable of a great
application necessary to establish probable principles
[hypotheses] [69].13 (B.1)
Today in the face of the development of biology and computer science,
the leading sectors of modern research in natural philosophy and
mathematics, where what is commonly classiϐied as science is scarcely
distinguishable from technology, even canonical philosophers begin to
recognize a cognitive value to practical activity. This cognitive value
should also be recognized in retrospective to the protagonists of the so
called early modern experimental philosophy.
2.2.1 The Experimental Philosophy of the
Accademia del Cimento
After Galileo’s death his pupils and admirers tended to present the
maestro as the founder of a method of inquire of the material world
strongly based on experiments, the still mysterious experimental
method. Vincenzo Viviani (1622–1703)  in particular to keep alive the
memory of his teacher, was involved in the Bologna edition of
Galileo’s works in 1656 [54] and devoted much time to the patient and
systematic collection of documents, testimonies and letters of
Galileo with a generous grant from de’ Medici. That allowed Antonio
Favaro, at the turn of the 20th century, to complete the national opera
in the style of completeness that certainly would have pleased Viviani.
In 1654 Viviani wrote a lucky Racconto istorico della vita del sig.
Galileo Galilei [55],14 a biography to be appended to Galileo’s works
published posthumously in 1717. Here he referred to numerous
experiences, among which the famous ones on the synchronism of the
oscillations of the pendulum and the fall of a heavy body from the
leaning Pisa tower.
In this while with the sagacity of his genius he invented that
simple and adjusted time measurement by means of the
pendulum, not yet known, taking the opportunity to observe it
from the motion of a lamp, while he was one day in the

Cathedral of Pisa; and making very precise experiences, he
ascertained the equality of its vibrations, and by then thought to
adapt it to the use in medicine for the measurement of the
frequency of the wrists, with amazement and delight of the
doctors of those times and that today we practice vulgarly: of
which invention he then gained various experiences and
measures of times and motions, and he was the ϐirst to apply it
to the celestial observations, with incredible purchase in
astronomy and geography
[...]
At this same time, it seems to him that to investigate the
natural effects one necessarily requires a true knowledge of the
nature of motion, given that philosophical and vulgar axiom
Ignorato motu ignoratur natura, thus he gave to the
contemplation of that. Then, with great dismay of all
philosophers, by means of experience and with solid proofs and
discourses, many conclusions of the same Aristotle on the
matter of motion were revealed as falsehood, since then held for
very clear and indubitable; as, among others, that the speeds of
the mobiles of the same matter, but unequally heavy, moving for
a given means, do not retain the proportion of their gravity
assigned to them by Aristotle, on the contrary all moved with
equal speed, demonstrating this with repeated experiments
from the height of the Campanile of Pisa in the presence of the
other teachers and philosophers, and the whole assembly of
students [55].15 (B.2)
In another biography, the Vita di Galileo, Niccolò Gerardini (1604–
1678) in about 1653–1654, after an ample discussion of the activity of
Galileo as experimenter, wrote:
He possessed a little amount of books, and his study depended
on continuous observations, deducing the subject of
philosophizing from all the things he saw, heard or touched; and
he said that the book in which one has to study was that of
nature, which is open to all people [55].16 (B.3)

This perspective of Galileo experimenter seems to be not faithful
however. If it is true that Galileo considered very relevant contrived
experiments, he was not so involved in strict experimentation as Viviani
and his friend suggested. In particular there are stringent historical
reasons to assert that Galileo neither made his observation of the
oscillations of the lamp in the dome of Florence nor he left heavy body
to fall from Pisa tower [102]. In Galileo’s manuscripts and letters there
are important reference to experiments, as documented by historians
such as Naylor, Clavelin, Segre, Drake, and Settle, but in his ofϐicial
writings he made reference nearly only to astronomical observations.
A question then raises: Assuming that his biography of Galileo, as
typical of the Renaissance, was more an hagiography, why
Viviani depicted Galileo as a pure experimentalist? And why pure
experimentation was so largely evaluated in the 1650s much before
English experimental philosophers established? Historians have not
given yet, for what I know, an answer to such questions. Is it possible
what appears to us as a feeble experimentalism was seen by Galileo’s
pupils a fundamental break with the traditional approach to natural
philosophy?
In Florence, even before the death of Galileo, experimental activity
spread encouraged by the Grand Duke Ferdinando II de’ Medici and his
brother Leopoldo. This activity culminated in founding in 1657 the
Accademia del cimento. It never had a statute and its birth is associated
with the ϐirst meeting of a group of scholars on 18th June 1657. Apart
from the Grand Duke and his brother, that company ranked: Vincenzo
Viviani (1622–1703), Giovanni Alfonso Borelli (1608–1679), Carlo
Rinaldini (1615–1698), Alessandro Marsili (1601–1670), Candido Del
Buono (1618–1676), Paolo del Buono (1625–1659), Antonio Oliva
(1624?-1691), Lorenzo Malagotti (1637–1712), Francesco Redi (1626–
1697), Carlo Dati (1619–1676), Alessandro Segni (1633–1697) [20].17
Correspondents were: Michelangelo Ricci, Giovanni Domenico Cassini,
Geminiano Montanari, Donato Rossetti, Ottavio Falconieri, Niels
Steensen, Jean de Thévenot, HonoréFabri [80].18
The Accademia del cimento purposes are declared in the preface to
the readers in the Saggi di naturali esperienze (herein Saggi, see Fig.
2.2) [80], the only publication of the academy. In it there were reports
of experimental activities on various natural phenomena using a

reϐined and very numerous instrumentation. A main role of the
Accademia del cimento was to experience and narrate the results of the
experiments, with the development of a particular language immediate
and ϐlexible. The importance the academicians attributed to the
instrumentation is documented by its abundance and its extensive
descriptions in the Saggi, as if only observations with the help of
instruments were worthy of being part of science. To give an idea, the
collection of Leopoldo alone contained 1282 glass instruments [10].19
The equipment had a non-trivial cost, which was supported by de’
Medici. It could be justiϐied only by the collective nature of the research
and would not make sense for an isolated scientist, even of the caliber
of Galileo.
The academy was the ϐirst modern society whose members worked
together in an unique collective project. For example, the Accademia dei
Lincei, founded much earlier, in 1603, although had among its members
some high level scientists, including Galileo, had the main function of
promoting the publication of the works that its members carried on
individually. The training of the academicians was varied, including in
addition to mathematicians—some members of the academy had an
excellent mathematics education, for example Borelli and Viviani—also
physicians and naturalists, and the natural philosophy ideas they
professed were different. To make possible a collective undertaking, the
academicians were required to limit as much as possible any
interpretation of data through theories, maintaining an objective
reading [41].20
In the following excerpt, taken from the Saggi, after having praised
mathematics, its limits in application to the natural sciences are
stressed:
This is what the Mind attempts in the search of Nature;
wherefore we must Confess, we have no better means then
Geometry, which at ϐirst Essay hits the Truth, and frees at once
from all doubts, and wearying Researches. And indeed she leads
into the way of Philosophical Speculations, but at last leaves us;
not that Geometry has not a large Field to expatiate in, and
Travels not over all Natures Works; as they all submit to those
Mathematick Laws, by which the Eternal Decree freely Rules,

and Commands them; but because we hitherto are unable to
follow her in so long, and wide a Path onely a few steps.
Nowhere we may not trust our selves to go farther, we can relye
on nothing with greater Assurance than the faith of Experience,
which (like one that having several loose and scattered Gems,
endeavours to ϐix each in its proper Collet) by Adapting the
Effects to the Causes; and again the Causes to the Effects if not at
ϐirst Essay, as Geometry yet at last succeeds so happily, that by
frequent trying and rejecting [emphasis added] she hits the
mark [80].21 (B.4)
Using a Baconian terminology one could say that the goal of the
academicians was to carry on natural history researches. It must be
said however that a direct inϐluence of Bacon on the empirical choices
of the academicians is practically absent and it is in fact clearly
documented that most of the academicians had not even read the
works of Bacon [10].22
The academy motto, trying and rejecting (provando e riprovando),
that was also accepted by the Royal society, is justiϐied both by the fact
that a single experiment can be conducted incorrectly, and therefore
not able to provide certain data, and by the fact that some events were
not observed with due attention, mainly because no one knew what he
had to concentrate in; by repeating experience one see new things.
According to the academicians, one ought to proceed with much
circumspection, lest too great a reliance and trust in experience, turn us
out of the way and impose upon us; since it sometimes falls out, that
before the clear truth appears to us, when the ϐirst more open veil of
deceit are taken off, we discover some cheating appearances that
indeed have some likeness, and resemblance of truth. These are the
imperfect lineaments that are seen through the last coverings that more
nearly veil the lovely face of truth; through the ϐine web whereof she
some-times seems so plain and lively, that some might conclude, she
was nakedly discovered [80, 113].23
One of the purpose of the natural histories of the academy was to
verify the assertions of natural philosophy that had became
commonplaces, such as for instance: nature abhors a vacuum. But also
important experiences made by others European experimenters were

repeated. Facts were the only authority recognized. To Leopoldo de’
Medici is attributed the will to contrast authority, because the
reputation of great authors proved too often hurtful to the studious,
who through too much conϐidence and veneration of their names, fear
to call in question what is delivered upon their authority; wherefore its
is worthy to confront with the most accurate and sensible experiments,
the force of their assertions [80].24 In a ‘democratic’ way, as the
academy veriϐied the experiments carried out by others, it allowed
others to check its own; and the record of the experiences reported in
the Saggi also had this purpose with the wishes for a free
communication to different ‘meetings’ scattered for the most
distinguished and substantial regions of Europe [80].25
Luciano Boschiero suggests that the above description is
deliberately artiϐicial and not very responsive to the actual functioning
of the academy [20]. Even though the ofϐicial publication, the Saggi,
declares very clearly a purely experimental activity, without discussing
the principles and conclusions of natural philosophy, the unpublished
texts and correspondence would show that the academicians also
debated among themselves vividly on the interpretation to give to the
experiments, and many of them used the experiments to verify their
own theories [20]. According to Boschiero, the ofϐicial account of a
purely experimental activity would have been dictated by the lords of
Florence, Ferdinando and Leopoldo.  Since the Renaissance, de’ Medici
had gained interest about natural philosophy, mathematics and
engineering as a means to increase their prestige in Italy and Europe.
After Galileo’s death they promoted an experimental activity stressing
that this was carried out in the footprints of the great Galileo and gave a
strong support to Vincenzo Viviani to collect works and news about
Galileo which could enforce such point of view. The Accademia del
cimento was founded to pursue this objective and its achievements had
to be shown externally by means of well prepared publications. De’
Medici strongly inϐluenced the way to expose the results of the academy
by stressing the experimental activity. However even though
Boschiero’s reasoning seems to be stringent it does not explain why in
the 1650s’ there was the idea that the experimental activity could be
considered as the most interesting one in the study of natural
philosophy.

The activity of the Accademia del cimento is documented, as already
noticed, by a single publication, Saggi of 1667, issued in a year that
coincided with the closing of the academy itself. The Saggi presented a
summary of experimental works over the course of a decade. The book,
lavishly illustrated, collected a considerable editorial success. In 1684
the ϐirst English translation appeared under the title Essayes of natural
experiments made in the Academie del Cimento [113] by Richard Waller
(d. 1715) on the recommendation of the Royal society of London. In
1731, the Dutch scientist Pieter van Musschenbroek (1692–1731)
prepared a Latin translation [85]. Among the later editions, very
important is the one edited by Vincenzio Antinori in 1841 [80], where
together with the original text also some appendixes relating to
experiences, not reported in the Saggi, but documented in the archive
of the academy, can be found.
Experiences dealt with various problems, some related to Galileo’s 
researches, on mechanics, others concerning subjects only by very
short time object of ‘scientiϐic’ investigation, such as heat, electricity
and magnetism, just explored by Galileo.  In all cases the experiences
contained qualitative ϐlanked by quantitative descriptions. It should be
said, however, that in most cases the numerical values of the
measurements performed are not reported. Indeed numbers appearing
in the various experiences are very few and generally referred to the
description of the instrumentation; they are normally reported in literal
form (that is ‘a thousand’ instead of ‘1000’). The exception is a long
series of tables that gave the temperature of water in a freezing process
[80].26


Fig. 2.2 Saggi di naturali esperienze. Frontespice [79], p. 26.
Reproduced with the permission of ETH-Bibliothek Zürich, Alte und Seltene Drucke
The reliability of the reported results, not being documented by
numerical values that could facilitate comparison to people who
wanted to reiterate the experience, was entrusted to the prestigious of
the academy, to its sponsor, Leopoldo, besides, in some cases, to the call
of similar experiences. Gassendi for instance is mentioned in several
places. There are not, at least I have not seen them, references to the
presence of distinguished witnesses. A rhetorical form of validation
that instead was widely used at the Royal society and by many natural
philosophers of the second half of the 17th century.
The activity of the glorious academy ceased in 1667 in a quite
inglorious way, for several causes. Most notable was the abandonment
by important members as Borelli, Oliva and Rinaldini and then the
appointment as Cardinal of Leopoldo de’ Medici, who had been the
academy engine, resulting in disengagement considered the new heavy
and delicate commitments to be undertaken. Alongside these
immediate causes, however, there was probably a most important
hidden cause, inherent the very structure of the academy, that is the
choice of the form of anonymous publication, probably the ϐirst in
history, and the commitment not to formulate theories [10]. Anonymity
frustrated the ambitions of individuals, especially the most talented,
ambitious, and among them certainly ϐigured Borelli. The banning of
scientiϐic theories made partly sterile the experimentation, among
other things preventing the creation of new and more interesting
experiments, the need for which could only be conceived within a
theory. The other European academies will adopt a different attitude.
For example, the Royal society (see below) allowed and encouraged
publications by individual members, which in addition to report their
contributions to the experiments carried out at the academy, could also
interpret them with their own categories of physics and mathematics.
2.2.2 The Natural Histories of the Royal
Society of London
The Royal society of London founded in 1660 was in many respects the
heir of the Academia del cimento. No coincidence that Robert Southwell

(1635–1702), who will be chairman of this society from 1690, was a
protégé of Viviani from whom he learned the methods and organization
of the Accademia del cimento.
There are many works that relate to the Royal society and its
foundation [12, 15, 16, 76, 107]; here there is no space and perhaps
there is no need of an in depth analysis of the society by studying
original sources; thus for many considerations I relay on published
studies. The society saw its origin in a meeting of various characters
(twelve), more or less famous and more or less well versed in the
sciences. As it appears from the journal book, on the 28th of November
1660, the lord viscount Brouncker, Mr. Boyle, Mr. Bruce, Sir Robert
Moray, Sir Paul Neile, Dr. Wilkins, Dr. Goddard, Dr. Petty, Mr. Balle, Mr.
Rooke, Mr. Wren, and Mr. Hill, after the lecture of Mr. Wren at the
Gresham College, withdrew, for mutual conversation, into Mr. Rooke’s
apartment, where, amongst other matters discoursed of, something
was offered about a design of founding a college for the promoting of
physico-mathematical experimental learning [12].27
A 1663 statute of the Royal society provided instructions for
separating facts from their interpretations, giving preferences to facts.
And if any fellow shall think to suggest any conjecture, concerning the
causes of the phenomena in such experiments, the same shall be done
apart; and so entered into the register of the society. Hypotheses thus
should not be avoided, simply they should be formulated on when a
very great collection of facts was available. This is what the statute of
1663 required:
The secretary shall jointly draw up the Report of the matter of
fact, in every such Experiment or Observation; or if any
difference shall happen between them in their apprehensions
there about, the same shall be related in the Report. In all
Reports of Experiments to be brought into the Society, the
matter of fact shall be barely stated, without any prefaces,
apologies, or rhetorical ϐlourishes; and entered so in the
Register-book, by order of the Society. And if any Fellow shall
think ϐit to suggest any conjecture, concerning the causes of the
phaenomena in such Experiments, the same shall be done apart;

and so entered into the Register-book, if the Society shall order
the entry thereof [99].28
Someone gave a restricted interpretation, for example Robert Moray
(1608?–1673):
In the mean time this Society will not own any Hypothesis,
systeme, or doctrine of the principles of Naturall philosophy,
proposed or maintained by any Philosopher Auncient or
Moderne. And till there be a sufϐicient collection made, of
Experiments, Histories, and observations, there are no debates
to be held at the weekely meetings of the Society, concerning any
Hypothesis or principle of philosophy, nor any discourses made
for explicating any phenomena, except by speciall appointment
of the Society, or allowance of the president: But the time of the
Assemblyes is to be employed, in proposing and making
Experiments, discoursing of the trueth, manner, grounds & use
therof; Reading & discoursing upon Letters, reports, and other
papers concerning philosophicall & mechanicall matters;
Viewing and discoursing of curiosities of Nature and Art; and
doing such other things as the Councel, or the president alone
shall appoint [67].29
Another example of this attitude was furnished by John Evelyn’s (1620–
1706) Sylva, or a discourse of forest-trees, and the propagation of timber
in his majesties dominions of 1664, the ϐirst work published by the Royal
society [76].30 The majority, Boyle included, saw an empirical
experimental basis for all theories and the rejection of any hypothesis
non clearly grounded upon experimental evidence. Other still, like John
Wallis (1616–1703) and Hooke, allowed room for mathematically
derived theories.
When Robert Hooke (1635–1703) published his Micrographia in
1665 the Royal society had to question his use of hypothesis and
interpretations, pressing him to reply:
After my Addressè to our Great Founderè and Patron, I could not
but think my self oblig’d, in consideration of those many

Ingagements you have laid upon me, to offer these my poor
Laboursè to thisMOST ILLUSTRIOUS ASSEMBLY. YOU have been
pleas’d formerly to accept of these rude Draughts. I have since
added to them some Descriptions, and some Conjecturesè of my
own. And therefore, together with YOUR Acceptance, I must also
beg YOUR pardon [emphasis added]. The Rules YOU have
prescrib’d YOUR selves in YOUR Philosophical Progress do seem
the best that have ever yet been practis’d [65].31
Below a summary of how a matter of fact should be established,
according to Thomas Spratt (1635–1713)  the author of History of the
Royal society of London, for the improving of natural knowledge of 1667
[107]. After the experimenters have performed the trial, said Spratt,
they brought all the history of its process back again to the test. Then
came the second great work of the experimenters; which was to judge
and resolve upon the matter of fact. In this part of their employment,
they used to take an exact view of the repetition of the whole course of
the experiment; and observed all the chances and the regularities of the
proceeding; what nature does willingly and what constrained; what
with its own power, what by the succors of art; what in a constant mode
and what with some kind of extravagance; industriously marking all the
various shapes into which it turns itself and by how many secret
passages it at last obtains its end. Never giving it over, till the whole
company has been fully satisϔied of the certainty and constancy; or, on the
other side, of the absolute impossibility of the effect. This critical and
reiterated scrutiny of those things, which are the plain objects of their
eyes must put out of all reasonable disputes, the reality of those
operations, which the society shall positively determine to have
succeeded [107].32
Though the fellows of the Royal society, at the early phase of its
institution and long after, differed as to the manner in which
experiments and observations could be best used, all of them were, or
at least declared to be, convinced that the improvement of natural
knowledge could be achieved by following methodological reform of
knowledge and the establishment of collective (and preferably state
supported) institutionalization of knowledge [76].33The Royal society
was proposing a pedagogical role believing that scientiϐic knowledge

should be shared and that it should somehow become a collective
enterprise. And certainly for people who were not introduced to the
study of science it was more simple and interesting to read reports of
experiments, rather than explanation of theories based on a
mathematical approach, not always conclusive.
The idea that knowledge should be based primarily, exclusively
according to some, on experimental evidence, had different origins, as
already discussed in previous sections. In England however the
inϐluence of Francis Bacon’s philosophy had most probably a major
role. Indeed Bacon’s writings on scientiϐic method began to be
rediscovered in the 1640s, just some years before the foundation of the
Royal society [76]34 and were carefully read by some of the Royal
society founders. Moreover the religious contrasts and bloody wars that
crossed Britain from the beheading of Charles I, the Government of
Oliver Cromwell and the Restoration of Charles II were still alive. The
founder of the Royal society wanted to avoid a climate similar to that;
certainly less bloody but equally pernicious—giving room for animated
and not resolvable discussions, among the supporters of different
scientiϐic theories.
How much Bacon  inϐluenced the single characters is difϐicult to say
and not yet sufϐiciently studied; it is a matter of fact however that
ofϐicially to most of the fellows of the Royal society Bacon was of
inspiration. Because of the variety of interest and approaches of the
various members of the society some historians had concluded that
Baconianism served to give a convenient public image, glossing over
internal disagreements. That is the Baconianism served to the Royal
society more as a nominal than a real construct: “It is even questionable
whether the Royal society had ‘a philosophy’ which extended beyond
immediate apologetic purposes. Behind their uniϐied front of
Baconianism, which was readily adopted as a defensive mechanism
against critics, lay diverse philosophical outlooks, which betray many
other inϐluences than Bacon and provided the basis for considerable
philosophical controversy in the pre-Newtonian period” [114].35 Some
other historians however assumed Bacon’s inϐluence much more
profound; see for instance [15].
The heterogeneous nature of early English Baconianism has been
used as an incentive by many historians to classify the fellows into two

separate camps: serious scientists on the one side and amateurish
dabblers on the other; moreover opinions are divided on whether the
serious scientists stand with or against Bacon. According to [76]36 this
is an oversimpliϐication of the question and even the role of the
amateurs should be analyzed with much more attention
A characteristic of the Royal society was its openness to the outside;
both with respect to the English society and to the scholars of the
Continent. Particularly important, at least initially, were the contacts
with Italy, which had seen the birth of the ϐirst scientiϐic institution of
experimental character, the Accademia del cimento, and with France,
where in 1666 a similar institution was founded, the Académie des
sciences de Paris. After the demise of the Accademia del cimento,
Italian natural philosophers looked at the Royal society for inspiration;
partially seeing it as the heir of the Accademia. Not many Italian were
fellows of the society however, but in the early decades of its foundation
the number of correspondent was great; among them there were
Marcello Malpighi and Vincenzo Viviani who later became fellow
respectively in1669 and 1661. Correspondents were from many part of
Italy, but especially from Bologna. Relations with the Académie des
sciences de Paris and French scientists varied greatly over the years.
2.2.2.1 The Journal of the Royal Society
One of the ways the Royal society advertised its activities was through
the regular publication of a magazine, the Philosophical Transactions of
the Royal Society of London (herein after Philosophical Transactions),
established by the (permanent) secretary Oldenburg in 1665. The
Philosophical Transactions should be printed the ϐirst Monday of every
month, if there was sufϐicient matter for it [15].37
The ϐirst number of the Philosophical Transactions contained
accounts of inventions and discoveries derived partly from
Oldenburg’s own knowledge, partly from accounts read to the Royal
society, partly from letters and partly from printed sources. By the
second number, the journal was settling into what became an its
pattern: extracts of letters, English and foreign—the latter translated
into English unless in Latin—and, at the end, one or more book reviews.

Despite current belief in experiments as one of the foundations of
science, only a small part of the volumes of the Philosophical
Transactions examined up to the 19th century were devoted to
reporting on contrived experiments. Both in terms of the percentage of
total articles and percentage of pages, experimental articles accounted
for only 5–20% of each volume up to volume 80. Only in volume 90,
opening the 19th century, did the percentages rise substantially to 39%
of the articles and 38% of the pages. Experiments were only one of
many types of information to be transmitted among those interested in
science. Most articles and pages were devoted to observations and
reports of natural events, ranging from earthquakes, through
astronomical sightings, anatomical dissections, and microscopical
observations; to accounts of technological and medical advances, and
travelogues of journeys to China and Japan or an interview with the
prodigy Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart [9].38
Table 2.1 shows the distributions of the memoirs of the
Philosophical Transactions in the various ϐield of natural philosophy in
the 18th century.
Table 2.1 Contents of the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, 1720–79,
arranged by decades. Drawn from [105], p. 37
Years NHist MMath Med ExNP Anat Antiq SpNP PMath Misc Total
1720s 86
80
76
38
40
2
11
12
13
358
1730s 109
94
60
43
29
9
12
6
1
363
1740s 157
84
124
60
58
39
10
8
17
557
1750s 268
82
97
51
24
38
17
11
3
591
1760s 162
172
59
31
17
27
22
9
6
507
1770s 183
94
36
55
28
11
14
19
10
450
Total
965
606
452
278
196
126
86
65
50
2826
%
34
21
16
10
7
4
3
2
2
99
Abbreviations: NHist: natural histories (natural sciences); MMath:
mixed mathematics; Med: medicine; ExNP: experimental natural
philosophy; Anat: anatomy and physiology of animals and plants; Antiq:
antiquities; SpNP: Speculative natural philosophy; PMath: pure
mathematics; Misc: miscellanea

Memoirs concentrated on natural sciences, mixed mathematics,
medicine, experimental natural philosophy, and anatomy. Very
occasionally members contributed papers on pure mathematics,
speculative natural philosophy, and antiquities. The prevalence of
natural sciences or medicine is hardly surprising, as the Royal society
was heavily populated with country gentlemen and physicians.
Table 2.2 shows the internal distributions of the mixed mathematics
papers. As one can see accounts of astronomical observations are
largely prevailing; yet numerous are papers about mechanics.
Table 2.2 Mixed mathematics in the of the Royal Society of London, 1720–79, arranged by
decades. Drawn from [105], p. 38
Years Astronomy Geography Mechanics Miscellaneous Total
1720s 32
38
6
4
80
1730s 23
45
19
7
94
1740s 40
19
14
12
85
1750s 30
18
15
19
82
1760s 106
36
11
19
172
1770s 33
35
8
18
94
Total
264
191
73
79
607
%
43
31
12
13
99
In the ϐirst volumes of the Philosophical Transactions, some of the
experiments were simply cookbook recipes for creating marvelous
effects or effects of practical use, such as the instructions for coloring
marble. However by volume 20 some experiments had clear
hypothesis-testing functions. Experiments were recognized as events
designed with speciϐic claims about nature in mind. In volume 25, for
example, Francis Hauksbee (1660–1713) wrote: “Since the greatest
satisfaction and demonstration that can be given for the credit of any
hypothesis is, that the experiments, made to prove the same, agree with
it in all respects, without force” [62].39
The comparison between the papers published in the Philosophical
Transactions and the treatises of natural philosophy of the same period,
even of those inspired by mechanicism, makes it evident the great
change that is intervening in the study of nature. Essentially all subjects

of natural philosophy are treated; using modern categories: physics,
chemistry, natural sciences, medicine. However, the approach is not
that of the canonical philosophers; there is a lack of attention to
metaphysics and to the construction of systems, although the rigor of
the treatment is often sufϐiciently high even for today’s standards. As
far as the study of the inanimate world is concerned, at the beginning
mainly the writings of mechanics, optics and astronomy were
presented, carried forward by mathematicians who followed the
approach of mixed mathematics but who did not disdain philosophy of
nature; since the 18th century, electricity and magnetism began to
receive a great deal of attention.
The form of communication, a memoir of a few pages, instead of a
long treatise, also contributed to modify the study of the philosophy of
nature. Given their relative shortness, the memoirs did not allow a
systematic treatment of the whole philosophy of nature; therefore, they
dealt with very speciϐic subjects beginning to outline a certain form of
specialization. Scholars with a mathematical background wrote about
astronomy, mechanics, optics, electricity, thermology and magnetism,
that is, topics today classiϐied as physics and chemistry. Other scholars,
especially amateurs, instead provided reports on journeys, quirks of
medicine, animals, stones. Arguments that are classiϐiable as natural
sciences and medicine.
The results of the experiments were reported with increasing
precision as a debate among the authors was established. They saw
forced to pay more attention and the making of increasingly precise
measurements. As experiments became something more than a private
affair between the researcher and his colleagues, there was increasing
likelihood that the events described were real successes. While at ϐirst
the report was little more than a summary of the information reporting
that the fact had happened, in the following period the detailed reports
of experiments became the point of making the experiment replication
possible, assuming a force of historical report, usually referred in ϐirst
person. The presence of illustrious witnesses was often referred to.
2.3 Mechanical Philosophy, Experimental
Philosophy and Mixed Mathematics

Mechanical philosophy and experimental philosophy are two very
useful historiographic categories, which have the advantage of using
terms and concepts also used in the 17th and 18th centuries. But today
historians tend to use them in a much more exclusive way than the
scholars whom they make history of.
The use of different terms lends to considering them as
representative of two uncorrelated activities. In reality things are more
complex and a scholar could be both a supporter of mechanical
philosophy and an experimentalist. In the following, for simplicity, I will
talk of two philosophies, even if the mechanical, in its corpularistic
form, represents a true form of philosophy of nature whereas the
experimental may represent, in fact, more an approach (to natural
philosophy), which can be mechanicistic or not.
As seen in the previous sections, the two philosophies can be
considered in a broad sense or in a narrow sense. The mechanical
philosophy considered in a broad sense, more properly referable only
as mechanicism, faces the study of nature with the exclusive use of the
laws of mechanics. Strictly understood, corpularism also is assumed.
Experimental philosophy understood in the strict sense refers to the
study of nature in which the empirical aspect derived from devised
experiments cannot be ignored. Understood in a broad sense it
indicates the compilation of natural histories, with or without any
attempt to verify hypotheses or deduce laws by induction.
Table 2.3 Interaction between mechanical and experimental philosophy
 
Mechanical philosophy Experimental philosophy
 
Broad
Strict
Broad
Strict
Mixed mathematics
–
–
Philosophy
–
–
Emergent sciences
–
–
Mathematics
–
–
–
Table 2.3 illustrates how experimental and mechanical philosophy
can be combined. The ϐirst row of the table, in which use is made of
mechanical theory and experiment, represents the activity of scholars
who are generally qualiϐied as mixed mathematicians. Among them

Galileo and Newton. The second row represents the scholars in whom
the mechanical philosophy (corpularistic) theory does not actually
interact with experiments. This is the case, for example, of Descartes 
who was interested in natural stories and also referred to Bacon: 
If someone with this mood would undertake to write a history of
celestial appearances, according to the method of Verulamius
[Francis Bacon], and, without putting in reasons or hypotheses,
he described heavens exactly as they appear, what position each
ϐixed star in respect of its neighbors, what difference, of size, of
color, of clarity, or to be more or less sparkling, and if that
responds to what the ancient astronomers wrote, and noted the
difference he ϐinds (because I have no doubt that stars change
little their position even they can be considered as ϐixed) [...] this
would be a work that would be useful to people, much more
than it could appear, and relieve me of much pain [50].40 (B.5)
According to Descartes the experiment should not be used to test
hypotheses, but simply to highlight what are the phenomena that occur
in our world that is regulated by necessary mechanical laws, but which
is contingent because it depends on the way God has set its initial
conditions, according to his will. After revealed these phenomena, a
mechanical explanation is provided, which always exists, although not
unique, because it is not always possible to solve the contingent
condition of the world.
The third row of Table 2.3 refers to the approach in which there is a
very intense experimentation connected to a corpuscular conception of
matter. This is the case of Boyle and of all the new sciences that study
electricity, magnetism, thermology, chemical reactions which today are
often called Baconian sciences (after Kuhn).  The fourth row sees
mechanics as a purely rational science. A typical representative of this
category is d’Alembert. But also Descartes and Euler can be considered,
with the necessary clariϐications.
The combination expressed in the ϐirst row, that of mixed
mathematics, is the one that had the greatest development, at least in
the 18th century. Part of the phenomena studied with the approach of
the third row, after the experiments have succeeded in clarifying and

quantifying them, is gradually brought back into the ground of mixed
mathematics. Biology and natural sciences remained outside for the
time being. The second row concerns an approach that today is no
longer considered scientiϐic but is relegated to natural philosophy.
Experimental and mechanical philosophy together have played a
fundamental role in the development of mixed mathematics. The
factual, contingent truths, empirically revealed, are foundations of
mixed mathematics. Thus, experimental philosophy played a crucial
role in their development. In the past, the empirical basis, with the
exception of astronomy, was founded on simple observations of the
regularities of nature that did not require the use of laboratory
experiments, with some exceptions for optics. Since the Renaissance
and in particular with Galileo, daily observation has been replaced by
contrived experiments. New phenomena were observed, from which
with an inductive approach, experimental laws were derived that could
be put at the basis of mixed mathematics, or individual experiences that
could be used to verify theories were recorded.
For instance, accurate measurements were taken of the fall of
bodies, of the period of oscillation of simple and compound pendulums,
of the speed of sound propagation, of the breaking and deformability of
bodies. In biology the use of the microscope allowed a greater
understanding of vital phenomena, advancing hypotheses and verifying
them. The practices of alchemy were made more rigorous, stripped of
their mystical content, to give rise to modern chemistry. Magnetism and
electricity, phenomena already known in the ancient world, were
subjected to an intense study. The invention of the thermometer
opened the possibility of a quantitative study of thermal phenomena.
The astronomical observations carried out with the use of the
telescope or in any case with more accurate optical equipments than
those used in antiquity, made it possible to study precisely the motion
of the planets, to discover irregularities and satellites, to visualize new
stars. At the beginning of the 18th century astronomy was with optics,
and more than optics, the ϐield of natural philosophy that had
underwent profound changes. Already with Kepler mathematicians had
begun to regain possession after so long, after Ptolemy indeed, of a
discipline that had become the prerogative of natural philosophers, a
discipline to which one can refer as physical astronomy. Galileo played

an important role. He acted as a pure experimental philosopher,
limiting himself to an observational work, with interpretations that
essentially had the task of giving a geometric description of the
phenomena. For example, in the case of the Medicean satellites he
limited to say that the phenomena he observed were explained by
hypothesizing bodies revolving around Jupiter, from the observation of
the phases of Venus he deduced that this planet must rotate around the
sun and not the earth. For the spots of the moon and the sun he limited
to geometric interpretations, perhaps with something more for
sunspots. Alfonso Borelli resumed the work of Kepler and carried out a
mechanical study of the motion of the planets. To do this he felt into the
shoes of the natural philosopher and provided explanations in terms of
efϐicient mechanical causes. But he did not stop at purely qualitative
aspects. If perhaps his speculations of natural philosophy could not be
impeccable he took them as a starting point for the application of the
laws of mechanics, arriving at a ‘satisfactory’ enough explanation of the
elliptical shape of the orbits of the planets around the sun.
Mechanical philosophy could become, and in fact became, an
important approach to the development of mixed mathematics,
especially for the so-called Baconian sciences. It allowed to provide
interpretative keys to the experimental results. For example,
Huygens, as already discussed in Chap. 1, thanks to the corpuscular
hypothesis of medium transmitting the light, built a geometrical
mechanical model that served as an explanation of the phenomena. He
could thus justify for example that the angle of refraction is smaller
than the angle of incidence passing from a less dense medium to a
denser medium. Or he could explain the phenomenon of double
refraction. The model could be used not only for the explanation of
known phenomena, but also, at least partially, for the prediction of new
ones. Corpularism helped to explain the motion of the planets of the
solar system. A typical example of the application of corpularism to
cosmology is provided by the Principia philosophiae of Descartes.
2.4 Robert Boyle, an Experimental and
Mechanical Philosopher

Robert Boyle (1627–1691) is generally considered a ‘scientist’ who
carried out important experiments in hydrostatics and pneumatics
(well known is Boyle-Mariotte’s law on gas compressibility) and
especially in chemistry. Very often indeed Boyle is framed as a (great)
chemist. Thomas Kuhn  considers that he made no substantial
innovation in chemistry [74], William Newman partially contrasted this
point of view [87] and Marie Boas considers Boyle to be a physicist
[13].
An important aspect of modern studies on Boyle is the attempt to
consider his thought as a whole rather then looking at only his more
known achievements. As for Newton indeed for him too the label
‘scientist’ is very restrictive. Boyle saw himself, and was seen by his
contemporaries, as a (new) philosopher of nature; he was a promoter
of the experimental philosophy and with Descartes, Gassendi and
Hobbes one of the greatest supporter of mechanical philosophy of the
17th century. He wrote philosophical treatises on mechanical
philosophy, speciϐically on the qualities, the most important of which
was The origine of formes and qualities of 1666 [34].41 He also wrote
fundamental texts on experimental philosophy among which The
sceptical chymist [21] and The christian virtuoso [26] and many
important reports of experiments on hydrostatics, pneumatics,
chemistry etc. Like Newton he was deeply involved in theology, to the
point that in The great historical, geographical, genealogical and
poetical dictionary of 1701 edited by Jeremy Collier (1650–1726), more
emphasis was given to his role as a lay theologian than as a natural
philosopher. For some bibliographical references on Boyle see the still
inϐluential [66]42 and the website Robert Boyle project [35]. Very
important is also a new edition of Boyle’s works [34].
Boyle lived in a time when natural philosophy was in strong identity
crisis. The old canonical philosophy of the schools was attacked from all
sides and many scholars presented new points of view on the nature of
things discordant with each other. He maintained that the only way to
introduce a new effective philosophy of nature, whose principles could
be shared by many, was to found it on experiments seen as source of
incontestable matters of fact. Apart from the circumstance that some
(canonical) philosophers, among whom Hobbes, did not accept a
philosophy founded on experiments, Boyle had to face the problem to

deϐine what precisely facts were. A problem whose difϐiculty is perfectly
clear to modern epistemologists, who commonly believes that facts
cannot be separated from assumed theories.
The refusal of a speculative approach to the study of nature led to a
natural rapprochement towards those who had always followed an
operative view to the understanding and manipulation of nature, that is
technicians and craftsmen. Many of whom were somehow, more or less
consciously, the heirs of the alchemical and magic culture. But the
relationship with artisans could not be one-way. It was also necessary
for scholars to interact with them so that they would become good
artisans, thus allowing a virtuous loop to be established. This required
that the propagation of knowledge occurred in an understandable way,
which had ϐirst of all to avoid the use of the language of the learned:
Latin. The artisan should have to become a virtuoso, a term with which
Boyle, and people of his entourage, did not mean so much a willing
dilettante but rather those who understood and cultivated the
experimental philosophy [33].43 The virtuoso should not have been
interested only in the philosophy of nature but also in addressing the
God of Christians, that is, he had to become a virtuoso Christian, a
Christian experimental philosopher.
According to Boyle, the experimental philosopher has a great
advantage over the scholastic. For in the peripatetic schools, where
things are wont to be ascribed to certain substantial forms and real
qualities (the former of which are acknowledged to be very abstruse
and mysterious things and the latter are confessedly occult). The
accounts of nature’s works may be easily given in a few words, that are
general enough to be applicable to almost all occasions. But these do
neither oblige a man to deeper searches into the structure of things and
consequently are very insufϐicient to disclose the exquisite wisdom. To
be told, that an eye is the organ of sight, continued Boyle, and that this
is performed by that faculty of the mind which from its function is
called visual, will give a man but a sorry account of the instruments and
manner of vision itself. Different is the situation for an experimental
philosopher who takes it necessary to sustain the pains to dissect the
eyes of animals and accordingly to have a view of the contrivance of the
organ. He being profoundly skilled in anatomy and optics, by their help
takes asunder the several coats, humors, and muscles, of which that

exquisite dioptrical instrument consists, and having separately
considered the ϐigure, size, consistence, texture, diaphaneity, or opacity,
situation, and connections of each of them, and their coaptation in the
whole eye, shall discover, by the help of the laws of optics, how
admirably this little organ is ϐitted to receive the incident beams of
light, and dispose them in the best manner possible [33].44
Boyle was a theorist of experimental philosophy, despite the
contrast toward the speculative philosophy that is attributed to him
and that he ofϐicially attributed to himself. His vision of experimental
philosophy concerned both epistemological and sociological aspects
(see below). In both of them one could see a Baconian inϐluence, but if it
was the case such an inϐluence was possibly indirect as “Bacon did not
play a particularly prominent role in Boyle’s early natural philosophical
writings” [68].45
2.4.1 Mathematics and Experimental
Philosophy
Although the mathematical culture of Boyle was for sure not negligible
[103],46 he used mathematics very sparingly; at least in his
experimental reports. There are two main reasons for this.
On the one hand as Boyle wanted to spread scientiϐic knowledge at
the widest possible level of society, mathematics, which required a
thorough study and thus was mastered only by an elite, certainly put a
limit to the spread of writings that used it. He, for example, criticized
Mersenne because, in his opinion, affecting brevity, had made himself
obscure; so what he wrote could scarcely be understood, but by
mathematicians [103].47 But Boyle did not intend to lower the level of
natural philosophical knowledge; he hoped that people being properly
educated could work to increase knowledge. He believed that the
scientiϐic knowledge should be public and therefore the scholars had to
disclose it with simple language and mainly had to carry out researches
that could have a public utility. This sociological face was somehow
reinforced by his puritanical ideology, which also contained democratic
demands. It was also reinforced by the profound change of English
society in the 17th century due to strong economic development
followed by the opening of extra-European markets.

On the other hand he had objection at an epistemological and
ontological level; according to Boyle the book of nature is not written in
mathematical language, but in a less rigid and precise language. He saw
in the use of mathematics in natural philosophy a certain degree of
immorality, that is a certain form of arrogance that pretends to idealize
and have a control on the variety God has diffused in the world he
created. In particular, he thought it was difϐicult to assign invariant
properties to the various material components in the world, as
mathematicians should do. For example what is named gold, one of the
most pure metals, it is not always the same metal. Not only because one
cannot obtain a pure product, but because the texture and compactness
and the speciϐic weight and the mechanical properties that may be
found in several samples can vary, even though to a small extent [31].
Thus ϐluctuations inevitably associated with experiments are not only
due to imperfection of measuring instruments or presence of accidental
impediments, such as friction, and other impurities, but are structural.
In any case, Boyle commended mathematics, especially pure
mathematics, as a general form of culture and training for the mind. For
him mathematics may bring help to the minds of men, to whatever
study they apply and consequently to the minds of the students of
natural philosophy. Mathematical disciplines make men accurate and
very attentive; they much improve reason, by accustoming the mind to
deduce successive consequences and judge of them without easily
acquiescing in any thing but demonstration. Moreover the operations of
symbolical arithmetics (or the modern algebra) seem to afford men one
of the clearest exercises of reason, nothing being there to be performed
without strict and watchful ratiocination, and the whole method and
progress of that appear at once upon the paper, when the operation is
ϐinished [33].48
In describing his experiments Boyle  used numerical values; integer
numbers to quantify the various operations; real numbers to represent
the measurements of various magnitudes involved. He also made a
limited use of mathematics to express the regularities or laws. A most
famous example is the measurement of the contraction of the volume of
air versus the increase the pressure (modern term) to which it is
subjected. In [103]49 it is suggested that in this case Boyle was

inϐluenced by his assistant Hooke more oriented toward mathematics
to describe laws of nature.
One of the aim of experimental philosopher, and Boyle was such,
was to show the compatibility between experimental ϐindings and the
principles of mechanical philosophy. “Boyle’s was a program for the
interpretation of nature rather than the interpretation itself. In fact
Boyle never attempts to determine what is the texture or the mixture of
particular elements or compounds” [103].50 He did not need to offer
speciϐic mathematical accounts of particular bodies or events in the
invisible realm of corpuscles, because he who did so would risk of
subjecting the visible to the invisible, the readily intelligible and
conceivable to the less intelligible and the esoteric, the concrete to the
abstract [103]51
The most important role mathematics played was indirect.
Boyle, like many other experimental philosophers of the period,
employed the way of reasoning typical of mathematicians in which
every proposition must be derived from previous assumptions, without
resorting to tricks of rhetoric—and a limited use of synonyms and
homonyms. The assumptions should be deϐined precisely and only
based on experimental observations. In The origine of formes and
qualities, Boyle contrasted the old scholastic philosophy of nature,
which dealt with forms and qualities, and where the language to
explain generation, corruption and alteration was usually so obscure,
tangled and unsatisfactory. Here, said Boyle, discussions of these
subjects consisted so much more of logical and metaphysical notions
and hair-splitting than of observations and reasonings about the real
world, and it was difϐicult for a reader of average intelligence to
understand what they meant and equally difϐicult for any intelligent
and unprejudiced reader to accept what they taught [33].52
In some important works, those that made him famous in the 18th
century, Boyle wrote explicitly as a mixed mathematician. This is the
case of his studies on the air compressibility, of which his New
experiments physico-mechanical touching the air of 1660 [25] is an
exemplary representative, and of the researches of the statics of ϐluids
referred toon the Hydrostatical paradoxes of 1666 [22]. These works
are judged by some modern historians of science almost a form of

evasion of Boyle from his real job of mechanical philosopher [15].53 But
in my opinion they represent the other side of Boyle.
To illustrate the most advanced use Boyle made of mathematics I
refer below some considerations whose main purpose was to prove
that the air had spring besides weight. That is that air exercises forces
that do not depend only on the weight of the atmospheric open sea that
dominates us but also on its tendency to expand, as suggested by the
experiences of Torricelli in 1644.
Regarding the weight of the air Boyle measured and found it 938
times less dense than water, a much more accurate results—from the
point of view of modern standard—than the known ones [33].54 The
elasticity of air was afforded mainly on qualitative basis, drawing from
corpuscular conceptions. Boyle’s hypothesis assumed air made of small
corpuscles, elastic in themselves, like little springs, as may be
resembled by a ϐleece of wool, that transfer their elasticity to the whole
air. This explanation of air elasticity may seem strange to a modern
accustomed to the idea of an air made of small particles: the pressure is
due to impact of these particles, which move very fast, against walls of a
vessel that contains the air. This view of pressure, however, emerged
only in the 18th century when in 1738 Daniel Bernoulli  published his
Hydrodynamica.
To signal however that Boyle in a late work, General history of air,
published posthumously, presented an account not very different from
Bernoulli’s. Here after having discussed about the constitution of air
and having introduced the elastic corpuscles resembling a ϐleece of
wood, he spoke about the existence of other particles responsible of
elasticity because their motion due to heat:
And I will allow you to suspect, that there may be sometimes
mingled with the particles, that are springy, upon the newly
mentioned account, some others, that owe their elasticity, not so
much to their structure, as their motion, which variously
brandishing them, and whirling them about, may make them
beat off the neighbouring particles, and thereby promote an
expansive endeavour in the air, whereof they are parts [30].55

Boyle’s air then is a heterogeneous substance, composed of at least two
sorts of elastic particles; some produce elasticity because of their shape
and some other because of their motion under the inϐluence of external
agitation due to heat.
Boyle referred his work about the compressibility of air especially
in the New experiments physico-mechanical touching the spring of the
air, and its effects [33],56 which saw three editions, 1660, 1662, 1682. In
the second and third editions Boyle reported two ‘additions’, A defence
of the doctrine touching the spring and weight of the air [33]57 to reply
the criticisms of Francis Line (1595–1675) and a discussion on
Hobbes’ ideas, An examen of Mr. T. Hobbes his Dialogus physicus de
natura aeris [33].58
The New experiments physico-mechanical touching the spring of the
air, and its effects referred to many experiences (43), all of them quite
interesting. Boyle  experimentation, conducted with great skill, was
both narration and explanation. Though his explanations were based
on proximate causes (see below) and qualitative, Boyle distanced
himself from Aristotelian philosophers (and even from Cartesian ones).
Occult qualities did not appear; or rather they were represented by
forces, pressures and weights, which were hidden because they were
not referred to their ϐirst causes, the interactions of the particles, but
justiϐied experimentally.
Experiments were performed using the air-pump Boyle had built
with Hooke’s help; for a description of this machine see for instance
[104].59 The ϐirst two experiments used lamb bladders closed at the
extremities and containing a little amount of air. By placing these
bladders into the receiver of the air-pump and letting the air out, one
could see their swelling up to the burst, even without the resort to a
very strong vacuum. A modern reader is a little disconcerted by the
naivety and ingenuity together with which the experiments were
conducted and reported. They were not carried out blindly, however,
but had the precise objective of demonstrating the hypothesis that air
has elasticity, or rather that it increases or decreases the volume
according to the forces that urge the containers in which air is
contained. There is no reference to quantitative aspects, neither about
some values of the experiment results, nor about the size of the objects
used. For instance, by referring to lambs blasters, he said they are were

small enough but never he speciϐied, for example, their size or their
thickness. About the air-pump it is only said that a little or a lot of air
was expelled, but not exactly how much. In this sense, Boyle’s narrative
was not unlike to that found in the Saggi of the Accademia del cimento.
At the end of his experiments Boyle believed he had proved that the air
was elastic.
Once ascertained the elasticity of air, Boyle intended to measure it
in some way. For instance in the Experiment 6 it is a matter of verifying
the expansion of an air bubble created in a tiny glass tube sealed on one
side and ϐilled with water. He complained, and here his rhetoric clearly
intervenes, also an unfortunate fact that happened, that is that the
chosen glass tube had broken and resulted shorter than desired. The
experiment however was carried out the same. The experience was
then repeated with a longer tube that, said Boyle, was at hand available
and used it for this reason even if it was not completely suitable
because too wide. The experiments revealed that the air expands over
100 times the initial volume when the water that ϐills the tube was
sucked out to make the vacuum. In this experience there were also
some measures, the initial volume and ϐinal volume of air which were
measured in quite ingenious way. In a case, said Boyle, a little
emphatically, their ratio was of one to 152. A modern reader could
criticize Boyle by saying that his quantitative determinations make no
sense because the expansion of the air is limitless and the ϐinal volume
can be a multiple great pleasure of the initial one. But Boyle still
considered hypothetical the expandability of the air to think that it
could be inϐinite [25].60
Boyle some time later resumed the experiments on air elasticity,
reported on the second edition of the New experiments physico-
mechanical touching the spring of the air, and its effects of 1662. The one
most known that makes Boyle famous is contained in A defense of the
doctrine touching the spring and weight of the air, where he exposed for
the ϐirst time the now well known law of Boyle -Mariotte, for which the
pressure in a gas and the volume occupied by it are inversely
proportional, for a ϐixed temperature.
The approach was different with respect to that of older
experiments, partly because the starting point is different. Once the
elasticity of the air has been established, Boyle could concentrate on

precise measuring. The designed test was quite simple and did not
require the use of the vacuum machine. It involved compressing the air
contained in a thin tube with the weight of a column of quicksilver and
measuring the relationship between the length of the section of tube in
which there was air and that in which there was quicksilver. On the
basis of his measurements Boyle was able to formulate the following
simple mathematical law: “the pressures and expansions to be in
reciprocal proportion” [24],61 but it is unclear whether as a result of
induction from the experimental measurements or as a priori
hypothesis. Notice that Boyle had not the modern concept of pressure,
intended as force per unit of surface; his pressure is simply a force. So
most probably Boyle would not have understood the modern
formulation of his law.
Boyle gave his law a contingency character, or rather perhaps
considered it interesting from a practical point of view, but attributed
to it no scientiϐic value in the strict sense, because there were no
guarantees on its actual truth, not only for all gases but neither for
different portions of air because a substance with varying composition.
Mariotte, who performed experiment on air compression more or less
in the same period of Boyle—and whose nome was associated to that of
Boyle in the so called law of Boyle-Mariotte—had a different
conception; he believed that mathematics could capture the actual
behavior of the phenomena and that it could be described by relatively
simple mathematical laws [81]. If the mathematical laws did not
observe exactly experimental, it depends only on the imperfections of
matter and the experimental errors (difϐicult to avoid) [41].62
2.4.2 Hypotheses and Matters of Fact
Boyle’s epistemology was empiric in the sense that it was founded on
matters of fact, recognized by observations and experimentations. It
left however much space to theoretical elaborations, or hypotheses,
about the causes at play. This theoretical activity was not sufϐiciently
noticed by contemporaries. For instance, when Boyle died, Leibniz and
Huygens while deploring his loss, in mutual correspondence declared
that he had wasted his talent in only performing experiments [69].63 A
quite ungenerous and false appreciation.

For Boyle a matter of fact once veriϐied was true; an hypothesis was
simply a possible explanation of a fact. However the division was not so
sharp. For Boyle the identiϐication of causes was a process that involved
steps ranging from the closest to the more remote causes; in such a
process a low level hypothesis (a proximate cause) might be assumed
as a matter of fact if carefully veriϐied by contrived experiments. An
example that may help to clarify how Boyle dealt with hypotheses and
matters of fact is the different ways in which he treated the spring of air
in different periods of his researches. The spring (that is elasticity) of
the air is a tendency to expand or to contract in dependence of the
external constraints to which it is subjected with a pressure that
opposes to these constraints. There is difference between a ϐluid, such
as for example water, in which there is a pressure dependent on its
weight but there is no trend to expand (or springiness)–at least not so
obviously–and a gas, for example air, which owes its pressure to the
weight of the surrounding atmosphere but tends to expand. In the ϐirst
experiment of his New experiments physico-mechanical touching the air
Boyle declared that the existence of the spring of the air can be
assumed as a reasonable hypothetical cause to explain a lot of
phenomena. Using his words: “I thought it not superϐluous, nor
unseasonable in the recital of this ϐirst of them, to insinuate that notion
by which it seems likely that most, if not all of them, will prove
explicable [...]. That there is a Spring, or Elastical power in the Air we
live in [...]. That our Air either consists of, or at least abounds with,
parts of such a nature; that in case they be bent or compress’d by the
weight of the incumbent part of the Atmosphere, or by any other Body,
they do endeavour, as much as in them lieth, to free themselves from
that pressure, by bearing against the contiguous Bodies that keep them
bent” [25].64 In some later experiments he instead gave for granted the
existence of the spring of air, as proved by experiments and as “from
now on acknowledged by the most eminent modern naturalists” [25]:65
in substance as a matter of fact.
Boyle’s goal was to provide an intelligible explanation or a
hypothesis for the various phenomena. But for some of them the causes
are unknown and thus they are inexplicable to human beings; the
category of inexplicable phenomena is quite large. For instance why the
body fall, how the cohesion of the smallest particles works, how human

soul can move bodies, how human memory operates. Besides things
that are inexplicable there are others that are mysterious and
incomprehensible, such as space and time and anything requiring the
concept of inϐinity [115].66
Boyle thought that though many phenomena were inexplicable in
themselves for the human being, excellent hypotheses (see below)
could be formulated of them which are intelligible. He assumed that the
same phenomenon could be explained by different hypothesis and
suggested criterions of choice, by classifying hypotheses as good or
excellent. Hypotheses to be accepted should be grounded in the
phenomena; the formation of premature or purely speculative
hypotheses should be regarded as a most serious error of natural
philosophy.
In the following the requisites of good and excellent hypotheses are
reported, expressed by Boyle in a mnemonic form:
1.
To frame a good Hypothesis, one must see First, that it
clearly Intelligible be.
 
2.
Next that it nought assume, nor do suppose That ϐlatly
dos any known Truth oppose.
 
3.
Thirdly, that with itself it do consist So that no One part,
th’other do resist.
 
4.
Fourthly, Fit and sufϐicient it should be, T’explain all the
Phenomena that we Upon good grounds, may unto It
refer: Or those at least, that do the Chief appear.
 
5.
Fifthly the Framer carefully must see That with the
Rest, it do at least agree, And contradict no known
Phenomena Of th’ Universe, or any Natural Law.
 
6.
Sixthly, An Hypothesis to be Excellent, Must not beg a
praecarious Assent; But be built on Foundations
Competent.
 
7. Next of all good, the Simplest it must be: At least from

all that is superϐluous, free.
8.
Eighthly, It should the only be, that may The given
Phaenomena & so wel display.
 
9.
Ninthly, It should inable us to foreshow The’ Events that
will, from welmade Tryals ϐlow [36].67
 
A good hypothesis must be intelligible and must not contain anything
manifestly impossible or false. It must explain the phenomenon under
study and not in contradiction with other known phenomena. An
excellent hypothesis must be good and in addition based on sufϐicient
evidence, it must be the simplest among all the good hypothesis that
explain the phenomena and lastly, it should have a predictive power.
An example of a hypothesis which is neither excellent nor good, is
the hypothesis of the existence of substantial forms of the schoolmen.
For Boyle this hypothesis should be rejected on the ground it was
unintelligible and superϐluous [29].68 The corpuscular hypothesis is
instead an excellent hypothesis as it provides accounts of most
phenomena which are easily understandable.
Although Boyle provided criteria for choosing hypotheses, he did
not provide a truth criterion. It was possible for him that an hypothesis
was excellent, but nevertheless it could not be declared true with
certainty, as there was no guarantee that a not good hypothesis be false.
The reason for which Boyle avoided any statement about the truthiness
of a hypothesis should be searched in his theology, as already
suggested. Boyle believed that God had created the world according his
inϐinite understanding and will and maintained the power to change it
at pleasure when he desired it. Human beings were created later and
independently of the world, with limits in their understanding. This
voluntaristic view of God is very different from Descartes’s . For him too
God was free to create the world with fully freedom; but after that God
was bound by his immutability to make arbitrary change, which
guarantees the possibility of a certain knowledge to men.
Boyle thought than human being was capable in the uncovering of
nature secrets, but there were limits that God in his inϐinite wisdom has
seen ϐit to impose on human understanding [36, 115].69 Most of
intellectual weakness will disappear in the afterlife.

In heaven our faculties shall not only be gratiϐied with suitable
and acceptable objects, but shall be heightened and enlarged,
and consequently our capacities of happiness as well increased
as ϐilled.
[...]
Our then enlarged capacities will enable us, even in objects
which were not altogether unknown to us before, to perceive
things formerly undiscerned, and derive thence both new and
greater satisfactions and delights [34, 115].70
In the second part of the Christian Virtuoso Boyle made clear that not
only in the afterlife there will be an understanding of theological
mysteries, but knowledge of of the world by natural philosophers (but
not for common men?) will be increased as well: “For, at least, in the
great renovation of the world, and the future state of things, those
corporeal creatures, that will then, be knowable, notwithstanding such
a change, as the universe will have been subject to, shall probably be
known best by those, that have here made their best use of their former
knowledge” [34].71

2.4.3 Corpuscular Philosophy and Chemistry.
Physical Chemistry
Because of his experimental work was largely on what today is
classiϐied as chemistry, Boyle is often labeled as a chemists. But he was
seen by his contemporaries more as a natural philosopher than an
alchemist or a chymist [13, 14].72 An interesting distinction between a
chemist and a mechanical philosopher as seen in the 18th century can
be appreciated by the following quotations, the former due to Bernard
de Fontenelle, the latter by Boyle himself.
Chemistry, by means of visible operations, resolves the body into
certain gross and palpable principles, salts, sulfur,&c. But
Physics, by delicate speculations, acts on these principles, as
chemistry has done on bodies; she herself resolves them into
even more simple principles, into small bodies and ϐigures of
inϐinite variety. This is the main difference between physics and
chemistry [53].73 (B.6)
To be short, those I reason with, do concerning blackness what
the chymists are wont also to do concerning other qualities;
namely, to content themselves to tell us, in what ingredient of a
mixt body, the quality enquired after does reside, instead of
explicating the nature of it, which (to borrow a comparison from
their own laboratories) is much as if in an inquiry after the
cause of salivation, they should think it enough to tell us, that the
several kinds of precipitates of gold and mercury, as likewise of
quicksilver and silver (for I know the make and use of such
precipitates also) do salivate upon the account of the mercury,
which though disguised abounds in them; whereas the difϐiculty
is as much to know upon what account mercury itself, rather
than other bodies, has that power of working by salivation
[28].74

There are reason to consider Boyle as the ϐirst physical chemist of
history, a title he deserves by reason of his attempts to apply physical
methods to chemistry and to use the corpuscular hypothesis to
elucidate chemical as well as physical phenomena [13].75
Some Boyle’s chemical theories had profound inϐluence upon later
chemists (and physicists); for example his hypothesis of the material
nature of ϐire, shared for instance by Boerhaave, and his explanation of
calcination of metals in terms of combination of ϐire particles with
calcined matter. When the idea of ϐire as corporeal was combined with
the current view that heat was caused by the motion of the particles of
matter the result was a 18th century theory that heat is associated to
the component particles agitated by ϐire, an all-pervasive, material
substance. Later another particulate ϐluid, phlogiston, was substituted
for ϐire in the explanation of calcination, and also this concept was
inspired by Boyle [87].76 The account of the historical genesis of Boyle’s
ideas and in particular understanding how much he drew from his
predecessors is not at stake here, however; it enough to comment what
he wrote in his papers.
Boyle was the champion of mechanicism and corpularism. His
approach to corpuscular philosophy, albeit inevitably based on some
metaphysical assumptions, had a strong empirical character. Differently
from Descartes who grounded his view on rational and indisputable
(for him) assumptions, Boyle assumed the existence of corpuscles as a
hypothesis, a well founded one, but a hypothesis that could in principle
be reviewed.
To Boyle experience showed that matter was composed of particles.
The corporeal substances were formed by minima naturalia (Boyle’s
nomenclature), which have not the meaning of indivisible elements in
an absolute sense; they were, however, indivisible in fact, in the sense
that known chemical and physical operations failed to decompose them
[23].77 Boyle still did not rule out that there were elementary particles
of undifferentiated matter, atoms in Democritean (or Epicurean) sense,
whose combinations give rise to atoms in Boyle sense (that is minima
naturalia), characterized by peculiar qualities determined by the
texture of the component corpuscles.78
Out of the minima naturalia were formed “primitive concretions or
cluster”, which although capable to being decomposed into minima

naturalia usually act as indissoluble components in chemical reactions
and thus can be considered as the seeds or immediate principles of
common matter [23].79 Boyle spook of prima mista as the simplest
assembly of minima naturalia, which continues toward more and more
complex aggregates called compounded and de-compounded. Where this
last peculiar term, de-compounded, actually means super-compounded
[87].80 The minima are never directly exempliϐied in nature, but the
prima mixta play the role of the elementary atoms or molecules of
various naturally occurring bodies (gold, silver, mercury, sulphur, etc.).
In many reactions change of quality is associated either with a
rearrangement of the prima mixta (mercury to mercury oxide and vice
versa) or with the secondary union of the prima mixta of two relatively
elementary substances (synthesis and analysis of the mercury
sulphides) [74].81
In The origine of formes and qualities [23], Boyle stated that two
principles are at the foundation of material world: undifferentiated
matter and motion: “I agree with the generality of philosophers so far,
as to allow, that there is one catholick or universal matter [emphasis
added] common to all bodies, by which I mean a substance extended,
divisible and impenetrable” [23].82 By adding that because this matter
all has the same intrinsic nature, the qualitative variation we see in
bodies must arise from something other than the matter they consist of.
“And since one does not see how matter could change if all the parts
that it is or could be divided into were perpetually at rest among it
follows that the universal matter can sort itself out into a variety of
natural bodies only if it has motion in some or all its distinguishable
parts” [23].83
Differently from the Greek, Boyle called for the will of God for the
existence of corpuscles, with a sentence that parallels the famous one
by Newton in the Query 31 of the Opticks:
But for (most of) the other phaenomena of nature, methinks we
may, without absurdity, conceive, that God in the scripture it is
afϐirmed, That all his works are known to him from the beginning,
having resolved, before the creation, to make such a world as
this of ours, did divide (at least if he did not create it incoherent)
that matter, which he had provided, into an innumerable

multitude of very variously ϐigured corpuscles, and both
connected these particles into such textures or particular bodies,
and placed them in such situations, and put them into such
motions, that by the assistance of his ordinary preserving
concourse, the phaenomena, which he intended should appear
in the universe, must as orderly follow, and be exhibited by the
bodies necessarily acting according to those impressions or
laws, though they understood them not at all, as if each of these
creatures had a design of self-preservation, and were furnished
with knowledge and industry to prosecute it [32].84
Boyle was not completely clear about the divisibility of matter. He
thought that some instruments, more appropriate than the commonly
used ϐire, could break up prima mixta (and even minima naturalia?) to
obtain their components [86]. This chance allowed him, for instance, to
consider as possible the transmutation of metals; indeed Boyle was
deeply involved in archetypal alchemical approaches as the
transmutation of metals in gold and the philosopher’s stone, that was
not such a mystical activity at it can be supposed as his atoms were not
the solid and impenetrable units of Democritus or Epicurus, but
structured composites made up of smaller particles of catholic matter,
there was every reason to imagine that a sufϐiciently powerful chemical
agent could be able to penetrate and break the particles of a metal into
their components and recompose them in a new metal. A procedure
which is assumed to be possible today, though not with chemical
agents, but through physical ones (bombing with elementary particles).
Strictly connected with Boyle’s opinion about the divisibility of
matter, is his deϐinition of element, reported below as given in The
sceptical chymist:
And, to prevent mistakes, I must, advertize You, that I now mean
by Elements, as those Chymists that speak plainest do by their
Principles, certain Primitive and Simple, or perfectly unmingled
bodies; which not being made of any other bodies, or of one
another, are the Ingredients of which all those call’d perfectly
mixt Bodies are immediately compounded, and into which they
are ultimately resolved: now whether there be any one such

body to be constantly met with in all, and each, of those that are
said to be Elemented bodies, is a thing I now question [21].85
A deϐinition considered by someone as very modern, by someone else
as not particular new, as already given in Aristotle’s De caelo [87].86
Indeed the deϐinition is not modern, because as stated in the last rows
of the previous quotation, a body to be an element should enter in the
composition of all bodies. Which is not true for the modern deϐinition,
where any body may be composed by an arbitrary number of elements.
Moreover the deϐinition should not be considered as Aristotelean,
because from this Boyle arrived to the experimental evidence that all
the presumed elements, ϐire, air, water, earth for the Peripatetics and
sulfur, salt, and mercury for the Paracelsians, are not such. According to
Boyle the only element, if one want to consider it, is the catholic matter,
while no consideration is given as possible candidate to elements to the
prima mixta, that to a modern could appear as natural candidates.
Boyle devoted much of his scientiϐic work to explain phenomena of
chemical nature, referring to his corpuscular theory. While from an
ontological point of view, in the weak sense in reality, Boyle considered
that any phenomena could be explained by recourse to corpuscles and
motion, by an epistemological point of view he considered as
problematic, and in some cases even impossible, this approach.
For although such explications be the most satisfactory to the
understanding, wherein it is shewn, how the effect is produced
by their more primitive and catholick affections of matter,
namely, bulk, shape and motion; yet are not these explications to
be despised, wherein particular effects are deduced from the
more obvious and familiar qualities or states of bodies, such as
heat, cold, weight, ϐluidity, hardness, fermentation,&c. though
these themselves do probably depend upon those three
universal ones formerly named [33].87
And in his studies on ‘chemistry’ Boyle often left out any argumentation
based on corpuscles and motion and spoke about chymical qualities’,
such as ϐixity, easiness to precipitate, volatility, ability to undergo
amalgamation with quicksilver, and so on [86].88 Even in ϐields today

part of mechanics, such as hydrostatics and pneumatics, Boyle often
avoided the recourse to corpuscular components, preferring physical
qualities such as forces and pressures considered as proximate causes,
as illustrated in the study of the spring of air. In such a case Boyle  could
behave as a mixed mathematician and did so giving fundamental
contributions. He however—this is the opinion of most historians—
maintained as fundamental an empirical and experimental analysis and
qualiϐied his study as physical-mechanics, preferring this term to that of
physico-mathematica, used to indicate the approach in the wake of
mixed mathematics, that was then spreading.
2.5 Newtonian Philosophy
If it is true that Newton was not the isolated genius it is asked to believe
and that physics and mechanics (besides mathematics) of the 18th
century were not his exclusive creation it is neverthless true that he
was seen by contemporaries as a very important natural philosopher
and mathematician. Gradually since 1750 s a myth grew around
Newton who became a reference for all the scholars of the western
world for any matter concerning physics (and chemistry), more or less
as Aristotle was in the previous centuries, so that one can say that
Newtonianism replaced Aristotelianism in the schools. “Newton was
most and foremost an emblem of a new era [...] With time, the historical
Newton receded into the background, overshadowed by the very legacy
he helped create” [112].89 This occurred notwithstanding Newton’s
writing were known only partially. Indeed by the middle of the 18th
century, a part from the Principia that was mainly a treatise of mixed
mathematics, a physicist or a chemist could ϐind elements of the
Newtonian philosophy only in the Opticks and in the Queries in the
Principia. He could read in Thomas Birch’s History of the Royal society
the early statement on Newton’s The hypothesis explaining the
properties of light discovered in my severall papers of 1675, while in
Boyle’s Works he could ϐind the letter written to him by Newton in 1679
concerning the properties of the aether (see Sect. 1.2.5.2). Such a
reader would be puzzled by the Scholium generale to Book III of the
Principia, in the third edition of 1726.

Within the limits of the inϐluence that an individual can have in the
development of a community, it indeed should be said that the role of
the individual Isaac Newton was great. But this gave no reason of the
myth of Newtonianism, for which much of what was known before him
and much of what was discovered after him was attributed to the
individual Newton. 
There are very many texts on the history of science of general
character where ‘Newtonianism’ and its afϐirmation ϐirst in England and
then in the Continent are discussed in depth. This point of view is
however not very interesting for the present book and will therefore
not be considered; or rather only some aspects of it will be commented.
Questions has been raised as to whether the ground on which
Newtonianism developed was already fertile and that rather than
conquering it, Newtonianism established itself because it had already
entered into current practice independently of Newton, following the
same path Newton had followed. For instance s’ Gravesande and
Musschenbroek are usually labelled as strict Newtonians. They met
Newton in England and popularized the theory of gravitation and the
heterogeneity of light. But they accepted also the Leibizian theory of vis
viva and recent researches have shown that they drew on
methodological sources different from Newton’s [51].90
The moral to be drawn is that our understanding of Newton’s legacy
in the 18th century will not be advanced by producing taxonomies of
different kinds of ‘Newtonianism’. Rather, advance will result from
studying the speciϐic contexts in which Newton and his work were
mobilized and from paying equal attention to both similarities and
dissimilarities between Newton’s work and that of 18th century
scholars. Differently put, we will be able to further our understanding
of Newton’s legacy once we realize that the label ‘Newtonianism’ has
misled more than enlightened [51].91
One realizes the fame Newton gained in the 18th century if he looks
for example at the entry Newtonianisme of the Encyclopédie, which
certiϐies a deϐinition already introduced in the English dictionary
Lexicon Thecnicum, at least since the edition of 1736 [42].92
Newtonianism, or Newtonian Philosophy, is the theory of the
mechanism of the universe, and particularly of the motions of

the heavenly bodies, their laws and their properties, as this has
been taught by Mr. Newton. See Philosophy.
The term Newtonian philosophy has been variously applied,
and from this, several ideas of the word have arisen.
Some authors understand by it the corpuscular philosophy,
as reformed and corrected by the discoveries with which Mr.
Newton has enriched it. It is in this sense that Mr.
Gravesande calls his elements of physics an Introductio ad
philosophiam Newtonianam. In this sense, the Newtonian
philosophy is no other than the new philosophy, different from
the Cartesian and Peripatetic philosophies, and from the ancient
corpuscular philosophies.
Others mean by Newtonian philosophy the method which
Mr. Newton follows in his philosophy, i.e. the method which
consists in deducing his reasoning and his conclusions directly
from phenomena, without any previous hypothesis; starting
from simple principles; deducing the basic laws of nature from a
small number of selected phenomena; and then in using those
laws to explain other things.
As others understand Newtonian philosophy, it considers
physical bodies mathematically, and applies geometry and
mechanics to solve [questions about] phenomena. Taken in this
sense, Newtonian philosophy is no other than mechanical and
mathematical philosophy.
Others mean, by Newtonian philosophy, that part of physics
which Mr. Newton has handled, extended and explained in his
book of the Principia.
And still others, ϐinally, understand by Newtonian philosophy
the new principles which Mr. Newton has brought into
philosophy, the new system he has founded on these principles,
and the new explanations of phenomena that he has deduced
from them [52].93 (B.7)
The deϐinition of the Encyclopédie was reiterated by
d’Alembert, Condorcet, de Lalande et als. [42].94
In substance there were two main meanings of Newtonianism in the
18th century, one connected with the Principia and another with

Opticks and Queries. The former will be examined in the next chapter
where the developments of mechanics in the Continent is discussed. Of
the latter, that more properly is linked to the experimental philosophy,
more precisely to that part of it that will later be called physics, is given
an outline below to then resume the subject in Chap. 4.
In the following I will use the label Newtonianism, but with a very
weak meaning, intending with this term the ideas for which forces are
mathematical entities rather than physical ones, a law 
 is
adopted, matter is corpuscular and each particle is endowed with
attractive or repulsive force acting at a (short) distance, vacuum is
accepted and light has a prevalently corpuscular nature; moreover
experiments plays a major role. Considering that the appreciation of
Newton’s ideas was different in the different ϐields of a scientiϐic society
that had already started a process of specialization, below I distinguish
between ‘chemists’ and ‘physicists’, intending with these labels
respectively, the scholars that were mainly inspired by alchemy and
those inspired mainly by mechanical and experimental philosophy.
2.5.1 Inϐluence of Newtonianism on Physicists
About physicists only two exemplary cases are considered: John
Theophilus Desaguliers  in England and Georges-Louis Leclerc, Comte
de Buffon in the Continent.
2.5.1.1 John Theophilus Desaguliers
In England one of the most faithful interpreter of the new physics was
John Theophilus Desaguliers (1683–1744),  a French-born British
natural philosopher, mathematician, clergyman, engineer and
freemason whose father has been exiled as a Huguenot by the French
government. He attended lectures by John Keill, who used innovative
demonstrations to illustrate difϐicult concepts of Newtonian natural
philosophy and obtained a master’s degree in 1712. He soon became
most successful in delivering public lectures in experimental
philosophy, offering them in English, French or Latin. By the time of his
death he had given over 140 courses of some 20 lectures each, on
mechanics, hydrostatics, pneumatics, optics and astronomy. He kept his

lectures up to date, published notes for his auditors, designed his own
apparatus, including a renowned planetarium to demonstrate the solar
system and a machine to explain tidal motion. In 1714 Isaac
Newton, then president of the Royal society, invited Desaguliers to
replace Francis Hauksbee as demonstrator at the society’s weekly
meetings; he was soon thereafter made a fellow of the Royal society
itself. Desaguliers applied his knowledge to practical situations. His
interest in steam engines and hydraulic engineering made him an
expertise in ventilation. He devised a more efϐicient ϐireplace which was
used in the House of Lords and also invented the blowing wheel which
removed stale air from the House of Commons for many years [47].
Desaguliers was eager to publicize rather than to publish his
lectures; eventually in 1734 ϐive long lectures and many additional
notes were published as the Course of experimental philosophy, which
saw a second volume in 1744. The ϐirst volume was devoted wholly to
theoretical and practical mechanics, including both a simple treatment
of Newton’s system of the world and a description of Mr. Allen’s
railroad at Bath. Desaguliers attributed the ten-year delay before the
appearance of the second volume to his desire to improve the
treatment of machines, especially waterwheels. In it he added seven
more lectures discussing impact and elasticity, vis viva and momentum,
heat, hydrostatics and hydraulics, pneumatics, meteorology and more
machines. This volume is even more concerned with applied science
and engineering than the ϐirst and entitles Desaguliers to be considered
a forerunner of the more advanced knowledge of machinery that
characterized the Industrial Revolution [60].
By referring to Newton’s Queries, in the Annotations upon the
eleventh lecture of the second volume, Desaguliers said that the
questions raised by Newton in the Opticks must be solved positively
upon close examination and that only the “incomparable philosopher’s
modesty made him propose those things by way of queries” [49].95 And
this, according to Desaguliers, was not only his opinion, but also that of
the “reverend and learned Dr. Stephen Hales”. This was a move shared
with many post-Newtonian scholars indeed.
According to Desaguliers there are two main kinds of attraction in
nature, that is gravity and cohesion. Another type not so strong as
cohesion but stronger than gravity exists. Its proportion in removal of

bodies attracting is nearly as the cube—this is also Newton opinion—of
distance: “This is the magnetical attraction” [49].96 But also, according
to Desaguliers there are repulsive powers in nature “and very often the
same bodies attract one another at a certain distance, and under some
circumstances do repel one another at different distances” [49],97 and
all the phenomena of nature, such for instance the elasticity can be
reduced to these powers.
Here Desaguliers is more direct than Newton for the dependence of
force between two corpuscles with distance; Newton only alluded to a
change of forces from attractive to repulsive as it happens in algebra,
without specifying which parameter was changing;
Desaguliers speciϐied the parameter: the distance between corpuscles.
A more clear statement of the variation of forces between two particles
can be found in the Compendious system of natural philosophy by John
Rowning—the dates of publication of the four parts of this book are
confusing, but part 1 seems to have appeared ϐirst in 1735 and part 2 in
1736 [97]98—an author now unknown but well renowned at his own
time. His treatise, reissued seven times, was used at Cambridge and
Oxford, at the College of William and Mary in Virginia, at many
dissenting academies and by John Wesley as a text for his itinerant
preachers. It was also mentioned in the correspondence of people as
various like John Adams, William Beckford and Joseph Priestley [101].
Below as Rowning characterized the forces between particles, in the
section of his treatise concerning ϐluids:
Further, since it has been proved that if the parts of ϐluids are
placed just beyond their natural distances from each other, they
will approach and run together; and if placed further asunder
still, will repel each other; it follows, upon the foregoing
supposition that each particle of a ϐluid must be surrounded
with three spheres of attraction and repulsion one within
another: the innermost of which is a sphere of repulsion, which
keeps them from approaching into contact; the next a sphere of
attraction diffused around this of repulsion, and beginning
where this ends, by which the particles are disposed to run
together into drops; the outermost of all, a sphere of repulsion

whereby they repel each other, when removed out of that
attraction [98].99
The ‘supposition’ of the three spheres of attraction and repulsion allow
to explain as a ϐluid can be converted into a solid and viceversa. If the
action of the ϐirst sphere is destroyed by cold, the particles of ϐluids
must necessarily be brought into closer contact with the forces of the
second spheres and by that means constitute an harder body than
before. An inverse mechanism acts in passing from solid to liquid.
The theory proposed by Rowing, of force alternating from repulsion,
attraction, repulsion and again attraction (due to gravity), is close to the
famous theory proposed by Boscovich in his Philosophiae naturalis
theoria redacta ad unicam legem virium in natura existentium of 1758,
discussed below in Chap. 4. For what I know Rowning’s and Boscovich’s
ϐindings are independent of each other.
2.5.1.2 Georges-Louis Leclerc, Comte de Buffon 
In France the acceptance of the Newtonian approach was a little slower;
but in the end it becomes robust, even if the attention was more
towards the Principia than Opticks. An exception is constituted by
Georges-Louis Leclerc, Comte de Buffon (1707–1788).
Because of the enormous editorial, but non only, success of his
Histoire naturelle, published in 36 volumes between 1749–1789,
Buffon is today esteemed as a naturalist, like the Swedish Carl Linnaeus
(1707–1778). Indeed, as most his contemporaries Buffon’s interests
ranged over various subject matters, among which physics and
mathematics (in this last subject he was encouraged by Gabriel
Kramer). And mathematical probability was one of his most interesting
work, the Mémoire sur le jeu the franc-carrau, presented in 1733 before
the Académie des sciences de Paris and favorably commented by
Fontanelle in the memoirs of the academy of the same year. Here he
showed his mastery of Calculus. The work was however published only
in 1777, as part of the Essai d’arithmetique morale, added to the fourth
supplement to the Histoire naturelle, généraleet particuliére [38]100 and
for this reason remained buried until Morgan Crofton (1826–

1915) discovered it in 1869, with great surprise and appreciation
[92].101
In the memoir, Buffon compared the different kind of ‘truth’, a
problem very popular in the period, differentiating among
mathematical, physical, moral truth. According to Buffon as physical
truth is concerned, there is no demonstration, no evidence whatsoever
as is instead the case of mathematics. A physical truth, necessarily
based upon observation or experiment, is only probable. And Buffon
tried to evaluate the degree of probability, with an interesting though
scarcely convincing procedure. He measured the reliability of the
physical truth with the probability that the sun would rise tomorrow:
“If one wants to reduce here the seniority of the world and of our
experience to six thousand years, the sun has risen for us only 2 million
190 thousand times—the days of six thousand years—and as to date
back to the second day that it rose, the probabilities to rise the next day
increase, as the sequence 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64 [...] or 
 (where n is
equal to 
). One will have, I say, 
 = 
; this already is
such a prodigious number that we ourselves cannot form an idea, and it
is by this reason that one must look at the physical certainty as
composed from an immensity of probabilities" [38].102
For the probability of the moral truth, Buffon started with the idea
that the most important event for a man is his own death. Now, the
tables of mortality show that the probability for a man at the age of ϐifty
to die within the following 24 hours is a little less than one out of 
. But an average healthy man is not afraid of dying because he
does not believe he will die the next day. Accordingly, any event whose
probability is equal or inferior to one out of 
 is of no concern for
us [38].103 Notice that the probability of moral truth is much lower the
probability of the physical truth.
Notwithstanding his conϐidence with mathematics, at least in his
youth, Buffon did not believe it could be very useful in physics, where
very complex phenomena are dealt with. He expressed his pessimism in
the Premier discourse of 1749 which opened the ϐirst volume of the
Histoire naturelle. Here he ϐirst expressed the impossibility to evaluate
the cause of physical phenomena. According to Buffon, suppose that

after having determined the facts through repeated observations and
having established new truths through precise experiments, one
wished to search for the causes, or reasons, for these occurrences. He
ϐinds himself suddenly bafϐled, reduced to trying to deduce effects from
more general effects and obliged to admit that causes are and always
will be unknown to him, because senses, themselves being the effects of
causes of which one has no knowledge, can give ideas only of effects
and never of causes. Thus one must be content to call cause a general
effect, and must forego hope of knowing anything beyond that. “These
general effects are for us the true laws of nature” [38, 78].104
According to Buffon, the union of mathematics and physics can be
accomplished only for a very small number of subjects. In order for this
to take place it is necessary that the phenomena to explain are
susceptible to being considered in an abstract manner and that their
nature be stripped of almost all physical qualities. But mathematics is
inapplicable to the extent that such subjects are not simple
abstractions. “The most beautiful and felicitous use to which this
method has ever been applied is to the system of the world” [38, 78].105
For Buffon there are very few other subjects in physics in which the
abstract sciences can be applied so advantageously.
When the problems are too complicated to allow the application of
calculation and measurement, as is almost always the case in natural
history and physics, according to Buffon, the true method of guiding
one’s mind is to make observations, to gather these together and from
them to make new observations in sufϐicient numbers to ensure the
truth of the main phenomena. Mathematics should be used only to
estimate the probabilities of the consequences that can be drawn from
observed facts. Above all, it is necessary to try to generalize these facts
and to distinguish well those that are essential from those that are only
ancillary to the subject in question. It is therefore necessary to link
these facts together by analogy, to conϐirm or destroy certain equivocal
points by experiments, to form one’s own explanations based on the
combination of all the connections and to present them in the most
natural order [38].106
The true goal of experimental physics is to experiment with all the
things that cannot be measured by mathematics, all the effects of which
one does not yet know the causes and all properties whose

circumstances are not known. This only can lead new discoveries,
whereas the demonstration of mathematical effects will never show
anything except what already known [38].107
But this abuse is as nothing in comparison with the
inconveniences into which one stumbles when one wishes to
apply geometry and arithmetic to quite complicated subjects of
physics, to objects whose properties we know too little about to
allow us to measure them. One is obliged in all such cases to
make suppositions which are always contrary to nature, to strip
the subject of most of its qualities, and to make of it an abstract
entity which has no resemblance to the actual being. And after
long reasoning and calculation on the connections and the
properties of this abstract entity, and after having arrived at a
conclusion equally abstract, when it appears that something real
has been found, and the ideal result is transferred back upon the
real subject. This process produces an inϐinity of false
consequences and errors [38].108 (B.8)
Buffon assumed a corpuscular structure of matter, admitting the
existence of vacuum. For him, at a microscopic level, inϐinitesimal
corpuscles attract each other with a force whose law varies with the
inverse of the square of their distance as it happens for gravitation. This
is because he maintained that nature must always act in the same way.
For not inϐinitesimal corpuscles the inverse square law, as is the case
for gravitation also, strictly applies only to spherical shapes. For
corpuscles of other shape it is no longer valid and becomes a function
of their shape and distance measured from some characteristic points.
This variation of the law did not disturb Buffon, because it could be
obtained, at least in principle, by imagining a corpuscle as formed by
inϐinitesimal spheres for which the inverse square law holds true. If the
force between two aggregates of corpuscles is referred to the distance
of their centers of gravity, a law different from the inverse of the square
is in general obtained, but if the aggregates are very small it differs only
slightly from the inverse square.
The chemist Louis-Bernard Guyton de Morveau (1737–1816), a
friend and follower of Buffon shared his views on this subject. He

attempted, as an example of the effect of shape, to calculate the force
between two tetrahedra, each composed of an array of close-packed
spheres. Assuming that each sphere of one tetrahedron is attracted by
any sphere of the other tetrahedron with the law of the inverse square,
the whole force referred to the centers of gravity of the two tetrahedra
clearly do not follow the inverse square [97].109
Buffon deϐinitive statement on the subject is to be found in the
preface to the volume XIII of his Histoire naturelle that deals with a
wide range of animals. There he wrote:
All matter is attracted to itself in the inverse ratio of the squares
of the distance, and this general law does not seem to vary in
particular attractions, except by reason of the shape of the
constituent particles of each substance, since this shape enters
as a factor into the [evaluation of the] distance [38].110 (B.9)
According to Buffon  all the powers of Nature with which we are
acquainted to, may be reduced to two primitive forces; the one which
causes weight and that which produces heat, that is expansion and
attraction [39].111 With his words: it is sufϐicient that the forces of
attraction and expansion are two general, real, and ϐixed effects, for us
to receive them for causes of particular ones; and impulsion is one of
these effects, which we must not look upon as a general cause, known
and demonstrated by our senses, since we have proved that this force of
impulsion cannot exist nor act, but by the means of attraction, which
does not fall upon our senses. The ϐirst reduction being made, it might
be perhaps possible to adduce a second, and to bring back the power
even of expansion to that of attraction, insomuch that all the forces of
matter would depend solely on a primitive one. Now cannot we
conceive that this attraction changes into repulsion every time that
bodies approach near enough to rub together, or strike one against the
other? Impenetrability, which we must not regard as a force, but as an
essential resistance to matter, not permitting two bodies to occupy the
same place, what must happen when two molecules, which attract the
more powerfully as they approach nearer, suddenly strike against each
other? Does not then this invincible resistance of impenetrability,
become an active force, which, in the contact, drives the bodies with so

much velocity, as they had acquired at the moment they touched? And
from hence the expansive will not be a particular force opposed to the
attractive one, but an effect derived therefrom [39].112
2.5.2 Inϐluence of Newtonianism on Chemists
Evaluating the contribution of Newton to chemistry (or alchemy, or
chymistry, terms that at the time were not clearly differentiated) is a
more difϐicult task. If it may be true that Newton made no fundamental
discovery in chemistry, it is equally true that his ideas on matter
constitution were considered useful and in agreement with their topics
by most chemists. These ideas can be resumed in four points. Matter is
no longer a mysterious subject, or at least it was such at an ontological
level, but there was a method of measuring matter: to weigh it, and the
balance was a familiar instrument to chemists. The corpuscular nature
of light helped chemists to reason about the inϐluence of light in
chemical reactions. Matter was made by corpuscles which may attract
or repel each other at microscopic level. These force were not
mysterious metaphysical beings, they were simply experimental
ascertainment of tendency to motion. Indeed the traditional
mechanicism, either Descartes’s or Gassendi’s and even Boyle’s could
not be helpful for chemists.
In the following I will consider only a few meaningful chemists,
those who also inϐluenced the physics of the 18th century in electricity,
magnetism, thermology: the English Stephen Hales (1677–1761) and
the Dutch Herman Boherhaave (1668–1738). I will refer very shortly
about the German chemist and physician Georg Ernst Stahl (1659–
1734); this also because Stahl’s link with Newton is weak. His
conception of matter constituted with Newton’s the two alternative
pillars of the theory of matter of the 18th century [73].113
Stahl was with Boherhaave one of the reference chemist of the ϐirst
half of the 18th century. He used the works of Johann Joachim Becher
(1635–1682) to come up with explanations of chemical phenomena.
The main theory that Stahl got from Becher was the theory of
phlogiston. This theory did not have any experimental basis before
Stahl worked with metals and various other substances in order to
separate phlogiston from them. Stahl proposed that metals were made

of calx, or ash, and phlogiston and that once a metal is heated, the
phlogiston leaves only the calx within the substance. Phlogiston
provided an explanation of various chemical phenomena and
encouraged the chemists of the time to rationally work with the theory
to explore more of the subject. This theory was later replaced by
Antoine-Laurent Lavoisier’s theory of oxidation.
Sthal like many chemists of his period was very difϐident toward
classical mechanicism. For instance, when one speaks of salt, he
stated, and says that it is composed by water and by one of the two
types of earths, he gives a real and clear idea of what he intends for salt.
And from this he will be sure that when obtaining a salt from a
whichever body, he will ϐind that is made up of earth and water. To the
contrary when one says that a salt is made of sharp particles, longer
than wide, and he is asked to look for this salt, he certainly could
neither ϐind nor discover it [83].114
2.5.2.1 Stephen Hales
An author very appreciated and named by Desaguliers who also
inϐluenced Benjamin Franklin was Stephen Hales (1677–1761), an
English ‘clergyman’ who made major contributions in botany,
pneumatic chemistry and physiology and was soon recognized as a
leading English scientist during the second third of the 18th century. He
received a good scientiϐic and mathematical education while in
Cambridge and Newton was there as a professor. In 1718 Hales was
elected a fellow of the Royal society. His published writings are very few
and well represented in the edition of 1733 of the Statical essays,
containing in vol. 1 the Vegetable staticks, a revised version a his edition
of 1727 [58] and in vol. 2 the Haemastaticks [59]. In the following I will
brieϐly present some meaningful aspects of Vegetable staticks only,
which were also well summarized by Desaguliers in the Philosophical
Transactions of 1727 [48].
Hales stated he was using the statical method of enquiring, that is
the examination of the amount of ϐluids, and solids dissolved into ϐluids,
an animal daily takes in and with what force and different rapidities
those ϐluids are carried about in their proper channels etc. This now
(and also then) obsolete use of the word statikcs, to mean weighting,

comes from Nicholaus Cusanus and his Idiota de staticis experimentis of
which an English translation is available [43].115
For Hales, science was more than the avocation of a country
minister: it was a natural extension of his religious life. If he was a
devote of the corpuscular world view and held that the living organism
was a self-regulating machine, which was in no way incompatible with
his faith. For him, as for many other physical theologians, nature
testiϐied the wisdom, power, and goodness of the all-wise Creator. Hales
derived from Newton  the fundamental concepts discussed in the
Queries: matter is particulate and the particles are subject to very
special laws of attraction and repulsion.
The Vegetable staticks, the most known Hale’s treatises, is one of the
ϐirst work on biology where an extended use of mathematics is made
[95]; a mathematics, that though Hales was skilled enough in the
matter, was kept at an elementary level, mainly consisting in algebraic
manipulations. To certify his belief in a quantiϐied science, Hales
opened his treatise with the words:
And since we are assured that the all wise Creator has observed
the mod exact proportions, of number, weight and measure, in
the make of all things; the most likely way therefore, to get any
insight into the nature of those parts of the creation, which come
within our observation, must in all reason be to number, weigh
and measure [58].116
A declaration which was outdated for the 18th century and echoes for
instance what Luca Pacioli wrote in the Summa de arithmetica,
geometria, proportioni et proportionalita of 1494 [41].117 The reference
to the Old Testament for a quantiϐied science, not infrequent however,
instead to Archimedes, derived from Hales’s theological attitude.

Fig. 2.3 Watering of the sun-ϐlower.
Redrawn from [58], p. 28, Fig. 1
As an example of the way Hales used mathematics, I summarize
below his experiment I of the Vegetable staticks, carried out with the
purpose to measure the quantity of water imbibed and perspired by the
sun-ϐlower illustrated in Fig. 2.3. In this experiment Hales was in the
need to evaluate the surfaces of the leaves of the plant. To avoid the
counting of all the leaves he recurred to a sampling procedure
described below.

I cut off all the leaves of this plant, and laid them in ϐive several
parcels, according to their several sizes, and then measured the
surface of a leaf of each parcel, by laying over it a large lattice
made with threads, in which the little squares were 1/4 of an
inch each; by numbering of which I had the surface of the leaves
in square inches, which multiplied by the number of the leaves
in the corresponding parcels, gave me the area of all the leaves;
by which means I found the surface of the whole plant, above
ground, to be equal to 5616 square inches, or 39 square feet
[58].118
It is of particular interest for the present book the role Hales attributed
to air. I do not intend to discuss in depth the matter, in particular the
difϐiculty of speaking about air in a period where there was no notion
about the nature and composition of gases, in particular the difference
between CO  and O , discovered by Lavoisier. I only want to underline
the inϐluence of Newton and the ϐinal idea Halles reached of air, which
had a role in the development in the theory of heath and electricity.
According to Newton, in their free state the particles of air exert
upon each other strong repulsive forces, which accounts for the air
elasticity. Yet this elasticity is not an immutable property, for he had
remarked that “true permanent air arises by fermentation or heat, from
those bodies which the chymists call ϐixed, whose particles adhere by a
strong attraction” [58].119 When air enters into dense bodies and
becomes ϐixed, its elasticity is lost because strong attractive forces
overcome the forces of repulsion between its particles [57]. For
Newton the particles of ϐluids which do not cohere strongly are of such
a smallness as render them most susceptible of agitations and are most
easily separated and rariϐied into vapor. In the language of the chemists,
they are volatile, rarifying with heat, and condensing with cold. But
those which are grosser, and so less susceptible of agitation or cohere
by a stronger attraction, are not separated without a stronger heat, or
perhaps not without fermentation [88].120
Hales found after many experiments that permanent air could be
obtained by the action of fermentation to free the air incorporated in
the substances of vegetables. This air is permanent because continue to

persist, is elastic and dilated as common air. In the end Hales could
conclude that ordinary matter contains particles of a special kind of
substance, referred to as air, that under particular circumstances (for
instance by heating and fermenting) can be released as an elastic ϐluid.
This substance should take the place of mercury or spirit as a ϐifth
element.
Since then air is found so manifestly to abound in almost all
natural bodies; since we ϐind it so operative and active a
principle in every chymical operation, since its constituent parts
are of so durable a nature [...], may we not with good reason
adopt this now ϐixt, now volatile Proteus among the chymical
principles, and that a very active one, as well as acid sulphur;
notwithstanding it has hitherto been overlooked and rejected by
Chymists as no way intitled to that denomination [58].121
For Hales what is commonly called air, that is the atmosphere, is a
“Chaos, consisting not only of elastick, but also of unelastick air
particles, which in great plenty ϐloat in it, as well as the sulphureous,
saline, water and earth particles, which are in no ways capable of being
thrown off into a permanently elastic state, like those particles which
constitute true permanent air” [58].122
2.5.2.2 Herman Boerhaave
Herman Boherhaave (1668–1738), an older colleague of s’
Gravesande and Musschenbroek,  is now virtually unknown but in his
own day had a great reputation. “One of the greatest teachers of all
time” and “perhaps the most celebrated physician that ever existed, if
we except Hippocrates” [111].123 Destined to study theology he devoted
himself to medicine and chemistry. He should also have some
conϐidence with mathematics, because at the beginning of his career he
augmented the income by giving lessons of mathematics. He was
created a foreign member of the Académie des sciences de Paris in
1728 and a fellow of the Royal society in 1730 [77].
Boherhaave is often portrayed as a disciple of Newton and an
adherent of Newtonian science. Moreover he would have had a great
role in the diffusion of Newtonianism in The Netherlands and in the

rest of the Continent. Actually the situation is much more complicated.
In 1715 Boherhaave in his rectorial oration Sermo academicus de
comparando certo in physicis addressed the question of the certainty in
physics and endorsed Newton’s approach, but also distinguished
himself from him. In [51]124 it is suggested that reference to Newton in
his Sermo academicus was instrumental to attach Descartes.  Indeed
references to Newton in Boherhaave’s writings, apart from some
orations, are scanty and a modern reader could hardly recognize a
direct and important role of Newton. The impression of the
contemporaries was however different and reference to Boherhaave as
a strict Newtonian appeared consistent.
Even though he was mainly famous as a physicians with a medical
system based on mechanics, Boherhaave most important contribution
to science was in chemistry. He introduced here exact quantiϐication
methods by measuring temperatures and using the precise balance
made by Fahrenheit.
When a spurious edition of his chemical lectures was published in
1724 under the title Institutiones et experimenta chemiae, he felt
impelled to publish in 1732 (followed soon by a second edition in
1733) his master piece Elementa chemiae [17], which was later
translated into English and French and remained the authoritative
chemical manual for decades. Boherhaave’s treatise is remarkable for
its clarity, its systematic presentation not very common in the chemical
treatises of the period. There is a very substantial treatment of heat
which inϐluenced Black’s work on speciϐic and latent heat ad also
inϐluenced Lavoisier’s theory of caloric [71].125
There were two early English translation of Boherhaave’s treatise,
one due to Timoty Dallowe of 1735 [44] and another due to Peter Shaw
(1694–1763) of 1741 [19]. In the following I will refer to Shaw’s
translation only, which is quite faithful to the original. It is ϐilled with
footnotes; too much may be however. In them the editor presented his
view on Boherhaave as a strict Newtonian, expressing his personal
understanding but altering the appreciation of Boherhaave proper
ideas. Regarding the reference to Newton, it must be said that in the
original Latin text they occurred in 11 instances in the two volumes; in
the English translation there were 69 instances (footnotes included).

Probably the only part in which Newton ideas of the force at a
distance reported in the Queries are made explicit and partially
accepted is in the discussion of the menstrua, or solvents. Here
Boherhaave declared that a purely mechanical action of the solvent is
not acceptable, but also active principles are needed.
Boherhaave deϐined a mestrum as follows: “The term is a barbarous
term; and denotes a body, which, when artiϐicially applied to another,
divides it subtly, so that the particles of the solvent remain thoroughly
intermixed among those of the solvend”. The reason why this solvent
was called a menstruum, is “because the chemists, in its application to
the solvend, ϐirst used a moderate ϐire, for a philosophical month, or
forty days” [19].126 But, said Boherhaave, it rarely happens that any
menstruum exerts all its dissolving power mechanically. And hence, “Sir
Isaac Newton, in his researches, has found reason, from observation, to
add other necessary causes” [19].127 They are the actions at a distance
of attraction and repulsion.
This views of a Newtonian chemistry, supported for instance in
[42]128 and [83] was contrasted in [72], where it is assumed than
Newton’s scheme, based on a limited number of forces possibly
describable by mathematical laws, was too rigid for Boherhaave, who
like Boyle, adopted the idea of seminal principles or thread of the warp,
that is corpuscles endowed by God with a very large variety of plastic
powers. These principles “are entwined and woven together, so as to
form the foundation and support for each single body existing, growing,
moving, maintaining itself and propagating itself by fruitful generation.
You realize that I allude to the seeds of things” [18, 72].129 According to
[72] the greater richness attributed to nature by Boherhaave should be
due to his Dutch Calvinism that more that Newton’s Puritanism made
Good free to do all what he wanted.
The part of the Elementa chemiae devoted to the characterization of
matter appears at ϐirst as a traditional treatment of natural philosophy
of the 17th century, with the introduction of the four elements: ϐire, air,
water and earth, not uncommon in chemical writings. However, a more
careful reading reveals its peculiarity. Boherhaave’s is an experimental
chemistry treatise, and although the quantitative aspects are not
relevant, it takes as its model, at least ofϐicially, Newton’s approach to
experimentalism.

Particularly important for the development of physical theories of
the 18th century is his conception of ϐire, which for Boherhaave was a
substance, a very thin ϐluid, present in all bodies. The English
translation of Boherhaave’s Elementa chemiae started the chapter
devoted to ϐire, with comments by the translator Peter Shaw:
The great and fundamental difference in respect of the nature of
ϐire, is, whether it be originally such, form’d thus by the Creator
himself at the beginning of things or whether it be mechanically
producible from other bodies, by inducing some alteration in the
particles thereof. Among the modern writers, Homberg,
Boherhaave, the younger Lemery and s’Gravesande maintain the
former: the latter is chieϐly supported by the English authors
[19].130
Boherhaave at the beginning did not pronounce on the nature of ϐire,
because “by introducing hypotheses a priori one may fall into error”
and such a caution can never be more necessary, according to him, than
on the present occasion.
Boherhaave distinguished between vulgar and pure ϐire. Vulgar ϐire,
as supported by combustible matter is very different from pure ϐire,
both in nature and effects. Many errors have arose among the chemists,
for want of distinguishing, with sufϐicient accuracy, between these two
kinds of things, which are known by the common name of ϐire [19].131
After a long list of experiments, Boerhaave removed concerns about
the nature of ϐire, giving some caracterization of it, after having stated
that it is a body:
1.
From a careful consideration of what has been above laid
down, we may perhaps be enabled to assert divers things
concerning the nature of ϐire. First then it appears, that true
elementary ϐire is corporeal, since under the name corporeal is
included any thing geometrically measurable by three lines,
drawn perpendicularly to each other from the same centre; or,
as we more usually express it, an extended surface.
 
2. But whether ϐire have also that further property, which some
of the greatest men of the present age hold inseparable from
ll b di
i
i ht
it
i
ti
t it
lidit
 

all bodies, viz. weight or gravity, in proportion to its solidity,
does not so certainly appear from every way the confederation
of the whole history of ϐire.
3.
The particles of ϐire, which have already been shewn to be
corporeal, appear further to be the smallest of all the bodies
yet known: for if they be corporeal, they must necessarily be
exceedingly subtile, as they readily penetrate all, even the
densest bodies, and pervading the thickest parts thereof, shew
themselves present in every assignable part thereof.
 
4.
The small particles which constitute the ultimate elements of
ϐire, appear to be the most solid of all bodies.
 
5.
These corporeal, solid, subtile particles appear perfectly
Smooth, even, and polished on their Surfaces.
 
6.
From the whole history of ϐire we may infer its absolute
simplicity, by which we mean that condition of a body,
whereby each particle of it retains the same nature which is
observed in the whole.
 
7.
The sixth property of ϐire is its mobility, which is so great, that
we are almost certain it never absolutely rests in any place
[19].132
 
A modern reader cannot probably see much novelty in
Boerhaave’s description of the properties of ϐire. It appears as a
restatement of ancient theories, Aristotelian, Epicurean. The novelty is
seen in the fact that Boerhaave derived the properties of ϐire not from
metaphysical reasonings but with reference to a lengthy series of
accurate experiments. A novelty can also be found in the assertion that
ϐire pervades all the substances, it is weightless and extremely mobile.
However no explicit reference is made to the property of elasticity, a
property that Newton associate to the aether and Hales to the air.
Boherhaave’s conception of ϐire, ϐlanked to that of air due to Hales,
more or less of the same period, offered the scholars of the 18th
century two new ϐluids pervading all bodies, which was the occasion for
the ‘invention’ of other ϐluids such as caloric, phlogiston, electric ϐluid

and so on. These ϐluids represent an ontological basis, or a reiϐication,
of the various kinds of force at distance. In [63]133 this process is seen
as the passage from homogeneous (one kind of object) explanation of
the phenomena of nature, to inhomogeneous explanations (more
objects).
2.6 The Treatises of Experimental Physics
At the beginning of the 18th century physics or physica was more or less
synonymous of natural philosophy, even though a little bit of ambiguity
remained, because Physics was the title of Aristotle’s treatise which
dealt only with one aspect of natural philosophy, that is that of the
inanimate world. Below what d’Alembert wrote in the Encyclopédie:
PHYSICS. This science, sometimes also called natural philosophy,
is the science of the properties of natural bodies, of their
phenomena and their effects, as of their different affections,
movements,&c. See&c. See Philosophy & Nature. This word
comes from the Greek 
, nature [52].134 (B.10)
The interplay between the two terms, physics and natural philosophy
continued for the whole 19th century, when the content of the matter
they indicated had already largely changed with respect to previous
centuries.
The spreading of the term physics with a quite modern meaning
started when the subjects belonging to natural sciences (modern term)
were excluded from courses on natural philosophy in the universities
and colleges. That is when the distinction between the two faces of
natural philosophy, general physics and particular physics were
stressed. General physics was since then simply named physics. It
excluded topics related to natural science, though maintained some
parts as electricity, magnetism, thermology, chemistry. In any case still
at the turn of the 19th century, neither the name physics nor its nature
of a well integrated scientiϐic discipline had a clear status.
There were two main reasons that led to the breaking up of the
unity of natural philosophy. First the spreading of the mechanical
philosophy, second that of the experimental philosophy. Mechanical

philosophy, especially in the form given to it by Descartes, had replaced
the traditional Aristotelian natural philosophy in the schools, though
not everywhere or even completely, but the teaching still remained
traditional, based on written texts. The spreading of experimental
philosophy modiϐied the form of teaching: not only books but and
mainly experiments. The discipline that used the experimental
approach to mechanics, optics, electricity, magnetism, thermology and
so on was usually referred to as experimental physics.
The ϐirst professor who used experiments in teaching, in a coherent
and organized way was the Cartesian scholar Jaques Rohault (1618–
1672), who gave private lessons about mechanical philosophy all
around France [82, 106]. He held weekly Wednesday conferences from
1659 until his dead, by illustrating and discussing experiments and,
probably more than any other contributed to establish Cartesianism in
France. The treatise where Rohault exposed his main ideas on natural
philosophy is the Traitéde physique of 1671 [93], but the English
translation with Newtonian comments added by Samuel Clarke, System
of natural philosophy of 1723, is much more known [94]. The treatise
was based on Cartesian philosophy, but avoided any metaphysical
reference. Differently from Descartes, Rohault held that experiments
had a theoretical role, hinting an empirical approach to knowledge. The
Traitéde physique, as well as the System of natural philosophy devoted
little space to living beings.
The role of experiments in the Traité de physique had various faces.
Often experiments are used to validate a theory or to test compering
theories, sometimes to conϐirm well known result, sometimes to ϐind
new results. Note however that in his experiments Rohault never
contradicted Descartes. This is very evident where he experienced
about the impact of bodies. Here he referred to only cases for which the
Cartesian laws of motion were conform to experience, avoiding thus
experiments that would have contradicted some ‘absurds’ Descartes’s
rules [94].135
An example of a quite trivial experiment is concerned with the
explanation of the functioning of a syringe [96].136 It is obvious, wrote
Rohault, that when the end of a syringe is open, the piston can be
drawn back with a circular motion of surrounding air. This is obvious
because of the general principle that in a full world, all motion is

circular. But what if the end is closed? Either (1) the syringe has pores,
and the motion will take place, or (2) the syringe does not have pores
and there will be no motion. But the experiment says that motion does
take place, thus there must be pores in the glass of the syringe. The
experiment intervenes not to allow for a choice between alternative
theories. Instead, the general principles of Cartesian theory being given,
the experiment is simply about a choice between two different
instances, equally possible, in our contingent world [93].137 In another
experiment Rohault reproduced what already done by Huygens to
prove that rotatory motion of the subtle particles surrounding the earth
can produce the gravity [94].138
An experiment which had not only a didactic value as the two
referred above explored a scarcely known phenomenon, concerned
what today is known as capillarity. Rohault considered two glass plates
very close to each other, immersed in a vessel ϐilled with water. The
water between the two plates raised above the level of the water in the
vessel, the more the lesser the distance between the plates:
81. If two plain Bodies which the Water will wet, such as two
pieces of clean Glass, be put very near one another, and dipped a
little way into a Vessel of Water; (I) the Air which moves from
one Side of the Vessel to the other, in order to get over the
Obstacle that lies in its èway, ought rather to pass over the Top
of the two Glasses, èthan to descend into that streight Place,
which isè between them: So that the Water is not so much
pressed èhere as it is in other Places, where the Air can go
without bending its so much, and so it ought to rise to a
considerable Height above the Level of the Water contained in
the Vessel; and thus we see by Experience that it does. 82. And
there is no doubt but that the Water would rise still higher, if the
two Pieces of Glass Were closed on both Sides, for by that means
almost all the Air which moves cross, without bending its
Course, would beè hindred from entering in. Or, which is the
same Thing, we may take a very small Glass Tube open at both
Ends, and dip it in the Water, for then the Air cannot enter in by
the Sides: so that the Water must rise very high in such fort of
Tubes, if they be very slender: And indeed I have made the

Water rise a Foot high in a GlassTube so small, èthat one could
scarce get a Horse-hair into it. 83. However, we must not
conclude from hence that it ought to rife on without End in these
small Tubes; for it is easy to see, that the Water must top, when
the Weight of that which is risen, tends downwards with greater
Force than the Pressure of the external Air has to thrust it up
[94].139
The experience is close to one carried out by Hauksbee, published in
the Philosophical Transactions in the years 1711–1713 and in the
Physico-mechanical experiments on various subjects of 1709, already
referred to in Sect. 1.2.5.1.
In England John Keill (1671–1721) delivered a course on Newtonian
physics using experiments at the university of Oxford from 1694 until
1709 [37].140 But the most inϐluential scholar to spread experimental
activity in the universities was Willem Jacob’s Gravesande (1688–
1742), professor of mathematics and astronomy at the university of
Leiden, starting from 1717, with Newton still active. He published in
Latin the treatise Physices elementa mathematica, experimentis
conϔimiata. Sive, introductio ad philosophiam Newtoninanam of 1720–
1721 (herein after Physices elementa mathematica, experimentis
conϔimiata). This text was translated into English by Desaguliers, as the
Mathematical elements of natural philosophy conϔirmed by experiments,
or an introduction to Sir Isaac Newton’s philosophy [100] in the same
years of the publication of ’s Gravesande’s treatise.141
’s Gravesande’s masterpiece—both in Latin and in English—went
through a complex evolution. The ϐirst edition written speciϐically for
students, was composed of four books that dealt, respectively, with the
body in general and the movement of solids, with ϐluids, with light, and
with celestial mechanics. In the second edition (1725), mathematical
proofs were added. Here as s’ Gravesande presented the second edition:
“When I ϐirst intended to write these Elements, my Design was that my
Auditors shou’d be able to re’collect, with ease such things as they had
heard more largely explained and demonstrated [...] But that the second
Edition might be likewise of service to such of my Readers as were
better acquainted with Mathematics, I annex’d the mathematical
Demonstrations of all such Propositions, in the scholia to those

chapters, in which they are mention’d” [100].142 From the third edition
of 1742 on, the treatise acquired its ϐinal structure: the books were now
six and embraced the totality of natural phenomena. The ϐirst book was
devoted to the body in general and its properties (extension, solidity,
divisibility and mobility), as well as to several speciϐic physical issues
(among which balance of forces, gravity, pressure). The second book
dealt with the inner forces and collision of bodies, the third discussed
ϐluids, the fourth air and ϐire, the ϐifth light, the sixth the system of the
world. Table 2.4 shows the entries of ’s Gravesande-Desaguilers’
treatise in its ϐinal version, into two volumes.
Table 2.4 Table of contents of Mathematical elements of natural philosophy conϔirmed by
experiments, or an introduction to Sir Isaac Newton’s philosophy [100], vol. 1, pp. LVII–LXIII
Vol. I
Book I
Part I
Of body in general
Book I
Part II
Of the actions of powers
Book I
Part III Concerning motions, chang’d by the action of powers
Book II
Part I
Of innate forces
Book II
Part II
Of the simple congress of bodies, direct and oblique
Book II
Part III Of compounded congress or collision
Book II
PartI V Of the laws of elasticity
Book III Part I
Of the gravity and pressure of ϐluids
Book III Part II
Of the motion of ϐluids
Book III Part III Of the actions and resistances of ϐluids in motion
Book III Part IV Of bodies mov’d in ϐluids
Vol. II
Book IV Part I
Of air and other elastick ϐluids
Book IV Part II
Of ϐire
Book V
Part I
Of the motion and inϐlexion of light
Book V
Part II
(No title)
Book V
Part III Of the reϐlection of light
Book V
Part IV Of opacity and colours
Book VI Part I
Of the system of the world
Book VI Part II
The physical causes of the celestial motions

If a modern reader leafs through’s Gravesande’s treatise, he does
not immediately think that it is a text from the early 18th century; in
many respects it could be taken for a modern elementary textbook of
physics, in particular in optics and mechanics. Going forward, in
particular starting from Chap. 1 of Book II (more or 1/3 of the ϐirst
volume), the reader realizes that things are a little different; the main
difϐiculty encountered is the way in which’s Gravesande treated force
and its measure. Before Book II, the modern reader thinks he is faced
with a text largely inspired by Newton’s ideas; here the use of force is
not precise; the prevailing term are power and pressure. From Book II
onwards, the impression changes and a certain bewilderment
intervenes. Said in modern terms while in the ϐirst chapters the action
of a force seems to be given by the product the force by time,
subsequently the action is deϐined as the product of the force by
displacement (that is a work in modern term), which leads to the
measure of the action of force as the product of mass by the square of
speed (
). Thus the readers sees that in the mechanics of ’s
Gravesande, notwithstanding the label Newton’s philosophy in the title,
there is a strong injection of the ideas of Leibniz and Johann Bernoulli
[112]. 
The following quotation from the second edition of Physices
elementa mathematica, experimentis conϔimiata, helps to clarify’s
Gravesande’s view:
‘Altho’ in many Things relating to the fore-mentioned Theories, I
differ in my Opinion from SĎė IĘĆĆĈ NĊĜęĔē, yet I made no
scruple to keep the title of an Introduction to the Newtonian
Philosophy, and to preϐix it to the second Edition [...]. He only,
who in Physics reasons from Phenomena, rejecting all feign’d
Hypotheses, and pursues this Method inviolably to the best of
his Power, endeavours to follow the Steps of Sir Isaac Newton,
and very justly declares that he is a NĊĜęĔēĎĆē Philosopher
[100].143
’s Gravesande tried to justify his measure of forces with a series of
experiments, some of the most interesting concern the measurement of

the effect produced by bodies of spherical shape dropped on a layer of
clay. The effect, at least in the 1742 edition, is measured by the volume
of the imprinting left in the clay. Experiments show that this effect is
proportional to the product of the weight of the sphere by the height
from which it is dropped and therefore to 
; for the axiom action =
effect = force, force should thus be measured by the square of speed
[100].144
The Physices elementa mathematica, experimentis conϔimiata was
replaced only after many years by Pieter Musschenbroek’s (1692–
1761) Introductio ad philosophia naturalem, posthumously published in
1762, that besides topics of mechanics and optics, introduced
electricity and magnetism also.
Fig. 2.4 Parabolic motion of a heavy body [100], vol. 1, p. 128, plate XIX
Figure 2.4 shows the apparatus’s Gravesande prepared to prove that
the motion of a heavy body, given a horizontal initial velocity, is a
parabola. The description of the experience, compared with those
referred to by Galileo a century before [40], is much more precise and
more simple and convincing.

The Ball is let down from B, having roll’d to C, is there
horizontally projected, and falls at F, and in the mean time
passes thro’ the Rings O, O, O, O. What has been said of the Curve
run thro’ by a Body horizontally projected, belongs also to any
Projection whatever. Let a Body be projected along AE; and let
ab, bc, cd, de be equal; the Body will pass along the Curve AFGHI
so, that the vertical Lines BF, CG, DH, EI, will be to one another,
as 1, 4, 9 and 16; in which Case also the Curve is call’d a Parabola
[100].145


Fig. 2.5 Fall of heavy bodies in the vacuum [89], tome II, p. 154, leçon VI, plate1. Reproduced with
the permission of ETH-Bibliothek Zürich, Alte und Seltene Drucke
In France the tradition of experimental physics was pursed by Jean
Antoine Nollet (1700–1779), on the footprints of ’s Gravesande and
Desaguiler. Nollet wrote a successful six volume treatise, the Leçons de
physique of 1743–1748 [89], concerned with experiments on
mechanics, electricity and so on. Nollet had the great credit of
substituting experimental physics to the speculative Cartesian physics
in France. But his disaffected and uncritical neglecting of mathematics,
common however to many experimental physicists of the time,
contributed to lead physics into a dead end from which it will only
come out at the end of the 18th century.
Below the description of a simple experiment about mechanics,
carried on with a quite complex apparatus, shown in Fig. 2.5, to prove
that in vacuum all bodies fall with the same speed, independently of
their weight. Let consider a frame which contains a glass tube which
has a length of six feet (just less than 2 m) and a diameter two and half
inches, wider and open at two extremes, AB, as shown in the Fig. 2 of
Fig. 2.6. A copper plate is attached to the top by means of a ring to
which is fastened the hatch of a wheel formed by six spokes which
turns vertically as shown in the Figs. 3 and 4. Before placing the piece of
Fig. 4 on the glass pipe, it is necessary to be careful by putting on each
radius pairs of small bodies with volumes that are nearly similar, but
different by weight. For example, a piece of lead and a feather may be
placed in the ϐirst pair; in the second a piece of copper and a small sheet
of paper, etc. When the air in the pipe has been thinned as much as
possible with the pump, by pulling the rope L and M wheel F two bodies
are made to drop down. Having done its work, it is passed another
stroke. The two bodies of each couple fall at the same time and there is
no visible difference in the duration of their fall. But if one repeats,
added Nollet, the experiment, leaving the tube full of air in its natural
state, those who have the most weight fall faster, the slowness is more
sensitive as its mass is less. Thus wood falls more slowly than iron, but
its slowness is not so great as that of paper and feather [89].146 The
experimental apparatus prepared by Nollet lended itself to perform
experiments, at least six falls of couples of heavy body with different

weights, in an operationally simple way. It was thus particularly
suitable for salons presentations.
Courses in experimental physics, possibly still held under the title of
natural philosophy, gradually replaced the traditional ones, both
Aristotelian and Cartesian, in universities and colleges. In the newly
established universities, and these were many in the 18th century
England, the new courses in experimental philosophy were taught by
specialists, who had more a mathematical training, broad meaning,
instead by philosophers of Aristotelian mould, even though the skill
required to understand such courses was not very heigh. Mathematics
still remained the cinderella in the undergraduate curriculum in the
universities. At Oxford, David Gregory (1661–1708), and after him
some professors of astronomy, provided injection of mathematics, but
they had only a few auditors [37].147 Still in 1750 in Cambridge,
Newton’s own university, hardly a student had mathematical skill to
demonstrate the propositions of the Principia. As the 18th century
progressed, as a consequence of the renovation of the courses in
natural philosophy, the courses of mathematics that since then had
been the places were the experimental philosophers had found room to
teach their physics, were restructured and were devoted to the teaching
of pure mathematics only.
In France the situation was different. The traditional courses in
natural philosophy were not replaced by courses of experimental
physics. They however changed in courses where mathematics had a
great role, in the wake of the traditional mixed mathematics. This kind
of teaching was dominant in the second half of the 18th century. As a
result, the experimental physics found little place in the courses of
natural philosophy, at least in the colleges, and were often taught
outside the main curriculum, in the vacation [37].148
In northern Italy a chair in experimental physics, endowed with a
cabinet of physics, seems to have been established in Pavia in 1730. The
next in Padua in 1738. Other neighboring universities gradually
followed—Pisa (1746), Turin (1748), Modena (1760) and Parma
(1770)—whereas in 1787 the facilities at Pavia, where the chair was
held from 1778 by the young experimenter, Alessandro Volta (1745–
1827), were improved with the opening of a purpose-built physics
theater [37].149 In Padua the new course was entrusted to Giovanni

Poleni (1683–1761), a professor who had long shown an interest in
providing visual tuition in the natural sciences [45]. At that date the
Paduan laboratory was purportedly the best equipped in Europe. In the
Institutionum philosophiae experimentalis specimen of 1741 [91], a
short booklet, written in the occasion of the opening of the cabinet of
physics, Poleni sustained that experimental physics should be of
support both to physics and mathematics. The reading of Poleni’s
booklet could be still useful for historians because of the huge amount
of citations of works in experimental physics, also of today relatively
unknown authors.
Everywhere the emergence of experimental physics on the one
hand, and on the other hand the consolidation of an approach
mathematically founded, especially of mechanics, shaped a dichotomy,
both in the teaching and research, in physics. The experimental physics
was characterized by a low level of theorization and mathematics used;
the theoretical physics, in the form of mixed mathematics, to the
contrary was characterized by a strong theoretical connotation and led
to a massive use of mathematics. There were social barriers to
overcome, because experimentalist and mathematicians belonged to
different communities that had little to share with each other [64].150
Gradually however experimentalists started to carry out quantitative
studies and consequently called for the help of mathematics to
interpreter the results they obtained. A fundamental role, both from a
theoretical and social point of view to break the division between the
two approaches to physics, was the foundation of the EƵcole
polytechnique in the revolutionary France, at the end of the 18th
century.
The other part of the traditional teaching of natural philosophy, that
is natural sciences, biology and chemistry were generally delivered in
the medical faculties. This in part could be explained by the fact that
these sciences, were descriptive in nature, like botany which already
had its place in the teaching of medicine. There were also similarity
with anatomy, where reference to the parts of bodies resembled the
reference to parts of animals, stone, etc. And chemistry was useful to
prepare drugs. As the new courses in the different branches were
established, they were occupied by specialist professors and working

scientists. However the connection between teaching and research was
still weak and many scientists were not professors.
As a ϐinal comment it can be said that the new science of physics
was a creation of the university world. Left to the new scientiϐic
academies, physics might have remained associated with traditional
natural philosophy and may be disappeared. When the Académie des
sciences de Paris was organized into sections in 1699, the new sciences
were divided into six categories: three mathematical (geometry,
astronomy, and mechanics) and three medical (anatomy, chemistry, and
botany). Physics was not among them. Nearly a century later in 1795,
when the academy was reconstituted as the ϐirst section of the Institute,
the new classiϐication of scientiϐic knowledge mirrored the
developments in the universities. Physics constituted a separate section
and a clear distinction was made between the mathematical sciences to
which physics was considered a part and the experimental or
classiϐicatory sciences [37].151
2.7 The Technology of Scientiϐic Instruments
Spreading of experimental physics determined a virtuous cycle with the
technology of physical models and measuring instruments. On the one
hand the request of these objects by the professional researchers and
the itinerant lecturers determined the stabilization of a crafted
profession, especially in London, which could offer increasingly reliable
instruments. On the other hand the possibility of using these
instruments enlarged the front of physical research especially in the
emerging ϐields of electricity, magnetism, chemistry, terminology and
meteorology.
A clariϐication needs to be made, the term scientiϔic instruments
even though quite diffused today, made no sense in the 18th century. A
part from that the same words science and scientists were not in use yet,
it also obscures the production and use of instruments for a wide range
of activities that would not be considered scientiϐic today. Instruments
were employed in many everyday, professional and leisure activities,
rather than solely being scientiϐic apparatuses. Early modern
instruments were therefore not classed as scientiϐic, but as optical,
mathematical, or philosophical. Or even more narrowly for use in

individual subjects such as astronomy and natural philosophy or in
surveying and navigation. Most mathematical instruments such as
drawing and geometric tools, sextants, and globes had a graduated
scale for performing calculations or for measuring angles and
distances; the use of verniers, already known since the 16th century,
was providential. Optical instruments employed lenses or mirrors and
included microscopes, telescopes, eyeglasses. Philosophical
instruments were used in the demonstration or investigation of natural
phenomena, including magnetism, electricity and the attributes of air
[8].
Improving instruments meant to improve the easy of use, the
endurance and especially the precision (the ϐigures one could read) and
the exactness (that is the proximity to the unknown ‘exact value’). For
what precision is concerned, because the values of any measurements
required reading a graduate scale, its increase required the possibility
to divide the scales in alway smaller portion. For what exactness is
concerned, the situation was more complex. It was of course well
known that many factors disturbed the measurement process: the
weather, in particular the temperature, the physiology of human body,
the eye in particular, the variation of uncontrolled boundary conditions,
the accuracy of crafting. To improve an instrument both precision and
exactness should be increased; the increase in precision only became
embarrassing, because the more precise the measures the easier they
where different from each other, and thus doubts on the exactness
arose.
A ϐield where the problem of the accuracy of measurements was
present since the antiquity was astronomy. By the middle of the 18th
century at least one statistical technique was in frequent use here: the
arithmetic mean among a collection of measurements made under
essentially the same conditions. Astronomers averaged measurements
they considered to be equivalent, observations they felt were of equal
intrinsic accuracy because the measurements had been made by the
same observer, at the same time, in the same place, with the same
instrument, and so forth. The problem appeared in a different way
when previsional models started to be used, in the 18th century based
on Newton’s universal gravitation law. These models gave the position
of a celestial body or a point in the space in different instant of times,

with respect to a limited amount of parameters. The evaluation of these
parameters by means of the direct measure of positions is called
indirect measurement; it is usually reached by introducing a redundant
system of equations (that is more equations than unknowns), that was
not easy to solve.
The idea of experimental errors and the application of statistical
procedures were developments of the 19th rather than the 18th
century. In this latter century there was the spread idea that using a
good enough instrument the experimental errors could be reduced to a
minimum, close to zero, and that in case of errors the fault fell on the
experimenter who was not very accurate and thus guilty. Attention was
thus focused on the search for always more precise instruments.
Moreover, in the 18th century the experimenters in reporting
quantitative data often, in the indirect measurements, uncritically
presented long strings of digits when in fact these were merely
products of their numerical computations starting from direct
measurements possibly of not very high precision (and exactness).
Sometimes they announced general conclusions on the basis of
astonishingly small bodies of empirical data. Coulomb, for example, in
his determination of the law of force between electric charges,
presented only three sets of experimental data, see Sect. 4.3.9.2, which
did not even ϐit his proposed inverse-square law very well [64].
Among the ϐirst to suggest a systematic solution for indirect
measurements were the ‘mathematician’ Leonhard Euler and the
astronomer Tobias Mayer (1723–1762). Over a period of two years
Mayer, made numerous observations useful to evaluate the
characteristic parameters (3) of the orbit of the moon, whose number
was much lower than the number of measurements (27) he made of
moon positions. From a mathematical point of view his problem was to
ϐind the solution of a system of twenty seven linear equations with
three unknown only. Using an a hoc method he made use of all the 27
measurements.
Leonhard Euler was concerning instead in the measurements of the
three body system Jupiter, Saturn and sun. The parameters to be
evaluated were six and the measurements available were seventy ϐive
sets composed each of seven values (latitudes, longitudes and so on).
He had thus to solve a system of seventy ϐive equations with six

unknowns. Differently from Mayer, Euler worked with small sets of
equations (usually as many as the unknowns) and only accepted
solutions when different small sets of equations yielded essentially the
same results [110].152
Only at the turn of the 19th century a consistent procedure was
found: the least squares method. The ϐirst clear and concise exposition
of this method was published by Adrien Marie Legendre (1752–1833)
in 1805 [75].153 In 1809 Carl Friedrich Gauss (1777–1855) published
his own method of calculating the orbits of celestial bodies. In that
work he claimed to have been in possession of the method of least
squares since 1795. This naturally led to a priority dispute with
Legendre [109].
The problem of an accurate time measurement, very important both
from the point of view of pure science and practical applications, was
solved in a satisfactory way in the 18th century. The greatest merit in
this ϐield is due to the English horologist John Harrison (1693–
1776) who in 1735 succeeded in making a satisfactory marine
chronometer (controlled by two rockers oscillating in opposite sense,
capable of counterbalancing the movements of the ship) to be used for
the determination of longitude.
Another area where remarkable progress was made is that of
optical devices: just remember that in 1757 the English astronomer and
optician John Dollond (1706–1761) managed to construct an
achromatic objective, which represented a milestone in this ϐield of
technology. The achromatism had already been made object a few years
before of extensive studies by Euler that defended against the opinion
of Newton the possibility of constructing achromatic lenses, but he did
not apply his ideas. Some important improvements were also
introduced, in the construction of the microscopes, by the German
Ulrich Theodor Aepinus (1724–1802) and by the Dutch ofϐicer François
Gerardzoon Beeldsnyder (1755–1808). Also the manufacture of
reϐlecting telescopes, already begun in the 17th century underwent
important improvements especially toward the end of the 18th century
by the great astronomer William Herschel (1758–1822) who made his
famous astronomical discoveries precisely with a device of this type.
Turning from optics to thermology, it should be remembered that
precisely at the 18th century dated the introduction of the

thermometric scales still used today, due to the Dutch Gabriel Daniel
Fahrenheit (1686–1736),  the French René Antoine Ferchault de
Réaumur (1683–1757) and the Swedish Anders Celsius (1701–1744).
This introduction was made possible by the discovery that the water
boiling temperature is constant if the atmospheric pressure remains
constant and the freezing point is substantially invariant with
atmospheric pressure. Very advantageous was the employment—
operated for the ϐirst time in a systematic form by Fahrenheit—of
mercury in place of alcohol as thermometric liquid; it allowed the
construction of smaller and more manageable thermometers, with
which it was possible to determine with greater accuracy than before
the course of the heating. Among the many other devices designed for
the experimental study of thermology, to remember the ϐirst
calorimeter built around 1750 by Joseph Black (1728–1799), professor
at the University of Glasgow, to measure the amount of heat absorbed
in the changes in state, and dilatometers built to determine the
dilatations of the metal rods to be used in the construction of watches.
John Harrison had also the merit of having built the ϐirst precision
scale. Other scales even more sensitive and accurate were built by the
French mechanical engineer Pierre Bernard Megnie (1751–1807) to
order by Lavoisier . They will constitute the fundamental instrument
with which Lavoisier operated his revolutionary discoveries [56].154
The development of instruments of measure needed both a manual
and a theoretical capacity. Many of the manufacturers that introduced
new ideas were ‘physicists’ or in any case had good knowledge of
physics. This is an example of a synthesis between technology and
theoretical science. This is also true for the instruments to be used in
electricity and magnetism, where the problem at the beginning was to
decide which magnitudes should be measured. For instance it would
have been impossible to translate the qualitative circulating-vortex
theory of magnetism that was widely accepted during the ϐirst half of
the eighteenth century into a quantitative theory and to decide which
were its representative magnitudes, since the then available
mathematical hydrodynamics would not have been up to the task.
Franklin’s theory of electricity, despite its success in rendering the
Leyden experiment comprehensible, was insufϐiciently coherent to
sustain quantiϐication. Only when the basic principles of electricity had

been cleaned up and rendered mutually consistent by
Aepinus, sometimes in ways far removed from Franklin’s own
conceptions, did electricity become a candidate for quantitative
treatment and measurements. Yet even then, because Aepinus could not
prove that the law of force between charges was inverse-square in
form, he failed to advance beyond a semi-mathematical formulation.
Henry Cavendish (1731–1810) in 1771 and Charles Augustin de
Coulomb (1736–1806) in the 1780 s took the process somewhat
further, but the development of a fully quantitative theory of electricity
had to await the work of Siméon Denis Poisson (1781–1840) in the
early years of the 19th century [64].155
2.8 Quotations
B.1
Mr. Boyle est mort, comme vous seaurez déja sans doute. Il
paroit assez étrange qu’il n’ait rien basti sur tant
d’expériences dont ses livres sont pleins; mais la chose est
difϐicile, et je ne l’ay jamais cru capable d’une aussi grande
application qu’il faut pour establir des principes
vraisemblables.
 
B.2
In questo mentre con la sagacità del suo ingegno invento
quella semplicissima e regolata misura del tempo per
mezzo del pendulo, non prima da alcun altro avvertita,
pigliando occasione d’osservarla dal moto d’una lampada,
mentre era un giorno nel Duomo di Pisa; e facendone
esperienze esattissime, si accerto dell’egualitàdelle sue
vibrazioni, e per allora sovvennegli di adattarla all’ uso della
medicina per la misura della frequenza de’ polsi, con
stupore e diletto de’ medici di que’ tempi e come pure oggi
si pratica volgarmente: della quale invenzione si valse poi in
varie esperienze e misure di tempi e moti, e fu il primo che
l’applicasse alle osservazioni celesti, con incredibile
acquisto nell’astronomia e geograϐia. [...]
In questo tempo, parendogli d’apprendere ch’
all’investigazione delli effetti naturali necessariamente si
richiedesse una vera cognizione della natura del moto,
stante quel ϐilosoϐico e vulgato assioma ignorato motu
 

stante quel ϐilosoϐico e vulgato assioma ignorato motu
ignoratur natura, tutto si diede alia contemplazione di
quello: et allora, con gran sconcerto di tutti i ϐilosoϐi, furono
da esso convinte di falsità, per mezzo d’ esperienze e con
salde dimostrazioni e discorsi, moltissime conclusioni
dell’istesso Aristotele intorno alia materia del moto, sin a
quel tempo state tenute per chiarissime et indubitabili;
come, tra l’altre, che le velocitàde’ mobili dell’istessa
materia, disegualmente gravi, movendosi per un istesso
mezzo, non conservano altrimenti la proporzione delle
gravita loro, assegnatagli da Aristotele, anzi che si muovon
tutti con pari velocità, dimostrando ciòcon replicate
esperienze, fatte dall’altezza del Campanile di Pisa con
l’intervento delli altri lettori e ϐilosoϐi e di tutta la
scolaresca.
B.3
Hebbe pochissima quantitàdi libri, e lo studio suo dependea
dalla continua osservazione, con dedurre da tutte le cose
che vedea, udiva o toccava, argomento di ϐilosofare; e diceva
egli ch’il libro nel quale si dovea studiare era quello della
natura, che sta aperto per tutti.
 
B.4
Or questo è appunto quello che l’anima va tentando
nell’investigazione delle naturali cose; e a ciò bisogna
confessare che non v’ha miglior mano di quella ella
geometria, la quale dando alla bella prima nel vero, ne
libera in un subito da ogni altro più incerto e faticoso
rintracciamento. Il fatto è, ch’ella ci conduce un pezzo
innanzi nel cammino delle ϐilosoϐiche speculazioni, ma poi
ella ci abbandona in sul bello: non perchèla geometria non
cammini spazj inϐiniti, e tutta non trascorra l’università
dell’opere della natura, secondo che tutte obbediscono alle
matematiche leggi onde l’eterno Intendimento con
liberissimo consiglio le governa e le tempera, ma perchè noi
di questa si lunga e sı̀ spaziosa via per anche non tenghiamo
dietro che pochi passi. Or quivi ove non ci è più lecito
metter piede innanzi, non vi ha cui meglio rivolgersi che alla
fede dell’esperienza; la quale non altrimenti di chi varie
gioie sciolte e sconnesse cercasse di rimettere ciascuna per
 

g
p
ciascuna al suo incastro, cosı̀ ella adattando gli effetti a
cagioni e cagioni ad effetti, se non di primo lancio, come la
geometria, tanto fa che PROVANDO E RlPROVANDO le riesce
talora di dar nel segno.
B.5
Si quelqu’un de cette humeur vouloit entreprendre d’écrire
l’histoire des apparences celestes, selon la methode de
Verulamius, & que, sans y mettre aucunes raisons ny
hypotheses, il nous décrivist exactement le Ciel, tel qu’il
paroist maintenant, quelle situation a chaque Etoile ϐixe au
respect de ses voisines, quelle difference, ou de grosseur, ou
de couleur ou de clarté, ou d’estre plus ou moins
étincelantes,&c.; item, si cela répond àce que les anciens
astronomes en ont écrit, & quelle difference il s’y trouve
(car ie ne doute point que les Estoiles ne changent tousiurs
quelque peu entr’elles de situation, quoy qu’on les estime
ϐixes); aprés cela qu’il y adjoustast les observations des
Cometes, mettant une petite table du cours de chacune,
ainsi que Tycho a fait de trois ou quatre qu’il a observées; &
enϐin les variations de l’ecliptique & des apogées des
Planetes: ce seroit un ouvrage qui seroit plus utile au public
qu’il ne semble peut estre d’abord, & qui me soulageroit de
beaucoup de peine.
 
B.6
La Chymie, par des operations visibles, resout les corps en
certains principes grossiers & palpables, sels, soufres,&c.
Mais la Physique, par des speculations delicates, agit sur ces
principes, comme la Chymie a fait sur les corps, elle les
resout eux-memes en d’autres principes encore plus
simples en petits corps mus et ϐigures d’une inϐinite de
façons: voila la principale difference de la Physique & de la
Chymie.
 
B.7
NEWTONIANISME, s. m. ou Philosophie Newtonienne,
(Physiq.) c’est la théorie du mechanisme de l’univers, &
particulierement du mouvement des corps célestes, de leurs
lois, de leurs propriétés, telle qu’elle a été enseignée par M.
Newton. Voyez Philosophie.
C
d
hil
hi
i
́
́
 

Ce terme de philosophie newtonienne a été
différemment appliqué, & de-làsont venues plusieurs
notions de ce mot.
Quelques auteurs entendent par la là philosophie
corpusculaire, telle qu’elle a été réformée & corrigée par les
découvertes dont M. Newton l’a enrichie. Voyez
Corpusculaire.
C’est dans ce sens que M. Gravesande appelle ses
élémens de Physique, Introductio ad philosophiam
newtonianam. Dans ce sens, la philosophie newtonienne
n’est autre chose que la nouvelle philosophie, différente des
philosophies cartésienne & péripatéticienne, & des
anciennes philosophies corpusculaires. Voyez Aristotélisme,
Péripatétisme, Cartésianisme,&c.
D’autres entendent par philosophie newtonienne la
méthode que M. Newton observe dans sa philosophie,
méthode qui consiste à déduire ses raisonnemens & ses
conclusions directement des phénomenes, sans aucune
hypothèse antécédente,àcommencer par des principes
simples,à déduire les premieres lois de la nature d’un petit
nombre de phénomenes choisis, & à se servir de ces lois
pour expliquer les autres effets. Voyez Lois de la Nature au
mot Nature. Dans ce sens la philosophie newtonienne n’est
autre chose que la physique expérimentale, & est opposée à
l’ancienne philosophie corpusculaire. Voyez Expérimentale.
D’autres entendent par philosophie newtonienne, celle
oùles corps physiques sont considérés mathématiquement,
& où la géométrie & la méchanique sont appliquées à la
solution des phénomenes. La philosophie newtonienne
prise dans ce sens, n’est autre chose que la philosophie
méchanique & mathématique. Voyez Méchanique &
Physicomathématique. D’autres entendent par philosophie
newtonienne, cette partie de la Physique que M. Newton a
traitée, étendue, & expliquée dans son livre des Principes.
D’autres enϐin entendent par philosophie newtonienne, les
nouveaux principes que M. Newton a apportés dans la
Philosophie, le nouveau système qu’il a fondé sur ces
i
i
& l
ll
li
i
d
h ́

principes, & les nouvelles explications des phénomenes
qu’il en a déduites.
B.8
Mais cet abus n’est rien en comparaison des inconvéniens
où l’on tombe lorsqu’on veut appliquer la Géométrie & le
calculà des sujets de Physique trop compliquez, à des objets
dont nous ne connoissons pas assez les propriétés pour
pouvoir les mesurer; on est obligé dans tous ces cas de faire
des suppositions toûjours contraires à la Nature, de
dépouiller le sujet de la plépart de ses qualités, d’en faire un
être abstrait qui ne ressemble plus à l’être réel, & lorsqu’on
a beaucoup raisonné & calculé sur les rapports & les
propriétés de cet être abstrait, & qu’on est arrivé à une
conclusion toute aussi abstraite, on croit avoir trouvé
quelque chose de réel, & on transporte ce résultat idéal
dans le sujet réel, ce qui produit une inϐinité de fausses
conséquences & d’erreurs.
 
B.9
Toute le matière s’attire en raison inverse du carré de la
distance, & cette loi générale ne paroı̂t varier, dans les
attractions particulières, que par l’effet de la ϐigure des
parties constituantes de chaque substances; parce que cette
ϐigure entre comme élément dans la distance.
 
B.10
PHYSIQUE. Cette science que l’on appelle aussi quelquefois
Philosophie naturelle, est la science des propriétés des
corps naturels, de leurs phénomenes & de leurs effets,
comme de leurs différentes affections, mouvevemens,&c.
Voyez&c. Voyez Philosophie & Nature. Ce mot vient du grec 
, nature.
 
References
1.
Anstey PR (2000) The philosophy of Robert Boyle. Routledge, London
2.
Anstey PR (2002) Locke, Bacon and natural history. Early Sci Med 7(1):65–92

3.
Anstey PR (2005) Experimental versus speculative natural philosophy. In: Anstey PR,
Schuster JA (eds) The science of nature in the seventeenth century. Springer,
Dordrecht, pp 87–102
4.
Anstey PR (2012) Francis Bacon and the classiϐication of natural history. Early Sci
Med 7(1–2):11–31
5.
Anstey PR, Vanzo A (2012) The origins of early modern experimental philosophy.
Intell Hist Rev 22(4):499–518
6.
Anstey PR, Vanzo A (2016) Early modern experimental philosophy. In: Justin S,
Buckwalter W (eds) A companion to experimental philosophy. Wiley-Blackwell,
Malden Massachusetts, pp 87–102
7.
Bacon F (1828) Of the proϐicience and advancement of learning, divine and human.
Dove, London
8.
Baker A (2012) Precision, perfection, and the reality of British scientiϐic instruments
on the move during the 18th century. Revue de la Culture Matérielle, pp 74–75
9.
Bazerman C (1988) Shaping written knowledge. The University of Wisconsin Press,
Madison
10.
Beretta M (2000) At the source of Western science: the organization of
experimentalism at the Accademia del cimento (1637–1667). Notes Rec R Soc Lond
54(2):131–151
11.
Bertoloni Meli D (2019) Mechanism. A visual, lexical, and conceptual history.
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburg
12.
Birch T (1756–1757) History of the royal society of London (4 vols). Millar, London
13.
Boas M (1952) The establishment of the mechanical philosophy. Osiris 10:412–541
[zbMATH]
14.
Boas M (1958) Robert Boyle and seventeenth-century chemistry. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge
15.
Boas Hall M (1991) Promoting experimental learning. Experiment and the Royal
society 1660–1727. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
16.
Boas Hall M (1992) The library and archives of the Royal society 1660–1990.
Arrowsmith, Bristol
17.
Boerhaave H (1733) Elementa chemiae (2 vols), 2nd edn. Cavelier, Paris
18.
Boerhave H (1715) Sermo academicus de comparando certo in physicis. Vander,
Leyden
19.
Boerhave H (1741) A new method of chemistry. Including the history, theory, and
practice of the art (2 vols), 2 edn. Translated into English and edited by Shaw P and
Chambers E. Longman, London

20.
Boschiero L (2007) Experiment and natural philosophy in seventeenth-century
Tuscany. Springer, Dordrecht
21.
Boyle R (1661) The sceptical chymist or chymico-physical doubts & paradoxes.
Cadwell, London
22.
Boyle R (1666) Hydrostatical paradoxes made out of new experiments. Hall, London
23.
Boyle R (1666) The origine of formes and qualities, according to the corpuscular
philosophy, Illustrated by considerations and experiments. Hall, Oxford
24.
Boyle R (1682) A defence of Mr. R. Boyle’s explications of his physico-mechanical
experiments, against Franciscus Linus. In: Boyle R (ed) New experiments physico-
mechanical touching the air: Whereunto is added a defence of the author’s explication
of the experiments against the objections of Franciscus Linus and Thomas Hobbs
(third edition), Flesher, London, pp 1–89
25.
Boyle R (1682) New experiments physico-mechanical touching the air: Whereunto is
added a defence of the author’s explication of the experiments against the objections
of Franciscus Linus and Thomas Hobbs (third edition). Flesher, London
26.
Boyle R (1690) The Christian virtuoso; shewing, that by being addicted to
experimental philosophy, a man is rather assisted, than indisposed, to be a good
Christian. Jones, London
27.
Boyle R (1725) The philosophical works of the honourable Robert Boyle (3 vols).
Innys, London
28.
Boyle R (1772) The experimental history of colours begun. In: Birch T (ed) The works
of honourable Robert Boyle (6 vols). A new edition, vol 1, Rivington et als, London, pp
668–788
29.
Boyle R (1772) Free inquiry into the vulgarly received notion of nature. In: Birch T
(ed) The works of honourable Robert Boyle (6 vols). A new edition, vol 2, Rivington et
als, London, pp 106–142
30.
Boyle R (1772) The general history of the air designed and begun. In: Birch T (ed) The
works of honourable Robert Boyle (6 vols). A new edition, vol 5, Rivington et als,
London, pp 609–750
31.
Boyle R (1772) Medicina hydrostatica: or, hydrostatics applied to the materia medica.
In: Birch T (ed) The works of honourable Robert Boyle (6 vols). A new edition, vol 5,
Rivington et als, London, pp 453–505
32.
Boyle R (1772) Some considerations touching the usefulness of natural philosophy. In:
Birch T (ed) The works of honourable Robert Boyle (6 vols). A new edition, vol 2,
Rivington et als, London, pp 1–201
33.
Boyle R (1772) The works of honourable Robert Boyle (6 vols) A new edition. Birch T
(ed). Rivington et als, London
34.
Boyle R (1999–2000) In: Hunter M, Davis EB (eds) The works of Robert Boyle (14

vols). Pickering & Chatto, London
35.
Boyle R (2019) Robert Boyle Project, the website also includes a section, Boyle’s
manuscripts online, which presents digital images of the most important volumes of
the Boyle papers at the Royal society. http://www.bbk.ac.uk/boyle/
36.
Boyle R (2020) Requisites of a good hypothesis, the Robert Boyle Project.
http://www.bbk.ac.uk/boyle/papers/
37.
Brockliss L (2003) Science, the universities, and other public space: teaching science
in Europe and Americas. In: Porter R (ed) The Cambridge history of science.
Eighteenth-century science, vol 4. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 44–66
38.
de Buffon GLL (1749–1789) Histoire naturelle, générale et particulière, avec la
description du Cabinet du roi (36 vols). Imprimerie Royale, Paris
39.
de Buffon GLL (1797) Buffon’s natural history (10 vols). Sysmond, London
40.
Capecchi D (2014) The problem of motion of bodies. Springer, Cham-Dordrecht
[zbMATH]
41.
Capecchi D (2018) The path to post-Galilean epistemology. Springer, Cham-Dordrecht
[zbMATH]
42.
Cohen IB (1956) Franklin and Newton. Harvard University Press, Cambridge
43.
Cusanus N (1996) Nicholas of Cusa on wisdom and knowledge. Translated into English
by Hopkins J. Benning, Minneapolis
44.
Dallowe T (1735) Elements of chemistry: being the annual lectures of Herman
Boerhaave (2 vols). Translated into English and edited by Dallowe T. Pemberton et als,
London
45.
De Fouchy G (1763) Eloge de M. le Marquis Poleni. Histoire de l’Académie Royale des
Sciences de Paris, pp 151–163
46.
Dear P (1995) Discipline & experience. Cornell University Press, Ithaca
[zbMATH]
47.
Desaguliers J (2019) Mactutor history of mathematics archive. http://www-
history.mcs.st-and.ac.uk/index.html
48.
Desaguliers JT (1727) An account of a book entitul’d vegetable staticks: or an account
of some statistical experiments on the sap in vegetables. Philos Trans R Soc Lond
34(398):264–291
49.
Desaguliers JT (1734–1744) A course of experimental philosophy (2 vols). Longman
et als, London
50.
Descartes R (1964) Oeuvres de Descartes; nouvelle édition complétée (1896–1913)
(11 vols). In: Adam C (ed) Tannery P. Vrin, Paris
51.

Ducheyne S (2017) Different shades of Newton: Herman Boerhaave on Newton
mathematicus, philosophus, and opticochemicus. Annals of Science 74(2):108, 125
52.
Encyclopédie (1751–1772) Encyclopédie ou dictionnaire raisonné des sciences, des
arts et des métiers, par une societè de gens de lettres (17 vols). Briasson-David-Le
Breton-Durand, Paris
53.
de Fontenelle B (1669) Physique/chimie. Mémoires de l’Académie Royale des Sciences
depuis 1666 jusqu’en 1699, pp 53–54
54.
Galilei G (1890) Opere di Galileo Galilei linceo (4 vols). Eredi del Dozza, Bologna
55.
Galilei G (1890–1909) In: Barbera FA (ed) Le opere di Galileo Galilei (National edition)
(20 vols)
56.
Geymonat L (1983) L’esigenza di una più ampia sperimentazione nelle scienze della
natura. In: Geymonat L (ed) Storia del pensiero scientiϐico e ϐilosoϐico. 9 vols, vol 3,
Garzanti, Milan, pp 192–215
57.
Guerlac H (1973) Hales, Stephen. In: Gillispie CC (ed) Complete dictionary of scientiϐic
biography. Scribner, New York
58.
Hales S (1727) Vegetable staticks; or, an account of some statistical experiments on the
sap in vegetables. Innys, London
59.
Hales S (1738) Statistical essays (2 vols), 3rd edn. Innys, London
60.
Hall R (1970) Desaguliers, John Theophilus. In: Gillispie CC (ed) Complete dictionary
of scientiϐic biography. Scribner, New York
61.
Hattab H (2011) The mechanical philosophy. In: Clarke DM, Wilson C (eds) The
Oxford handbook of philosophy in early modern Europe. Oxford University Press,
New York, pp 71–95
62.
Hauksbee F (1708) Touching the difϐiculty of separating two hemispheres upon the
injecting of an atmosphere of air in their outward surface, without withdrawing the
included air. Philos Trans R Soc Lond 25(305):2415–2417
63.
Heilbron JL (1979) Electricity in the 17th and 18th centuries. University of California
Press, Berkley
64.
Home R (2003) Mechanics and experimental physics. Eighteenth-century science. In:
Porter R (ed) The Cambridge history of science. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, pp 354–374
65.
Hooke R (1665) Micrographia. Martyn & Allestry, London
66.
Hunter M (ed) (1994) Robert Boyle reconsidered. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge
67.
Hunter M (1995) Science and the shape of orthodoxy: intellectual change in late
seventeenth-century Britain. Boydell, Woodbridge

68.
Hunter M (2007) Robert Boyle and the early Royal society: a reciprocal exchange in
the making of Baconian science. Br J Hist Sci 40(1):1–23
69.
Huygens C (1888–1950) Oeuvres complètes de Christiaan Huygens (22 vols). Nijhoff,
The Hague
70.
Kepler J (1937) Johannes Kepler Gesammelte Werke (23 vols). Beck, Munich
71.
Kerker DH (1955) Herman Boerhaave and the development of pneumatic chemistry.
Isis 46(1):36, 49
72.
Knoeff R (2002) Herman Boerhaave (1668–1738). Calvinist chemist and physician.
Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences. Amsterdam
73.
Kubbinga H (1988) Newton’s theory of matter. In: PB S, G D (eds) Newton’s scientiϐic
and philosophical legacy, Kluwer, Dordrecht, pp 321–342
74.
Kuhn T (1952) Robert Boyle and structural chemistry in the seventeenth century. Isis
43(1):12–36
75.
Legendre A (1805) Nouvelles méthodes pour la détermination des orbites des
comètes. Didot, Paris
76.
Linch W (2001) Solomon’s child. Method in the early Royal Society of London.
Stanford University Press, Stanford
77.
Lindeboom G (1970) Boerhaave, Hermann. In: Gillispie CC (ed) Complete dictionary of
scientiϐic biography. Scribner, New York
78.
Lyon J (1976) The ‘Initial discourse’ to Buffon’s “Histoire naturelle”: the ϐirst complete
English translation. J Hist Biol 9(1):133–181
79.
Magalotti L (1691) Saggi di naturali esperienze fatte nell’accademia del Cimento.
Second edition. Cecchi, Florence
80.
Magalotti L (1841) Saggi di naturali esperienze. Tipograϐia Galileiana, Florence
81.
Mariotte E (1740) Essais de physique, ou mémoires pour serviràla science des eboses
naturelles. Second essai. De la nature de l’air. In: Mariotte E (ed) Oeuvres de Mariotte.
Nouvelle edition, vol I, Neaulme, La Hat, pp 148–182
82.
McClauglin T (1996) Was there an empirical movement in mid-seventeenth century
France? Experiments in Jacques Rohault’s Traité de physique. Revue d’Histoire des
Sciences 49(4):459–481
83.
Metzger H (1974) Newton, Stahal. Boerhaave et la doctrine chimique, Blanchard,
London Paris
84.
More H (1659) The immortality of the soul, so farre forth as it is demonstrable from
the knowledge of nature and the light of reason. Flesher, London
85.
van Musschenbroek P (1731) Tentamina experimentorum naturalium captorum in

Academia del Cimento sub auspiciis serenissimi principis Leopoldi Magni Etruriae
Ducis et ab ejus academiae secretario conscriptorum: ex Italico in Latinum sermonem
conversa. Quibus commentarios, nova experimenta, et orationem De methodo
instituendi experimenta physica addidit Petrus van Musschenbroek. Verbeek, Leyden
86.
Newman W (1996) The alchemical sources of Robert Boyle’s corpuscular philosophy.
Ann Sci 53(6):567–585
87.
Newman W (2014) Robert Boyle, transmutation, and the history of chemistry before
Lavoisier: a response to Kuhn. Osiris 29(1):63–77
88.
Newton I (1730) Opticks: Or, a treatise of the reϐlections, refractions, inϐlections and
colours. Innys, London
89.
Nollet J (1754–1765) Leçons de physique expérimentale (6 vols). Arksté and Merkus,
Amsterdam & Leipzig
90.
Paciucchi M (2010) Il lessico della meccanica dei solidi fra settecento e ottocento.
Aracne, Rome
91.
Poleni G (1741) Institutionum philosophiae experimentalis specimen. Stamperia del
Seminario, Padua
92.
Roger J (1977) Buffon and mathematics. In: Miles R, Serra J (eds) Proceedings of the
Buffon bicentenary symposium on geometrical probability, image analysis,
mathematical stereology, and their relevance to the determination of biological
structures, Paris, pp 29–36
93.
Rohault J (1671) Traité de physique. Thierry, Paris
94.
Rohault J (1723) System of natural philosophy. Illustrated with Dr. Samuel Clarke’s
notes (2 vols). Knapton, London
95.
Roller DH (1960) Stephen Hales and quantitative mechanism. Bios 31(4):195, 204
96.
Roux S (2013) Was there a Cartesian experimentalism in 1660s France? In: Dobre M,
Nyden T (eds) Cartesian empiricism. Springer, Dordrecht, pp 47–88
97.
Rowlinson J (2002) Cohesion. A scientiϐic history of intermolecular forces. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge
98.
Rowning J (1737-1743) A compendious system of natural philosophy (4 parts).
Harding, London
99.
Royal Society of London (1940) The record of the Royal Society of London for the
promotion of natural knowledge. Morrison and Gibb, London
100. s’ Gravesande J (1747) Mathematical elements of natural philosophy conϐirmed by
experiments, or an introduction to Sir Isaac Newton’s philosophy (2 vols), 6 edn. Innys
et als, London
101.
Schoϐield R (1970) Rowning, John. In: Gillispie CC (ed) Complete dictionary of

1
scientiϐic biography. Scribner, New York
102. Segre M (1989) Viviani’s life of Galileo. Isis 80(2):206–231
[MathSciNet]
103. Shapin S (1988) Robert Boyle and mathematics: reality, representation, and
experimental practice. Sci Context 2(1):23–58
104. Shapin S, Shaffer S (1985) Leviathan and the air-pump. Hobbes, Boyle, and the
experimental life. Princeton University Press, Princeton
105. Sorrenson R (1996) Towards a history of the Royal society in the eighteenth century.
Notes Rec R Soc Lond 50(1):29–46
[MathSciNet][zbMATH]
106. Spink A (2018) The experimental physics of Jacques Rohault. Br J Hist Philos
26(5):850–870
107. Sprat T (1667) The history of the Royal society of London for the improving of natural
knowledge. Martyn & Allestry, London
108. Spuit L (2019) The transit of science and philosophy between the dutch republic and
italy: the case of newtonism, inTRAlinea. Transit and translation in early modern
Europe, Special issue
109. Stigler S (1981) Gauss and the invention of least squares. Ann Stat 9(2):465–474
[MathSciNet][zbMATH]
110. Stigler S (1986) The history of statistics. The Belknap Press of Harvard University
Press, Cambridge Massachusetts
[zbMATH]
111. Thomson T (1930) History of chemistry (2 vols). Colburn and Bentley, London
112. van Besouw J (2017) Out of Newton’s shadow: An examination of Willem Jacob ’s
Gravesande’s scientiϐic methodology. PhD thesis, Vrije univerity of Brussel
113. Waller R (1684) Essayes of natural experiments made in the Academie del cimento.
Alsep, London
114. Webster C (1968) The origins of the Royal society. Hist Sci 6:106–127
115. Wojcik JW (1997) Robert Boyle and the limits of reason. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge
Footnotes
vol. 15, p. 146.

2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
 
p. 82; p. 12. note 2.
 
pp. 80–81.
 
p. 197.
 
p. 74.
 
pp. 95–96.
 
p. 218.
 
Preface. Not numbered pages, third page.
 
p. 19, free on line version.
 
pp. 70–71.
 
pp. 124–125.
 
p. 3.
 
vol. 10, p. 239.
 
vol. 19, pp. 599–632.

15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
 
vol. 19, p. 603, 606.
 
vol. 19, pp. 646.
 
p. 10.
 
p. 82.
 
p. 135.
 
pp. 440–449.
 
p. 6. Translation in [113]. Notice the number of pages starts again from 1 after the preface of
Magalotti.
 
p. 140.
 
pp. 6–7. To the reader.
 
pp. 7–8.
 
p. 8.
 
pp. 95–104.
 
vol. 1, p. 3.

28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
 
pp. 289-290.
 
p. 173.
 
pp. 34–69.
 
Letter to the Royal society, just before the preface.
 
p. 99.
 
p. 17.
 
p. 15.
 
p. 123.
 
p. 5.
 
p. 59.
 
p. 65.
 
p. 2415.
 
vol. 1, pp. 251–252.

41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
 
vol. 5, pp. 281–291.
 
pp. 215–226.
 
vol. 5, p. 513.
 
vol. 5, pp. 516–517.
 
p. 7.
 
p. 26.
 
p. 43.
 
vol. 3, p. 426.
 
p. 35.
 
p. 40.
 
p. 41.
 
vol. 1, p. 4.
 
p. 112.

54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
 
vol. 1, Experiment 36, p. 86.
 
p. 615.
 
vol.1, pp. 1–185.
 
vol.1, pp. 118–185.
 
vol.1, pp. 186–242.
 
pp. 26–30.
 
pp. 30–31.
 
p. 58.
 
pp. 478–484.
 
vol. 10, p. 239; pp. 228–229.
 
Experiment 1, p. 12.
 
Experiment 20, p. 71.
 
pp. 153–157.

67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
 
vol. 36, fol. 57v. Transcribed in [115], p. 167.
 
pp. 117–188.
 
p. 188; vol. 8, f. 187r.
 
vol. 1, Seraphic love, p. 283; p. 210.
 
vol. 6. Christian virtuoso. Second part, p. 776.
 
pp. 496–497; p. 91.
 
p. 54.
 
p. 724.
 
p. 497.
 
p. 65.
 
p. 71.
 
Atoms is a word Boyle used in a not technical way to mean irreducible corpuscles.
 
pp. 71–72.

80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
 
pp. 66–67.
 
p. 25.
 
p. 3.
 
p. 3.
 
p. 39.
 
p. 350.
 
p. 64.
 
vol. 1, p. 308.
 
p. 67.
 
pp. 21–22.
 
p. 110.
 
p. 125.
 
p. 180.

93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
101
102
103
104
 
Article Newtonianisme. English translation by Terry Stancliffe.
 
p. 180.
 
vol. 2, p. 403.
 
vol. 1, p. 16.
 
vol. 1, p. 17.
 
p. 66.
 
Part. II, pp. 5–6.
 
Supplement, tome 4, pp. 46–148.
 
p. 32.
 
Supplement, tome 4, p. 53. Notice that Buffon measured here probability differently from us;
it may be greater than unity. In modern language Buffon would say that the probability that sun
does not rise tomorrow is 
, a negligible value indeed.
 
Supplement, tome 4, p. 56.58.
 
vol. 1, p. 57; p. 175.

105
106
107
108
109
110
111
112
113
114
115
116
117
 
vol. 1, p. 58; p. 176.
 
vol. 1, p. 62.
 
vol. 1, p. 60.
 
vol. 1, Premier discours. De la manière d’tudier & de traiter l’Histoire naturelle, pp. 60–61.
Translation in [78].
 
p. 38.
 
vol. 13, p. XIII.
 
vol. 10, p. 27.
 
vol. 10, pp. 30–31.
 
p. 331.
 
p. 102–103.
 
pp. 605–624.
 
p. 1.
 
p. 85.

118
119
120
121
122
123
124
125
126
127
128
129
130
 
pp. 5–6.
 
p. 165. Quoted from Newton’s Query 31.
 
Query 31. p. 372.
 
p. 316.
 
p. 315.
 
p. 212, 209.
 
p. 112.
 
p. 37.
 
p. 489.
 
p. 511.
 
p. 224.
 
pp. 22, 178.
 
vol. 1, p. 206.

131
132
133
134
135
136
137
138
139
140
141
142
 
vol. 1, p. 298.
 
vol. 1, pp. 357–364.
 
pp. 65–70.
 
Article Physique.
 
vol. 1, pp. 48–53.
 
pp. 55–56.
 
Part I, pp. 73–74.
 
vol. 2, p. 94.
 
vol. 1, p. 148.
 
p. 63.
 
Although the title page gives the date as 1720, the book had in fact already appeared in 1719;
even the English translation of Desaguliers had appeared in December of that year [108], footnote
17.
 
p. X.
 

143
144
145
146
147
148
149
150
151
152
153
154
155
p. XI
 
pp. 197–208.
 
vol. 1, p. 124.
 
Tome II, pp. 128–131.
 
pp. 65–66.
 
p. 66.
 
p. 64.
 
p. 66.
 
pp. 83–84.
 
pp. 16–28.
 
The least squares method is referred to in a very clear way in a short appendix with the title:
Sur la méthode de moindres quarrées, pp. 72–25.
 
vol. 3, pp. 193–195.
 
p. 273.
 

(1)
 
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
D. Capecchi, Epistemology and Natural Philosophy in the 18th Century, History of Mechanism and
Machine Science 39
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-52852-2_3
3. Classical Mechanics
Danilo Capecchi1  
Ingegneria Strutturale e Geotecnica, Sapienza Università di Roma,
Rome, Italy
 
Danilo Capecchi
Email: danilo.capecchi@uniroma1.it
Abstract
The evolution of mechanics towards what is now called classical
mechanics is explored in depth. The exposition of fundaments and
applications in various treatises and papers are examined, especially
those of continental scientists and in particular the syntheses of Euler
and d’Alembert, who described the way mechanics could be made a
rational discipline, like mathematics, based on Calculus. The complete
mathematization of mechanics only occurred at the end of the 18th
century however, with Lagrangian synthesis which is brieϐly
summarized, concentrating more on the relations between physics and
mathematics than to the technical aspects, which, however, are very
important. The justiϐication by the scholars of the 18th century of the
foundations of mechanics, required substantial involvement in
metaphysics and epistemology to introduce fundamental notions: the
nature of space, time, force, constitution and properties of bodies,
nature of motion. However, this effort was pursued not with the
classical and organic approach of canonical philosophy but with the
pragmatism of mathematical philosophers. Reading the chapter, for the
nature of the subject, requires a basic knowledge of mathematics; to to
make the text smoother the more technical aspects are left to notes.

3.1 Mechanics and Natural Philosophy at the
Turn of Century
The term mechanics at the turn of the 18th century had already a
meaning close to the modern one: the science of equilibrium and
motion. Still the ancient meaning of science of simple machines, or
statics, persisted and the science of motion was considered separately,
as dynamics, a term Leibniz contributed to spread. The logical status of
mechanics had always been particular among the traditional mixed
mathematics. Aristotle, for instance, added it to the list of subordinate
sciences (the term he used for mixed mathematics) at last, as a limiting
case. There were sociological reasons. Mechanics, although in the
puriϐied version that mathematicians gave it, referred to practical or
technological activities, not highly esteemed by the ‘intellectuals’ of the
time. Which was not true for astronomy and music that were reserved
for the elite, and not even for optics, which had light as reference, the
noblest of the substances. There were epistemological reasons.
Astronomy and optics studied, all considered, geometric objects: lines
and curves. Music was based on arithmetic ratios between the pitch of
sounds. The insights that gave raise to these disciplines had their origin
in the senses; sight for optics and astronomy, hearing for music.
Mechanics referred to a quality that was certainly revealed to us,
but in a more abstract way: weight. Of it we could have intuition for the
interaction that aroused on our body; with touch when a heavy object
weighs on us and with muscular effort when we try to lift this object.
Weight however could hardly be reduced to geometry or arithmetic.
Even the science of motion, the modern part of mechanics, presented
similar problems; it required the use of a somewhat even more
mysterious and difϐicultly quantiϐiable magnitude: time. And until the
16th century motion remained substantially in the sphere of natural
philosophy and was not studied by mathematicians. In the 16th century
they began to take an interest in the subject for various reasons related
in large part to technological development. Among the most interesting
contributions were those of Niccolò Tartaglia—with his ballistics
studies—and Giovanni Battista Benedetti—with his studies on the
natural motion of heavy bodies. In the 17th century Galileo succeeded

in bringing back an important part of the science of motion, the study of
the fall of bodies, in the ϐield of mathematics, with an approach that
however was long object of criticisms both of merit and method. With
Newton ϐinally, mechanics (old mechanics and dynamics) left the
restricted area of the traditional mixed mathematics that dealt with
particular problems only, even if complex, and became a discipline with
a cosmological character with the ambition to face all the problems of
motion (and equilibrium) of both sublunar and celestial worlds. In this
way the traditional natural philosophy was completely replaced by the
new science in the study of motion.
Paradoxically, mechanics, the least mathematical among classical
mixed mathematics, changed its status in the 18th century and became
the closest to mathematics. This was possible not only for a better
understanding of mechanical processes, but also for a change in the
epistemology of science. This saw a gradual shift from the typical
approach of mixed mathematics (with a partial exception of astronomy
and music) that starting from ‘certain’ principles—either because
derived from more or less direct experience or from the conclusions of
natural philosophy and metaphysic reasonings—passed to an approach
in which certainty was replaced by plausibility. An approach that will
developed in the modern hypothetical deductive method. The
justiϐication of the principles—and in this astronomy had been a model
—was based on the ‘truth’ of the theorems derived from these
principles through mathematics. Sometimes the interest of
mathematicians for the adherence to reality of their theorems passed
into the background compared to elegance and rigor they obtained.
Moreover, a theoretical core was enucleated, based on general relations,
always valid. These general relations were made special only when one
wanted to study concrete problems, such for instance the fall of heavy
bodies and the motion of the planets around the sun.
Most mathematicians of the 18th century had a good knowledge of
the philosophy of nature; they came from schools where there was a
teaching largely based on philosophy of nature, if not properly the
Aristotelian, at least the mechanist one. They could move so as natural
philosophers. Less careful, compared to the old canonical natural
philosophers, to the coherence and elegance of their constructions, that
were sometimes a miscellany of the various schools, from which they

picked up the elements considered more suitable to the development of
their mechanical and physical theories. Thus, not always philosophy
drew mechanics, but sometimes was mechanics which drew
philosophy. Main interaction of mechanics with philosophy was not
however with natural philosophy but rather with metaphysics and
epistemology: the role of mathematics, concepts of space, time and
force, the nature of constraints, and so on.
At the turn of the 18th century mechanics had not yet a well deϐined
orientation, as well as not even its ambits were very clear. Three main
paths can be enucleated. The ϐirst, that can be traced back to
Galileo (and Newton), according to which the object of mechanics was
the study of the variation of velocity of a body after an impressed force.
When the motion develops on the three dimensional space this
approach gave raise to a vector mechanics which saws as a main
character the vector (modern term) force. The mathematical theory
more suitable for completing the study of an isolated or a set of mass
points was Calculus. The second path, not completely distinct from the
ϐirst, focused on the phenomenon of impact among either hard or
elastic bodies. It was still a vector mechanics, which had as its main
object the vector velocity; its interest was motivated by the dominant
mechanical philosophy of the time. The suitable kind of mathematics
was (linear) algebra. The third path, saw at its center work and energy
(modern terms). The kind of mathematics suitable for its study was
algebra, but also Calculus was called for non completely elementary
situations.
3.2 The Spreading of Calculus
Mathematicians of the 18th century who gave a substantial
contribution to the development of mechanics were a restricted
handful; a main reason for this is that in the particular historical
moment the development of mechanics was strictly connected with the
new born Calculus and the mathematicians who could handle it were
very few.
If in physics the 18th was the century of electricity, in mathematics
it was the century of differential and integral calculus, simply Calculus.
Even though its fundaments were laid in the previous century it was the

18th century to improve and use it in a massive way. Great was its
inϐluence on the development of physics; this is quite natural because
the kind of mathematics inϐluenced always the representation of the
external world, at least into two ways. On the one hand mathematics, as
an instrument, describes the reality in the limits possible for its
language. On the other hand, when the instrument is powerful, as it
happens for Calculus, the temptation to apply it to all the aspects of
reality is great. And where there are difϐiculties to describe the reality,
this is changed and adapted, by introducing models suitable to
mathematics. In the case of Calculus the main imprinting was for sure
the character of continuity that should have the model to be treated
analytically, both in time and space. Besides this aspect connected to
profound properties of Calculus, there was another aspect, apparently
trivial but that instead revealed to be fundamental: its algorithmic
nature. Calculus in its essence has an algebraic nature and is based on
relations of equality which leads to equations. The solution of these
equations, that are derived from the principles of a science reduced to
mathematical expressions, is carried out with well codiϐied algorithms
and all considered simply to apply, though the calculations involved
may be tremendous. They sometimes led to unexpected solutions that
the use of geometry could not predict because here, for any problem,
the solutions were partially preϐigured by visual intuition.
By comparing the treatises and papers of mechanics of the 18th
century is immediately evident the denial of the rhetorical exposition
typical of the 17th century, where apparently there was not so great
difference in form of reasoning between natural philosophy and
mathematics (geometry). The exposition of the principles has now as
its main purpose the setting up of one or more differential equations.
Most of the text is made of mathematics.
The received view ascribes the invention of the inϐinitesimal
calculus (both differential and integral) to the most famous
mathematicians of the 17th century, Newton and Leibniz; well known is
the quarrel on the priority in which the two scholars where involved.
This is of course an oversimpliϐication and it should be more correct to
say that Newton and Leibniz gave a very important contribution to
Calculus. Indeed the inϐinitesimal calculus found its roots in ancient
times and not only in the West but also in the East, India and Arabia.

For the western civilization it saw its origins in the difϐiculties to deal
numerically with the continuous magnitudes of geometry and in the
method of exhaustion by Eudoxus and Archimedes. More recently with
the method of indivisibles of Cavalieri, then in the works of
Torricelli and later of Pascal, Descartes, Roberval, Barrow and
especially Pierre de Fermat (1601–1665). For a general view of the
history of inϐinitesimal calculus see the old but still convincing [23].
Newton and Leibniz had the chance to arrive last and the great
merit to understand the potentiality of Calculus and to give it an
algorithmic aspect. They developed approaches based on similar
concepts but with a different language. Newton came ϐirst, but the route
traced by Leibniz prevailed in the long run. Both for intrinsic and
substantial reasons. Leibniz’s version was simpler to handle with,
especially for the introduction of the concept of partial derivatives,
necessary to deal with continuous systems. Moreover it found in Jakob
and Johann Bernoulli careful readers that clariϐied and expanded the
quite cryptic Leibniz’s writings. Other mathematicians completed the
work, among which Varignon, Hermann, Euler, d’Alembert and others.
Newton did not ϐind analogous supporters and the Calculus at the
beginning of the century was a continental affair. Its spreading in
Europe was largely due to Johann Bernoulli and Malebranche. The
former for his technical ability, the latter for his ability as cultural
manager.
Nicolas Malebranche  (1638–1715) has been considered by modern
historians essentially as a philosopher with a strong metaphysical
vocation. Actually, as for many other scholars of the 17th and 18th
centuries, such as Descartes and Leibniz, he was a more articulated
character. He had a good mathematical culture and greatly appreciated
the role of mathematics in philosophy [138]. For this attitude he was
the reference for many French mathematicians, the so called
Malebranchians, or the members of Malebranche’s circle; among them:
de l’Hôpital, Reyneau, Jaquemet, Byzance, Bernard Lamy, Varignon,
Carré, Rémond de Montmort, Sauveur, Saurin, Guisnée, Renau
d’EƵlisagaray, Fontenelle and Polignac, Nicole, Privât de Molières, etc.
They united their efforts against the traditional Cartesians, taking
Leibniz for reference and Johann Bernoulli “à leur service” [151].1
Indeed if the true inventors of Calculus were the Leibnizians, the

Malebranchians were the popularizers and helped to spread Calculus in
the whole Europe.
In particular two brilliant members of Malebranche’s circle, Pierre
Varignon (1654–1722)  and Guillaume François Antoine de Sainte
Mesme, marquis de l’Hôpital (1661–1704) were directly taught by
Johann Bernoulli. Who also taught Pierre Maupertuis, Alexis
Clairaut, Christian Goldbach, Samuel-Henri König and Euler. Jakob
Hermann (1678–1733) was taught instead by Jakob Bernoulli. In
particular de L’Hôpital, under Johann Bernoulli’s payed tutoring,2 wrote
a fundamental treatise Analyse des inϔinitement petits, pour l’intelligence
des lignes curbes, published anonimously in 1696. The treatise was
successful and followed by a second edition in 1716. Varignon made
clariϐication and addition publishing a his version.
L’Hôpital treatise is limited to differential calculus. For what
concerned integral calculus de Hôpital in his preface, explained that he
had also intended to present this, however, Leibniz, having written him
that he was working on the subject, he “took care not to deprive the
public of such a beautiful work” [2].3 Unfortunately, Leibniz never
completed his job.
In the following I will present a short account of l’Hôpital’s book so
that the reader can have an idea about the knowledge on the matter at
the turn of the 18th century. To start with, the content:
1.
The rules of this calculus.
 
2.
Use of the differential calculus4 for ϐinding the tangents of all
kinds of curved lines.
 
3.
Use of the differential calculus for ϐinding the greatest and
the least ordinates, to which are reduced questions de
maximis & minimis.
 
4.
Use of the differential calculus for ϐinding inϐlection points
and cusps.
 
5.
Use of the differential calculus for ϐinding evolutes.
 
6.
Use of the differential calculus for ϐinding caustics by
ϐl
i

reϐlection.
 
7.
Use of the differential calculus for ϐinding caustics by
refraction.
 
8.
Use of the differential calculus for ϐinding the points of
curved lines that touch an inϐinity of lines given in position,
whether straight or curved.
 
9.
The solution of several problems that depend upon the
previous methods.
 
10.
A new method for using the differential calculus with
geometric curves, from which we deduce the method of
Messrs. Descartes  and Hudde [2].5
 
Fig. 3.1 Deϐinition of differential.
Redrawn from [2], Plance 1, Fig. 1
The fundamental and primitive concept of the differential calculus is
not that of derivative as it is today, but that of differential. It is deϐined
in a intuitive way, without recourse to the concept of limit:
The inϐinitely small portion by which a variable quantity
continually increases or decreases is called the Difference. For
example, let AMB be an arbitrary curved line (Fig. 3.1) which has

the line AC as its axis or diameter, and has PM as one of its
ordinates. Let pm be another ordinate, inϐinitely close to the ϐirst
one. Given this, if we also draw MR parallel to AC, and the chords
AM, Am, and describe the little circular arc MS of the circle with
center A and radius AM, then Pp is the differential of AP, Rm the
differential of PM, Sm the differential of [the straight line] AM,
and Mm the differential of the arc AM. Furthermore, the little
triangle MAm, which has the arc Mm as its base is the differential
of the segment AM [the region contained by the straight line AM
and the arc AM], and the little region MPpm is the differential of
the region contained by the straight lines AP and PM, and by the
arc AM [2].6 (C.1)
Note that the deϐinition of the differential is very general; it refers to
variation of any quantities, angles, arcs, areas, segments. There is not
the distinction between dependent and independent variables, but only
variables quantities, indicated with the letters x, y, z &c, and constants.
There is not a clearly deϐined coordinate system and not an explicit
concept of function. In the frequent geometrical representations, used
mainly for explanatory purpose, there are two axes. The coordinates on
the horizontal axis are usually referred to as abscissas, but they are not
alway the independent variable (a concept made not explicit). The
coordinates on the other axis, usually perpendicular to the horizontal
axis, are named ordinates; although oblique ordinates were
occasionally arranged at a different angle to the axis.
L’Hôpital then gave the rules for the differential calculus:
1.
The differential of a constant is 0.
 
2.
The differential of the sum 
 is 
.
 
3.
The differential of the product xy is 
.
 
4.
The differential of the quotient x/y is 
. 
5. The differential of a power 
 is 
 [2].7
 

Only polynomial expressions are present in the treatise; sinusoidal
functions and logarithms, well known at the time, are missing.
One of the most important problems dealt with in the l’Hôpital’s
treatise is the one concerning maxima and minima (the greatest and
the least ordinates); attention is focused on geometrical curves. With
reference to Fig. 3.2a, the problem is formulated as follows: “Given the
nature of the curved line MDM, we wish to ϐind a value AE of AP such
that the ordinate ED is the greatest or the least of its similar ordinates
PM” [2].8
Fig. 3.2 Maxima and minima.
Redrawn from [2], Plance 4, Figs. 35 and 36
The solution is associated9 to points where the differential of the
ordinate, dy is zero.  In the case of point D of Fig. 3.2b, where a modern
sees a maximum assuming the vertical coordinate as independent
variable, l’Hôpital imposed 
 instead of 
, as a modern
could have done.
Of a certain interest is the introduction and use of higher order
differentials, which presents some difference with respect to the
modern use, at least for notation. This is the deϐinition
Deϐinition I. The inϐinitely small portion by which the difference
of a variable quantity continually increases or decreases is called
the difference of the difference of this quantity, or else its second
difference [2].10 (C.2)

The second order differentials are indicated either as ddx or ddy
(modern use 
 or 
), to distinguish them from the power of a
differential, 
 or 
.
3.2.1 First Uses in Dynamics
First applications of Calculus to dynamics are commonly attributed to
Newton. Probably not at the time of the ϐirst edition of the Principia, but
shortly after in the attempt to bring back into the algebraic language of
ϐluxions the differential geometry of his masterpiece. Leibniz in the
Tentamen de motu coelestium causis appeared in the Acta Eruditorum in
1689, two years after the release of Newton’s Principia [122], presented
the ϐirst differential equation of motion in the language of Calculus; he
was not able to solve it however.
It is not far from truth saying that the ϐirst serious attempts to write
down and solve the equations of motions using the language of Calculus
are due to Varignon, who moved in the route that will afϐirm in the 18th
century. He knew very well Calculus, even though probably did not
contribute much to improve it. This is Johann Bernoulli’s biting
comment: “I am not sure who, after L’Hôpital’s death, is now versed in
mathematics in France. Certainly I do not know anyone there today
who excels in the most profound questions, except perhaps Varignon,
from which, however, one should not expect much progress. He
understands other people’s results and knows how to perfect them, but
is not able to invent. You would say that he is a good commentator, but
not a true author” [126].11
Varignon’s reference in dynamics, at least ofϐicially, was more
Galileo than Newton. Of Galileo two are the propositions used by
Varignon as well as by many scholars at the turn of the 18th century:
the proportionality of speed with respect to time, and the law of the
squares of times for the height of fall. These two relations were often
generalized to the case of forces other than weight, by introducing the
ratio between force and weight. This generalization was made simple
by the introduction of Calculus. In particular the proportionality
between speed and time, 
, becomes 
 with a a constant, by

assuming the proportionality holds good also for inϐinitesimal intervals
of time; it can easily be integrated to give 
. This result is
obtained in a straightforward way, inside a well established algorithm,
without the use of complex reasonings involving the nature of space
and time. If the cause of motion is different from gravity but due to a
force of intensity f, it is immediate and intuitive to replace a with f and
write 
, with m the weight. It should be said that the forces
other than weights were essentially of two kinds in the 18th century,
the forces due to elasticity (and the spring model was very present) and
the centripetal force among the celestial bodies, which is proportional
to the mass but depends on the mutual distance.
In three memories probably written around 1693, Varignon
published results somehow connected to the applications of Calculus to
dynamics; the way of exposition recalls Wallis in his Mechanica sive de
motu of 1669–1671 [27],12 who is indeed praised. In the ϐirst memoir,
Regles du mouvement en general [163], he stated the following principle
or fundamental rule:
In all motions [...], either they are uniform, accelerated or
retarded [...], the summation of forces which give motion is
always proportional to the summation of the spaces passed by
all points [163].13 (C.3)
The principle is given without any justiϐication, but considering that
here for force of a body Varignon intended mv, that is the product of
mass and speed,14 the fundamental rule can easily proved by using the
integral calculus. The sum of force is 
, which of course is equal
to ms and thus proportional to s, the space passed.
The second paper Regles du mouvement accelerez suivant toutes les
proportions imaginables d’acceleration ordonnes [162] is a simple
generalization of the fundamental rule. More interesting is the third
paper Application de la regle generale des mouvements à toute les
hypotheses possible d’accelerations ordonnes dans la chute des corps
[161]. Even here the recourse to Calculus is hidden, but there is an
important result that will be the basis of subsequent work. In the paper

Varignon introduced a different interpretation of the force/weigth, or at
least an ambiguous one, arriving to the equality [161]:15
which holds between two different bodies falling from two different
inclined planes, to read with the following table:
where length and height refer to the inclined planes and time is the time
needed for the body to come down.
The previous relation can be easily justiϐied using the Galilean law
of fall. Mass and weight are apparently redundant, because they are not
required in the Galilean law; but they reveal fundamental when
Varignon attempted to apply his expression to forces more general than
weight.
In the years 1700–1701, Varignon presented four memoirs on
dynamics to the academy of Paris more directly connected with
Calculus [19];16 of them I will discuss Maniere generale de determiner
les forces, les vitesses, les espaces, et les temps, une seule de ces quatre
choses étant donnée dans toutes sortes de mouvemens rectilignes variés à
discretion [166] and Des forces centrales ou des pesanteurs necessaires
aux planetes pour leur faire decrire les orbes qu’on leur a supposez
jusq’ici [165]. In the ϐirst memoir Varignon came back to Proposition 39
of the ϐirst book of the Principia, using the language of Calculus. Here
Newton had given diagrams relating space, force, velocity, time, for
different expressions of force as function of distance using a geometric
approach, in which the solution was ϐirst given and then checked, with
an inverse procedure (modern meaning) [140].17
Varignon started his enterprise by expressing the instantaneous
speed v as the ratio between the inϐinitesimal space dx and inϐinitesimal
time dt: 
, an apparently innocuous move but with a great
heuristic power. The expression is differentiated by Varignon, assuming

dt as constant, arriving to the expression 
. Then he passed
to a mechanical relation, the generalized Galilean law: “For the spaces
passed by a body pressed by a constant and continuously applied force
[y], as we usually conceive gravity, being in the composite ratio of this
force and the square of times, one will have 
” [166].18
Two things should be noted here; ϐirst the assumption that spaces
passed are proportional to forces impressed. This requires a concept of
mass, which however is kept hidden because not necessary to deal
with, in the case of the motion of a single mass point. Second the
Galilean law is applied to an inϐinitesimal interval of time dt—so that y
can be assumed constant—and, with a certain nonchalance, the space
passed is qualiϐied as a second order differential and the factor 1/2 is
ignored. In the end Varignon could write two general rules of motion
along a straight line:
These rules were used in different situations. For instance if the
relation 
 is known, given by the Galilean law 
 for instance,
one has the equation 
, which can be rewritten as 
, that integrated gives 
. In the case of variable forces,
Varignon combined his two rules, to obtain the relation 
,
which he integrated to give 
, or 
, “as
Newton proved in the ϐirst part of this 39th proposition” [166],19 which
furnishes a relation between x and v. To obtain a relation between x and
t, Varignon made recurse, as in the previous case, to the relation: 
, which integrated furnishes the searched
expression.

In the second memoir, Varignon introduced explicitly the mass in
his equations. The memoir deals with the motion of bodies, planets,
under central forces (both centripetal and centrifugal), on curvilinear
orbits. In the ϐirst part of the memoir he reproduced with the language
of Calculus the geometrical reasoning carried out by Newton to obtain
the expression of the central force acting on planets while rotating
about the sun.
In the ϐinal part of the paper Varignon assumed the motion of two
different bodies-planets, whose mechanical and geometrical quantities
can be read in the following table:
Varignon said that in one of his memoirs of 1693 [165],20 he had
proved the relation:
This relation is differentiated, and after some passages that I avoid to
comment, the expressions is obtained: 
, where
d means differential.
Fig. 3.3 Bodies under central forces.
Redrawn from [165], Figs. 6 and 7

At this point with reference to Fig. 3.3, where the thickest lines
represent the orbits of a mass point and C and D the centers of the
forces, Varignon identiϐied dl with PL and 
 with EF (parallel to lC and
fD respectively), and arrived to the expression:
Which assuming as constant one of the term of the equality (in
particular equal to 1), gives:
Geometry shows that PL is an inϐinitesimal of the second order, so that
the previous relation could be interpreted as 
, which is
probably the ϐirst complete expression in the language of Calculus of
the second law of motion (modern term). Varignon seemed however
not to be conscious of the fact. Firstly he did not say explicitly that PL is
a second order differential of the radius r, and secondly he ended his
paper by stating that because the mass m is constant for a given body it
can be neglected and instead of the previous equation one can use the
simpler one 
. Varignon is justiϐied however because he was
not searching the relation we see in his results. Varignon did not see,
but others probably did.
More interesting, though much later, are the applications of Calculus
by Hermann; not so much in his masterpiece the Phoronomia of 1716,
which is largely based on geometrical argumentation à la Newton, but
in a paper of 1727, Theoria motuum qui nascuntur a potentiis in corpora
indesinenter agentibus, published in 1729 [106]. The paper starts with
the general lemma, proved in an unconvincing way:
A force [Hermann said power] (P) acting continuously in the
element of time (dt) is equal to the mass of the body (M), to
which the force is applied, multiplied by the element of speed
(dC) produced in the small interval of time (dt) [106].21 (C.4)

That is 
. This is a nearly verbatim expression of
Newton’s second law, according to the standard interpretation,
expressed in the language of Calculus.
With his general lemma, Hermann could integrate the equations of
motion associated to different expressions of force as function of the
position of the body to which is applied. The purpose, limited to one
dimension, is to ϐind ϐirst the expression of the speed C as function of
the space S. This is made by changing the equation 
, in the
other, more used at the time, 
 and introducing the force
of a molecule p, such that 
, that is the force of unity of mass (he
so did not accept here the Newtonian locution accelerative force). In
such a way Hermann’s relations are simpliϐied as 
; 
. This last equation is easily integrated by giving 
. Once one has found C as function of S, he can ϐind the
relation 
.
If Varignon and Hermann were ϐirst to introduce the Calculus into
the equations of motions, Johann Bernoulli’s contributions were the
most interesting before Euler. Bernoulli faced more complex problems
than those treated by Varignon: the skew impact of extended bodies,
the motion of cycloidal and conical pendulums, the oscillation of a
ϐloating body, the vibration of a chain, the motion of a bi-pendulum, the
motion of a heavy wedge on a smooth surface due to the descent of a
body, the motion of a heavy wedge under impact, the motion of a body
contained in a rotating tube, the motion of ϐluids and so on. Dating
Bernoulli’s writings on dynamics is not a simple task, but most are after
Varignon’s, and probably after 1710, the year Bernoulli was involved in
the solution of the problem of the motion of planets about the sun [99].
In the following I will give some hints of the works preceding the
publication of the Mechanica sive de motu by Euler in 1736.
Bernoulli solved his mechanical problems partly with the principle
of conservation of living forces, partly using the “ordinary principle of

mechanics”. In the following quotation he made clear the difference
between principles like that of conservation of living forces, classiϐied
as indirect principles and the ordinary principles of mechanics. The
former are not principles in the strict sense; they are true propositions
but not yet proved in a rigorous way; the latter instead are evident in
themselves and accepted by all mathematicians.
In the book Hydrodynamics which my Son published not long
ago, he undertook that subject under luckier auspices, but he
relied upon an indirect foundation, namely the conservation of
live forces, which is most certainly true and was proved by me as
well, but is still not accepted by all Philosophers. It was I who
ϐirst presented this hypothesis in the Dynamics of solids (after
Huygens used a similar principle to determine the center of
oscillation), and from that hypothesis I ϐirmly exhibited the same
solution for a water-course which is given by the ordinary
principles of dynamics accepted by all Geometers [15].22 (C.5)
The work in which Bernoulli made an use of the differential calculus
moving in the same path of Varignon and Hermann is the Hydraulica
[15], composed not before 1738 but artfully antedated by him 1732 for
reason of priority over his son Daniel who published an Hydrodynamica
in 1738.
Hydraulica starts with some deϐinitions that are summarized below:
The space traveled by a body = x
The mass of the propelled body = m
The motive force within the limit of the region traveled = p
The speed acquired = v
The time through x = t [15]23.
which are followed by the well known relations: 
, 
 and therefore [15]:24

To notice that among the accelerating force there is gravity; it is
indicated by Bernoulli, as presently, with g. The motive force (the
weight) of a body of mass m is thus mg [15].25
I am not interested here to discuss the various and interesting
suggestions and some incoherences in the Hydraulica, but only intend
to show as Bernoulli applied the inϐinitesimal calculus (Fig. 3.4).26 Let
consider the conduit ABCFDE of Fig. 3.5, composed of two cylindrical
pipes of different size, ACDE and CBCF, of which the former has a base
GD open at the oriϐice GF through which it connects to the narrower
pipe BF. A homogeneous and weightless liquid ϐlows with a stationary
motion; the ϐluid is pressed by a motive force p at EA. Because the
speed of water increases passing from the left side to the right one, in a
limited zone IG the ϐluid is object to an acceleration. A part of the ϐluid
in the zone IDF remains at rest instead.
Bernoulli studied the motion of a layer of water having a surface
deϐined by the varying height 
 and the inϐinitesimal thickness
dt=Ll; the width is not named. The ϐluid in IG is endowed with an
accelerating force 
, while the speed with which it moves is given by 
, being v the speed of the ϐluid in the narrower pipe and m =
FG, its height. For the law of dynamics he has introduced at the
beginning, Bernoulli can write 
. The motive force is obtained
by multiplying the accelerating force (Bernoulli term) 
 by the mass on
which it acts, proportional to y, resulting in the expression 
. From now on I could not follow Bernoulli reasoning. It seems to me,
but I am not sure, he wanted to ϐind the whole motive force by summing
up the motive force for all the layers, that is by integrating the
accelerating force along the portion IG. The result of this integration if
furnished by Bernoulli as:

with h = IH the height of the larger pipe, to which Bernoulli referred as
the motive force or pressure p of the ϐluid [15].27
Fig. 3.4 Central forces varying linearly.
Redrawn from [106], Table 13, Fig. 2
Fig. 3.5 Flow of a ϐluid through pipes of different sections.
Redrawn from [15], vol. 4, Table 89, Fig. 1
3.3 Scalar Approaches to Mechanics
Approaches to mechanics that had at its center living forces, work and
action, classiϐied as scalar magnitudes from a mathematical point of
view, were quite central in the 18th century. Today these approaches
are part of what is called scalar mechanics because it did not use

geometric vectors. This is a modern category and cannot be applied to
the 18th century, when the use of a scalar approach was restricted to
solve particular problems. Only with Lagrange, at the turn of the 19th
century, a comprehensive scalar mechanics became an alternative to
mechanics based on geometric vectors.
If a scalar approach dated back to time immemorial, one can
however look at Descartes  and his followers as recent reference.
Without claiming that Descartes had exactly these notions, in his
writings many scholars read two principles of conservation, referred to
two different entities but both identiϐied with the term force. In the ϐirst
sense, and using a modern term to simplify, force is measured by the
work made by a force, usually gravity. In the second sense the word
force is associate to a body in motion and is measured by the product
m|v|, where |v| is its speed (being v the vector of velocity) and m its
mass. Both forces conserve in their ambit of competence; statics and
dynamics respectively. Leibniz in a his well known work Brevis
demonstratio erroris memorabilis Cartesii, published in 1686 [120],
noted that this homonymy was misleading. Starting from the
metaphysical principle that force should be conserved, he claimed that
m|v| was a wrong measure for the dynamic force [120].28 The writing of
Leibniz, in itself not particularly new, had the great merit to stimulate a
discussion on the true measure of force, that lasted for nearly a century;
the so called living forces quarrel, well known and documented by
historians; see [22, 40, 101, 104, 118]. And if in some cases the
discussion was sterile, it gave raise to a debate about foundation of
mechanics.
Leibniz someway was successful in changing his natural philosophy
into a mixed mathematics. His most interesting theoretical works in
this respect are Dynamica de potentia at legibus naturae corporum,
Tentamen de motuum coelestium causis of 1689, Essay de dynamique of
1692, Specimen dynamicum of 1695 and Essay de dynamique sur les loix
du mouvement of 1699 [121–125].
In the Essay de dynamique Leibniz, proposed two kinds of force, or
better two ways to measure force: static and dynamic, though in not
very clear way. The static force is taken to be the product of the weight
of a body and the height from which it falls (mgh), the dynamic force is
given by the product of the mass/weight and the square of speed the

body possesses (
), named living force, a term not yet introduced in
the Brevis demonstratio erroris memorabilis Cartesii, which had great
success for the whole 18th century [108]. The Essay de dynamique
seems to suggest that, all considered, there is only one kind of force and
that work can be transformed into living force and vice versa [27, 62].29
This reading, that could be not historically correct, was made by Johann
and Daniel Bernoulli, arriving to the formulation and use of the
principle of conservation of living forces.
In the following for the sake of space I will focus only on two
scholars, Johann Bernoulli and Maupertuis with the hope to furnish a
view on the conception about mechanics of the ϐirst half of the 18th
century, where the link with the philosophy of nature of the 17th
century was still important.
3.3.1 Johann Bernoulli’s Forces and Energies
The leading actors in the history of mechanics of the ϐirst half of the
18th century can be divided into three groups. The mathematicians of
the Académie des sciences de Paris; the Basel mathematicians and the
English mathematicians. This last group, apart from an initial
inϐluential role with Maclaurin, Keill, Taylor, choose to move on the path
of geometrical approach traced by Newton, that turned out to be
unsuccessful in the long run. The mathematicians of the Continent
adopted instead the algebraic approach introduced by Leibniz. They
disregarded, for the most part, the logical and conceptual problems
associated with the manipulation of inϐinitesimals and exploited the
power of the algebraic notation to solve new and old canonical
problems. Scientiϐic journals published these solutions alongside the
empirical results of chemists, astronomers, and anatomists.
A fundamental character of this enterprise was Johann
Bernoulli, the greatest mathematician of the period and the owner of
the keys of Calculus. As already commented in a previous section he
and his brother Jakob spent a lot of time to decipher the synthetic
Leibniz’s writings published on the Acta Eruditorum in the 1680s.
Differently from Leibniz they were interested more in the concrete
development of the algorithm than on philosophical worries.

Johann Bernoulli (1667–1748) was born in Basel. Johann’s father
Nicolaus had made a fortune as a Spezierer, a merchant of imported
drugs, spices, paint and the like. At the age of fourteen, Johann was sent
to Neuchatel to learn French and commerce and was enrolled ϐifteen in
1682 at Basel University. He got his prima laurea in 1684 with the
Dissertatio de effervescientia et fermentatione which was reviewed
nothing less than by Leibniz in the Acta Eruditorum of 1691. He wrote
his second dissertation for the academic degree as doctor of medicine:
De motu muscolorum meditationes mathematicae in 1694.
Bernoulli went on to Paris at the turn of 1690 where he won a good
place in the mathematical circle of Nicolas Malebranche (1638–1715),
as a representative of the new Leibnizian calculus. Here he gained
immediate success with his mathematical solution to the curve of a
chain, the catenaria, reached with Calculus. He met l’Hôpital (1661–
1704) and Varignon. Both became his disciples though they were older
than him. In 1693 he began his exchange of letters with Leibniz, which
resulted into the most extensive correspondence ever conducted by the
latter.
On the recommendation of Christiaan Huygens, Bernoulli had been
offered the chair of mathematics at Groningen. After Jacob death in
1705, Johann succeeded him at the mathematics chair in Basel. And
upon Newton’s death in 1727 he was considered the unchallenged
leading mathematical preceptor to all Europe. Among his many
important achievements is the discovery, in 1694, of a general
development in series by means of repeated integrations by parts; the
series subsequently named after him. He made fundamental
contributions to differential geometry (inverse problem of tangents), to
the calculus of variations and to the systematization of the differential
calculus (integration of algebraic functions), and coined the term
integral in mathematics. Bernoulli was actively involved in the priority
dispute between Leibniz and Newton about Calculus, supporting the
former. He became a member of the scientiϐic academies of Paris,
Berlin, London, St. Petersburg and Bologna [91].
Bernoulli writings, published in the Acta Eruditorum and in the
memoirs of the Académie des science de Paris, are collected in his
Opera Omnia, published in 1742 in four volumes [16] and in the
Virorum celeber. Got. Gul. Leibnitii et Johann Bernoulli commercium

philosophicum et mathematicum, of 1745 into two volumes [18]. Other
writings are the object of a modern editorial project, of which only a
few volumes are published, such as Der Briefwechsel von Johann I
Bernoulli of 1955, 1988 and 1992, and a volume on mechanics
published in 2002, Band 6 of Die Werke von Johann I und Nicolaus II.
Most of his writings concern mathematics; but there are some on
mechanics and a few on philosophy of nature. Bernoulli’s passion for
communicating his idea is clear from his numerous scientiϐic
correspondence, about 2 500 letters, exchanged with some 110
scholars.
Often Johann Bernoulli, thanks to his leading role in mathematics
and his Cartesian and Leibnizian philosophy, is charged to have slowed
down the diffusion of Newtonianism with great damage to the
development of science in the Continent. Personally I think that this
judgment, a part from being ungenerous, is misleading. If it is intended
that he contrasted some aspects of Newton’s natural philosophy,
particularly the idea of action at distance and defended Leibniz against
Newton on the priority of Calculus, then the charge is correct. But if it is
intended that he slowed the diffusion of Newtonian mechanics, this is
not absolutely true. Certainly, Bernoulli did not embrace completely
Newtown’s Principia; but he was probably the ϐirst to read and
understand it in full in the Continent and got from Newton what was
essential in mechanics; from the axioms of motion—he used a concept
of force very close to the Newtonian one, even though assumed for it a
Leibnitzian name, dead force—to the law of universal gravitation, its
mathematical expression only of course. He discussed and integrated
the equation of motion of a planet by showing with a different approach
than Newton, that it is an ellipse. He shared with Newton the
corpuscular conception of light.
Bernoulli lived a few generations after Newton and thus he moved
from a higher point of view. Besides the dynamics of the material
points, to which he contributed with the introduction of differential
calculus, Sect. 3.2.1, he also addressed other problems that became the
benchmarks for new theories of mechanics at the start of the 18th
century. For the purpose he used also theoretical tools not related to
Newton’s. In particular he developed and used the principle of living

forces and the principle of virtual velocities (modern—Lagrangian—
term).
3.3.1.1 Philosophy of Nature
It may be strange but the man who after the dead of Leibniz and
Newton was the greatest mathematician of the whole Europe,
graduated as a doctor in medicine at the university of Basel. This is less
strange if one reϐlects that studies at the universities at the time were
conceived differently than today and that his dissertations Dissertatio
de effervescientia et fermentatione and De motu muscolorum
meditationes mathematicae, though connected to medical issues, should
be framed into the tradition of physico-mathematica of the end of the
17th century. Here Bernoulli developed on the one hand themes typical
of natural philosophy, on the other hand he applied, in the second
dissertation, his recent acquisitions of Calculus to solve the mechanical
problems associated with the working of muscles. In the following the
evaluation of the two dissertations that Bernoulli himself expressed in
a letter of 1695 to Pierre Chirac (1650–1732), professor of medicine in
Montpellier:
I regret to have published it [Dissertatio de effervescientia] in
my youth, seeing now that I should have explained my thoughts
in a more geometrical way. There is in this piece of work no
analysis, neither new nor old, and, therefore, the demonstrations
cannot detain anybody except perhaps by the obscurity of the
words. As far as the dissertation on the movement of muscles is
concerned, I must recognize that I had not the leisure of dealing
thoroughly with such a curious matter, having been distraught
by the troubles which other matters had given me then. It is true
that I use a new analysis but it would be impossible to turn the
demonstrations which I draw from it in the usual way of
common geometry, for, if that could be done, Mr Borelli who,
although one of the greatest geometers of this time, did not
know anything of this new calculus, no doubt would have told
the truth better on these hypotheses which he established for
the theory of the movement of muscles.30

Though Bernoulli considered his dissertations as scarcely interesting,
they reveal his epistemology. In the Dissertatio de effervescientia et
fermentatione, to explain the process of fermentation he assumed the
interaction between two different kinds of corpuscles. Though I
attributed a deϐinite shape to the particles of acid and alkali, said
Bernoulli, that this could not be demonstrated by any experiment
because of the smallness of the particles which could be seen neither by
the naked eye nor with the help of a microscope. It is enough—
continued Bernoulli —for me if the attribution of such a shape to these
particles so as to explain at best the nature of effervescence does not
oppose reason or experience. The astronomers adopt that hypothesis of
the system of the world which explains at best the celestial phenomena
and the movement of the heavenly bodies although they cannot
demonstrate its truth by unquestionable and unshakable arguments.
They retain it so far until another one more likely and convenient
appears [18].31 This kind of epistemology is inϐluenced by the Cartesian
conception of mechanical explanations: what matters is to ϐind a
possible explanation; its actual existence has less interest. But
Bernoulli often ϐlanked to the Cartesian approach that of the mixed
mathematics; the assumed hypothesis should be veriϐied against the
experimental data and changed if contradicted.
In 1730, with the paper Nouvelle pensée sur le Système de M.
Descartes, Bernoulli won the prize proposed by the Académies des
sciences de Paris on the cause of the elliptic shape of the orbits of
planets about the sun and other aspects. Here he tried to defend the
theory of vortices by Descartes  against the charge of incongruence
raised by Newton and Huygens [12]. In 1734, he won another prize of
the same academy with the paper Essai d’une nouvelle physique celeste
[14], where he presented his own conception on the composition of
matter and the nature of gravity, that was a signiϐicative variant with
respect to Descartes’s.
For Bernoulli at the moment of creation the supreme being (l’Etre
souverain) produced two kinds of matter starting from a primeval
preexisting undifferentiated matter. A part of the undifferentiated
matter was left unchanged, it was going to constitute a completely ϐluid
medium divisible at inϐinity and inϐinitely subtle—the element of ϐirst
kind; the remain part of matter was used to make corpuscles that piked

up because of their motion form small masses (massules) whose part
are coherent without the need they are perfectly hard—the element of
second kind [14].32
Bernoulli is not very clear about the behavior of the
undifferentiated matter; on the one hand he asserted that it is so subtle
to not impede in any way the motion of the massules. On the other hand
he suggests that it can transport the whirlpools of massules he
supposed ϐill the universe. Bernoulli universe is made up of a huge
quantity of the element of the ϐirst kind; the elements of the second
kind though may be close to each other, leave intervals that are very
large compared to their dimension. As a matter of fact the volume
occupied by the element of the second kind is inϐinitely small with
respect to the volume of the ϐirst element.
The sun (and the stars) is made up of the matter of the ϐirst kind
very compressed. It, together with the element of second kind (the
massules), at the moment of creation acquired a motion of rotation
about its center. Because of this motion the massules may leave the sun
and reach the earth. This is the origin of light. To explain gravity
Bernoulli assumed that each star emanates a huge number of massules.
Made reference to sun for instance. The stars surrounding sun emanate
a lot of small masses, that are very tiny and can pass without any
difϐiculty all the material bodies, the planet for instance. They however,
because their great number, inevitably clash with the massules
emanated by the sun. In the impact, the particles merges to form
greater masses, the pelotons. These are pressed by the massules coming
from the stars and directed toward the sun. When they meet a planet,
the pelotons being grater than the massules, cannot pass through the
matter of the planet and push them toward the sun. This is the origin of
gravity. That gravity follows the law of the inverse square of the
distance is explained by Bernoulli by considering that the density of
pelotons varies with the inverse of the square of the distance, because
the surface of a sphere varies with the square of radius as well. The
pelotons that fall in the sun reintegrate the matter that left it as
massules. In the explanation Bernoulli is obliged to introduce an impact
between hard bodies, while at the beginning of his expositions had
supposed the massules not necessarily hard; this is of course an
incoherent position.

In an appendix to the Du discours sur le loix de la communication du
mouvement of 1724, devoted to the explanation of the cause of
elasticity, Bernoulli assumed that the presence of the subtle matter is
the main responsible for the elasticity of bodies. To explain the fact,
consider for example a vessel of any shape, ϐilled with subtle matter; we
can admit that this matter, which passes easily through the pores most
narrow of all bodies, will cross with the same facility the pores of the
vessel. We suppose that in addition to this subtle matter there is a lot of
corpuscles too coarse to escape through the pores of the vessel, but
which swim freely in the subtle matter; leaving between them intervals
so spacious that all these corpuscles pick up in a heap, might not
occupy a hundred thousandth of the volume of the vessel. Each of the
corpuscles, because of the different shape, will move differently from
each other. In this way the corpuscles form circles of various diameters
which tend to expand due to the centrifugal force; the expansion is
opposed by the walls of the vessel. A body, which plays the role of the
vessel described above, has a huge number of pores; when it is
compressed, they decrease and the the diameters of the circles tend to
shrink, so the centrifugal force tends to grow and to oppose the
narrowing; the elastic effect is thus generated [10].33
3.3.1.2 Metaphysical Principles. Living Force
and Virtual Velocities
Both the principles of conservation of living force and virtual velocities
were proposed by Bernoulli in a very clear form, even though the
proofs were based on scarcely evident metaphysical principles. Only a
mathematician could follow this approach. Neither Leibniz, that a great
mathematician, was able to do this because bridled by his philosophy.
The introduction of the principle of conservation of living forces is
carried out by Bernoulli in an important paper of 1724 (published
1727), Du discours sur le loix de la communication du mouvement,
presented for a contest to the Académie des sciences et belles lettres de
Berlin won by Maclaurin. The approach followed by Bernoulli was not
usual in the traditional mixed mathematics and would not have been
approved by Newton and only slightly tolerated by Euler, because based
on metaphysical questionable assumptions.

Principle of living forces.
Bernoulli proved, in more ore less rigorous way, as a theorem, that the
vis viva should be measured after Leibniz. Here the statement of the
theorem: “The living force of a body is proportional to the square of the
speed and not to the simple speed [and to the mass]” [10].34 The term
living force can be traced back to Leibniz and indicates the force of a
body in motion, or to Galileo and his force of blow. It represents the
capacity of action, or the force, of a moving body, for the simple fact that
it is in motion. This force, which is not deϐined clearly and distinctly, is
treated essentially as a substance. It transforms and does not destroy
itself. In order to argue this thesis, Bernoulli made use of the
metaphysical principle, typical of the pre-Cartesian philosophy of
nature: “In effect anybody consider it as an incontestable axiom, that no
part of an efϐicient cause can be lost, unless it produces an effect equal
to its lost” [10],35 generally not accepted by the community of
mathematicians.
The proof of the theorem on the true measure of living forces was
quite articulated and made use of springs and mass points. The ϐirst
phase of the argumentation considered two sets of elementary springs,
as shown in Fig. 3.6.
Fig. 3.6 Two assemblies of equally compressed springs.
Redrawn from [10], Plate 1, Fig. 6
The ϐirst set (system A) is composed by twelve elements, the second
(system B) by three elements, all the elementary springs are equal so

that the ϐirst set is four times long the second, if they support the same
pressure (Bernoulli’s term). Two equal masses, L and P are appended at
the free end of the springs. When the springs are left free to extend,
they apply a force on the masses putting them in motion. The
pressure/dead force is thus transformed into living force.
Bernoulli concluded this ϐirst phase of argumentations by asserting that
the living force acquired by the two masses, at a certain time, or better
at the end of the expansion of the springs, is proportional to the length
of the two set of springs, because it should be proportional to the
number of elementary springs contained in any set.
In the second phase of his argumentation Bernoulli studied the
dynamics of the two masses L and P of Fig. 3.6, passing from rest to
motion. This is made by recurring to the “known law of acceleration”, 
, which is rewritten as 
 [10].36 Notice that
Bernoulli has replaced a relation of proportionality, 
, with a
relation of equality 
, by neglecting the constant of
proportionality, in such a case the mass.
Integrating the previous relation from the instant (or position) of
release to the instant (or position) when the spring stops to act, with
Bernoulli’s notation, gives 
. This general expression is
particularized for the two masses L and P. For P the speed is still
indicated by v, while for L it is indicated by z. For the latter the
following relation holds true, 
—being n equal to the
ratio between the number of springs of the systems A and B, and also
the ratio between their length; in this particular case 
—because 
 clearly adds on the springs. In the end Bernoulli could write the
proportion:

For what discussed in the ϐirst phase of the argumentation, the ratio of
lengths n equals the ratio of living forces, so also vv : zz equals the ratio
of living force; the proof of the theorem is thus concluded. That the
living force is proportional also to the mass m is given for granted, what
was not considered as problematic and no need was felt to specify that
instead of p one should have considered p/m.
Bernoulli considered, just after his proof, and as a corollary, the case
of force of gravity, which can be imagined to be due to a spring of
inϐinite length which as such acts with a constant pressure. In such a
case the integral 
 gives ph where h is the height of fall of a heavy
body, and p is its weight. In such a way Bernoulli could connect his
reasoning to that of Leibniz, who to establish the true measure of living
forces made recourse to the model of a heavy body in its fall.
The issue of the conservation of living force, using for it the ‘true’
measure, is brought into the ϐield of the impact of bodies. In particular
the impact of two mass points that clashed frontally. On this issue it
must be remembered that Bernoulli’s essay concurred for a contest
based on the question: “What are the laws according to which a
perfectly hard body, put into motion, moves another body of the same
nature either at rest or in motion, and which it encounters either in a
vacuum or in a plenum?” [10].37 According to Bernoulli there are two
possible views about hard bodies; either as a limit case of plasticity
with inϐinite strength or as limit case of elasticity with inϐinite stiffness.
The ϐirst possibility is to disregard, for him, because it contradicts the
principle of continuity postulated by Leibniz which he accepted,
according to which in the impact between two bodies there cannot be
an abrupt change in speed, “natura non operatur per saltum” [10],38 as
it would occur for plastic bodies. Instead hardness due to elasticity and
inϐinite stiffness is welcome in physics. And “even if the existence of
hard bodies from this point of view would be physically impossible, it is
not less certain that one can always consider these bodies as one
considers prefect lines and surfaces in geometry and inϐlexible levers
without weight in mechanics” [53].39
For elastic bodies the three properties hold true in the impact:
1. The relative speed is conserved.

 
2.
The quantity of direction [that is quantity of motion] is
conserved.
 
3.
The living force is conserved.
 
The ϐirst two are proved by Bernoulli by using the ordinary laws of
mechanics. The third property, known as the principle (referred to by
Bernoulli as theorem) of conservation of living forces, or more simply
the principle of living force, could be proved, as a theorem by the ϐirst
two with simple algebraic passages, and Bernoulli did this. To notice
that he quoted Huygens while he did not quote Leibniz that already
noticed the fact that of the three relations referred above, only two
were independent [27].40
But for Bernoulli his algebraic proof was not necessary, because the
conservation of living force is logically necessary and derives from the
indubitable metaphysical principle of the reciprocity between cause
and effect. This is what Bernoulli said.
But now that this truth is put in its light and beyond all reach,
one has reason to admire the perfect conformity which reigns
between the laws of nature and geometry, which it observes so
constantly. In all circumstances, it seems that nature has
consulted geometry by establishing the laws of the notion. For if
it had been possible for the forces of the bodies, which are in
motion, not to have been due to the products of the masses by
the squares of speed, and that nature had made them in another
ratio; it would have contradicted itself; the order of geometry
would have been violated. The quantity of living forces, the only
source of the continuance of motion in the universe, would not
have been preserved; consequently, there would be no equality
between the efϐicient causes and their effects; in a word, all
nature would have fallen into disorder [10].41 (C.6)
Bernoulli concluded his essay by applying the principle of conservation
of living forces to a theme that had long stimulated the curiosity of

mathematicians, the search for the length of a simple pendulum
equivalent to a compound pendulum, that he himself had studied using
the ordinary principles of mechanics [9]. He based on this assumption
(or hypothesis): the living force of a compound pendulum made of n
masses connected to a rigid thread, dropped from a given position,
when it reaches the lowest position, equals the summation of the living
forces of the n masses assumed as free from the rigidity constraint, that
is belonging to many simple pendulums all dropped from the same
position of the compound pendulum. With reference to Fig. 3.7, the
whole compound pendulum HABC and the single masses A, B, C
forming the simple pendulums HA, HB, HC are dropped from the
horizontal position.
Fig. 3.7 Equivalent length of a compound pendulum.
Redrawn from [10], Plate 4, Fig. 15
Bernoulli knew that his hypothesis is scarcely convincing and
justiϐied it by asserting that however it is more convincing than the
hypothesis assumed by Huygens “who supposed that the center of
gravity of a composite pendulum, felt from an assigned height, does not
raise to an hight greater from which it felt if the single weights which
composed the pendulum tore loose when the pendulum has reached
the vertical position” [10].42 This because both for the compound
pendulum and for the single pendulums there is a common cause of
their descent: gravity.

Under this hypothesis the search for the length of the equivalent
pendulum is straightforward. The living force of the compound
pendulum, less a constant of proportionality, is given by 
, with the upper case letters indicating the masses
and the lower case letters indicating their distances from the point of
suspension H, that are proportional to speeds. In the case of isolated
simple pendulums, the living forces of each mass A, B, C are
proportional to their heights of fall, which are in turn proportional to
the distances a, b, c. Without any justiϐication, I do not see it,
Bernoulli, most probably referring to results found in his Nouvelle
theorie du centre d’oscillation of 1714 [9],
 assumed that the sum of
the living forces of the simple pendulums is 
, being x
the sought length of the equivalent simple pendulum. By equation the
two expression of the living forces 
, allows to evaluate x, which
assumes the well known value.
If in the Du discours sur le loix de la communication du mouvement
Bernoulli spoke about the conservation of living force clearly only in
the case of the impact among elastic bodies, in subsequent writings he
extended the idea of conservation in a clear way also when there is a
variation of the apparent living force due to the action of external
forces, due either to springs or gravity.
In the De vera notione virium vivarum, earunque usu in dynamicis,
printed in 1735 but probably written before [13], Bernoulli assumed
that for the conservation of living force one does not consider only the
free living forces, expressed by the mass multiplied by the square of
speed, but also the (living) force, which is stored for instance in
deformed springs. The living force is “something real and substantial”,
which has its own value, “it ϐlows but always preserves. This is what we
call conservation of living forces” [13].43 Let us consider for instance a
compressed spring with a body placed at one end. In this case the force
of the spring is completely inside the spring, whereas the body is at
rest. But, if we suddenly release the compressed spring, the body then
gradually acquires a speed and the spring is deprived of any force. Thus,
without any exterior transfer of force, we have converted the force of

the spring into the living force in the body. The procedure is clearly
reversed when a body traveling with uniform speed is brought to rest
by an initially uncompressed spring. If the spring could push two or
more bodies, when released, then the sum of the living forces gained by
the separate bodies, each one endowed with its own speed, is equal to
the force initially accumulated within the spring. This is true because,
as a principle, there is equality between the cause and the effect [13].44
Notice that Bernoulli seems to speak of living force of a spring; but
never he said exactly this; he spook rather of the force of the spring
which can be measured by the living force it can impart to a body
attached to it. His son Daniel instead spook clearly of the living force of
the spring referring to the living force which is actual but at a
microscopic level in the perpetual motion of aethereal particles which
are responsible for the elasticity [27].45
Bernoulli took again the problem of the true measure of the living
forces, using a new point of view. Let consider the two unequal masses
A and B of Fig. 3.8, at the end of a set of equal and equally compressed
elementary springs. Let then the springs allowed to extend; the masses
A and B are pressed in the opposite direction, until the springs
exhausted their force, and start moving with speeds a and b
respectively. Bernoulli then stated:
1.
The two masses are pushed by the same forces.
 
2.
The increments of speeds a and b are inversely proportional to
A and B.
 
3.
The ϐinal speeds a and b stay in the ratio 
.
 
4.
Consequently the quantity of motion of the two masses are
equal, that is 
.
 
5.
The time the two masses reaches the ϐinal speed is the same.  
6.
The position of the center of the common center of gravity C
remains at rest.
 

For the last point instead of a single set of spring one can considered
two independent sets AC and BD, ϐixed at C. At this point
Bernoulli made an assertion that at ϐirst appears unjustiϐied. Name f the
living force acquired at the end of the expansion of the springs, by the
mass A and 
 the corresponding one of the mass B, said Bernoulli, then
the equality holds: 
. This assumption appears clear
however by referring to the Du discours sur le loix de la communication
du mouvement, where it is proved that the living force of a set of equal
and equally compressed springs equals the number of springs and so
the length of the set. In the case of Fig. 3.8, at any instant the speed (as
well as the displacement) of the extremity of the two sets of springs AC
and BC is proportional to the number of springs. Thus as living force is
proportional to the number of springs and the number of springs is
proportional to speed, it follows that living force is proportional to
speed.
Fig. 3.8 Living forces from a compressed spring.
Redrawn from [13], Table 49, Fig. 2
By considering together the two relations, 
, and 
, by multiplying the numerator of the second term of the
proportion by Aa and the denominator by Bb (which equals Aa), one
obtains:
that is the living forces of a body in motion is proportional to the
product of its mass and the square of its speed.
Bernoulli applied the principle of living forces to solve a certain
number of problems in the Theoremata selecta pro conservatione virium
vivarum demonstranda et esperimenta conϔirmanda (of 1727) [11],
published in 1729, that logically should follow the text published in
1735 [27].46

Principle of virtual velocities
The formulation of the principle of virtual velocities by Bernoulli, who
referred to it as the principle of energies, is more difϐicult to explain.
Largely because he did not make it the subject of any speciϐic treatise or
article, but only of some letters in the years 1714–1715, to abandon
completely the matter, until ϐifty years later, Lagrange revived and made
the principle the fulcrum of his analytical mechanics. The letters in
object are from and to Varignon and Bernard Renau
d’Eliçagaray (1652–1719) and had as an occasion the comment on a
treatise of d’Eliçagaray about the motion of ships, Théorie de la
manoeuvre des vaisseaux of 1689 [56].
The ϐirst time Bernoulli suggested a solution based on the principle
of virtual velocities is in a letter to d’Eliçagaray of 12th August 1714,
which I was not able to read, but whose content is partially quoted in
[148] and in a letter of Varignon to Bernoulli of 22th January 1715.
Here Varignon said that Bernoulli considered as the greatest and ϐirst
principle of mechanics the following statement, known after
Lagrange as the principle of virtual velocities:
In each equilibrium there is an equality of the energies [what the
Latins (and Galileo) called momentum] of the absolute forces,
that is among the sum of the products of the forces by the virtual
velocities [20].47 (C.7)
The meaning of virtual velocities is explained in the following
quotation:
I mean with virtual velocity the only tendency to move the forces
have in a perfect equilibrium, where they do not move actually
[...]. Wherefore to avoid ambiguity, instead of saying that their
powers or forces are as the products of the masses by their
velocities you might have done better to express yourself well,
the energies of powers or forces are as the products of these
powers or forces by the virtual velocities [148].48 (C.8)
The greatest and ϐirst principle of mechanics49 was stated in a more
precise form in the letter of Bernoulli to Varignon of February 26th,

1715 (written shortly after the letter of Varignon to Bernoulli, above
referred to), which is well known because reproduced in the Nouvelle
mécanique ou statique by Varignon, published posthumous in 1725,
with the wrong date February 26th, 1717 (a typo?):
Conceive several different forces acting along different trends or
directions to balance a point, line, surface, or body; conceive also
to impress to the whole system of these forces a small motion
either parallel to itself in any direction, or around a ϐixed point
whatsoever: you will be glad to understand that with this
motion each of these forces will advance or retire in its direction,
unless someone or more forces had their trends perpendicular
to the direction of the small movement, in which case this force
or these forces, neither advance nor retire anything. These
advancements or retirements, which are what I call virtual
velocities, are nothing but than what each direction increases or
decreases by the small movement [...]. All this being understood,
I form this general proposition: In any equilibrium of any forces
in any way they are applied and following any directions, either
they interact with each other indirectly or directly, the sum of the
positive energies will be equal to the sum of the negative energies
taken positively [167].50 (C.9)
In this letter Bernoulli furnished the applications of the principle to
various problems.51 Bernoulli gave neither justiϐication of his principle
of energies nor a hint from what it could be derived. Two ways appear
possible; a static derivation or a dynamic derivation. Varignon
suggested the static alternative and made reference to Descartes  and
his letters to Constantijn Huygens of 1637 [26].52 Varignon said that
Bernoulli virtual velocities are nothing but the chemins instantanées of
Descartes and that the Cartesians had already deduced from his
principle the same equality of moments, or energies, or quantities of
motion:
Cartesians, according to the letter I cited of their Master,53 had
already deduced from his principle the same equality of
Moments or energies, or the quantity of motion, that you use, for

two powers in equilibrium on simple machines, and in ϐluids,
from the incipient motion that Mr. Descartes  prescribes in this
letter. But you are the only, for what I know, who extended the
equality of energies to as many powers you like, acting in any
direction and in equilibrium with themselves. This point is very
nice, but (as I have already said) it supposes the equilibrium
among them and does non prove it [20]. (C.10)
But it is possible a dynamic derivation based on the notions of living
and dead force. For Bernoulli the living force came from the
accumulation or sum of pulses of dead force; it is not difϐicult to assume
the accumulation is made by summing the energies pdx, where p is the
dead force and dx is the small displacement in the direction allowed by
constraints. If there are competing dead forces-pulses of contrary
tendencies, they destroy and in some circumstance there will be
equilibrium. It is natural to assume that the destruction of all pulses is
satisϐied when the sum of all energies vanishes; which gives Bernoulli’s
rule. The possibility of this derivation was clearly seen and justiϐied,
quite convincingly, by Vincenzo Riccati in his De’ principi della
meccanica of 1772 [26].54

3.3.2 Maupertuis and the Role of God in
Mechanics
Pierre-Louis Moreau de Maupertuis (1698–1759), after private
schooling went to Paris at the age of sixteen. In 1717 he began to study
music, but soon developed a strong interest in mathematics. Since 1722
he was living in Paris becoming friendly with the dramatist, novelist
and journalist Pierre Carlet de Chamblain de Marivaux, the playwright
Antoine Houdard de La Motte, and the mathematicians Joseph Saurin,
François Nicole, and Jean Baptiste Terrasson. His early interest in
mathematics now blossomed and, with instruction in the higher
reaches of the subject from these men, he soon acquired a deep
understanding. Maupertuis became an adjoint of the Académie des
sciences in 1723 (associé in 1725) and in the following year he
produced his ϐirst paper Sur la forme des instruments de musique which
studied the effect of the shape of an instrument on the characteristics of
the sound it produced.
In 1728 Maupertuis made a trip to London that was to exert a major
inϐluence upon his subsequent career. From this time on,
Maupertuis was the foremost proponent of the Newtonian movement
in France and a convinced defender of Newton’s ideas about the shape
of the earth. In order to extend the range of his mathematical and
scientiϐic knowledge Maupertuis went to Basle to study under Johann
Bernoulli. He matriculated in Basle on 30 September 1729 and spent
the session living in Bernoulli’s home. At the University of Basle he
received an outstanding education and training. He learnt of
Descartes’s vortex theory model of the solar system and of Leibniz’s
views on mechanics from his teacher Johann Bernoulli who was
perhaps the strongest supporter of these theories.
Back in Paris in 1730, Maupertuis began writing papers on
mechanics in which he used the expertise he had already developed in
mathematics. In May 1735 the Paris academy sent an expedition to
Peru to make measurements of the Earth. It was headed by Charles
Marie de La Condamine (1701–1774) and had Pierre Bouguer (1698–
1758)  and Louis Godin (1704–1760) as members. A second expedition

was sent to Lapland headed by Maupertuis. In a meeting of the
academy on 20 August 1737 he referred to that his results conϐirmed
that the earth was oblate. He was elected to the Académie Française in
1743.
Maupertuis was invited to Germany by Frederick II of Prussia in
1740 as part of his aim of bringing top philosophers and scientists to
Berlin. In 1746 Maupertuis was ofϐicially appointed as the president of
the Berlin academy, a post which he was to hold for eight years.
Although he tried very hard to make a success of his role as president of
the Berlin academy, things were rather against him. Partially because
he did not speak German and, although the ofϐicial business of the
academy was conducted in French or Latin, Maupertuis was rather cut
off from the day to day administration which was conducted in
German. Anyway he published on many topics including mathematics,
geography, moral philosophy, biology, astronomy and cosmology [98,
107]. The career of Maupertuis shows as a working mathematician
could manage about philosophy. Maupertuis was successful in both the
two ϐields, to the point that starting from the age of forty eight, in
precarious health he no longer carried out original works in
mathematics but shifted his attention to metaphysics.
In 1751 Maupertuis was accused by the mathematician Samuel
König (1712–1757)  to have derived from Leibniz his ideas about the
most important result he thought to have given to mechanics: the
principle of least action [24].55 The evidence which was put forward to
support the claim was a letter of 1707 from Leibniz to Jakob
Hermann, even though this letter could not be exhibited in the original
and the accusation by König was quite difϐicult to sustain [147].
The contrast between König and Maupertuis became the pretext for
keep on a cultural battle, already going on for years, which saw on the
one side the supporters of the new science, Euler in the lead, but also
d’Alembert, lined up in favor of Maupertuis; on the other side the
supporters of the claim that it was up to canonical philosophers to
dictate theoretical principles and the method of their disciplines to
mathematicians and physicists. They were headed by Wolff and his
school (but also the progressive Voltaire supported König). That of the
Wolϐians was a retro-battle; physics, mechanics, astronomy, theory of
matter, theory of light were now autonomous disciplines, based on

axioms often of an empirical nature, far from the old school formulas
concerning the substance (form and essence), which in some way
Leibniz had resumed and renewed [35].56 The battle was won; even
Frederick II supported the president of his academy, but
Maupertuis’s failing health collapsed under the strain and he left Berlin
for Paris in 1753
Of Maupertuis I will discuss here only his papers concerning the
least action: Loi du repos des corps of 1740 (published in 1742), Accord
de différentes loix de la nature qui avoient jusqu’ici paru incompatibles of
1744 (published 1748), Les loix du mouvement et du repos, déduites d’un
principe de métaphysique of 1746 (published 1748). The way
Maupertuis dealt with the subject is very interesting because it often a
view of the epistemological position about mechanics at be beginning
of the 18th century.
In his paper of 1740, the Loi du repos des corps, he did not speak
about action. He referred only to the minimum of a certain function of
forces. Quite interesting are his considerations about the different
nature of the principles to adopt in physics.
If the sciences are based on certain, simple and clear principles,
from which all the truths which are the object of them depend,
there are still other principles, less simple, to be honest, and
often difϐicult to discover, but which, once discovered, are very
useful. These in some way are the laws that nature follows in
certain combinations of circumstances, and teaches us what it is
on such occasions. The ϐirst kind of principles hardly need
demonstration, by the evidence which they make when the mind
examines them; the latter cannot be considered as physical
demonstrations in the strict sense, because it is impossible to go
through all the cases in which they take place. Such, for example,
is the principle so well known and useful in the ordinary statics;
that in all body assemblies, their common center of gravity drops
as low as possible. Such is that of the preservation of the living
forces. Never have we given a general demonstration of the rigor
of these principles; but no one, accustomed to judge in the
sciences, and who will know the power of the induction, will
doubt their truth. When we have seen that on a thousand

occasions nature acts in a certain way, there is no man of
common sense who believes that in the millennium it will follow
other laws.
As for the a priori demonstrations of these kinds of
principles, it does not appear that physics can give them; they
seem to belong to some higher science. However, their certainty
is so great, that many mathematicians do not hesitate to make
the foundations of their theories and use them every day to
solve problems, whose solution would cost much more trouble
without them. Our mind being as small as it is, it is often too far
for it [the distance] from the ϐirst principles to the point where it
wants to arrive, and it gets tired or departs from his path. These
laws, of which we speak, exempt it [our mind] from a part of the
way: one leaves with all his strength, and often has only a few
steps to go in order to reach the place where he wishes [135].57
(C.11)
The idea expressed in this quotation echoes that expressed at the
beginning of the 20th century by Albert Einstein in an article published
on The London Times in 1919, about the difference between theories
based on principles and constructive theories:
We can distinguish various kinds of theories in physics. Most of
them are constructive. They attempt to build up a picture of the
more complex phenomena out of the materials of a relatively
simple formal scheme from which they start out. Thus the
kinetic theory of gases seeks to reduce mechanical, thermal, and
diffusional processes to movements of molecules, i.e., to build
them up out of the hypothesis of molecular motion. When we
say that we have succeeded in understanding a group of natural
processes, we invariably mean that a constructive theory has
been found which covers the processes in question. Along with
this most important class of theories there exists a second,
which I will call “principle theories”. These employ the analytic,
not the synthetic, method. The elements which form their basis
and starting point are not hypothetically constructed but
empirically discovered ones, general characteristics of natural

processes, principles that give rise to mathematically formulated
criteria which the separate processes or the theoretical
representations of them have to satisfy. Thus the science of
thermodynamics seeks by analytical means to deduce necessary
conditions, which separate events have to satisfy, from the
universally experienced fact that perpetual motion is impossible.
The advantages of the constructive theory are completeness,
adaptability, and clearness, those of the principle theory are
logical perfection and security of the foundations. The theory of
relativity belongs to the latter class [64].58
After some premises Maupertuis tempted to formulate a principle of
minimum, general enough to pair the principle of living forces:
Let a system of bodies that weigh, or that are drawn to some
centers by forces that act on each body, as the power n of their
distances from the centers. In order that all these bodies may
remain at rest, the sum of the products of each mass by the
intensity of the force and by the power 
 of the distance
from the center of the force (that we can call the sum of the
forces of rest [emphasis added]) make a minimum or a maximum
[135].59 (C.12)
A modern reader can see here a particular case of the minimum of
potential energy theorem, limited to central forces depending on a
power of the distance and a system of mass points (remember that the
potential energy of a force proportional to 
 is proportional to 
);
constraints are not named but are implicitly assumed. The principle is
proved for same particular cases using the equation of equilibrium of
statics, with a procedure similar to that used to prove the principle of
virtual velocities; and probably Bernoulli’s and Varignon’s writings that
Maupertuis knew were of inspiration. Maupertuis’s principle though
interesting was however scarcely appealing for who wanted to give a
general law of nature.
In the paper of 1644, Accord de différentes loix de la nature qui
avoient jusqu’ici paru incompatibles, devoted to the refraction of lights
Maupertuis formulated his principle of minimum introducing the word

action—a word that for the same admission by Maupertuis, goes back
to an analogous deϐinition of Leibniz [27, 110]60—and basing it on the
metaphysical principle according to which “nature for the production of
his effects always operates with the simplest means” [136].61 That is
assuming the validity of ϐinal causes in physics.
Before applying the principle of minimum to refraction of light,
Maupertuis referred to Fermat, praising him for the brilliant idea but
also criticizing him because of his recourse to a wrong principle.
Fermat assumed that a ray of light to pass from a point A of a given
medium, where light moves with speed a, to a point B of another
medium where light moves with speed b, with the two media separated
by a plane, makes its way according to a path that needs the minimum
time. If the ϐirst medium is more rareϐied than the second, then 
and the angle on refraction is less than the angle of incidence, as
experience shows [1, 92].
Even though the result is correct, the approach was wrong for
Maupertuis, because for him the speed of light is the greater the greater
the density of medium. This position, that we know as wrong, was the
position of both Descartes and Newton and was natural to assume it for
Maupertuis. If applied to the ‘right’ nature of light propagation
Fermat’s principle would give a wrong result. Maupertuis thus
proposed to make minimum not time, but the effort that nature makes,
which he called action. It, according to Maupertuis, “depends on the
speed of the body and the space it passes, but it is neither speed nor
space taken separately [...], it is rather proportional to the sum of the
spaces multiplied by the speeds with which they are passed” [136].62
This deϐinition of action is in no way justiϐied. The suspect for a
cunning reader is that Maupertuis chose an a hoc expression on the
basis of result to obtain, known in advance. With reference to Fig. 3.9,
where V is the speed of light in the more rareϐied medium and W that in
the denser medium, and the positions of points A and B are given, the
action is deϐined by 
. It should be made minimum by
varying the position of R. Of course the result obtained is the correct
one.

Fig. 3.9 Action and law of refraction.
Redrawn from [136], p. 424
Maupertuis concluded his article by recalling the hostility of most
mathematicians to the recourse to ϐinal cause, asserting that he himself
partially agree with these criticism, even considering the errors on
which one can fall by using it, as Fermat and Leibniz did. But for him “it
is not the principle in itself that led them to error, but rather the harry
[with which they applied it]” [136].63
In the paper of 1746 Les loix du mouvement et du repos, déduites
d’un principe de métaphysique, Maupertuis extended his principle to
mechanics; statics and dynamics (limited to the impact of bodies). An
important part of the paper is the perspective with which the principle
of least action is presented. Instead to refer simply to nature which
operates with the minimum effort, Maupertuis brought into play
nonetheless than God himself and presented the principle of least
action as a proof of the existence of God, to the extent that the original
title of the paper was The laws of motion and rest deduced from the
attributes of God [157].64 Actually God had a twofold role. From the one
hand the existence of God, which is certain, with the attribute of inϐinite
wisdom, makes reliable the principle of least action; on the other hand
the trueness of the principle of least action deduced by experimental
and theoretical results is the proof of the existence of God.
The introduction of the principle of least action to mechanics is
however much more complex than the application to refraction.
Maupertuis has full consciousness of the fact and consulted Euler, to
whom he recognized greater skill in mathematics, exchanging some

letters with him on the matter. Euler appreciated Maupertuis’ work and
found in it some suggestions for its applications to his mechanics and to
develop the calculus of variations. Below Maupertuis’ principle:
GĊēĊėĆđ ĕėĎēĈĎĕđĊ.
In any change in nature the Quantity of Action necessary for this
change, is the less as possible.
The Quantity of Action is the product of the mass of bodies, by
their speed and by the space they travel. When a body is
transported from one place to another, the action is the greater,
the larger the mass; the faster the speed and the longer the
space by which it is transported [137].65 (C.13)
What leaves the greatest perplexities in the paper by Maupertuis is the
choice of the mathematical expression of the action to be minimized.
Apart from the arbitrariness in the choice, this deϐinition is not clear
mainly because it leaves as undeϐined the evaluation of the space to be
considered; a problem that did not exist in the case of refraction. From
the applications it appears that Maupertuis considered the space
passed in the unity of time; which is the same as speed; thus the action
is proportional to the square of speed.
The ϐirst situation to be examined is the impact between bodies of
mass A and B moving with an initial speed a and b. If the velocities after
the impact of the two bodies are in de order 
 and , the change in
speed is respectively 
 and 
. Maupertuis, with a reasoning
not fully perspicuous—at least for me and criticized by Euler also
[157]66—deϐined the action assuming the change of speed instead of
the speed itself, as it should be according to his deϐinition; thus the
action is given by as 
.
For the solution of the problem one has to introduce a constitutive
relationship; in particular to specify if the two impacting bodies are
hard or elastic. Using the mathematical language it can be said that the
problem of least action is a problem of conditioned minimum. Thus
even though admitting to establish the expression of the action without

any ambiguity, it remains the fact that it is not sufϐicient alone to solve a
given mechanical problem, sharing the fate with the principe of
conservation of living forces.
In the case of hard bodies it was know from experience and natural
philosophy, that after the impact the bodies move with the same speed
that is 
. If x is such a speed, the action assumes the expression 
, which is a function of a single variable x and can
minimized with the ordinary means of Calculus. In the case of elastic
bodies, it is known from mechanics—and Maupertuis added no
comment on this fact, by substantially minimizing the use of a principle
independent of his—that the relative speeds of the two bodies are the
same before and after the impact, that is it is 
, which
makes determinate the problem of minimum [137].67
In the second situation Maupertuis passed to examine static
problems, which were the object of his paper of 1740. For the sake of
simplicity he limited to the case of the lever. Let A and B the
masses/weights appended at the extremities of a lever whose length is
assigned, it is wanted the position of the fulcrum C for the equilibrium.
By indicating with z the distance CA and 
 the distance CB,
Maupertuis deϐined the action as 
. The choice of this
expression is justiϐied by Maupertuis by asserting the z and 
 are
proportional to the speed of A and B respectively [137].68 By
minimizing the action with respect to x, the law of lever is obtained.
3.4 Euler’s Natural Philosophy and Vector
Analysis
Leonhard Euler (1707–1783),69 born in Basel, the ϐirst child of Paul
Euler and Margaretha, spent his beginning youth not in Basel but in the
nearby Swiss countryside Riehen. His parents were his ϐirst teachers.
Margaretha, is thought to have instructed him in beginning reading. His
father gave an elementary education in mathematics. Like his teacher

Jakob Bernoulli, Paul Euler taught his young son mathematics not as an
isolated discipline but as underlying all natural knowledge, interrelated
with other ϐields.
Euler, who required instructional preparation completed, was sent
by his parents to Basel, perhaps as early as the age of eight. By the
second decade of the 1700s Basel was no longer in its golden period;
nonetheless the presence of Jakob and Johann Bernoulli made it a
center for scientiϐic and mathematical research. In 1715 Paul Euler
hired as a private tutor Johannes Burckhardt (1691–1743), a young
theologian with a tolerable background in mathematics. At the time
Burckhardt was supporting Johann Bernoulli in arguments with Brook
Taylor and other members of the Royal society of London over which
was superior, Leibniz’s differential calculus or Newton’s.
After completing his gymnasium education in 1720, Euler
registered at the university of Basel for courses in the philosophical
faculty, which covered ϐields of learning outside recognized professions.
It was the equivalent of the modern secondary school. The
philosophical faculty imparted a general education before a student
chose a specialty for a higher degree. Through hard work and an
astonishing memory, Euler mastered all of his subjects. During his ϐirst
two years he was enrolled in Johann Bernoulli’s class for beginners in
geometry as well as practical and theoretical arithmetic. He spent two
years earning his prima laurea, roughly equivalent to a bachelor’s
degree, receiving it in 1722 at the age of ϐifteen. In 1723 he passed the
examination of the philosophical faculty for the master of arts degree,
and ofϐicially received it in 1724 at the age of seventeen.
Euler’s increasing attention toward mathematics and natural
philosophy did not please his father, who obliged him to register in the
theology faculty in 1723 in preparation for taking holy orders. He felt
fortunate to continue Saturday meetings with the stern Johann
Bernoulli. While likely concerned about employment for his genial son,
Paul Euler accepted a Johann Bernoulli’s request for Euler’s shift out of
theology.
All suggests that Euler examined such classics as the second edition
of Copernicus’s De revolutionibus orbium coelestium as well as Kepler’s
Astronomia nova and Galileo’s Dialogo sopra i due massimi sistemi del
mondo. Euler’s master’s lecture shows that he was studying Descartes’s

Principia philosophiae and La géométrie. He possibly also read Rohault’s
Cartesian masterful Traité de physique, a major physics text of the late
17th century, which appeared in 1671.
The interests of Euler’s teacher make it probable that he read a
range of works relating to the new Calculus and its applications,
beginning with the Analyse des inϔiniment petits pour l’intelligence des
lignes courbes published in 1696 in Paris, attributed to de L’Hôpital.
Euler possibly examined two texts of Varignon, a correspondent,
disciple and friend of Johann Bernoulli: the Projet d’une nouvelle
méchanique, published in 1687, and the Nouvelles conjectures sur la
pesanteur of 1690. Varignon’s Nouvelle méchanique ou statique and
Éclaircissemens sur l’analyse des inϔiniment petits, both from 1725, may
also have been available. Euler must have studied Jakob
Bernoulli’s articles on the theory of inϐinite series, published from 1682
to 1704 and reprinted in 1713; his Ars conjectandi on probability, with a
preface by Nikolaus I, published posthumously in 1713; and Jakob
Hermann’s Phoronomia, sive de viribus et motibus corporum solidorum
et ϔluidorum of 1716. Other books which Euler referred to are John
Wallis’s Arithmetica inϔinitorum (1656) and Brook Taylor’s Methodus
incrementorum directa et inversa (1715). No conϐirming evidence exists
on whether Euler saw Johann Bernoulli’s pioneering articles for the
Académie des sciences de Paris in 1718 on what would become the
calculus of variations [24].
Euler was called to the Academia scientiarum imperialis
petropolitanae of St. Petersburg by his friend Daniel Bernoulli in 1727.
He remained there until 1741 to reach the Académie royales des
sciences et belles lettres de Berlin. Here he had some problems with
Frederick II that ϐinally pushed him back to St. Petersburg in 1766
where he remained until his death in 1783, at the age of 78 and almost
completely blind. One of the most proliϐic writers, among the greatest
mathematicians of all time, Euler treated all the themes of physics, with
an approach, however, more as a ‘mathematician’ than an experimental
physicist; from astronomy to optics, from electricity to magnetism, from
hydraulics to mechanics, to music, leaving an indelible mark in all
sectors. He also wrote many pages of philosophy of nature, still of
interest today because written with the sober language of the
mathematician. His writings, more than twenty books and pamphlets

and about 800 papers, are collected in his Opera omnia [90]. It remains
to complete the correspondence, written in several languages. Most are
in Latin and French, some in German and Russian (Euler also had
competence in Italian, Spanish, Chinese and Japanese). Despite his
strong religiousness Euler was an illuminist philosopher-scientist and
his faith in reason transpires in all his writings.
3.4.1 Philosophy of Nature
Since entered the university of Basel, Euler, as discussed just above, had
been deeply interested in the studies of theology and natural
philosophy and only seventeen he gave a lecture for his master degree
comparing the natural philosophies of Descartes  and Newton. 
Certainly he was not a canonical philosopher but he reϐlected at
length on the classical themes of philosophy of nature. He was not
interested in discussions of an abstract character and even for that he
was generally hostile to the approach to the natural philosophy and
mechanics of Leibniz’s school, represented in his time by Christian
Wolff (1679–1754), a colleague of his at the academy of Berlin.
Studying Euler’s philosophy is challenging not so much to understand
his works on mechanics or physics (modern sense), but rather to see
how natural philosophy was being transformed into his hands. It was
indeed his mathematics that inϐluenced his philosophy and not vice
versa; in particular his research on Calculus inϐluenced his conception
of matter and space. Euler had no particular reason to stand on one
side or the other in the philosophical debates of the period though he
had a profound estimate of Newton referring to him as the Summus
Neutonus; not being a canonical philosopher he could limit himself to
accepting those ideas that seemed closer to his sensitivity as a
mathematician without looking deeply into their consistency.
Euler’s ideas about philosophy of nature are scattered everywhere.
The natural references are however the Anleitung zur Naturlehre [89] of
the 1750s but published only in 1862, referred in the following as the
Anleitung the and Lettres à une princesse d’Allemagne [86] of 1760s,
referred in the following as Lettres. The Anleitung did not spread
greatly, even because of his late publication. The Letters had instead a
different fate. Michael Faraday (1791–1867) for instance read the

letters [24]70 but not the Anleitung which was probably read instead by
Bernhard Riemann (1826–1866) [155].71
Euler’s philosophy of nature was generally well received, praised by
Voltaire for instance. According to Alexandre Koyré the Lettres may be
included among prominent Newtonian popularizations [111].72 But
also by Leibniz, even though here and there Euler criticized his
philosophy of nature. It should be cited however a strong criticism by
three scholars well connected with Euler, d’Alembert and Lagrange and
Daniel Bernoulli.  They judged him severely. Lagrange wrote to
d’Alembert, “Our friend is a great analyst but quite poor a philosopher”
[116].73 D’Alembert replied indignant: “It is incredible that such a great
genius as him on geometry and analysis is in metaphysics so inferior to
the smallest schoolboy, not to say so ϐlat and so absurd, and it is the
case to say: Non omnia eidem Dii dedere” [116].74 Daniel Bernoulli in
turn complained Euler’s lake of competence in philosophical matter
with the Swiss astronomer Johann Jakob Huber (1733–1798): “Mr.
Euler is an admirable man, when the principles are well established;
but I do not ordinarily like him in the examination of principles. The
physical and mainly metaphysics are out of his reach and it is a great
misfortune for this excellent man to confuse his strength and his
weakness”75
3.4.1.1 Anleitung Zur Naturlehre
The Anleitung, has been received incomplete. The end of Chap. 5 and
the beginning of Chap. 6 are missing (which probably occupied about 7
pages). There are reasons to think that, even with these pages, the work
could not be not complete and we can therefore ask why Euler did not
ϐinished it [155]. In its current form the book consists of 21 chapters
that can be grouped as follows:
1.
Chapters 1–5, the role of natural philosophy and the main
properties of matter;
 
2.
Chapters 7–9, general introduction to the principles of
mechanics;
 
3. Chapters 10–11, apparent motion, general rules of motions;

 
4.
Chapters 12–18, the property of matter;
 
5.
Chapters 15–18, possible forms of matter;
 
6.
Chapters 19, gravity;
 
7.
Chapters 20–21, principles of hydrostatics and
hydrodynamics.
 
The opening of the Anleitung suggests a traditional treatise on
natural philosophy or natural science, even of Aristotelian mould.
According to Euler, natural science (the name he gave to natural
pilosophy) aims to explain the causes of changes that occur on material
bodies. Wherever there is such a science, he continued, it is very
incomplete, since it is able to state with certainty the causes of only
very few changes. Moreover, changes are restricted to those occurring
on inorganic or material bodies, thus distinguishing natural science
from the science of the mind, which aims to explain mental changes.
Nothing is said about living beings [89].76
All changes involving material bodies must arise from the essence
and from the properties of bodies themselves. What is common to all
material bodies without exception is called a property of the bodies and
therefore all things not sharing this property are excluded from the
domain of material bodies. The general properties of material bodies,
are those shared without exception. The essence of material bodies is a
property that is not only shared by all of them but such that all things
having this property must of necessity be considered material bodies
[89].77
Following the reading of the Anleitung it is understood however that
the causes and the properties of which Euler spook are those useful for
a mathematical treatment of the philosophy of nature, adopting a
mechanicistic approach; they are extension (that is the position or
conϐiguration), mobility (velocity and acceleration), persistence or
inertia (mass) and impenetrability (force, because forces are due to
impenetrability). Euler, wanted to found a coherent system, able to

describe all the inorganic nature, starting only from some principles of
mechanics and a few other hypotheses. Even Newton, another
‘mathematician’ who wondered about the relationship between
philosophy of nature and mathematics, in some of his Queries (28–31)
had sketched some ideas in this direction, but they remained only
queries.
A general property of material bodies is extension, and anything
that has no extension cannot be regarded as a material body. We are not
only convinced by our experience that all material bodies that we know
possess extension, but our concept incorporates extension in such a
way, that we can exclude all things without extension from the category
of material bodies. It follows then that whatever can be said of
extension per se, can without exception also be said of material bodies.
Everything with extension is divisible, and divisibility can be continued
ad inϐinitum; therefore all material bodies are inϐinitely divisible [89].78
However Euler did not enter the question of the actual corpuscular
(atoms) or continuum constitution of matter. What he said is that one
knows from experience that the actual subdivision of many material
bodies can be carried out to an astonishing degree, and that our tools
and senses are too blunt to permit this subdivision to be carried even
further. He was not discussing what can actually be done, but rather the
merely the possibility of taking the subdivision even further.
For liquid matter Euler however denied the existence of elementary
indivisible particles or atoms.
A liquid matter cannot be formed from a number of small
particles that are solid and hard, for whatever the shape and
arrangement of the particles might be, for it is not possible that
a pressure that acts at one location will propagate in all
directions with equal force [89].79 (C.14)
An important concept that Euler considered worthy to be exposed in
his foundational text is what today is called potential energy or possibly
work, to which he referred to as the effectiveness, and to which he also
assigned the name effort des forces sollicitantes [82].80 The effectiveness
of a force is the integral quantity that is found if one multiplies the force
with the differential of the distance to which it pushes the body, and

then integrates. This concept is of the utmost importance, because (1)
the sum of the effectiveness of all forces 
always has the same magnitude—given by the increase of living force—
for any three different coordinate planes, that is, in modern term, it is
invariant with the change of coordinates. (2) The whole theory of
equilibrium is based on it. For it can be shown that equilibrium cannot
occur, if the sum of the effectivenesses is not a minimum, or
occasionally a maximum: “This marvelous theorem was ϐirst derived by
the world renowned President de Maupertuis and is closely connected
with the other general principle of frugality. From this we see at the
very least that the effectiveness has a major inϐluence on all motions
that can be produced by forces, and that it deserves to be given a special
name [emphasis added]” [89].81 It also must be remarked however that
Euler seems not to be conscious that he had to limit the nature of forces
in his deϐinition; only for what are now called conservative forces—for
which the integrals appearing in the deϐinition of effectiveness are
independent of the path—Euler considerations has any meaning.
It may seem strange that in a treatise dealing with general aspects,
Euler had also found ample space to exquisitely technical aspects
concerning the laws of hydrostatics and hydrodynamics (Chaps. 20–
21). It must be kept in mind however that for Euler ϐluids were not only
the ordinary ones, for example water and air; also the aether (see next
sections), the medium through which light propagates, was a ϐluid and
as such subjected to the laws of hydraulics.
David Speiser, with a bit of whiggism, suggests that Euler was the
ϐirst to imagine a uniϐied ϐield theory, an idea and a hope that are at the
center of the ambitions of physicists [155].82 In fact, according to Euler
all physical phenomena, with the possible exclusion of gravity (see
below), can be reduced to the interactions of four scalar ϐields (the
densities and pressures of gross matter and aether) and two vector
ϐields (the velocities of matter and aether), interconnected and
governed by partial derivative equations. Seen as an attempt,
Euler’s way of proceeding with hydrodynamics is not very different
from that used in modern physics to unify ϐield theories, despite the
present more in-depth knowledge of the structure of matter and the
huge amount of accumulated empirical data. Even today, the basic

differential equations of a ϐield of physics, whose theory is known, are
also considered as fundamental for other sectors, in which a theory is
still lacking. In the case of Euler, the basic differential equations are
those of hydrodynamics and the radical hypothesis is that of an unique
aether [155].83 Despite the considerations of Speiser, which seem
convincing, in the Anititung there is however no mention of the
aethereal ϐluid, neither for what concerns electricity nor for what
concerns magnetism. Topics that will be treated with plenty in the
Letters.
3.4.1.2 Lettres à une Princesse d’Allemagne
At the time of the publication of the Letters, Euler stood at the peak of
his career. He was the director of the mathematics class (division) of the
St. Petersburg academy and a well known mathematician. Although he
sent the individual letters between 1760 and 1762, he had derived
them from articles dating back to 1720s. Thus, notwithstanding the
didactic character, they offer an outline of his scientiϐic ideas and the
modiϐications occurring in them along a long period of time.
The letters, 234 in number (a thousand pages), originated from
lessons delivered to the princess Charlotte Ludovica Luisa, a relative of
Frederick II of Prussia, but were conceived more generally for young
students. They met with prodigious success; by the turn of the 19th
century they had been translated from the original French into eight
other languages: Russian, German, Dutch, Swedish, Italian, English,
Spanish and Danish. The numbering of the letters is different from
edition to edition, here that of 1770–1774 is considered [86].
Euler’s letters essentially concern philosophy of nature seen from
different points of view. That of the canonical philosopher, with
considerations of physica generalis and that of the philosophers
emerging at the time. It is not easy to group them by themes; it can be
said that the ϐirst letters (about 140) have a more general character; the
others are more technical and deal with current topics in physical
research, among them at least seventeen letters are devoted to
electricity and nineteenth to magnetism.
Among the ϐirst letters there are ϐive dedicated to music (4–8). We
are in a period in which the musical theory was undergoing somehow a

revolution with Jean-Philippe Rameau (1683–1764) among the
protagonists. Euler, only twenty four, had written an interesting paper
on music, the Tentamen novae theoriae musicae of 1730–1731 [69],
which was criticized by Rameau. The two ‘musicians’ exchanged some
letters about consonances in the 1750s [24].84
Letters (17–44) follow, that deal with optics. The ϐirst four of the
theory of propagation of light with particular reference to Newton; only
a nod is made at Descartes; the others face problems of geometrical
optics, of brightness and color of bodies, and also of the structure of the
human eye. Euler compared the ‘hemanatistic’ (projectile) theory
attributed to Newton with his vibrational theory, reported in particular
in the Nova theoria lucis of 1744 [72]. He did so without mentioning
Huygens who had proposed a theory in which light spread in a medium
as pulses.85 According to Euler, to explain the nature of light and color, it
must be admitted celestial spaces ϐilled with a subtle matter, he called
aether. A ϐluid matter like air but much thinner; nevertheless, with
much greater elasticity (using a modern term, stiffer than air). And as in
the air sound is propagated, so light propagates in the aether [86].86
In the letters from 45 to 79 there are general considerations on
mechanics. They concern gravity in a general sense, the law of universal
gravitation, to conclude with the explanation of gravity, associated with
the elasticity of the aether, without however going into details. It is here
that one sees that a mature Euler is not fully satisϐied of his mechanical
explanation of gravity. Indeed, in the letters 46 and 54, for instance, he
wrote that “philosophers have warmly disputed, whether there actually
exists a power which acts in an invisible manner upon bodies; or
whether it be an internal quality inherent in the very nature of the
bodies, and, like a natural instinct, constraining them to descend”
[86],87 “On this question philosophers are divided. Same are of opinion
that this phenomenon is analogous to impulsion; others maintain, with
Newton, and the English in general, that is it consists in attraction
[86].88 Thus declaring his incapacity of a deϐinitive choice.
Letters from 80 to 87 concern aspects of natural philosophy, bodies
and spirits. In the letter 76 Euler criticized Wolff’s conceptions of
dynamics. He did this by referring substantially to what he had already
written in his Gedancken von den Elementen der Cörper of 1746 [72]
(see below).

Letters 88 to 114 address issues of ethic, psychology and logic.
Particularly in the letters 103–105 the diagrams of Euler–Venn are used
to explain some logical relations. The simplest case is that reproduced
in Fig. 3.10.
Fig. 3.10 Simple diagrams of Euler–Venn.
Redrawn from [87], p. 101
It is true that the idea of representing graphically logical
relationships was not completely new; this had happened in some
treatises of the 18th century. But it was to Euler that the mathematician
John Venn (1834–1923) referred to in his studies on logic more or less
a century later.
Letters from 115 to 132 concern essentially epistemology, from
which the inϐluence of Descartes and Locke and perhaps even of
Condillac transpire—without explicit reference to them—and letters of
metaphysics in which Euler repeated the criticism toward Leibniz’s
monad system.
To illustrate in a clear way Euler’s reasoning in philosophical
themes, in the following it is fully reported the letter 115, which
discusses the different types of knowledge: rational, empirical and
moral. It should be noted that when Euler named rational knowledge,

he referred explicitly only to geometry. Nothing is said about
mechanics, that in his treatises he always regarded as a purely rational
discipline.
Letter 115. The true Foundation of human Knowledge. Sources of
Truth, and Classes of Information derived from it.
Having taken the liberty to lay before you my opinion
respecting the most important article of human knowledge, I
ϐlatter myself it will be sufϐicient to dissipate the doubts which
naturally arise out of the subject, from want of exact ideas of the
liberty of spirits.
I shall now have the honour of submitting to your
consideration the true foundation of all our knowledge, and the
means we have of being assured of the truth and certainty of
what we know. We are very far from being always certain of the
truth of all our sentiments; for we are but too frequently dazzled
by appearances, sometimes exceedingly slight, and whose
falsehood we afterwards discover. As we are, therefore,
continually in danger of deceiving ourselves, a reasonable man is
bound to use every effort to avoid error, though he may not
always be so happy as to succeed.
The thing to be here chieϐly considered is the solidity of the
proofs on which we found our persuasion of any truth whatever,
and it is absolutely necessary that we should be in a condition to
judge if they are sufϐicient to convince us or not. For this effect I
remark, ϐirst, that all truths within our reach are referable to
three classes, essentially distinguished from each other.
The ϐirst contains the truth of the senses; the second those of
the understanding; and the third those of belief. Each of these
classes requires peculiar proofs of the truths included in it, and
in these three classes all human knowledge is comprehended.
Proof of the ϐirst class are reducible to the senses, and are
thus expressed:
This is true for I saw it, or am convinced of it by the evidence of my
senses.

It is thus I know that the magnet attracts iron, because I see it,
and experience furnishes me with incontestable proofs of the
fact. Truths of this class are called sensible, because they are
founded on the senses, or on experience.
Proofs of the second class are founded in ratiocination; thus:
This is true, for I am able to demonstrate it on principles of just
reasoning, or by fair
syllogisms.
To this class, principally, logic is to be referred, which prescribes
rules for reasoning consequentially. It is thus, we know, that the
three angles of a rectilinear triangle are together equal to two
right angles. In this case I do not say I see it, or that my senses
convince me of it; but I am assured of it’s truth by a process of
reasoning. Truths of this class are called intellectual, and here
we must rank all the truths of geometry, and of the other sciences
[emphasis added], in as much as they are supported by
demonstration. You must be sensible, that such truths are wholly
different from those of the ϐirst class, in support of which we
adduce no other proofs but the senses, or experience, which
assure us that the fact is so, though we may not know the cause
of it. In the example of the magnet, we do not know how the
attraction of iron is a necessary effect of the nature of the
magnet, and of iron; but we are not the less convinced of the
truth of the fact. Truths of the ϐirst class are as certain as those of
the second, though the proofs which we have of them are
entirely different.
I proceed to the third class of truths, that of faith, which we
believe, because persons worthy of credit relate them; or when
we say:
This is true, for several creditable persons have assured us if it.
This class, accordingly, includes all historical truths. You believe,
no doubt, that there was formerly a king of Macedon, called
Alexander the Great, who made himself master of the kingdom
of Persia, though you never saw him, and are unable to

demonstrate, geometrically, that such a person ever existed. But
we believe it on the authority of the authors, who have written
his history, and we entertain no doubt of their ϐidelity. But may it
not be possible that these authors have concerted to deceive us?
We have every reason to reject such an insinuation, and we are
as much convinced of the truth of these facts, at least of a great
part of them, as of truths of the ϐirst and second classes.
The proofs of these three classes of truths are extremely
different; but if they are solid, each in it’s kind, they must equally
produce conviction. You cannot possibly doubt that Russians
and Austrians have been at Berlin, though you did not see them:
this, then, is to you a truth of the third class, as you believe it on
the report of others; but to me it is one of the ϐirst class, because
I saw them, and conversed with them, and as many others were
assured of their presence by means of other senses. You have,
nevertheless, as complete conviction of the fact as we have. 31st
March, 1761 [88].89
From letter 133 onwards, physical problems are addressed. In
particular letters from 138 to 154 deal with electricity and letters from
169 to 186 with magnetism.
Apart from the Letters, the only Euler’s left written work on the
theory of electricity is a comment of a paper by Aepinus [83]. This
notwithstanding he considered electricity a very interesting ϐield to be
explored:
The subject which I am now going to recommend to your
attention almost terriϐies me. The variety it presents is immense,
and the enumeration of facts serves rather to confound than to
inform. The subject I mean is electricity, which for some time
past has become an object of such importance in physics that
everyone is supposed to be acquainted with its effects [86].90
(C.15)
Euler was primarily interested in the electric ϐield, not in the charge (he
was among those who rejected the idea that there were two types of
electricity). For him electricity is due to the presence of one electric

ϐluid, the aether which in normal circumstances ϐill the pores which
travers all bodies in all directions. The electric qualities of a body
depend on how easy or how difϐicult the pores are to open. In
conductors (modern term)—metals and such—the aether can easily
ϐlow in and out; in this case, the pores are always open, so to speak.
With other materials a certain strength is required to open the pores
through friction: these are the insulators (modern term).
To magnetism instead Euler dedicated some papers and letters, see
for instance [74, 75, 149]. Magnetism also is associated to a ϐluid.
Originally—in the Anleitung for instance—in Euler’s opinion the same
aether was responsible for gravity, magnetism, electricity and light. In
the Lettres, in particular in Letter 176, instead he was of the opinion
that the aether associated to magnetic forces was a special kind of
subtle matter and not simply the subtlest part of a single all pervading
aether [86].91 He seems never to have had any doubt that the light
aether is responsible for electric phenomena as well.
3.4.1.3 Matter and Its Properties
Euler dealt at length with physics and metaphysics of bodies, matter
and related properties here and there in his scientiϐic works. However,
there are some papers in which he focused speciϐically on the subject.
Among them: Dissertatio de igne, in qua ejus natura et proprietates
explicantur written in 1737, Gedancken von den Elementen der Körper of
1746,92 Recherches physiques sur la nature des moindres parties de la
matiere of 1746, Réϔlexions sur l’espace et le tems of 1748, Recherches
sur l’origines des force of 1750, Lettres à une princesse d’Allemagne sur
divers sujets de physique & de philosophie of 1760–1761, Anleitung zur
Naturlehre of 1750s.
According to Euler, bodies are characterized by the following
general properties: extension, mobility, inertia and impenetrability.
Among them the fundamental is impenetrability which as such should
be considered the very essential property of bodies.
Whatever is impenetrable belongs to the category of bodies, and
therefore the essence of bodies is their impenetrability, on which
therefore all the other properties must be founded [89].93 (C.16)

A body has extension in common with space, mobility with moving
images projected on a wall, both of which however do not possess the
property of impenetrability.
In [97], it is suggested that the idea that impenetrability constitutes
the essence of body depends upon two Euler’s claims: it is unique and
necessary to a body and it is irreducible, in the sense that conceiving a
body as impenetrable is a primitive clear notion. Both Boscovich in the
Theoria philosophiae naturalis of 1758 and Kant in the Metaphysische
Anfangsgründe der Naturwissenschaft of 1786, thought impenetrability
of bodies as an obscure idea requiring elucidation in terms of a more
basic notion, that of repulsive force. For them, repulsive force was the
physically primitive notion not requiring further elucidation, just as
attractive force was physically primitive [97].94 Considering that Euler
was deriving force from impenetrability (see below), his is exactly the
opposite path than that of Boscovich and Kant.
According to Euler, from impenetrability, extension and mobility
follow. His argumentations on these points have more a rhetorical than
demonstrative value, but are equally interesting. From the very
convincing thesis (a) no-extension 
 no-impenetrability, from the rule
of classical logic, it follows (b) impenetrability 
 extension. More
difϐicult is to argue (c) impenetrability 
 mobility; indeed a thing can
be at rest though impenetrable, thus impenetrability is not sufϐicient for
actual motion; Euler maintained it was sufϐicient instead for possible
motion, thus implication (c).
Inertia, called persistence (Standhaftigkeit) in the Anleitung, is also
associated by Euler with impenetrability. But the derivation (d)
impenetrability 
 persistence, has more problems than derivations
discussed previously. Euler’s strategy is to prove the implication (e)
mobility 
 persistence, that with the implication (c) would give (d).
The derivation of the implication (e) implies the principle of inertia
—“because when a thing is mobile, it should also have persistence,
since otherwise any change would occur without sufϐicient reason”
[89]95—that Euler, like d’Alembert, based on the principle of sufϐicient
reason, which has been the object of criticism by many scholars.
Because implication (d) would derive from two weak implications (c)
and (e) and it would consequently be two times weak. For a different
view on this point see [97].96

Bodies are portions of matter, thus Euler devoted a lot of attention
to the properties of matter. The Recherches physiques sur la nature des
moindres parties de la matiere, a relatively early work, began with the
following question: “It is an important question in physics and
metaphysics to establish wether or not the smallest part of matter are
similar to each other” [73].97 Euler tried to answer this question
coming to the conclusion that all the smallest parts of bodies, referred
to as the smallest molecules of matter, are made of the same stuff. In
order to speak about the smallest molecules it is necessary however to
distinguish between the properly said matter (groben Materie), gross
matter, characterizing the inertia of bodies to which only the term
molecules is referred to, from another type of matter, which is usually
not recognized as such, called subtle matter, interposed among
molecules (Notice that notwithstanding Euler used the term molecules,
he said nothing about a corpuscular conception of matter; that is the
molecules may be not corpuscles).
Following these premises, repeated some years later in the
Anleitung, Euler argued that also the subtle matter probably is of one
kind only; so in the world there are probably only two kinds of matter;
a subtle matter and a gross matter. The different apparent nature and
density of bodies depends on a different combination of subtle matter
and gross matter, with the subtle matter that ϐills the pores of the gross
matter, that may be more or less numerous and great. The molecules of
gross matter have no pores, and even if they cannot be divided in act,
being extended they can be divided with the imagination.
There will be thus at least two main kinds of matter; one [the
gross matter] which gives the fabric of sensible bodies, whose
the particles have all an unchangeable degree of density,98 which
is even greater than the apparent density of gold; the other [the
subtle matter] kind of matter will be that of which the subtle
ϐluid which cause the gravity is composed, and we call the aether
[73].99 (C17)
The thesis that there are only a few kinds of matter is carried out by
Euler with both physical and metaphysical arguments. From a
metaphysical point of view he invoked a principle of economics. While

for the gross matter Euler arrived at a more or less convincing
argument that it is only of one kind, for the subtle matter he had less
certainty.
To prove the uniqueness of gross matter, after making
considerations based on daily experience that lead to believe that there
is a single type of (gross) matter, Euler passed to examine two laws of
empirical nature. The ϐirst law concerns the fact that the force of gravity
varies with the inverse of the square of the distance, as Newton has
shown (Euler’s words) and thus the weight of bodies decreases with
the square of their distance from the center of the earth. The second
empirical law concerns the fact that bodies of different weight fall with
the same temporal law (in vacuum).
From the law of the inverse of square, Euler proved that the density
and thus the pressure of the aether towards the centre of the earth
which causes gravity (see below) must decrease with inverse
proportion of the distance. Thus, if x is the distance from the center of
the earth, the pressure of the aether should vary as 
, being A a
constant of proportionality, and h the pressure of the aether when at
rest, as it is for 
. From this expression of the pressure, it is easy
for Euler to prove that the weight of a body is proportional to the
volume of the gross matter (what Euler called the true size) it contains.
Then, from the independence of the temporal law of fall for bodies of
different weight, and from the law of mechanics (force and mass are
proportional), it derives that weight and mass are proportional. But for
Euler mass is the measure of persistence; this means that if one takes
two whichever piece of gross matter with the same true volume, they
have the same values for all the four essential properties of matter—
extension by assumption, mobility and impenetrability (not measurable
magnitudes) because they are shared by all bodies, and persistence as
just proved—thus they are perfectly equal, and thus all gross matter is
of the same stuff [89].100
A ϐirst draft of the hypothesis of the existence of a subtle matter or
aether can be found in the Dissertatio de igne, in qua ejus natura et
proprietates explicantur that Euler wrote in 1737 for the award of 1738
proposed by the Académie des sciences de Paris, which was assigned to
him [78]. To explain the phenomenon of combustion, Euler claimed that

the ϐlame arises from the sudden explosion of molecules of “materiae
subtilis igneae compressae” and to illustrate his conjecture he used a
corpuscular model: “Let’s imagine a great quantity of glass spheres, full
of air strongly compressed, and this mass of spheres is the material we
want. Suppose that a force intervenes just sufϐicient to break a single
sphere; it is clear that both the impetus of the air and the projection of
the fragments of glass will produce a similar effect in the nearby
spheres and then from these in all the others, until all are broken,
emitting with immense roar the air that they enclosed” [79].101
Euler went on to argue that the heat given off by the ϐire, the rapid
spread of the ϐlame in all directions seems to violate the ordinary laws
of mechanics and must be explained in another way; to maintain the
laws of mechanics it is necessary to resort to a further postulate: the
existence of an aether, a substance distinct from the igneous particles.
The ϐlame does not instantly disperse in the air due to the resistance of
this aether, much more elastic and rareϐied than the igneous matter,
which surrounds and holds the ϐlame in an unstable equilibrium. The
continuous shocks that are created at the limit between the aether and
ϐlame give place to vibrations that generate light and transmit it in a
straight line [79].102 To postulate an aether was certainly not new in the
18th century and many variants were formulated. For a discussion of
the various hypotheses discussed in the period 1740–1750 by
physicists see [25].
The properties of subtle matter had been discussed in depth in the
Recherches physiques sur la nature des moindres parties de la matiere
and in the Gedancken von den Elementen der Körper (to be taken again
in the Anleitung). In the second part of the former of the two papers,
Euler ϐirst denied the possibility of the existence of vacuum with
metaphysical considerations; scarcely convincing indeed. While he did
not mention a physical more convincing (for us) motivation, namely
that the presence of vacuum would not justify the oscillatory theory of
light proposed in his Nova theoria lucis, where propagation is
conceived, in analogy to that of sound, as elastic waves propagating in
the medium.
The subtle matter is very different from the gross matter; in
particular it is not gross matter made of very tiny corpuscles separated
by vacuum, but rather a continuous substance or, with a technical

modern word, a continuum. In the Anleitung, Euler spook at length
about his continuous aether and did not feel embarrassed to introduce
a concept, continuity, which was alien to the dominating mechanical
philosophy where the aether had usually a corpuscular nature.
Euler’s aether ϐills the whole space, leaving no emptiness. Air consists
essentially of aether with small corpuscles of gross matter. While the
gross matter is incompressible, the aether is compressible:
Gross matter is therefore not capable of any change other than
in the appearance of its shape, which, if appropriate forces are
available, can be changed in arbitrary ways.
[...] It does not appear to be true that subtle matter also has
always and everywhere the same density, such that it could
through no force be driven into a smaller space. Instead an
important difference between gross and subtle matter seems to
be that the latter can be compressed [89].103 (C18)
The aether although has the property to expand or shrink and behaves
like an elastic medium, has a certain density that is proper to it.
However, in no case it is possible to reduce a portion of aether to a
point, that is to effectively annihilate it [89].104 Euler clearly stated that
the compressibility of subtle matter does not imply the violation of its
property of impenetrability.
Euler did not propose a convincing, at least for a modern,
explanation of the force/pressure caused by the elasticity of aether
which is not deducible from any of the typical properties of matter,
extension, inertia, impenetrability, mobility, and therefore should be
treated as a primitive (essential?) concept. Forces on gross matter are
explained in Euler’s mechanics by means of impenetrability and inertia.
For instance, suppose an elastic body in motion that impacts with a
rigid surface; it receives a force and rebounds because of the
impenetrability of the surface and the resistance to change its motion
from the inertia of the ball. The pressure of the aether against a rigid
surface cannot be explained in the same way because it acts on static
situation also and the inertia of the aether is assumed to be negligible:
“because experience shows that the celestial bodies do not suffer
effects with their impact with the aether that ϐills the universe” [89].105

Certainly one can see an analogy with gases; but in this case he (Euler
himself) can resort to a mechanicistic explanation; this was what
Daniel Bernoulli did in his Hydrodynamica of 1738: the pressure of a
gas is determined by the impact of the particles on the walls of the
vessel that contains it [6].106 But for Euler the aether is not formed by
particles.
Mature Euler also doubted that there is on kind only of subtle
matter: “Whether there are several kinds of this subtle matter, some of
which are denser than others, we shall not be discussing here, but if
indeed there are several kinds, we shall refer to them collectively as
subtle matter. As long as the explanation of what occurs in nature does
not require several such kinds, it would be bold and against the rules of
a sound science of nature if, merely following our imagination we were
to increase the number of kinds of subtle matter” [89].107
According to him, the aether that is found in the universe is
compressed far beyond its natural state and consequently exerts a great
elastic force on the bodies formed by the gross matter [89],108 able to
explain the resistance of the materials, their elasticity and the force of
gravity.
The resistance of solid bodies is associated with the hydrostatic
pressure that the subtle compressed matter exerts on the various
particles of ordinary gross matter. An explanation similar to that
suggested by Galileo with the use of horror vacui. When two smooth
grains of gross matter come into contact with each other, the elastic
force of the aether makes them adhere strongly and the breaking
strength is maximum. If, on the other hand, the contact between the
grains is not complete, then the breaking strength will be the minor the
minor the contact surface.

Fig. 3.11 Strength of bodies [89], vol. 2, Table XX, Fig. 235
To show this more clearly, let the two bodies, or better two portions
of a body, of Fig. 3.11, ABCD and ABEF, be joined at the surface AB such
that between them the cavities ab, cd, ef are ϐilled with the aether. The
body ABCD on the one hand, will then be forced against the other body
by the aether that presses on the planes CD and EF; on the other hand it
will be pushed back by the aether in the cavities ab, cd, ef. Therefore the
force with which the body ABCD is pressed against the other body
ABEF is the result of the two contrasting forces.
The lack of resistance in ϐluids is explained by the fact that here
gross matter is so suffused by the aether that the particles have
nowhere immediate contact. To see how this could happen, imagine
that every particle of gross matter is surrounded by subtle matter, and
the particles consequently never approach each other so closely that
there would not remain some subtle matter between them. If every
particle were at rest, such a mixing would be hard to understand; but if
the subtle matter is in motion so that it continuously ϐlows between the
gross particles, then in this way immediate contact can be impeded
[89].109
The elasticity is explained by admitting that inside bodies there are
cavities (pores) ϐilled with subtle matter that do not communicate with
the outside. When a body is deformed, either compressed into a smaller
space or expanded into a larger one, then there will be change in the
size of its pores, some being expanded, but others being compressed,
with the elastic aether contained in the pores that follows the same fate
contrasting the change of size [89].110 The elasticity of commonly
experienced bodies is thus explained by means of the elasticity of the
aether, which is clearly a vicious circle. Thus what Euler actually
explained was not the elasticity itself but rather why bodies made by an
incompressible matter exhibit elasticity.
The account above referred about elasticity explains the behavior of
the various bodies. The difference in elasticity lies in the diversity of the
dimensions and arrangement of the pores. The loss of elasticity as a
result of heating is explained by assuming that the subtle matter
contained in the pores is set into motion by heat, opening up access to
previously closed pores; at the end the matter has less and larger pores

than before. Therefore even though before heating there were large
forces, these can vanish after heating.
The weight of the bodies, that is gravity, is explained by admitting
that the density, and therefore also the pressure of the aether
surrounding the earth, increases by increasing the distance from its
center. Euler is very precise in his explanation. Gravity should be
associated to the gradient of pressure in the aether around the earth
that determines the movement of the aethereal ϐluid downward with
the consequent downward drag of the gross matter, determining the
heaviness of the bodies [89].111
The section devoted to the heaviness of bodies ends with the
consideration that even if one does not know why the pressure
decreases in proximity to the planets, to stay with this doubt is always
better than not knowing anything as when one says that the heaviness
is due to attraction.
Although we have to stop here and hardly can hope ever to ϐind
the cause of the diminution of the elastic force of the aether, it is
easier to resign to this than to merely maintain that all bodies
are by their nature endowed with a force to attract each other.
For since one cannot even form an understandable concept of
this attraction, one can by way of contrast at least understand
how it is possible that the elastic force of a liquid matter is
reduced, and one also understands that this can occur in a way
that is in accordance with the laws of nature [89].112 (C19)
3.4.1.4 The Origin of Forces
Force in the 18th century was the fundamental magnitude of mechanics
and was introduced in various ways, each with its own problems. In his
youthful treatise of 1736, the Mechanica sive de motu analytice exposita,
Euler introduced the concept of force in a classical and rather generic
way. The force [potentia] is “an action on a free body that either leads to
the motion of the body at rest, or changes the motion of that body”
[66].113 It is worth noting that Euler had two Latin terms to indicate
force: potentia and vis. To potentia he gave the technical meaning of
cause of the variation of the motion of a body, to vis a generic meaning,

either technical or common, for example he can speak of vis gravitatis
as an example of technical use, as well as of vis inertiae and the vis of
impenetrability, as an example of common use.
Many years later, when he wrote the Theoria motus corporum
solidorum seu rigidorum, with a much clearer understanding of
mechanics, Euler proposed the deϐinition:
Deϐinition 12. What induces to change the absolute state of
bodies is named a force [vis]; it should be due to external causes,
since the body will remain in its own state due to internal causes
[84].114 (C20)
Is there any change in the status of force (in the ontology); from a being
has it became a name, and instead of a potentia a vis? The question
mark is justiϐied also because in the Anleitung, preceding of some years
the Theoria, Euler in a succinct proof of the laws of motion had written
that force is measured by the effect it produces. Here he wrote: “A force
twice as big must in the same time produce twice as big an effect,
because just in view of that do we consider it twice as big” [89].115 A
similar position is also reiterated a few pages after Deϐinition 12 in the
Theoria, as will be commented in a subsequent section. In any case the
above deϐinition hides some ambiguities, always present in the scholars
of the 18th century when they dealt with force, Newton included.
In the following in the attempt to decipher the complex
argumentations on the concept of force I will assume that force is for
Euler a primitive concept, which in particular is reduced to the
anthropomorphic idea of pressure. What Euler tried to explain is not
what is force or pressure but rather what is its origin. The fact then that
Deϐinition 12 deϐines force as the name given to the external cause of
the change of motion does not regard ontology but simply serves to
delimit the broader concept that force has in the natural philosophy of
the period, somehow a hypostatization of any cause, also internal.
In the Recherches sur l’origine des forces of 1750, Euler to explain
forces had paused on the role of impenetrability. He observed that
despite the inertia, or the general property of bodies by virtue of which
each body tends to preserve its state, we see that bodies that fall under

our observation continually change their state. So these bodies are
subject to forces that must necessarily be external [80].116
To illustrate how forces are generated Euler considered two bodies
A and B. A is at rest while B is moving toward A. After the impact, in
order to avoid its own penetration A acts to change the state of B and in
turn B acts on A. In other words A applies a force to B (due the
impenetrability of A, which is an external cause) and B to A. Euler
concluded that these forces see their source in the impenetrability only
[80].117 That is the forces due to impenetrability are passive forces
(modern term); they are not determined neither for their quantity nor
for their direction; they only are ‘obliged’ to act when the
impenetrability of a body is threatened, otherwise they do not produce
any effect.
It is true that a greater action would prevent penetration as well,
but it is more natural to assume a minimal value; that is forces have at
all times value and direction strictly necessary to prevent penetration,
so that if a minimum force is sufϐicient for the purpose only it acts
[80].118 In this criterion of “least action” Euler took inspiration from
Maupertuis and in it one can ϐind a justiϐication of the principle of least
action. To Maupertuis he made explicit reference in the letter 78 of the
Lettres [87].119
Euler argued that the forces that two bodies exchange are equal and
opposite to each other. For Euler this equality of forces, which is
commonly known as the principle of action and reaction, is a necessary
consequence of the impossibility of penetration. So, for him, it is a
rational and not an empirical law.
This equality of forces, hence the great principle of equality
between action and reaction, is a necessary consequence of the
nature of penetration. For, if it would be possible for the body A
to penetrate the body B, body A would be equally as much
penetrated by the body B; therefore, since the damage that these
bodies that penetrate, is equal, these two bodies must also
employ equal forces to resist penetration. So, as much as the
body B is solicited by the body A, that will be solicited equally by
this, both deploying exactly as much force as necessary to
prevent penetration. But these two bodies acting one on the

other by any force, will be in the same state as if they were
compressed together by the same force [80].120 (C21)
Euler was also able to analyze the evolution of the force due to
impenetrability in the case of impact. Differently from many scholars of
the period, and in agreement with Johann Bernoulli (and Leibniz), he
assumed that impact is not an instantaneous process: “The
instantaneous impact would not be in accordance with the always
respected law of nature, for which nothing can occur instantaneously,
and as for a leap. According to this law a so great change, as sometimes
is that occurring in the impact of bodies cannot occur without
corresponding to a some interval of time” [71].121
In the hypothesis that the impacting bodies are linear elastic Euler
can furnish an explicit expression of the force of impact. If P is such a
force, it is given by the expression 
, where F is the force
necessary to get a penetration k, while z is the current value of the
penetration during a static experiment; F/k, today known as stiffness,
was named by Euler degree of hardness (degree de dureté) [80].122 For
reasons of space, and also because it is not relevant for the present text,
I do not repeat the mathematical steps involved in the full solution of
the problem of impact, for instance the evaluation of the maximum
value reached by P. I limit myself to say that the approach and the
results are essentially the same Euler had obtained in his youthful work
De communicatione motus in collisione corporum of 1731 [67]. The
difference is that now Euler had a clear concept of mass, whereas in
1731 he had not. But the equations are the same, demonstrating how
mathematics may be more powerful than physics.
In subsequent works Euler associated force not only with
impenetrability but with inertia also. Imagine, for example, stopping a
moving ball by opposing it a hand; if inertia would have no role in the
explication of force one could be free to assume the ball without inertia.
In this case the ball would be rejected or stopped but the hand would
not notice anything; which is contrary to what happen in the real world.
To obtain an effect it is necessary that the ball is equipped with the
ability to resist changes of motion, that is that it has not zero mass
(inertia). In the Theoria Euler limited to say that forces originate from

impact of bodies because of their impenetrability. He wondered if all
the forces have this origin. Without excluding the existence of other
forces, he was content to say that a very important class of forces has
this origin.
Here’s how Euler describes the role of impenetrability: “The cause
of those forces by which the state of a body is changed may be agreed to
lie not in inertia alone but in inertia coupled with impenetrability.
Indeed, seeing that only bodies can be said to be impenetrable and
since bodies are necessarily endowed with inertia, impenetrability as
such involves inertia, so that impenetrability alone is rightly considered
the source of all forces by which the state of bodies is changed. It will
therefore be proper to consider this property more exactly as being the
origin of all forces” [84].123 He thus can still pretend that only
impenetrability counts, because inertia is given when impenetrability is
given.
The account of the force of impact between the two bodies A and B
considered in Sect. 3.4.1.4, may be completed as follows: when B comes
into contact with A, it experiences a force which we would normally
term A’s force of resistance to change of state. Note that the force is not
in any sense in A: what is in A is its inertia, that is not a force because it
only maintains A’s state. But this internal principle is experienced by B
as a force. There is, therefore, an external force acting on B which is not
internal to A. Nor does it act at a distance because it is a prior condition
of there actually being a force that A and B be impenetrable and that
they be in contact [97].124
Euler underlined in several occasions that the forces of impact are
external to the bodies and that inertia is not a force in the sense that it
is not responsible for the change in the motion of a body, it has only the
role of preventing it. In his work of 1746 Gedancken von den Elementen
der Körper [72], Euler criticized Leibniz’s, or rather Wolff’s, philosophy
of forces and monads. Euler’s main criticism concerned Wolff’s thesis
that the monads, which are the ultimate components of reality, are
endowed with an internal force that intends to continually change their
state. Euler believed that there was indeed an internal force, which
however tended to maintain the state and not to change it, and
concluded: “One must therefore stipulate that two particular well
differentiated classes of things exist in the world, to one of which

belong the corporeal things, whose essence consists in the force
[ability] steadily to maintain their state. The other however comprises
the souls and ghosts, which are endowed with a force to change their
state” [72].125
3.4.1.5 Concepts of Time and Space
Euler discussed the concepts of space in his technical works such as the
Mechanica sive de motu analytice exposita and Theoria motus corporum
solidorum seu rigidorum, and in some more philosophical ones such as
the Lettres and Anleitung. But the text in which he did it in a systematic
way is Réϔlexions sur l’espace et le tems of 1748 [77]. Euler’s discussion
is very interesting; he had perhaps less philosophical culture than a
professor of philosophy but he knew much more directly the topic he is
dealing with. Euler’s paper did not escape to Immanuel Kant (1724–
1804)  who read it a ϐifteen years after its publication. Kant observed
that the mathematical and empirical considerations of motion and
space furnished many data to guide the metaphysical speculation in the
track of the truth and avoid the void speculations of the philosophers of
his time [36].126
Euler defended his thesis of absolute space against the
‘metaphysicians’ who believe that only the concept of relative space
made sense. The metaphysicians in question were naturally the
followers of Leibniz and Wolff, not explicitly named however. That he
referred to them is evident when he stated “I strongly doubt [...] that the
equality of the spaces should be judged by the number of monads that
ϐill it” [77].127 He addressed his thesis of absolute space with
metaphysical and physical reasons, although he recognized that in fact
it is not possible to individuate any absolute system. The metaphysical
reason consists in afϐirming that a fertile concept in physics cannot be
empty: “One should instead assert that both the absolute space and the
absolute time, such as mathematicians look at, are real things which
submit outside our imagination, because it would be absurd to sustain
that pure imaginary objects could be assumed as foundation of the real
principles of mechanics” [77].128 The physical reason is that only by
conceiving absolute space can one explain the inertia of bodies,
empirically detected.

Euler argued with a simple example that inertia cannot depend on
the presence of nearby bodies to which refer motion by considering a
body that ϐloats on still water, remaining at rest in turn. If the water
begins to ϐlow, an observer, rigidly linked with it, sees the body move
without any force being applied to it. Or if he sees the body remaining
at rest with respect to the water, a careful examination shows him that
this is due to the effect of water dragging. So Euler can conclude: “I
strongly doubt that metaphysicians dare to sustain that bodies
maintain their position with respect to other bodies thanks to their
inertia, because it could be easy to show the falsehood of this
explanation because of the consideration I discussed on bodies close to
their neighbor” [77].129
Euler then dealt with the case in which the position of a body is
referred to ϐixed stars. Being them at rest—a possibility that is not
certain for Euler [84]130—the absolute space of the mathematicians
would coincide with that of the metaphysicians. But, he wondered, how
the ϐixed stars so far can determine inertia? This is impossible.
This thesis, rejected by Euler, is endorsed by some modern
scientists, who also refer to the reϐlections on the subject by the
epistemologist Ernst Mach.
As Ernst Mach has pointed out, it cannot be a coincidence that
the ϐixed stars appear indeed ϐixed relative to inertial frames,
and hence that it is reasonable to consider inertia as a force
exerted on local objects by the totality of the objects in the entire
universe. Thus, Newton’s law may best be interpreted as a
consequence of the basic axiom that the sum of the forces,
including the inertial force, acting on a particle should be zero
and of the constitutive law of inertia, which states that this
inertial force should be given by 
, where a is the
acceleration relative to an inertial frame [142].131
In essence Euler concluded that the preservation of the state (motion or
rest) of bodies is explained only by conceiving place according to the
criterion of mathematicians in an absolute way and not in relation to

other bodies. And nobody can say that the principle of inertia is based
only on something that exists in our head.
The reality of space is conϐirmed by the principle of preservation
the direction of motion. If space were a relative concept, what sense
would it have to speak of direction? It must be a direction of an
absolute space that can be conceived in a natural way by abstraction.
Euler ended his considerations on space by reiterating the
metaphysical argument that one cannot say that a principle accepted as
true in physics by nearly all scholars (the principle of inertia), is
founded on a thing that exists in our imagination only (the absolute
space), and from this it must be concluded that the mathematical idea
of absolute space cannot be in any way imaginary, but that there is
something of real in the world which corresponds to this idea [77].132
According to Ernst Cassirer the Réϔlexions sur l’espace et le tems set
up in fact not only a program for the construction of mechanics but a
general program for the epistemology of natural sciences. It sought to
deϐine the concept of truth of mathematical physics independently of
the concept of truth of the metaphysicians. The considerations of Euler
rested entirely on the foundations on which Newton had erected the
classical system of mechanics. His concepts of absolute space (and
absolute time, see below) were revealed not only as the necessary
fundamental concepts of mathematical-physical knowledge of nature,
but as true physical realities. To deny these realities on philosophical
grounds, means to deprive the fundamental laws of dynamics—above
all the law of inertia—of any real physical signiϐicance. In such an
alternative, the outcome cannot be questioned: the philosopher must
withdraw his suspicions concerning the “possibility” of an absolute
space and an absolute time as soon as the reality of both can be shown
to be an immediate consequence of the validity of the fundamental laws
of motion [36].133
Once established the reality of space, Euler went on to examine
time. Beginning with the observation that the ideas of space and time
always go together [77].134 Arguing on the reality of time is however
more complicated. Euler distinguished between the idea of time and
time itself. He had no objection to the idea that time is conceived as a
succession of changes. But this idea is not sufϐicient to assert that two
time intervals are the same, as one has to say in mechanics. Thus,

according to Euler, time cannot be reduced to the idea of succession of
changes; there must be something else: absolute time. Euler concluded
by saying that he realized that his considerations could only be taken
on by philosophers who are willing to give some sense of reality to time
and motion, while they will not make the slightest impression to those
who consider everything as relative [77].135
3.4.2 Mechanics and Mathematics
Euler’s role in mechanics has been overshadowed by the historians of
mechanics such as Mach, Dugas, Montucla, Dühring, very careful to the
fundaments, who see him more as a mathematician than a mechanician.
After all, more than 60% of his work deals with pure mathematics, and
even those whose object is mechanics and astronomy contain many
sections that can be classiϐied as mathematics. Today Euler’s role, even
for what concerns the fundaments of mechanics, is re-evaluated. Some
see him as the founder of modern classical mechanics as well as the one
who threw the germs of the theory of relativity and quantum
mechanics [156].
Euler was (lucky enough to be) born in a period when all the
mechanics and all the Calculus was to build starting from the
foundations of the 17th century. He has often been seen as the
successor of Newton and Leibniz.  Regarding the legacy left by Euler we
must distinguish between the actual one, that is, the inϐluence that he
had on his contemporaries and the inϐluence he could have had if all of
his writings had been published and understood. And also the inϐluence
it could have on modern mathematicians and physicists if they were
still studied. On this last point I limit myself to note that many of
Euler’s scientiϐic writings could be well understood by a modern reader
and that it is still possible to identify promising lines of research now
abandoned.
In any case the relevance of Euler’s thought, although interesting, is
not a priority of this book. The reference to predecessors and
contemporaries in mechanics is considered only on speciϐic points, the
main objective being to expose and explain his ideas. In this section I
will focus almost exclusively on the fundaments of Euler’s mechanics,
largely neglecting his elaborations in the areas of rigid body dynamics,

theoretical astronomy, theory of elasticity and ϐluid dynamics, even
though they represent the greatest contribution of Euler to mechanics.
In my analysis, I will undergo a critical examination of the current
view, due in large part to Clifford Ambrose Truesdell’s studies who
edited (vol. 12, 13) or co-edited six volumes of the collected works of
Euler, and wrote appreciated articles and essays on him. He was
Euler’s greatest advertising agent, making him a 18th-century hero; a
genius like Newton and perhaps superior to him. The current view can
be summarized as follows:
1.
Euler translated Newton’s mechanics into Leibnizian language. 
2.
He introduced the use of vector calculus in mechanics.
 
3.
He deϐined precisely the mechanics of the mass point, starting
from the uncertain Newtonian mechanics.
 
4.
He deϐined precisely the mechanics of the rigid body.
 
5.
He made fundamental contributions to the systems of
deformable bodies.
 
6.
He founded modern hydrodynamics.
 
7.
He introduced the concept of observer.
 
I will not stop to question these theses, limiting myself to say that it
is one of the many myths of historiography that sees the evolution of
science due to the work of isolated geniuses. It is hard to imagine that
one man, not even one with exceptional memory and great
workmanship and intelligence like Euler, could have done so much on
his own. However, I believe that it is true that Euler was able to gather
and summarize the ideas of his time and for this reason, when one does
not care about the genesis of the various ideas, but wants to take stock
of a certain era, the study of his researches must be considered as
essential.

The reconstruction of the basis of Euler’s mechanics is carried out
here by studying his published works—articles and books—and some
letters. The main text which has ben considered is Theoria motus
corporum solidorum seu rigidorum (hereinafter Theoria), written in
1760 and published in 1765 [84]. That is, I will start from a text in
which the foundations of mechanics have already been laid. Of course, I
will also refer to the Mechanica sive de motu analytice exposita (herein
after Mechanica), published in 1736 and to articles and books that
show both his researches and conceptions of natural philosophy,
among which the most important is the Anleitung.
Euler had his own clear idea of how to develop a mechanical theory
able to solve the problems that were then still waiting for a solution.
Already in his early treatise, the Mechanica, he presented the work
program that engaged him throughout his life: developing all the
mechanics starting from the laws of motion of the mass point, a concept
that he was among the ϐirst to specify. Here is Euler’s program as
reported in the general scholium of Chap. 1 of the Mechanica:
1.
In the ϐirst place, very small bodies which can be considered as
points are referred to.
 
2.
Then the approach follows for these bodies of ϐinite
magnitudes which are rigid and are not allowed to change
their shape.
 
3.
In the third case ϐlexible bodies will be considered.
 
4.
Fourthly, those which allow extension and contraction.
 
5.
Fifthly the motion of bodies, constrained by others.
 
6.
In the sixth case the motion of ϐluids are in the agenda [66].136  
Never was Euler explicit about his epistemologic conceptions about
mechanics. In particular, although in practice he treated mechanics as a
purely rational discipline, widely described with the language of
Calculus, nowhere made his position explicit and never equated the

status of mechanics with that of mathematics. Probably this silence was
not due to an oversight but to some form of uncertainty. The only
explicit statement he made about the role of mathematics in mechanics
was his declaration of the preference given to the analytic treatment
over the geometric one. For Euler only the former allows a systematic
approach to all problems, while the latter involves the search for new
routes for every problem. But this is of course true not only for
mechanics, but for mathematics in general, and it was for this reason
that in the 18th century in every ϐield of mathematics and physics,
geometry was replaced by algebra and Calculus, bringing the discipline
of geometry to a state of decadence, from which it will recover only in
the 19th century. Here is what Euler wrote about this point in the
preface of the Mechanica:
Thus, I always have the same trouble, when I might chance to
glance through Newton’s Principia or Hermann’s Phoronomia,
that comes about in using these [synthetic methods], that
whenever the solutions of problems seem to be sufϐiciently well
understood by me, that yet by making only a small change, I
might not be able to solve the new problem using this method.
Thus I have endeavored a long time now, to use the old synthetic
method to elicit the same propositions that are more readily
handled by my own analytical method, and so by working with
this latter method I have gained a perceptible increase in my
understanding. Then in like manner also, everything regarding
the writings about this science that I have pursued, is scattered
everywhere, whereas I have set out my own method in a plain
and well-ordered manner, and with everything arranged in a
suitable order. Being engaged in this business, not only have I
fallen upon many questions not to be found in previous tracts, to
which I have been happy to provide solutions, but also I have
increased our knowledge of the science by providing it with
many unusual methods, by which it must be admitted that both
mechanics and analysis are evidently augmented more than just a
little [66].137 (C22)

The last sentence of the above quotation, in which Euler declared that
the developments of mechanics and mathematics are closely linked, is
worthy of note; mathematics allows to solve problems of mechanics,
mechanics suggests cues to mathematics to treat unresolved problems.

3.4.2.1 Theoria Motus Corporum Solidorum Seu
Rigidorum. The Motion of Mass Points
The ϐirst part of the Theoria, the Introductio (103 pages over a total of
527, preface excluded), reports a summary of the main results on the
dynamics of the mass point, largely taking up from Mechanica, with
many clariϐications and updatings.
What a modern reader notices ϐirst, in reading the Theoria, though
to a less extent to what happens for the Mechanica, is the verbosity of
the exposition, common at the times, that in many cases instead of
helping confuses and makes it difϐicult a reading because it does not
allow to distinguish what is strictly necessary from what is superϐluous.
The sense of frustration is increased by the fact that in what is
presented as a formal and generally axiomatic exposition there is little
or no distinction between theorems and principles. Principles are
almost never declared; the main exception concerns the principle of
inertia.
Here is what Euler wrote about this point in the Lettres, a text
published shortly after the Theoria:
This principle [of inertia] is commonly expressed in the two
following proposition: A body once at rest will remain eternally
at rest, unless it be put in motion by some external or foreign
cause: Secondly, A body once in motion will preserve it eternally,
in the same direction, and with the same velocity; or will
proceed with an uniform motion, in a straight line, unless it is
disturbed by some external, or foreign cause. In these two
propositions consists the foundation of the whole science of
motion, called mechanics [87].138 (C23)
While in the Mechanica the principle of inertia is not explicitly referred
to as such, in the Theoria it is widely introduced with two propositions,
qualiϐied as axioms (see below). At no point Euler referred to as a
principle what a modern would treat as such; that is the metaphysical

principle of sufϐicient reason that plays a fundamental role in
Euler’s proofs.
The way of introducing and using principles becomes less
mysterious if one reϐlects that the 18th century mathematicians
understood the term principle differently from us. They referred to a
principle as a proposition placed at the foundation of a theory,
requiring nothing else. Then the principle can be either ϐirst, that is,
primitive, evident in itself or true empirically, or it can be a second
principle if it can be demonstrated by ϐirst principles. Among the
principles of mechanics there are, for example, the principle of
minimum action and that of the conservation of living forces. In
Euler’s time the logical status of these principles was not exactly
deϐined; it was thought that they could be proved by ϐirst principles
(and Euler will in part do so), but they still were not. Here is what Euler
wrote about principles:
Although the principles in question are new, as they are not yet
known or spread by the authors who have treated of Mechanics,
it is understood, however, that the foundation of these principles
cannot be new, but that is absolutely necessary that these
principles should be deduced from ϐirst principles, or rather
axioms, over which the doctrine of motion is established [78].139
(C24)
The term axiom is used by Euler in the Introductio only three times to
extend the validity of the properties from relative to absolute motion
and to introduce the concept of inertia, with the classical meaning of a
self-evident proposition. The term theorem is used eight times; there
are then ϐifteen deϐinitions and nineteen propositions qualiϐied as
problems. These propositions could generally be formulated as
theorems because they provide the solution of the problems also.
Euler’s operation, perhaps similar to that of Euclid, serves to make the
discussion less abstract.
The Theoria opens with the deϐinitions of rest and motion:
Deϐinition I. Just as a body at rest remains perpetually in the
same place, so a body in motion continues to change its position.

Clearly a body that is observed to adhere always to the same
place is said to be at rest: but that body which advances by
gliding from place to place in time is said to be moving [84].140
(C25)
The primitive concepts necessary to understand this deϐinition, those of
space and time, are introduced soon after, at a discursive level into two
Explications and one Scholium. Space is introduced as an absolute
entity: “Now we can only conceive a notion about this space itself by
abstraction, by considering all the bodies to be removed, and what is
left we decide to call space” [84],141 “a concept which was argued at
length by philosophers (and uselessly)”.
But the idea of absolute space, admitted Euler, cannot be used in
practice neither to deϐine the position of bodies nor their motion. They
must be referred to nearby bodies which must be able to maintain
invariable in time positions relative to one another in order to fulϐill the
purpose. To determine the location of a point P it is necessary to know
its distance from at least four non-coplanar points A, B, C, D [84].142
After introducing the reference system, or using a modern term the
observer, Euler went on to deϐine the notions of relative motion and
rest. A body is at rest with respect to A, B, C, D if its distance from them
does not vary, otherwise it is in motion (Deϐinitons 2, 3) [84].143 Note
that Euler did not use the term relative, but “with respect to”.
In a few deϐinitions Euler introduced the concepts of path (Deϐiniton
4), uniform and difform motions (Deϐiniton 5) and velocity (Deϐiniton
5), limited to uniform motion. Some comments are dedicated to the
deϐinition of velocity as the relationship between two heterogeneous
quantities. The difϐiculty, inherent in the geometric concept of
proportion and magnitude that requires comparison between uniform
magnitudes, is solved by introducing units of measurement for space
and time; in this way it is possible to deϐine (the numerical value of) the
velocity as the ratio between the numerical values that represent the
measurements of space and time. Deϐiniton 7 concerns the direction of
motion in the rectilinear and curvilinear cases, assumed as that straight
line in which the motion is occurring or, if it is along a curve, as the
tangent to the curve.

After these deϐinitions, Problem 1 follows, which deals with the use
of the differential calculus to evaluate the space traveled by a point
moving on a straight line with a velocity v assigned as function of time.
Euler assumed that for a small dt (the element of time), the passed
space ds, an elementary space indeed, is traversed with constant v
velocity deϐined by 
, in which v and s are explicitly thought of
as generic functions of time, without particular restrictions on their
regularity. This assumption is referred to as Proposition 3 in the
Mechanica. “As indeed in geometry the elements of curved lines are
considered to be the elements, non-uniform motion is resolved into an
inϐinite number of uniform motions. This is not the case, but it can be
ignored without error. In either case the truth of the proposition is
therefore apparent” [66].144
The idea of considering constant any magnitude (in the present case
the velocity) on condition of referring to a very small spatial or
temporal intervals is what gives Calculus a great heuristic power. If the
velocity of the body v is given at individual instants, then the distances s
passed in time t can be obtained with the help of the relation 
,
the integral of which gives 
. Similarly if the speed v
corresponding to a distance s is known, then the time t, in which the
distance s is passed, is given by the differential equation 
,
which gives 
.
More than one historian concedes that this approach to motion
contains elements of novelty. Meanwhile, velocity is deϐined as a
derivative (modern term, actually for Euler it was a ratio of
differentials) of a function s(t) which is considered as a generic
mathematical function and therefore an abstract concept not
necessarily connected to a geometric curve. Then time is treated in the
same way as any other physical quantity, and it does not have a
particular role as it happens for example in Newton, with his idea of
ϐluxions [156].145
I do not pronounce on this judgment about Euler’s originality.
Certainly a similar treatment was not possible before the introduction

of Calculus; furthermore it was established that Euler contributed a lot
to the generalization of the concept of function. If one compares the
way velocity is introduced in the Theoria and in the Mechanica, written
a twenty years earlier, he notices greater ease due to greater conϐidence
both with the Calculus and the concept of function. It should be kept in
mind that Euler’s text also had a didactic function and the maturation of
the concepts referred to was not only his but mainly of the
contemporary readers who did not need to be reassured about the
validity of the procedure.
Problem 2 considers the motion of a mass point on a plane curve. It
is reduced to the study of two mono-dimentional motions projecting
the velocity into two directions not necessarily orthogonal, even if,
added Euler, it would be better if they were such, for reasons of
simplicity of calculations. For the motion in space (Problem 3) the
projection is on to three axes. It should be noted that this is only a
kinematic problem where the problem of the legitimacy of
decomposition does not arise.
Studying motion with respect to ϐixed orthogonal coordinate axes
instead of mobile intrinsic or natural coordinates is considered a
fundamental turning point of Euler’s mechanics, a choice that appears
ϐirst in his work Recherches sur le mouvement des corps célestes en
général of 1747 [76]. The use of intrinsic coordinates, the standard
approach at the turn of the 18th century, had two drawbacks. On the
one hand it required skill to ϐind the right frame of reference. On the
other hand the approach was too difϐicult for bodies moving into a
three dimensional space. To be carried out consistently it needed
concepts of differential geometry such as curvature, torsion and so on,
fully developed only in the 19th century. The use of ϐixed coordinates
does not present these problems. Although the equations may be
complicated, they can be written in a standardized way. Even in this
case, however, it must be said that Euler was not the ϐirst to project the
equations of motion on two or three axes. According to Lagrange the
ϐirst was Colin Maclaurin (1698–1746) in his A treatise on ϔluxions of
1742 [115].146
If the curve FM be described by powers directed in any manner
whatsoever, and the force at any point M, resulting from the

composition of these powers, act in the direction MK, and be
measured by MK; let MK be resolved into the force MO in the
direction of the ordinates MP (
), and the force OK parallel to
the base AP (
); then, the time being supposed to ϐlow
uniformly, or the velocity at M being represented by the ϐluxion
of the curve FM, the force MO will be measured by  and the
force OK by  [132].147
Johann Bernoulli also had done it according to [134, 159, 160].148 But
only with Euler, the use became systematic; indeed it became the only
one.
Decomposing the motion into two or three directions can be seen as
a step toward modern vector algebra. A same magnitude, a geometric
vector, can give rise to different pairs (or triads if in space) of
components as the coordinate system varies. The choice of the
coordinate system can be arbitrary. To the decomposition of the motion
in several directions Euler gave the name resolution. The motion is said
to be resolved, provided that the small interval traversed in the element
of time is considered as the diagonal of a parallelogram or
parallelepiped [84].149 Euler also considered other types of coordinates
and therefore of decomposition. In problems 5 and 6 polar coordinates
are introduced in the plane and in the space respectively.
In Chap. 1 of the Introductio Euler carried out only kinematic
considerations. In the following chapters he went on to discuss the
causes of motion. They are classiϐied internal and external:
1.
Internal causes. Responsibile for the reason either for rest or
motion of a body, with the exclusion of all external causes.
They are able to contribute anything to change the state of
motion or rest.
 
2.
External causes. Responsible of the change of the state of
motion and rest of a body.
 

In Chap. 2 Euler explained the nature and characteristics of internal
causes, that is inertia. To achieve his purpose he introduced the concept
of absolute motion. In essence he said that, if there is an absolute space,
of any body one can say if it is at rest or in motion with respect to this
space; motion and rest which are classiϐied as absolute. This obvious
fact can be expressed through an axiom:
Axiom 1. Every body, even without being relative to other
bodies, either remains at rest or moves, that is, it is either at
absolute rest or in absolute motion [84].150 (C26)
Two more axioms express the principle of inertia, a term which Euler
has not yet introduced.
Axiom 2. A body, which is absolutely at rest, if subjected to no
external actions, will persist indeϐinitely in the state of rest.
Axiom 3. A body, which is absolutely in motion, if subjected to no
external actions, continues to move uniformly along the same
direction [84].151 (C27)
These axioms, which Euler called the principles of internal motion, are
justiϐied in a simple way, basing on the principle of sufϐicient reason.
For the state of rest Euler argued for instance, that because all the
external causes of motion have been withdrawn, no reason is present,
that a body should begin to move in one direction rather than in any
other: “This truth depends on the principle of sufϐicient reason” [84].152
A somewhat more sophisticated reasoning concerns the permanence in
the state of uniform motion. No change in the direction can indeed
occur, since there is no reason it should be deϐlected from that, in one
rather than in all the other directions; “clearly it surely maintains the
same direction, for the principle of sufϐicient reason”. About speed [the
modulus of velocity] it can be said that “unless it always remains the
same, either it increases or decreases, of which neither absurdity can
be said; for if it is either being increased or decreased, it must happen
to follow a certain law; but what this law may be cannot be conceived in
any way, since nothing surely will be agreed upon [...] Therefore nothing
is relinquished, unless as we have stated, the speed too always stays the

same, and the direction likewise” [84].153 The reader is asked to reϐlect
on the validity of these demonstrations.
With the introduction of the three axioms, the ϐirst theorem
(Theorem 1) appears very simple in reality. It asserts that the axioms
valid for absolute motion also apply to relative motion, provided it is
referred to a body (to an observer) that is at (absolute) rest or in
uniform rectilinear motion [84].154
In Deϐinition 11 the reason of the validity of axioms 2 and 3, that is
the internal cause of motion, is given a name, inertia (the persistence)
of the Anleitung):
That quality of bodies, the reason for persisting in the same state
present within a body itself, is called inertia, and also sometimes
the force of inertia [84].155 (C28)
with the concept of state (absolute) introduced as follows: “While a
body is either absolutely at rest or moving uniformly in a direction, it is
said to persist in the same state” [84].156
Inertia indicates that property of bodies, whereby being at rest
means that they will continue to be at rest, therefore as if they oppose
to motion; but since bodies set up in motion themselves equally oppose
all to be changed, either on account of the speed or direction; the name
inertia seems a good choice. Sometime, said Euler, it is called force of
inertia, because the body is resistant to change the state; but because
often force is deϐined as the (external) cause which is changing the state
of the body, force of inertia is not acceptable with this meaning—
though Euler occasionally did. Whereby, as confusion should arise, it is
better to omit the name force and refer to it by the simpler name of
inertia [84].157
Chapter 3 is devoted to the external cause of motion; to it also is
given a name, force, with Deϐinition 12. Though it has already been
introduced in Sect. 3.4.1.4, I rewrite it for the sake of clarity:
What induces to change the absolute state of bodies is named a
force [vis]; it could be due to external causes, since the body will
remain in its own state due to internal causes

After the introduction of external and internal causes of motion, Euler
could go on to demonstrate what is now known as the Newtonian
equation of motion, for the one-dimensional case. In essence Euler
considered as a necessary truth, that is rational, the law that Newton, at
least ofϐicially, considered contingent, that is empirical. The
demonstration takes place into two steps.
Theorem 2a. The small space [
], through which a given body
at rest is advanced in the assigned small interval of time dt by
different forces, is proportional to the forces [84].158 (C29)
Theorem 3. If equal forces act on unequal bodies at rest, the
effect [
] produced in the same small time intervals [dt] is
inversely proportional to the inertias of the bodies [84].159 (C30)
The proof of Theorem 2a is very simple, based on the assumption of the
additivity of the effect of different forces. Basically, said Euler, if a small
body, a corpuscle, is pulled forwards by a force equal to p in the short
time interval dt through the small space equal to 
, and if another
force equal to p is acting on the same body along the same direction, the
body progresses through another equal small interval equal to 
.
Thus this corpuscle acted on by a force equal to 2p in the same interval
of time dt is pulled through the small distance equal to 
. Similarly if
n forces—or equivalently a force np—act on the corpuscle at rest for
the same time interval dt, they move the body through the interval
equal to 
.
The demonstration is not convincing however. Euler assumed
indeed that the effect of the sum of two forces (two causes) is the sum
of their effects, that is he is assuming a principle of superposition and
this is not granted.160 And even if this is conceded the proof would be
only a trivial theorem of arithmetics (at Euler’s time) for which if two
quantities increase of the same amount they are proportional.
Moreover the demonstration follows a reasoning apparently different
from that carried out in the Anleitung. Here (Theoria), in the proof of

Theorem 2a, force is considered as measured a priori, in the sense that
it is independent of the formulation of dynamics, there (Anleitung),
force was measured from effect and the proof of the theorem would
become a simple truism. On this point see Sect. 3.4.2.2.
Euler’s writing is substantially contemporary to one of Daniel
Bernoulli, the Examen principiorum mechanicae, et demonstrationes
geometricae de compositione et resolutione virium of 1726 [5], in which
the latter posed the problem of the logic status of the law that links
acceleration to force, assuming force as deϐined a priori concluding that
the law is empirical and not rational. Bernoulli said that the part of
mechanics that deals with the balance of forces can be deduced from
the principle of composition of forces, as Varignon has shown. If
another principle is added to this principle, namely that according to
which the increases in velocity are proportional to the increments of
time multiplied by the force, mechanics is completed, relative to the
motion. Galileo used this principle. Bernoulli believed that the principle
of composition of forces is a necessary truth, while that of Galileo is a
contingent truth: “Nature could have made the increases in velocity in
the bodies proportional to the increments of time multiplied by any
function of the pressure, so that said t the time, p the pressure and v the
velocity, it was not 
, but for example 
 or 
”
[5].161
The proof of Theorem 3 is analogous. Basically it is said that if one
joins two bodies of equal mass under a given force the effect is halved.
With some details, following Euler’s reasoning: Let consider a corpuscle
having an inertia A, which at rest is moved by a force equal to p for the
short interval of time dt through the small space 
; if another
corpuscle B equal to A is acted on by a force also equal to p along the
same direction, it moves in the same dt by the same small space 
. If
the two corpuscles are joined together into one resulting in a body with
an inertia 2A (it is an implicit assumption by Euler), it acted by the force
equal to 2p, in the time equal dt moves still of the small space 
. Thus
a force 2p on the body of inertia 2A produces the displacement 
.
Similarly a force np applied to a body nA produce the same

displacement 
. Thus for the Theorem 2a, the force p on a body nA
produces a displacement 
.
Note that inertia is not equivalent to the Newtonian quantity of
matter, at least as it is conceived in the ϐirst edition of the Principia (see
Sect. 1.2.2.1), it is rather a property of a body whose measurement is
deϐined in an operational way as the constant of proportionality
between force and displacement 
. Euler can thus introduce the
concept of mass in the following way, with Deϐinition 15:
The mass or the quantity of matter of a body is the name given to
the amount of the inertia which is present in that body, by which
just as it tries to continue in its own state so it tries to resist all
changes [84].162 (C31)
where also the term quantity of matter is redeϐined by means of the
concept of mass, inverting the usual approach where the mass is
deϐined by the quantity of matter. The property of additivity is
implicitly attributed to the mass as clear from the proof of Theorem 3.
That is, if one joins two bodies with mass 
 and 
, he gets a body
with mass 
.
The operational (or dynamical) deϐinition of mass used by Euler
was not common in the 18th century; almost all mathematicians
treated mass (and inertia) as proportional to the quantity of matter,
taking for granted the meaning of this term (for instance the number of
atoms or a volume), a geometric deϐinition all considered). The
operational deϐinition of mass will be given a foundation role in the
19th century by Mach in his Die Mechanik in ihrer Entwicklung
historisch-kritisch dargestellt written at the end of the 19th century
[131].
In the Mechanica Euler had given a different formulation of mass
and it is after a theorem—and not a deϐinition—(Proposition 17) that
the amount of inertia (vis inertia) is proportional to the amount of
matter or mass [66].163 The amount of matter, however, was deϐined in a
vague way, like the set of points (atoms?) that make up a body. Only that

not all the points have the same mass. More precisely the points can be
taken having the same mass when the same force exerts an equal effect
on them (that is they have the same inertia). Thus the demonstration of
the theorem on the equality between inertia and mass of the Mechanica
is the result of a vicious circle of the type: the amount of matter
(geometry) is proportional to the amount of inertia (dynamics) so the
amount of inertia is proportional to the amount of matter.
At this point, by putting together Theorems 2a and 3 and using the
deϐinition of mass, Euler could enunciate Theorem 4, according to
which:
Theorem 4. If corpuscles at rest with masses in an unequal ratio,
are acted on by some singular forces, the small intervals through
which they are thrust forwards in the same short time intervals
will be composed in the direct ratio of the forces and the inverse
of the masses [84].164 (C32)
That is, for a force p and a mass A, it can be written 
.
In Problem 9, Euler started to replace the elementary displacement 
 measured from the rest with the variation dv of velocity. Coming to
the relation (with his symbols):
where 
 is a proportionality constant necessary to move from a
proportion to a formula, which is the natural way to work with algebra
and Calculus.165 Euler basically said that the increment 
, for a given
interval of time dt is proportional to the element of velocity dv and
therefore for Theorem 4 the above relation follows.
A modern reader sees in the previous formula the second law of
motion of Newtonian mechanics in the monodimensional case. To
discuss whether Euler’s was the ϐirst formulation of the equation of
motion—it was not indeed—is not relevant here; certainly it was one of
the ϐirst times the second law of motion was written in a very clear and

unequivocal form. The only thing missing is the meaning of the
constant 
; but this concerns only the choice of units of measurement
and Euler made a choice later.
What leaves a little ‘surprised’, especially if reading the Theoria
immediately after the Mechanica, is the fact that dv is placed directly
proportional to the time interval dt, Theorem 4 authorizes only to say
that dv is proportional to p and inversely proportional to A. The
proportionality between dv and dt had been treated as a theorem in the
Mechanica (Proposition 15), attributing its discovery to Galileo, who
actually saw it as a plausible hypothesis to be veriϐied experimentally,
or if not it, its consequence, that is the law according to which spaces
vary with the square of times. “Galileo was the ϐirst to use this theorem
in the investigation of falling heavy bodies. Indeed he did not give a
demonstration of it, however because of the strong agreement with
phenomena, nobody doubted it anymore” [66].166
Euler’s demonstration is very simple but circular. This is how it
works: consider n inϐinitesimal time intervals 
. The increase in
velocity du is the same in each interval of time 
, assumed equal to
each other, because by hypothesis the force, that is the cause of motion
is the same. So after n equal intervals 
 the velocity becomes 
, from which it follows that dv is proportional to 
[66].167 The circularity is to admit the constancy of the increase in
velocity over time, which is the same as saying that the increase in
velocity is proportional to time.
The reasons for omitting the proof of proportionality of dv with dt
in the Theoria are not clear, at least to me. It is possible that everything
derives from Euler’s, and others, studies on ϐinite differences, in fashion
in the early 18th century. These studies had shown that the variation of
a function y of x, in a certain small interval dx, is necessarily
proportional to dx itself, that is 
, width 
 a proportionality
constant, generally dependent on x. Euler assumed it natural that the
variation of velocity v in a given interval of time, once force and mass
are ϐixed, cannot but vary linearly with the inϐinitesimal interval of time

dt, and therefore 
. The physical nature of the problem tells us
that the variations of velocity in a certain interval dt are always the
same (
 const.), or it varies as 
, but the case 
 is
not contemplated.
The motion of a body moving along a plane curve (Problem 13)
following a force acting on the plane is treated by resolving the force
into two (orthogonal) components and then studying two separate one-
dimensional motions. It should be noted that unlike the case presented
in Problem 2, which was purely kinematic in nature, the idea of
resolution or projection hides the underlying physical principle, the
parallelogram rule, for which the projections of forces are forces
themselves that act independently of each other (without interaction).
This is one of the cases in which the power of the mathematical
instrument hides the physical nature of the problem. Somehow Euler
was aware of the problem and said that a force is traced back to three
forces P, Q and R acting in the (orthogonal) directions x, y and z, with
the “static resolution criterion” [84].168
The equations of motion eventually take the form [84]:169
in which A is the mass/weight while the symbol g denotes the height
through which a heavy body drops in the time of a second, in a speciϐied
region of the globe, in case mass and weight are assumed to have the
same numerical value: “Let the mass of the corpuscle be equal to A,
which clearly indicates as well the weight, if the corpuscle is situated in
a region of the earth chosen to evaluate an absolute measure [84].170,171
In these equations the constant 
 introduced in Problem 9 has been
replaced by 2g. That is a coefϐicient that had only the role to transform
a proportion in an algebraic equation is given a mechanical meaning,
the space traveled in one second. Still in his work of 1749 Euler had
assumed 
, which in modern terms, corresponds to assume an
acceleration of gravity 
 and thus 
. The choice had

derived from the desire of giving a simple expression to the speed of fall
from the height h, which is simply given by 
, instead of 
. No inconsistency is at play; it is just a different choice of units of
measurement.
To note that the equations of motion Euler wrote are in accord with
the rule of Calculus of the 18th century, where the concept of
differential was fundamental. Using modern notation, Euler normally
wrote the equation of motion as 
, and not 
, where
the symbols are the usual. However, he also used the acceleration a in a
technical way, as the ratios dv/dt or 
. This is what he wrote
when integrating the equation of motion: “[In dynamics] the effect
should be measured by the acceleration or the change in the speed, that
is impressed on the body in a given time: this is proportional to that
force divided by the mass of the body. [...] dv is equal to the product of
the acceleration and the element of distance travelled” [66].172
3.4.2.2 Measurement of Forces
The discussion of the origin of forces given in Euler’s writings on
natural philosophy, in the Researches sur l’origine des forces in
particular, does not provide any criterion for their measurement. The
force due to impenetrability is not measurable in itself as it exists only
at the moment of impact. What, at least in principle, is declared to be
measurable, is its effect, which for Euler according to the Newtonian
approach, is expressed by the variation in velocity in an assigned small
interval of time, which in the case of the impact should be much less
than the duration of the contact between the bodies that collide.
In the writings speciϐic on mechanics, such as the Mechanica and the
Theoria, the problem is discussed a little more. In the ϐirst treatise,
Euler showed no particular difϐiculty to introduce the measurement of
forces. It could be obtained by the rules of statics, a discipline at the
time considered well founded. These rules indeed allows to measure a
force as function of a sample force, for instance a weight. It is enough to
evaluate how many unities of the sample force should be summed (the
additivity of forces is granted, for instance by the rule of parallelogram)

to reach the equilibrium when they act in the opposite direction with
respect to the force to be measured. This means that the measure of a
force is a priori and independent of dynamics, that is independent of
the dynamical effect it produces.
Euler is more careful in the Theoria, here he distinguished between
a static and a dynamic measure; of course when two forces measured
with the two approaches give the same numerical value for Euler the
forces are equal under all the aspects, that is there are not dynamic and
static forces but only different ways to measure them; the dynamic way
is used only when static measurements are not possible, as for instance
it occurs for gravitational forces of astronomy.
Euler had established his equations of motion, Theorems 2a and 3,
referring to the increment of the displacement of a body due a force
starting from the rest, because only in this case he had an independent
criterion to measure force, the static one. In the case of motion Euler
said that nothing is known concerning the measurement of forces and
the way to measure them is left to us: “Since in statics, from which we
draw the measurement of forces, the bodies to which the
measurements are applied, may be considered in a state of rest, and
thus nothing is deϐined concerning the measurement of these forces
when they act on the body in motion” [84].173
In dynamics the only way left for the measure of forces should be
searched in the measure of the effects, that is they can be measured a
posteriori only: “Therefore the magnitude of these forces is determined
not by the impenetrability, which clearly cannot be quantiϐied, but from
the change of the state which must be effected lest the body penetrate
each other” [84].174
Euler, however, did not dwell at length on the problem of measuring
forces and did not relate the dynamic and a posteriori measure of force,
based on motions, with the static and a priori measure, based on the
equilibrium. In such a way he avoided to make clear if the foundation of
his mechanics is dynamic or static. Euler left comments on the dynamic
measure of force only in some Explicationes of the Theoria, as he would
not to compromise himself with strong declarations. Here he proposed
the convention that if a force acting on a body in motion causes a
displacement shift 
 in the direction in which it acts, that force is

assumed to be equal to the force that would cause the same
displacement 
 from the rest, evaluated, for instance, according to
Theorem 2a (that is if 
 is the law derived from Theorem 2a, and
the shift of displacement measured for a body in motion is 
, the force
associated to this variation of motion is given by 
).
For the forces, then, by which bodies already in motion are acted
upon, we set up this ground of measuring, so that we shall judge
these equal to those which would have executed the same effect
on the same bodies at rest in the same time. This ground,
however, does not require proving, because it rests upon a
deϐinition and thus it was open to us to establish it. For if for any
motion the small space 
 should be equal to small space 
,
through which the same small body at rest is brought forward in
that same little time by force p, we also call those forces equal
[84].175 (C33)
Admitting of measuring a force through its dynamical effect, it seems
that the Newtonian law of motion could be considered as a simple
deϐinition and the concept of force could become superϐluous. Only a
weak ontological substratum would remain which allows to attribute
some reality to force; but it is a link that can be broken without
substantial changes in the formal development of mechanics.
Actually, things are a little different; to better understand it,
consider the relation 
. If the mass m is assumed as a primitive
magnitude, deϐined for example in a geometric way as a volume, then 
 can be seen either as an operational deϐinition of f or as an
empirical law—in this last case f should be deϐined a priori. If, on the
other hand, the mass m is deϐined operationally (or dynamically), then
the force f must necessarily be a primitive magnitude. Moving from
epistemological and ontological aspects to purely mathematical ones in
which only the numerical values of the physical quantities, that is their
measures, are concerned, then the different deϐinitions of force and

mass ϐlatten out. For example, considering force as a primitive physical
magnitude, the natural way to measure it is the use of the laws of
statics. But the force can also be measured by the relation 
,
without it becomes a deϐined quantity because a measure does not
affect the ontology of f. The mass either deϐined operationally
(dynamically) or directly (geometrically) can always be measured with
weight. In the ϐirst case because there is an empirical law—the
acceleration of heavy bodies is constant—which allows to afϐirm the
proportionality between mass and weight; in the second case because
there is sufϐicient empirical evidence that the weight is proportional to
the amount of matter (volume). As for the historical aspects are
concerned, it can be said that Newton did not pronounce clearly on the
nature of mass and force, hesitating between a priori deϐinition
(apparently preferred) and an operational one. Euler and
d’Alembert resolved this ambiguity differently. The former considered
mass as deϐined operationally (and force as primitive), the latter mass
as primitive (and force as deϐined operationally).
3.4.3 The Apparent Motion and the Observer
Although Euler believed in the existence of an absolute space, he
nevertheless believed that motion, as a matter of fact, could only be
studied in a relative space, deϐined by a certain conventional reference
frame. This is, for instance, what Euler wrote in his Mechanica, and in
other occasions:
Because of the immense nature of space and of its unbounded
nature [...] we are unable to form a ϐixed idea of this. Thus, in
place of this immense space and of the boundaries of this, we
are accustomed to deϐining a ϐinite space and the limits within
which bodies can move, from which we can indicate the states of
motion and of rest of bodies. Thus, we are accustomed to say
that a body that keeps the same situation with respect to its
boundaries is at rest, and truly that which changes with respect
to the same, to be in a state of motion [66].176 (C34)

In the Anleitung Euler posed himself the problem to see what happens
by changing the reference frame, in particular by considering two
frames in motion with respect to each other, a problem which had
ancient origins. Galileo founded his mechanics referring to a thought
experiment; imagining to be in the cabin of a moving ship. Huygens also
set out on a uniform motion to study the problem of collision. Euler was
part of this tradition, also followed by some mathematicians at the
beginning of the 18th century, but as usual, he speciϐied and enlarged it.
A fairly detailed analysis of his modus operandi can be found in [21,
133].
Already in one of his works of 1739 in which he addressed the
problem of the inϐluence of the ϐinite speed of light in astronomical
observations, Euler faced the purely kinematic problem to correct the
observational data to take into account the fact that the observers were
based on the earth mobile with respect to the ϐixed stars [68]. In
Chap. 10 of the Anleitung Euler studied instead the inϐluence of a
change of reference in dynamics and introduced the concept of
observer, to which he referred to with the German term Zuschauer,
which is properly translated as spectator. Basically a ϐixed or mobile
coordinate frame (without clock). There are some important results
that clarify what today is known as the Galilean principle of relativity.
Thanks to the use of Cartesian coordinates and Calculus, the
mathematical passages that Euler had to face appears very simple to a
modern.
The ϐirst proposition states:
If the observer moves at constant speed along a straight line and
he estimates directions correctly, then all bodies that are either
at rest or are moving at constant speed in a straight line, will
appear to him to remain in the same state [89].177 (C35)
Notice that it is not speciϐied very clearly if the observer is considered
to be moving with respect to the absolute space. The second
proposition basically states that the equations of motion are the same
for an absolute system and for a system that moves uniformly with
respect to it:

If the observer moves uniformly in a straight line and if he
judges directions correctly, that is according to parallel running
lines, then the maintenance of the apparent movement requires
the same forces as the true movement, however much the
apparent movement may differ from the true movement [89].178
(C36)
In the two propositions the statement asserting that the direction are
judged correctly means in modern term that the observer is moving
without rotation.
In a third proposition, perhaps the newest one, Euler considered an
observer which transaltes (without turning) unevenly. In this case, he
concluded that ϐictitious forces must be considered alongside real
forces.
But if the observer does not move uniformly in a straight line,
but does estimate directions correctly [emphasis added], then to
maintain the apparent motion of all bodies, in addition to the
forces that are actually acting on the bodies, further forces are
required that will at every instant and in every body produce the
change that takes place at the location of the observer, but acting
in the opposite direction [89].179 (C37)
Therefore, apart from the forces P, Q, R that actually act on each body,
three additional forces are needed that in each body produce the same
change that occurs at the location of the observer, but in the opposite
direction.
The above proposition of Euler found its applications on several
occasions. In the Theoria, for example, he applied it to astronomy, in
order to eliminate the non-inertial motion of the observer’s frame
based on the earth [84].180 In a his important work on water wheels
Euler studied the action of a jet of water coming out of a rotating pipe
[81]. To determine this action, the observer is located in a frame rigidly
linked with the pipe [21, 133].181 An approach that will be followed by
the 19th century engineers involved the study of turbines. In a more
general study of 1755, Euler arrived to formulate relations that have
analogies, a part from some mistakes in calculation, with the famous

relations that Gaspard-Gustave de Coriolis (1792–1843) found almost a
century later [21, 133],182 with reference to a problem similar to that
faced by him, that is a rotating wheel.
3.5 D’Alembert Science and Philosophy
Jean Le-Rond d’Alembert (1717–1783), the son of an ofϐicer and an
aristocrat, was left in the steps of the Saint-Jean-le-Rond de Paris
church, from which he took his name. Raised by a commoner, he later
had a pension from his father who also recognized him. He however
continued living for many years in the home of his foster mother.
D’Alembert communicated his ϐirst memoirs to the Académie des
Sciences de Paris, of which he was elected as an adjoint astronomer in
1741 and associé géomètre in 1746. In 1746, he also earned his
admission to the Berlin academy of sciences. The friendship with
Diderot and the beginning of the collaboration with the Encyclopédie
dates back to 1749. The editing of the Discours préliminaire and
numerous items to 1750s. He took a lively part in the battles for the
Encyclopédie and the recovery after the closure of the 1752 was largely
due to his prestige. In 1754 Frederick II of Prussia invited him to
preside over the Berlin academy, but d’Alembert refused (and so again
in 1759 and 1762). The same year he was elected member of the
Académie Française. The personal attacks of the opponents gradually
removed him from the Encyclopédie, until the complete breakdown of
1758. Even relations with Diderot then became colder; with Rousseau
the break was total. D’Alembert went ever closer to Frederick II of
Prussia and Voltaire, with both entertaining a dense correspondence;
but he refused any offer to leave France, just as he refused to become
tutor to the son of Catherine II of Russia. He preferred to live modestly
in Paris, attending the lounges of Mme Geoffrin, Mme Du Deffand and
Mlle de Lespinasse, for whom he had a deep affection. In 1772 he was
elected perpetual secretary of the Académie Française. Sick and tired,
he gathered talented young people around him, including Condorcet
and came publishing his Opuscules de mathématiques. D’Alembert was
also a Latin scholar of some note and worked in the latter part of his life
on a superb translation of Tacitus, for which he received wide praise
including that of Diderot [34].

On the assessment of d’Alembert, surely one of the most intelligent
and creative mathematician of the 18th century, weighed the lack of
interest on the part of scholars, either trained in science or in letters.
Considered by historians of literary and philosophical education a mere
scientist, a slightly original follower of Locke, or at most a ‘precursor of
positivism’, he has been confused among others in the sensationalist
current of the second 18th century. Historians with scientiϐic education
have considered instead d’Alembert a brilliant scientist but a superϐicial
one; distracted by his literary interests.
His real originality as mathematician, epistemologist, ideologist of
the Enlightenment is best placed to light by recent studies and his
ϐigure of activist philosophe and promoter of the alliance between
philosophers and enlightened rulers emerges in the foreground,
besides those of Diderot and Voltaire. Among modern historians
educated in science interested in the work of d’Alembert should be
mentioned Clifford Ambrose Truesdell and Thomas
Hankins. Truesdell, known for his preference for Leonhard Euler and
for his habit to judge scientists of the past with modern standards, gives
sometimes a ϐierce judgment of d’Alembert, though all in all arriving to
a favorable overall assessment. Here examples of his sarcasm: “one
searches for the little solid matter [in d’Alembert’s work] as a sparrow
pecks some nutritious seeds from a dung heap a task not altogaether
savory” [90].183 “D’Alembert is a notorious schizograph: the elegant
directness of his belles-lettres, often seen also in the preface to his
scientiϐic works, never enlightens the thick penumbra of his
mathematical exposition” [159].184 Not even Hankins is very tender. He
stresses the superϐiciality of d’Alembert referring testimonies of
Clairaut, Daniel Bernoulli and Condorcet on this aspect. Hankins also
expressed a negative opinion on the late d’Alembert’s scientiϐic
production. D’Alembert would have contrasted these criticisms,
especially those of Truesdell, by replaying: “The important thing is to
discover; there will be never the lack of textbook-makers” [102].185
An important present-day editorial project concerns the complete
works of d’Alembert [55, 145]. The project contemplates the
publication of a forty volumes and should be completed in the next few
years to heal the current gap in d’Alembert’s literature. In fact until
today there were only two editions, 19th-century, of

d’Alembert’s complete works, which, however, exclude all works of a
scientiϐic nature. For the latter the relatively recent publications are
fragmentary. An examination of the manuscripts for the preparation of
the complete works contributed among other things to debunk a mite,
fueled by d’Alembert himself, according to which since 1760, his
scientiϐic literature would have suffered a sharp decline in favor of
publicist and philosophic activities, due to depressive phases and
illnesses. The mood of d’Alembert would be well represented in the
following:
What bothers me a lot is the fact that geometry, which is the only
occupation that really interests me, is something I cannot do.
Everything I do in literature, although very well considered (it
seems to me) in our public sessions of the French Academy, is
for me only a way to pass the time, for the lack of nothing better
to do [116].186 (C.38)
In fact, during the last years of his life, d’Alembert wrote at least 4000
pages of scientiϐic subject, some very important: on vibrating strings,
on hydrodynamics, on probability. Some of these works were published
in the Opuscules mathématiques, many others remained unpublished.
D’Alembert received his education at the Jansenist Collège des
Quatre Nations in Paris where he entered as gentilhomme. The choice of
the Quatre Nations was lucky, as it was the only school in Paris that
devoted an entire year to the study of mathematics. The instruction
offered by the college was elementary, but the library contained 2500
volumes only on mathematics: a rich mine for the curious d’Alembert. 
In 1735 he received the baccalaureate. After a year without success
studying medicine he directed his attentions to mathematics. In fact he
must have kept this interest alive, because on 1739 he presented his
ϐirst mathematical document to the Académie des sciences de Paris.
His mathematical sources were all products of the circle around
Malebranche and the philosophy course he attended at Quatre Nations
was a Cartesian one that besieged him with premonition, innate ideas
and vortices that grew up to despise. This did not, of course, make
Alembert a Cartesian or Malebranchian, particularly since he read their
papers mainly for the mathematics they contained. In any case, ideas of

Malebranche and Descartes emerged in many points in all his
philosophical works.
D’Alembert must have been familiar from the earliest times with the
popular side of Newtonianism as it appeared in the Eloge of
Fontenelle and in the Lettres philosophiques and Elemens de la
philosophie de Newton of Voltaire. However d’ Alembert made a serious
study of Newton’s Principia only after he had worked his way through
simpler texts. Some time after 1739 he read the annotated edition
published by Thomas Le Seur and François Jacquier [141] and wrote a
short commentary on the ϐirst book. D’Alembert published his ϐirst
important work, Traité de dynamique, in 1743 (he was only 26). It was
concerning mechanics with new methods and foundations. He had just
started to read it at the regular sessions of the academy when
Clairaut started reading a his own treatise, with methods similar to his.
D’Alembert thus rushed his treatise to the publisher and it appeared
substantially unϐinished with some misprintings; indeed all his books
went to the publisher before they were really ready. It was a move that
d’Alembert repeated frequently through his career to forestall any
mathematicians who was working on the same subject.
D’Alembert did not take up the pen for philosophy until 1751, after
the acquaintance with Diderot, Condillac and Rousseau, three of the
most brilliant minds of the French Enlightenment. The only information
we have concerning these d’Alembert’s early friendships comes from
Rousseau’s Confessions. It appears that Rousseau introduced Condillac
to Diderot and then Diderot brought d’Alembert into the circle. Diderot
was a closest friend, Condillac the one whose philosophy agreed most
closely with his own. These were the men who turned
d’Alembert’s head to philosophy.187
D’Alembert proved to be good philosopher, strict meaning, not a
philosopher of nature however but rather an epistemologist; a natural
role for a scholar trained in mathematics who charged himself for
founding the new science. As an epistemologist—he was familiar with
the empiricist philosophy of Locke and Condillac— he inϐluenced the
view on modern mathematical physics to an extent that should be still
clariϐied by historians, very great however. It must be said, in any case,
that the reϐlections on the epistemology of science made explicit by
d’Alembert after the 1750s had its roots in his mathematical works of

the 1740s, also and especially in his youth work, the Traité de
dynamique. After all, d’Alembert was not a schizophrenic with two
personalities, that of the philosopher and that of the mathematician.
He lived in a period where the Aristotelian-Euclidean epistemology
was challenged from many sides. He knew the logic of Port Royal for
having studied it at the Collège des Quatre Nations; he was also an
admirer of Newton’s empirical philosophy, to which in the meantime
Locke had attempted a solid philosophical basis. The Lockian and
Newtonian conceptions are evident in his works on general physics.
Here the principles have a clear empirical value; they are true because
they are as they are in fact and not because they have to be as they are.
Nevertheless, they are undoubted.
The Port-realist conception surfaces from mathematics and
mathematical physics, where the distinction between ϐirst and second
order principles, echoes the conventionality in the choice of the
principles. However, d’Alembert’s position is not well deϐined; on the
one hand, he maintained that notions obtained by abstraction from
sensations become clear and distinct and provide the basis for
apodictical reasoning; on the other hand (this is explicitly stated for
geometry and indirectly for mechanics) he argued that many basic
notions could not be clear and distinct, or at least one could not provide
a precise deϐinition of them. This is, for example, the case of the straight
line. Indeed we do not have any speciϐic deϐinition for it. Perhaps for
this reason d’Alembert introduced a concept that referred to that of the
nominal essence of Lockian mold, and spook of deϐinition as
intermediate between nominal and real deϐinitions as commonly
accepted, in whose understanding the genetic method plays an
important role.
D’Alembert questioned the position of Descartes, Pascal and the
Port-realists, for which man is able to produce correct reasoning in a
natural way. According to him, we express our notions through
language but language is imperfect so that our reasoning can hardly
have that degree of apodicticity that we would like to attribute it, at
least in the sciences. Only for mathematics, especially for algebra,
precise languages have been developed that can make reasoning
conclusive. In any case, even if the language is imperfect, the
philosopher and the mathematician learn to extricate themselves with

it. Science so conceived loses its traditional structure of a series of
deductively linked reasonings. Rather it is a chaining based on a
rationality that is not reduced to deduction only but also recalls, for
example, analogy.
The problematic of the apodeictic validity of the conclusion of a
reasoning is evident also in the considerations d’Alembert developed
on the reduction to the absurd and for his interest in the art of
conjecture. Below what he wrote on the reduction to the absurd, by
doubting that not-not equals yes, appearing ante litteram a supporter of
non-classical logic, that so much space is conquering in modern
epistemology.
But if the number of our certain knowledge is very small, that of
our direct knowledge is even more so. We ignore, for a large
number of objects, what they are and what they are not. And we
have only negative ideas about others; that is, we know better
what is not of what it is. Happy, however, in our indigence, to
possess this imperfect and truncated knowledge, which is
nothing but a more reasoned and sweeter way of being ignorant.
Now in all these cases we will be forced to resort to indirect
demonstrations, the main demonstrations of this type are
known under the name of reduction to the absurd. They consist
in proving a truth for the absurdity that would follow if it were
not admitted [to be true]. In this category all the demonstrations
concerning the incommensurable must be put, that is, the
magnitudes that have no common measure. In fact the idea of
inϐinite necessarily enters this kind of quantities; now we do not
have of the inϐinite but a negative idea, since we do not conceive
it but by the negation of the ϐinite [51].188 (C.39)
The art of conjecture preϐigures what today goes under the name of
inductive logic; it has the task of drawing conclusions where the
premises are uncertain or deriving the causes given the effects. Here is
what D’Alembert wrote on the matter:
In the art of conjecture we can distinguish three branches. The
ϐirst [is] what mathematicians call probability analysis in

gambling [...]. The second branch deals with [...] different issues
related to common life, such as those concerning the duration of
the life of men, maritime insurance, inoculations [...]. The third
branch deals with the sciences in which it is rare or impossible
to reach the proof and in which the art of conjecture is
nevertheless necessary [52].189 (C.40)
The main method d’Alembert saw in the art of conjecture in the third
branch, that of the empirical sciences, was the analogy among facts
which have something common.
At length it has been debated whether d’Alembert should be
considered as a Newtonian or a Cartesian, with conϐlicting opinions. An
interesting synthesis is suggested by Michel Paty who sees in
d’Alembert the one who reorganized the Newtonian dynamics on the
basis of Cartesian rationality: “Cartesian intelligibility for a Newtonian
program” [144].190 Granted it makes sense to consider the dichotomy
Newton-Descartes —indeed it did not exist, or at least was not so clear
at the turn of the 18th century—this approach could not capture the
essence of the problem. D’Alembert entered strongly into the vein of
mixed mathematics as Newton did and as Descartes did not instead, to
propose himself as a new philosopher of nature. From this point of
view I believe that with Euler and Clairaut, d’Alembert should be
considered as one of the ϐirst great mathematicians of the Continent to
enter the new course of mixed mathematics, and in such I agree with
the common view of historians with scientiϐic background. Even a
superϐicial reading of d’Alembert’s scientiϐic works makes it clear that
they are enormously closer to those of Newton than to those of
Descartes. Both Newton and d’Alembert, after interesting preliminaries
of philosophy of nature, epistemology and metaphysics, that differ
perhaps profoundly from each other, moved in the same direction.
D’Alembert, like Newton, placed the law of universal gravitation at the
basis of his astronomy and as a technical tool he assumed what in the
previous sections has been called a vectorial approach based on the so-
called Newton’s second law.
Even outside mechanics, in what Alembert called physical-
mathematics, the methodology is the classical one of mixed
mathematics that refers to an empirical approach to knowledge. This is

the judgment d’Alembert wrote about Newton in the Discourse
preliminaire: “That great genius saw that it was time to banish
conjectures and vague hypotheses from physics, or at least to present
them only for what they were worth, and that this science was uniquely
susceptible to the experiments of geometry” [54].191
3.5.1 The Way to Knowledge
D’Alembert assumed the disposition of all our knowledge according to
a single great chain. This has been seen as the generalization of the
Newtonian empirical approach which from the physical phenomena
manages to go back to a few principles from which then to descend to
obtain all the particular truths. And also the generalization of Locke’s
approach, according to which, starting from simple notions, one can
follow the pathways of every science. This is true, but
d’Alembert modiϐied the conceptions of his illustrious predecessors,
which remained all in all within the main stream of the Aristotelian-
Euclidean epistemology. His modiϐications concerned both the very
conception of science and the organization of theories.
For d’Alembert the principles of our knowledge, in physics for
instance, are the simplest properties that the observation shows us.
These properties depend on the essence, the intimate nature of bodies,
which we do not know and never will know. Their certainty depends on
the fact that they are human products resulting from an activity whose
phases can be reconstructed; these are abstractions that explain the
nature of the object as it appears to us and not as it is.
The results of our observations depend also on the intimate nature
of our soul that is even more unknown to us. “The human spirit that has
long been searching for these primitive truths, making a thousand
attempts to reach and never ϐinding them [...] looks like a criminal
imprisoned in a dark place, trying in every way to ϐind a way out [...]
most often glimpsing a faint light for some narrow and tortuous cleft
that strives in vain to enlarge [52].192
D’Alembert was in a privileged position; he was a great
mathematician, a professional physicist and had an excellent
philosophical culture; characteristics that was combined in very few
people. His mathematical preparation allowed him to develop a

synthesis between the rationalist approach, still strong in France also
for the persistence of the Cartesian heritage, and the empiricist
approach. A synthesis that today is unanimously recognized as
indispensable in dealing with those sciences he called physico-
mathematique—in the following I will use the modern term
mathematical physics which is close to d’Alembert meaning—adopting
and specifying a word introduced in the 17th century.
Aristotle believed that there were more sciences, each one
characterized by its own principles. This point of view was accepted, or
at least not challenged by Newton. D’Alembert instead supported the
uniqueness of the sciences and the possibility, even if only ideal, to
identify a single principle for it. This position is documented in this
very signiϐicant passage:
If we knew why things exist we would probably be a long way to
solve the problem of how different things exist. Because, most
likely, everything is bound in the universe more intimately than
we think; and if we knew this ϐirst reason, this reason so
embarrassing for us, we would hold the end of the chain that
forms the general system of beings and we would have nothing
but to develop [this principle] [52].193 (C.41)
According to the majority of historians, the radicalization of
d’Alembert in the application of a single principle and of a single
methodology is to be found in his Cartesianism. According to Hankins
[102], for instance, d’Alembert’s vision, and also Condillac’s, on the
structure of the sciences and consequently on the chain of
knowledge/being is essentially the vision of a mathematician: “There
can be few doubts about the origin of this vision; it is undoubtedly the
rational philosophy of René Descartes” [102].194 As proof of his
statements, Hankins cites the Discours de la méthode in which
Descartes  refers to a sequence of reasoning as a chain, on the model of
mathematical reasoning. According to Descartes all the sciences are
connected like a chain and none can be grasped completely without the
others follow. Moreover, “Those long chains of simple and easy reasons,
of which the geometers routinely use to bring their demonstrations to

the end, had made me imagine that all the things likely to fall under
human knowledge, follow one another in the same way” [58].195
Hankins also claims that d’Alembert had no doubt that a chain
exists. As far as created beings are concerned, this is documented by
many statements by d’Alembert, see for example the entry Cosmologie
of the Ecyclopédie. As for the chain of deductions, its sensationalist
philosophy implies that the structure of our knowledge reϐlects the
structure of the natural world; if this is continuous, even that is
continuous. Here is what D’Alembert wrote:
All beings and therefore all the objects of our knowledge have an
interconnection that escapes us [51].196 (C.42)
The concept and the term chain of being has been re-enacted by Arthur
Lovejoy (1873–1962), in his The great chain of being of 1936 [130].
Lovejoy gave an overview of the evolution of this concept, which he
considered contemplates the principles of fullness, continuity and
hierarchy. In the 18th century this idea was particularly popular near
the naturalists and Buffon among them. However, the idea of the chain
of being lent itself to being applied also in the sphere of ideas and
reasoning to describe their consequentiality.
Paolo Casini [32, 33] expresses greater prudence, stating that if
there is a Cartesianism in d’Alembert, it has been ϐiltered by the cultural
debate of the epoch. For him the characteristic accent placed in logical
consequentiality introduces a common intellectual necessity in France,
even among those who share the anti-Cartesian critique carried out in
Newton’s Principia. Is it a precise Cartesian heritage or a generic forma
mentis? [32].197Moreover insisting on the Cartesianism of
d’Alembert and contrasting it with his Newtonianism does not make
great sense, if it is not ϐirst cleared how the two isms differ, since they
are historically much more connected than generally accepted.
Also in the work where one sees more d’Alembert’s Cartesianism,
that is the Traité de dynamique, together with the undeniable inϐluences
of Descartes, both on the structure of the work and on the individual
concepts, one could see a continuation and puriϐication of mechanics, in
the spirit of Newton rather than a ϐlattening on Descartes’s rationalism.
One should not forget that d’Alembert was mainly a mathematician and

a mathematician does not need the permission of a philosopher to
attempt the mathematization of the world. It is true that Newton’s
Principia were simpliϐied and puriϐied of many residue of old
metaphysics and natural philosophy, but there was still room for
phenomenological laws, of a contingent nature and thus not necessary
to reason. Among them, the law of universal gravitation and the
phenomena of friction—in the study of the motion of ϐluids.
Casini maintains that d’Alembert changed over time his point of
view. From an optimistic position in the Discourse preliminaire he
would have moved to a more skeptical position in the Essai sur les
elemens de la philosophie. In this mature work d’Alembert expressed the
idea that it was impossible to know the whole chain of knowledge; we
could only see pieces. The chain for d’Alembert has a methodological
function. It is not a concrete reality like Buffon’s chain of creatures, but
it is an operational background that serves to justify the economic
character that characterizes his conception of sciences [33].198
This thesis of two phases of thought, however, appears to be a little
forced, in my opinion. In fact, that the idea of the chain of being has a
methodological function is clear not only from the late works of
d’Alembert, but also from the Discourse preliminaire; thus may be there
are not two phases. In the Discourse preliminaire, after developing an
ideal genetics of all knowledge, d’Alembert recognized that ideas have
developed in a different way in historical reality. Mainly not in a linear
way, but following failed attempts more than once before arriving at the
right solution. This fact certainly diminishes the reality of the chain of
being in the development of thought, a reality that instead obviously
continues to exist in the natural world, where the errors of nature
always leave in some way a permanent trace.
3.5.1.1 D’Alembert’s Sensationalism
To understand d’Alembert’s scientiϐic epistemology, one must examine
his conceptions of knowledge in general; how it originates and what it
is based on. Following Locke, d’Alembert believed that the origin of our
knowledge should not be sought in innate ideas but rather in
sensations:

All our immediate knowledges are reduced to those we receive
through the senses; it follows that we owe all our ideas to
sensations [54].199 (C.43)
It is undeniable the inϐluence of Condillac, who already in his Essai sur
l’origine des connaisances humaines of 1746 had simpliϐied the
conception of Locke according to which simple ideas come from
sensation and reϐlection, admitting the primacy of sensation.
This conception, continued d’Alembert, is now generally accepted
and the innate system of ideas is rejected by everyone. To prove that
sensations are the origin of all our knowledge, it is sufϐicient to show
that they have the possibility of being so. This possibility can be
considered a proof, because it explains the origin of our knowledge in
the simplest way, without assuming anything that comes from certain a
priori knowledge.
The ϐirst thing that our sensations make us to know, and that is
not even distinguished from them, is our existence [...]. The
second knowledge we owe to our sensations is the existence of
external objects [...]. The effect that these innumerable objects
produce on ourselves is so strong, so continuous and unites us
so much to them, that, after the ϐirst moment in which our ideas
press us within ourselves, the sensations that besiege us from
every side, force us to escape from [...]. The involuntary
affections that make us feel, compared to the voluntary act that
presides over our reϐlected ideas [...] determine in us an
invincible inclination to afϐirm the existence of the objects to
which we refer these affections, seeming to be the cause of them
[54].200 (C.44)
In this passage two statements must be underlined:
1.
Our existence is not distinguished from our sensations.
 
2.
We come to know the external bodies because they determine
in us involuntary affections.
 

The ϐirst statement seems to reϐlect the conceptions of
Condillac, which at the beginning of the Essai sur l’origine des
connaisances humaines, had written: “Whether we raise ourselves up to
the heavens, or descend into the abysses, we never go out of ourselves
and do not perceive anything other than our thinking” [39].201
The second statement presents a personal solution by d’Alembert to
the thorny problem of the existence or absence of external bodies. A
solution that is not deϐinitive however; in a letter to Voltaire he indeed
expressed his skepticism on the matter:
I swear that the only reasonable way in all these metaphysical
shadows is skepticism [emphasis added]. I do not have a distinct
idea and even less a complete idea, of matter and everything else
[...]. I am led to believe that what we see is only a phenomenon
that does not contain anything outside of ourselves as we
imagine it; and I always return to the question of the Indian
king: Why do things exist? Because this is really the most
surprising thing of all [53].202 (C.45)
Condillac had tried an answer in the Traité des sensations. But his
proposal was not accepted by d’Alembert who was essentially
convinced, as also Condillac was, that we cannot prove in a convince
way the existence of bodies external to us. It seemed to him only a most
reasonable hypothesis; in fact, if the existence of bodies is supposed,
the sensations we would feel of them could not be more alive than they
actually are. Therefore, for a reason of economy, it is reasonable to
accept the existence of external bodies. In any case, a serious
philosopher should not raise these doubts but rather turn to the
understanding of how we form the idea of external bodies, including
ours.
The object of the philosopher must indeed be the study of
phenomena trying to understand them as much as possible. The
method to follow to order our knowledge must be genetic; of every
notion we must analyze the way it was formed, the simple notions from
which it derives, but not the mechanism for which ideas are formed in
individuals. Thus in d’Alembert’s genetic analysis of knowledge there
are no concessions to psychologism.

3.5.1.2 The Organization of Theories
A fairly detailed exposition of the genetic method—the method of
establishing ideas by following their formation—is reported in the
EƵclaircissement I of the Essai su les elemens de la philosophie. Here
d’Alembert introduced ϐirst the Lockian concept of simple ideas,
deϐined as those ideas or notions that we do not know how to
decompose into other notions. There are two types of them, the notions
that derive immediately from the senses and the abstract notions,
which are acquired by abstraction, in which we consider in a single
object one (or a few) properties, without paying attention to the others.
The process of abstraction in d’Alembert has the function of extracting
from the sensations the most important characteristics. For this reason
his abstract notions, including the notions of extension and of body,
resemble the primary qualities of Locke, while notions derived directly
from the senses, such as smells, tastes, etc., refer to secondary qualities,
that would have no meaning without the perceiving subject [32] (Fig.
3.12).203

Fig. 3.12 Simple, composite notions and deϐinitions in d’Alembert.
Adapted from [119], p. 70
The abstract notions of d’Alembert are therefore by no means
concrete; indeed they are the ‘facts’ that the science of nature and
metaphysics must deal with; simple and recognized facts, which do not
presuppose others and which can neither be explained nor disputed. In
physics they are the phenomena that observation discovers in the eyes
of all; in geometry the sensitive properties of the extension; in
mechanics the impenetrability of bodies; in metaphysics the results of
our reϐlections.
Alongside simple abstract notions there are abstract composite
notions, characterized by the fact that simple notions can be derived
from their analysis. All compound abstract notions need to be deϐined,
while attempts to deϐine simple abstract notions can only cause
confusion. According to d’Alembert, from simple notions we can derive
not only composite notions but also other simple notions, for

generalization of them. They cannot be further generalized and are not
capable of deϐinition [52].204
As an example of generalization, d’Alembert reported the case of
simple abstract notions of extension and duration. They contain the
most general notion of part. The parts subsist together in the extension
and follow each other over the duration. But the notion of part is no
longer deϐinable than those of extension and duration [51].205 The
mechanism of generalization is not well explained by d’Alembert. It
resembles deϐinition, but here the generalized notion is only suggested
by the juxtaposition of simple notions, with a process in which the
intervention of intuition is decisively required.
For d’Alembert, composed (and even simple very general) notions,
can be grasped very well with the genetic method, which must often be
preferred in philosophy to give a proper deϐinition. The genetic method
allows to analyze the composite notions and to identify the simple
components, making them clear, better than the deϐinition can. One of
its main advantages is to guarantee us from the error in which we will
fall on abstract notions by referring them to concrete objects. From the
following passage, which draws inspiration from geometry, transpires
those that according to d’Alembert are the advantages of the genetic
method; instead of saying that the straight line is an extension without
width or thickness; the surface an extension without thickness, the
bodies an extension with width, length and thickness, one would prefer
to proceed in the following way: let suppose to have a solid body;
immediately distinguish three things, the extent, the limitation in all
directions and the impenetrability. Making abstraction from this last
one it remains the abstract notions of extension and limitation. These
ideas constitute the geometric body, which differs from the physical
body by the idea of impenetrability. Then make an abstraction from the
extension or the space that this body occupies, only considering its
limitation in all directions. And this limitation gives the idea of surface,
which is reduced as it is clear to the extension in two dimensions.
Finally, in the idea of surface still make abstraction from one of the two
dimensions that compose it and still you have the idea of line [52].206
Simple and complex notions, with deϐinitions, are the bricks with
which to build the elements of knowledge. Philosophy, that for
d’Alembert is the general term for rational knowledge, has as its

elements the primitive parts which we can suppose the whole is formed
of. The elements are also the principles from which the explanations of
the various aspects of philosophy originate in the explanation of
phenomena. D’Alembert speciϐied his concepts on the elements of
philosophy in various texts. In the following I will refer mainly to the
Discourse preliminaire to the Encyclopédie (1751), to the Essai sur les
elemens de la philosophie—collected in the Melanges de littérature,
d’histoire et de philosophie [47], a ϐirst edition in 1759 and a second in
1767 with the addition of Eclaircissements [51]—and to some entries
to the Encyclopédie, among which in particular: EƵlemens, Cause,
Système, Expérimental, Cosmologie. Here is what D’Alembert wrote at
the beginning of the Essai sur les elemens de la philosophie:
In the multitude of truths that the Encyclopédie embraces, and
which in vain we would try to know all together, there are some
that raise and dominate above the others, like some rock top of
an immense sea. If these truths that are most interesting to
know, are gathered in the elements of the philosophy that will be
used in the Encyclopédie as an introduction, the usefulness of
this great work will undoubtedly become more general and
more secure [51].207 (C.46)
Since philosophy concerns all knowledge, the elements of philosophy
must contain the fundamental principles of all human knowledge.
According to d’Alembert, this knowledge is of three kinds, either facts,
or feelings, or discussions. Only this last type for him would belong
entirely to philosophy, even if the other two are close to it for some of
the aspects under which they can be seen.
But even though these sciences are different from each other,
both for their extension and for their nature, there are
nonetheless general points of view that must be followed to
treat the elements; moreover there are different nuances in the
way of applying these general points of view to the elements of
each particular science; this is what needs to be developed
[51].208 (C.47)

In order to understand better the idea of an element, imagine,
d’Alembert said, a science that is completely deϐined and transcribed
into a single text. Moreover, in this text all the propositions are
concatenated, that is, “they form an absolutely continuous series” so
that each proposition depends solely on the preceding. In this case all
propositions are nothing but the “translation of the ϐirst, presented
under a different aspect; all these were reduced to this ϐirst
proposition” [51].209 Proposition which is for d’Alembert the element of
the science in question. If all the sciences, d’Alembert continued, follow
this pattern, it would be possible to unite all the existing elements in a
few pages. In this way one could also have a unique point of view on
them and the elements of all the sciences would be reduced to a single
principle, the main consequences of which would be the elements of
each particular science.
It is useful to assume two kinds of elements, those who are at the
top of a chain of deductions and those that belong to a node formed by
two or more branches of the chain. D’Alembert referred to the former as
principles of ϐirst order and to the latter as principles of second order,
that are only improperly principles, because derived from others. They
could be assumed as principles because of their key role in the
derivation of many propositions of the theory [51].210 However
according to d’Alembert even the so called ϐirst order principles, may
be, are not such and could depend on others not yet known (Fig. 3.13).
The principles of the second order are in general the theorems of a
science, obtained by considering more than one principle of it. These
theorems, however, are of a very general nature and a large part of the
propositions of a science can be derived from them without resorting to
ϐirst order principles. For many scientists of the 18th century, a (ϐirst)
principle was a principle in the Aristotelian sense, that is evident in
itself, indubitable. A second order principle was a principle only
because it was placed at the beginning of a theory but was not evident.
It was not necessarily a theorem in the modern sense, because it is not
said that general demonstrations were available, but there was a shared
conjecture that it could be demonstrated or it was simply true.
If it is desirable that the elements of philosophy be reduced to one
only, when it comes to exposing and explain them, as in the
Encyclopédie, it is advisable to follow a different point of view;

otherwise the elements would be reduced to almost nothing and their
use and application would be too difϐicult. All kinds of knowledge
concerning revealed religion must be excluded from the elements of
philosophy. They are absolutely alien to the human sciences for their
object, for their character, for the very type of convictions that they
produce in us, suitable more, as noted Pascal, for the heart than for the
spirit [51].211
Fig. 3.13 First and second order principles
3.5.2 The Parts of Science
Science, that is the knowledge clear and distinct based of principles
evident in themselves [65],212 is the term d’Alembert used to name a
speciϐic part of knowledge. According to d’Alembert, the three great
objects of knowledge are: God, man, nature, which give raise to three
main sciences. In the Essai sur les elemens de la philosophie he followed
this order to present the elements of the various sciences, presenting
ϐirst the sciences of the spirit, which deal with God and man, then those
of nature. To all, however, preceded logic, or the “art of reasoning”. It is
the ϐirst science to be dealt with in the elements and “forms its title and
entrance”. Then metaphysics follows that deals with the problem of
existence and divinity and moral that deals with man. Grammar, which
plays a transversal role like logic, closes the review of the sciences of
the spirit.
In the following a summary of the sciences related to the third great
object of knowledge, nature, are reported with some details. Here

d’Alembert adopted the order: algebra, geometry, mechanics,
astronomy, hydraulics, optics, acoustics, general physics. This order has
changed below for editorial and logical reasons; moreover for the sake
of space no room is left to optics and acoustics.
3.5.2.1 Mathematical Sciences: Algebra and
Geometry
For d’Alembert, the study of nature is that of the properties of bodies
which depend on motion and shape. So mechanics and geometry that
deal with these two things are the two necessary keys. Geometry, which
comes ϐirst is simpler but must be preceded by algebra, a more general
science that deals with the properties of magnitudes. Two reasons give
this science a prominent place among the ingredients of philosophy.
The ϐirst is that it helps geometry and physics and is absolutely
necessary for the ‘transcendent’ part of the two sciences. The second
reason is that it is among the most certain knowledge we have. And
even if there are still obscure things in algebra, this, according to
d’Alembert, depends more on those who study it than on the discipline
itself. Furthermore, algebra must be distinguished from mathematical
analysis. The ϐirst is the science of the calculation of quantities in
general, the second concerns the way of solving problems:
The principles of algebra are addressed only to purely
intellectual notions, to the ideas that we form in ourselves by
abstraction, simplifying and generalizing primitive ideas. Thus
these principles properly contain only what we have put in them
and what is most simple in our perceptions. They are somehow
our work; so how can they leave something to be desired as far
as the evidence is concerned? [51].213 (C.48)
The ‘inventors’ of algebra have formulated a series of rules that are
used by most without knowing the origin, how the language is spoken
without knowing its grammar. The philosopher, however, must
investigate the elements of algebra and the examination of the simplest
operations is sufϐicient for the purpose (the most complicated
operations will indeed give only technical information). In this way

algebra will not take much room in the elements of philosophy, but by
restricting it in such a small space, it can be presented in an almost
entirely new form.
The use that mathematics makes of algebra to determine unknown
by known magnitudes is what distinguishes it from logical analysis,
which is nothing but than discovering what is not known by means of
what is known. All algebraists use logical analysis to begin with and to
conduct the calculations; but at the same time the help of algebra
greatly facilitates the application of this analysis to the solution of
problems [51].214
Geometry “is the science of the properties of extension, when one
considers it as simply extended and endowed with form” [51].215 The
truths of geometry are purely hypothetical when applied to the world.
Nevertheless, these truths are not useless, having regard to the
practical consequences that result from them. For instance, in geometry
one knows about curved lines that continually approximate a straight
line without ever meeting it, and that nonetheless, being traced on a
paper, are sensibly confused with this straight line leaving less than a
very small space. It is the same of other propositions of geometry; they
are the intellectual limit of physical truths, the term to which they can
be approximated as much as desired, without ever arriving exactly. But
if the geometrical theorems do not take place strictly in nature, at least
they serve to solve with sufϐicient precision for the practice, the
different questions that can be placed on the extension [51].216 In order
to demonstrate in a rigorous way the ‘truths’ of the ϐigures of the
bodies, one is obliged to suppose in them an arbitrary perfection. Once
the ‘truths’ are found, they can be transferred in an approximate way to
the outside world. Geometry is used every day in this way: from
speculative geometry to practical geometry and vice versa.
According to d’Alembert, the ‘method of inventors’, that is the
analytic method, is the most suitable way to present algebra and its
elements. Because algebra is a purely intellectual science and can be
treated in a simple and rigorous way, it is sufϐicient to follow the natural
order of the spirit, avoiding only the useless or false attempts in which
some inventors have incurred. For geometry the matter is different;
here the method of inventors can be used to illustrate it to ordinary
people; the philosopher should instead follow the synthetic method.

In the Essai d’Alembert expressed his regret that the scholars who
deal with elements are even the least prepared ones. The masters of art,
who after a long and diligent study, have seen difϐiculty and subtleties
known, disdain to retrace their steps, either because they are
committed always to open new frontiers, or because they consider it
less productive to deal with elements. But yet only those who know a
science in detail can get to formulate the true elements. Of course, these
considerations by d’Alembert are very apt for an era like ours where
the gap between education and research is very high.
According to d’Alembert the fundaments of geometry are the
deϐinitions, the propositions and the demonstrations; a modern reader
is quite surprise not to ϐind in the fundaments the primitive notions, a
concept to which d’Alembert devoted large space, and to which a great
relevance is given in modern axiomatic theories. They are given for
granted. Among the fundaments, however, the deϐinitions are the most
delicate ones. For example, abstract notions of straight line and
surfaces are accepted as primitives. These ‘primitive’ notions can
nevertheless be deϐined. For example, the straight line can be deϐined as
the shortest line that can be carried from one point to another. But
deϐinitions of this type do not completely contain the primitive idea
that we form of the straight line; and similarly for the plan. A deϐinition
cannot make these notions clearer; also because of the imperfection of
language. For this reason, in general, the deϐinitions are those that
deserve the greatest attention.
According to d’Alembert, the elements of geometry immediately
lead to the geometry of curves, a fundamental discipline in mechanics.
Although in some cases it can also be studied with the method of the
ancients, it can more easily studied with algebraic methods and
sometimes only with these. Those who consider the method of the
ancients more rigorous than the algebraic one, ϐind a kind of
consolation to consider useless what they do not know [51].217

3.5.2.2 General Physics
Most of the philosophes, even those of litterary inclination, confronted
with empirical sciences. Voltaire somehow metabolized Newtonian
physics, Diderot dealt with physiology and chemistry, Rousseau with
chemistry and so on. Everyone wanted to break with the optimistic
Cartesian physics, according to which the world is a great machine
whose mechanism can be thought out and unveiled, considering
instead a most complex issue. Condillac, in the Traité des systèmes of
1749, criticized the great systems of the 17th century. According to
Condillac, the physicist must renounce to explain the mechanism of the
whole universe and limit himself to searching for constant relations.
For a correct understanding of d’Alembert’s conceptions of general
physics, it is better to see them alongside those of Diderot, which are
clearer. Diderot essentially believed that mathematics had reached its
peak and that further progress in science could only be achieved
through experiments. In the De l’interprétation de la nature of 1754, he
expressed the conception that only experiments can open access to the
knowledge of nature; mathematics, for its part, tends to remain
enclosed in itself and not to provide new knowledge.
Abstract sciences have occupied the best minds for too long and
with too little fruit; neither one did study what was important to
know, nor he put choice, nor ideas nor method in his studies.
Words have multiplied endlessly, and the knowledge of things
has remained behind. [...] Facts, of whatever nature, are the true
wealth of the philosopher. But one of the prejudices of rational
philosophy is that he who does not know how to number his
crowns, will be scarcely richer than one who has only one crown
[60].218 (C.49)
According to Diderot, in order to become active and fruitful, the
scientiϐic method must be brought to full autonomy and freed both by
the constraints imposed by the old metaphysics and by the constraints
imposed by mathematics. This position is also somehow accepted by
the ‘mathematician’ d’Alembert, who wrote:

The more useful you can get from applying Geometry to Physics,
the more you have to be careful in this application. It is to the
simplicity of its object that Geometry owes its certainty; as the
object becomes more complex, certainty darkens and moves
away. We must therefore settle on what is unknown, nor believe
that the words of Theorem and Corollary, make the essence of
proof, by secret virtue [42].219 (C.50)
For Diderot the ideal of science is the descriptive one. And for him the
most interesting disciplines are biology, physiology, botany, chemistry,
etc. Here experience teaches to rebuild the chain of being, without the
help of mathematics. Naturally the study must have its own systematic
nature, which must not, however, be derived from a priori reasoning,
but deduced from its particular objects. Diderot also criticized the
taxonomic approach of Linnaeus, because of the rigid division of the
plant world into genus and species, contrasting it with the approach of
Buffon, according to which in nature only individuals exist and only
what is described exactly is known.
D’Alembert expressed similar ideas in what he called general
physics. According to him, for those phenomena for which mathematics
is of little use, one must follow mainly a ‘method’. Facts are what a
physicist must try to know well; the more he collects them, the closer
he will be to see their concatenation. His purpose must be to put order
until it is possible. To explain as far as possible from one side to the
other, to grasp both the main trunk and the units.
But d’Alembert moved in a broader perspective than Diderot’s. Next
to general physics he put mathematical physics (sciences physico-
mathematiques) [51],220 that is experimental sciences, in which
however mathematics plays a fundamental role, moving in the
mainstream traced by his colleagues mathematicians since the ancient
Greece. For him, there are large parts in physics where only one
experience, or even one observation, an empirical principle, serves as a
basis for a complete theory. These parts belong to mathematical physics
and consist in the application of geometry and Calculus to phenomena.
Often, to be successful, the ϐiner geometry is required. And the
geometry of the ancients could not go much further.

At the beginning of the paragraph of the Essai sur les elemens de la
philosophie. dedicated to general physics, d’Alembert took up the
distinction already introduced in the Discourse preliminaire, between
common physics and experimental physics. According to him, the study
of physics should be divided into two parts that should not be confused;
observation and experience. The observation is less reϐined and
precise, it is limited to the facts that are before our eyes. Instead,
experience seeks to penetrate nature more deeply. “The observation
can be called the physics of the facts, or rather the vulgar and palpable
physics, while one should reserve for the experience the name of occult
physics” [51].221
Observation, due to inevitable voids it leaves and the curiosity it
provokes, leads to experience. Similarly, experience leads to
observation; thus one can consider experience and observation as the
continuation and the complement of each other. The experiments or
observations of many phenomena are indispensable also for the
mathematical physical sciences and also for the same mechanics, which
is a completely a priori discipline. When the conclusions of a
mathematical physical theory refer to an ideal situation (for example,
when friction is ignored in the motion of bodies), the only way to take
into account the phenomena not attributable to the idealized theory is
to make use of experience:
The only experimental utility that the physicist can draw from
observations, on the laws of equilibrium, on those of motion and
on the primitive affections of bodies, is to carefully examine the
difference between the result that the theory provides and the
one that provides the experience; and to use this difference with
skill, to determine, for example, in the effects of the impulse, the
alteration caused by the air resistance; in the effects of simple
machines, the alteration caused by friction and other causes [...]
so then experience will no longer simply serve to conϐirm the
theory, but by differing from it without causing it to fall, it will
lead to new truths that theory alone could not have reached
[51].222 (C.51)

The ϐirst object of general physics is the examination of the properties
of bodies that observation makes us to know, so to speak, in general,
but of which only experience can measure and determine the effects.
According to d’Alembert, among these effects there are the “phenomena
of heaviness”. No theory has been able to explain the law of falling
bodies; but once this law has been found through experience, all that
belongs to the motion of heavy bodies is reduced to calculation. The
role of general physicist has ended and that of mathematical physicist
starts. Moreover, d’Alembert added, when we release physics from
wanting to explain everything, we are far from condemning the spirit of
conjecture and the spirit of analogy. These two precious and rare gifts
are rarely mistaken when soberly used. In any case, a wall must never
be raised between nature and the human spirit. And waring, pay
attention not to be wary of excess. How many modern discoveries of
which the ancients had no idea? And how many others that we will
judge impossible, are reserved for our posterity?
Here is a very famous image, which will be repeated with some
variations in many of the writings of d’Alembert on physical sciences:
Nature is an immense machine whose main springs are hidden
from us and we see this machine only through a veil that hides
the play of the most delicate parts. Among the most visible parts,
and perhaps we can say the most gross, this veil allows us to
glimpse or to discover, that many are set in motion by a single
spring, and it is mainly this that we must try to unveil [42].223
(C.52)
In the following I brieϐly mention the historical evolution of physics as
reported in the Essai sur les elemens de la philosophie, which echoes that
of the Discourse preliminaire; a synthesis that is useful for
understanding both the conceptions of history and physics of
d’Alembert. According to him, the ancients had not neglected the study
of nature. Their physics was not as limited or unreasonable as many
believe. Examples include the medicine of Hippocrates and the
atomistic theories of Democritus. “Nevertheless, the ancients seem to
have studied the physics we call vulgar, rather than what we have called
occult physics and which is properly experimental physics”, “The wisest

among them have made the picture of what they saw; they did well and
stopped there” [51].224 D’Alembert believed that the true physical taste
of the ancients is to be found in Aristotle’s De historia animalium.
After the science of classical Greece, there was the Middle Ages
“those dark times”, in which, according to d’Alembert, only Roger
Bacon and Gerbert [of Aurillac] gave some light. Moreover the small
number of the great geniuses that studied nature, until the Renaissance,
did not take much care of experimental physics. Chemists, rather than
physicists; rich in an inϐinity of useful or curious but isolated
knowledge, they ignored the laws of motion, those of hydraulics, the
heaviness of the air and many other things.
A very important role is given to Francis Bacon, who ϐirst embraced
an extremely vast ϐield: “He saw the general principles that were to
serve as a foundation for the study of nature, he proposed to recognize
them through language, he announced a large number of discoveries
[51].225 Then d’Alembert quoted Descartes, giving him great merits in
philosophy. Less however in experimental physics where he “opened
some way, but more by recommending it than by practicing it. He had
the courage to give the laws of motion ϐirst; but the experience, or
rather as we will say later, the reϐlection on the most common
observations would have shown him that his laws were unsustainable”
[51].226
Despite its limitations, the spirit of experimental physics that
Bacon and Descartes  had introduced expanded considerably. The
school of Galileo, Boyle, Mariotte and many others carried out a large
number of successful experiences. Little by little, the physics of
Descartes replaced that of Aristotle, or rather that of his commentators,
in schools. “Finally, Newton ϐirst showed the art of introducing
geometry into physics and combining experience with calculation.”
Thus forming an “exact, profound, luminous and new science” [51].227
3.5.2.3 Mathematical Physical Sciences:
Astronomy and Hydraulics
D’Alembert introduced the term mathematical physical sciences giving it
a meaning very close to the modern one: “Physico-mathematiques. We
thus call the parts of physics, in which we combine observation and

experience with mathematical calculus, and where we apply this
calculation to the phenomena of nature [...]. Mathematical physical
sciences are as numerous as there are branches in mixed mathematics”
[65].228
From the previous deϐinition one could imagine that the
mathematical physical sciences are nothing but the mixed mathematics
of the 16th and 17th centuries, apart from the use of the Calculus as
main mathematical approach. Probably this is not the case however.
Indeed in the entry Physico-mathématique of the Encyclopédie,
d’Alembert furnished the following list for his mathematical physical
sciences: astronomy, mechanics, statics, hydrostatics, hydrodynamics or
hydraulics, optics, catoptrics, dioptrics, airometry, music, acoustics, etc.
While the list he gave in the entry Mathématique for the mixed
mathematics is: mechanics, optics, astronomy, geography, chronology,
military architecture, hydrostatics, hydrodynamics, navigation, etc. That
is geography, military architecture, chronology, navigation seem to be
considered as mixed mathematics—because they use mathematics—
but not physical mathematical disciplines. This, most probably, because
d’Alembert did not count them as physical matters, or because
mathematics is used only on some aspects of the discipline. Notice that
the physico-mathématique of d’Alembert is different from the physico-
mathematica of the 17th century which indicated both mixed
mathematics and experimental physics when treated with the same
strictness as that used in mathematics [28].229
It is puzzling to see that in the list of the mathematical physical
sciences there is also mechanics (as well as statics), which
d’Alembert considered a strictly mathematical discipline. This is most
probably due to the fact that while writing for the Encyclopédie he had
to take account non only of his own conceptions but also the most
common ones.
In most parts of natural philosophy the physical mathematical
approach can be carried out only for some aspects. In some cases the
phenomena are too complex to be described by mathematical
relationships and cannot therefore serve as a starting point for a
mathematical theory. For d’Alembert, for example, this is the case of the
application of the laws of hydrodynamics to the study of the circulation
of blood in the veins or arteries of men. In other cases it may happen

that, even if “starting from reliable empirical data, the predictions of
some phenomena obtained with mathematical elaborations are found
to be contradicted by experience. Such a contradiction, according to me,
can only come from certain purely analytical assumptions that the
application to physics makes necessary. In this case, I believe, we must
renounce every theory [...] and treat it as one of the issues in which the
calculation cannot have any hold” [42].230 This statement by
d’Alembert is not easy to decipher. Most probably he meant that to
apply the mathematical analysis, it is necessary to resort to
simpliϐications. For example d’Alembert believed that not all functions
(modern meaning) are likely to be treated with mathematics, but only
those analytical expressions constructed with the procedures of algebra
and differential calculus. If the empirical data are represented by non
analytical expressions, analysis cannot give reliable results.
Astronomy, apart from mechanics, is the most certain of all the parts
dealing with physical objects. It is divided into two parts: proper
astronomy, that is, geometrical astronomy or observational astronomy
and physical astronomy. Geometrical astronomy is not a pure
mathematical discipline because it needs the empirical laws about the
motion of stars derived from observations. D’Alembert believed that it
could be better explained by the method of ‘inventors’, that is by means
of analysis. For this purpose he imagined a man fallen from heaven to
earth, with only geometrical notions, who begins his empirical
observations before following the enunciation of the ϐirst laws. Among
the ϐirst observations are those concerning the motion of the planets.
For these it is natural to suppose ϐirst circular orbits around the earth,
to ϐinally arrive after many observations and reϐinements of the theory
to true laws, those that prescribe an elliptical orbit with the sun in a
focus.
Physical astronomy is also very important, “I mean here by physical
astronomy, not the chimera of vortices, but the explanation of
astronomical phenomena by the admirable theory of gravitation. See
gravitation, attraction, Newtonianism. If Astronomy is one of the
sciences that do the most honor to the human spirit, Newtonian
physical astronomy is one of those that makes it the most” [65].231 In
fact, the knowledge of the true laws of celestial phenomena also allows
us to improve the knowledge of geometrical astronomy: one can in fact

foresee motions that he did not imagine existed and then actually ϐind
them.
D’Alembert stated that the ancients had already formulated more or
less all the hypotheses that are known today. However, he added, at
least from a scientiϐic point of view, their hypotheses do not have a
fundamental value, because they are are “vague and ill-tested”. In
science, vague hypotheses do not count, but only precise statements
based on true facts. According to d’Alembert, the ϐirst carefully
developed system of the world was that of Descartes, based on vortices.
But this system was based on inaccurate assumptions and tended to
explain everything and nothing. For this reason Newton had to
introduce the universal gravitation, which perhaps less seductive,
however, ceased to be a hypothesis for its admirable agreement with
the celestial phenomena.
Below a passage of relevant epistemological interest, in which in a
maybe anti-historical way, one could glimpse a falsiϐicationist approach:
Among the different hypotheses we can imagine to express an
effect, the only ones worthy of our examination are those that by
their nature provide us with infallible means to verify if they are
true [emphasis added]. The system of gravitation falls into this
category and deserves only for this the interest of philosophers.
There is no fear here of that abuse of calculation and geometry,
in which physicists have fallen too often to defend or to ϐight
hypotheses. The planets being supposed to move, either in the
void, or at least within a non-resistant space, and being known
the forces with which they interact, determining the phenomena
that must occur is a purely mathematical problem. There is
therefore the rare advantage of being able to judge irrevocably
the Newtonian system [...] it would be desirable that all matters
of physics could be decided so incontestably. Thus the system of
gravitation can be considered true only after having assured
itself, by means of precise calculations, that it responds perfectly
to the phenomena [51].232 (C.53)
And the agreement that was found between the celestial phenomena
and the calculations based on universal gravitation, an agreement that

occurs more and more every day, “seems to have made deϐinitively
decide the philosophers [mathematicians] in favor of this system, even
if it is not explained in any way” [51].233
It should be said that around the middle of the 18th century there
had been a heated debate about the validity of the law of universal
gravitation, which ended with the triumph of the Newtonian theory. In
1747, Clairaut read a memory at the Académie des sciences de Paris,
where he asserted that the motion of the moon could not be explained
by the Newtonian theory. Clairaut suggested a corrective function to the
quadratic law of Newton, active only at a small distance. Among other
things, according to Clairaut, in this way the phenomena of capillarity
were better explained. Euler was on Clairaut’s thesis;
d’Alembert suggested caution and a better check of the calculations,
while Buffon sharply contrasted Clairaut’s thesis. Finally with a
reϐinement of his calculations Clairaut succeeded in explaining the
anomalies he had observed in the motion of the moon, maintaining the
quadratic dependence.
D’Alembert, at the end of his considerations on astronomy posed the
problem if the theory of universal gravitation, undoubtedly valid in
astronomy, also applies to the terrestrial bodies. In this regard, he
maintained a prudent position: “We only recognize that the effects of
this force have not yet been traced back to any of the known laws of
mechanics. We do not imprison [therefore] nature within the narrow
limits of our intelligence” [51].234 After some consideration on the
magnetic and electric forces, and more generally on the forces that are
exerted among the elements of matter, d’Alembert added: “Let us look
carefully at precipitating our judgment about nature and even on the
existence of an attractive force among terrestrial bodies [...] we cannot
at all conclude that attraction is a universal principle, until we are
forced by phenomena” [51].235
D’Alembert devoted a great deal of attention to hydraulics
throughout his life; particularly to hydrodynamics. Among his studies
on the subject, are fundamental: the Traité de l’équilibre et du
mouvement des ϔluides of 1744 (followed by a second edition in 1770)
and the Essai d’une nouvelle théorie de la résistance des ϔluides of 1752
[42, 45]. In addition there are many entries to the Encyclopédie and a
large session of the Essai sur les elemens de philosophie. The two

treatises of 1744 and 1752 are mainly considered here. It should be
noted that in the second treatise there are considerations of an
epistemological character which, later, will be taken entirely in the Essai
sur les elemens de philosophie, however, moving them from the chapter
dedicated to hydraulics to the one dedicated to general physics.
In his discussion on hydraulics d’Alembert concentrated on the role
of geometry and algebra in physics and warned of their abuse.
According to d’Alembert, hydraulics could also be studied with the laws
of mechanics, developed in the Traité de dynamique. If we knew the
shape and the mutual position of all the particles composing the ϐluid,
claimed d’Alembert, the principle of mechanics could be sufϐicient to
study their rest or motion. But because the shape and position of the
particles of the ϐluid are unknown one has to deal with an
indeterminate problem, at least from a mathematical point of view
[45].236 Only the experience can instruct us in detail on the laws of
hydraulics, that the most sophisticated theory could never have made
us to suppose. For the need to the recurse to empirical, and thus
contingent, principles hydraulics is considered by d’Alembert as a
mathematical-physical science and not a pure mathematical one, as
mechanics.
D’Alembert devoted considerable attention to the nature of the
principles of hydraulics, with considerations also valid for the empirical
sciences in general. For him one must be careful not to be inϐluenced by
his mathematical training in choosing the principles: “I have looked for
the principles of ϐluid resistance as if analysis had nothing to do with it;
and once these principles have been found, I have tried to apply
analysis” [42].237 It is natural that this methodological choice could be
not easy, added d’Alembert, because after having sacriϐiced the
simplicity of calculation to the certainty of the principles, naturally one
must expect that the application of calculations to these principles
could be very difϐicult. But there are no other ways [42].238
There are few empirical principles of very general nature and,
according to d’Alembert, indubitable, in hydrostatics; they are:
1.
Fluids are made up of particles.
 
2. The pressure inside ϐluids is the same in all directions.

 
I suppose only, that no one can contradict me, that a ϐluid is a
body composed of very small particles, separated and able to
move freely. [...] Since philosophers cannot immediately and
directly deduce the laws of their equilibrium from the nature of
ϐluids, they have at least reduced them to a single principle of
experience; the equality of pressure in all directions. [...]. In fact,
condemned as we are to ignore the ϐirst properties, the inner
structure of bodies, the only resource that remains to our
sagacity is at least to try to make in each subject the analogy
between the phenomena and bring them all to a small common
denominator of primitive and fundamental facts [42].239 (C.54)
Hydrodynamics is more complex; it can be studied by ϐlanking the
principle of dynamics of the Traité de dynamique, in particular
d’Alembert principle (see below), with other indubitable empirical
principles:
1.
When a ϐluid ϐlows from a vessel its superior layer remains
always sensibly horizontal.
 
2.
The velocity of the particles of each layer are equal and
parallel to each others [45].240
 
If these conditions are not satisϐied mathematics cannot be applied
to hydrodynamics.
One of the advantages, d’Alembert claimed, of his approach is the
possibility to prove that the principle known as conservation of living
forces is valid both for solids and ϐluids and to show and avoid its
drawback. D’Alembert praised Daniel Bernoulli to have used the
principle of conservation of living forces in his Hydrodynamica of 1738,
in a very elegant way, but blamed him for not having proved it in a
convincing way [45].241
3.5.2.4 Mathematical Physical Sciences: Music

Even though musical theory had been since Pythagoras subject of
inquire of mathematicians, by the 18th century what was called musica
theorica was absorbed in treatises of musica practica, increasingly
written by musicians for their colleagues and more concerned with
empirical aspects than abstract theories; moreover some parts of music
relating to theoretical aspects of acoustics where detached from their
musical context. D’Alembert represented a partial exception; for him
indeed music played an important role in his conception of science, as it
was the case for Ptolemy’s Harmonics [28].242 He wrote about thirty
musical articles for the EƵncyclopédie; a little number when compared
with about the 1600 entries that portent his march, but however
important, in the period 1750–1757. Moreover he made meaningful
interventions in his role of editor with the articles presented by the
‘musician’ Jean Jaques Rousseau (1712–1778), [37].
The involvement of d’Alembert in musical issues has its roots in
1749, when Jean Philippe Rameau (1683–1764) submitted to the
Académie des sciences de Paris, for approval, a manuscript containing
the elements of his musical theory. It was published in a revised form as
the Démonstration du principe de l’harmonie in 1750 [150], a title that
was subsequently subject to d’Alembert’s criticisms. Indeed the term
démonstration did not appear in the memoir presented and approved
by the academy in 1749. The title was, as reported in the register of the
academy, Mémoire où on expose les fondemens d’un systéme de musique
théorique & pratique. M. Rameau, noticed d’Alembert, after the approval
of the academy, believed he could assigns to his system the quality of
demonstration even though the academy declared repeatedly that he
could not claim to assume his principle as proved [50].243
In his writings Rameau argued that music is largely a mathematical
subject, that can be comprehended under a unique principle, an
experimental result indeed, clear and evident to him, with an explicit
reference to Cartesian epistemology. By making some musical
experiments he was struck as by a ϔlash of light by the acoustical
phenomenon for which a vibrating string will normally generate not
only its fundamental frequency but also higher frequencies, in
particular the perfect twelfth and the major seventeenth (the meaning
of these terms will be discussed later). Rameau called such a vibrating
system a corps sonore [150].244

When d’Alembert read Rameau he had no theoretical knowledge of
musics. In any case he was shortly able to understand and greatly
appreciated him, to the point he assigned Rameau a relevant position
among the geniuses of science and arts in his Discourse préliminaire de
l’Éncyclopédie [54].245 However, even though d’Alembert praised
Rameau’s theory he did not appreciate his prose, and for this reason he
felt himself impelled to write a more readable treatise than that
proposed by Rameau himself, which originated the Élémens de musique
of 1752, written anonymously as a form of respect [3], which was
followed in 1762 by a second edition, this time with the name
d’Alembert in the cover [50].
The Élémens de musique was not simply a didactical work; it was
rather a propagandistic pamphlet for spreading d’Alembert’s rational
epistemology. “By reformulating Rameau’s brilliant but ineptly
articulated theory into a rigorous writing d’Alembert was able to
provide both a vindication as well as an advertisement for his own
peculiar scientiϐic epistemology” [38].246 A treatise on music was a
perfect means to illustrate the merits of his professed empirical-
rational metodology of physical sciences because more simple of his
Traité de dynamique, for instance
D’Alembert exposed the general ideas of his epistemology of music
in the Discourse préliminaire to the second edition of the Élémens de
musique, in a period in which his conceptions of philosophy of science
were mature. To start with he declared music a physical mathematical
science, like hydraulics and astronomy and unlike mechanics which is
purely rational like mathematics. Thus for music too, as for the other
physical mathematical sciences one should not seek a striking evidence,
which is the characteristic of the works of mathematics alone, and
which is found so rarely in those of physics.
According to d’Alembert, there will always be into the theory of
musical phenomena “a kind of metaphysics, which these phenomena
implicitly suppose and which carries its natural obscurity there”
[50].247 It is for this reason that one should not expect to ϐind in this
matter what is called demonstration; it is enough to reduce the main
facts to a well-interlocked and well-consistent system deduced from a
‘single experience’, and to have established on this simple foundation

the most well-known rules of musics. “At the same time we doubt that it
is possible to bring a greater light to these matters” [50].248
Thus, continued d’Alembert, although most of the phenomena of
musical art seem to be deduced in a simple and easy way from the
resonance of sound bodies, one should perhaps not yet hasten to afϐirm
that this resonance is demonstratively the unique principle of harmony.
At the same time, it would not be less injurious to reject this principle,
because certain phenomena do not seem to be deduced from it as easily
than others. From this it is can only be concluded, either we will
perhaps be able, by new research, to reduce these phenomena to a
single known principle; or that there should be some other unknown
principle, more general than that of the resonance of the sound body, of
which the latter is only a branch. Or ϐinally, that we should perhaps not
try to reduce all musical science to one and the same principle.
There are indeed physical mathematical sciences which demand
only one experience, or one principle; there are others which
necessarily suppose several, the combination of which is necessary to
form an exact and complete system. At this point d’Alembert stated that
music belongs to this last category of sciences [50].249 This is in
contradiction with what claimed by Rameau, who asked for one
principle only.
D’Alembert in Élémens de musique made indeed recourse to more
that one experience. Besides that referred to by Rameau, which
remained the fundamental one, he considered two more experiences in
the edition of 1752 and only one in the edition of 1762. In the following
reference will be to the 1762 edition only; for the sake of completeness
the two experiences refereed here, that due to Rameau and that added
by d’Alembert, are resumed below.
Experience I. If one excites a sonorous body, beyond the
fundamental sound and the octave, two others sounds are heard,
one of which is the perfect twelfth, that is the octave of the
[interval of] ϐifth, the other the major seventeenth, that is the
double octave of the [interval of] major third [50].250
D’Alembert added that this experience is particularly evident by making
the larger strings of the cello vibrate; the fundamental sound is called

generator, the others, the octave included, its harmonics.
Experience II. Anybody notices the similarity between a sound
and its octave. These two sounds are perceived by the ear as
almost equal [50].251
In order to make the meaning of these experiences comprehensible to a
non-musician, some deϐinitions need to be recalled. The interval
between two notes of frequencies 
 and 
 is given by the ratio 
; the sum of two intervals is the interval deϐined by the
product of the two intervals. An interval of third major is characterized
by 
, an interval of ϐifth is characterized by 
, an interval
of octave by 
. An interval of two octaves above a third major is
thus characterized by the product of the interval of a third major and
two intervals of octave, that is, by 
; an interval of
one octave above a ϐifth is deϐined by 
.
Basically what Experience I says is that together with the generating
or fundamental frequency 
, one hears also notes corresponding to
frequencies 
 and 
. This result does not surprise a modern reader
who knows that though a vibrating string is capable of all the
frequencies 
, with 
, even frequencies as well as
higher frequencies are difϐicult to excite and therefore cannot be heard.
The result could not surprise even d’Alembert, who knew acoustics very
well, only that for him the experience in question was not of acoustic;
that is, it did not concern the knowledge of the frequencies that a body
can potentially emit, but only those that the ear perceives in the
ordinary conditions in which a musician operates.
Indeed d’Alembert warned philosophers not to waste their time
looking for physical explanations of musical phenomena, explanations
always vague and insufϐicient; still less must they consume themselves
in efforts to rise in a region more distant from their gaze, and to lose
themselves in a labyrinth of metaphysical speculations on the causes of

the pleasure that harmony makes us experience. It is not a question
here, of the physical principle of the resonance of sound bodies, which
at the moment are unknown, and which perhaps we will seek for a long
time in vain; it is even less a question of the metaphysical principle of
the feeling of harmony, a principle even less known, and which
according to all appearances will always remain covered with clouds. It
is only a question of showing how it is possible to deduce from a single
experience the main laws of harmony, which musicians have found only
by trial and error [50].252
The two experiences in themselves cannot be considered as
principles of harmony; they become such by adding a metaphysical
principle, for which what is conform to nature should be treated as a
guide by a composer; and since nature says that by exciting a sound
body we obtain a chord formed with the base frequencies 
 and the
two harmonics 
 and 
, this chord must be considered as perfect
to the maximum degree. Furthermore, the perfection is maintained,
albeit at a lower level, if a note of this chord is substituted with that
corresponding to an upper or lower octave.
As an example of the application of his musical principles,
d’Alembert gave the example in which the fundamental note was do (or
ut, according the 18th century nomenclature). The harmony suggested
by nature is the chord formed by do followed by a note one octave
above the ϐifth and a note two octaves above the major third. The two
notes that follow do can be replaced by two others, scaling these below
by one or two octaves, therefore considering the major third and the
ϐifth which in the note scale adopted by Rameau correspond
respectively to mi and sol. The chord do mi sol do is thus obtained which
can be played more easily than that suggested by Experience I and that
if it is not quite perfect, it is the one that comes closest to the perfection
of nature. With similar reasonings, more or less perfect chords can be
built.
D’Alembert ended his Discourse préliminaire, by warning against an
abuse of mathematics in music, even though it is largely a mathematical
science. “As a professional geometer, I believe I have some right to
protest here (if I may be allowed to express myself strong) against this
ridiculous abuse of Geometry in Music” [50].253 And noticed that the

perfect number used in the musical theory should be interpreted with
prudence. The ratio of the octave as 1 to 2, that of the ϐifth as 2 to 3 that
of the major third such as 4 to 5, etc. may not be the true relationships
of nature; but only approximate ratios such as experience has made
them known. Because experience gives them only approximatively. But
luckily these ratios are sufϐicient, even though they are not not exactly
true, to give reason of phenomena that depend on the ratio of sounds
[50].254
3.5.3 Mechanics as a Mathematical Science
In the 18th century mechanics was the science par excellence. Just as it
had been in the previous two centuries and as it will be in the next
century. This is true even for d’Alembert. According to him, mechanics
is an entirely deductive science, such as algebra and geometry,
accepting what asserted by Euler in the Mechanica sive motus scientia
analytice exposita of 1736, facing other scientists of the time, of whom
perhaps the most representative was Daniel Bernoulli, who considered
mechanics an empirical science (for these arguments see [59]).
As for Euler, in the mechanical writings of d’Alembert one can
identify two parts, physically separated. A ϐirst part in which the
principles are discussed and justiϐied. Here d’Alembert worked as a
philosopher; he chose the main notions and justiϐied the principles that
regulate them. In the second part, he used the principles as a starting
point to develop their consequences by means of mathematical
analysis. This second part is often the one that takes up more space and
at ϐirst glance makes the treatise of dynamics to seem a mathematical
one. However, it is not a simple application of an already ϐinished
mathematical theory; this is not given in its entirely and the solution of
various problems requires the development of new mathematical tools.
3.5.3.1 Clear and Distinct Notions
In the following I present an exposition of the main notions about
mechanics of d’Alembert derived from both the scientiϐic treatises of
the 1740s, the Treatise de dynamique at ϐirst place, and the
philosophical writings of the 1750s, such as the Essai sur les elemens de
la philosophie. As already noted above, although the epistemological

texts are posterior, up to ten years, to its main scientiϐic treatises, these
do nothing but explain what is implicitly contained in those.
As discussed in the previous sections, for d’Alembert in a science
only notions that have adequate clarity and distinction can be accepted.
And d’Alembert identiϐied only two basic abstract notions that possess
these characteristics: the notions of space and time and consequently
those of impenetrability and motion; that are so the unique ‘objects’ of
mechanics.
Space, time and motion
Space and time according to d’Alembert’s terminology are not
principles, because principles for him should be propositions (possibly
‘true’). They are instead simple (abstract) notions, and as such
undeϐinable. Motion, the fundamental object of mechanics, is a
composite notion, to be deϐined from the simple notions of space and
time. Motion is nothing but the transport in time of a body from one
place to another, places that can be confronted with parts of the space
assumed as “ϐixed and immobile” [48].255 Or otherwise, motion is: “The
reiterate applications of a mobile to the different parts of the undeϐined
space, that we imagine as the place of bodies” [48].256 For d’Alembert a
motion can be studied in geometry too, but here it does not occur in
time and the consideration of (physical) time is what distinguishes
physical from geometrical motion [48].257
Thus in mechanics or science of the motion of bodies, neither
space nor time must be deϐined, because these words contain
only a simple notion; but we can and must deϐine motion,
although the notion is quite familiar to everyone, because the
idea of motion is a composite notion which contains two simple
ones, that of the space traversed, and that of time employed to
browse it [65].258 (C.55)
Indeed the deϐinition of motion, besides the two simple notions of
space and time also requires those of place and body, that however can
be obtained by the former, and the principle of superposition, which
assures the possibility to perform reiterate applications. A body is a
portion of extension which enjoys the property of impenetrability.

Impenetrability is the main property of bodies for which they are
distinct from indeϐinite space. The place of a body is the part of the
space it occupies; that is, the part of the space that coincides with the
extension of the body [48].259
D’Alembert indirectly criticized Descartes’s concepts of space and
motion, by declaring that metaphysical considerations are scarcely
relevant for the study of mechanics, and distancing from his conception
of extension. For d’Alembert there are two kinds of extension, “one that
should be regarded as impenetrable which constitute what we properly
call bodies; the other which is considered simply as extended, without
examining if it is penetrable or not” [48].260 D’Alembert had read
Newton and knew his ideas of absolute time and space, but he did not
make them his own; in this regard he took a pragmatic approach. While
space is assumed in principle as indeϐinite—but not inϐinite—and, like
Newton, in some absolute way, it is in practice treated as relative, that is
referred to parts assumed as ϐixed. A similar discourse holds true for
time; after the introduction of time as an absolute notion, which “by his
nature ϐlows smoothly” [48],261 attention is then concentrated on its
measure, by treating it as relative. For some more comments on the
notions of time and space see [119].262
The measure of motion depends on two different magnitudes,
associated respectively to space and time, that are heterogeneous; for
d’Alembert they can however be compared if a unit of measure is
assumed for them, so that both of them give raise to real numbers,
which actually can be compared [48].263 This speciϐication reveals that
d’Alembert, as well as Euler and other mathematicians of the time, had
still some problems to deal with heterogeneous magnitudes when
moving from geometry to algebra.
Matter and Mass
Mass is a term and a notion that appears but without any comment in
d’Alembert’s mechanics. It is unclear whether he used a rhetorical
artiϐice, introducing a fundamental notion of mechanics by minimizing
the thing so that not to deprive mechanics of its predetermined
geometric character, or if he ϐitted it into the tradition that goes from
Descartes  to Newton, which identiϐied mass with the amount of matter.
This second way could allow d’Alembert to include mass in the

geometric order, because a clear and distinct notion. In fact, for him,
matter is nothing but extension with impenetrability and therefore
volume. D’Alembert expressed his views on mass in the entries Masse,
Densité, Divisibilité of the Encyclopédie. For example he wrote: “The
density of a body is the ratio of its mass (ie, the space which it would
occupy if there were absolutely no pores [emphasis added]) to the space
that it actually occupies” [65].264
D’Alembert in his treatises on mechanics, never referred to mass as
inertia. He deϐined the latter term in some entries of the Encyclopédie.
For example, he wrote:
The force of inertia, is the property common to all bodies to
remain in their state, either of rest or motion, unless some
foreign cause makes them to change. [...] It is called resistance
when one wants to speak of the effort a body makes against
what tends to change its state; and we call it action, when we
want to express the effort that the same body makes to change
the state of the obstacle that resists it [65].265 (C.56)
But the entries of the Encyclopédie did not necessarily reϐlect
d’Alembert’s own idea, but rather the most widespread ones. The
difϐiculties inherent in the notion of mass will become clear only since
19th century when giving a rigorous formulation of the laws of
mechanics [109].
Force
The various notions of force as moving cause or power, are to be
rejected for d’Alembert because not clear and distinct; force is a
“doubtful dark and metaphysical being, which is only capable of
spreading darkness on a science otherwise clear to itself” [48].266
D’Alembert’s position was accepted by some, including Lazare Carnot
and rejected by others. In general the majority of scholars referred to
the notion of force, as perceived by common sense. Ignoring
d’Alembert’s criticisms.
Skepticism toward force did not originate directly from
d’Alembert; it was a direct consequence of the acceptance of the early
mechanical philosophy. Even Maupertuis, had this same attitude. The

skepticism was already present in Descartes  and especially in
Malebranche; two scholars well present to d’Alembert. 
The notion of force as power was eliminated by Malebranche not
only because its intake limits the power of God, but also because it is
not well deϐined. According to Malebranche force cannot be observed
or measured directly; it appears a simple word, invented by
philosophers to conceal their ignorance. Berkeley, in De Motu wrote
sentences in which d’Alembert would recognize, though it seems
unlikely that he knew his work, published only in England, in the 1720s.
Even Hume was contrary to the notion of force as well as to the notion
of cause in general; however in this case it is possible that there was
some inϐluence, because Hume enjoyed a good popularity among the
philosophes.
According to d’Alembert there are only two kinds of causes, and
thus ‘forces’ in mechanics:
1.
The causes that result from the mutual action of the bodies
because of the impenetrability, which is one of the “major
causes of the effects” that we observe in nature.
 
2.
Causes not reducible to impulse. These causes are considered
as separate, although one should be convinced of their
reducibility to impulse and just do not know how to prove this
reduction.
 
The causes of the ϐirst type have well known laws. What we cannot
say for those for those of the second type. We know them only through
the effects; we speak of a cause only because we see an effect. Among
the causes of the second type there is gravity, which because cannot be
reduced to impact, and then to geometry, could not obey the necessary
laws of mechanics and thus gives raise to contingent laws. That is what
d’Alembert wrote: “[...] because it is not yet possible to explain the
celestial phenomena with impact and also because the impossibility to
explain them with this principle [the impact] is based on convincing
evidence, if not on demonstrations” [65].267 But, if one should choose
between the hypothesis of gravity generated by the impact of aether
particles (as frequently used in the time) or generated by an innate

force he would choose the latter. Said with Sherlock Holmes:
“Eliminated the impossible, the improbable remains”.
D’Alembert went on to say that, in fact, also the causes of the ϐirst
type, which seem obvious, are so only improperly. In the entry Cause of
the Encyclopédie he wrote:
What we call causes, even those of the ϐirst type, are such
improperly; they are indeed effects from which other effects
result. A body pushes another or a body is in motion and meets
another, there should necessarily occur changes in the status of
bodies on this occasion [emphasis added], because of their
impenetrability. The laws of these change are determined
through certain principles, and accordingly the impacting bodies
are considered as causes of the motion of impacted bodies. But
this way of speaking is improper. The metaphysical cause, the
real cause is unknown [65].268 (C.57)
In the same entry, d’Alembert argued against the metaphysical
principle: effects are proportional to their causes. Basically he said that
if we are dealing with ‘real’ causes, the principle does not make sense
because metaphysical causes cannot be measured (we cannot for
example, say that one sensation is double of another or that white is
twice the color of red). If instead a cause is considered an effect, then
the principle makes no sense. D’Alembert also contrasted another
commonly accepted metaphysical principle, the ϐinal causation. As
examples of ϐinal causation: “Water goes back into the pumps because
nature has a horror of vacuum”, the principle of least action for the
reϐlection and refraction of light. He argued their inconsistency, but
leaves a glimpse of the ϐinal causes as a pragmatic method, when the
results obtained with them agree with the conclusions obtained from a
mechanicistic model. Thus he saved in some way the principle of least
action of Maupertuis, perhaps out of friendship.
In essence d’Alembert, despite the rationalistic system of his
mechanics, reafϐirmed his empiricist belief. We have only to deal with
the effects. In mechanics we call cause of effect another effect; the real
causes are unknown. A chain of explanations of cause-effect is nothing

but than a relationship between effects, which, however, can be
connected by necessary laws.
Eliminated the force (cause) as possible notion of dynamics, the
motion can be described by geometry alone, through the recruitment of
impenetrability added to extension. Thus d’Alembert did apparently not
leave room in his mechanics to what now goes by the name of Newton’s
second law:
So why should we resort to the principle that everyone uses
today, that for which the accelerating or retarding force is
proportional to element of velocity? [...] We will not examine at
all if this principle is a necessary truth [...] not even, as some
Geometer [think], a purely contingent truth [...] we will be
content to observe that, true or doubtful, clear or obscure, it is
useless in mechanics and consequently it must be banned
[48].269 (C.58)
Though the usual notion of force is not clear and distinct,
d’Alembert cannot avoid its use, because it was an integral part of the
approaches to mechanics of his time; it and a relation expressing the
proportionality of force and acceleration-variation of velocity has
already been used by Hermann, Euler, Varignon and the Bernoullis. The
only way remained to d’Alembert was to make clear the notion; and he
did so by introducing it as a deϐinition. The word used by
d’Alembert for ‘force’ was motive force (force motrice) 
, to indicate
the product of mass by acceleration or, sometimes, the element of
velocity du, given by the product of acceleration a—named accelerating
force (force acceleratrice) and very often indicated by d’Alembert with
the same symbol 
 used for the motive force—by the element of time
dt [48].270 In the end d’Alembert wrote the relation:
This relation can be used—and was used by d’Alembert – as
Newton/Euler did. The motive force is known in an empirical way, by
collecting data concerning motion and its derivative in a given situation.
For different situations (that is different initial conditions) the actual

motion can be found by integrating a second order differential
equation. This is the way d’Alembert explain the meaning of the
previous relation:
We have just seen that in whatever way the motion is
accelerated or retarded, the differential equation of the curve
will always be of this form 
. Now if one wants to
make use of this equation, as well of the equations 
and 
 to determine in any motion the relation
between u, t, e he could think that for the purpose the
knowledge of the cause which accelerates or delays the
movement would be necessary. The object of the remark is to
show that this is not the case, but that 
 is always given by the
very deϐinition of the motion in question; thus, according to this
remark, if one wanted to make use of the equations 
, 
, & 
 to determine the
relation of spaces, velocities, and times in a motion the law of
which will be given, it will sufϐice to substitute in these
equations instead of 
 a quantity suitable for expressing the law
according to which it will be assumed that velocity increases or
decreases: when we assume, for example, that instantaneous
velocity decreases are like squares of velocity, we write 
, 
 (g being a constant coefϐicient), &
so on [48].271 (C.59)
It should be noted that the relationship 
 is more than a
tautology; even if d’Alembert glances on the fact. The two members of
the equality not always have the same meaning. Indeed in one case 
may be unknown and u known, in another case 
 may be known and u
unknown. For example, proceeding like Newton, one can ϐind that in the

motion of a planet around the sun represented by u, 
 can be evaluated
as 
. Once the empirical relation of 
 has been found, for
instance it is found that it depends on the square of distances, one
assumes the principle of determinism according to which 
 is
invariable over time, in a certain portion of the universe and therefore
also applies to new motions different from those with which it was
obtained. These new motions can be obtained by solving the
differential equation 
, with the appropriate initial conditions.
Indeed in many important applications, as in his astronomical or
hydraulic studies, d’Alembert used a mechanic of forces and hardly can
it be distinguished by that of Euler for instance. Only in the part
devoted to fundaments d’Alembert is the use of the term force precise.

3.5.3.2 Traité de Dynamique
D’Alembert delineated his design to reduce mechanics to mathematics
in the Traité de dynamique, which saw two editions in 1743 and 1758
[44, 48]; the second edition is longer (a 30% more) and contains many
footnotes, due to EƵtienne Bézout (1730–1783) but there were no
substantial changes, a part from a long addition to the preface; for a
comparison of the two editions see [41]. To note the change in the use
of personal pronouns, “we” (nous) of the ϐirst edition is replaced by
“they” (ils) in the second edition to mark difference on some positions
[48, 119].272
When d’Alembert wrote the Traité de dynamque in 1743, his ϐirst
printed work, he was only 26. Then he was not yet involved in the
activity of ‘professional’ philosopher which will characterize his mature
works, and his epistemology of science was still unripe. However he
had already clear the role of mechanics. Moreover in the second edition
of 1758, when he had already ϐinished his Essai sur les elemens de la
philosophie (published 1759) he maintained unchanged the approach.
In the following I do not want to stress the defects of his text, object
of severe criticisms more ore less convincing, by many historians, even
though it was appreciated by d’Alembert’s contemporaries, such as
Euler and Daniel Bernoulli [102].273 I only want to illustrate the way
d’Alembert imagined to develop his design of rationalization of
mechanics. For instance, if d’Alembert said he had proved a theorem I
give it for granted, without any criticism for his eventual (and indeed
frequent) vicious circles.
Reading the Traité de dynamique is not a very simple task. The fact
cannot be explained and dismissed as done by Truesdell, by saying that
d’Alembert did not have clear ideas. As noticed, the treatise saw two
editions more than ten years one from the other that did not
substantially changed the structure and therefore it can be considered
the fruit of in-depth reϐlections. Thus, d’Alembert most probably had
clear ideas even though they are not such for us. The treatise consists of
a preface and two parts. In the preface d’Alembert described his
conception of mechanics and the plan of his work. In the ϐirst part he

presented his principles and argued to justify their status as fundament
of mechanics. This part is written, according to d’Alembert, to be
accessible to beginners. The second part opens with the statement of
the so called d’Alembert principle and is followed by three chapters of
applications. Here d’Alembert treated questions already raised by Jakob
Hermann, Leonhard Euler, Jakob, Johann and Daniel Bernoulli   and
others.
The preface states that there are three principles of mechanics, the
principle of inertia, the principle of the composition of motions and the
principle of equilibrium. Then d’Alembert spook of a general simple
and direct method of solution [48].274
In the ϐirst part of the treatise there are four deϐinitions concerning
bodies and place (Deϐiniton 1) and motion (Deϐinitons 2, 3, 4), two laws
(Lex I and Lex II) concerning the persistence in the state of rest and of
motion. In the second part, what was classiϐied as a method in the
premise, is referred to as “general principle to ϐind the motion of many
bodies” [48].275 All the other propositions of the treatise are named
theorems or corollaries. Thus theorems are also the principle of
composition of motion and the principle of equilibrium. Below, laws,
principles, theorems assumed at the basis of d’Alembert mechanics.
1.
Lex I. A body at rest will persist, unless that one external cause
move it.
 
2.
Lex II. A boy once put in motion by any cause, must always to
move along a straight line, until a new cause, different from
that had caused the motion, will act on it.276
 
3.
Deϔinition [masked principle]. The motive force [that is force]
is equal to the product of mass by accelerating force [that is
acceleration].
 
4. Theorem. If two any powers acts together on a body at point A
to move it, one from A to B uniformly during a given time, the
other from A to C, uniformly during the same time, and if one
considers the parallelogram ABCD; I say that the body A will
move along the diagonal AD uniformly, in the same time it
passed AB and AC.277
 

5.
Theorem. If two bodies whose velocities are in the inverse ratio
of their masses and have opposite direction, so that one cannot
move without facing the other, there will be equilibrium
among the two bodies.
 
6.
Principle. Let A, B, C,&c. be the bodies of the system and
suppose they are impressed the motions a, b, c,&c. and that
they are forced by their interactions to change in the motion a,
b, c,&c. It is clear that the motion a impressed to body A can be
regarded as composed of the motion a and of another motion 
. In the same way it is possible to consider the motions
b, c,&c. composed of the motions b, , c, ,&c., from which it
follows that the relative motions of the bodies A, B, C,&c.
would be the same if instead to give them the impulse a, b, c it
would be given the couples of impulses a, 
; b, ; c, ,&c.
Now, because of supposition, bodies A, B, C,&c. took the
motions a, b, c,&c, then the motions 
,&c. must not to
disturb in any way the motions a, b, c,&c. That is if the bodies
had received only the motions 
,&c. they should have
destroyed themselves mutually and the system remain at rest.
From this it results the following principle [emphasis added] to
ϐind the motion of any bodies that interact each to other.
Decomposed each of the motions a, b, c,&c. impressed to each
body in other two motions a, 
; b, ; c, ,&c., such that if only
the motions 
,&c. were impressed to the bodies, the
system should have remained at rest, it is clear that a, b, c,&c
will be the motions these bodies will assume because of their
actions [48].278
 
For sure there is a lack of precision in the treatise, some
misprintings, but there are no serious contradictions. Some modern

historians accuse d’Alembert of having made confusion and abuse of
language by calling for instance principles what actually are not such,
see for instance [61]. A careful reading of d’Alembert, assuming that
already in 1743 he had similar ideas to those expressed in 1759 in his
Essai sur les elemens de la philosophie, makes clear that the meaning of
the term principle is not that of Aristotelian-Euclidean mould, as
proposition evident per se. Rather it is a ‘truth’ that lies at the top of a
chain of deductions of a science, a ϐirst proposition. It is often more
properly a theorem as it can be demonstrated from simple notions; this
is a common use in the 18th century, as already commented in previous
sections. For example the laws of inertia are ‘demonstrated’ using the
compound notion of motion, the implicit assumption of the isotropy of
space and the principle of sufϐicient reason. Law I and II are justiϐied by
d’Alembert in two very different way. The former is considered as
nearly evident in itself; this is d’Alembert argumentation: “Because a
body cannot impress a motion by itself, being no reason to move from
one side instead from another [for the isotropy of space]” [48],279 The
proof of Lex II requires a more involuted treatment and is substantially
circular. Indeed it uses a presumed corollary of Lex I, for which a body
cannot modify the motion by itself, which as a matter of fact prove Lex
II. But the assumed corollary is not such and in no way can be inferred
from Lex I.280
Thus d’Alembert, notwithstanding the weakness of his proofs—for
modern standard at least—is justiϐied in the use of principle and
theorem as synonyms; although we would have preferred, for reasons
of clarity, to reserve the term theorem to the propositions
demonstrated starting from ϐirst propositions; but this is a problem of
ours.
D’Alembert did not use the term axiom instead, that refers to a
proposition evident for itself (see the entry Axiome of the
Encyclopédie), as in Euclid, or in fact true, as in Newton, and unlike
Newton, he did not consider interchangeable the two terms law and
axiom.
D’Alembert in the Essai sur les elemens de la philosophie, written
some year later than the Traité de dynamique, introduced the
distinction between principles of ϐirst order and principles of second
order, the latter being derived from two or more ϐirst order principles.

It is no clear d’Alembert would have considered the three principles of
dynamics—inertia, composition of motion and equilibrium—as
principles of ϐirst order, because they are at the top of the chain of
deductions in dynamics or if they are principles of second order,
because they are proved simply by reϐlecting on the notions of motion
and impenetrability. D’Alembert’s principle would have instead
considered by him for sure as a principle of the second order, because
proved by principles of ϐirst order. Indeed the principle of inertia and
the decomposition of motions are explicitly referred to in the proof,
even though for the last there is no explicit reference to the way the
decomposition is made, that is, it is not explicitly stated that one should
use his second principle of dynamics which provides the parallelogram
rule (items 4 of the previous list). The principle of equilibrium is only
hinted at by asserting that there are motions to be destroyed. From the
applications we see however that the destruction of the motions is
regulated by his third principle of dynamics and its consequences;
using as a matter of fact the criteria for the balancing of simple
machines.
Another aspect that surely hits the modern reader is that the three
principles of d’Alembert seem different from Newton’s. There are
various reason for this, indeed. First, what are now called Newton’s
principles (or laws) were not known at d’Alembert time, and hardly
could Newton himself recognize them as his. They were presented for
instance by Euler in a clear way more or less in the same period of the
publication of the Traité de dynamique. There was not yet a well-
deϐined method for dealing with the various problems of mechanics.
Not even in astronomy, where much could be done and much had be
done by Newton, limiting to the motion of the free mass point. There
were thus several methods carried out by a small group of
mathematicians who felt competing with each other and held to their
originality to the utmost, trying to devise methods different from others
only to distinguish themselves.
There were thus no compellent reasons for a free mind to adopt the
ideas of another person, not even Newton who d’Alembert considered
“for sure the greatest physicist of the century” [45].281 Moreover, a
careful reading of the Traité de dynamique reveals that from a technical
point of view there is not a great difference between Newton’s (even in

the form suggested by Euler) and d’Alembert’s mechanics. There is the
law of inertia; the principle of equilibrium has strong similarity with
the law of action and reaction. Lastly, there is also a notion of force and
the second law of motion, even though it is not presented as a principle
but as a deϐinition.
A modern reader, accustomed to different formulations of
mechanics, based either on the notion of force, or work, or energy,
would be tempted to think that d’Alembert is simply doing a make-up
operation. In fact, once one has a working theory available, he does not
take much to restructure it—as today it takes little to move from a
force-based mechanic to an energy-based mechanics. It is just a matter
of doing some mathematical or rhetorical steps. After all,
d’Alembert almost always used the relationship 
, as one
does in a force-based mechanics. But if there is something true in this
consideration and there is any make-up in d’Alembert’s mechanics it is
not dictated by a desire for originality but by a different sensitivity that
is authentic and profound.
In the second edition of the Traité de dynamique of 1758,
d’Alembert  added a comment long enough, and all considered
attractive, on whether or not the laws of mechanics are necessary. For
d’Alembert  the laws of mechanics deducted according to his notions of
space and motion would ‘necessarily’ be those that matter left to itself
would follow. But nothing prohibits, according to him, that God could
implement direct intervention in order to change them (it would be
what today we might call a continuous miracle).
According to d’Alembert, the proposed question is therefore
reduced to knowing whether the laws of equilibrium and motion that
are observed in nature are different from those that the matter
abandoned to itself would have followed. If they are different, the laws
of statics and mechanics, as given by experience, are contingent truths,
since they are the result of a particular will expressed by the supreme
being; if, on the contrary, the laws provided by experience agree with
those that reasoning alone ϐinds, the observed laws are necessary
truths [48].282
The addition of the comment was motivated by the prize launched
in 1756 by the Académie royale des sciences et belles lettres de Berlin

on the subject: “If the laws of statics and mechanics are necessary or
contingent truths”. D’Alembert  participated to the competition with a
lost text, but the competition was postponed and eventually canceled. It
is reasonable that the lost text contained the additions to the second
edition of the Traité de dynamique of the aforesaid comment [119].283
The reasoning of d’Alembert appears not entirely coherent to a
modern reader and even to some contemporary ones. A scholar of
mechanics substantially contemporary to him, Daviet de
Foncenex (1734–1798), a student of Lagrange, will object to him in a
convincing way. In his work Sur les principes fondamentaux de la
mécanique of 1760 [93], Foncenex noted that if the laws are necessary
in no way they could be contingent:
It seems, moreover, that the action of the Creator on the bodies
do not make in any way hypothetical the application of the laws
of mechanics to the universe, as M. d’Alembert seems to suggest
in his introduction [to the Traité de dynamique]. Because there
will always be allowed to consider this action of God as a new
force acting on the bodies; then whatever the motions which
result, they will never be contrary to the laws of mechanics that
need to be immutable in themselves [93]284 (C.60)
3.5.3.3 The Principle of D’Alembert and Its
Applications
In the previous section I underlined the similitude between
d’Alembert’s and Newton’s principles. Now I speak about the
differences. D’Alembert’s mechanics, much more than Newton’s, was a
mechanics of impact, like that of Descartes, at least for what
foundations are concerned. D’Alembert was not fully clear, but he said
that the effect of forces (d’Alembert meaning), acting continuously has
been studied quite in depth (may be he was referring to Euler); the
effect of the force of impact were instead poorly known and studied;
thus he intended to ϐill the gap [48].285
The bodies of d’Alembert are usually mass points, even though on
this aspect he was not consistent, and hard, in the sense generally
adopted in the 18th century, that is rigid and deprived of elasticity. In

the direct impact of a hard mass point with an obstacle, assumed as
hard, the body does not bounce and loses all its speed. Mass points,
besides hard are also assumed smooth. In a oblique impact only the
component of velocity orthogonal to the obstacle is lost; the parallel
component is maintained because of the absence of friction. This
simpliϐication that d’Alembert adopted is necessary to carry forward his
project of mathematization of mechanics. D’Alembert is conscious of the
fact; his mechanics was a pure science and as such not suitable to deal
with many practical problems, as for instance those for which frictions
is important. But he had no choice. Like Torricelli who in his ballistic
studies declared to write for mathematicians and not for the gunners,
he was not bothered by the fact [102],286 his interest too was to write
for mathematicians.
The ϐirst principle (nomencalture of the Preface) of
d’Alembert’s dynamics, (law of inertia) concerns the motions of bodies
before and after the impact. The second principle (decomposition of
motion) is functional to the decomposition of the velocity of a mass
point into two components, one orthogonal and the other parallel to an
impacted body. The third principle (the law of equilibrium), is only
apparently a statical law. It concerns more than one body and
introduced tacitly for the ϐirst time the concept of mass. Actually its role
is to ϐind the law of impact between two bodies (mass points), by
evaluating both the motion cancelled and that remained in the impact.
The principle also deals with ‘static’ forces (common use), that is
equilibrium strict sense. The extension was quite straightforward
because for d’Alembert static forces were nothing but mass times
virtual motion287: “Mr. Leibniz assumed that the dead force [static
force] is equal to the product of mass by the virtual velocity” [65].288
The principle of equilibrium considers not only free bodies, mass
points, but also constrained bodies. In such a case the laws of
equilibrium are those valid for the simple machines found in classical
statics: the lever, the inclined plane, the pulley and so on. Nowhere
d’Alembert referred to the principle of virtual velocities as a criterion of
equilibrium, though he should have known it from Johann
Bernoulli and Varignon.
The so called d’Alembert principle studies the motion of many
bodies that impact directly or through rigid threads. A problem that

was not faced by Newton and that instead became an important theme
of research for the mathematicians of the 18th century. This principle
has been the object of much criticism, even ϐierce, many interpretations
about its meaning, many hypotheses about its origins [61, 63, 94–96,
131, 152, 159].289 I believe that for it is worth the saying “many
enemies much merit”. The criticisms are only partly motivated and
depend on a not careful reading of d’Alembert’s works and the lack of
contextualization. The same applies to origins and interpretations.
With regard the criticisms, I refer to my exposition of the principle,
that I hope should make possible for a careful reader to get his own
idea. I just want to say that with his principle d’Alembert was able to
solve many complex problems, Lagrange placed it at the base of his
dynamics. Certainly the principle does not present itself as a well-
deϐined algorithm; in particular, the methods of ‘destruction’ of the lost
motions, that is the modalities with which to impose the equilibrium
are not speciϐied. But the use of the principle becomes more clear if one
reads the whole work of d’Alembert and he studies its applications. The
same perplexities may ϐind a young student who begins to read modern
treatises on classical mechanics. Without a training on practical
applications and problem solving, he would not be able to fully grasp
and use the theory he studied in the theoretical treatises. This process
was made explicit for example by Thomas Kuhn in his The structure of
scientiϔic revolutions of 1962 [112] with his notion of paradigm that
questions the algorithmization of any theory of modern physics. On the
other hand, it would be anti-historical to accuse d’Alembert not to have
operated, for example, as Euler, who starting from his ϐirst principles
formulated, in the more or less convincing way, propositions of simpler
application such as, for instance, the law of moment of momentum.
With regard to the genesis of d’Alembert’s principle there are
various opinions; they are commented on by Christophe Schmit [152]
which also adds his own ideas. The commonly accepted view, strongly
supported by Truesdell [160],290 sees the ϐirst formulation of it, though
in a less general form, in a paper by Jakob Bernoulli of 1703,
Démonstration générale du centre du balancement ou d’oscillation tirée
de la nature de la levier [8]; the formulation had been reported already
in 1686 in the Actes de Leipsick, before Newton published his Principia
[160].291 The context is similar; the reasoning and the wording the

same; there are destroyed motions (Bernoulli used also terms like
velocity, force, impulse) which should be equilibrated by the law of
statics. Moreover for sure d’Alembert knew Jakob Bernoulli’s work
because summarized in a paper by Johann Bernoulli which he quoted
[9]. Michel Paty instead sees the origin of d’Alembert principle in
unpublished papers by d’Alembert, on hydraulics [152].292 In
Hermann’s Phoronomia of 1716 there is a variant of Bernoulli’s
approach [105]293 and even Euler used some form of it in a paper of
1740 [30, 70].294 In [152] it is suggested that the roots of the principle
are spread in the various conception of equilibrium at the end of the
17th century, and in the rule of parallelogram due to Varignon
published in 1687 [164].
Be that as it may, d’Alembert was a man of his time and knew many
of the 17–18-century mechanical works; his principle should therefore
be seen as a synthesis and a generalization of previous works. Nothing
original at all but all very original, therefore. Lazare Carnot gave an
‘algorithmic’ form of it in his Essai sur le machines in géneral of 1803, in
the case of impacting bodies, and Lagrange gave it the deϐinitive form
for continuously varying forces assuming the principle of virtual work
as a criterion of equilibrium for the destroyed motions [26].295
Problems solved in the Traité de dynamique
Instead to insist in the difϐicult of understanding theory and
applications for a modern reader of d’Alembert principle, I go to show
how d’Alembert used it to solve some puzzling problems of the time
and as he could extend it to study the motion of extended bodies and
ϐluids. Of the fourteen problems studied by d’Alembert in the Treatise de
dynamique I will present only a few.
Problem I. Find the motion of a thread CR, ϐixed in C and charged
by many bodies A, B, R as you like. Suppose that such bodies, if
the thread would not impede their motions, will move in the
same time, along the lines AO, BQ, RT, perpendicularly to the
thread [48].296 (C.61)
The motions (velocities) that the bodies (of mass) A, B, R of Fig. 3.14a
would assume without constraints are AO, BQ, RT; or better these are

the motions the bodies would assume if they were appended to the
three independent pendulums CA, CB, CR. Indeed there is some
confusion between displacements and velocity in the exposition of the
problem, because the drawing shows a path along an arc of circle,
which implies one is assuming displacements. This however should be
considered as one of the many d’Alembert’s imprecisions. The correct
interpretation should be velocity.
The rigidity constraints imposed by the thread CR make that the
actual motions are AM, BG, RS. So that −OM, −QG, ST are destroyed
motions. For d’Alembert principle they equilibrate somehow. The
equilibrium is imposed by assuming the rule of the lever, that is in
modern language by equating to zero the (static) moments of the
destroyed motions of the masses A, B, C multiplied by their masses with
respect to the fulcrum C. Which means that the following equality
should be veriϐied:
From it is easy to ϐind the motion of a point of the thread AR, for
instance point R, as a function of the impressed velocities.
For a modern reader it is difϐicult to see as the solution of the
problem could be afforded by means of d’Alembert principle. There are
not indeed impacts, and thus one cannot understand how there could
be destroyed velocities. The problem becomes clearer if instead of
thinking to actual velocity one thinks about ‘virtual’ velocity, or better
velocities of tendency as deϐined by d’Alembert.  These velocities should
be assumed inϐinitesimal. If u is a velocity, the virtual velocity is the
element of velocity du; sometimes assumed coincident with
acceleration du/dt. So AO, BQ, RT should be assumed as the virtual
velocities that the bodies would acquire if they were not constrained by
the thread, and similarly AM, BG, RS the ‘actual’ virtual velocities.

Fig. 3.14 Composite pendulums.
Redrawn from [48], Plate II, (a) Fig. 22, (b) Fig. 31
D’Alembert struggled enough about the concept of virtual velocity. If
from a mathematical point of view the concept could be accepted (this
was the same problem one could ϐind in any treatment of Calculus);
from a physical point of view the situation was different. Indeed
d’Alembert, as Descartes, could not think of a velocity small as he
pleased because for him a possible cause for the variation of velocity
was the impact with other bodies (eventually by the aether), and may
occur only for ϐinite increment.297
That d’Alembert motion should be interpreted as virtual velocities
appears clear if one considers the Corollary I to problem I. This is a
simple extension of the solution to the case when instead of the
impressed velocities one has motive forces 
 applied respectively
to the points A, B, R. They are deϐined as the product of the mass by the
element of velocity. Previous relations remain still valid if one pose 
, 
, 
, or equivalently 
, 
, 
. In the Corollary II d’Alembert credited
Bernoulli to have already found a similar results when the impressed
motions are those due to gravity. The Bernoulli in question is Johann
and not Jakob, as one could think at ϐirst glance, the reference is
Nouvelle theorie du centre d’oscillation of 1717 [9].

Problem V. Let consider a wire CmM ϐixed in C and loaded by two
weights m, M, being only slightly moved from the vertical line
CO. Find the duration of the oscillations of the wire [48].298
(C.62)
The application of d’Alembert principle to Problem V is puzzling; not so
much for the approach itself but for the wording. Indeed here neither
reference to impact nor to motion is present. The treatment is the same
as that carried out by scholars that used explicitly the concept of force
with the classical meaning. The external motive force of gravity
(d’Alembert terms) acting on the body m of Fig. 3.14b is decomposed
along the direction mu, the direction of the actual motion, and along
another one, at the moment unknown direction mR, to be destroyed.
Similarly the force of gravity on M is decomposed into the direction Mv
and in the direction MP to be destroyed. For the equilibrium
(destruction of forces) it is necessary that the efforts acting along mR
and MP have a resultant in the direction of Cm (or mR); or equivalently
they have equal and contrary components in the direction orthogonal
to Cm (or mS). Thus there should hold the proportion: [the effort direct
along MP] is to the effort along mR, as the inϐinitely small [sine of the]
angle RmS is to the inϐinitely small [sine of the] angle MmS [48].299 With
this equilibrium d’Alembert was able to ϐind the expressions of the
forces not destroyed and so the motion of the bodies. He arrived to two
ordinary differential equations.300 In [103]301 it is discussed the
method used by d’Alembert to integrate these equations and the
introduction he made of many concepts of linear algebra as that of
eigenvalue.
Problem IX. A body whose mass is m and velocity is u, moves on
the same line as another body with mass M and velocity U. Find
the velocity of those bodies after the impact [48].302 (C.63)
This problem is very simple, and probably could have been exposed
directly in the illustration of the law of equilibrium. It is also one of the
few cases of impact explicitly dealt by d’Alembert in his treatise. The
solution of the problem is straightforward. Let be v the velocity of the
former body after the impact, V that of the latter. It will be, 

; 
 and 
, with the terms in
parenthesis represent lost motions. By d’Alembert principle the
destroyed motions are equilibrated and so, 
;
from which it is 
.
Then d’Alembert as a corollary considered the case, 
, 
. This to simulate the impact of the small and fast particles of
aether with common bodies. Previous result gives mu as the quantity of
motion gained by the greater body M. Which allows d’Alembert to
conclude: “The quantity of motion that the body loses or gains should
be regarded as proportional to the impacting power [...]. In this case the
effect of such a power is always the same, either the [impacted] body is
at rest or in motion” [48].303
Problems solved in other treatises
D’Alembert applied his principle, or better some adaption of it, also in
his treatises: Recherches sur la precession des equinoxes of 1749, Traité
de l’équilibre et du mouvement des ϔluides of 1744 and Reϔlexions sur la
cause générale des vents of 1746. In the treatise on the precession of the
equinoxes d’Alembert applied his principle to an extended rigid body,
the whole earth indeed. Here there are not distinct mass points;
however the acquaintance with Calculus allows d’Alembert to replace
the mass point with a small volume, an inϐinitesimal particle of the
whole extended body. Each particle is endowed with a motive force
which follows the Newtonian law of gravitation. D’Alembert principle
assumes the form:
Let there be a body that is moved with any motion, and of which
each of the parts has a different velocity represented by the
indeterminate u in any instant; and let there be as many
accelerative forces as one pleases, 
, etc., that act on the
body, and in virtue of which the velocity u of each part in any
instant is changed in the following instant into another velocity 
, different for each part. I say that if one regards the velocity u

as composed of the velocity 
 and another velocity 
, which is
inϐinitely small, the system of all the parts of the body, each with
its velocity 
, must be in equilibrium with the forces 
,
etc. [43].304 (C.64)
An exposition quite simple for a modern reader of the version of the
principle, could be: In the time dt the velocity u of each particles of the
body is changed in the velocity 
, there is the destruction of motion by
constraints and the creation of new motion by the ‘forces’ 
,&c.
This last would give the velocities 
,&c. So a particle would
tend to move with the speeds 
 +&c, but because of the
constraint it takes only the velocity 
, so that 
 +&c, are the lost motions
to be equilibrated. But 
 can be interpreted as the element of velocity
du (actually du is by deϐinition the difference between new and old
velocity, that is 
), which sometimes
d’Alembert confounded with acceleration. So the new formulation of
the principle can be stated by asserting the quantities 
 (
,
or in modern notation 
) are equilibrated with the motive forces 
,&c.
It should be noted that in this exposition there is an abuse (by
myself) of notation, for the sake of simplicity. In fact, writing the lost
motion in the form 
, presupposes a knowledge by
d’Alembert of the modern vector calculus notation (symbol ±) for the
composition/decomposition according to the parallelogram rule, which
was not the case. However, for the components of the motion, indicated
as 
, d’Alembert can use the ordinary symbols of sum/subtraction

because it is an operation between scalar magnitudes, and thus he can
write 
, 
, 
.
D’Alembert wrote the equation of equilibrium between the motion 
 and the motive forces 
,&c, by assuming a system of coordinate
with the origin in the center of the rigid body-earth, one of the
coordinate plane containing the ecliptic, another coordinate plane
orthogonal to the ecliptic passing for the terrestrial axis and the third
plane orthogonal to the ϐirst two. The equilibrium equations consist in
imposing the equality of the static moment of motion 
 and motive
forces 
,&c. with respect to the coordinate axes.
In the Traité de l’équilibre et du mouvement des ϔluides of 1744 [45],
d’Alembert still adapted his principle to the new situation, giving the
formulation:
Let the velocities of the different slices of the Fluid at the same
time are represented, in general, by the indeterminate v. Imagine
that dv is the increment of v in the next instant, this quantity dv
is different for different slices, positive for some, & negative for
others; in a word, that is 
 expresses the speed of each
slice when it takes the place of the one immediately below; I say
that if each slice was supposed to tend to move with the only
inϐinitely small speed 
, the Fluid would remain balanced
[45].305 (C.65)
In the Reϔlexions sur la cause générale des vents of 1747 [46],
D’Alembert presented his principle in the following form:
Suppose, then, that point A moves according to AG; on any curve
PAD, being animated with a real accelerating [motive] force = 
and at the same time it is solicited to to move according to AG by
a force = F, which for some reason is changed to 
; I say that if

this body A, would be solicited according to AP by a force = 
 would remain at rest [46].306 (C.66)
This last statement, and even though to a less extent the previous two,
gives reason to the interpretation proposed by Lagrange, which has
now became a standard, see below, Sect. 3.6.

3.6 Epilogue. Lagrangian Synthesis
Mechanics with Euler and d’Alembert had became an algebraic theory;
it still remained geometric in some parts however, and based on the
concept of vectors. A concept that today could be founded without any
reference to classical geometry but that in the 18th century could not.
An important and large step toward a complete algebrization of
mechanics was taken by Lagrange with his Mechanique analitique of
1788 [114]. This treatise added little, at least in its ϐirst editions, to the
development of mechanics and collected most results obtained by
Lagrange himself since 1760s. But it was completely new for its way of
exposition and its logical-epistemological conception. Mechanics from
rational became analytical.
The term analytical mechanics has different acceptations in the
history of mechanics. Today its more diffuse meaning is that of a
mathematical theory based on algebra and Calculus, whose principles
are formulated by means of scalar relations and this deϐinition
substantially covers Lagrange’s use. For Truesdell analytic mechanics is
limited to discrete systems (excluding thus continua, solid and ϐluid),
and this limitation of the term is quite diffuse also [143]. Vectors were
still present in Lagrange, but they were referred only through
components and mainly there could be many different local systems of
reference in the same mechanical assembly. According to the meaning
assumed beforehand Euler’s mechanics is not analytic, even though he
himself referred to it as analytical mechanics.
Lagrange in the preface of his masterpiece said that his mechanical
theory had became a branch of analysis. The principles of this branch
were represented by general formulas. They were enough to solve any
problem of mechanics, both in statics and dynamics. They however
were considered to be given, and no serious interest was addressed to
their derivation. From this point of view the Mechanique analitique
should be considered one of the ϐirst modern text in modern
mathematical physics, that is a mathematical theory based on
principles that could not be necessarily true.
In the following, fo the sake of completeness, the whole preface of
Lagrange’s treatise is quoted, notwithstanding it is well known and

commented in the literature, because of it shortness.
I propose to condense the theory of this science and the method
of solving the related problems to general formulas whose
simple application produces all the necessary equations for the
solution of each problem. I hope that my presentation achieves
this purpose and leaves nothing lacking. In addition, this work
will have another use. The various principles presently available
will be assembled and presented from a single point of view in
order to facilitate the solution of the problems of mechanics.
Moreover, it will also show their interdependence and mutual
dependence and will permit the evaluation of their validity and
scope. I have divided this work into two parts: statics or the
theory of equilibrium, and dynamics or the theory of motion. In
each part, I treat solid bodies and ϐluids separately. No ϐigures
will be found in this work. The methods I present require
neither constructions nor geometrical or mechanical arguments,
but solely algebraic operations subject to a regular and uniform
procedure. Those who appreciate mathematical analysis will see
with pleasure mechanics becoming a new branch of it [emphasis
added] and hence, will recognize that I have enlarged its domain
[114].307
Lagrange’s approach is greatly different from that of Euler in his
Mechanica motus scientia analitice exposita or Theoria motus corporum
solidorum seu rigidorum, not only because based on different principles.
They differ for two other main points of view. First. Euler’s mechanics
has a substantially axiomatic structure, where concepts are introduced
and explained, before being used. Lagrange’s mechanics has not such an
axiomatic structure. It uses concepts and even some principles that are
assumed to be already known and accepted in mechanics, by its
scholars. Moreover the general formulas Lagrange talked about are not
a true formulas but rather rules that need interpretation. Second.
Lagrange’s mechanics differently from Euler’s makes no reference to
natural philosophy to justify its assumptions. ‘Principles’, where
necessary, are justiϐied with mathematical reasoning. Where it would
be necessary to exit from this ambit, Lagrange was elusory. Instead of

considerations drawn from natural philosophy or metaphysics,
Lagrange referred to an historical account in his premise to the parts in
which his work is divided (statics, dynamics, hydrostatics,
hydrodynamics). And a well made account indeed, which has been of
inspiration for many historians of mechanics [30, 31].
History gives a justiϐication of the theory and replaces that based on
considerations of philosophical nature. Lagrange thus intended to show
that his point of view is nothing but the results gained in the history of
mechanics, starting from the ancients, Archimedes in primis. In his
history there is no room for the philosophers of nature, Descartes  is a
partial exception. He presented the contribution of his peers, the
mathematicians.
The historian of mathematics Gino Loria (1862–1954) proposes a
different explanation. He maintains that Lagrange did so because
congenial for him. He was indeed a profound connoisseur of the history
of mechanics and mathematics and considered useful to frame his
contribution in a more general context. Below Loria’s considerations on
this point:
He, besides to presenting himself as one of the most original and
profound thinkers we know, also appears as one of the most
learned mathematicians. The scope of his studies can well be
said to embrace all mathematics, pure and applied; theoretical
and practical arithmetic; algebra and inϐinitesimal calculus;
mechanics and mathematical physics, with the main
applications of such disciplines (for instance ballistics); ϐinally
astronomy, with all the disciplines connected to it, such as
watchmaking and navigation. Well, to ϐight and win in all these
wide and very varied ϐields he armed himself with all the science
of his own century, making familiar to everyone, without
exception, handling the logical and algorithmic procedures in
use at the time. To prove it it is enough to note that, although a
true analyst by temperament and habits, he was nevertheless
able to handle with enviable ease the kinematic-geometric
methods constantly used by Newton [129].308 (C.67)

Thus the history of physics written by Lagrange could be seen as a
further enlargement of his studies, carried out by his universal mind.
One of the general formulas of analytical mechanics of Lagrange is
given by Johann Bernoulli’s law of energies, named by him principle of
virtual velocities, a name that will used here through the text.
If an arbitrary system of any number of bodies or mass points,
each acted upon by arbitrary forces, is in equilibrium and if an
inϐinitesimal displacement is given to this system, in which each
mass point traverses an inϐinitesimal distance which expresses
its virtual velocity, then the sum of the forces, each multiplied by
the distance that the individual mass point traverses in the
direction of this force, will always be equal to zero. [114].309
(C.68)
Lagrange maintained that any general principle of mechanics that could
be found in future would differ from the principle of virtual velocities
only for its formal expression [114]:310 Because of the relevance of the
principle, Lagrange attempted also a his own justiϐication with more or
less success; on this point see [26].
Another general formula used by Lagrange, is d’Alembert principle
which he reformulated, or better chose among the various formulations
given by d’Alembert. Lagrange distinguished between the accelerating
forces with reversed sign:
that actually moves a body (P, Q, R), from the external assigned
accelerating forces. D’Alembert principle, in the version given it by
Lagrange, afϐirms that the accelerating forces, both actual and assigned,
multiplied each for the mass of the bodies on which they act, should
equilibrate:
If one imagines to impress to each body, the motion is will take,
with sign reversed [
], it is clear that the system will be
reduced at rest [115].311 (C.69)

The success of the Mechanique analitique, besides the use of the
generalized principle of virtual velocities, is also due to the massive
introduction of the calculus of variations. A kind of calculus in which
instead of the variation of ordinary variable, for instance time and
position, there are variations of functions. The method has a long
history and can be dated back to ancient Greeks; among its classical
problem there is the search of the ϐigure having maxima area for an
assigned perimeter (isoperimetric problem). The name calculus of
variation is due to Euler [85],312 as equally to Euler should be
attributed the solution of some important problems; but it was the
young Lagrange who developed a formalism very efϐicient and closing
related to that of the inϐinitesimal calculus.
Lagrange worked his ideas from 1755 until 1760 and published
them in the 1760/61 issue of the Miscellanea Taurinensia [113]. He
also published a number of other papers on the subject, which reached
their climax at his hands in 1788 in his Méchanique anlitique, where he
used the method of variation to solve many mechanical problems and
as the natural language for the principle of virtual velocities.
The fundamental concept is that of variation expressed with the
symbol . If 
 is a generic function belonging to a some space
of funtions, the variation with respect to a reference function 
, is the function 
. Generally it
is assumed that 
 and 
 are close, according to an appropriate metric.
Combining the two general formulas and using the symbols of the
calculus of variations, gives a single general formula, the symbolic
equation of the whole mechanics (modern name). For a system of mass
points it is:
where P, Q, R&c, are the active accelerating forces (that is forces for unit
of mass) on each mass point, which are assumed as assigned, and the
accelerating forces [the acceleration, as a matter of fact]:

effectively acting on each point. The symbols preceded by , a variation
indeed, indicate virtual displacements, respectively in the direction of
the forces, (
), and the global axes, 
. S means
summation over the mass points. Sign are adjusted considering that
forces P, Q, R and displacements p, q, r are positive in opposite
directions.
Lagrange’s general equation is not a true equation, for at least two
fundamental reasons. First x, y, z are generally constrained, so that this
equations should be ϐlanked by equations expressing constraints.
Lagrange did so using the so called method of Lagrange multipliers,
which implies to add to the previous equations a term containing the
equations of constraints [26].313 Second, virtual displacements should
be eliminated, because they are not deϐinite magnitudes.
Lagrange’s formalism applies very well also to the study of motion
and equilibrium of ϐluids. No discussion is carried out of their internal
structure. Only it is said that the particles which compose ϐluids are
material and that for this reason the general laws of equilibrium are as
applicable to them as they are to solid bodies. Indeed, the principal
property of ϐluids and the only one which distinguishes them from solid
bodies, according to Lagrange , is that all their parts have no resistance
against the smallest force and can move among themselves with all
possible facility. This property is easily modeled by Calculus and it
follows that the laws of equilibrium and motion for ϐluids do not
require a separate theory but that they are only a particular case of the
general theory of mechanics. The symbolic equation of dynamics
applied as well; the only particularity lies in the choice of the constraint
equations. In the case of statics of incompressible ϐluids, for instance,
the equation of conditions is derived by imposing the incompressibility
at a local level. It requires that the volume of each particle be invariable.
So, having expressed this volume by (dxdydz), it must be 
. The symbolic equation of mechanics is thus:

in which X, Y, Z, that replace P, Q, R, are the accelerating forces for each
elementary mass and considering we are in statics, m is replaced by
dxdydz; 
 is the so called Lagrange multiplier.
3.7 Quotations
C.1
La portion inϐiniment petite dont une quantité variable
augmente ou diminue continuellement, en est appellée la
Différence. Soit par exemple une ligne courbe quelconque
AMB, qui ait pour axe ou diametre la ligne AC, & pour une de
ses appliquées la droite PM; & soit une autre appliquée pm
inϐiniment proche de la premiere. Cela posé, si l’on mene
MR parallele à AC; les cordes AM, Am; & qu’on décrive du
centre A, de l’intervalle Am le petit arc de cercle MS-Pp sera
la difference de AP, Rm celle de PM, Sm celle de AM, & Mm
celle de l’arc AM. De meme le petit triangle MAm qui a pour
base l’arc Mm, sera la difference du segment AM; & le petit
espace MPpm, celle de l’espace compris par les droites AP,
PM, & par l’arc AM.
 
C.2
Deϐinition I. La portion inϐiniment petite dont la différence
d’une quantité variable augmente ou diminue
continuellement, est appellée la différence de la difference de
cette quantité, ou bien sa différence seconde.
 
C.3
Dans toutes sortes de mouvemens [...] soit que ces
mouvements soient uniformes, ou accelerez, ou retardez [...]
la somme des forces qui font le mouvement dans tous les
instants de sa durée, est toujours proportionnelle à la
somme des chemins ou des lignes que parcourent tous les
points des corps mu.
 
C.4
Potentia indesinenter agens (P) ducta in elementum
temporis (dt) aequipollet facto ex massa corporis (M) cui
potentia applicata est, et elemento celeritatis (dc) quod
tempusculo (dt) producit.
 

tempusculo (dt) producit.
C.5
In Opere Hydrodynamico, quod non ita pridem in lucent
edidit Filius meus, felicioribus auspiciis aggressus est
materiam istam, sed fundamento nixus indirecto,
conservatione scilicet virium vivarum, licet verissimo atque
a me demonstrato, nondum tamen ab omnibus Philosophis
recepto. Primus ego hanc hypothesin exhibui in Dynamicis
solidorum [postquam Hugenius simili principia pro centro
oscillationis determinando usus est] ostendique eandem
constanter ex illa hypothesi solutionem elici, quam dant
ordinaria principia dynamica ab omnibus Geometris
admissa.
 
C.6
Mais a present que cette vérité est mise dans son jour &
hors de toute atteinte, on a lieu d’admirer la parfait
conformité qui regne entre les loix de la Nature, & celles de
la Geometrie; conformité qu’elle observe si constamment &
dans toutes les circonstances, qu’il semble que la Nature ait
consulté la Géométrie, en etablissant les loix du Mouvement.
Car s’il eut été possible que les forces des corps, qui sont en
mouvement, n’eussent pas été en raison des produits des
masses par les quarrez des vitesses, & que la Nature les eut
faites en une autre raison; elle se seroit démentie, l’ordre de
la Geometrie auroit été viole. La quantité des forces vives
source unique de la continuation du mouvement dans
l’Univers, ne se seroit pas conservée: plus d’égalité par
consequent entre les causes. efϐicientes & leurs effets; en un
mot, tout Ia Nature seroit tombée dans le desordre.
 
C.7
Dans chaque equilibre il ya une egalité d’energies des forces
absolue, c’est a dire entre le produite des forces absolues
par less vitesses virtuelles.
 
C.8
J’entends par vitesse virtuelle la seule disposition à se
mouvoir que les forces ont dans un parfait equilibre, où
elles ne se meuvent pas actuellement. C’est pourquoy eviter
l’equivoque, an lieu de dire que leurs puissances ou les
forces sont comme les produits des masses par leurs vitesse
vous auriez peut-être mieux fait de vous exprimer ainsi les
 

vous auriez peut-etre mieux fait de vous exprimer ainsi, les
energies des puissances ou des forces sont comme les
produits de ces puissances ou de ces forces par les vitesses
virtuelles.
C.9
Concevez plusieurs forces différentes qui agissent suivant
différentes tendances ou directions pour tenir en équilibre
un point, une ligne, une surface, ou un corps; concevez aussi
que l’on imprime a tout le système de ces forces un petit
mouvement, soit parallèle a soi-même suivant une direction
quelconque, soit autour d’un point ϐixe quelconque: il vous
sera aise de comprendre que par ce mouvement chacune de
ces forces avancera on reculera dans sa direction, a moins
que quelqu’une ou plusieurs des forces n’ayent leurs
tendances perpendiculaires a la direction du petit
mouvement; auquel cas cette force, ou ces forces,
n’avanceroient ni ne reculeroient de rien; car ces
avancemens ou reculemens, qui sont ce que j’appelle
vitesses virtuelles, ne sont autre chose que ce dont chaque
ligne de tendance augmente ou diminue par le petit
mouvement; et ces augmentations ou diminutions se
trouvent, si l’on tire une perpendiculaire a l’extremite de la
ligne de tendance de quelque force, la quelle
perpendiculaire retranchera de la même ligne de tendance,
mise dans la situation voisine par le petit mouvement, une
petite partie qui sera la mesure de la vitesse virtuelle de
cette force [...] Tout cela étant bien entendu, se forme cette
Proposition generale: En tout équilibre de forces
quelconques, en quelque maniere qu’elles soient appliquées, et
suivant quelques directions qu’elles agissent les unes sur les
autres, on mediatement, on immediatement, la somme des
Energies afϔirmatives sera egale a la somme des Energies
négatives prises afϔirmativement.
 
C.10 Les Cartesiens conformément à la lettre que je viens de citer
(art. 1.) de leur Maistre, avoient desja deduit de son
principe la même egalité de Momens, ou d’energie, ou de
i ́ d
l
d
 

quantités de mouvement, que vous employez pour deux
puissances en equilibre sur les machines simples, & dans le
ϐluides, par les commencemens de mouvement que M.
Descartes  prescrit dans cette lettre; mais vous etes le seul,
que je sçache, qui ait étendu cette égalité d’energies à tant
de puissances qu’on voudra supposer en équilibre entr’elles
suivant des directions quelconques. Cette Remarque est fort
belle; mais (comme j’ay desja dit) elle suppose équilibre
entre des puissances donnée & de directions données sans
le prouver.
C.11 Si les Sciences sont fondées sur certains principes simples &
clairs dès le premier aspect, d’où dépendent toutes les
vérités qui en sont l’objet, elles ont encore d’autres
principes, moins simples à la vérité, & souvent difϐiciles à
découvrir, mais qui étant une fois découverts sont d’une
très-grande utilité. Ceux-ci sont en quelque façon les Loix
que la Nature suit dans certaines combinations de
circonstances, & nous apprennent ce qu’elle sera dans de
semblables occasions. Les premiers principes n’ont guére
besoin de Démonstration, par l’ evidence dont ils font dès
que l’esprit les examine; les derniers ne sauroient a voir de
Démonstration physique a la rigueur, parce qu’il est
impossible de parcourir généralement tous les cas on ils ont
lieu. Tel est, par exemple, Ie principe si connu & si utile dans
Ia Statique ordinaire; que Dans tous les assemblages de
corps, leur commun centre de gravité descend le plus bas qu’il
est possible. Tel est celui de la conservation des Forces vives.
Jamais on n’a donne de Démonstration générale à Ia
rigueur, de ces principes; mais jamais personne,
accoûtumée à juger dans les Sciences, & qui connaı̂tra la
force de l’induction, ne doutera de leur vérité. Quand on
aura vi que dans mille occasions la Nature agit d’une
certaine maniére, if n’y a point d’homme de bon sens qui
croye que dans Ia mille-uniéme elle suivra d’autres loix.
Quant aux demonstrations à priori de ces sortes de
principes, il ne paroı̂t pas que la Physique les puisse donner;
elles semblent appartenir a quelque science supérieure.
C
d
l
i
d
i
d
l
i
 

Cependant leur certitude est si grande, que plusieurs
Mathématiciens n’hésitent pas a en faire les fondements de
leurs Theories, & s’en servent tous les jours pour résoudre
des Problèmes, dont sa solution leur coûteroit sans eux
beaucoup plus de peine. Notre esprit étant aussi peu étendu
qu’il l’est, if y a souvent trop loin pour lui des premiers
principes au point ou il veut arriver, & il se lasse ou s’écarte
de sa route. Ces loix dont nous parlons, le dispensent d’une
partie du chemin: il part de-la avec toutes ses forces, &
souvent n’a plus que quelques pas a faire pour arriver la ou
il desire.
C.12
Soit un système de corps qui pesent, ou qui sont tirés vers
des centers par des Forces qui agissent chacune sur chacun,
comme puissance n de leurs distances aux centres; pour que
taus ces corps demeurent en repos, if faut que la somme des
products de chaque Masse, par l’intensité de sa force, & par
la puissance 
 de sa distance au centre de fa force
(qu’on peut appeler la somme des Forces du repos) fasse un
Maximum ou un Minimum
 
C.13
PėĎēĈĎĕĊ ČĊēĊėĆđ. Lors qu’il arrive quelque changement
dans la Nature, la Quantité d’Action, nécessaire pour ce
changement, est la plus petite qu’il soit possible. La Quantité
d’Action est le produit de la Masse des Corps, par leur
vı̂tesse & par l’espace qu’ils parcourent. Lors qu’un Corps
est transporté d’un lieu dans un autre, l’Action est d’autant
plus grande, que la Masse est plus grosse; que la vı̂tesse est
plus rapide; que l’espace, par lequel il est transporté, est
plus long.
 
C.14
Eine ϐlüssige Materie muss zu allererst diese Eigenschaft
haben, dass ihre Teilchen nicht aneinander befestigt sind, so
dass ein jegliches Teilchen ohne einigen Widerstand von
den übrigen abgesondert und in Bewegung gesetzt werden
kann
 
C.15 La matière, sur laquelle je voudrois à présent entretenir V.A.

me fait presque peur. La variété en est surprenante, & le
dénombrement des faits sert plutôt a nous éblouir qu’à
nous éclairer. C’est de l’Electricité dont je parle, & qui depuis
quelque tems en devenüe un article si important dans la
Physique, qu’il n’est presque plus permis à personne d’en
ignorer les effets.
 
C.16
Alles was undurchdringlich ist, gehört in das Geschlecht der
Körper, und daher besteht das Wesen der Körper in der
Undurchdringlichkeit, in welcher folglich alle, übrigen
Eigenschaften ihren Grund haben müssen.
 
C.17
II y aura donc deux espéces de matiere, l’une qui fournit
l’étoffe à tous les corps sensibles et dont toutes les
particules ont la même densité, qui est très considerable et
qui surpasse meme de plusieurs fois celle de l’or; l’autre
espece de matiere sera celle dont ce ϐluide subtil qui cause
la gravité est compose, et que nous nommons l’éther.
 
C.18
Die grobe Materie ist also an sick selbst keiner anderen
Verönderung fähig als in Ansehung ihrer Figur, welche,
wenn hinlöngliche Kröfte vorhanden, auf alle mögliche
Arten veröndert werden kann. [...] Dass die subtile Materie
auch allezeit und allenthalben eine, bestöndige Dichtigkeit
haben sollte, dergestalt, dass dieselbe durch keine Kröfte in
einen kleineren Raum getrieben werden kannte, scheint der
Wahrheit nicht gemöss zu sein. Vielmehr mochte auch
hierin ein Hauptunterschied zwischen der groben und
subtilen Materie bestehen, dass sick diese
zusammendrücken liesse.
 
C.19 Ungeachtet wir aber hier stehn bleiben müssen und kaum
hoffen können, jemals die wahre Ursache dieser
Verminderung der elastischen Kraft des Aethers zu
ergründen, so kann man sich doch damit leichter begnügen;
als wenn man blosserdings vorgiebt, alle Körper seien von
Natur mit einer Kraft begabt, einander anzuziehen. Denn da
i h
di
A
i h
i h
i
l i
 

man sich von diesem Anziehn nicht einmal einen
verstöndlichen Begriff mach en kann, so kann man im
Gegentheil zum wenigsten überhaupt einsehn, wie es
möglich sei, dass die elastische Kraft einer ϐlüssigen Materie
vermindert werde, und man begreift auch, dass dieses auf
eine den Gesetzen der Natur gemösse Art geschehen könne.
C.20
Deϐinitio 12. Quicquid statum corporum absolutum mutare
valet, id vis vocatur; quae ergo, cum corpus ob causas
internas in statu suo esset permansurum, pro causa externa
est habenda.
 
C.21
Cette égalité des forces, d’ou dépend le grand principe de
l’égalité entre l’action & réaction, est une suite nécessaire de
la nature de la pénétration. Car, s’il étoit possible que le
corps A pénétrât le corps B, le corps A seroit précisément
autant pénétré par le corps B; donc, puisque le danger que
ces corps se pénètrent, est égal de part & d’autre, il faut
aussi que ces deux corps employent des forces égales pour
resister à la penetration. Ainsi, autant que le corps B est
sollicité par le corps A, précisément autant sera celui-cy
sollicité par celui-là, l’un & l’autre déployant exactement
autant de force qu’il faut pour prévenir la penetration. Or
ces deux corps agissant l’un sur l’autre par une force
quelconque, se trouveront dans le même état que s’ils
étoient comprimés ensemble par Ia mê me force.
 
C.22 Idem omnino mihi, cum Neutoni Principia et Hermann
Phoronomiam perlustrare coepissem, usu venit, ut, quamvis
plurium problematum solutiones satis percepisse mihi
viderere, tamen parum tantum discrepantia problemata
resolvere non potuerim. Illo igitur iam tempore, quantum
potui, conatus sum ex synthetica illa methodo elicere
easdemque propositiones ad meam utilitatem analytice
pertractare, quo negotio insigne cognitionis meae
augmentum percepi. Simili deinde modo alia quoque passim
dispersa ad hanc scientiam spectantia scripta sum
persecutus, quae omnia ad meum usum methodo plana et
aequabili exposui atque in ordinem idoneum digessi Hoc in
 

aequabili exposui atque in ordinem idoneum digessi. Hoc in
negotio occupatus non solum in plurimas antea nondum
tractatas incidi quaestiones, quas feliciter solutas dedi: sed
etiam complures peculiares methodos sum adeptus, quibus
tam mechanica quam ipsa analysis non parum augmenti
accepisse videantur.
C.23
Or on énonce communément ce principe par deux
propositions, dont l’une porte, qu’un corps étant une fois en
repos demeure éternellement en repos, à moins qu’il ne soit
mis en mouvement par quelque cause externe ou étrangere.
L’autre proposition porte, qu’un corps étant une fois en
mouvement, conservera toujours éternellement ce
mouvement avec la même direction & la meme vitesse, ou
bien sera porté d’un mouvement uniforme suivant une ligne
droite, à moins qu’il ne soit troublé par quelque cause
externe ou étrangere.
 
C.24
Quoique les principe dont il s’agit ici soient nouveaux,
entant qu’ils ne sont pas encore connus ou étalés par les
Auteurs, qui on traité la Mécanique, on comprend
néanmoins, que le fondement de ces principes ne saurait
être nouveau, mais qu’il est absolument nécessaire, que ces
principes soient déduits des première principes, ou plutôt
des axiomes, sur le quels toute la doctrine du mouvement
est établie.
 
C.25
Deϐinitio I. Quemadmodum Quies est perpetua in eodem
loco permanentia, ita Motus est continua loci mutatio.
Corpus scilicet, quod semper in eodem loco haerere
observatur, quiescere dicetur: quod autem labente tempore
in alia atque alia loca succedit, id moveri dicitur.
 
C.26
Axiom 1. Omne corpus, etiam sine respectu ad alia corpora,
vel quiescit vel movetur, hoc est vel absolute quiescit vel
absolute movetur.
 
C.27 Axioma 2. Corpus, quod absolute quiescit, si nulli externae
actioni fuerit subiectum, perpetuo in quiete perseverabit.
A i
3 C
d b
l t
t
i
lli
t
 

Axioma 3. Corpus, quod absolute movetur, si nulli externae
actioni subiiciatur, secundum eandem directionem motu
aequabili progredi perget.
C.28
Deϐinitio 11. Proprietas illa corporum, quae rationem
perseverationis in eodem statu in se continet, inertia
appellatur, quandoque etiam vis inertiae.
 
C.29
Theorema 2a. Spatiola, per quae idem corpusuclum
quiescens eodem tempusculo dt a diveris viribus
promovetur, sunt ipsis viribus proportionalia.
 
C.30
Theorema 3. Si aequales vires corpuscula inaequalia
quiescentia sollicitent, effectus eodem tempusculo producti
erunt reciproce inertiae corpusculorum proportionales.
 
C.31
Deϐinitio 15. Massa corporis vel quantitas materiae vocatur
quantitas inertiae, quae in eo corpore inest, qua tam in statu
suo perseverare quam omni mutationi reluctari conatur.
 
C.32
Theorema 4. Si corpuscula ratione massae inaequalia
quiescant atque a viribus quibuscunque singula
sollicitentur, erunt spatiola, per quae eodem tempusculo
protrudentur, in ratione composita ex directa virium in
inversa massarum.
 
C.33
Pro viribus ergo, quibus corpora iam mota sollicitantur,
hanc dimetiendi rationem stabilimus, ut eas aequales
iudicemus iis, quae in iisdem corporibus quiescentibus
eodem tempore eundem effectum essent praestaturae. Haec
autem ratio non indiget probatione, quia deϐinitioni
innititur nobisque adhuc liberum fuerat eam constituere. Si
enim promotu quocunque spatiolas 
 aequalia fuerint
spatiola 
, per quod idem corpusculum quiescens
tempusculo eodem profertur a vi p, huic etiam illas vires
aequales appellamus.
 
C.34 Quoniam autem immensi illius spatii cuiusque terminorum,

[...] nullam nobis certam formare possimus ideam; loco
huius immensi spatii eiusque terminorum considerare
solemus spatium ϐinitum, limitesque corporeos, ex quibus
de corporum motu et quiete indicamus. Sic dicere solemus,
corpus, quod respect horum limitum situm eundem
conservat, quiescere, id vero, quod situm eodem respectu
mutat, moveri.
 
C.35
Wenn der Zuschauer gleichgeschwind in einer graden Linie
fortrückt und die Gegenden richtig, das ist, nach
gleichlaufenden Linien schötzet, so werden zur
Unterhaltung der scheinbaren Bewegung, wie sehr dieselbe
auch von der wahren unterschieden sein mag, eben
diejenigen Kröfte erfordert, als zur Unterhaltung der
wahren Bewegung.
 
C.36
Wenn aber der Zuschauer sich nicht gleichförmig in einer
graden Linie bewegt, dennoch aber die Gegenden richtig
schötzet, so werden, um die scheinbare Bewegung aller
Körper zu bewerkstelligen, noch ausser den Kröften, welche
wirklich auf dieselben wirken, solche Kröfte erfordert,
welche in einem jeden Körper alle Augenblicke eben die
Verönderung hervorbringen, welche in dem Orte des
Zuschauers vorgeht, aber nach einer umgekehrten
Richtung.
 
C.37
Wenn aber der Zuschauer sich nicht gleichförmig in einer
graden Linie bewegt, dennoch aber die Gegenden richtig
schötzet, so werden um die scheinbare Bewegung aller
Körper zu bewerkstelligen, noch ausser den Kröϐlen, welche
wirklich auf dieselben wirken, solche Kröfte erfordert,
welche in einem jeden Körper alle Augenblicke eben die
Verönderung hervorbringen, welche in dem Orte des
Zusehauers vorgeht, aber nach einer umgekehrten
Richtung.
 
C.38 Ce qu’il y a de plus fâcheux pour moi, e’est que Ia Geometric
est la seul occupation qui m’intéresse véritablement, sans

p
q
,
qu’il me soit perm is de m’y livrer. Tout ce que je fais de
littérature, quoique très-bénignement accueilli (à ce qu’il
me semble) dans nos seances publiques de l’Académie
Française, n’est pour moi que du remplissage et une espèce
de pis-aller.
 
C.39
Mais si le nombre de nos connoissances certaines est fort
petit, celui de nos connoissances directes l’est encore
davantage. Nous ignorons, par rapport à un grand nombre
d’objets, ce qu’ils sont & ce qu’ils ne sont pas; & nous
n’avons sur beaucoup d’autres que des idées négatives y
c’est-à-dire, nous savons ce qu’ils ne sont pas bien mieux
que ce qu’ils sont; heureux encore dans notre indigence de
posséder cette connoissance imparfaite & tronquée, qui
n’est qu’une maniere un peu plus raisonnée & un peu plus
douce d’être ignorans. Or dans tous ces cas on sera forcé
d’avoir recours aux démonstrations indirectes. Les
principales démonstrations de ce genre sont connues sous
le nom de réduction à l’absurde; elles consistent à prouver
une vérité par les absurdités qui s’ensuivroient si on ne
l’admettoit pas. Dans cette classe doivent être placées toutes
les démonstrations qui regardent les incommenssurables,
c’est-à- dire, les grandeurs qui n’ont aucune commune
mesure entr’elles. En effet l’idée de l’inϐini entre
nécessairement dans celle de ces sortes de quantités; or
nous n’avons de l’inϐini qu’une idée négative, puisque nous
ne le concevons que par la négation du ϐini.
 
C.40 Dans l’art de conjecturer on peut distinguer trois branches.
La premiere qui a été long-temps la seule; et qui n’a meme
commence à être cultivée que depuis environ un siècle, est
ce que les mathématiciens appellant l’analyse des
probabilités dans les jeux de hasard [...] La seconde branche
est l’extension [...] à differentes questions relatives à la vie
commune; Comme celles qui ont rapport a la durée de la vie
des hommes; au prix des rentes viagères, aux assurances
maritimes à l’inoculation [...]. Cette troisième branche a
pour objet les sciences dans lesquelles il est rare ou im
 

possible de parvenir à la démonstration’ et dans lesquelles
cependant l’ art de conjecturer est nécessaire.
C.41
Si nous savions pourquoi il y a quelque chose, nous serions
vraisemblablement bien avancés pour résoudre la question
comment telle et telle chose existent-elle? car
vraisemblablement tous se tient dans l’univers plus
intimement encore que nous ne pensons; et si nous savions
ce premier pourquoi, ce pourquoi si embarrassant pour
nous, nous tiendrons le bout du ϐil qui forme le système
général des êtres, and nous n’aurions plus qu’à le developer.
 
C.42
Tous les êtres, & par conséquent tous les objets de nos
connaissances, ont entr’eux une liaison qui nous échappe.  
C.43
Toutes nos connaissance directes se réduisent à celles que
nous recevons par les senses; d’ou il s’ensuit que c’est à nos
sensations que nous devons toutes nos idées.
 
C.44
La premiere chose que nos sensations nous apprennent. et
qui meme n’en est pas distinguée, c’est notre existence [...]
La seconde connaissance que nous devons a nos sensations,
est l’existence des objets extérieurs [...]. Ces objets
innombrables produisent sur nous un effet si puissant, si
continu, et qui nous unit tellement à eux, qu’après un
premier instant ou nos idées réϐléchies nous rappellent en
nous-memes, nous sommes forces d’en sortir par les
sensations qui nous assiègent de toutes parts, et qui nous
arrachent a la solitude ou nous resterions sans elles [...]. Les
affections involontaires qu’elles nous font éprouver,
comparées avec la determination volontaire qui preside a
nos idées réϐléchies [...] tout cela forme en nous un penchant
insurmontable à assurer l’existence des objets auxquels
nous rapportons ces sensations, et qui nous paraissent en
être la cause.
 
C.45 A foi et a serment, je ne trouve dans toutes les ténèbres
métaphysiques de parti raisonnable que le scepticisme; je
n’ai d’idée distincte, et encore d’idée complète, ni de la
 

,
p
,
matière ni d’autre chose [...] je suis tenté de croire que tout
ce que nous voyons n’est qu’un phénomène, qui n’a rien
hors de nous de semblable à ce que nous imaginons, et j’ en
reviens toujours à la question du roi indien: Pourquoi y a-t-il
quelque chose car c’est la en effet le plus surprenant.
C.46
Dans la multitude des vérités que l’Encyclopédie embrasse,
& qu’en vain on chercheroit à saisir toutes ensemble, il en
est qui s’élèvent & qui dominent sur les autres, comme
quelques pointes de rochers au milieu d’une mer immense.
Ces vérités qu’il importe le plus de connoı̂tre, étant réunies
& rapprochées dans des élémens de Philosophie qui
serviroient à l’Encyclopédie comme d’introduction, l’utilité
de ce grand Ouvrage en deviendrait sans doute plus
générale & plus assurée.
 
C.47
Mais quelque différentes que ces Sciences soient entr’elles,
soit par leur étendue, soit par leur nature, il est néanmoins
des vues générales qu’on doit suivre dans la manière d’en
traiter les élémens; il est ensuite des nuances différentes
dans la manière d’appliquer ces vues générales aux élémens
de chaque Science particulière; c’est ce qu’il faut développer.
 
C.48
Mais les principes de l’Algèbre ne portent que sur des
notions purement intellectuelles, sur des idées que nous
nous formons à nous-mêmes par abstraction en simpliϐiant
& en généralisant des idées premières; ainsi ces principes
ne contiennent proprement que ce que nous y avons mis, &
ce qu’il y a de plus simple dans nos perceptions; ils sont en
quelque façon notre ouvrage; comment peuvent-ils donc,
par rapport à l’évidence, laisser encore quelque chose à
desirer.
 
C.49 Les sciences abstraites ont occupé trop longtemps et avec
trop peu de fruit les meilleurs esprits; ou l’on n’a point
étudié ce qu’il importait de savoir, ou l’on n’a mis ni choix, ni
vues, ni méthode dans ses études; les mots se sont
lti li ́
ϐi
t l
i
d
h
t
t ́
 

multiplies sans ϐin, et la connaissance des choses est restee
en arrière [...]. Les faits, de quelque nature qu’ils soient, sont
la véritable richesse du philosophe. Mais un des préjugés de
la philosophie rationnelle, c’est que celui qui ne saura pas
nombrer ses écus, ne sera guère plus riche que celui qui
n’aura qu’un écu.
C.50
Plus on peut tirer de l’application de la Geométrie à la
Physique, plus on doit etre circonspect dan cette
application. C’est à la simplicité de son object que la
Géometrie est redevable de sa certitude; à al mesure que
l’object devient plus composé la certitude s’obscurcit &
s’éloigne. Il faut donc savoir s’arrêter sur ce qu’on ignore, ne
pas croire que les mots & de Theoréme & de Corollaire,
fassent par quelque vertu secrette l’essence d’une
démonstration.
 
C.51
La seule utilité expérimentale que le Physicien puisse tirer
des observations sur les lois de l’équilibre, sur celles du
mouvement, & en général sur les affections primitives des
corps, c’est d’examiner attentivement la différence entre le
réésultat que donne la théorie & celui que fournit
l’expérience; & d’employer cette différence avec adresse,
pour déterminer, par exemple, dans les effets de l’impulsion,
l’altération causée par la résistance de l’air; dans les effets
des machines simples, l’altération occasionnée par le
frottement & [...] car alors l’expérience ne servira plus
simplement à conϐirmer la théorie y mais différant de la
théorie sans l’ébranler, elle conduira à des vérités nouvelles
auxquelles la théorie feule n’auroit pu atteindre.
 
C.52 La nature est une machine immense don les ressorts
principaux nous son cachés; nous ne voyons meme cette
machine qu’à travers un voile qui nous dérobe le jeu des
parties les plus délicates. Entre les parties plus frappantes,
& peut-être, si on ose le dire, plus grossieres, que ce voile
nous permet d’entrevoir ou de découvrir, il est plusieurs
qu’un meme ressort met en mouvement, & c’est là sur-tout
ce que nous devons chercher à démêler.
 

ce que nous devons chercher a demeler.
C.53
Parmi les différentes suppositions que nous pouvons
imaginer pour expliquer un effet, les seules dignes de notre
examen sont celles qui par leur nature nous fournirent des
moyens infaillibles de nous assuer si elles sont vraies. Le
systême de la gravitation est de ce nombre, & mériteroit par
cela seul l’attention des Philosophes. On n’a point à craindre
ici cet abus du calcul & de la Géométrie, dans lequel les
Physiciens ne sont que trop souvent tombés pour défendre
ou pour combattre des hypotheses. Les planètes étant
supposées le mouvoir, ou dans le vuide, ou au moins clans
un espace non résistant, & les forces par lesquelles elles
agissent les unes sur les autres étant connues, c’est un
problème purement mathématique, que de déterminer les
phénomènes qui en doivent naı̂tre; on a donc le rare
avantage de pouvoir juger irrévocablement du systême
Newtonien [...] il seroit à souhaiter que toutes les questions
de la Physique pussent être aussi incontestablement
décidées. Ainsi on ne pourra regarder comme vrai le
syistême de la gravitation, qu’après s’être assuré par des
calculs précis qu’il répond exactement aux phénomenes.
 
C.54
Je suppose seulement, ce que personne ne peut me
contester, qu’un Fluid est un corps composé de particles
très petites, détachées, & capable de se mouvoir librement
[...] Car les Philosophes ne pouvant déduire immédiatement
& directement de la nature des Fluides les loix de leur
équilibre, ils les ont au moins reduites a un seul principe
d’experience, l’égalité de pression en tout sens [...] En effet,
condamnés comme nous le sommes à ignorer les premieres
propriétés & la contexture intérieure des corps, la seule
ressource qui reste à notre sagacité est de tacher au moins
de saisir dans chaque matière l’analogie des Phenomenes, &
de les rappeller tous à un petit nombre de faits primitifs &
fondamentaux.
 
C.55 Ainsi dans la Méchanique ou science du mouvement des

corps, on ne doit déϐinir ni l’espace ni le tems, parce que ces
mots ne renferment qu’une idée simple; mais on peut & on
doit même déϐinir le mouvement, quoique la notion en soit
assez familiere à tout le monde, parce que l’idée de
mouvement est une idée complexe qui en renferme deux
simples, celle de l’espace parcouru, & celle du tems employé
à le parcourir.
 
C.56
Force d’inertie, est la propriété qui est commune à tous les
corps de rester dans leur état, soit de repos ou de
mouvement, à moins que quelque cause étrangere ne les en
fasse changer [...]. On l’appelle résistance, lorsqu’on veut
parler de l’effort qu’un corps fait contre ce qui tend à
changer son état; & on la nomme action, lorsqu’on veut
exprimer l’effort que le même corps fait pour changer l’état
de l’obstacle qui lui résiste.
 
C.57
Que ce que nous appellons causes, même de la premiere
espece, n’est tel qu’improprement; ce sont des effets
desquels il résulte d’autres effets. Un corps en pousse un
autre, c’est-à-dire ce corps est en mouvement, il en
rencontre un autre, il doit nécessairement arriver du
changement à cette occasion dans l’état des deux corps, à
cause de leur impénétrabilité; l’on détermine les lois de ce
changement par des principes certains, & l’on regarde en
conséquence le corps choquant comme la cause du
mouvement du corps choqué. Mais cette façon de parler est
impropre. La cause métaphysique, la vraie cause nous est
inconnue.
 
C.58 Pourquoi donc aurions-nous recours à ce principe dont tout
le monde fait usage aujourd’hui, que la force accélératrice
ou retardatrice est proportionnelle à l’élément de la vitesse?
[...]. Nous n’examinerons point si ce principe est de vérité
nécessaire [...] pas non plus, avec quelques Géometres,
comme de vérité purement contingent [...]: nous nous
contenterons d’observer, que vrai ou douteux, clair ou
obscur, il est inutile à la Méchanique, & que par conséquent
il doit en être banni
 

il doit en etre banni.
C.59
On vient de voir que de quelque maniere que le mouvement
soit accéléré ou retardé, l’équation différentio-différentielle
de la courbe sera toujours de cette forme 
. Or
si on veut faire usage de cette équation, ainsi que des
équations 
 & 
 pour déterminer dans
un mouvement quelconque la relation entre u, t, e, il faut
connoı̂tre 
 & l’on pourrait penser que pour cet effet la
connoissance de la cause qui accélere ou retarde le
mouvement seroit nécessaire; l’objet de la Remarque est de
faire voir que non, mais que 
 est toujours donné par la
déϐinition même de l’espece de mouvement dont il est
question; ainsi, conformément à cette même Remarque,
quand on voudra faire usage des équations 
, 
, & 
 pour déterminer la relation des
espaces, des vitesses & des tems dans un mouvement dont
la loi sera donnée, il sufϐira de substituer dans ces équations
à la place de 
 une quantité propre à exprimer la loi suivant
laquelle on supposera que se font les augmentations ou
diminutions de vitesse: quand on supposera, par exemple,
que les diminutions instantanées de vitesse sont comme les
quarrés de la vitesse, on écrira 
 
(g étant un coefϐicient constant), & ainsi du reste.
 
C.60 Il paroit d’abord que l’action du Createur sur les corps ne
rend en aucune façon hipotétique l’execution des loix de la
Méchanique dans l’univers, comme M. d’ Alembert semble le
supposer dans cet endroit; puisqu’il nous sera toujours
permis de considerer cette action de Dieu comme une
nouvelle force qui agit fur les corps: quels que soient alors
les mouvemens qui en résultent, ils ne seroit jamais
contraires aux principes de la Méchanique qui doivent
 

contraires aux principes de la Mechanique qui doivent
immutables par eux mêmes.
C.61
Probléme I. Trouver la vitesse d’une verge CR ϐixe en C &
chargée de tant de corps A, B, R qu’on voudra, en supposant
que ces corps, si la verge ne les empêchoit, décrivissent
dans des tems egaux les lignes inϐiniment petites AO, BQ, RT
perpendiculaires à la verge.
 
C.62
Probléme V. Un ϐil CmM ϐixe en C, & chargé de deux poids m,
M, étant inϐiniment peu éloigné de la verticale CO, trouver la
durée des oscillations de ce ϐil.
 
C.63
Probléme IX. Un Corps dont la masse est m, & la vitesse u, se
mouvant sur une même ligne avec un autre Corps dont la
masse est M. SC la vitesse U, trouver la vitesse de ces Corps
après le choc.
 
C.64
Soit un corps qui se meuve d’un mouvement quelconque, &
dont toutes les parties aient chacune une vitesse différente
représentée par l’indéterminée u dans un instant
quelconque: soient aussi tant de forces accélératrices qu’on
voudra, 
,&c. qui agissent sur ce corps & en vertu
desquelles la vitesse u que chaque partie a dans un instant
quelconque, soit changée l’instant suivant en une autre
vitesse 
, différente pour chaque partie. Je dis que si on
regarde la vitesse u comme composée de la vitesse 
 &
d’une autre vitesse 
, qui est inϐiniment petite; le système
de toutes les parties du corps, animées chacune de la vitesse
 doit être en équilibre avec les forces 
,&c.
 
C.65 Soient en general les vitesses des différentes tranches du
Fluide dans un meme instant, représentées par
l’indéterminée v. Imaginons que dv soit l’increment de v
dans l’instant suivant, cette quantité dv soit différente pour
les différentes tranches, positive pour les unes, & negative
pour les autres; en un mot que
exprime la vitesse
 

pour les autres; en un mot, que 
, exprime la vitesse
de chaque tranche lorsqu’elle prend la place de celle qui est
immédiatement au-dessous; je dis que si chaque tranche
étoit supposée tendre a se mouvoir avec la seule vitesse
inϐiniment petite 
, le Fluide resteroit en équilibre.
C.66
Supposons donc que le point A se meuve suivant AG; sur
une courbe quelconque PAD, etant animé d’une force
accélératrice réelle = 
 qu’en meme tems il soit sollicité de
se mouvoir suivant AG par une force = F, qui par quelque
raison que ce puisse être, se change en 
; je dis que ce
corps A, s’ll étoit sollicité suivant A P par une force = 
demeureroit en repos.
 
C.67
Egli, oltre a presentarcisi come uno dei pensatori più
originali e profondi che si conoscano, ci appare eziandio
come uno dei matematici più dotti a noi noti. L’ambito dei
suoi studi si può ben dire abbracci tutta la matematica, pura
ed applicata; aritmetica teorica e pratica; algebra e calcolo
inϐinitesimale; meccanica e ϐisica matematica, con le
principali applicazioni di tali discipline (p. es. la balistica);
ϐinalmente astronomia, con tutte le discipline ad essa
collegate quali sarebbero l’orologeria e la navigazione.
Ebbene per combattere e vincere in tutti questi ampli e
svariatissimi campi Egli si armò di tutta la scienza del
proprio secolo, rendendosi famigliare il maneggio di tutti,
senza eccezione, i procedimenti logici e algoritmici, allora in
uso: a provarlo basta rilevare che, benché vero e proprio
analista per temperamento e per abitudini, Egli era però in
grado di maneggiare con invidiabile disinvoltura i metodi
cinematico-geometrici costantemente adoperati da
Newton. 
 
C.68 Si un système quelconque de tant de corps ou points que
ton veut tirés chacun par des puissances quelconques est en
équilibre & qu’on donne à ce système un petit mouvement  

equilibre & qu on donne a ce systeme un petit mouvement
quelconque, en vertu duquel chaque point parcoure un
espace inϐiniment petit qui exprimera fa vitesse virtuelle; la
somme des puissances multiplies chacune par l’espace que
le point ou elle est appliquée parcourt suivant la direction
de cette même puissance, sera toujours égale a zero.
C.69
Car, si l’on imagine qu’on imprime à chaque corps, en sens
contraire, le mouvement qu’il doit prendre il est claire que
le système sera réduit au repos.
 
Notes
For instance, in the case of the expression 
 (AP = x, PM =
y and AB = a), taking differentials gives:
When the point P falls in the searched point E (
) it is: 
.
“Substituting this value in place of y in the equation 
, one
ϐinds for AE the value 
 ” [2], p. 43.
Consider for instance the differential of the expression:
L’Hôpital distinguished the two cases dx is constant or dy is constant.
The ϐirst case corresponds, according to modern reading, to assume x as
independent variable, the second to assume y. The resulting
differentials of the previous expression in the two cases are
respectively:

With Leibniz’s symbols, the differential equation of motion of a
planet moving with harmonic motion is given as:
(3.1)
where r is the distance from the center of the (harmonic) motion,  the
inϐinitesimal time, a the area described by the radius r in the unitary
time, q the length of the major axis of the ellipse and 
 the
length of the minor axis (the axis where there are no foci), being e the
eccentricity; the symbol “,  : ” means that all the terms on the right side
of the equation should be divided by 
.
Varignon arrived to the expression [165], p. 228:
where ds is the space measured on the orbit (the curvilinear abscissa in
modern terms), while dx is the variation of the distance from the center
of the force.
He probably referred to the memoir Application de la regle
generale des mouvements à toute les hypotheses possible d’accelerations
ordonnes dans la chute des corps. Here he had got for the motion on two
inclined planes the relation: 
, where h and H are
the heights of the inclined planes of length l and 
 respectively (This is
the relation reported in the present book, with different symbols). If the
quantities ph/l and 
, that are the component of weights p and 
along the inclined planes, are assumed equal to the forces f and 
acting on the bodies, one obtains the relation referred to by Varignon.
Hermann presented results for different expressions of the force
p; among which, 
 const, p varying linearly from a center and p
varying arbitrarily. I refer only to the second situation. With reference

to Fig. 3.4 the expression of the force is given by 
, with b
the value of the force at the beginning of the motion A (segment Aa in
Fig. 3.4); S the space passed measured from A, and a the distance of A
from the center G. After integration, the expression of the speed is given
by 
, and time by 
 [106], p.
144.
In the memoir of 1714, where he used the ordinary principles of
mechanics, Bernoulli assumed that in a pendulum, a mass A located at a
distance a from the fulcrum, can be replaced by a mass 
 located at a
distance x, such that 
; that is by imposing the equivalence of
the static moments (by then one of the ordinary principles of
mechanics) of the masses-weights A and 
. The same holds true for
the masses B and C; the living forces of these masses is given by 
, which gives 
 [9], pp. 215–217.
Here with some details Euler’s proof. Let assume three
coordinate axes in the absolute space, OA, OB and OC and call the
components of the motion (velocities) along the axes u, v, w. The
motion of the observer is deϐined by velocities 
, that by
assumption are constant. To the observer, the motion of the body as
seen from the axis OA, for instance, will appear the smaller, the faster
its own motions. The apparent motion in the direction of the axes OA,
OB and OC will be 
 respectively. From
the equations of motion, that Euler had already developed, it follows
that for the maintenance of the true (absolute) motion one requires
three forces, 
, so that:

where M is the mass and n a normalizing factor. Now replace u, v and w,
by 
, in these equations. Since 
 and 
 are constants, the
differentials remain unchanged, so that it is apparent that for the
maintenance of the apparent motion the same forces P, Q and R are
required as for the true motion.
In this case also the proof is very simple. However arbitrarily the
motion of the observer may change, with reference to the three
assumed axes it can always be represented by the three motions
(velocities) 
 and 
 by taking these quantities to be variable. Now if
the true movement requires the forces:
By replacing u, v, w by 
 the maintenance of the
apparent motion will require the following three forces:
D’Alembert calculations are quite demanding; here for the sake of
simplicity only the static moments of lost motions are considered,
because more interesting. By renaming the coordinate axes as x, y, z,
interpreting 
 as the components of acceleration, or 
and indicating the element of mass as dM, the following relations are
obtained:
These expressions appear to a modern reader nearly the same as those
found by Euler in his paper of 1750, Decouverte d’un nouveau principe

de mecanique [29]. This fact is scarcely commented by modern
historians who usually credit Euler to be the ϐirst to write the equations
of motion of a rigid body rotating about a free axis [168]. What is sure
is that d’Alembert’s sent Euler his paper in 1749, shortly after its
publication. Euler in his Découvertee d’un noveaux principe de
mécanique of 1750, where he presented equations similar to those of
d’Alembert, did not acknowledge d’Alembert’s paper; d’Alembert was
astonished and hurt by the fact and in 1752 published a comparison of
his procedure with that of Euler concluding that “the method employed
by this great geometer [Euler] is absolutely the same, fundamentally as
my second method [...] of my work” [168], p. 237. In 1752 Euler
published an Avertissement with an appreciation of what d’Alembert
wrote in his Researches sur la précessions des equinoxes [78].
The similarity of relations and the above referred circumstances
would lead to suppose that actually d’Alembert had preceded Euler in
discovering the equations of motion of a rotating rigid body by using a
‘lofty rule’ very close to his. How much Euler was inspired by
d’Alembert and derived his strategy from d’Alembert’s is difϐicult to say,
considering that d’Alembert himself was not completely original with
his principle. For comments in this matter see [168].
An interesting example of Lagrange to reduce to a minimum the
role of geometric intuition in his treatise, is shown clearly in the way he
introduced the virtual displacements of the points of a rigid body, for
which there is the constraints of the invariance of the distance of the
various point. The traditional way was to start from the relations which
expressed the change of coordinate of the various points, from a ϐixed
coordinate system to a system of coordinate joined to the moving body;
relations which are obtained using geometrical reasoning. Lagrange
instead started directly from a local rigidity constraint, by imposing
that the variation of distance of a given point and all points in its
neighborhood be zero. In particular if (dx, dy, dz) express the difference
of coordinates between a point of reference and its closest points, the
conditions is expressed by Lagrange with the condition 
. With a series of lengthy and not always simple
passages, Lagrange arrived to an equation of the kind [114], p. 117:

where 
 are the sought virtual velocities and 
are six parameters independent of the coordinate of the points,
function of the time only. Later on Lagrange will assign a meaning to
these parameters, though not strictly necessary. The Greek letters
denote translation, the Latin capital letters angle of rotation.
A classic example of the versatility of the calculus of variations can
be found in the derivation of the principle of conservation of living
forces, a concept to which Lagrange did not give any particular physical
meaning. The starting point is the symbolic equation of motion. Here
the virtual velocity-variations 
 are free to assume any values,
though compatible with constraints of the system, and thus they can
also assume the values dx, dy, dz, that is the actual displacements,
which for sure are compatible with constraints. So one can write:
At this point Lagrange noticed that 
 is ‘usually’
integrable, as in the case of central forces he assumed in the
Mechanique analitique, and thus can be derived from a function 
 of 
, so that 
, and rewrote the previous
expression as:
which integrated furnished the principle principle of conservation of
living forces:

“where F designates an arbitrary constant of integration equal to the
value of the ϐirst member of the previous equation in a given instant of
time” and 
 the square of speed” [114], pp. 207–208.
Using the rules of the calculus of variations, after some lengthy
calculations one obtains the relation of incompressibility in the form
[114], p. 143:
and the symbolic equation of equilibrium assumes the form:
References
1.
Andersen K (1983) The mathematical technique in Fermat’s deduction of the law of
refraction. Hist Math 10(1):48–62
[MathSciNet][zbMATH]
2.
Anonymous (1696) Analyse des inϐiniment petits. Imprimerie Royale, Paris
3.
Anonymous (1752) EƵ lémens de musique, théorique et pratique suivant les principes
de M. Rameau. Jombert and Bruyset, Paris-Lyon
4.
Arnauld A, Nicole P (1775) La logique, ou l’art de penser, contenant, outre les regles
communes, plusieurs observations nouvelles, propres a former le jugement.
Humboldt, Paris
5.
Bernoulli D (1728) Examen principiorum mechanicae, et demonstrationes
geometricae de compositione et resolutione virium. Commentarii Academiae
Scientiarum Petropolitanae 1:126–142
6.
Bernoulli D (1738) Hydrodynamica, sive de viribus et motibus ϐluidorum
commentarii. Dulsseker, Strasbourgh
7.
Bernoulli D (1750) Remarques sur le principe de la conservation des forces vives pris

dans un sens général. Mémoires de l’Académie Royale des Sciences et Belles Lettres de
Berlin 4:356–364
8.
Bernoulli J (1703) Démonstration générale du centre du balancement a toutes sortes
de ϐigure tirée de la nature du levier. Mémoires de l’Académie Royale des Sciences de
Paris, pp 78–84
9.
Bernoulli J (1714) Nouvelle theorie du centre d’oscillation. contenant une regle pour
le déterminer dans les pendules composés & balançans non seulement dans le vuide,
mais aussi dans les liqueurs; laquelle regle est appuyée sur un fondement plus sér
qu’aucun qu’on ait publié jusqu’ici par rapport à cette matiere. Mémoires de l’Académie
Royale des Sciences de Paris, pp 208–230
10.
Bernoulli J (1727a) Du discours sur les loix de la communication du mouvement.
Jombert, Paris
11.
Bernoulli J (1727b) Theoremata selecta pro conservatione virium vivarum
demonstranda et esperimenta conϐirmanda. In: Bernoulli J (ed) Opera omnia (1742, 4
vols), vol 3. Bousquet, Lausanne and Geneva, pp 124–130
12.
Bernoulli J (1730) Nouvelle pensée sur le système de M. Descartes, & la maniere d’en
deduire les orbites & les aphelies des planets. In: Bernoulli J (ed) Opera omnia (1742, 4
vols), vol 3. Bousquet, Lausanne and Geneva, pp 131–172
13.
Bernoulli J (1735a) De vera notione virium vivarum, earunque usu in dynamicis. In:
Bernoulli J (ed) Opera omnia (1742, 4 vols), vol 3. Bousquet, Lausanne and Geneva, pp
239–260
14.
Bernoulli J (1735b) Essai d’une nouvelle physique céleste; servant à expliquer les
principaux phénomènes du ciel, & en particulier la cause de l’inclination des orbites
des planetes par rapport au plan de l’equateur du soleil. In: Bernoulli J (ed) Opera
omnia (1742, 4 vols), vol 3. Bousquet, Lausanne and Geneva, pp 261–364
15.
Bernoulli J (1742a) Hydraulica. In: Bernoulli J (ed) Opera omnia (1742, 4 vols), vol 4.
Bousquet, Lausanne and Geneva, pp 387–483
16.
Bernoulli J (1742b) Opera omnia (4 vols). Bousquet, Lausanne and Geneva
17.
Bernoulli J (1968) Hydrodynamics by Daniel Bernoulli and Hydraulica by Johann
Bernoulli. Dover, New York, Translated into English by Carmody T, Kobus H
18.
Bernoulli J, Maquet P, Ziggelaar A, Kardel T (eds) (1997) On the mechanics of
effervescence and fermentation and on the mechanics of the movement of the
muscles. Trans Am Philos Soc New Ser 87(3):i–v+1–158
19.
Bernoulli J (2008) Die Werke von Johann I und Nicolaus II Bernoulli. In: Villaggio P
(ed) Die gesammelten Werke der Mathematiker und Physiker der Familie Bernoulli
(1955-), vol 6. Birkhäuser, Basel
20.
Bernoulli J (2011) Unpublished correspondence, private communication by Radelet
De Grave
21.

Bertoloni M (1993) The emergence of reference frames and the transformation of
mechanics in the Enlightenment. Hist Stud Phys Sci 23:301–335
22.
Blackwell R (1977) Christiaan Huygens’ The motion of colliding bodies. Isis
68(4):574–597
[MathSciNet]
23.
Boyer C (1949) The history of Calculus and its conceptual development. Dover, New
York
24.
Calinger R (2016) Leonhard Euler. Mathematical genius in the Enlightenment.
Princeton University Press, Princeton
25.
Cantor G, Hodge M (eds) (1981) Conceptions of ether. Studies in the history of the
ether theories. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
26.
Capecchi D (2012) History of virtual work laws. Birchäuser, Milan
27.
Capecchi D (2014) The problem of motion of bodies. Springer, Cham, Dordrecht
[zbMATH]
28.
Capecchi D (2018) The path to post-Galilean epistemology. Springer, Cham, Dordrecht
[zbMATH]
29.
Capecchi D (2020) Leonhard Euler between mathematics and natural philosophy: An
introduction to natural science Anleitung zur Naturlehre. In: Sriraman B (ed)
Handbook of the history and philosophy of mathematical practice. Forthcoming,
Springer, Dordrecht
30.
Capecchi D, Drago A (2005a) Lagrange e la storia della meccanica. Progedit, Bari
31.
Capecchi D, Drago A (2005b) On Lagrange’s history of mechanics. Meccanica 40:19–
33
[MathSciNet][zbMATH]
32.
Casini P (1964) D’Alembert epistemologo. Rivista critica di storia della ϐilosoϐia
19(1):28–53
33.
Casini P (1970) Il problema d’Alembert. Rivista di. Filosoϐia 1(1):226–47
34.
Casini P (1973) Introduzione all’Illuminismo. Laterza, Bari
35.
Casini P (2008) Euler ϐilosofo della natura e accademico. L’ipotesi dell’etere e la
controversia antiwolfϐiana. Quaderni-Accademia delle scienze, pp 123–136
36.
Cassirer E (1953) Substance and function and Einstein’s theory of relativity. Dover,
New York
[zbMATH]
37.
Cernuschi A (1996) D’Alembert pris au jeu de la musique. Ses interventions
musicographiques dans l’Encyclopédie. Recherches sur Diderot et sur l’Encyclopédie
21:145–161

38.
Christensen T (1989) Music theory as scientiϐic propaganda: The case of d’Alembert’s
EƵ lémens de musique. J Hist Ideas 50(3):409–427
39.
de Condillac EB (1746) Essai sur l’origine des connaissances humaines. Mortier,
Amsterdam
40.
Costabel P (1956) La ‘loi admirable’ de Christiaan Huygens. Revue d’Histoire des
Sciences et de leurs Applications 9(3):208–220
41.
Crépel P (2005) Jean Le Rond d’Alembert, Traité de dynamique (1743, 1758). In:
Grattan-Guinness I, Cooke R, Corry L, Crépel P, Guicciardini N (eds) Landmark writings
in western mathematics 1640–1940. Elsevier Science, Amsterdam
[zbMATH]
42.
d’Alembert J (1743a) Essai d’une nouvelle théorie de la résistance des ϐluides. David,
Paris
43.
d’Alembert J (1743b) Recherches sur la precession des equinoxes et sur la nutation de
l’axe de la terre. David, Paris
44.
d’Alembert J (1743c) Traité de dynamique. David, Paris
45.
d’Alembert J (1744) Traité de l’équilibre et du mouvement des ϐluides. David, Paris
46.
d’Alembert J (1747) Réϐlexion sur la cause générale des vents. David, Paris
47.
d’Alembert J (1753-1767) Melanges de littérature, d’histoire et de philosophie, vol 5 .
Catelain, Amsterdam
48.
d’Alembert J (1758) Traité de dynamique, 2nd edn. David, Paris
49.
d’Alembert J (1761) Démonstration du principe de la composition des forces.
Opuscules Mathématiques 1:169–179
50.
d’Alembert J (1762) EƵ lémens de musique, théorique et pratique suivant les principes
de M. Rameau, éclaircis, développées et simpliϐiés, 2nd edn. Bruyset, Lyon
51.
d’Alembert J (1767) Essai sur les elemens de la philosophie. In: d’Alembert J (ed)
Melanges de littérature, d’histoire et de Philosophie (5 vol), 4th edn., vol 4. Catelain,
Amsterdam
52.
d’Alembert J (1805) Essai sur les elemens de la philosophie. In: d’Alembert (ed)
Oeuvres philosophiques, historiques et littérariés de d’Alembert (18 vols), vol 2.
Bastien, Paris
53.
d’Alembert J (1821–1822) Oeuvres complètes (5 vols). Belin, Paris
54.
d’Alembert J (1894) Discourse preliminaire de l’Encyclopédie, Edited by Picavet F.
Colin, Paris
55.
d’Alembert J (2018) http://numerix.univlyon1.fr/dalembert/d/indexracine.html
56.

d’Elizagaray RB (1689) De la theorie de la manoeuvre des vaisseaux. Estienne
Michallet, Paris
57.
Descartes R (1657–1667) Lettres de M. Descartes. Edited by Charles Angot (3 vols).
Angot, Paris
58.
Descartes R (1668) Discourse de la method plus la dioptrique et les météores. Girard,
Paris
59.
Dhombres J, Radelet de Grave P (1991) Contingence et nécessité en mécanique. Etude
de deux textes d’inédites de Jean d’Alembert. Physis 28(1):5–114
60.
Diderot D (1875) Oeuvres complètes de Diderot (20 vols). Garnier, Paris
61.
Drago A (1999) Il principio di d’Alembert non è un principio. Sua relazione col
principio dei lavori virtuali. In: Tucci P (ed) XIX Congresso SISFA, Como, pp 185–209
62.
Drago A (2003) La riforma della dinamica secondo G.W. Leibniz. Testi originali e loro
interpretazione moderna. Hevelius, Benevento
63.
Dugas R (1950) Histoire de la mécanique. Griffon, Neuchatel
[zbMATH]
64.
Einstein A (1982) Ideas and opinions. Translated into English by Bargmann S. Three
Rivers, New York
65.
Encyclopédie (1751–1772) Encyclopédie ou dictionnaire raisonné des sciences, des
arts et des métiers, par une societè de gens de lettres (17 vols). Briasson-David-Le
Breton-Durand, Paris
66.
Euler L (1736) Mechanica sive motus scientia analytice exposita (2 vols). Academiae
Scientiarum, Saint Petersburg
67.
Euler L (1738) De communicatione motus in collisione corporum. Commentarii
Academiae Scientiarum Petropolitanae 5:159–168
68.
Euler L (1739a) Explicatio phaenomenorum quae a motu successivo lucis oriuntur.
Commentarii Academiae Scientiarum Petropolitanae 11:150–193
69.
Euler L (1739b) Tentamen novae theoriae musicae ex certissismis harmoniae
principiis dilucide expositae. Academiae Scientiarum, Saint Petersburg
70.
Euler L (1740) De minimis oscillationibus corporum tam rigidorum quam ϐlexibilium.
methodus nova et facilis. Commentarii Academiae Scientiarum Petropolitanae 7:99–
122
71.
Euler L (1746a) De la force de percussion et de sa veritable measure. Mémoires de
l’Académie des Sciences et Belles Lettres de Berlin 1:21–53
72.
Euler L (1746b) Gedancken von den Elementen der Körper. In: Various (ed) Leonhardi
Euleri Opera omnia (in progress), III, vol 2, Teubneri GB; [then] Fussli Turici; [then]
Birkhäuser, Basel, pp 347–366

73.
Euler L (1746c) Recherches physiques sur la nature des moindres parties de la
matiere. Opuscula Varii Argumenti 1:287–300
74.
Euler L (1748a) De observatione inclinationis magneticae. In: Leonhardi Euleri Opera
omnia (in progress), III, vol 10, Teubneri GB; [then] Fussli Turici; [then] Birkhäuser,
Basel, pp 110–137
75.
Euler L (1748b) Dissertatio de magnete. In: Various (ed) Leonhardi Euleri Opera
omnia (in progress), III, vol 10, Teubneri GB; [then] Fussli Turici; [then] Birkhäuser,
Basel, pp 138–179
76.
Euler L (1749) Recherches sur le mouvement des corps célestes en général. Mémoires
de l’Académie des Sciences et Belles Lettres de Berlin 3:93–143
77.
Euler L (1750) Reϐlexions sur l’espace et le tems. In: Various (ed) Leonhardi Euleri
Opera omnia (in progress), III, vol 2, Teubneri GB; [then] Fussli Turici; [then]
Birkhäuser, Basel, pp 376–383
78.
Euler L (1752a) Avertissement au sujet des recherches sur la precession des
equinoxes. Mémoires de l’Académie des Sciences et Belles Lettres de Berlin 6:412
79.
Euler L (1752b) Dissertatio de igne, in qua ejus natura et proprietates explicantur. In:
Recueil de piéces qui ont remporté le prix de l’Académie royale des sciences. Contenant
les pieces depuis 1738 jusqu’en 1740, vol 4. Imprimerie Royale, Paris, pp 5– 21
80.
Euler L (1752c) Recherches sur l’origine des forces. In: Various (ed) Leonhardi Euleri
Opera omnia (in progress), II, vol 5, Teubneri GB; [then] Fussli Turici; [then]
Birkhäuser, Basel, pp 109–131
81.
Euler L (1756) Théorie plus complete des machines qui sont mises en mouvement par
la reaction dell’eau. Mémoires de l’Académie des Sciences et Belles Lettres de Berlin
10:227–295
82.
Euler L (1757) Principes generaux du mouvement des ϐluides. Mémoires de l’Académie
des Sciences et Belles Lettres de Berlin 11:274–315
83.
Euler L (1761) Comment to F.U.Th. Aepinus’ Descriptio ac explicatio novorum
quorundam experimentorum electricorum. In: Leonhardi Euleri Opera omnia (in
progress), III, vol 10, Teubneri GB; [then] Fussli Turici; [then] Birkhäuser, Basel, pp
CXXI–CXXIV
84.
Euler L (1765) Theoria motus corporum solidorum seu rigidorum ex primis nostrae
cognitionis principiis stabilita et ad omnes qui in huiusmodi corpora cadere possunt
accommodata, presented 1765. Röse, Rostock
85.
Euler L (1766) Elementa calculi variationum. Novi Commentarii Academiae
Scientiarum Imperialis Petropolitanae 10:51–93
86.
Euler L (1770-1774) Lettres à une princesse d’Allemagne sur divers sujets de physique
& de philosophie (3 vols). Steidel & Compagne, Mietau, Leipzig
87.
Euler L (1775) Lettres à une princesse d’Allemagne sur divers sujets de physique & de

philosophie (3 vols). Societé Typographique, Berne
88.
Euler L (1802) Letters of Euler on different subjects in physics and philosophy
addressed to a German princess (2 vols). Translated into English by Hunter H, Murray
et al, London
89.
Euler L (1862) Anleitung zur Naturlehre. In: Fuss P and Fuss N (ed) Opera postuma:
mathematica and physica (2 vols), III, vol 2. Eggers & Socios, Saint Petersburg, pp
449–560
90.
Euler L (1911–2018) Leonhardi Euleri Opera omnia (in progress). Teubneri GB; [then]
Fussli Turici; [then] Birkhäuser, Basel
91.
Fellman E, Fleckenstein J (1970) Bernoulli, Johann (Jean) I. In: Gillispie CC (ed)
Complete dictionary of scientiϐic biography. Scribner, New York
92.
Fermat P (1891–1912) Syntesis ad refractiones. In: Fermat P (ed) Oeuvres de Fermat
(4 vols), vol 1. Gauthier-Villars, Paris, pp 73–179
93.
de Foncenex DF (1760–1761) Sur les principes fondamentaux de la mécanique.
Melanges de philosophie et de Mathématique de la Societé Royale de Turin Tomus
alter, pp 299–322
94.
Fraser CG (1983) J.L. Lagrange’s early contribution to the principles and methods of
mechanics. Arch Hist Exacts Sci 28(3):197–242
95.
Fraser CG (1985a) d’Alembert’s principle: The original formulation and application in
Jean d’Alembert’s Traité de dynamique (1743) (part one). Centaurus 28:31–61
96.
Fraser CG (1985b) d’Alembert’s principle: The original formulation and application in
Jean d’Alembert’s Traité de Dynamique (1743) (part two). Centaurus 28:145–159
[MathSciNet][zbMATH]
97.
Gaukroger S (1982) The metaphysics of impenetrability: Euler’s conception of force.
Br J Hist Sci 15(2):132–154
[MathSciNet][zbMATH]
98.
Glass B (1970) Maupertuis, Pierre Louis Moreau De. In: Gillispie CC (ed) Complete
dictionary of scientiϐic biography. Scribner, New York
99.
Guicciardini N (1985) Johann Bernoulli, John Keill and the inverse problem of central
forces. Ann Sci 52(6):537–575
[MathSciNet][zbMATH]
100. Hakfoort C (1995) Optics in the age of Euler. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
[zbMATH]
101. Hankins TL (1965) Eighteenth-century attempts to resolve the vis viva controversy.
Isis 56(3):281–297
102. Hankins TL (1970) Jean d’Alembert. Science and Enlightenment, Clarendon, London
103.

Hawkins T (1975) Cauchy and the origins of spectral theory. Hist Math 2(1):1–29
[zbMATH]
104. Heimann PM, McGuire JE (1971) Cavendish and the vis viva controversy: A Leibnizian
postscript. Isis 62(2):225–227
105. Hermann J (1716) Phoronomia, sive de viribus et motibus corporum solidorum et
ϐluidorum libri due. Wetstonios, Amsterdam
106. Hermann J (1727) Theoria motuum qui nascuntur a potentiis in corpora indesinenter
agentibus. Commentarii Academiae Scientiarum Imperialis Petropolitanae 2:139–173
107. Hutton J (2019) Mactutor history of mathematics archive. http://www-
history.mcs.st-and.ac.uk/index.html
108. Iltis C (1971) Leibniz and the vis viva controversy. Isis 62(1):21–35
[MathSciNet][zbMATH]
109. Jammer M (1961) Concepts of mass in classical and modern physics. Harvard
University Press, Cambridge, MA
110. Jourdain PE (1912) Maupertuis and the principle of least action. Monist 22(3):414–
459
111. Koyré A (1965) Newtonian studies. Champan & Hall, London
112. Kuhn T (1962) The structure of scientiϐic revolution. The University of Chicago Press,
Chicago
113. Lagrange JL (1760) Essai sur une nouvelle méthode pour déterminer les maxima et les
minima des formules intégrales indéϐinies. In: Serret JA, [Darboux G] (1867–1892)
(ed) Oeuvres de Lagrange (14 vols), vol 1. Gauthier-Villars, Paris, pp 333–362
114. Lagrange JL (1788) Méchanique analitique. Desaint, Paris
115. Lagrange JL (1811) Mécanique analytique. In: Serret JA, [Darboux G] (1867–1892)
(ed) Oeuvres de Lagrange (14 vols), vol 11. Gauthier-Villars, Paris
116. Lagrange JL (1867–1892) Ouvres de Lagrange (14 vols). Serret JA [Darboux G] (eds).
Gauthier-Villars, Paris
117. Lagrange JL (1997) Anal Mech. Translated into English by Boissonnade A and Vagliente
VN, Springer, Dordrecht
118. Laudan LL (1968) The vis viva controversy, a post-mortem. Isis 59(2):130–143
[zbMATH]
119. Le Ru V (1994) Jean Le Rond d’Alembert philosophe. Vrin, Paris
120. Leibniz G (1686) Brevis demonstratio erroris memorabilis Cartesii et aliorum circa
legem nature, secundum quam volunt a Deo eandem semper quantitatem motus
conservari; qua et in re mechanica abutuntur. Acta Eruditorum 3:161–163

121. Leibniz GW (1689a) Dynamica de potentia at legibus naturae corporum. In: (1849–
1863) GC (ed) Mathematische Schriften (7 vols), vol Band II. Reprographic reprint
Hildesheim, Olms, pp 281–431
122. Leibniz GW (1689b) Tentamen de motuum coelestium causis. Acta Erud 2:82–96
123. Leibniz GW (1692) Essay de dynamique. In: Foucher de Careill A (ed) (1859–1875)
Oeuvres de Leibniz (7 vols), vol 1. Didot, Paris, pp 470–473
124. Leibniz GW (1695) Specimen dynamicum. In: Gerhardt CI (ed) (1849–1863)
Mathematische Schriften (7 vols), vol II. Asher A and Schmidt HV, Berlin, Halle, pp
234–246–Part II, pp. 246–254
125. Leibniz GW (1699) Essay de dynamique sur les loix du mouvement. In: Gerhardt CI
(ed) (1849–1863) Mathematische Schriften (7 vols), vol II. Asher A and Schmidt HV,
Berlin, Halle, pp 215–231
126. Leibniz GW (1849–1863) Mathematische Schriften (7 vols), Gerhardt CI (ed). Asher A
and Schmidt HV, Berlin, Halle
127. Leibniz GW, Bernoulli Johann, Ficquet E (1745) Virorum celeber. Got. Gul. Leibnitii et
Johann Bernoulli commercium philosophicum et mathematicum (2 vols). Bousquet,
Lausanne & Geneve
128. de l’Hôpital GF, (2015) L’Hôpital analyses des inϐiniment petits. Birkhäuser, Dordrecht,
Translated into English by Bradley RE, Petrilli SJ, Sandifer CE
129. Loria G (1913) Lagrange e la storia delle matematiche. Bibl Math 3(13):333–338
130. Lovejoy AO (1981) The great chain of being. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA
131. Mach E (1919) The science of mechanics: a critical and historical account of its
development. Translated into English by McCormack TJ, Open Court, Chicago
132. Maclaurin C (1801) A treatise on ϐluxions (2 vols). Baynes et al, London
133. Maltese G (2000) On the relativity of motion in Leonhard Euler’s science. Arch Hist
Exact Sci 54(4):319–348
[MathSciNet][zbMATH]
134. Maltese G (2003) The ancients’ inferno: The slow and tortuous development of
‘Newtonian’ principles of motion in the eighteenth century. Essays on the history of
mechanics in memory of Clifford Ambrose TruesdelI and Edoardo Benvenuto.
Springer, Basel, pp 199–222
135. Maupertuis PL (1740) La loi du repos des corps. Mémoires de l’Académie Royale des
Sciences de Paris 1:170–176
136. Maupertuis PL (1744) Accord de différentes loix de la nature qui avoient jusqu’ici paru
incompatibles. Mémoires de l’Académie Royale des Sciences de Paris, pp 417–426
137.
Maupertuis PL (1746) Les loix du mouvement et du repos, déduites d’un principe de

métaphysique. Histoire de l’Académie Royale des Sciences et Belles Lettres de Berlin,
pp 267–294
138. Mouy P (1938) Malebranche et Newton. Revue de Métaphysique et de Morale
45(3):411–435
139. Nagel E (1961) The structure of science. Harcourt, Brace & World, New York
140. Newton I (1726) Philosophia naturalis principia mathematica. 3rd edn. Innys, London
141. Newton I (1822) Philosophiae naturalis principia mathematica, auctore Isaaco
Newtono. Le Seur T, Jacquier F (eds). Duncan
142. Noll W (2004) Five contribution to natural philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University,
Pittsburgh, PA
143. Panza M (2002) Mathematization of the science of motion and the birth of analytical
mechanics: a historiographical note. In: Cerrai C, Freguglia P, Pellegrini P (eds) The
application of mathematics to the sciences of nature. Springer, Dordrecht, pp 253–272
[zbMATH]
144. Paty M (2001a) D’Alembert, la science newtonienne et l’héritage cartésien. Revue de la
Philosohie 38(2)
145. Paty M (2001b) Les recherches actuelles sur d’Alembert a propos de l’édition de ses
oeuvres complètes. In: Michel A, Paty M (eds) Analyse et dynamique. Etudes sur
l’oeuvre de d’Alembert, Presses de l’Université Laval, Québec, pp 25–94
146. Pourciau B (2016) Instantaneous impulse and continuous force: the foundations of
Newton’s Principia. In: Iliffe E, Smith GE (eds) The Cambridge companion to Newton.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 93–186
147. Radelet de Grave P (1998) La moindre action comme lien entre la philosophie
naturelle et la mécanique analytique: Continuités d’un questionnement. Llull
21(41):439–484
148. Radelet de Grave P (2002) Déplacements, vitesses et travaux virtuels. Ph.D. seminar,
Department of Ingegneria delle strutture, University of Pisa
149. Radelet de Grave P, Speiser D (2004) Introduction to volume III/10 of Leonhardi
Euleri Opera omnia, electricity, heat and magnetism. In: Leonhardi Euleri Opera omnia
(in progress), III, vol 10, Teubneri GB; [then] Fussli Turici; [then] Birkhäuser, Basel, pp
XIII–CXXIV
150. Rameau JP (1750) Démonstration du principe de l’harmonie, servant de base à tout
l’art musical théorique & pratique. Durand and Pissot, Paris
151. Robinet A (1960) Le groupe malebranchiste introducteur du calcul inϐinitésimal en
France. Revue d’Histoire des Sciences 13(4):287–308
[MathSciNet][zbMATH]
152.
Schmit C (2013) Sur l’origine du principe general de Jean Le Rond d’Alembert. Ann Sci

70(4):493–530
153. Scott WL (1970) The conϐlict between atomism and conservation theory, 1644–1860.
Elsevier, New York
154. Speiser D (2008) Euler, the principle of relativity and the fundamentals of classical
mechanics. In: Fuss P, Fuss N (eds) Discovering the principles of mechanics (1600–
1800). Birkhäuser, Basel, pp 179–224
[zbMATH]
155. Speiser D (2010) Il ϐisico Leonhard Euler. Il Club dei Volterriani 10:31–56
156. Suisky D (2009) Euler as physicist. Springer, Berlin
[zbMATH]
157. Terrall M (2002) The man who ϐlattened the world: Maupertuis and the science in the
Enlightment. The University of Chicago Press, Chicago
158. Truesdell CA (1954) Editor’s introduction: rational ϐluid mechanics, 1687–1765. In:
Leonhardi Euleri Opera omnia (1911–, in progress), 2, vol 12–13, Teubneri GB; [then]
Fussli Turici; [then] Birkhäuser, Basel
159. Truesdell CA (1960) The rational mechanics of ϐlexible or elastic bodies. In: Leonhardi
Euleri Opera omnia (1911–, in progress), 2, vol 1, part 2, Teubneri GB; [then] Fussli
Turici; [then] Birkhäuser, Basel
160. Truesdell CA (1968) Essays in the history of mechanics. Springer, New York
[zbMATH]
161. Varignon P (1666–1699a) Application de la regle generale des mouvements à toute les
hypotheses possible d’accelerations ordonnes dans la chute des corps. Mémoires de
l’Académie Royale des Sciences de Paris Printed in 1730 10:354–360
162. Varignon P (1666–1699b) Regles du mouvement accelerez suivant toutes les
proportions imaginables d’acceleration ordonnes. Mémoires de l’Académie Royale des
Sciences de Paris Printed in 1730 10:339–343
163. Varignon P (1666–1699c) Regles du mouvement en general. Mémoires de l’Académie
Royale des Sciences de Paris Printed in 1730 10:225–233
164. Varignon P (1687) Projet d’une nouvelle mechanique avec un examen de l’opinion de
M. Borelli, sur les propriétez des poids suspendus par des cordes. Martin & als, Paris
165. Varignon P (1700a) Des forces centrales ou des pesanteurs necessaires aux planetes
pour leur faire decrire les orbes qu’on leur a supposez jusq’ici. Mémoires de l’Académie
Royale des Sciences de Paris, pp 224–243
166. Varignon P (1700b) Maniere generale de determiner les forces, les vitesses, les espaces
et les temps, une seule de ces quatre chose étant donné dans toutes sortes de
mouvements rectilignes variés à discretions. Mémoires de l’Académie Royale des
Sciences de Paris, pp 22–27
167.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Varignon P (1725) La nouvelle mécanique ou statique (2 vols). Joubert, Paris
168. Wilson C (1987) D’Alembert versus Euler on the precession of the equinoxes and the
mechanics of rigid bodies. Arch Hist Exact Sci 37(3):233–273
[MathSciNet][zbMATH]
Footnotes
p. 287.
 
On the relationship between l’Hôpital and Johann Bernoulli see for instance [128], pp. VII–XVI.
 
Preface.
 
Note that l’Hôpital said “calcul des differences” instead of differential calculus.
 
Table of content. English translation in [128].
 
p. 2. English translation in [128].
 
pp. 3–7.
 
p. 41.
 
Labels (x) and (y) are mine.
 
p. 55.
 
Johann Bernoulli to Leibniz, 21st June 1704, Band III/2, p. 755.

12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
 
pp. 235–240.
 
p. 226.
 
In Sects. 3.2 and 3.3 the variation of space for unit of time is called speed and not velocity,
becasue we are concerned with a scalr magnitude.
 
p. 359.
 
p. 119.
 
pp. 120–122.
 
p. 23.
 
p. 27.
 
p. 241. Actually for the sake of coherence in this equation and in the following I changed p with
f and  with .
 
pp. 139–140.
 
vol. 4, p. 392. English translation in [17].
 
vol. 4, p. 395. English translation in [17].

24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
 
p. 395.
 
vol. 4, p. 394.
 
For comments on Bernoulli’s Hydraulica see [158].
 
vol. 4, p. 400.
 
p. 163.
 
pp. 290–293.
 
Quoted from [18], pp. 9–10.
 
p. 87.
 
p. 276.
 
pp. 91–97.
 
p. 53.
 
p. 56.
 
p. 44.

37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
 
p. 8.
 
p. 5.
 
vol. 3, Eloge de Jean Bernoulli, p. 355. English translation from [153]. Of course Bernoulli’s
thesis was not accepted by the academy of science; he was disqualiϐied and Colin Maclaurin won
[153].
 
p. 298.
 
vol. 3, p. 56.
 
p. 78.
 
p. 240.
 
pp. 241–242. Adapted from the paraphrase in [19].
 
p. 326.
 
pp. 321–324.
 
Letter of Varignon to Bernoulli of 22th January 1725.
 
p. 18.
 

49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
Bernoulli gave no name to his principle; it was named by Lagrange principle of virtual
velocities and by Varignon principle of energies.
 
vol 2, pp. 175–176.
 
For a thorough discussion about the genesis and meaning of the virtual velocities principle see
[26].
 
p. 167.
 
[57], letter 73, vol. 1, pp. 327–346.
 
pp. 230–233.
 
pp. 337–343.
 
p. 131.
 
pp. 170–171.
 
p. 228.
 
p. 171.
 
p. 297; p. 425.
 
p. 412.

62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
 
p. 423.
 
p. 425.
 
p. 270.
 
p. 290.
 
pp. 171–172.
 
p. 291–293.
 
p. 294.
 
This section report an updating of a previous paper [29].
 
p. 565, note 35.
 
p. 46.
 
p. 18.
 
vol. 13, p. 135. Letter of Lagrange to d’Alembert, 16th June 1769.
 
vol. 13, p. 148. Letter of d’Alembert to Lagrange , 7th August 1769.

75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
 
Letter of Daniel Bernoulli to Johann Jakob Huber, 27th July 1756. Quoted from [147], p. 455.
 
vol. 2, p. 449.
 
vol. 2, pp. 450–453.
 
vol. 2, pp. 453–455.
 
vol. 2, p. 526. Translation into English by Hirsch E.
 
p. 287. It must be said that Daniel Bernoulli in his work of 1750, Remarques sur le principe de
la conservation des forces vives pris dans un sens général, introduced something like the
effectiveness [7], p. 359.
 
vol. 2, p. 493. Translation into English by Hirsch E.
 
p. 45.
 
p. 46.
 
pp. 362–363.
 
About of the difference between the conceptions of Euler and Newton and for a justiϐication of
the absence of the name of Huygens in Euler’s writings of optics see [100].
 
[vol. 1, Letter 19.

87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
 
vol. 1, Letter 46, p. 195.
 
vol. 1, Letter 54, p. 230.
 
vol. 1, pp. 448–451.
 
Letter 138, vol. 3, p. 277. English translation in [154].
 
Letter 176, vol. 3, pp. 118–119.
 
Euler published anonymously Gedancken von den Elementen der Körper, an anti-Wolfϐian
work. It was immediately recognized as bearing his signature however.
 
vol. 2, p. 472.
 
p. 140.
 
vol. 2, p. 472.
 
pp. 141–142.
 
p. 289.
 
The density does not vary in time, that is gross matter is incompressible [89], vol. 2, p. 510.
 
p. 300.

100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
110
111
112
 
pp. 542–545.
 
p. 10.
 
pp. 18–19.
 
vol. 2, pp. 511–512. Translation adapted from Hirsch E.
 
vol. 2, p. 513.
 
vol. 2, p. 542.
 
pp. 200–203.
 
p. 509.
 
vol. 2, p. 517.
 
vol. 2, p. 535.
 
vol. 2, pp. 537–538.
 
vol. 2, p. 542.
 
vol. 2, p. 547. Translation into English by Hirsch E.

113
114
115
116
117
118
119
120
121
122
123
124
125
 
p. 78.
 
p. 44.
 
vol. 2, p. 476.
 
p. 423.
 
p. 427.
 
p. 430–431.
 
vol. 1, p. 304.
 
p. 434.
 
p. 36.
 
p. 441.
 
p. 46.
 
p. 147.
 
p. 15.

126
127
128
129
130
131
132
133
134
135
136
137
138
 
p. 351.
 
p. 331.
 
p. 326.
 
p. 328.
 
p. 38.
 
p. 9.
 
p. 329.
 
p. 351.
 
p. 331.
 
p. 333.
 
p. 37.
 
Preface. Translation into English by Bruce I.
 
vol. 1, p. 309. English translation in [88].

139
140
141
142
143
144
145
146
147
148
149
150
151
 
p. 194.
 
p. 1. Translation into English by Bruce I.
 
p. 1.
 
p. 2.
 
pp. 3–5.
 
p. 12. Translation into English by Bruce I.
 
p. 132.
 
p. 243.
 
vol. 1, p. 298.
 
p. 210; pp. 184–236; p. 112.
 
Deϐiniton 8, p. 21.
 
p. 30.
 
pp. 32, 33.

152
153
154
155
156
157
158
159
160
161
162
163
164
 
p. 32.
 
p. 34.
 
p. 37.
 
p. 35.
 
p. 35.
 
p. 36.
 
p. 55.
 
p. 56.
 
The principle of superposition presupposes for its validity that the two cause do not interact
to give a cause different from their sum.
 
pp. 126–127.
 
p. 57.
 
p. 57.
 
p. 59. English translation adapted from Bruce I.

165
166
167
168
169
170
171
172
173
174
175
176
 
Incidentally if A is the weight, as Euler always assumes, then  coincides with the
acceleration of gravity (modern meaning).
 
p. 53.
 
p. 51.
 
p. 77.
 
p. 85.
 
p. 77.
 
Note that g is one half the value of the acceleration of gravity G, this follows from the relation 
: By assuming 
 it follows 
.
 
p. 84.
 
p. 53.
 
p. 50.
 
p. 53. English translation in [146].
 
vol. 1, p. 2. Translation into English by Bruce I.

177
178
179
180
181
182
183
184
185
186
187
188
189
 
vol. 2, p. 497. Translation into English by Hirsch E.
 
vol. 2, p. 497. Translation into English by Hirsch E.
 
vol. 2, p. 498. Translation into English by Hirsch E.
 
pp. 120–121.
 
p. 342; pp. 322–326.
 
p. 326; pp. 342–342.
 
Sect. 2, vol. 12, p. CXVII.
 
pp. 186–187.
 
p. 63.
 
vol. 13, p. 331. Letter of d’Alembert to Lagrange, September 22th, 1777.
 
Some bibliographic information is drawn from [102].
 
pp. 166–168.
 
vol. 2, pp. 83–84.

190
191
192
193
194
195
196
197
198
199
200
201
202
 
p. 4.
 
p. 100.
 
vol. 2, pp. 64–65.
 
vol.2, p. 64.
 
p. 117.
 
p. 21.
 
p. 24.
 
p. 85.
 
p. 42.
 
p. 14.
 
p. 15–16.
 
pp. 1–2.
 
vol.5, ϐirst part, p. 186. Letter to Voltaire, 29 August 1769.

203
204
205
206
207
208
209
210
211
212
213
214
215
 
p.41.
 
vol. 2, p. 49.
 
pp. 30–31.
 
vol. 2, p. 53.
 
pp. 8–9.
 
p. 24.
 
p. 24.
 
pp. 35–37.
 
p. 20.
 
Article Science.
 
pp. 154–155.
 
p. 157.
 
vol. 4. p. 158.

216
217
218
219
220
221
222
223
224
225
226
227
 
vol. 4, p. 159.
 
pp. 176–177. D’Alembert, in the Essai sur les elemens de la philosophie and in other writings,
expressed a harsh judgment on the decadence of English mathematics, which inϐluenced by the
ambiguous example of Newton considered only the way of the ancients.
 
vol. II, pp. 18–19.
 
pp. XLII–XLIII.
 
p. 282.
 
p. 270. The distinction between observation and experience is not new. It can be also found in
the texts of experimental philosophy of the 17th century [28], pp. 400–406.
 
p. 284.
 
p. XXIX.
 
p. 270–272.
 
pp. 277–278.
 
p. 278.
 
p. 280.

228
229
230
231
232
233
234
235
236
237
238
239
240
 
Entry: Physico-Mathématique.
 
pp. 240–243.
 
pp. 37–38.
 
Entry: Physico-Mathématique.
 
pp. 229–230.
 
p. 231.
 
p. 236.
 
p. 243.
 
p. VII.
 
p. XI.
 
pp. XXI–XXII.
 
pp. XXV–XXIX.
 
p. XIII.

241
242
243
244
245
246
247
248
249
250
251
252
253
 
pp. XVI–XVII.
 
pp. 34–42.
 
p. XVI. Footnote.
 
p. 8.
 
p. 122.
 
p. 419.
 
p.XIII.
 
p. XIV.
 
p. XVII.
 
p. 14.
 
pp. 16–17.
 
p. XXVII.
 
p. XXX.

254
255
256
257
258
259
260
261
262
263
264
265
266
 
pp. XXX–XXXI.
 
p. VI.
 
p. V.
 
p. VII.
 
Entry: Elemens.
 
pp. 1–2.
 
p. VI.
 
p. V.
 
pp. 37–49.
 
p. 16.
 
Entry: Densité.
 
Entry: Force.
 
p. XVII.

267
268
269
270
271
272
273
274
275
276
277
278
 
Entry: Attraction.
 
Entry: Cause.
 
p. XII.
 
Sect. 22.
 
p. 25.
 
p. II, p. 28.
 
p. 45.
 
p. XXXII.
 
p. 72.
 
Note that also Descartes  in the Principia philosophiae presented the principle of inertia into
two steps.
 
D’Alembert presented a proof of this principle in a new different and more convincing way, in
a memoire of 1761 [49].
 
pp. 71–75.
 

279
280
281
282
283
284
285
286
287
288
289
290
p. 4. To note that Lex I is assumed as an axiom (VI) in La logique de Port Royale, and is derived
directly from the more general axiom III: “The nothingness cannot be the cause of something”,
[4], p. 336. To note also that in the edition of 1743 the sentence evidenced in italic was missing.
 
For a discussion on the problematic in any statement of the law of inertia see [139].
 
p. V.
 
pp. XXV–XXVII.
 
p. 25.
 
pp. 299–300.
 
p. 73.
 
p.173.
 
Note that for d’Alembert virtual velocity has a meaning different from the usual one, thai is
possible velocity; it is better deϐined as the velocity of tendency or incipient velocity; see below.
 
Entry:: Force vive. The force of impact due to the virtual motion was a concept known since
Torricelli in the 17th century [27], pp. 175, 284–286.
 
pp.238–292, 331–343, 172–183, 239–271.
 
pp. 248–252.
 

291
292
293
294
295
296
297
298
299
300
301
302
303
304
p. 252.
 
p. 499.
 
pp. 100–110.
 
pp. 104–105.
 
pp. 291, 242, 268.
 
p. 96.
 
For some comment on d’Alembert’s idea on the matter see [102], pp. 195–213.
 
p. 139.
 
p. 140.
 
For details see [96], pp. 148–149.
 
pp. 4–7.
 
p. 211.
 
p. 212.
 
p. 35. English translation in [168].

305
306
307
308
309
310
311
312
313
 
p. 70.
 
pp. 19–20.
 
Preface. English translation in [117].
 
p. 334.
 
pp. 10–11.
 
p. 12.
 
p. 256.
 
p. 54. Though the term variation is Lagrange’s. 
 
pp. 240–274.
 

(1)
 
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
D. Capecchi, Epistemology and Natural Philosophy in the 18th Century, History of Mechanism and
Machine Science 39
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-52852-2_4
4. Physics in General
Danilo Capecchi1  
Ingegneria Strutturale e Geotecnica, Sapienza Università di Roma,
Rome, Italy
 
Danilo Capecchi
Email: danilo.capecchi@uniroma1.it
Abstract
D’Alembert counted as physics in general disciplines such optics,
acoustics, positional astronomy, cosmology, magnetism and electricity.
For the sake of space, this chapter deals with optics and electricity only.
A good deal of the optical works, concerned the theories of propagation
of light, with those of undulatory character that required complex
mathematical treatments and the use of partial differential equations,
becoming a fertile ground for mathematical physics. The experience
with which the theories were compared was mostly based on
experiments conducted in the 17th century by Newton and Huygens. 
Relevant new experimental work, on a quantitative basis, was carried
out only relatively to what is today known as photometry with
Bouguer and Lambert.  The creation of the 18th century was the
science of electricity. It assumes in the chapter the paradigmatic role of
the development of the experimental sciences starting from the
ascertainment of the phenomena at a qualitative level—remaining
partially in the footsteps of the traditional natural philosophy—up to
their quantiϐication. The number and quality of experiments on
electricity grew dramatically, especially after the 1750s when the
discovery of the Leyden jar made it possible to accumulate large
charges. After a brief mention to the situation in the 17th century, the

chapter passes to the examination of the English experimenters and the
continental ones to stop before Alessandro Volta’s studies at the end of
the century.
4.1 Theories of Light
The studies of optics in the 18th century related to those of the
previous century with an important difference; there was little or no
systematic experimental activity of the properties of light such as those
carried out for example by Newton, Huygens and the followers of
Descartes. The focus was on the theoretical studies of nature and
propagation of light. Experimental activity was however not completely
lacking but was focused on photometry studies.
As already commented in the previous sections, traditional optics
was a complex conglomerate of arguments of mixed mathematics and
natural philosophy, these latter concerning the nature of light and the
physiology of the eye. They derived from the Greek traditions, such as
for example Aristotelian, Platonic, Epicurean and were generally devoid
of quantitative considerations. In the 17th century and to a greater
extent in the 18th century, these arguments were critically re-
examined, especially by scholars with training in mathematics and
experimental philosophy. Many of them did not have preconceived
ideas, based on a priori principles of metaphysics or philosophy of
nature (apart from the acceptance of mechanicism), or at least this was
the image they intended to convey. The objective was to analyze the
possible mechanisms of light transmission, deϐined by geometric
models, on which the laws of mechanics could be applied and make
calculations or develop reasonings to obtain results to compare with
experiments for a feedback on the model.
From the point of view of the mechanical philosophy, dominant in
the 18th century, the possible alternatives could be classiϐied into two
different types. This is what the French mathematician, physicist and
astronomer Jean Jaques de Mairan (1678–1771) wrote on the purpose:
All modern systems of light can be reduced to two. For, either
the motions of the luminous body are transmitted to the eye
only because they are communicated to the matter which is

between the luminous body and us, as the vibrations of a sound
body reach the tympanum of the ear, only because they excited
in the air a similar movement; or the agitation of the luminous
body produces in it an emission and a ϐlow of corpuscles, which
strike the organ of the eye in the same manner as the invisible
parts which detach themselves from a ϐlower. There is no
alternative, either the luminous body sends to us particles of its
substance, or it does not. It is necessary that light propagates
according to one of these two ways, otherwise one should resort
to occult qualities [147].1 (D.1)
Actually the dichotomy suggested by Mairan, even if at ϐirst sight it
seems well founded, does not allow to classify all the numerous
approaches to the study of the propagation of light of the 18th century
as the two categories sometimes overlap. The dichotomy is identiϐied
by various labels. The most common is particle (or corpuscle) and wave
as in [1], but there are other such as Newtonian and Cartesian as in
[80], emission and medium as in [116] and projectile and vibration as
in [47]. In the following, instead to invent one my own I will adopt the
labels suggested in [47]: projectile and vibration, because in my opinion
it gives a more immediate idea. Vibration has been preferred to wave
because that of wave has a modern taste which not always ϐit with the
conceptions of the 18th century.
Even though today the dichotomy of the theories of light is
considered a gross over-simpliϐication, it was not considered such in
the 18th century as: “to the supporters of one theory the other theory
had faults so fundamental that no distinction between varieties of the
same theory was sufϐicient to placate opposition to that theory. This
meant that opponents of either the wave or the particulate theory
seldom, in their attacks, distinguished between different varieties of
either theory” [131].2
Table 4.1 lists the scholars who, for their own admission, supported
of the different theories about light transmission. The supporters of
vibration theories admitted that light was faster in less dense medium,
the supporters of the projectile theory, to the contrary assumed that
light was faster in the more dense medium. These assumptions did not
derive from direct experimental measurements of light speed, what at

the time was not possible, but where simple ad hoc hypotheses to
justify some experimental results, for instance that passing from air to
glass the refraction angle is less than the incidence angle. To ϐind
mechanical reasons to explain one theory or another was more a
question or rhetoric than logic. Among the supporter of the projectile
theory to signal the exception of Emmaunel Maignan (1601–1676) who
as early as the 1648 in his Perspectiva horaria sive de horographia
gnomonica tum theoretica, tum practica, assumed that light was faster
in air than in glass, but simply because his mechanism of refraction
derived from Hobbes’s vibrational one [146].3 For a discussion of
Maignan’s theory of light see [181].
Table 4.1 Different theories of transmission of light and their supporters
 
Greek
 
Effect from the object
Effect from the eye
Active medium Propagation of the effect by the medium
(Aristotle)
Ray with medium (Stoics)
No active
medium
Emission of matter Atomists
Ray without medium (Euclid,
Ptolemy)
 
Projectile tradition
Vibration tradition
17th century
Maignan 
Descartes
Newton 
Hobbes
Huygens  
18th century
’s Gravesande 
Johann Bernoulli II 
Musschenbroek 
Euler 
Clairaut 
Lambert
In [47] it is suggested a third class of theories, that is somehow alien
to mechanical philosophy: ϔluid theories. Fluid theorists claimed that
light was a substance, usually consisting of small particles of matter,
like the projectile theorists. However, they frequently denied most of
the concepts related to the projectile theory. Central to their conception
was some form of ubiquitous aetherial ϐluid to explain various
phenomena, in particular heat and ϐire. Few ϐluid theorists were

concerned with explaining the standard optical phenomena, most were
concerned primarily with cosmological questions about the role of ϐire
and light in the economy of nature. Thus instead of studying optics in a
mechanist environment, the ϐluid theorists adopted a different style
and approached theories of light via chemistry and theology.
In the 19th century ϐluid theories had become irrelevant in the
study of optics but in 18th century they still had some appeal. One of
the most important supporter of the ϐluid theory was the Dutch
physician and chemist Herman Boherhaave (1668–1738) who
formulated a theory of the nature of ϐire which became very inϐluential;
for instance he inϐluenced’s Gravesande and Musschenbroek. According
to Boerhaave, the gross matter was inactive, lacking also the property
of inertia. By contrast he attributed all activity and motion in the
universe to ϔire which is described as the universal cause of all changes
in nature. This is an active substance composed of very small smooth,
round, impenetrable and indivisible particles; moreover, it was
conserved and could not be created, destroyed or transmuted into
particles of gross matter. Under normal conditions ϐire was uniformly
distributed throughout the universe but some processes could increase
its density in a limited region. Elementary ϐire was not directly
observable but became apparent only through its effects; principal
among these were heat and light. Thus light was a particular
manifestation of ϐire and consisted of rectilinearly moving ϐire particles,
whereas heat was produced by an excess of these particles [47].4
Another supporter of the ϐluid theories that spanned his activity
through the whole 18th century was James Hutton (1726–1797). His
role will be discussed below with some deepening, also because of his
interesting epistemology of science. Hutton, according to the modern
categories was a scientists; not a physicist but rather a natural scientist.
According to the categories of the period he was a supporter of
experimental philosophy and physico-mathematica, in the sense he
used the strict way of reasoning of mathematicians in physical topics.
Hutton had not a great mathematical background and made no
substantial use of analysis and geometry in his researches. Here is how
the web encyclopedia Mathematics Mactutor classiϐies him: “James
Hutton was a chemist but is best known as a geologist. Why then
include him in this archive? There are two reasons. First his remarkable

theory of the age of the Earth was inspired by Newton’s world view as
presented in the teaching of Colin Maclaurin, and second that one of his
main collaborators in his geological research was John Playfair (1747–
1819) [a ϐirst rank mathematician]” [129]. Hutton is famous for his
theory of uniformitarianism, that is the assumption that earth evolved
from its original state and natural processes over geologic time explain
the present features of the earth’s crust. Hutton established geology as
a science, and as a result he is usually considered the father of modern
geology. He was born in a rather wealthy family and in 1740 entered
the university of Edinburgh, where he was taught mathematics by Colin
Maclaurin, in addition to logic and metaphysics by John Stevenson.  He
graduated in the spring of 1743, only seventeen. In 1747, Hutton went
to Paris to perfect his medical studies, undertaken at Edinburgh, which
he completed in Leiden later. However he never really intended to
practice medicine. He moved to London after graduating and visited a
friend of his, a certain James Davie, in Edinburgh to do a chemical
works. When in London his interest in geology evolved, and in
particular the Discourse on earthquakes by Hooke, the New theory of the
earth by William Whiston, the Protogaea by Leibniz and the Histoire
naturelle by Buffon,  as well as Niels Steensen’s  treatise Dissertation
concerning a solid body enclosed by the process of nature within a solid,
caught his attention. He moved to Slighhouses near his father’s farm in
1754, where he began to cultivate and work on his theories of geology.
In 1767, he returned to Edinburgh and founded a laboratory to
elaborate his theories on the history of the earth. When he realized that
the soil was caused by rock erosion, Hutton also understood that there
is another mechanism that creates rocks beneath the surface, which
then form a new earth. Because he knew that this process was
extremely slow, Hutton concluded that the earth must have been
very old.
The Royal society of Edinburgh invited Hutton to give two lectures
on his theory. The ϐirst conference took place in March 1785 and since
Hutton was ill, was his friend Joseph Black to speak of the earth system.
The second conference was delivered by Hutton himself a month later.
Of course, many saw his conclusions as an attack on the Christian
church and some strongly opposed his views. Hutton’s reaction was
what one would expect from an exceptional scientist: he made trips to

see the rock formations to try to get more evidence that his theory was
correct. Because Hutton’s writing style was difϐicult, John
Playfair  rewrote The theory of the earth, Hutton’s most known treatise.
Playfair managed to explain Huttons’ ideas in a simpler and clearer way
and provided facts to support and arguments against in the Illustrations
of the Huttonian theory of earth published in 1802 [168].
In his late treatise Dissertation upon the philosophy of light, heat, and
ϔire of 1794, where a ϐluid theory of light is explored, Hutton introduced
the difference between the man of science and the philosopher and
exposed interesting epistemological considerations. Notice the
introduction of locution man of science which predated the introduction
of the term scientist usually attributed to William Whewell (1794–
1866) in 1833. In the premise of his work he stressed the relevance for
a man of science of the general considerations about the method of
enquire. In his words: “The men of science may perhaps conceive that I
have written the more general parts merely as introductory, or as
subservient to those in which I give experiment and explanation of
appearances”. But, continued Hutton, “My view is very different; I wish
to engage men of science, that is those who have sufϐicient knowledge
of the particular branches of science, to employ their acquired talents in
promoting general science, or the knowledge of that great system,
where ends and means are wisely adjusted in the constitution of the
material universe and I only, or chieϐly, give those explanations of
phenomena as an illustration of the doctrine, which upon all occasions I
have held, with regard to the pursuit of science and philosophy” [128].5
According to Hutton a man of science and a philosopher are
different things, although they both proceed in reasoning scientiϐically,
after having distinguished their ideas. The purpose of the one, although
occasionally extensive, is naturally limited, in having a subject which is
particular; the purpose of the other again, though not perhaps
unlimited, is universal and employs that general knowledge which
science had provided, in order to procure something still more
interesting to the person who thus is made for a superior enjoyment
[128].6 A man of science should be a philosopher also.
The dominating inductivist approach of the experimental
philosophy of the ϐirst half of the 18th century had already given up and
a substantial role was given to the elaboration of theories. According to

Hutton it is only general knowledge which is proper to direct the
making of experiments. Thus, though natural philosophy requires to
have matters of fact, yet, the indeϐinite collection of facts does not
conduct to philosophy; and the properly disposing of one fact in the
generalization of our knowledge, is more valuable than the indeϐinite
progress of experiment made without a wise design [128].7
Hutton proposed a quite sophisticated version of the method for
hypothesis. For him facts are fundamentals to validate a theory; but if a
single fact contradict it, before leaving, an in depth analysis should be
carried out. Indeed, asked Hutton, are we, upon the faith of a solitary
experiment, to abandon our theory of heat and cold, which is the
generalization of a broad experience? Are we to build new theory upon
a single fact, before this fact is properly analyzed, in seeing every
circumstance with which it is connected, and before comparing that
analyzed fact with every other event which it should agree? [128].8
However Hutton could also be seen as an inductivist: “In the whole
of Hutton’s doctrine he rigorous guarded himself against principle
which could not be founded on observation. He made no assumptions.
Every step in his deductions was based upon actual fact, and the facts
were so arranged as to yield naturally and inevitably the conclusion
which he drew from them [102].9
Hutton was a supporter of the theory of phlogiston—assimilated by
Hutton with ϐixed light—which postulates that a ϐire-like element called
phlogiston is contained within combustible bodies and released during
combustion. For him light and heat derive from phlogiston degradation
and phlogiston dubbed the solar substance: “It is the light of the sun
which is stored up in the substance of vegetable bodies, as ϐixed light, or
phlogiston” [8, 128].10 Light and heat are not the same but light and
radiating heat cannot be distinguished: “What dilates the thermometer,
is surely heat; and, when that substance quits the contracting
thermometer, in order to dilate the contiguous atmosphere, it is also
heat, because it then observes the laws of heat, and produces its effects.
But, when a substance is irradiated from a warm body, when it
traverses with the velocity of light a transparent medium is reϐlected by
one metallic speculum to be again concentrated by another; and when
it then heats a black body more easily than a bright one, we ϐind a
substance acting the part of light, in all respects, and not that of any

species of heat; therefore, while this substance must be properly named
light, it cannot, without absurdity, without committing a ϐlagrant
transgression in our science to be named heat” [128].11
In the following a few theories, vibration and projectile, are
discussed to show the way mathematicians addressed this subject of
natural philosophy. A greater space is devoted to vibration theories for
two reasons. First the projectile theory has largely been discussed in
Chap. 1 in the form given to it by Newton; second vibration theories are
more interesting for the present book, because in it the role of
mathematicians was more relevant.
4.1.1 Projectile Theories
Newton is considered the champion of projectile theory, though most
historians attribute him a weak conception of it. He indeed left open
some other ways of transmission of light, even those of not
mechanicistic mould. He was however read by his contemporaries as a
strong sustainer of the projectile theory. And a modern by reading his
writing, without the warning of historians, is tempted to see Newton as
clearly sided toward projectile theory.
After the various editions of the Opticks, before the half of the 18th
century, in England the projectile theory became shaped into a system
[47].12 In the Continent it found supporter in the Netherlands by ’s
Gravesande  and Musschenbroek, who however made some changes,
inϐluenced by Boherhaave’s concept of light as projected ϐire [116].13 In
France the projectile theory did not ϐind place at the beginning, because
of the dominant Cartesian theory of light. Things changed after
Voltaire, Clairaut and Gaspard Le Compasseur de Créqui-Montfort,
marquis de Courtivron spread Newton’s ideas. Important was the role
of Courtivron who in 1752 published a Newtonian treatise of opticks,
the Taité de optique [142], which had a great diffusion.
However among the Cartesians, or if one prefers the Neo-Cartesians,
there was an important scholar, the already cited Jean Jacques Dortous
de Mairan (1678–1771), who was president of the l’Académie des
sciences de Paris for some period and before Voltaire and other
Newtonians supported the projectile theory. As Descartes he imagined
the universe ϐilled with elements of the second type according to

Cartesian classiϐication. But in this plenum, differently from Descartes,
he assumed that light was carried by small corpuscles and that such a
transmission occurred in a ϐinite time.
Mairan afforded the theme of light transmission in a early paper of
1717, the Dissertation sur la cause de la lumiere des phosphores et des
noctiluques [147], which won prize of the Académie de Bordeaux; a
dissertation on what is now called luminescence. Though Mairan had a
good mathematical background, he was part of the Malebranchian
circle, Calculus and geometry do not transpire from his paper, which
could be classiϐied as an experimental philosophy work. Here empiric
data are relevant and, at least in principle, they are used to accept or
refute the various theories of light. But differently from most
experimental philosophers, he did not follow an inductive approach
and, according to his Cartesian education, made extensive use of
mechanical models, that were considered consistent not only against
the experimental data but also against a pre-established system of
natural philosophy.
In his dissertation Mairan ϐirst contrasted the vibration view, with a
thesis very common among the supporters of projectile theories, that it
could not explain the rectilinear propagation of light. Then he passed to
present his own theory, according to which light is nothing but a
“successive ϐlux” of some subtle matter caused by the agitation in the
luminous bodies, such as the sun for instance. The subtle matter of light
would propagate in the aether with a very high speed; it covers the
distance from sun in seven minutes [147].14 According to Mairan there
is no difϐiculty to admit that the aether has a very very low density so it
does not oppose any substantial resistance to the motion of the
corpuscles of light. With regard to the objection commonly addressed
against the supporter of projectile optics, according to which the sun,
the classic luminous body, if it were to actually issue corpuscles, after so
many centuries would be exhausted, Mairan proposed two solutions,
which could coexist; (1) either light is formed by corpuscles of
negligible mass, though much larger than the particles of aether, that
not even in many centuries could be perceived the consumption, (2) or
light coming from the other stars supplies the consumption.
To luminous corpuscles Mairan attributes not only motion and
extension, but also a quality, entering into the world of chemistry. The

entrance of quality in his mechanist vision is that of Robert Boyle.  All
the bodies of the world differ among them only by the ϐigure and
motion of the invisible parts which compose them (ϐirst principles), or
in other words, by the different size and by the various arrangements of
parts. This idea so simple in appearance, however, are the source of a
prodigious variety. But, said Mairan, the industry of men, in the search
for the intrinsic nature of body, is unable to reach these last parts,
owing to their smallness, thus “They [men] have given the name of
(second) principles of the bodies to the simplest parts, in which the art
can reduce them. These (second) principles are the so-called chemicals.
They are small masses of matter, corpuscles whose insensitive parts
have received certain conϐigurations, or some motions and which are so
closely related to each other, or of such great subtlety, that the analysis
has not been able to separate them so far. It is one of those principles
that is the matter of the light. This matter must be by all the same and
that of a luminous body differs from that of another luminous body but
for the assemblages of the different corpuscles” [147].15 Mairan named
sulfur the principle of light.
So I think the luminous material consists of a very subtle, very
delicate sulfur [emphasis added] and that it is nothing but the
active ingredient of Chemists, so named, because it acts alone
and makes others act. Indeed of the ϐive principles of Chemistry,
there is only the sulfur, which has this property: among the
other four, one counts as purely passive, the Earth, which only
serves as a receptacle or to the others, & three means, which are
Salt, Water & Mercury, which become able to act when are joined
to the sulfur [147].16 (D.2)
Mairan insisted that it was necessary to distinguish the common
sulphur, or the fat, oily, sulfurous matters, from the sulfur which is in
question here; for whatever they abound in this principle, nevertheless,
as they can be decomposed, reduced by analysis into simpler
components, they could only be classiϐied as mixed. He maintained,
with Newton, that colors are not modiϐication of light, but that the light
contains in itself all the colors, independently of the internal or external
conϐigurations of the bodies through which it passes, or on which it is

reϐlected. That is, a ray of the sun, for instance, is composed of particles
of different species, each of them with the property of exciting in the
soul, by means of the organ of sight, the particular feeling of a color,
without any reϐlection or refraction ever changing it.
White is not a color, but a compound of all colors and black, on the
contrary, is the negation of all colors, or light.
Each color of bodies does not consist in the ϐigure, and in the
particular arrangement of the parts which compose them if not
that they are better adapted to absorb in their pores the light of
a certain color and to reϐlect that of another color. Thus the
carmine, for example, is very red, because it reϐlects only the red
light, and all the other species of light break up and lose
themselves in its pores without reϐlecting [147].17 (D.3)
Finally, each species of light has its determined index of refraction, that
is, that each color passing obliquely from one medium to another, air,
for example, in the crystal, breaks up to meet with a its characteristic
angle. “This is what Mr. Newton, author of this discovery, calls the
different refrangibility of the colors of the light. It is principally by this
property that he recognized all the other properties; and his clever
experiments, would alone be sufϐicient to immortalize a name less
famous than his” [147].18
Mairan returned to the subject of light, in four lengthy memoirs
with the main purpose to give a Neo-Cartesian derivation of the laws of
refraction (and reϐlection as well) in 1722, 1723, 1738 and 1740 [148,
149, 151, 152, 167]. In these memoirs he gave more prominence to the
vibrational theory of light than he had done in the past. He repeated
that reϐlection and refraction were equally explained by both
vibrational and projectile theories: “I do not want here to exclude any
physical system about light unless it goes outside mechanic philosophy
or is manifestly contrary to experiments” [151].19
In these memoirs the chemical considerations about the particles of
light are no longer resumed and a fully mechanical approach is
followed. The difference in color is explained with the different speed of
the particles of light, and the refraction is made to depend on the speed
of light. Because white light is a mixing of particles with different speed,

they are separated during refraction, and Newton experimental
ϐindings can be justiϐied.
Corol. 39. Thus the different velocities, the different degrees of
refrangibility and the different colors of light are in themselves
and independent of us, one and the same property which only
expresses a graduation of the effects due to one single cause
[151].20 (D.4)
Of some interest is also Mairan memoirs on sound, Sur la propagation
du son dans les differens tons qui le modiϔient of 1637 [150], because
here the transmission of sound is compared with that of light and some
considerations on the possibility that light transmits by vibrations are
reported. Here he assumed that air, as a vehicle of sound, is an
assemblage of an inϐinity of particles of different elasticity, the
vibrations of which are analogous in duration to those of the different
tones of sound bodies. Moreover between all these particles only those
of the same species, of the same duration of vibration and in unison
with the sound body, can retain the vibrations of this body and transmit
them to the ear. “That the smallest mass of sensible air contains several
of these particles of all kinds, and that all their vibrations, or the
trembling of the mass in all its parts, can only produce sound or noise”
[150].21
4.1.2 Vibration Theories
For what the vibration theories is concerned, Descartes was considered
by nearly all the scholars of the period, the starting point even though
no vibrations exist in his system. More complex is the evaluation of the
role attributed to Huygens, already discussed in Chap. 1, who was
instead a true former supporter of a vibrational optics. For a discussion
on the acceptance of the wave theories before and after
Newton see [12].
A scholar which was cited often about light transmission in the
treatises of the 18th century is the ‘Cartesian’ Nicolas
Malebranche (1638–1715). He not only contributed, at the foundation
level with metaphysical considerations [117], but also with technical
contributions [143]. One of the most well-known results of his scientiϐic

activity relate to the mechanism of light transmission; his
considerations are mainly reported in Reϔlexion sur la lumiere et les
couleurs, et la generation du feu of 1699 [154] and in the
Eclaircissements of De la recherche de la vérité of 1712 version [153].
This last writing included the paper of 1699, published in the Mémoires
de l’Académie des science de Paris, with few but important changes,
that will be commented later, and some details about the property of
the medium that transmits light.
In the paper of 1699 Malebranche expressed his criticisms to
Descartes’s theory of light, because for instance it made impossible for
rays of light of different colors to cross without interacting and losing
their color. Indeed for Descartes color was associated to a certain value
of the spin (angular moment, rotatory speed) of the hard spheres of
subtle matter (aether) and, when the rays meet, for their colors do not
change it is necessary that the spheres had two distinct spins, which is
impossible. For this reason he removed the assumption of the perfect
rigidity of the assembly of aetherial particles. One more reason is that
the Descartes’s theory implied an inϐinite speed of light, while recent
measurement indicated that it was ϐinite. However in this point
Malebranche remained ambiguous and, though he seemed to accept the
ϐinite value of the speed of light, he left some space to the possibility it
was inϐinite.
Malebranche’s aether is a unique primary substance that, forced to
move at high speed in a closed and plenum world, is obliged to whirl in
vortices whose dimensions can decrease without limit. Matter,
considered essentially as a continuum, can be divided with no effort
into particles as small as you like: “matter can be divided à l’inϔini and
each part makes no resistance at all to be divided” [153].22 In this
divisible matter the vortices of tiny particles are characterized by a very
hight speed. The centrifugal force then requires that these small
vortices are capable of releasing a “fearful” force upon breaking up.
Thus Malebranche’s aether is elastic; however its elasticity does not
come from the elasticity of the particles in themselves but is associated
to the dynamics of rigid particles. Under normal conditions the forces
or pressures exchanged among the vortices are balanced: “the vortices
counterbalance each other” [153].23 The balance is disturbed by the

action of the luminous bodies which determine pulses of pressure in
the elastic medium.
In the work of 1699, however, Malebranche did not insist on the
discussion of the nature of the aether and took as an example of
propagation of pulses of pressure what would happen in a spherical
vessel ϐilled with a ϐluid compressible but very stiff.
Suppose, said Malebranche,  to make in the balloon of Fig. 4.1 ϐilled
with a compressible and compressed ϐluid, a small hole as in A. All parts
of the ϐluid, like those, for example, which are in R, S, T, will tend
towards A, by the straight lines RA, SA, etc., because all the parts which
were equally pressed, ceasing to be such on the side opposite to the
hole A must tend to A since all pressed body must tend to move toward
the side where they ϐind less resistance. Equally, if a piston operates at
the opening A and pushes the ϐluid promptly forward, the same parts R,
S, T, V, etc., will all tend to get away from the hole by the same straight
lines AR, AS, etc., because they are more pressed by the side that
respond to A directly than any other. Finally, if the piston moves
forward and backwards promptly, all the parts of the ϐluid matter that
ϐills the ballon will receive an inϐinite number of pulses that can be
called vibrations of pressure.
Let’s apply this reasoning to light and colors, said
Malebranche. Everything around us is full and our eyes are currently
compressed. But this compression of the optic nerve does not excite
any sensation of color, because this nerve is always in the same state; by
the same reason that we do not feel the weight of the air that surrounds
us, though as heavy as 28 in. (
 cm) of mercury. But imagine a T-
shaped eye, or everything else turned towards a ϐlame A of a torch
(Fig. 4.1), the parts of the ϐlame being in a continual motion, will press
the subtle matter harder than in the darkness by vibrating very
promptly pressing the bottom of the eye; thus the optic nerve more
compressed than usual and shaken by the vibrations, will excite in the
soul a sensation of brightness. If a black body M is assumed at S, the
subtle matter not being reϐlected to the eye and not shaking at all the
optic nerve, it will be seen as black. If the body M is such that the subtle
matter is reϐlected from this body to the eye and produce vibrations
equally prompt, this body will appear white. It will even appear very

bright as the ϐlame of the torch, if the body M is polished and the rays
are reϐlected mostly in the same order, because the brightness comes
from the force of the vibrations, and the color of their promptitude.
But if the body M is such that the subtle reϐlected matter excites
in the eye more or less rapid vibrations in certain degrees, that I
do not think we can determine exactly, we will have some of the
colors we call primitive; yellow, red, blue, if any part of the body
M reduces equally the vibrations caused by the ϐlame in the
subtle matter. And we will see all the others colors that are made
by the mixture of the primitive ones when the parts of the body
M will decrease unequally the promptness of the vibrations of
the light [154].24 (D.5)
That is what I meant when I went ahead in some of my books
[Recherches de la verité of 1674–1675 and the Entretiens sur la
métaphysique et sur la religion of 1688], said Malebranche,  that light
and colors consist nothing but that in various shakes or vibrations of
aethereal matter, or vibrations of pressure more or less prompt [that is
with low or high frequency], that the subtle matter produces on the
retina [154].25
Fig. 4.1 A ballon ϐilled with an elastic ϐluid.
Redrawn from [154], p. 23

In the previous passage there is a summary of Malebranche’s wave
theory of light. He tended to justify his theory by making analogies
between the propagation of light and that of sound; a phenomenon this
last that at the time was quite well studied, even if some problems
remained to be solved. An analogy which was the inverse of that made
by Mersenne, who in the Harmonie universelle studied the properties of
sound starting from those of light [159].26 Essentially
Malebranche believed he had proved that the different colors consist
only of the different frequencies of vibration of the pressure that
propagates in the aether, in analogy to the different musical tones that
derive from the different frequency of vibration in the air [154].27
In the Reϔlexion sur la lumiere et le couleurs, et la generation du feu
as reported in the Recherche de la verité of 1712, Malebranche made
two important changes in the text; one concerning the theory, another
concerning the speed of propagation of light. In 1699, Malebranche did
not know Newton’s color theory and believed that color was a
modiϐication of a uniform light caused by interaction with colored
bodies. In 1712, after reading Newton’s Optics, Malebranche, expressed
the following, apparently severe judgment: “Although Mr. Newton is not
a physicist, his book is very curious and very useful to those who have
good principles in physics. Besides, he is an excellent geometer.
Everything I think about the properties of light can be adjusted to his
experiment” [155].28
Malebranche agreed with Newton’s phenomenological approach
and accepted Newton’s conclusions and admitted that the colors are
contained in the light from the beginning and derive from the
absorption of a part of the colors contained in the white light that hits
the colored body under observation. And the red, the orange, the
yellow, the green, the blue, the indigo or dark blue and the violet, do not
change their color or the amplitude of their vibrations, as Descartes 
said, and that their refractions always have the same relation with each
other, “which Mr. Newton has proved by several decisive experiences”
[153].29
But if the body M is such that the subtle reϐlected matter excites
in the eye more or less rapid vibrations to certain degrees, that I
do not think we can determine exactly, we will have some of the

simple homogeneous or primitive colors, like red, yellow, bleu,
etc., and we will have the other compounded colors, and even
the whiteness that is the more composed of all, according to
various mixtures of rays whose vibrations will have various
promptitudes [frequencies]. I say that whiteness is the most
composed of all because it is composed by the assembly of
vibrations of different promptness, that each small part of the
ϐlame produces in the subtle matter. Since everything is full and
inϐinitely compressed, each ray retains in all its length the same
promptitude of vibration that has the small part of the ϐlame
that produces it. And because the parts of the ϐlame have a
movement varies, the rays of colors necessarily have vibrations
that make different refractions. But we should see on that the
experiences that will be found in the excellent work of
Newton [153].30 (D.6)
According to Malebranche, one must not judge the cause by the
sensation it has produced. It is easy to conceive of two or more unequal
vibrations, pressing together on the same ϐiber of the optic nerve,
which can shake the main part of the brain in the same manner as a
mean vibrations. Any white ray is a mean of all simple rays, red, yellow,
blue, etc. which all have different vibrations and refractions; and all the
different colors come only from the various mixtures of simple rays, or
transmitted or reϐlected from the small transparent parts of opaque
bodies.
Regarding the speed of light, Malebranche  questioned the results
reported by Huygens—that witnessed a ϐinite speed of light—basing on
alternative results obtained by Giovanni Domenico Cassini (1625–
1712); “because Mr. Cassini has observed eclipses of the satellites of
Jupiter in different distances from the earth, which do not agree with
the conclusion of M. Huygens” [153],31 and this seems to reinforce his
doubt on the possibility that the speed of light could be ϐinite, even if
there is no precise judgment on the point.
To decide about the originality and relevance of
Malebranche’s contribution to the theory of light propagation is not
simple. He was considered by his contemporaries as a forerunner for
the hypotheses that light propagates as periodic pulses and each color

is associate to a particular frequency of vibration. Two were the
assumptions that allowed this result: (1) The aether is an elastic
medium; (2) Light propagates likewise sound. The ϐirst assumption is
the most interesting and original one because Malebranche justiϐied it
inside Cartesian physics, with a space ϐilled with rigid and not elastic
matter. The second assumption is not new; there has always been
association between sound and light. Malebranche was in an
advantageous position to start from a theory of sound well deϐined in
which the periodic nature of sound waves was generally accepted.
From the point of view of the present book, Malebranche’s
contribution is relevant because it shows the way a scholar strongly
oriented toward metaphysics, but who also had a good mathematical
background, afforded topics of natural philosophy. Differently from
scholars more mathematically oriented, as Huygens and Euler for
instance, Malebranche inserted the explanation of the nature of light in
a coherent system, by integrating it with his metaphysical conceptions.
An important contribution to the study of nature and light
propagation is that of Johann II Bernoulli (1710–1790), the youngest
son of Johann I. His contribution, not much cited by modern historians,
is particularly interesting because it presents the right balance, for the
times, among the considerations of natural philosophy of a Cartesian
qualitative nature and their quantiϐication using reϐined instruments as
Newtonian equations of motion and mathematics.
Bernoulli’s work commented here is the Recherches physiques et
géométriques sur la question: Comment se fait la propagation de la
lumière of 1736. Here Bernoulli referred to the astronomical
measurements reporting the value provided by Rømer according to
which the light would take 11 min to reach the earth, and that provided
by Newton, according to which it would be sufϐicient 7–8 min. Thus,
even though the speed of light is not inϐinite; it is however very high
and Bernoulli tried to convince the reader that this is not so unlikely.
And for this he referred to the second ‘Newtonian’ law of motion
written in a quite modern notation as 
, in which “f is the motive
force, m the mass and a the accelerating force” [35].32 For the same
value of f the acceleration, which is considered to be representative of
the variation of speed, or of the speed tout court, is the greater the

smaller the mass. And therefore for a very small mass and for
sufϐiciently large forces such as that of the aether particles one will
have a very great speed. It it is noteworthy that Bernoulli’s text is
contemporary (same year) to the Mechanica of Euler (a friend of his), in
which the second law of motion is expressed, using a modern notation,
as 
, an expression that in the 18th century was preferred to 
.
The ‘Cartesian’ Bernoulli challenged the Newtonians, by asserting
that “if it is allowed to Messrs the Newtonians to suppose an universal
gravitation among bodies, even though no physical explanation is
furnished for this, with a greater reason it could be allowed to imagine
a pressure that act on the subtle matter which ϐills the vast spaces of
the world” [35].33
At this point Bernoulli introduced the ϐirst important hypothesis of
his theory: the aether is endowed with elasticity. And unlike
Newton and Huygens which according to him had introduced the
elasticity of the aether without any explanation [35],34 he will give a
physical explanation of it. About Newton Bernoulli probably referred to
the considerations he made in the Queries of Optics; while the
accusation to Huygens seems to be improper because he gave a physical
justiϐication, albeit a summary one, of the elasticity of the aether; see
Sect. 1.1.3.1.
Bernoulli’s explanation is that of Malebranche, who is explicitly
named: “I do not ϐind anything more appropriate for my project than
the small vortices of P. Malebranche” [35].35 At this point Bernoulli can
present his theory on light propagation:
I imagine that all this cluster of small whirlpools that ϐill the vast
spaces of the world is mingled with very subtle, hard or solid
corpuscles, leaving among them spaces, if you like, a thousand
times longer than the diameter of one of these corpuscles, I do
not need to determine the length of them, it is sufϐicient that I
understand very clearly that each straight line drawn from one
point to another, will contain an inϐinity of these small
corpuscles, of which I can suppose the intervals nearly equal,
since these corpuscles are uniformly dispersed among the small

whirlwinds, though the corpuscles themselves may be of
different magnitudes [35].36 (D.7)
That is, the medium through which light propagates is made of
inϐinitely many aetherial elastic whirlpools mingled with inϐinitely
many hard particles of luminous matter.
According to Bernoulli, each point of a source of light can excite, in
the universe conceived by him, an inϐinity of rays of different direction,
as many as there are straight lines coming out of this point. Each of
these straight lines, ϐilled with small corpuscles (and vortices)
distanced of many units from each other, receives from the (point-wise)
luminous source a violent shock which compresses the closest vortices
displacing the corpuscles of luminous matter from their positions of
equilibrium, by producing vibrations along each straight line.
Fig. 4.2 A luminous ϐilament.
Redrawn from [35], ϐigure III of the table of ϐigures
After the exposition of the basic aspects of his optics,
Bernoulli introduced a key concept, that of luminous ϔiber (ϐibre
luminous) as the segment that connect the beginning of the
perturbation of the aether to its end along a given line [35];37 a
luminous ray is deϐined as a chain composed by a great number of
luminous ϐibers aligned along a straight line, at least when light
propagates in a homogeneous medium [35].38
According to Bernoulli, the ϐirst hard luminous particle of the
medium displaced by the impulse received by the luminous source
(particle D of Fig. 4.2) causes a compression of the aether comprised
between the ϐirst and second particle C (interval DC). This causes the
displacement of the second particle C which compresses the space CB
between the second and the third particle, and in sequence the third
and the forth with an effect that tends to decreases with the distance
from D, until the last particle which is moved, A. The length of the

interval between the beginning of the perturbation (D) and its end (A)
is the luminous ϐiber: indeed it is only one half, as Bernoulli will clarify
later; the full length being AG [35].39 It is natural for a modern reader to
see in the length of the luminous ϐiber the wave length of light, even
though with some perplexity.
Once that the interval DC (transformed in cd) between the ϐirst and
second particle has reached the maximum compression, the particle D
inverts its motion and displaces the particle E, then the particle F until
in G the motion is exhausted. The cycle continues for a great number of
oscillations very small but very speedy.
Once the nature of light propagation has been described in a general
way, Bernoulli began to make quantitative considerations, using the
then known (Newtonian) laws of dynamics. The ϐirst result obtained is
that the oscillations of the luminous particles are synchronous. In other
words, the period of vibration is always the same regardless of the
amplitude of the oscillation. It is a question of proving the following
general proposition, not new at the times:
A body placed in a center of equilibrated forces, if it is displaced
by whatever cause, up to a small interval in the direction of the
two springs or motive forces, will return in its initial position,
and will make vibrations in equal time in the form of
tautochronous oscillations [35].40 (D.8)
The proposition is demonstrated by showing that when considering
small oscillations the oscillating body is subjected to a force that varies
linearly with the displacement, “according to the known properties of
these forces, the corpuscle will do isochrones vibrations of equal or
unequal excursions” [35].41
The luminous particles are of different sizes and masses, randomly
distributed, so it should turn out that the luminous ϐibers are formed by
different kind of particles. Actually, according to Bernoulli, this does not
occur because a resonance phenomenon triggered, similar to those that
occur between vibrating strings and each luminous ϐiber is made up
only of particles of equal mass. In essence, the structure of a light ϐiber
is determined by the ϐirst particle that is excited by the light source; it
begins to vibrate and resonates only with the contiguous particles of

the same mass. Particles of different mass are expelled and become part
of other luminous ϐibers.
This way to communicate motions in the bodies with the same
disposition to the motion, is something very ordinary to nature, said
Bernoulli; one sees for example that several strings of music, located
close together each others, some of which are at the unison. If one of
these is pinched it will urge all those that are strained in the same tone
and will live all the others at rest, even the nearest, if it is not tuned to
the octave or the ϐifth, which will also receive some small, sensible
impression; but in general the strings that give high dissonant tones
receive no impression [35].42
Bernoulli’s explanation of the formation of luminous ϐibers,
although ingenious, appears inconsistent, and not only if considered
from a modern point of view. The idea that the impulse given to the ϐirst
particle of the ϐiber is attenuated with distance until it is exhausted,
even if intuitive, is not consistent with the laws of mechanics then
available. The attenuation phenomenon that Bernoulli suggests should
be seen rather as a delay in the time of transmission of the impulse. As
the ϐirst particle is stimulated, the impulse it receives is transmitted to
the adjacent luminous particles with a certain ϐinite velocity and
reaches them after a certain interval of time, until the motion of the
ϐirst particle has breached its maximum.
Fig. 4.3 Elastic forces.
Redrawn from [35], ϐigures I of the table of ϐigures
Still less convincing, and apparently contradictory, is the
explanation of the transmission of the movement of the light ϐiber to

particles external to it to form other ϐibers, which are called secondary
ϔibers, leaving the title of primary ϔiber to that in which the movement
originated of the disorder caused by the luminous body. According to
Bernoulli,  when the particles B, C, D, etc. of Fig. 4.2 have reached the
limits of their excursions in b, c, d, etc. the aether or elastic material
around A will be accumulated and condensed very strongly; therefore
making an effort to to restore forward and backward, as do all springs,
it will not only repel the particles of the ϐirst ϐiber but also spreading it
on the opposite side will stir the particles found in its region L, and will
produce a new ϐiber that will be called secondary [35].43 What does not
work in this reasoning is that there is no reason that the aether should
accumulate around A, because as Bernoulli explained, the movement
transmitted by the ϐirst particle has been exhausted and therefore
around A the aether should be substantially undisturbed.
According to Bernoulli, sound and light have a great afϐinity. Sound
as light takes its origin with the production of ϐibers that can be called
sound ϔibers, which extend to more or less large distances, depending
on the greater or lesser force with which the sonorous body has excited
the air. Luminous ϐibers and sound ϐibers have the same nature,
because both require an elastic medium in a state of compression. The
luminous ϐibers are generated in an extremely thin aether, composed of
vortices of an unimaginable smallness that determine an enormous
elasticity and pressure. Air particles are much heavier than those of the
aether so that the frequencies of vibration of sound are much lower
than those of light. The light rays travel in a straight line because the
solid corpuscles are incompressible and cannot expand transversely,
while the air particles, which in the sound ϐibers take the place of the
luminous solid particles, being deformable in all directions when they
are compressed, tend to deform laterally, which causes the formation of
new transverse ϐibers as branches, which bear the sound, albeit less
strongly, through oblique directions [35].44
After deϐining the mathematical model of light ϐiber,
Bernoulli moved on to quantitative determinations concerning the
shape and frequency of vibrations and the speed of light. I do not enter
into the merits of evaluating the correctness of the results, which is not
an easy task given the difference in notation between the analysis of the
18th century and the modern one, but above all because rigor was then

more an exception than a rule. I will therefore limit myself to describing
the procedure in a very general way. The ϐirst thing Bernoulli did, in the
section entitled Calcul, is to deϐine what, in a quite improper way, could
be called waveform. In particular he wanted to determine the equation
of the curve A
G of Fig. 4.2, which has as abscissas the position
of the luminous corpuscles and in the ordinates the displacements (Dd,
Cc, Bb, etc.) of these points when the disturbance of the point D is at its
maximum. Note that in the curve there is no difference if the
displacements are to the left (like those of the stretch AD) or to the
right (like those of the stretch DG). After a series of more or less
conclusive arguments Bernoulli came to the conclusion that it is a
cycloid: “It is what is proper to the Roulette or the Cycloide” [35].45 For
comments on Bernoulli’s calculations, see [44].46
At this point Bernoulli pointed out that the same curve was
obtained by his father Johann I for the vibration of a taut string,
reported in the acts of the Petersburg academy of 1728 in a memoir
entitled Meditationes de chordis vibrantibus [34], although his are
longitudinal oscillations (longitudinales) and those of the father
transversal oscillations (latitudinales). The memoir of 1728 shows that
a string, homogeneous and uniform, vibrates with a shape which “is an
elongated companion of the trochoid” [34].47 The work continues by
demonstrating that when the sine of contact angle is confused with the
angle itself a sinusoidal shape is obtained [187].48
The coincidence of the shape of the longitudinal oscillations of the
luminous particles and the transversal oscillations of the vibrating
string is sufϐicient for Bernoulli to consider valid also for the light the
equation, found by his father, that provides the frequency of vibration
in the form:
Where 
, AG the length of the luminous ϐiber of Fig. 4.2, A is
representative of the pressure of the aether, and D the arbitrary length
of a simple pendulum; the above relation furnishes the number of
vibrations of the sound ϐiber in the same time a pendulum of length D

makes an oscillation. If D represents the length of a pendulum with a
period of one second, the previous relation furnishes what presently is
called frequency, that is the number of vibrations in one second.
To obtain the speed of light Bernoulli made the assumption that the
number of the vibrations of the luminous body in the primary ϐiber
equals the number of secondary ϐibers that are activated. This means
that by multiplying the length AG of the ϐiber by the number of the cycle
in a period the distance covered in that period is obtained, which is
given by:
Bernoulli used this formula for the speed of sound and compare it with
the values obtained by Newton in the second book of the Principia, and
found the value of 979 pieds d’Angleterre, moins a demi pouce per
second [35].49 Comparing the values of the experimental speeds of light
and sound then available, Bernoulli found that the value of A in the
previous relation in the case of light should be 
, whose root 
 represents the ratio between the speed of light and that of
sound.
Bernoulli went on to study reϐlection and refraction of light.
Regarding refraction, he started from the premise that the speed of
light is greater in denser than in rarer bodies. Very simply the reason is
to be found in the fact that in denser materials the pores are smaller
than in the less dense ones and therefore the vortices of ether have to
move in narrower spaces with a consequent decrease in their diameter
and therefore an increase in the centrifugal force and therefore of
compression. And where the compression is greater, for the formula
Bernoulli found, the speed is greater [35].50
Bernoulli  referred back to the memory of his father of 1701 in the
Acta Eruditorum, Disquisitio catoptrico-dioptrica exhibens reϔlexionis &
refractionis naturam [33], where refraction was explained by reducing
it to the equilibrium of three forces, which act on a mobile point in
different directions. For the laws of statics they will produce
equilibrium only when two any of them are inversely proportional to

the sinus of the angles that their directions make with the third force
[35].51 Bernoulli’s task was to determine the origin and values of the
forces of which the father spook. The ϐirst force is given by the effort
with which the incident ray of the ϐirst medium enters obliquely in the
second medium, the second force is the more or less large resistance
encountered in the second medium, the third force is simply passive
and is such that the point of incidence (assumed as a material body)
stressed by the two other forces is prevented from slipping on the
surface of separation between the two mediums.
With reference to Fig. 4.4, consider the ϐiber AEB oblique to the
surface of separation between air and glass CD. The two ends A and B of
AEB play the role of ϐixed supports. It is clear that the particles of the
ϐiber AE will not be able to continue their motion along AEF, because
the pressure in the aether of the glass is greater than that in the aether
of the air and therefore there would be an imbalance of forces in the
direction of propagation. Thus there should be a deviation of the
luminous ray; because of this deviation the corpuscle in E would be
stressed by forces of different intensity and direction, with the pressure
of the part EB that would tend to push the particle E towards the left.
Bernoulli did not make explicit that the imbalance that would occur
between the two forces acting on different lines in the particle E is
compensated by a reactive force, provided by the mediums.
Fig. 4.4 Refraction of a luminous ϐilament.

Redrawn from [35], ϐigure IV of the table of ϐigures
The dispersion of a light bundle, formed by different ϐibers each
characterized by corpuscles of the same mass, is explained by
Bernoulli, admitting that the hard particles that transmit the light in the
medium of the incident ray, have mass different from those that are in
the medium of the refracted ray and that the angle of refraction of the
luminous ϐibers “contained in the same bundle will suffer larger or
smaller refractions, as much as the accelerating forces of the corpuscles
of the media through which the light must pass are different. So the
compound ray entering there must disperse in single rays, and be seen
each the color that suits it” [35].52
The vibratory theory of light reached its peak in the middle of the
18th century with Euler, who developed his considerations on the
subject in the small treatise Nova theoria lucis et colorum [89], less than
80 pages, presented at the Académie des Sciences et belles lettres de
Berlin in 1744. A summary appeared in the Histoire of the academy for
the same year (published however in 1746) [91], but this text was
never published in full; it survives, as a manuscript with the title
Pensées sur la lumiére et les couleurs, in the archives in Saint Petersburg
[124].53
Euler  knew the work of Johann Bernoulli II because, in 1737,
Johann I sent him a copy of it and asked for an opinion. Euler replied by
praising the work; he was only critical toward the derivation of the
velocity of sound, which reproduced Newton’s formula and
contradicted his own [80]54 And he was aware of Malebranche’s color
theory, who is cited in his text, as also mentioned were Mairan and
Descartes.  He was also inspired by Newton’s sound theory as reported
in the second book of the Principia. Quite strange for a modern, he did
not cite Huygens, of whom he should know about. The reasons are not
clear; certainly the theory of Euler was profoundly different from that
of Huygens; Euler did not accept for example the so called
Huygens principle, whereby every point struck by a luminous impulse
in turn becomes a source. It should however be said that at the time of
Euler the theory of Huygens, had already been set aside by opticians
and Euler could very simply have followed the others in ignoring it
[80].55

Euler’s light transmission theory has been the subject of a number
of studies, but less than those that have been devoted to his mechanical
or mathematical writings. Probably Euler’s contribution to optics most
valued by historians is his discovery of achromatic lenses. This work
falls within the ϐield of geometrical optics, a subject ϐilling four volumes
of Euler’s Opera omnia, two more volumes are occupied by the
Dioptrica, published in 1769–1771. In contrast, the articles on physical
optics, including the Nova theoria the lucis et colorum, were contained
in one volume only. However, Euler gave just as high a value, or a higher,
to his Nova theoria as he did to his works on dioptrics.
From the point of view of the present book, Euler’s work has a
relatively marginal relevance, because the arguments of natural
philosophy are all considered few and large space is left to
mathematical developments. Euler could act with optics as a pure
mixed mathematicians because he had already developed his own
physical theory of the aether starting from the Dissertatio de igne, in
qua ejus natura et proprietates explicantur written in 1737, developed
in an extended form in the Recherches physiques sur la nature des
moindres parties de la matiere of 1744, practically at the same time of
the Nova theoria the lucis et colorum, and then in the Anleitung. The
aether was treated as an absolutely continuous, elastic medium with
highly compressed in its equilibrium conϐiguration.
Euler devoted a long introductory part to refutation of Newton’s
projectile theory of light and to support the vibration theory. He
believed that the propagation of light in its medium was a phenomenon
completely analogous to that of the propagation of sound that he had
already studied in a short dissertation Dissertatio physica de sono
written in 1727 as part of applying to the physics chair of the university
of Basel at the age of 20. This work was somewhat expanded in the ϐirst
chapter of his treatise Tentamen novae theoriae musicae ex certissismis
harmoniae, published only in 1739, although written around 1730 [88].
Euler conceived of air as made up of inϐinitely small but
nevertheless real and springy particles that are compressed together.
Euler had the qualitative picture of sound as being a pressure
vibrations of the air induced by a sound source. These vibrations, like
those of pendulums, are harmonic, that is sinusoidal, with pitches
described by their frequency of vibration in the case of simple sounds.

Composite sounds are made up of simple sounds, sounding consonant
when the frequencies have a simple ratio.
Regarding the transmission of light, since the medium in which it is
propagated, the aether, is continuous and therefore ϐinite particles of it
do not exist, as it is for air, Euler had to consider the vibration of an
inϐinitesimal element of aether, to be treated as a purely geometric
entity, as Newton had done in Principia in his study of the propagation
of sound in a ϐluid.
Euler believed that light propagation were essentially a mono-
dimensional phenomenon, although light rays could propagate in all
directions and a spherical front could be determined.
Once a pulse has been formed it moves forward in a straight line
if the medium is uniform, as it is assumed for the rays of light.
The transmission of pulses arises from an agitation of the
particles of the elastic medium in which the pulse is situated.
Since the agitation at all times tends in a deϐinite direction, it
gives the pulse a motion towards that same region [89].56 (D.9)
Figure 4.5 illustrates the propagation of light as conceived by Euler. A
source in A produces pulses in all directions; in this way spherical front
waves such as GG, FF, EE, DD, CC, BB are generated. If the pulse at G
affects the organ of sight, the ray of light is judged to have arrived along
the direction normal to the pulse GG. Therefore rays exist in the aether
only in as far as straight lines normal to the pulses are conceived there
[89].57
Fig. 4.5 Spreading of pulses of light.
Redrawn from [89], Fig. 3 of Table V

In Chap. 1 of the Nova theoria lucis et colorum Euler studied the
mechanism of propagation of a pulse. He used Newton’s treatment of
pulses in elastic media as developed in the Principia by reformulating
the geometric treatment in algebraic form. Euler’s ultimate aim was the
deduction of the equation for the speed of light conϐining his attention
to the propagation of a single pulse. The basic hypotheses are (1) that
the change in pressure of the aether is proportional to the variation of
its density, or if desired of its volume, (2) that the restoring force is
linear elastic and that the impulse propagates according to a harmonic
law, that is sinusoidal. Under these conditions Euler obtains the
following formula for the speed of sound [89]:58
where k is a constant that multiplied by the speciϐic weight D (weight
density) gives the elastic force of the medium, a is the space passed in
the time T.59 The formula, Euler pointed out, is the one obtained by
Newton. Replacing in this formula the value 
, as made by
Newton, one gets for the sound the speed of 975 English feet per
second [89].60 The speed of light is obtained by assuming for k a value
of 
 greater than that of the sound. In [116]61 comments to the
passages leading to this value are reported in detail.
In Chap. 3 Euler examined the propagation of successive pulses.
Here he introduced a magnitude, the distance c between two successive
pulses, which is to be compared with the modern concept of
wavelength, and derived the well-known formula of wave theories
[89]62:
where c is the distance between two consecutive pulses, n the speed of
light and i the frequency of pulsation, valid in the case of isochronous
vibrations.

Euler believed that the pulses within a medium different from the
aether, water for instance, propagated exclusively in the water particles,
rather than in the aether ϐilling the voids left by water particles. If one
used the standard formula for the speed within a medium—air or
water—for calculating the speed of light, the resulting value would be
much lesser than the actual one as water density and consequently the
coefϐicient k is much lower, less than 
. Euler thought
however it was incorrect to employ the equation he had found for the
aether, because the propagation through water is entirely different
from the propagation trough aether, since the contact of the parts of the
water causes the pulses to be propagated nearly as in an instant (ut
quasi in istanti impressiones receptae transferuntur) and the speed in
water is not very different from the speed in aether [89].63 This last
statement is stated without Euler commented the rather strange
circumstance that two entirely different propagation mechanisms
result in virtually the same speeds. Neither he was disturbed by the fact
that various differing materials, such as water, glass and diamond,
demonstrated almost the same propagation speed.
Euler divided the rays of light into two types. The ϐirst type is
constituted by simple rays, in which the pulses follow each other at a
constant distance (in time and in space); they are identiϐied with the
homogeneous rays of Newton and as in Newton’s theory the perception
of a color is connected to a particular simple ray, characterized by a
certain distance of pulses and therefore frequency. To make this idea
acceptable, he afϐirmed that the organ of sight is able to distinguish the
number of impulses it receives in an assigned time as the perception of
the high and low tones in the sound by the ear is based on a similar
process. The second type of rays is constituted by composite rays, in
which the pulses follow each other at irregular intervals. Euler
recognized that the terminology was improper because, at least for him
a “composite ray” was a single ray produced by a non-isochronous
vibration and not a mixture of different rays; this is the case of solar
rays. Even so, he preferred not to deviate from the established
terminology derived from Newton [89].64
The refraction of a simple ray of light is explained by Euler with
reference to Fig. 4.6. Consider the pulse Pp with P touching the

transition surface from a less dense medium ACB (air for instance) to
the denser medium ADB (glass for instance). The part of the pulse
indicated by P moves in the denser medium with a speed 
 less of the
speed 
 of the part p which remains in the less dense medium ACB,
until it reaches the surface AB at 
. Meantime the part P of the pulse
has reached the point 
, with P
 less than 
 in the same ratio of 
. Euler noticed that the pulses Pp and 
 cannot be parallel and
because the rays are perpendicular to pulses, by deϐinition, the
direction of the ray should change, as shown in the ϐigure and the ratio
of the sinus of the angle of incidence and that of refraction equals the
ratio 
.
Fig. 4.6 Refraction of rays of light.
Redrawn from [89], Fig. 5 of Table VI
Euler’s reasoning is not very stringent however, because based on
two not proved assumptions. First, that the pulses propagated less
rapidly in a denser medium than in a less dense medium [89].65 A quite

common assumption for the vibration theories of 18th century. Only
later in the treatise he suggested an explanation. Second, that the
pulses of light propagates as parallel lines after the refraction. This
proposition can be found in Huygens also and had become background
knowledge of the 18th century [181].66
To explain the phenomenon of dispersion of light, Euler had to
postulate that the light rays of different colors move at different speeds.
This is in contrast with the theory developed in Chap. 2 of his treatise,
in which it is found that the speed of light is constant regardless of the
frequency of the pulses. Euler suggested, probably an a hoc hypothesis,
that uniform speed only operates for isolated pulses. In presence of a
sequence of pulses they interact, which results in an increase in speed.
The increase in speed is not constant for each color, but it depends on
the frequency associated to the color. According to Euler the ratio of
speed passing from a less denser to a denser medium is the greater the
greater the frequency and consequently the pulse with lower frequency
has the greater refraction.This means that violet that is more refracted
among the solar rays should have the lowest frequency while the red
that is less refracted should have the highest frequency; which is in
contrast with modern theories of light, that assume that red has the
lowest frequency [89].67
This type of explanation is good for simple rays of light and reϐlects
Newton’s explanation. As far as sunlight is concerned, Euler’s ideas are
different; he believed that rays coming out of the sun cannot be
synchronous and therefore they were composite rays. Indeed, because
the sun’s particles are in continual motion (as a result of the high
temperatures), at some point in time one frequency will be the
prevalent one, and at a later time, another. Consequently the
composition of sunlight would not be constant; its pulse frequency
would continuously change [89].68
The dispersion of sun white light can be explained with reference to
Fig. 4.7.

Fig. 4.7 Dispersion of white solar rays of light.
Redrawn from [89], Fig. 6 of Table VI
In the diagram the intervals [HI, IK, [...], OP, of pulses of a non
synchronous ray are drawn different from each other to represent
pulse with different distances. There are seven intervals with an
implicit reference to Newton’s seven main colors. Pulses as Hh can be
imagined as parts of a sequence of isochronous pulse having HI as wave
length. These pulses (violet pulses, for instance) having the greatest
distance have the lowest frequency ant thus are refracted more than
the others; pulses as Pp have instead the greatest frequency (red
pulses), so they are refracted the least.
Possibly the idea of non synchronous rays is one of the most
interesting of Euler’s work, because it explains the dispersion without
the recourse to the idea of superposition of synchronous rays, which as
will be explained below has not a clear physical meaning. While for the
supporters of the projectile theory it is easy to imagine different rays
made of different particles corresponding to given colors that remain
distinct in a bundle of rays, it is more difϐicult for the supporters of
vibration theory to imagine that pulses of pressure with different
frequencies could maintain their individuality, especially in situation
like that suggested by Euler of a homogeneous medium.
The idea of a light beam composed of several light rays of different
frequencies that remain distinct is suggestive but groundless; this

notwithstanding it is an idea commonly conveyed today in textbooks of
physics, used to an abstract approach to physics. Using the modern
mathematical language of wave theory one can say that the physical
superposition of several waves of light with different frequencies, each
of which has a sinusoidal shape, gives raise to a single wave of complex
shape, no longer sinusoidal and in general not even strictly periodic,
albeit ϐluctuating. At the mathematical level one can still imagine this
wave composed of simple waves, which can be visualized using
appropriate mathematical algorithms such as the Fourier transform,
but it is only a mathematical and not a physical decomposition.
Assuming this point of view, it can be said that the assumption for
which colors are contained in sun, white light, as Newton did, does not
make much sense. According to Euler, when the white light falls on an
opaque body it is not reϐlected as an elastic ball in motion is reϐlected
by a wall. What happens is that the particles on the surface of the body
begin to vibrate with a their proper frequency and emit rays with color
corresponding to these frequencies. “Opaque bodies, as long as they are
not illuminated, must be compared to musical instruments not in use,
or, is you will, to strings which emit no sound till they are touched”
[93].69 This kind of reasoning works well not only if one imagines light
as formed by separated color rays but also as composite rays. Indeed
the equation of motion of vibrating bodies make clear that even though
waves that hit the body is not considered as a mix of separate rays, the
bodies gives back a vibration corresponding to its natural frequency.
One more very interesting Euler’s idea is that of colores derivativi
[89],70 that in modern term can be translated as over and under colors
[116],71 roughly representing our infrared and ultraviolet rays, that is
rays outside the visual spectrum. These rays are associated with the
ordinary rays, using an analogy from sound. Just as in music, sounds
with vibrations, that bear a double, quadruple, eight-fold (etc.) ratio to
the main tone are considered similar, so simple rays of light containing
in a given time, two times, four times, eight times the pulses of red, for
instance, should be considered as variation of red even though they
cannot be seen [89].72
This holds true for pure or high colors, such as the rainbow and
prism present them to us. The other colors, lower colors, differ

only as tones of various octaves. So in the case that a red ray
makes 10,000 vibrations per second, rays which make 5000, or
2500, or 1250, or 625 vibrations in the same time, will also
produce a red color, but less high than the ϐirst. Therefore, there
will be several differences of color for each name, as we have in a
harpsichord several tones expressed by the same letter [90].73
(D.10)
According to Euler the idea of colores derivativi could be applied to
the explanation of Newton’s rings [116].74 Euler was explicit on this
point in his Essai d’une explication physique des couleurs engendrees sur
des surfaces extremement minces published in 1754 [92].75
Vibration theories enjoyed limited acceptance during the 18th
century; the dominant theory remained, the projectile theory both
because of the prestige of Newton and because of they were able to
explain in a satisfactory way the rectilinear propagation of light and a
the complex and somehow reϐlection, refraction and dispersion.
Euler’s theory was accepted in the 18th century only to himself and a
few others, especially in Germany [116]; it did not, however, arouse
much interest even for later proponents of wave theories, such as
Thomas Young and Augustin-Jean Fresnel, if not for the fact that a great
mathematician like Euler had previously believed that light was
undulatory and colors depended on the frequency of vibration.
Young, for instance was quite well aware of the adverse criticism that
Euler’s theory had received and was cautious, in his optical writings at
least, to point out where he thought Euler had made mistakes [131].76
To note that Ernst Mach in his The principles of physical optics cited
Euler only incidentally and not for his pulse theory [144].
4.2 Photometry, a New Field of Optics
Today the term photometry refers to the measurements of the power of
light. In the 18th century the term photometry had a broad meaning
and also comprehended illuminating and optical engineering, astro
photometry, etc. Elements of photometry can be traced back to ancient
optics; but it is only in the 18th century that it saw a new course. A brief
history can be found in [141]. From the Middle Ages to Maurolico, to

Kepler  to get to François Aguilon (1567–1617) who is credited with
having conducted the ϐirst modern photometric experiment in his
Opticorum libri sex philosophis iuxta ac mathematicis utilis of 1613,
documented by one of the splendid seven engravings by Pieter Paul
Rubens (1577–1640), reported in Fig. 4.8.
Fig. 4.8 Aguilon’s photometric experiments [6], front cover of book V, p. 356.
Reproduced with the permission of ETH-Bibliothek Zürich, Alte und Seltene Drucke
Aguilon described his experiment as follows:
Now we explain in what manner of converse reckoning the same
things arises. Fixed at one end of the table is the board behind
which is arranged the card which intercepts the rays of both
lights. Then the lights are moved and yet the distance from the
card is unequal, so that the interval of the twin lamp is double of
that by which the single lamp is distant. Plainly therefore, by
considering the card, the light of the twin lamp appears brighter
than the single; and so that the lights observed on the card
become equal, it is necessary for the twin lamp to be moved

further, because the decrement of light brought about by a
double space is less than double [6].77 (D.11)
Here Aguilon stated that two equal bright lamps located at double
distance than a single lamp produces less light. According to
[141],78Aguilon’s more than a test of photometry was simply a test of
the effect of illumination with the distance of the lamp.
Mersenne, Huygens,  Anders Celsius (1701–1744) and Euler also
contributed to photometry, but the one who often is named alongside
Lambert as the father of photometry was Pierre Bouguer (1698–1758).
In 1729 Bouguer published his Essai d’optique sur la gradation the la
lumiere [40] and posthumously in 1760 an augmented version, the
Traité d’optique sur la gradation the la lumiere [41]. Below only some
hints of the Essai are given for the sake of space.
The Essai d’optique sur la gradation the la lumiere is the ϐirst
extensive work devoted exclusively to photometry. It is divided into two
parts. The ϐirst part is mainly experimental and gives fundamental
procedures. Here Bouguer exposed clearly the way to compare sources
of different luminance. Bouguer compared the brightness produced by
two or more equal lamps—joined to give one single source—with a
source made of a single lamp, changing the distances from the sources
to an illuminated screen until the brightnesses are equal for the two
sources together and the one alone. A general law is obtained: The ratio
of the square of the distances gives the ratio of number of lamps:
In fact, it is only necessary to take a torch, to move it away or to
approach it until it lights up successively in the same manner as
the two lights that one wants to compare; and if we take the
squares of the two different distances, these squares, placed in
an inverted order, will express the ratio of the light [40].79 (D.12)
The second part of Bouguer’s treatise is devoted to the decrease of light
passing though translucent media.
4.2.1 Lambert’s Contribution. A Philosopher
and a Physicist

The most important work on photometry of the 18th century was the
Photometria, sive, De mensura et gradibus luminis, colorum et umbrae of
1760 (herein after simply Photometria. Lambert was not the ϐirst to
introduce elements of photometry, nor was he the one who introduced
almost all the elements, but he was the ϐirst to give it a deϐinite
structure.
Johann Heinrich Lambert (1728–1777) was born in Müllhausen, a
small town of Alsace, then part of the old Swiss confederation of 1536–
1798. Lambert’s formal education at an elementary school ceased when
he was only twelve. Since then he started his life program of self-
education. In 1745 Lambert became a secretary to Jean Rodolph Iseline
(1705–1779), a professor at the Institute of Basel. Later on he got the
position as private tutor for the children of count Peter von Salis and
was in the position to become acquainted with Swiss scholars. In 1755
he published his ϐirst scientiϐic memoir on heat. In 1756 he left
Switzerland for a tour through Europe. In Göttingen met the
mathematician Abraham Kästner and the astronomer Tobias
Mayer. Reading Kästner’s book on opticks was very important for him.
The French conquer of Göttingen pushed Lambert to Utrecht where he
remained for two years. In this period he met Musschenbroek. After a
trip to Paris, where he got in touch with d’Alembert and
Messier, Lambert continued his travel through Marseille, Nice and
Milan for eventually returning home at the end of 1758.
After this he started a new and longer trip which lasted ϐive years,
through Switzerland and Germany. During this period he wrote
continuously. In 1760 in Augsburg he published his Photometria and in
1761 two important books, the Insigniores orbitae Cometarum
proprietates where he introduced the method of determining the orbit
of comets for the case of parabolic orbits based on three astronomical
observations and Cosmologische Briefe ϔiber die Einrichtung des
Weltbaues where he described the structure and the motion of the
universe and expressed the opinion that the Milky way might be visual
effect of a lens shaped universe [192]. In 1765 Lambert obtained a
place in the Académie royale des sciences et belles-lettres de Berlin,
where he remained until his death.
A true polymath, he was called the Newton or the Leibniz of Alsace,
Lambert’s interests ranged from theoretical subjects, such as

philosophy, logic, mathematics, natural philosophy to instrument
designs, practical activity of surveying and so on. He not only proposed
a his own philosophy and epistemology, but also suggested a
methodology of science and was a practicing great theoretical and
experimental ‘scientist’.
Lambert was a fairly proliϐic writer; for instance in the twelve years
he stayed at the academy of Berlin he wrote more than 160 works, not
all published during his life. His writings today are classiϐied either as
scientiϐic or philosophical, following a dichotomy typical of modern
highly specialized organization of studies. The scientiϐic writings are
mainly in French and Latin in the juvenile period and in German late, as
it is the case for the Pyrometrie oder vom Maasse des Feuers und der
Wärme, published posthumous in 1779 [139], where Lambert gave a
comprehensive, for the time, theory of heat in the style of the
Photometeria. He dealt not only with radiation but also with reϐlection
of heat, though this effect could not be proved and his results could
have been only speculative. The philosophical writings, with some
exceptions, are in German; among them should be cited his probably
two main treatises: the Neues Organon of 1764 and the Adage zur
Architectonik of 1771 and some texts on logic, whose appreciation is
controversial. The source of bibliography on Lambert and of Lambert is
still represented by [183]; interesting updating can be found in [178],
from which most of biographic information is drawn, and in [141].
Lambert had not received much attention by philosophers and
scientists of his period. Philosophers considered him an epigone of
Locke and Wolff and overshadowed by the rise of his contemporary
Immanuel Kant (1724–1804). A certain revival of interest occurred
towards the end of the 19th century, determined by the outcome of
Neo-Kantianism. He had no better luck as experimental philosopher
and mixed mathematicians, because his interests laid mainly outside
the mainstream of 18th century science. For instance he did not
devoted much effort to electricity or to rational mechanics, the two
dominating topics of the science of the period. Modern historians of
science are however interested in his production.
From the studies of the last century by philosophers and historians,
Lambert emerges as an important protagonist of the German
Auϐklärung. A philosopher and a scientist who based knowledge on few

Part I
Part II
Part III
Part IV
Part V
Part VI
fundamental ideas and axioms, but differently from the German school
then represented by the Leibnizian Wolff, he considered that
experimental evidence has not only the role of giving a value of truth to
an hypothesis, but also it gives guidelines for the process of knowledge
itself; in other words analysis and synthesis cannot be separated. He
was however conscious that the experimental evidence may be
misleading and a great care must be devoted to experimentations. He
strongly insisted on the quantitative nature of science and saw
mathematical laws at the basis of scientiϐic knowledge, while
mechanicistic explanations may be useful to suggest hypothesis but in
the end they should have no role in ϐinal account of phenomena [81].
4.2.1.1 Photometria
Lambert’s treatise, the Photometria, is an impressive work divided into
six parts; below the title of each of them.  
In which are set forth assessments and degrees of direct light
its brightness and illuminating power.
In which the assessments of light from transparent bodies,
chieϐly from glass, are subjected to experiments and calculation.
In which assessments of light depending on opaque bodies
are surveyed by experiments and calculation.
In which the sense of light and its apparent brightness is
deϐined by calculations and experiments.
In which the dispersion of light in a transparent medium is
investigated, chieϐly traveling in the atmosphere of the earth.
In which the illumination of the planetary system is subjected
to calculation [137].80
 
In the following I will refer with some details on part I only. It is
divided into three chapters. Chapter 1 exposes the principles of
photometry, or better its main principles. Other assumptions are
introduced to afford complex phenomena in the more applicative parts
of the treatise. Chapter 2 concerns the transmission of light from

extended sources. Chapter 3, comes back to the principle of photometry
and reports a series of experimental data which conϐirm them by the
use of a statistical analysis.
In the preface to Photometria Lambert deϐined the object: “it
concerns itself with the brightness of light, its density, its illuminating
force, its modiϐication in color and shade, its degrees, its increase and
decrease which it undergoes in all cases” [137]81 and the epistemology:
Between hypotheses which I will call mathematical and those
which are physical there is the greatest difference. The physical
are frequently assumed, so that it is not known where in a
matter they may stray from the truth; whence it happens that in
turn, each may be rejected again, only as their aberration from
the truth is revealed with the advance of time. In the
mathematical it is almost always known not only in what part
they recede from the truth, but also it is possible in many cases
to deϐine in advance the importance of the aberration [137].82
(D.13)
While it is clear what Lambert could mean for a physical hypothesis, it
is a mechanist explanation of Cartesian mould, less clear is the meaning
of mathematical hypothesis. He seems to refer to mathematical function
assumed to represent the quantitative aspect of a phenomenon, whose
shape can be determined by means a best ϐitting procedure (modern
meaning). But it is possible Lambert used the term in a more general
way, for instance as a mathematical model or algorithm. The role of
hypotheses in Lambert’s epistemology is further speciϐied some pages
below. The most certain criteria for a hypothesis arriving at truth is that
when one is able to predict the outcome of new phenomena from the
hypothesis, thence to deduce propositions which experiments,
established for this end, support [137].83
Optics, classical geometrical optics, has been framed among the
mixed mathematics in which considerations of traditional natural
philosophy, nature of light, physiology of eye for instance, were present
and important. But, as optics was also the mixed mathematics closer to
pure mathematics (geometry) itself, it was natural for Lambert, once he
had framed his Photometria in optics, to proceed as a mathematician

with the renounce to the search for the ultimate causes. Even though he
was dealing with an aspect of optics that in principle was far from being
caught by geometry. Lambert had a good knowledge of traditional
natural philosophy; he wrote for instance a treatise on cosmology and
physical astronomy, the Systême du monde, ϐirst printed in 1770 [140],
but in the Phoronomia he acted as a mathematician and as an
epistemologist, subtracting a part of natural philosophy to the
canonical philosophers.
In Chap. 1 the main assumptions of photometry, which he referred
to as laws are presented. The chapter opens in a very similar way
Aristotle opened his Physica [11]:84
It appears to be the common fate of human knowledge that
those things which are most apparent to the senses, can be more
remote from understanding. Certainly the theory of light sets a
clear example of this declaration for us. For many very serious
difϐiculties oppose fully exploring its very power and nature, and
they can hardly be overcome; so that it is remarkable how in this
matter-which is the very fount of clarity-our understanding is
still enveloped in so much darkness, and such great shadows
remain on light itself [137].85 (D.14)
Lambert stated that an acceptable physical theory of light is lacking,
and both the Eulerian (vibration theory) and Newtonian (projectile
theory) are unsatisfactory, even though he expressed his preference for
Euler: “the Eulerian seems more consistent with the proper nature of
light” [137].86 He admitted that photometry is in the same position it
was the thermology before the invention of the thermometer and
expressed the hope that a photometer could be devised, which exposed
to a light indicated its intensity and brightness. At the moment there is
the eye only, which is a precise enough instrument, but which does not
furnishes an absolute measure of brightness, so that only comparative
results of equal or more or less brightness are possible.
Lambert built a vocabulary of the magnitudes and concepts he
introduced; in this he advanced previous authors, Bouguer included.
Table 4.2 refers some of Lambert’s deϐinitions compared with modern
ones. It must be noticed that however not all the concepts of the table

have precise modern correspondents and that Lambert himself was not
completely consistent, because the same concept is sometimes
expressed with different terms. Notice that, in the column of modern
terms, luminous ϐlux (a measure of the total amount of light a source of
light puts out) is used to deϐine most magnitudes.
Table 4.2 Lambert’s nomenclatura in the Photometria. Main concepts. Adapted from [141], p. cv
Lambert
Modern
Radiuos luminous (Ray of
light)
The fundamental unity. Newtonian ray
Section
42
Punctum radiante (Radiant
point)
Inϐinitesimal element of light source
Section
48
Quantitas radiorum (Quantity
of rays)
Luminous ϐlux
Section
43
Densitas radiorom (Density of
rays)
Luminous ϐlux per unit of area or solid angle: intensity
or illuminance
Section
44
Intensitas (Luminous
intensity)
Flux for solid angle. Luminous intensity
Section
39
Claritas (Brightness)
Illuminance. Flux for unit of illuminated surface
Section
98
Illuminatio (Brightness)
Illuminance. Flux for unit of illuminated surface
Section
98
Claritas visa (Perceived
brightness)
Brightness
Section
37
Splendor (Splendor)
Luminance. Flux for unit surface of luminous source
Section
98
The introduction of precise mathematical laws is preceded by the
exposition of semiquantitative empirical laws, which are known from
everyday experience:
1.
Two or more candles illuminate more than one.
 
2.
An object becomes brighter as it is moved closer to a light.
 
3.
Light incident obliquely on a surface illuminates it less [137].87 

They are then speciϐied by assigning mathematical functions, as
follows:
1.
Illumination [the brightness] is greater in proportion with the
number of [equal] candles, or lights, or radiant points [surface]
by which a page of paper or a plane exposed to these is
illuminated.
 
2.
It [The brightness] is less to the degree that the square of the
distance of the illuminated plane to the luminous body is
greater.
 
3.
It [The brightness] decreases in proportion with the sine of the
angle of incidence [137].88
 
These laws can be proved a priori, if one accepts some principles of
natural philosophy. The ϐirst law is suggested by the evidence that light
does not impede light when it traverses the same space. If one takes the
candles to enjoy equal brightness, equal distance from a screen, and
ϐinally equal size, since one light does not block another, it is clear that
for any new candle an equal degree of brightness is added to the paper.
The same hold good if one substitutes another light in place of the
candles, equally bright. The second law could be derived by assuming
that light propagates in spherical surfaces. It is evident that the same
number of rays traverse each spherical surface. But on the larger
surface the rays are diffused over a larger space, whence the density of
rays is less and the brightness is lower. Equally the third law is easily
proved by noticing that the number of rays is less when they strike the
same surface obliquely, whence they cannot be but more rare.
That the brightness decreases in the same ratio by which the sine of
the angle of incidence decreases, is demonstrated by a simple
geometrical argument. With reference to Fig. 4.9, on the plane AB,
parallel rays are incident between CA and DB. Since the brightness is
associated to the number of rays divided by the surface on which they
are incident, the same number of rays must be divided in a case
(normal incidence) by AE and in another case by AB (oblique
incidence), and therefore the density on AE will be to the density on AB

reciprocally as the lines themselves, or directly as AB to AE, thus the
third law.
Fig. 4.9 Oblique incidence of rays of light.
Redrawn from [137], Fig. 1 of Table I
But Lambert believed that these a priori arguments were not
completely stringent, also because he saw a certain circularity in these
arguments as they partly take for granted what one wants to prove and
he suggested that everything must rest with the experience; not only to
verify the three laws separately but also and especially the
consequences that derive from them. But also an experimental
veriϐication maintains a circularity. The three laws cannot be
independently proved, even empirically, but one of them must be given
by deϐinition or rather as a hypothesis that cannot be directly veriϐied.
This depends on the fact that there is not a photometer that allows a
direct measure. Lambert was not explicit, but he assumed the ϐirst law
as a hypothesis. He said that it is clear for instance that two candles
produce a greater brightness than one, but this is all the eye can say
because it has no criteria to establish that the brightness is doubled. It
is however natural assume that if the intensity of light doubles also the
sensation doubles; even though this is not certain, and indeed in the
case of sound for instance, the sensation increases with a logarithmic
law. Similarly one can see a sheet of paper more remote from the candle
to be dimmer than another which is closer, but how much the eye
cannot say.
Of the experiments Lambert carried out to prove his laws, only one,
named Experiment 1, is referred to here. It is the simplest but contains
the essence of photometry. With reference to Fig. 4.10, let consider the
horizontal plane ABC with two equally bright candles placed at A, a
white screen BE is set up so that the rays from A are incident normally

on it. At HL it is placed another smaller screen, so that the shadow
proceeding from each candle at A covers the part DFEC of the bottom
screen. A third candle equally bright as the preceding ones, is placed at
K, so that only the left part of the bottom screen, DFEC is illuminated by
it. While maintaining this condition, candle K is moved toward the
plane BE or moved away from it, until both part DG and DE appear
equally illuminated.
Having done this, the distance of the candles from plane BD is
measured; it is found that AB is to KC as 
 is to 1; or, the square of the
distance AB is to the square of the distance KC as 2 to 1, or more
generally the square of the distance AB is to the square of the distance
KC as the candles at A are to the candles at K. The experiment will be
more accurate when the size and brightness of individual candles are
more nearly equal. Notice that in this experiment only mathematical
laws 1 and 2 are considered, because only orthogonal incidence is
assumed [137].89
Fig. 4.10 An experiment of photometry,
redrawn from [137], Fig. 2 of Table I
The three laws of photometry are reexamined in depth in Chap. 3,
by rediscussing their analytic structure. Lambert did so by starting with
general analytical expressions for these laws, that for him could always

Section 272
Section 273
Section 274
be represented by a series expansion. What he gave for granted were
only the three semiquantitative laws already considered in Chap. 1.
At the end of lengthy reasonings of which I do not intend to discuss
here the legitimacy, Lambert obtained the expression of the brightness 
 as a function of the distance x, the number of candles z, the sine of
the angle of incidence s and and inessential constant of proportionality
A, in the form:
To conclude later that 
 should be the correct choice not to go
against common experience [137].90 This equation resumes all the
three Lambert’s experimental laws.
To be sure of the correctness of his law Lambert performed several
experiments similar to those referred to in Chap. 1. However, they were
more accurate because repeated more than once and the estimated
results were obtained through averages. For instance Lambert instead
of the value 
 for the dependence of the distance obtained
0.714 [137].91 This difference is “from the errors which can creep into
the judgement of the eye” [137].92
In the elaboration of the experimental data Lambert introduced a
statistical analysis, which did not reduce to the mean only, and if even
based on simple criteria, it represented the ϐirst effort for a critical
analysis of a series of experimental data [108].93 Indeed
Lambert should be credited as the main predecessor of Gauss for the
theory of errors. Referring to Jakob Bernoulli Ars conjectandi, published
in 1713, Lambert observed that:  
If some law is tested, it is enough that the residues be less
than the maximum error the eye can make.
If the experimental conditions are varied and the
residues vary in proportion to the changes made, then the law is
untrue.

Section 275
Section 279
If the law is true and universal, positive and negative errors should
occur indifferently.
If either positive or negative errors predominate, then
either the assumed law is not true in all its details, or there is some
systematic instrumental error.
If the same experiment is taken to have been repeated
inϐinitely, it is correct to assume that the mean value among all does
not differ from the truth.
 
He then classiϐied errors according to their origin (Section 282),
proved the necessity of rejecting the extreme observation (Section 287–
291), estimated the precision of observations (Section 294) using the
divergence of the arithmetic mean of all observations from the
arithmetic mean obtained after having rejected the extreme
observations. He raised also the problem of introducing a statistical
analysis based on the maximum probability that the measured
magnitude would differ the less from the true value (Section 295), he
considered a continuous frequency curve (Section 296), formulated the
principle of maximum likelihood (Section 303) and deduced the
likelihood equation, stating, however, that in most cases the maximum
likelihood estimate will not differ from the arithmetic mean
(Section 306) [182].94
In Chap. 1 Lambert had argued that his three laws of photometry
cannot be veriϐied experimentally separately, but that one of them must
be considered true by hypothesis, essentially because there is not a
photometer that gives an absolute measure of the amount of light, or
rather illumination. The treatment carried out in Chap. 3 allows us to
see these statements in a different light. In effect empirical experience
shows that the three laws, even if they cannot be veriϐied separately,
can in some way be veriϐied simultaneously. Or rather what can be
experimentally veriϐied is that if two sets of quantities (
) and (
) give the same value of the function 
, then the
brightness found is the same. At this point two things are possible. One

can stipulate that 
 is the measure of brightness, intended as the
perceived light; or one can say that 
 actually measures a physical
magnitude, in particular the illumination, or the luminous ϐlux per unit
area; in such a case it is only assumed that the brightness, depends on
the illumination, in the sense that two brightnesses are equal when
their illumination is equal. Lambert seems to opt for this second
possibility.
In Chap. 2, Lambert considered the illumination due to an extended
sources. Reference is made to the sun surface as a practical example.
The question is posed: does elementary surfaces seen with different
angles produce the same illumination? In particular does a particle
located at the center of the sun disk produce the same illumination of a
particle located at the borders? The response is simple and furnished
soon by the examination of Fig. 4.11 which is assumed to represent the
sun disk, where the diameter AB is orthogonal to rays converging
toward the eye of the observer located with his feet on the plane of the
ϐigure. From the ϐigure one can see that the small surface mM on the
boundary of the disk has an apparent surface mn (or pP), thus: “the
increment of illumination proceeding from any element of surface, mM,
is not as the true area of the particle mM, but rather as the apparent, pP,
which covers the solar disk” [137].95
Fig. 4.11 Illumination from elements with different inclinations,
redrawn from [137], Fig. 5 of Table I
Thus, if I is the luminance (light ϐlux per unit of emitting surface),
representative of the number of candles per unit of surface, in the

orthogonal direction, the effective luminance is 
, where 
 is
the angle ADM. The brightness/illumination does not depend only on
the inclination (
) of the radiating surface, but also by the inclination
of the receiving surface (
). With reference to Fig. 4.12, the luminous
ϐlux on the elementary surface dA, or the brightness, due to the
elementary illuminating surface 
 (representative of the area Mm), is
given as:
Lambert did not furnish an explicit expression like this; but expressed it
rhetorically and used as a matter of fact this expression in some
numerical applications he carried out. It should be noticed that the
above relation is a local one, and in principle it allows to evaluate the
total ϐlux that a luminous source of any shape transfers to a receiving
body of any shape, on condition that one knows the distribution of I
and is able to solve a double integral.
Fig. 4.12 Angles of emission and incidences
Lambert Versus Brouguer
In 1758 Lambert had bought a copy of Pierre Bouguer’s Essai d’optique.
He acknowledged his debt to Bouguer’s earlier work as well as to that
of Euler and others, but he had not seen Bouguer’s Traité before his
own Photometria was published. Lambert and Bouguer covered much
the same ground, but their approaches were very different in nature.
Both dealt with photometric measurement of direct, reϐlected and
transmitted light, developed formulae for the attenuation and
dispersion of light in transparent media and applied in the investigation
of light from the sun, planets and stars. Apart from his cosine law for

the intensity of illumination of a surface by an oblique beam of light,
there was little in Lambert’s work that had not also appeared in
Bouguer’s Essai d’optique. There is no doubt that Bouguer was by far
the more inspired experimenter of the two and the originator of many
results that Lambert merely copied from his Essai. Both were adamant
about the primacy of experimental data; they differed in that Bouguer
was vague about his deϐinitions of photometric magnitudes and in
places relied on deduction from a mechanical model in order to predict
his experimental results, whereas Lambert’s theoretical approach was
purely phenomenological and mathematical in nature. Both however,
like so many of their contemporaries, relied unconsciously on an
assumed simplicity in the laws of nature.
The pervasive use of mathematics, and of Calculus in particular, is
one of Photometria characteristic. It was not uncommon however in
optical works, and Bouguer also made use of extensive use of
mathematics, of Calculus too, though to a very little extent. Lambert’s
approach caused that criticisms were raised by experimental physicists
of the time who accused him of being more interested in mathematics
than in photometry [141].96 This is however a criticism that could be
extended to all modern physics where the language of mathematics has
replaced that of traditional experimental philosophers.
There were few, if any, use and appraisal of Photometria for almost a
hundred years from its publication. Only Lambert returned to
photometrical studies twice while he was at Berlin academy of science.
Particularly interesting is what he wrote in 1768 on photometric
aspects of paintings [138]. At the moment there is not a clear picture of
how much Photometria inϐluenced studies carried out by the physicists
of the 19th century [141].97 Photometry was taken up again only in
1854 with the publication of Grundiss des Photometrishen Calcüles
(Outline of photometric calculations) by August Beer (1825–1863)
[32]. In his introduction Beer stated that nothing substantial had been
added to photometry since Lambert’s treatise.
4.3 Electricity as a Paradigm of Experimental
Sciences

The history of studies on electricity is particularly interesting because it
shows the passage that took place in a single century, the 18th century,
from the conception of traditional natural philosophy, in which
electricity was little more than a curiosity—rubbed amber attracted
small pieces of paper or other—to a science and a technology based on
precise mathematical laws that showed the potential of this
phenomenon, fully developed only in the 19th century. As a matter of
fact if the 18th century from a philosophical or political point of view is
considered as the century of the Enlightenment, from the point of view
of science it should be considered the century of electricity.
Of course, even though the 18th century saw a rapid development of
the knowledge of electricity, this did not fall from the above but was a
consequence of a long incubation period, in which though no new
phenomena were discovered, electricity was at the center of the
attention of natural philosophers, experimental philosophers and
mathematicians. Beginning in the second half of the 17th century, new
scholars of the philosophy of nature appeared on the scene who did not
come from universities or academies but were self-taught or had
followed a short period of scientiϐic literacy by attending numerous
seminars then in fashion, or private lessons. Electricity was an
extremely interesting topic for these groups. Although no one caught a
glimpse of technological use, as was the case for other sectors of
physics such as mechanics, hydraulics and optics, and even terminology,
electricity began to present a series of very interesting phenomena,
which sometimes also took a turn that we could deϐine parlor.
It should not be ignored indeed that a substantial contribution to
the positive results in the study of electricity had come from the
pleasant form that the scientiϐic disclosure had taken, particularly
congenial to the spirit of the times, especially in the 18th century. To
cultivate physical and in particular electrical experiences, became a
fashion soon widespread in all elegant European environments to the
point of infecting the same French court. Scholars of the time indulged
with frivolous but spectacular experiments: for example tables
electriϐied secretly, which made sparks emerge from the guests’ forks;
or the electric Venus, the kiss of a lady, electriϐied and isolated, from
whose lips an electric shock was received. With the use of the Leiden
jar, a condenser which allowed a more violent discharge, it also leaded

to mass shocks: in the real presence, the academician Louis-Guillaume
Le Monnier (1717–1799) electriϐied 140 courtiers, overtaken by
Antoine Nollet with 180 gendarmes in the royal gardens, and 200
Cistercians in their convent.
If these behaviors arouse our perplexity it should be remembered
that the spirit of the time required that even the most serious
arguments were treated with ϐinesse and elegance. At that time the
scientiϐic cabinets were not far from the living room and even very
strict scholars felt he need to address their readers by introducing
scientiϐic arguments with gallant tales. After all the results encouraged
them, as testiϐied by the Italian and European fortune of the Il
newtonianismo per le dame of 1737 [7], the original work by Francesco
Algarotti (1712–1764) on Newtonian optics, in which the author made
rococo lightness coexist with the anxiety of philosophical renewal.
4.3.1 Early Theories About Electricity
In the following few sections I will try to summarize the main
contributions of the 17th century to electricity which were very
numerous. Every philosopher of nature who dealt with the problem
proposed his own explanation. The purpose of this section cannot be
that of referring a complete account of the various approaches, for
which one can make reference to excellent past and present histories,
such as for instance [122, 171]. It is rather to give a general idea of the
way the study of electricity was subtracted to traditional natural
philosophers to pass into the hand of experienced experimenters with a
mathematical background more or less profound who mostly avoided
metaphysical considerations. To this end I will brieϐly summarize the
ideas of some of the protagonists. These were characters that according
to modern categories are classiϐiable as philosophers of nature but not
of scholastic style and in some way heretics: William Gilbert, Niccoló
Cabeo and Descartes. All three followed in some way a natural
philosophy of Aristotelian mould. Gilbert maintained the ideas of form
and substance, but made an extensive recourse to experience. Cabeo
approached a substantially mechanicistic conception of nature and
made an important use of mathematics. Descartes, who ofϐicially
declared himself an enemy of the philosophical approach of schools,
still moved within the traditional framework of the philosophy of

nature with the fundamental objective of the search for (mechanical)
causes.

4.3.1.1 Mechanical Efϔluvium Theories
William Gilbert 
The ofϐicial entrance of electricity into natural philosophy as a subject
worthy of interest by scholars can be rooted in the De magnete by
William Gilbert published just at the beginning of the 17th century
[103]. Gilbert’s argumentations can today be classiϐied as natural
philosophy, although the importance given to experience, also to
contrived experiments, was fundamental. Independently of the fact one
wanted to consider Gilbert as a “revolutionary hero” or a “moderate
peripatetic and not above plajarizing those he critics”, the De magnete is
a milestone and affected either positively or negatively the ideas of the
17th century in electricity and magnetism.
Electricity is dealt with in Chap. II of Book I of the De magnete,
devoted in particular to the behavior of amber. Here it is distinguished
from magnetism at the ontological level:
In all bodies everywhere are presented two causes or principles
whereby the bodies are produced, to wit, matter and form
[emphasis added]. Electrical movements come from the materia,
but magnetic from the prime forma; and these two differ widely
from each other and become unlike, the one ennobled by many
virtues, and prepotent; the other lowly, of less potency, and
conϐined in certain prisons, as it were [103].98 (D.15)
Gilbert had to differentiated sharply the pure bond of sympathy uniting
iron and lodestones from the promiscuous behavior of amber. The
distinction was crucial; a sympathy should be mutual and shared
between two similar objects, while the attraction of amber is toward
many objects of different kind. According to the principle that no action
can be executed by matter except by contact—a part from sympathy—a
principle accepted both by corpuscularians and scholastics,
Gilbert deduced that a material bond should exist between the excited
electric body and the attracted chaff.
Gilbert claimed that the attractive property of amber belongs to a
wide variety of different substances such as common glass, sulfur, resin,

precious stones and wax; and this was an important achievement of his.
He observed that all these substances were almost hard and
transparent and therefore, for the ideas of that time, formed by
consolidation of watery liquids. Thus, he concluded that the common
menstrum of these liquids must be a particular humor, whose
possession explained the electrical properties.
Friction might be supposed to warm or otherwise excite and
liberate the humor, which would then issue from the body as an
efϐluvium and form an atmosphere around it. The efϐluvium, meeting
light objects produces the union commonly (but improperly) known as
an electrical attraction. The ‘attraction’ is explained by an analogy; all
bodies, said Gilbert,  are cemented together by moisture; wet bodies on
the surface of water attract one another when sufϐiciently close, and
drops of water on a dry surface unite when contiguous, thus the electric
humor acts similarly to water by joining the various parts of chaff
among them and to the electric body.
Below the description of the causal explanation of the electric
attraction:
Therefore the efϐluvium called forth by a friction that does not
clog the surface—an efϐluvium not altered by heat, but which is
the natural product of the electric body—causes unition and
cohesion, seizure of the other body, and its conϐluence to the
electrical source [...]. The efϐluvia spread in all directions: they
are speciϐic and peculiar, and sui generis, different from the
common air; generated from humor; called forth by caloriϐic
motion and rubbing, and attenuation; they are as it were
material rods—hold and take up straws, chaff, twigs, till their
force is spent or vanishes; and then these small bodies, being set
free again, are attracted by the earth itself and fall to the ground
[103].99 (D.16)
Niccoló Cabeo
Nicoló Cabeo (1586–1650) was a disciple of Giuseppe
Biancani (1566–624) and professor at Parma and Genoa. His most
successful treatises were Philosophia magnetica, in qua magnetis natura
penitus explicatur, et omnium quae hoc lapide cernuntur, causae propriae

afferuntur of 1629 [42] (hereinafter Philosophia magnetica) and a
commentary on Aristotle’s Meteorologica, Commentaria in libros
meteorologicorum in 1646 [43] (herein after Commenatria) which was
reedited posthumous in 1686 with the title Philosophia experimentalis.
The Commentaria was actually an original presentation of the
physics of terrestrial phenomena based on observations and
experiments. As in other works of this type by Jesuit authors, elements
of experimental physics were integrated along with Aristotelian
doctrine. Cabeo separated physica, as he called natural philosophy, from
metaphysics and mathematics, both of which he considered speculative.
For him physica is concerned with the sensible only.
Substantial forms were the main target of Cabeo’s attack on
metaphysics. The common conception of forms as essences was
mistaken, according to Cabeo; for him forms were real, physical,
material entities, namely spirits and vapors with powers and virtues.
What Aristotle called form, and what some considered metaphysical, is
in fact a speciϐic type of body. It is a spirit, a vapor that consists of small
particles of matter and contains active forces that order the world
[156].
Cabeo had referred about electricity in his Philosophia magnetica, a
text that though modeled on Gilbert’s De magnete, contained many and
interesting new experiments. According to him for the earlier opinions
about the cause of electrical attraction, only Gilbert’s, was found worthy
of examination, though he also was largely unsatisfactory. Whatever
attraction is, it does not involve a humor that cements all things: “These
are words introduced for eloquence, not for explaining the cause and
method of attraction” [42].100 Experiment shows that some things
concreted of humor—metals and certain gems, for example—do not
attract; and that others, which contain no more humor—like glass and
other gems—do. In any case, for Cabeo, Gilbert’s watery efϐluvia cannot
act as put across. Fluids adhere in proportion to their viscosity; since
cohering glass plates separate more easily in air than under water, they
should separate still more easily in a subtle humor [42].101 What then
causes the attraction between ϐloating sticks that Gilbert saw as the
prototype of electrical interactions?
Cabeo distinguished four species of attractions. First was the
standard sympathy which he accepted as the cause of magnetic action.

Then came attraction by gravity or levity, through which a body tends
towards its place by a native quality. The third attraction operated
when bodies moved to ϐill a vacated place, or rareϐied air condenses.
Finally there was proper attraction, by which one body draws a second
through others conjoined, as in pulling a boat with a rope [42].102 It is
the third kind of attraction which was implicated in electrical
phenomena.
According to Cabeo, friction opens pores of the electric body to
streams of subtle efϐluvia, which beat back and rarefy the surrounding
air; the air returns to re-establish its former density, driving light
bodies before it. This resemble Plutarch’s theory toward which
Galileo also inclined “Amber, diamond, other joys and very dense
materials, heated, attract light corpuscles, and this is because they
attract the air in cooling down, and the air blows to the corpuscles”
[101].103
Cabeo observed that chaff attracted by a large ϐlat electric body
tends to go to the edges, a consequence, he said, of the concentration
there of the efϐluvia projected from the center of the body. In other
experiments attracted sawdust particles adhered to one another to
form a thread. Cabeo thought that the wild ϐluctuations of the far ends
of these threads, from which particles occasionally ϐlew off, were an
ocular demonstration of the suppositious aerial motions [122].104
Moreover, Cabeo observed that a strongly electriϐied body
sometimes drew scraps of iron or wood with such force that they
rebounded to a distance of three or four inches [42].105 On the strength
of this remark he has been sponsored as the discoverer of electrostatic
repulsion. He did not however consider that he had found anything
novel; on the contrary, he saw in this ‘repulsion’ conϐirmation of his
mechanism of attraction, indeed were sticky efϐluvia (as supposed by
Gilbert) the agent of electricity, drawn bodies could never rebound, but
once arrived must remain attached as Gilbert wrongly said they did.
René Descartes and the Cartesians
Descartes  considered a parochial argument that related to electricity
and treated it very shortly in his Principia; just after a long discussion
on magnetism. Descartes explanation was not very different from those
of Gilbert and Cabeo. But while the last two did not explain in detail the

mechanism of attraction, Descartes did, even though his explanation
may bafϐle a modern reader.
According to Descartes the electric matters such as amber, wax,
resin, glass etc, have all the same property of glass; a product of ϐire
which makes the constituent third-element particles, smooth and plane
so that they can adhere. There are of course intervals between parts of
the third-element, which are mostly long, so that only the middle of
these intervals is wide enough to give passage to parts of the second
element which make transparent the glass. What remains of these
intervals are small slots, so narrow that there is nothing but the ϐirst
element that can occupy them. It is to notice, concerning this ϐirst
element, whose property is to take the ϐigure of the places where it is,
that while it ϐlows by these small slots, the less agitated parts of it join
and make up strips that are very thin, but which have a bit of breadth
and come spinning around all the parts of the glass, without ever to get
away from it, because the passages they ϐind in the air, or in the other
bodies that surround it, are not adjusted to their measure, to receive
them [83].106 When one rubs the glass strongly enough, so that it
warms up a little, these strips are driven out of their pores and are
forced to go to the air and other bodies around, where not ϐinding pores
so ϐit to receive them they go back to the glass, and bring with them
feathers or others small bodies [83].107
Descartes’s disciples followed his approach by giving electricity
scarce relevance and repeating substantially master’s arguments. This
is also true about Jacques Rohault  in his physical treatises Traité de
physique of 1671 and System of natural philosophy of 1723, the famous
English translation of the Traité with notes by Samuel Clark.  Below as
Rohault explained the reason of electricity; he did not use the same
terminology as Descartes and his explanation is more didactical, but the
main assumptions are the same.
Suppose, said Rohault, that there is a certain matter, which is, very
subtle continually moving in the smallest pores of the electric bodies
and that it comes from the center to the surface where it is reϐlected
inwards by the resistance of the air which it then meets with. Now
when these bodies are rubbed this gives a sufϐicient force to the subtle
matter contained in them, to overcome the resistance of the air and to
extend itself to a little distance all round them; but because the subtle

matter cannot go very far without losing some of its force, the agitation
and circulation of the air will drive it back and force it to return and
enter into some of the pores which it came out of, and where other
matter cannot so conveniently enter, because it is not so well
proportioned to the bigness and ϐigure of those pores. Thus in amber,
for example, that has been rubbed, a great number of the particles of
the subtle matter, like so many ϐine threads, too small to be seen, come
out of it and dart themselves in to the air, where meeting with small
bodies, they get in to the pores of them and then return back into the
amber; at the same time, the air continually repelling these small
threads, and forcing them to contract themselves into less and less
compass, presses likewise in the same manner upon the light bodies
into the pores of which these small threads have thrust themselves; so
that in returning back to the amber they carry small straws, in whose
pores they are engaged along with them [176].108
Neither Huygens devoted much attention to electricity; he started to
have some interest only since 1672, under the inspiration of Otto von
Guericke’s (1602–1686) work with the sulphur sphere. Some notes of
Huygens’ studies of 1692-93 are collected in his Oeuvres. Below an
explanation of the attraction of a ϐlock of wool by an electriϐied amber
(which had replaced Guericke’s sulfur) sphere, based on the
assumption of vortices:
Evidently a certain vortex of invisible matter surrounds the ϐlock
of wool, which vortex originates in and is transmitted by that set
up about the sphere [of amber] by rubbing. The vortices impede
and prohibit the ϐlock’s motion towards the sphere. But once the
ϐinger is removed or because of some other disturbance, the
ϐlock accesses the sphere [130].109 (D.17)
Huygens also recognized electrostatic repulsion; for him two ϐlocks
each having acquired a vortex from the sphere will repel each other
without a previous attraction.
4.3.1.2 Fluid Theories
Gilbert,  Cabeo and Descartes  assumed a similar mechanism: by
rubbing an electric body an efϐluvium comes out and acts on light

bodies so that they tend to join the electriϐied body; the efϐluvium then
reenters the electriϐied body.
Other explanations of electricity were however possible. Of
particular relevance are those suggested by Newton. He assumed the
existence of an electric spirit which, for reason unknown to us, is
endowed with attractive forces. Newton’s ideas on the matter are
spread in many writings, drafts of the Principia and Optics, glosses and
in the alchemical writings, largely unexplored, as it has ϐinally become
clear to the 20th century historians. Here there is no room to discuss
Newton’s opinions on electricity, that can be found in recent literature
[118, 119, 125, 166, 195] and only some quotations where he described
the properties of his electric spirit are referred to. Instead of the well
known quotations from the Queries of the Opticks and the general
scholium of the Principia, less known but very explicit writings are
referred to.
Below an interesting comment from Newton’s Second paper on
colors and light of 1675 (read at meetings of the Royal society, but
never printed in the Philosophical Transactions):
And as this condensed matter by rarefaction into an aetherial
wind (for by its easy penetrating and circulating through glass I
esteem it aethereal) may cause these odd motions, and by
condensing cause electrical attraction with its returning to the
glass to succeed in the place of what is there continually
recondensed; so may the gravitating attraction of the earth be
caused by the continual condensation other such like aethereal
spirit, not of the main body of phlegmatic aether, but of
something very thinly and subtilly diffused through it, perhaps
of an unctuous or gummy, tenacious, and springy nature, and
bearing much the same relation to aether, which the vital aereal
spirit, requisite for the conservation of ϐlame and vital motions,
does to air [36].110
So by rubbing an electric body the aetherial (electric) spirit is issued
from it as a wind, which by reaching nearby bodies makes them to be
moved toward the body by its condensation and its unctuosity. A not

dissimilar picture from Gilbert’s, of whom Newton knew the De
magnete [195].
The possibility for an electric aether and its properties, are better
speciϐied in the following quotation, drawn from a draft of Query 31 of
the Opticks:
There are therefore Agents in Nature able to make the particles
of bodies attract one another very strongly & to stick together
strongly by those attractions. One of those Agents may be the
Aether above mentioned whereby light is refracted. Another
may be the Agent or Spirit which causes electrical attraction. For
tho this Agent acts not at great distances except when it is
excited by the friction of electrick bodies: yet it may act
perpetually at very small distances without friction, & that not
only in bodies accounted electrick but also in some others. And
as there are still other mediums which may cause attractions,
(such as are the Magnetick efϐluvia); it is the business of
experimental Philosophy to ϐind out all these Mediums with
their properties [119].111
The idea of an electric ϐluid (that is a not inert ϐluid such as water, but
endowed with a power) was pursued further after Newton death,
framed in a more general context of ancient philosophy and alchemy for
which many physical phenomena were attributed to some ϐluids. An
important representative of them was heat, conceived by many
physicists and chemists of the 18th century as a ϐluid substance and no
longer associate to the agitation of elementary particles (return to
Aristotle?). After Boherhaave studies of 1720s of chemical nature, in
particular after the publication of his Elementa Chemie in 1732, where
heat was understood in terms of a ϐluid (ϐire), even electricity started to
be associated to ϐluids. Two main theories should be evidenced, that of
two ϐluids, published by Robert Symmer in 1759 and that one ϐluid
developed ϐirst by William Watson and then by Benjamin Franklin in
1746–1747.
The theories of two ϐluids is well summarized by Priestley in his The
history and present state of electricity, with original experiments of 1771.
Symmer assumed that there were two different electric ϐluids, or

emanations of two electric powers, essentially different from each
other; that electricity does not consists in the afϐlux and efϐlux of these
ϐluids, but in the accumulation of the one or the other of them in
electriϐied bodies; or, in other words, it consists in the possession of a
larger portion of one or the other power, what is requisite to maintain a
balance within the body; and lastly, that, according as the one or the
other power prevails, the body is electriϐied in the one or the other
manner. According to Symmer, the principle of two distinct electrical
powers, upon due consideration, do not disagree with the general laws
of nature. It is one of the fundamental laws of nature, that action and
reaction are inseparable and equal; and, when one looks round, he ϐinds
that every power which is exerted in the material world meets with a
counteracting power, which controls and regulates its effects, so as to
answer “the wise purposes of providence” [171].112
Let us suppose that the friction of any electric body produces a
separation of these two ϐluids, causing, in the usual method of
electrifying, the vitreous electricity of the rubber to be conveyed to the
hand and the resinous electricity of the hand to be conveyed to the
rubber. The rubber will then have a double share of the resinous
electricity, and the conductor a double share of the vitreous; so that no
substance whatever can have a greater or less quantity of electric ϐluid
at different times. The quality of it only can be changed [171].113
Franklin, following Watson, assumed electricity due to one ϐluid
only. He recognized however that there were two different kinds of
electriϐication, the one associated to an excess of electric ϐluid and the
other associated to a defect of electric ϐluid, to which Franklin referred
to as positive or negative electriϐication respectively. Below there is the
description that Franklin himself gave of his theory.
1.
The electrical matter consists of particles extremely subtle,
since it can permeate common matter, even the densest
metals, with such ease and freedom, as not to receive any
perceptible resistance.
 
2. Electrical matter differs from common matter in this, that the
parts of the latter mutually attracts, those of the former
mutually repel, each other. Hence the appearing divergency in
a stream of electriϐied efϐluvia.
 

3.
But though the particles of electrical matter do repel each
other, they are strongly attracted by all other matter.
 
4.
In common matter there is (generally) as much of the
electrical, as it will contain within its substance. If more is
added, it lies without upon the surface, and forms what we call
an electrical atmosphere: and then the body is said to be
electriϐied [94].114
 
Fluids have the properties of conserving; thus electricity or charge
(Franklin term) conserves. When a piece of resinous body, such as
amber, is electriϐied by rubbing it at one extremity, the electric ϐluid
which is subtracted from this extremity is restored from the other
extremity by the hand of the man rubbing the amber. Indeed being the
hand and the body of the man a conductor they can receive electric
ϐluid from the ground which contains an enormous amount of it. This is
what is called pumping effect.
A modern reader probably could not pronounce about the theories
of one electric ϐluid or two electric ϐluids, because the present
conception is a merging of the two. Today it is thought that there are
two different kinds of electricity, the positive one associated to protons
and the negative one associated to electrons, and this is in accord with
the theory of two ϐluids. Only electrons can however move, and this is in
accord with the theory of one ϐluid, whose particle are the electrons.
Notice that there is an inversion in the nomenclature. While according
to Franklin an excess of electric ϐluid gives a positively charged body;
today a body with an excess of electrons is named negatively charged;
this because the resinous electricity, that today is characterized by an
excess of electrons, was in the past considered deprived of ϐluid electric
and then negatively electric.
4.3.2 Some Elements in the History of
Electricity in the 18th Century

The present section does not want to report a history of electricity, even
though largely summary. The goal is only to provide sufϐicient elements
for the understanding of the following sections in which the
relationship between natural-philosophy-epistemology-mathematics of
some of the protagonists of the electricity history is explored.
The development of electricity in the 18th century is not only
characterized by its rapid growth but also by its modalities in
particular:
1.
Many of the contributors did not have an academic
background.
 
2.
This fact was made possible by the afϐirmation of the
experimental philosophy that had almost entirely replaced the
traditional natural philosophy.
 
3.
By the development of a bourgeoisie that had enough spare
time and also an entrepreneurial mentality.
 
4.
By the diffusion of the experimental philosophy outside the
academic sphere with cycles of lectures.
 
Below I will provide a brief comment on these points. The following
Table 4.3 lists the electricians of the 18th century according to their
profession during the years 1700–1790; from it is clear the relevance of
not professional researchers.
Table 4.3 Electricians by professions 1700–1790. Taken from [122], p. 99
 
 
1700 00–39 40–49 50–59 60–69 70–79 80–89
A. Jesuits
7
 
6
6
6
6
1
Univ. profs.
4
 
4
1
1
4
1
College profs.
1
 
2
4
4
2
 
B. Academicians
3
1
4
10
4
5
10
Big three
1
1
4
10
3
3
5
Others
2
 
 
 
1
2
5
C. Professors
4
10
31
22
16
29
25
Universities
4
9
24
18
11
23
15

 
 
1700 00–39 40–49 50–59 60–69 70–79 80–89
Colleges
 
1
7
4
5
6
10
D. Lecturers
3
4
4
2
2
3
3
E. Others
10
5
43
32
19
28
40
Britain
5
5
22
14
11
15
13
Elsewhere
5
21
18
8
13
27
 
TOTALS
27
20
88
72
47
71
79
a Salaried only, except for associate at AS
b Paris, Berlin, Petersburg
c Exclusive of Jesuits
According to Priestley,   the history of electricity before Coulomb,
can be divided into 10 periods [171]:
I
Before the ϐirst important discoveries of the 18th century.  
II
Experiments of Francis Hauksbee,  Isaac Newton’s lab
assistant.
 
III
The experiments of Stephen Gray who discovered the
transmission of electricity at distance.
 
IV
Experiments and discoveries of Charles François de
Cisternay Dufay who discovered that electricity comes in two
forms which he called resinous and vitreous.
 
V
The continuation, and conclusion of the experiments of
Stephen Gray.
 
VI
The experiments of John Theophilus Desaguliers.
 
VII
The experiments of the Germans and of William
Watson, before the discovery of the Leyden jar in the years
1745–1746.
 
VIII From the discovery of the Leyden jar in the 1745 and 1746,
to Benjamin Franklin discoveries. The methods used by the  

1600
1660
1675
1705
1729
French and English physicists, to measure the distance to
which the electric shock can be carried, and the velocity with
which it passes. Experiments on animal and other organized
bodies in this period and other experiments connected with
them, made chieϐly by Antoine Nollet. The history of the
medicated tubes, and other communications of medicinal
virtues by electricity.
IX
The experiments and discoveries of Franklin himself. The
discoveries concerning the Leyden jar, and others connected
with them.
 
X
From the time that Franklin made his experiments in
America, till the year 1766.
 
4.3.2.1 Time Table of the Main Achievements on
Electricity
 
William Gilbert (1544–1603) ϐirst diffused the term electricity
(electrica) and electric from the Latin word electrum for amber
(electricus, ‘of amber’) and Greek (
).
Otto von Guericke (1602–1686) invented a machine, a rotating
sulphur sphere, that produced static electricity.
Robert Boyle (1627–1691) discovered that electric force could
be transmitted through a vacuum and observed attraction and
repulsion.
Francis Hauksbee (1660–1713) discovered that rubbing a glass
ball, evacuated of air in order to build up a charge, a glow was visible at
distance if he placed his hand on the outside of the ball. This effect later
became the basis of the gas-discharge lamp, which led to neon lighting
and mercury vapor lamps. Hauksbee clearly showed that the bodies
previously attracted could then be rejected, but he did not associate the
fact with repulsion of similarly charged bodies.
Stephen Gray (1666–1736) discovered the transmission of
electricity at distance and existence of two kinds of matter, today

1733
1745-6
1746
known as insulator and conductor, terms introduced by Desaguliers in
1742, though in a not technical way. He also enlarged the list of
material that could be electriϐied [82].115
Charles François de Cisternay Dufay (or Du Fay) (1698–1739), a
polymath member of the Académie des sciences de Paris, discovered
that electricity comes into two forms which he called resinous and
vitreous. Similar electricities repel, different electricities attract. What
now seems a simple fact conϐirmed by experience was not yet well
recognized. Until then there was a shared idea that electriϐied bodies
attract small pieces of matter and the repulsion which was sometimes
observed could always traced back to attraction. Dufay also found that
every body can acquire electriϐication, except metals and substances
too soft or ϐluid to rub. Differently from the English electricians,
Dufay was an educated man. Fontenelle said that he was the only man
of his time to submit contributions to the Académie in any ϐield then
object of study; anatomy, astronomy, botany, chemistry, geometry,
mechanics and general physics. According to Heilbron,
Dufay’s substantive discoveries: the sequence attraction-contact-
repulsion, the two kind of electricities, shocks and sparking, are but
one aspect and perhaps not the most signiϐicant, of his achievement.
His insistence on the universal character of electricity, on the necessity
of organizing known facts before grasping for new ones, all helped to
introduce order at precisely the moment when the accumulation of
data about electricity began to require them. He found the subject a
record of often capricious, disconnected phenomena, the domain of
polymaths, textbook writer, and professional lecturers, and left it a
body of knowledge that invited and rewarded prolonged scrutiny from
serious professional physicists [122].116
Ewald Jürgen Georg von Kleist (1700–1748) and Pieter van
Musschenbroek (1692–1761) with Andrea Cunaeus ‘invented’ the
Leyden jar the ϐirst electrical capacitor.
William Watson (1715–1787) proposed one ϐluid theory. He
likened the agent of electricity to an aether whose particles act upon
one another over microscopic distances, and upon ponderable bodies
by impact. He presented his theory in the A sequel to the experiments
and observations tending to illustrate the nature and properties of

1747
electricity of 1746 [194]. Watson concluded his treatise in the style of
Newton’s Opticks with a series of queries (ten); some of them are
summarized below: (1) Wether or not electrical attraction and
repulsion be attributed to the ϐlux of an electrical aether? (2) Wether or
not electricity or electrical aether may be elementary ϐire? (3) Wether
or not this elementary ϐire may appear in different forms; as air when
diffused over a large surface, as lambent ϐlame when brought towards a
point. Wether or not does it explode and become the object of feeling
as well of our hearing? (4) Wether or not is this ϐire always intimately
connected with all bodies at all times? (6) May its elasticity be inferred
from empirical observations? (7) May an electrical machine be called a
ϐire-pump in the same sense that the instrument of Otto Guericke and
Mr. Boyle is called an air-pump and the aether is not generated by the
machines but pumped from the ground? (8) Does the separation of ϐire
from bodies by motion, and its restoration to them after that motion
has ceased, causes us to incline that ϐire is an original, a distinct,
principle, a substance, formed by the Creator himself, as
s’Gravesande and Boherhaave believed, rather than mechanically
producible from other bodies, as believed by Boyle and
Newton besides others scholars? [194].117
Benjamin Franklin (1706–1790), an American polymath and
one of the founding fathers of the United States. A leading author,
printer, political theorist, politician, freemason, postmaster, scientist,
inventor, humorist, civic activist, statesman, and diplomat. As a
scientist, he was a major ϐigure in the American Enlightenment and the
history of physics for his discoveries and theories regarding electricity.
To be precise he was considered as a great natural philosopher in
Europe, while in America he was mostly famous as a state man and an
inventor.
Franklin was not the uneducated self made man as often he is
portrayed. Youth he received a good scientiϐic training and surely read
Newton’s Opticks [66].118 Eighteenth he went to England and made the
acquaintance of a number of ‘scientists’, among them Henry
Pemberton  (1694–1771), who was then preparing—under Newton’s
direction—the third edition of the Principia.
His ϐirst studies in electricity are documented in the Experiments
and observations in electricity made at Philadelphia in America,

published for the ϐirst time in 1751 [94]. It consists in a series of
letters, mostly to Peter Collison (1694–1768) a botanist fellow of the
Royal society. There were ϐive English edition of the letters. The fourth
one, of 1769, is the ϐirst complete editions and also contains some
other writings by Franklin [97]. There were also three French editions,
and one in German and Italian as well.
Franklin took inspiration from Watson for his general one ϐluid
theory; however even Newton could have been of inspiration. Below an
interesting comparison between the properties of Franklin ϐluid and
Newton’s aether
It is a little remarkable, that the electric ϐluid, in this, and in
every other hypothesis, should so much resemble the ether of
Sir Isaac Newton in some respects, and yet differ from it so
essentially in others. The electric ϐluid is supposed to be, like
ether, extremely subtle and elastic, that is, repulsive of itself;
but, instead of being, like the ether, repelled by all other matter,
it is strongly attracted by it; so that, far from being, like the
ether, rarer in the small than in the large pores of bodies, rarer
within the bodies than at their surfaces, and rarer at their
surfaces than at any distance from them; it must be denser in
small than in large pores, denser within the substance of bodies
than at their surfaces, and denser at their surfaces than at a
distance from them. But no other property can account for the
extraordinary quantity of this ϐluid contained within the
substance of electrics per se, or for the common atmospheres of
all excited and electriϐied bodies [171].119
One more idea Franklin took from Watson was that of electric pump.
That is that electricity produced by an electric machine, for instance, is
not created but driven from ground.
An example of esteem enjoyed by Franklin is given by the great
Swedish electrician Johan Carl Wilcke (1732–1796)  wrote in his
preface to his German translation of Franklin’s text in 1759. According
to Wilcke, the elaboration of the theory of electricity is the chief part of
Franklin’s work even though its principles were not the invention of
Franklin. Indeed all these may already be discovered in other works

1752
written earlier and with which, according to Franklin’s own statement,
he was familiar. Still, continued Wilcke, great credit must be given to
Franklin. For not only did he clarify them, but he also applied them
with ingenuity to the discharging-or shock experiments which are
generally associated with the names of Leyden and of
Musschenbroek. These hitherto had no natural explanation which
could be considered as a proof. If he advanced thereto by means of a
triϐle too artiϐicial, still his explanations are less artiϐicial than others
still more incredible [66, 96].120
A comparison between Newton and Franklin was not uncommon,
and is still such. Franklin was considered by many the Newton of
electricity. On the similarity between Newton and Franklin, are of the
interest the considerations by I. Bernard Cohen [66]. In recognition of
his work with electricity, Franklin received the Royal society’s Copley
Medal in 1753 and in 1756 he became one of the few 18th-century
Americans elected as a Fellow of the society. He received honorary
degrees from Harvard and Yale universities.
Benjamin Franklin ‘invented’ the lightning rod and
demonstrated that lightning was electricity. He proposed an
experiment to prove that lightning is electricity by ϐlying a kite in a
storm that appeared capable of becoming a lightning storm. On May 10,
1752, Thomas-François Dalibard (1709–1778) of France conducted
Franklin’s experiment using a 40-foot tall (
 m) iron rod instead of
a kite, and he extracted electrical sparks from a cloud. On June 15,
1752, Franklin may possibly have conducted his well-known kite
experiment in Philadelphia, successfully extracting sparks from a
cloud. This account was read at the Royal society and printed as such in
the Philosophical Transactions [95]. Franklin was careful to stand on
an insulator, keeping dry under a roof to avoid the danger of electric
shock [57]. Others, such as Georg Wilhelm Richmann (1711–1753) in
Russia, were indeed electrocuted in performing lightning experiments
during the months immediately following Franklin’s experiment.
Franklin’s electrical experiments led to his invention of the
lightning rod, for which he is famous, even though as often occurs in
history of inventions there is the possibility Franklin was not the ϐirst
to actually introduce the lightning rod. The exact non-Franklin origins
of the lightning rod are hotly debated, see for instance [127].

1753
John Canton (1718–1772), a London schoolmaster, was to
become the leading English Franklinists of the 1750s. He discovered
that clouds could become electriϐied positive and negative
independently of Beccaria and Franklin. In 1753 he published in the
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society a seminal paper,
Electrical experiments, with an attempt to account for their several
phaenomena, together with observations on thunder clouds with the
declared purpose to study the nature of electricity in the clouds [45].
Here he presented a series of experiments (9), that are now considered
the proof of the electrostatic induction (modern term). Today we refer
to electrostatic induction, as a modiϐication in the distribution of
electric charge on one material, typically a conducting one, under the
inϐluence of nearby objects that have electric charge. Thus, a negatively
(positively) electriϐied body A brought near an electrically neutral body
B induces a positive (negative) electricity on the side in front to it and a
negative (positive) one on the far side. B, furthermore, becomes
charged positively (negatively) in all its parts if its negative (positive)
side is grounded. With the phenomenon of induction nearly any
behavior of electrostatics then known could be accounted for: the
Leyden jar, the condenser, the electrophore and so on.
But for Canton and his contemporaries, the result of the
experiments he presented was seen simply as a new and curious
phenomenon: bodies could be electriϐied without getting in touch. It
will be only Aepinus in 1759 who explained the phenomenon using the
same principles adopted today, but his results were not accepted at the
moment, and various and not always convincing explanations were
given for many years.
Below only the ϐirst two of Canton’s experiments are discussed,
which though simple, represent the essence of the phenomenon of
induction. In the ϐirst experiment, two very tiny balls of cork or brass
were suspended from the ceiling by conducting threads so that they
were close to each other. Canton found that bringing an electriϐied
(positively) glass tube three or four feet (1.22 m) below the balls
caused a separation. Bringing the glass tube closer caused them to
separate further. Finally, on removing the tube altogether, the cork balls
come together again. In the second experiment the two balls were
suspended by insulating threads of silk. Canton found that in this case

1759
1759
1785
the electriϐied glass tube had to be brought much closer within
eighteen inches (50 cm) from the balls before they repelled each other.
Furthermore, the repulsion continued for some time after the tube had
been taken away [45].121 Similar phenomena occur if a wax tube
(negatively electriϐied) is used.
Canton explanation derived from Franklin’s theory and is only
partially in agreement with modern explanations. It is indeed such, or
not very different, for the case of electriϐied wax. In such a case,
according to Canton,  when the excited stick of wax is brought near the
balls suspended by conducting threads, the electric ϐluid comes from
the ceiling through the threads into the balls, and condensed there,
because it is attracted by the negatively charged wax which wants
electric ϐluid. When the wax is withdrawn, the balls, being grounded,
return to their natural (that is, neutral) state. For a glass electriϐied
tube, the explanation of Canton is far from that given today, which
would be specular to the previous one. Canton assumed than when the
atmosphere of the positively electriϐied glass comes close to the cork
balls, some electric ϐluid is assumed by the balls that becomes
electriϐied positively and thus repels. The reason of this asymmetrical
explanation is not given by Canton, but it must be probably searched in
the difϐiculty existing in Franklin’s theory to explain the repulsion of
negatively electriϐied bodies.
Robert Symmer (1707–1763), educated at the university of
Edinburgh, where he took a belated M.A. in 1735, proposed the theory
of two electric ϐluids: “I confess it was unlucky that I felt myself obliged
to use, in some respect, the same terms that Mr. Franklin and others,
who follow his system, make use of, while there is an essential
difference in the things meant by them and by me. By the terms
positive and negative, they mean, as in algebra, simply plus and minus.
By the same terms I mean two distinct powers (both of them in reality
positive) but acting in contrary directions, or counteracting one
another” [121].122
Franz Ulrich Theodor Aepinus published his Tentamen theoriae
electricitatis et magnetismi, the ϐirst mathematical and rigorous
treatment of static electricity.

1786
1800
Charles Augustin Coulomb (1736–1806) published his paper on the
inverse square law for electric charges.
Luigi Galvani (1737–1798) demonstrated what is now
understood to be the electrical basis of nerve impulses when he made
frog muscles twitch by jolting them with a spark from an electrostatic
machine.
Alessandro Volta (1745–1827) invented the ϐirst electric
battery. Volta proved that electricity could travel over wires.
  In the previous time table two important characters of the science of
electricity in the 18th century are missing: Antoine Nollet and Henry
Cavendish. The former because, though one of the most famous
electrician of the 18th century, he was more a science communicator
than a creative person, this is at least the shared view. The latter
because, notwithstanding he was a brilliant mathematician and
experimenter in many ϐield of physics, most of his writings remained
hidden in his drawer, and if published were not noticed as due.
Cavendish’s writings were rediscovered and printed by Maxwell  a
century later; also his inϐluence on the contemporary is reevaluated.
Henry Cavendish, (1731–1810), considered today the greatest
experimental and theoretical English chemist and physicist of his age,
was also famous as a wealthy man. Cavendish was distinguished for
great accuracy and precision in researches and measurements into the
composition of atmospheric air, the properties of different gases, the
synthesis of water, the law governing electrical attraction and
repulsion, a mechanical theory of heat, etc. Below an efϐicient portrait
Among eighteenth-century British natural philosophers,
Cavendish stands out for the sustained intensity of his inquiry
into the workings of nature. Simply put, his life was about
natural philosophy. First and foremost, natural philosophy was
his work. Not ordinarily thought of as an occupation, natural
philosophy offered him an activity of a kind that was compatible
with his aristocratic position in the wider society. It opened for
him a career of public service fully as absorbing as traditional
careers in politics and government, the military, religion, law,

and medicine. With his career came fellowship. Inordinately shy
in public, Cavendish came together with a limited society with
which he could make human contact [158].123
Of him only two papers on electricity were published, in 1771, the An
attempt to explain some of the principal phaenomena of electricity, by
means of an elastic ϔluid [55] and in 1776, the Attempts to imitate the
effects of the torpedo [56]. But they did not fail to impress those who
read them, with his great mastery of theory and experiments. Of the 20
parcels of (unpublished) papers on electricity 18 belong to the years
1771, 1772, 1773; the remaining are dated 1775, 1776 [85].124
To note that in ϐifty years Cavendish devoted to sciences, in only ϐive
was he occupied with electricity. His tastes and interests were
extraordinarily varied; apart from his contribution to electricity he
made important contributions to chemistry, gravitation, heat,
magnetism and meteorology. His most known result is the
determination of the weight of the earth or, equivalently, the value of
the universal gravitational constant, published in the memoir
Experiments to determine the density of the earth of the Philosophical
Transactions of 1798 [57]. His experiment to weigh the earth has come
to be known as the Cavendish experiment.
In the paper of 1771, the only to be commented here,
Cavendish following the same line of research traced by Aepinus, but
“as I have carried the theory much farther than he has done, and have
considered the subject in a different, and, I ϐlatter myself, in a more
accurate manner, I hope the society will not think this paper unworthy
their acceptance” [55].125
In his paper Cavendish assumed as a principle (hypothesis) of his
theory that attractions-repulsions between particles of electric ϐluid
and between particles of ordinary matter vary according to the same
function of the distance.
Or, to express it more concisely, if you look upon the electric
ϐluid as matter of contrary kind to other matter, the particles of
all matter, both those of the electric ϐluid and of other matter,
repel particles of the same kind, and attract those of a contrary

kind, with a force inversely as some less power of the cube
[emphasis added] [55].126
Notice that the word hypothesis is emphasized as the title of a
paragraph. Thus Cavendish recognized, very honestly, that his theory is
based on an assertion non-veriϐiable directly through experiments; only
the consequences can. However, the acceptance of a not directly
veriϐiable assumption is common to all the theories of electricity of the
time: from Franklin to Aepinus to Nollet; only they were not explicit on
the fact. One more thing to notice is that Cavendish did not make the
hypothesis that the force varies as the inverse square but a more
general hypothesis (inversely as some less power of the cube). This in
the footprint of Newtons that in the Principia studied different forms
for the laws for the centripetal force.
In Part 1 of his paper Cavendish laid down the theory of the electric
ϐluid; in Part 2 he compared the propositions he found with known
experiments: “I have now considered all the principal or fundamental
cases of electric attractions and repulsions which I can think of; all of
which appear to agree perfectly with the theory” [55].127
In Proposition 5 (Problem 1) of Part 1 he assumed as a special case
the inverse square law for the electric force. The proposition proofs
that in a conducting sphere the electric ϐluid at the equilibrium should
be located on the surface, or equivalently that no electric ϐluid could be
inside [55].128 In Proposition 6 (Problem 2) Cavendish assumed the
case of electric force varying with a law different from the inverse
square. He confessed not to be able to furnish a general solution, but
suggested that in such a case there could be electric ϐluid inside the
sphere.
Cavendish extended these results to the case of conducting bodies
with any shape, even though he stated his result in a dubitative form by
asserting:
From the four foregoing problems it seems likely, that if the
electric attraction or repulsion is inversely as the square of the
distance, almost all the redundant ϐluid in the body will be
lodged close to the surface, and there pressed close together, and
the rest of the body will be saturated. If the repulsion is

inversely as some power of the distance between the square and
the cube, it is likely that all parts of the body will be
overcharged: and if it is inversely as some less power than the
square, it is likely that all parts of the body, except those near the
surface, will be undercharged [55].129
These propositions were not considered as particularly interesting
by the readers of the 1771 paper. A different reaction would have been
obtained if the same readers could have read further papers, where
Cavendish returned to his propositions and made accurate
measurements of electricity inside an electriϐied spherical surface, by
ϐinding a vanishing electric ϐluid, a part from experimental errors and
thus giving an indirect proof that electric attraction is inversely as the
square of the distance. Cavendish results’s can be found in his writing
collected by Maxwell in 1879 [58, 59].
To carry out his experiment Cavendish took the globe G of Fig. 4.13,
12.1 (30 cm) inches in diameter,130 and suspended it by a solid stick ss
of glass run through the middle of it as an axis, and covered with
sealing-wax to make it a more perfect non-conductor of electricity. He
then enclosed this globe between two hollow pasteboard hemispheres
(H and h), 13.3 (34 cm) inches in diameter, and about 1/20 of an inch
(1 mm) thick, in such a manner that there could hardly be less than
4/10 (1 cm) of an inch distance between the globe and the inner
surface of the hemispheres in any part, the two hemispheres being
applied to each other so as to form a complete sphere. The inner globe
and the hemispheres were both coated with tinfoil to make them the
more perfect conductors of electricity.

Fig. 4.13 Cavendish’s apparatus to prove that electricity is logged on the surface of a conducting
body [58], p. 106
A communication was made by a piece of a conducting wire run
through the hemispheres and touching the inner globe, a piece of silk
string being fastened to the end of the wire, by which it could be drawn
out at pleasure. The hemispheres were electriϐied by the positive side of
a Leyden jar, and then immediately the wire which made
communication between the inner and the outer globes was drew out
by the silk string. Then the two hemispheres were instantly separated.
The result was, that though the experiment was repeated several times,
neither the pith balls of the electroscope Tt (see Fig. 4.13, bottom)
separate nor any signs of electricity is shown in the globe G [58].131
These are Cavendish conclusions:
The 1st experiment shews that when a globe is electriϐied the
whole redundant ϐluid therein is lodged in or near its surface,

and that the interior parts are entirely, or at least extremely
nearly, saturated, and consequently that the electric attraction
and repulsion is inversely as the square of the distance, or to
speak more properly, that the theory will not agree with
experiment on the supposition that it varies according to any
other law [59].132
In his writings Cavendish also gave an estimate of the experimental
errors he could have done, so giving credence to his statement. By
referring to his sophisticated experimental apparatus and the precision
with which he could measure the absence of electric ϐluid inside a
conductor, he could assert: “We must therefore conclude that the
electric attraction and repulsion must be inversely as some power of
the distance between that of the 
th and that of 
th”
[58].133
To be honest, what Cavendish was authorized to assert is that if the
electric force varies as 
, the exponent n should be close to 2; but the
possibility remains that the force could vary in another arbitrary way
with r, for instance according to a not algebraic function.
Jean Antoine Nollet (1700–1770) one of the great popularizers of
the new electrical science in the salons and at the court of 18th-century
France, studied humanities at the Collège de Clermont in Beauvais,
starting in 1715. He completed a master’s degree in the faculty of
theology at the university of Paris in 1724. Nollet was particularly
interested in the new science of electricity. He assisted Dufay, especially
with electrical experiments and travelled with him in 1734 to meet
physicists in England and in 1736 in the Netherlands. He was a member
of the Royal society of London from 1735 (as resulting from the ofϐicial
list of fellows of the Royal society). In 1739 he became adjoint
mécanicien of the Académie des sciences de Paris and in 1742 associé
mécanicien. From at least 1743, this academy identiϐied Nollet as the
person who was particularly in charge of research about electricity. In
1753 he became the ϐirst professor of experimental physics in France.
But whatever low the merits of Nollet as an electrician could have
been, the world of science owes him a debt of gratitude. He was a
master showman and the success of his public demonstrations of

electrical phenomena stimulated interest in the subject. He was
particularly well known in the world of physique du salon, the
presentation of physics experimenting with elegant ladies of the French
court.
Nollet was the great contender of Franklin, not so much at personal
level but at a philosophical one. There was a profound clash between
the theories of the two antagonists: the Cartesian (Nollet) and the
Newtonian (Franklin), intending these labels mainly as representing
mechanicistic explanation (ultimate causes) versus force explanation
(proximate causes). A proliϐic writer, Nollet published many papers on
electricity, some of them were devoted to a frontal attack to
Franklin. The sixth volume of his famous Leçons de physique
expérimentale, published in six volumes between 1743 and 1748 and
reprinted many times [163], contains a vast accumulation of curious
and ingenious experiments. Most of them were spectacular and they
could entertain as well as instruct a courtly audience (Fig. 4.14).
Nollet theory of electricity is expressed in eighteen fundamental
propositions in Chap. 21 of the sixth volumes of the Leçons de physique
expérimentale. The propositions postulate on the existence of a subtle
matter which penetrates all bodies, with different degrees of ease. It is a
ϐluid which can be compared with elementary ϐire and light. An
electriϐied body emits rectilinear divergent rays of electric ϐluid but
simultaneously receives convergent rays of the same electric ϐluid,
these are two characterizing principles: efϐluence and afϐluence. Bodies
have two typologies of pores one for the emission of electric ϐluid, the
other for receiving it, however the returning ϐluid was not necessarily
that very matter ϐluid had left the electriϐied body. Yet, independently of
the number of pores, some bodies at some times have a stronger
current of efϐlux than of afϐlux, and hence there may be both resinous
and vitreous electriϐication [163].134


Fig. 4.14 Electricity for the dames [162], Frontpage.
Reproduced with the permission of ETH-Bibliothek Zürich, Alte und Seltene Drucke
As clear from previous exposition, Nollet’s theory is Cartesian
rather than Newtonian; indeed the electric ϐluid is not elastic and
repelling in the sense of Newton’s aether, but was more like the inert
elementary matter of Descartes (Fig. 4.15).
Nollet’s theory was considered very tortuous by Priestley, who
commented it as follows: “A man of less ingenuity than the Abbé could
not have maintained himself in such a theory as this; but, with his fund
of invention, he was never at a loss for resources upon all emergencies,
and in his last publication appears to be as zealous for this strange
hypothesis [emphasis added] as at the ϐirst” [171].135

Fig. 4.15 Electricity for the dames [162], pl. 4, p. 216.
Reproduced with the permission of ETH-Bibliothek Zürich, Alte und Seltene Drucke

4.3.2.2 Memoirs on Electricity Published in the
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
of London
A large body of the experimental (and theoretical) researches on
electricity of the 18th century was reversed on the Philosophical
Transactions. Table 4.4 refers to all papers on electricity published in
the ϐirst half of the century; Table 4.5 refers instead to a selection of
papers of the second half of the century, when the researches on
electricity had growth enormously.
Table 4.4 Papers on electricity of the ϐirst half of the 18th century (52 papers over 300). The
dates are according to the calendar adopted in England at the times
1708
Hauksbee 
An account of some experiments, touching the electricity and light producible on
the attrition of several bodies
1720 Gray
An account of some new electrical experiments
1731 Gray 
A letter to Cromwell Mortimer,  containing several experiments concerning
electricity
A letter concerning the electricity of water, from Mr. Stephen Gray to Cromwell
Mortimer 
A letter from Mr. Stephen Gray to Dr. Mortimer, containing a farther account of his
experiments concerning electricity
Two letters from Mr. Stephen Gray, to Dr. Mortimer,  containing farther accounts of
his experiments concerning electricity
1733
Dufay 
A letter from Mons. Du Fay to his grace Charles duke of Richmond and Lenox,
concerning electricity
1735 Gray 
Experiments and observations upon the light that is produced by communicating
electrical attraction to animal or inanimate bodies, together with some of its most
surprising effects
A letter from Stephen Gray to Dr. Mortimer, containing some experiments relating
to electricity
An account of some electrical experiments intended to be communicated to the
Royal society by Mr. Stephen Gray, taken from his mouth by Cromwell
Mortimer the day before he died
1739
Desaguliers 
Some things concerning electricity
An account of some electrical experiments made before the Royal society
Electrical experiments made before the Royal society
Several electrical experiments, made at various times, before the Royal society

1739
Wheler 
Some electrical experiments, chieϐly regarding the repulsive force of electrical
bodies
1739
Wheler
An account of some of the electrical experiments made by Granvile Wheler, at the
Royal society’s house, on May 11 1737
1739
Wheler
A letter from Granvile Wheler to Dr. Mortimer, containing some remarks on the late
Stephen Gray. His electrical circular experiment
1739
Desaguliers 
Some thoughts and experiments concerning electricity
An account of some electrical experiments made before the Royal society on
thursday the 16th of February 1737–8
An account of some electrical experiments made at his Royal highness the prince of
Wales’s house at Cliefden, on Tuesday the 15th of April 1738. Where the electricity
was conveyed 420 feet in a direct line
1742
Desaguliers
Some further observations concerning electricity
Some conjectures concerning electricity, and the rise of vapours
1744
Wintler 
Abstract of what is contained in a book concerning Electricity
1744 Miles 
A letter from the reverend Henry Miles, to Mr. Henry Baker, of ϐiring phosphorus by
electricity
A letter from the reverend Henry Miles to the president; containing observations of
luminous emanations from human bodies, and from brutes; with some remarks on
electricity
1744
Watson 
Experiments and observations, tending to illustrate the nature and properties of
electricity.
1746
Watson
A continuation of a paper concerning electricity
1746
Watson
A sequel to the experiments and observations tending to illustrate the nature and
properties of electricity; in a letter to the Royal society from the same
1746 Miles 
Extracts of two letters from the rev. Henry Miles to Mr. Henry Baker, concerning
the effects of a cane of black sealing-wax, and a cane of brimstone, in electrical
experiments
1746
Watson 
Further experiments and observations, tending to illustrate the nature and
properties of electricity
1746 Miles
Extracts of two letters from Henry Miles, to Mr. Henry Baker containing several
electrical experiments
1746
Trembley 
Part of a letter from Mr. Trembley, to Martin Folkes, concerning the light caused by
quicksilver shaken in a glass tube, proceeding from electricity
1746 Miles 
Part of a letter from Dr. Miles, to Mr. Henry Baker concerning electrical ϐire
A letter from Dr. Miles to Mr. Baker concerning the electricity of water
A letter from Dr. Miles to Mr. John Ellicot of weighing the strength of electrical
efϐluvia

Part of two letters from Henry Miles, to Mr. Henry Baker, containing some electrical
observations
1746
Winkler
  An extract of a letter from Mr. John Henry Winkler to a friend in London;
concerning the effects of electricity upon himself and his wife
1746
Robins 
A letter to Mr. Benj. Robins, shewing that the electricity of glass disturbs the
mariners compass, and also nice balances
1746
Needham 
Of a letter from Mr. Turbervill Needham to Martin Folkes, concerning some new
electrical experiments lately made at Paris
1746 Le
Monnier 
Of a memoir concerning the communication of electricity; read at the public
meeting of the Royal academy of sciences at Paris, Nov. 12. 1746. By Monsieur le
Monnier the younger, M.D. of that academy, and F.R.S. Communicated by the author
to the president of the Royal society
1746
Browning 
Part of a Letter from Mr. John Browning, of Bristol, to Mr. Henry Baker, dated Dec.
11. 1746. Concerning the Effect of Electricity on Vegetables
1746
Watson 
Observations upon so much of Monsieur Le Monnier the younger’s memoir, lately
presented to the Royal society, as relates to the communicating the electric virtue
to non-electrics
1748
Watson 
A collection of the electrical experiments communicated to the Royal society by Dr.
Watson, read at several meetings between October 29 1747 and Jan. 21
1748
Nollet 
Part of a letter from abbé Nollet, of the Royal academy of sciences at Paris to
Martin Folkes, concerning electricity
1748
Ellicott 
Several essays towards discovering the laws of electricity, communicated to the
Royal society by Mr. John Ellicott and read on the 25th of Feb. 1747. And at two
meetings soon after
1748 Baker A letter from Mr. Henry Baker F. R. S, to the president, concerning several medical
experiments of electricity
1748
Roche 
A Letter from Mr. Robert Roche to the president, of a fustian frock being set on ϐire
by electricity
1748 Hales Of a letter from the Dr. Stephen Hales to Mr. Westly Hall, concerning some electrical
experiments
1748
Watson 
An account of the experiments made by some gentlemen of the Royal society, in
order to measure the absolute velocity of electricity; communicated to the Royal
society
1749 Bose 
Of a letter from Mr. Matthias Bose, of Wittemberg, to Mr. W. Watson on the
electricity of glass, that has been exposed to strong ϐires
1749
Watson 
A letter from Mr. Watson, F. R. S. to the Royal society, declaring that he as well as
many others have not been able to make odours pass thro’ glass by means of
electricity; and giving a particular account of professor Bose at Wittemberg his
experiment of beatiϐication, or causing a glory to appear round a man’s head by
electricity
1749
Nollet 
Of a letter from the Abbe Nollet, to Charles Duke of Richmond accompanying an
examination of certain phaenomena in electricity, published in Italy, by the same

Table 4.5 Main papers on electricity of the second half of the 18th century (45 papers over 300)
1752
Watson 
An account of Mr. Benjamin Franklin’s treatise, lately published, intituled,
Experiments and observations on electricity, made at Philadelphia in America
1752
Watson
An account of Dr. Bianchini’s Recueil d’experiences faites à Venise sur le medicine
electrique
1752
Watson
An account of professor Winkler’s experiments relating to odours passing through
electrised globes and tubes
1752
Nollet 
Two letters of the abbé Nollet to Mr. William Watson, relating to the extracting
electricity from the clouds
1752
Watson
An account of the phaenomena of electricity in vacuo, with some observations
thereupon.
1752
Franklin 
A letter of Benjamin Franklin; to Mr. Peter Collinson, concerning an electrical kite
1753
Nollet
An account of a treatise, presented to the Royal society, intituled, “Letters
concerning electricity; in which the latest discoveries upon this subject, and to the
consequences which may be deduced from them, are examined
1753
Wilson 
A letter to the right honourable the earl of Macclesϐield, president of the Royal
society, from Mr. Benjamin Wilson, concerning some electrical experiments, made at
Paris
1753
Canton 
Electrical experiments, with an attempt to account for their several phaenomena;
together with some observations on thunder-clouds
1753
Winkler 
A letter from John Henry Winkler, professor of natural philosophy at Leipsic, and
fellow of the Royal society, to Thomas Birch, secretary of the Royal society, relating
to two electrical experiments
1753
Canton 
A letter to the right honourable the earl of Macclesϐield, president of the Royal
society, concerning some new electrical experiments, by John Canton 
1753
Nollet
An account of a treatise, presented to the Royal society, intituled, Letters concerning
electricity; in which the latest discoveries upon this subject, and to the
consequences which may be deduced from them, are examined
1753
Winkler
A letter from John Henry Winkler, professor of natural philosophy at Leipsic, and
fellow of the Royal society, to Thomas Birch, secretary of the Royal society, relating
to two electrical experiments
1755
Franklin 
Electrical experiments, made in pursuance of those by Mr. Canton, dated Decem. 3,
1753
1755
Franklin 
Extract of a letter concerning electricity, from Mr. B. Franklin to Mons. Delibard,
inclosed in a letter to Mr. Peter Collinson
1757
Franklin 
An account of the effects of electricity in paralytic cases
1759
Wilson
A letter from Mr. Benjamin Wilson, to the Rev. Tho. Birch

1759
Symmer 
New experiments and observations concerning electricity
1759
Beccaria 
Experiments in electricity
1759
Wilson
Farther experiments in electricity
1759
Wilson 
Experiments on the Tourmaline
1759
Wilson
Farther experiments in electricity
1761
Canton 
A letter from John Canton, to Benjamin Franklin, containing some remarks on Mr.
Delaval’s electrical experiments
1761
Nollet,
Watson
An account of a treatise in French, presented to the Royal society, intituled, letters
sur l’electricité
1761
Wilson
Observation upon some gems similar to the tourmalin
1761
Canton 
A letter from John Canton to Benjamin Franklin, containing some remarks on Mr.
Delaval’s electrical experiments
1763
Wilson 
A letter from Mr. B. Wilson to Mr. Aepinus 
1764
Calandrini 
Observations upon the effects of lightning, with an account of the apparatus
proposed to prevent its mischiefs to buildings, more particularly to powder
magazines; being answers to certain
1767
Lane 
Description of an electrometer invented by Mr. Lane; with an account of some
experiments made by him with it
1768
Priestley 
An account of rings consisting of all the prismatic colours, made by electrical
explosions on the surface of pieces of metal
1769
Priestley 
Experiments on the lateral force of electrical explosions
1771
Priestley 
An investigation of the lateral explosion, and of the electricity communicated to the
electrical circuit, in a discharge
1771
Cavendish 
An attempt to explain some of the principal phaenomena of electricity, by means of
an elastic ϐluid
1772
Priestley 
An account of a new electrometer, contrived by Mr. William Henly, and of several
electrical experiments made by him
1773
Wilson 
Observations upon lightning, and the method of securing buildings from its effects:
In a letter to Sir Charles Frederick
1776
Cavendish 
An account of some attempts to imitate the effects of the torpedo by electricity

1776
Cavallo 
Extraordinary electricity of the atmosphere observed at Islington on the month of
October, 1775
1777
Cavallo
An account of some new electrical experiments
1777
Cavallo
New electrical experiments and observations; with an improvement of Mr. Canton’s
electrometer
1780
Cavallo 
An account of some new experiments in electricity, with the description and use of
two new electrical instruments
1788
Cavallo
Of the methods of manifesting the presence, and ascertaining the quality, of small
quantities of natural of artiϐicial electricity
1788
Cavallo
Description of a new electrical instrument capable of collecting together a diffused
or little condensed quantity of electricity
1788
Cavallo 
Of the methods of manifesting the presence, and ascertaining the quality, of small
quantities of natural of artiϐicial electricity
1797
Pearson 
Experiments and observations, made with the view of ascertaining the nature of the
gaz produced by passing electric discharges through water
1800
Volta 
On the electricity excited by the mere contact of conducting substances of different
kinds
4.3.3 A Representative of British Electricity.
Stephen Gray
British contribution to electricity, especially in the experimentation,
was fundamental in the 18th century. The Philosophical Transactions
published a huge number of papers on electricity, attracting also the
contributions from the Continent. A short list of British electricians
helps to understand the scale of the phenomenon: Francis Hauksbee
(1660–1713), Stephen Gray (1666–1736), Robert Symmer (1707–
1763), Benjamin Wilson (1712–1788), William Watson (1715–
1787), John Canton (1718–1772), Henry Cavendish (1731–1810),
Joseph Priestley (1733–1804); to them one can add the American
Benjamin Franklin (1706–1790). Below I will discuss only the
contribution of Stephen Gray, which is probably the most important
because he opened the main stream.
Stephen Gray (1666–1736) was an intriguing ϐigure in the history of
physical science in the 18th century. He is given great credit for his
discovery that electrical effects can travel long distances over suitable
‘lines’ (which gives him the best of all claims to being the father of

electrical communication). The content and quality of his other
scientiϐic works have remained substantially unknown; moreover only
a few hints about his biography is available; below I refer a summary of
what is referred to in [61, 65, 122]. The son of a dyer and brother to a
dyer, carpenter and grocer, he was born in Canterbury where he lived
until 1706. He had a fair education, including enough Latin to puzzle
out Scheiner’s Rosa ursina; it is not known at what extent he knew
about mathematics, in particular of Calculus. He may have studied in
London or Greenwich for a time, perhaps under the astronomer John
Flamsteed, a friend of his. Gray belonged to the category of amateur, in
the sense that he pursued his researches in his spare time and without
earning a living with them; in any case he was from many points of
view an educated man in scientiϐic matter. From the beginning Gray’s
scientiϐic work was characterized by astronomical observations under
Flamsteed and won him the regard of the scrupulous. Much earlier, a
few (11) consecutive papers, some of them very short, mainly on
optical and astronomical topics were published on the Philosophical
Transaction of the Royal Society of London between 1696 and 1706
[65].
Meantime his trade had become too strenuous and Gray managed
for the admission to the Charterhouse, a foundation established as a
day school for poor boys and a home for eighty gentlemen pensioners;
his request was eventually accepted in 1719. As an inmate of the
Charterhouse he would have time to pursue his inquiries relating to
astronomy and navigation and might happily ϐind out something that
might be of use. Shortly after his admission to the Charterhouse
Gray showed the Royal society his ϐirst paper on electricity [109]. The
paper was the only communications by Gray printed during Newton’s
presidency of the Royal society. The coincidence of Gray’s silence and
Newton’s tenure has prompted the suggestion that Newton, who
disliked Flamsteed, deliberately muzzled his protege, who however was
appreciated by Newtonians like John Keill and Brook Taylor. 
4.3.3.1 Electriϔication of Bodies
I will comment only Gray’s two memoirs on electricity published in the
Philosophical Transactions. The ϐirst of 1721, reported his experiences
of electriϐication that led to an enlargement of the list of electrical

materials, such as amber, the second ten years later, in 1731, that
proved that electricity can be transmitted at distance. Gray published
some other interesting memoirs in the Philosophical Transaction, three
still in 1731 as a continuation of his experiments [110, 111, 113] and
another in 1735 [114].
The memoir of 1721, An account of some new electrical experiments,
of only four pages, classiϐiable with the categories of Peter Dear as a
historical account, made almost no reference to theories concerning the
nature of electricity, but only reported the results of the experiments,
which proceed gradually, going from simple to more complex; result of
the latter was suggested as a hypothesis by the former. Gray started
from an observation that is presented as a random achievement. The
feathers that had been attracted to an electriϐied glass tube, after the
tube was removed behaved as an electriϐied material. With his words:
“Having often observed in the Electrical Experiments made with a Glass
Tube, and a Down Feather tied to the end of a small Stick, that after its
Fibres had been drawn towards the Tube, when that has been
withdrawn, most of them would be drawn to the Stick, as if it had been
an Electrick Body, or as if there had been some Electricity
communicated to the Stick or Feather” [109].136
These experiments provided an opportunity to verify if other
materials than feathers could be electriϐied; in various ways by rubbing
with hand, by heating before rubbing and also without rubbing. In the
end Gray gave a list of substances he called electrical bodies; his paper
ends with the words: “An Enumeration of the several Bodies mentioned
herein, that we found to be Electrical: 1. Feathers, 2. Hair, 3. Silk, 4.
Linnen, 5. Woollen, 6. Paper, 7. Leather, 8. Wood, 9. Parchment, 10. Ox-
Guts [109].137 These materials, Gray pointed out, apart from being
electriϐiable have another property which is common to glass; when
they are rubbed in the dark a light follows the ϐingers when they are
moved.
It must be said that Gray’s memoir did not differ much from the
contributions to the Philosophical Transactions of the early 1700s, in
which the results of the most varied experiments were reported, some
which today would be considered pure curiosities. The only timid
reference that Gray made to the theories of electricity is when he talked
about the electriϐication of paper: “ϐinding them, after they are well

heated before rubbing, to emit copiously their electric efϐluvia”
[109],138 a phenomenon far to be veriϐied experimentally.
Gray was more expansive, in a long letter to Hans Sloane (then
secretary of the Royal society), of 1707, referring the results of some
experiments on electricity:
Exp. 12th. or rather an addition to the second139 if when the
feather has left the Glass the hand or any other solid object be
placed betwixt it and the Glass it will Return back to meet it and
ϐix upon it provided the hand be nearer to it than any other
object. I made this Experiment in order to conϐirm or overthrow
my ϐirst Hypothesis concerning the Reason of this Phenomenon
viz that Electricity Proceeded from an Emission and Reϐlection
of its own Efϐluvia by external objects but this is contradicted by
the now mentioned Experiment. I have therefore thought on an
other Hypothesis, which at Present Seems to me somewhat
more probable, that as all bodies Emitt soe they Receive part of
the Efϐluvia of all other bodies that Inviron them and that the
attraction is made according to the current of these Efϐluvia but
then how rubing the Glass though it may cause a more copious
and swift Eruption of the Efϐluvia yet that it should in like
manner affect other distant bodies is hard to conceive. I am
therefor far from thinking what I here offer is an Entire solution
of the Phenomena this I must leave to the consideration of the
Learned [emphasis added] [60].140
Gray ϐirst hypothesis ascribed the feather behavior to a mixture of
ϐlows, one direct from the tube, the other reϐlected from neighboring
objects. The adherence of a hovering feather to a large object placed
between it and the tube contradicts this hypothesis and consequently
he suggested another one.
The ϐinal sentence in italic in the above quotation is a formula used
many times by Gray (and Hauksbee ); probably an indication of their
feeling of cultural inferiority, but also a lack of interest in the
formulation of not veriϐied hypothesis.
4.3.3.2 The ‘Transmission’ of Electric Virtue

Of a very different tenor, perhaps not in the method, but in the results is
his work published in 1731, A letter to Cromwell Mortimer, M. D. Secr. R.
S. containing several experiments concerning electricity, which refers to
experiments carried out mainly in 1729. The result of these
experiments is summarized brieϐly by Gray at the beginning of his
work:
In the Year 1729 I communicated to Dr. Desaguliers, and some
other Gentlemen, a Discovery I had then lately made, shewing
that the Electrick Vertue of a Glass Tube may be conveyed to any
other Bodies, so as to give them the same Property of attracting
and repelling light Bodies, as the Tube does, when excited by
rubbing; that this attractive Vertue might be carried to Bodies
that were many Feet distant from the Tube” [112].141
This result is often presented by historians as the discovery of the
transmission of electricity, neglecting to specify that Gray was studying
electrostatic phenomena in which there is no electric current to
transmit.
Also in this paper the experiments followed one another with small
variations in a way that they seem completely natural, starting from a
result that is presented as a casual observation, similar to what
Gray had done in his work of 1721:
I then resolved to procure me a large Flint-Glass Tube, to see if I
could make any farther Discovery with it, having called to Mind a
Suspicion which some Years ago I had, that as the Tube
communicated a Light to Bodies, when it was rubbed in the
Dark, whether it might not at the same Time communicate an
Electricity to them, though I never till now tried the Experiment,
not imagining the Tube could have so great and wonderful an
Inϐluence, as to cause them to attract with so much Force, or that
the attraction would be carried to such prodigious Distance, as
will be found in the Sequel of this Discourse [112].142
The starting fortuitous event was the observation of the cork, which
closed an electriϐied glass tube (see Fig. 4.16a), that attracted a feather

as the tube itself did. In reality the experience described in the above
quotation could not be completely fortuitous. The phenomenon
described by Gray could not be noticed by a person who had no
laboratory experience and who had not even the slightest idea about
the acquisition of attractive power. In reality Gray had a basic theory,
which conceived the propagation of the electric virtue as an efϐluvium
coming out of the electriϐied body to reach the neighboring bodies. A
theory certainly not new but that Gray had made his own since his ϐirst
studies on electricity and that in the 1730s presented as if it were a
new acquisition, certainly with a rhetorical device.
This idea of ‘transmitting’ the electric virtue is likely to underlie his
idea of a medium to transmitting it from one body to another. From a
strictly physical point of view this idea is not coherent; it is would have
been more logical to consider the glass tube and the corks as a single
body; the only peculiarity being the particular shape that this assembly
of two bodies would have. This is the criticism made by Priestley to
Gray: “This experiment shews that Mr. Grey had not properly
considered the line of communication and the body electriϐied by it, as
one and the same thing, in an electrical view, differing only in form, as
they were both alike conductors of electricity [171].143
It is necessary to reϐlect, that although Gray presented his results as
if he were writing a diary with a faithful account of what happened, also
recording some failures, his exposition has a rhetorical character. Surely
his experiment is not accidental as he wrote and perhaps it was not
even been attempted by him ϐirst; it is a phenomenon that many
experimenters have observed. Gray reϐlected critically on it and
formulated some hypotheses about what could happen by making small
variations of the experiment.
As already noticed, Gray’s observation that the glass tube
communicates his electric electricity to the cork that is able to attract a
feather presented to it, was an opportunity for a series of experiments
with the aim of verifying how far the electrical property of the tube
could be transferred. But before these experiments Gray presented his
‘electrostatic generator’. It was a very slender tube, 3 feet and 5 in.
(about 104 cm) long with a diameter of 2 in. and 2/10 (about 5.6 cm),
which is electriϐied by rubbing it with bare hands. The tube is closed at

both ends by two corks to prevent dust from entering, which would
compromise the experiments (Fig. 4.16a).
Fig. 4.16 Different arrangement of the tube and the receivers of electricity.
Modiϐied from [186], Appendix
Gray with his experiments had the aim of determining in a
systematic way to which bodies the attractive virtue could be
communicated. He also wanted to know how far he could pass on this
property. After a preliminary test, he put a wooden stick 4 in. long
(about 10 cm) into the hole made in an ivory sphere with a diameter of
1 in. 3/10 (3.3 cm). The other end of the stick was inserted into the
cork, in turn stuck in the glass tube; notice that Gray’s work is not
accompanied by ϐigures so it is impossible to accurately reconstruct the
conϐiguration of the apparatus he used. Figure 4.16b should fairly
faithfully describe the conϐiguration used in these early experiments.
When he rubbed the tube, he observed that the ivory ball was attracting
the feather more vigorously than did the cork. The length of the stick was
then increased up to 24 in. (60 cm) and found that the attraction
continued to be observed. He then replaced the wooden stick with iron
and brass cables observing the same effects. He noticed that though the
wire was closer to the cork its attracting power was not so strong as

that of the ball [112]. Later, Gray increased the length of the cables
up to 3 feet (90 cm), but at that point he observed many vibrations
caused by the rubbing of the pipe that made the attractions hardly
observable.
Then the ivory ball was hung to the tube by a metal string, iron or
brass, according to what illustrated in Fig. 4.16c. When he rubbed the
tube, the ivory ball attracted and repelled brass leaves under it, which
Gray tended to replace to the feather. The same happened when he
attached a ball of cork to the string and then an iron ball of 1 pound 1/4
(about 570 g). Following these procedures, he was able to communicate
the electricity of the rubbed tube to different bodies connected to it
with strings that were thus able to attract the brass leaves, for example
a half-penny, a piece of block-tin, a piece of lead to ϐire-shovel, a copper
tea-kettle or empty or full with water and so on, a chimney scoop, an
empty or full of water copper teapot, a silver mug. He had ϐinally
managed to get metals to attract light bodies. No one had been able to
achieve this effect in the 2000 years since the discovery of electricity
“and so Gray succeeded at least in awaking their hidden electricity”
[122].144 Gray continued his research activity using ivory, ϐlint-stone,
sand-stone, load-stone, bricks, tiles, chalk and also several vegetable
substances, as well green or dry [112].145
From May 1729 he continued his experiments in the country; some
were made at Norton-Court with John Godfrey (nephew of John
Flamsteed), some others at Otterden-Place with Granvil Wheler (1701–
1770), a worthy member of the Royal society. With Godfrey he got
positive results with a rod 24 ft (about 7,3 m) long, connected to the
glass tube. Even at this great distance a cork ball placed at the end of
the rod attracted a brass leaf when the tube was rubbed. Gray extended
this length up to 32 ft (nearly 10 m), including the tube [112].146 But
once again the vibrations caused by the rubbing of the tube disturbed
the experiment. He then decided to attach a string again to the tube to
hold a sphere of cork or ivory, as in Fig. 4.16c. When Gray rubbed the
tube, he could make the sphere attract the brass leaf even when the
string used was 26 ft (8 m) long and had been suspended by him
outside a balcony.
Later, he tried to increase the length of his device in the horizontal
direction. First he made a loop at each end of two lines, and hanging

one (BC of Fig. 4.16d) on a nail drove into a beam, the other line AD
passed through the hook in B; the part BA of the line AD hanging
downwards, supported the ivory ball at the end A; the other end D of
AD was connected to the tube by a loop. Then the leaf-brass being laid
under the ball, and the tube rubbed, yet not the least sign of attraction
was perceived upon this. Gray concluded with the following
explanation:
When the Electrick Vertue came to the Loop that was suspended
on the Beam, it went up the same to the Beam; so that none, or
very little of it at least, came down to the Ball [112].147
It is possible that Gray suspected that something might not work. He
had probably already had some experience of transmitting horizontally
with a rope suspended from multiple strings that came down from the
ceiling. The arrangement of Fig. 4.16d serves to highlight the simpler
experimental situation to test the transmission of electric virtue: a
horizontal line BD is suspended by a wire CB to the ceiling.
Gray explained the failure of the transmission, by saying that the
electric virtue was absorbed by the beam (which in modern language is
seen as earth), coming close to the modern explanation.
In June 1729 Gray decided to continue the experiments with his
friend Granville Wheler, with a small solid glass cane of about 11 in.
(28 cm) long and 7/8 in. (2 cm) of diameter. Operating from a window,
after rubbing the small glass cane with wires from 16 ft (4.9 m) to 34 ft
(10.4 m) suspended from the cane, they got that the leaf-bras was
attracted and repelled beyond what they expected.
According to Gray’s narrative Wheler was desirous to try whether
they could carry the electric virtue horizontally:
I then told him of the Attempt I had made with that Design, but
without Success, telling him the Method and Materials made use
of, as mentioned above. He then proposed a Silk Line to support
the Line, by which the Electrick Vertue was to pass. I told him it
might do better upon the Account of its Smallness; so that there
would be less vertue carried from the Line of Communication,
with which, together with the apt Method Mr. Wheler contrived,

and with the great Pains he took himself, and the Assistance of
his Servants, we succeeded far beyond our Expectation [112].148
The ϐirst experiment of the horizontal transmission was made in the
matted gallery July, 1719 in the morning. About four feet from the end
of the gallery there was a cross line that was ϐixed by its ends to each
side of the gallery by two nails; the middle part of the cross line was
silk, the rest at each end packthread; then the line to which the ivory
ball was hung, and by which the electric virtue was to be conveyed to it
from the tube, being eighty feet and a half in length (25 m, about), was
laid on the cross silk line, so as that the ball hung about nine feet (2.7
m) below it; then the other end of the line was by a loop suspended on
the glass cane and the leaf-brass held under the ivory ball on a piece of
white paper. When the tube was rubbed, the ivory ball attracted the
leaf-brass and kept it suspended for some time [112].149
Figure 4.16e illustrates the disposition. The cross line of silk is
represented by the circle S in grey (it is a cross section), the packthread
is connected from one side to the tube, from the other side to a ball.
Gray believed that the success of the experiment was due to the fact
that the line was supported by a very thin thread, without giving weight
to the fact that it was made of silk.
By using the silk support and making the packthreads made laps,
the two friends managed to transmit the electric virtue up to 293 ft (90
m). Attempting a longer line caused the silk support to break. They then
made attempts with supports of more resistant material, in particular
brass wire always very thin to avoid, in the idea of Gray, the
transmission of virtue to the gallery. With some surprises and though
the tube was well rubbed, yet there was not the least motion or
attraction given by the ivory ball, neither with the great tube which was
used when the small solid tube was found ineffective.
This time Gray was forced to believe that it was not so much the
subtlety of the support to prevent the dispersion of the electric virtue;
it was rather the kind of material:
By which we were now convinced, that the Success we had
before, depended upon the Lines that supported the Line of

Communication, being Silk, and not upon their being small, as
before Trial I imagined it might be [112].150
The fact that there were materials that allowed the transmission of the
electric virtue and other that did not was a very important discovery by
Gray in the memoir of 1731. Though less striking than the transmission
through long distances it involved the very nature of matter.
By using more than one silk support in order to reduce the effort
they sustained, Gray and Wheler managed to transmit the electric
virtue up to 765 ft (236 m), “and the attraction was not less
perceivable” [112].151
A part silk Gray found that other substances could be used as
support such as hair, glass and resin, while as receiver of the electric
virtue he found soap bubbles in water, a map of the world, an umbrella.
And also a person; an amazing experiment experiment that will be
repeated in bourgeois salons. Here how this experiment, illustrated in
Fig. 4.15, that become popular in the European Courts, is described by
Gray:
April 8, 1730, I made the following Experiment on a Boy
between eight and nine Years of Age. His Weight, with his
Cloaths on, was forty-seven Pounds ten Ounces. I suspended him
in a horizontal Position, by two Hair-Lines, such as Cloaths are
dried on: They were about thirteen Feet long, with Loops at each
End. There was drove into the Beam of my Chamber, which was
a Foot thick, a Pair of Hooks opposite to each other, and two Feet
from these another Pair in the fame manner. Upon these Hooks
the Lines were hung by their Loops, so as to be in the Manner of
two Swings, the lower Parts hanging within about two Feet of
the Floor of the Room: Then the Boy was laid on these Lines
with his Face downwards, one of the Lines being put under his
Breast, the other under his Thighs: Then the Leaf-Brass was laid
on a Stand, which was a round Board of a Foot Diameter, with
white Paper palled on it, supported on a Pedestal of a Foot in
Hight, which I often made use of in other Experiments, though
not till now mentioned Upon the Tube’s being rubbed, and held
near his Feet, without touching them, the Leaf-Brass was

attracted by the Boy’s Face with much Vigour, so as to rise to the
Hight of eight, and sometimes ten Inches. I put a great many
Pieces on the Board together, and almost all of them came up
together at the same Time. Then the Boy was laid with his Face
upwards, and the hind Part of his Head, which had short Hair on,
attracted, but not at quite so great a Hight as his Face did. Then
the Leaf-Brass was placed under his Feet, his Shoes and
Stockings being on, and the Tube held near his Head, his Feet
attracted, but not altogether at for great a Hight as his Plead:
Then the Leaf-Brass was again laid under his Head, and the Tube
held over it, but there was then no Attraction, nor was there any
when the Leaf-Brass was laid under his Feet, and the Tube held
over them [112].152
In June 1730 Gray and Wheler made an experiment showing that the
attraction and repulsion was as strong, if not stronger, and that the
efϐluvia might be carried to great lengths without touching the line with
the glass tube [112].153 This was precisely the conϐirmation of the idea
that Gray had projected at the outset. After a ϐirst conϐirmation they
made experiment to see how far the electric virtue could be carried
forward in a line, without touching the same. They arrived to obtain an
effect up to 886 ft (270 m).
Two more Gray’s studies of efϐluvia in the paper of 1731 are worthy
to be cited. The ϐirst investigation concerned whether solid objects
receive a stronger communicated electricity than hollow objects. Two
oak cubes, one solid and one hollow, were suspended and joined by a
packthread; when the tube stood over the middle of the line connecting
the two cubes, both attracted equally.
Gray expected that communicated electric virtue would be
proportional to the quantity of matter in bodies; it was not the case
(indeed the surface areas is a better candidate), but the negative result
did not disconϐirmed Gray’s opinion about the theory of electric
efϐluvia: “yet I am apt to think that the Electrick Efϐluvia pass through
all the interior Parts of the solid Cube, though no Part but the Surface
attracts; for from several Experiments it appears, that if any other Body
touches that which attracts, its Attraction ceases till that Body be
removed, and the other be again excited by the Tube”[112].154

The second investigation concerned the different power of
attraction due to the shape of the support of the brass leafs to be
attracted. With his words: In these experiments, besides the large stand
above mentioned, I made use of two small ones. The tops of them were
three inches diameter; they were supported by a column of about a foot
in hight, their bases of about four inches and half. They were turned of
lignum vitae (guaiacum); their tops and bases made to screw on for
convenience of carriage. Upon the tops there were white papers. When
the leaf-brass laid on any of these stands, I ϐind it is attracted to a much
greater hight than when laid on a table, and at least three times higher
than when laid on the ϐloor of a room [112].155
This is one of the ϐirst known description of the power of the points.
That is, the electric force is stronger around sharp and pointed regions
of conductors than around ϐlat surfaces.
Others papers published on the Philosophical Transactions are
summarized in [171].156 To signal only some experiments to test the
electric attraction in a void [111, 113].157 Priestley, suggested that
Gray probably could have avoided this experiment if he had known
those carried out by Boyle: “In the ϐirst place, Mr. Grey made some
experiments, which, probably unknown to him, had been made before
by Mr. Boyle” [171].158 Indeed, Gray cited Boyle’s experiments with the
air-pump [113]159 and probably knew also those related to electricity,
thus he could have had his own reason to repeat the experiment.
4.3.4 The Leyden Jar
A typical modern design of the Leyden jar consists of a glass bottle with
metal (gold) tin foils coating the inner and outer surfaces of the bottle.
The foils stop short of the mouth of the jar. A metal electrode passing
through the lid of the jar electrically connected by some means (usually
a hanging chain) to the inner foil allows the charge to reach the inner
foil; the outer foil is grounded. The inner and outer surfaces of the jar
store opposite charges.
The original form of the device was just a glass bottle partially ϐilled
with water, with a metal wire passing through a cork closing it; the role
of the outer plate was provided by the hand of the experimenter
(Fig. 4.17).

Fig. 4.17 Leyden jar.
a Redrawn from [172], p. 570; b Original drawing by Musschenbroek [160], p. 6
A ϐirst version of the Leyden jar was due to the German
‘administrator and cleric’ Ewald Jürgen Georg von Kleist (1700–1748),
and is known as Kleist’s phial, described by himself in a letter to Johann
Gottlob Krüger (1715–1759), in the following way: “If a nail, a strong
wire, etc., is introduced into a narrow-necked little medicine bottle and

electriϐied, especially powerful effects follow. The glass must be very
dry and warm. Everything works better if a little mercury or alcohol is
placed inside. The ϐlare appears on the little bottle as soon as it is
removed from the machine, and I have been able to take over sixty
paces around the room by the light of this little burning instrument”
[133].160
Kleist was guided in his discovery by some false assumptions and
got his result after various attempts by varying some parameters. From
a modern point of view it can be said that Kleist arrived at his result by
chance. This was, and still is, a quite common situation in modern
physics, differently to what happened in the old natural philosophy
where practically no discoveries occurred and theories served mainly
to explain the why of known phenomena.
Kleist’s ϐirst experiment occurred on October 1745 and its results
was communicated to other people; but because he neglected to
mention fundamental conϐigurations, most probably because he did not
know they were such, his correspondents failed to repeat the
experience. In 1745–1746 Musschenbroek got an analogous apparatus
and experience, which because of the place of the experience was
called, and is still called, Leyden jar. To be precise the crucial part of the
experience that led to the Leyden jar was due to Andrea Cunaeus, a
layer of profession used to visiting Musschenbroek’s laboratory.
Cunaeus wishing to electrify water, employed for this purpose a
wide-mouthed ϐlask, which he held in his hand, while a chain from an
electric generator dipped in the water. When the experiment had been
going on for some time, he decided to disconnect the water from the
generator and for this purpose was about to lift out the chain; but, on
touching the chain, he experienced a shock, which gave him the greatest
consternation.
Cunaeus reported his discovery to Musschenbroek and his colleague
Jean Nicolas Sébastien Allamand (1716–1787) who repeated the
experiment, which succeeded. Two days later Musschenbroek himself
repeated the experiment by replacing a globe for the jar.
Musschenbroek, differently from Kleist,  was most attentive in referring
to his distressing experience and reported it to his appointed
correspondent at the Académie des Sciences de Paris, René Réaumur
(1683–1757):

I would like to tell you about a new but terrible experiment,
which I advise you never to try yourself, nor would I, who have
experienced it and survived by the grace of God, do it again for
all the kingdom of France. I was engaged in displaying the
powers of electricity. An iron tube AB [see Fig. 4.18b] was
suspended from blue-silk lines; a globe, rapidly spun and
rubbed, was located near A, and communicated its electrical
power to AB. From a point near the other end B a brass wire
hung; in my right hand I held the globe D, partly ϐilled with
water, into which the wire dipped; with my left hand E I tried to
draw the snapping sparks that jump from the iron tube to the
ϐinger; thereupon my right hand F was struck with such force
that my whole body quivered just like someone hit by lightning
[160].161 (D.18)
The Leyden jar contravened all the principles on electricity then
known, to the point of leaving Musschenbroek bewildered, as
witnessed by the confession of ignorance expressed in his letter to
Réaumur: “I understood nothing and could explain nothing about
electricity”. First convincing (sic) explanations, at least from the
modern point of view, on the operation of the Leiden jar were provided
only by Franklin and his collaborators.
4.3.5 A Comprehensive Theory of Electricity.
Franz Ulrich Theodosius Aepinus
While most English experimental philosophers pursued
experimentation, leaving aside mathematics, in the Continent a
comprehensive theory of electricity was developed in Germany by an
experimental philosopher with good knowledge of mathematics: Franz
Ulrich Theodosius Aepinus (1724–1802). He was born in Rostock, a city
of Duchy of Mecklenburg, Germany. His father held the chair of theology
and a his elder brother that of oratory at the University of Rostock.
Aepinus studied medicine and mathematics at Jena, under the guidance
of George Edward Hamberger (1697–1775), professor of botany,
anatomy and surgery who should have an important role in
Aepinus’ education. Physics taught by Hamberger was all but

Newtonian; inspired by Leibniz and Descartes with however a strong
attention to experimentation. Aepinus took his M.A. in 1747 at Rostock
with a dissertation on the paths of falling bodies.
Until 1755 Aepinus taught mathematics at Rostock, as a junior
lecturer and published only on mathematical subjects: the properties of
algebraic equations, the integration of partial differential equations, the
concept of negative numbers. In 1751–1752 one of his auditors was
Johan Carl Wilcke (1732–1796), who had come to Rostock for a clerical
career but then oriented for physics and mathematics. A few years later
Wilcke played a role in reorienting Aepinus career. In 1755
Aepinus became director of the observatory in Berlin and a member of
the local academy of sciences. Here for two years was in close contact
with Leonhard Euler. This would have removed his Leibnizian approach
to natural philosophy and brought him closer to the Newtonian view.
Aepinus  was neither especially interested nor experienced in
astronomy and his closest published approach to the subject during his
Berlin stay was a mathematical analysis of a micrometer. His main
interest at the time was the study of the tourmaline, to which he was
introduced by Wilcke, who had followed him to Berlin. Aepinus’ ϐirst
researches on the thermoelectric (modern term) properties of this
stone were fundamental. He recognized the electrical nature of the
attractive power of a warmed tourmaline and was particularly struck
by the formal similarity between the tourmaline and the magnet in
regard to polarity which inspired him to reconsider the possibility, then
occasionally discussed, that electricity and magnetism were basically
analogous; on tourmaline he wrote an important paper in 1756 [2]. In
seeking an explanation for the strange behavior of this substance,
Aepinus came to the anti-Franklinian idea of a Leyden jar without the
glass (see below) and conceived an air condenser.
In 1756 Aepinus asked to be relieved of his positions in Berlin in
order to accept the directorship of the observatory and the
professorship of physics, vacant since the death of Richmann, at the
imperial academy of St. Petersburg. Euler, with whom he boarded in
Berlin, warmly recommended him for the job and interceded with
Frederick II to procure his release, which occurred in the spring of
1757. The Petersburg academicians expected that Aepinus, as beϐitted
Richmann’s  successor, would continue to work on electricity. They

were not disappointed. Late in 1758 Aepinus completed the lengthy
Tentamen theoriae electricitatis et magnetismi, herein after referred to
as Tentamen.
In 1760 or 1761 Aepinus became instructor to the Corps of imperial
cadets, a position that left him too little time to fulϐill his scientiϐic
duties. The observatory was seldom used and the equipment in the
physics laboratory deteriorated. These circumstances gave Mikhail
Lomonosov (1711–1765) the opportunity for a furious attack on
Aepinus. Despite such unfavorable conditions, Aepinus continued for a
few years to produce papers on various mathematical and physical
subjects. Among them perhaps the most interesting is a masterful
discussion of the mercurial phosphorus and a critical examination of
Mayer’s theory of magnetism in the Novi commentarii of the Petersburg
academy for 1766–1767. About that time Aepinus’ scientiϐic activity
ceased almost entirely. He became preceptor to the crown prince, a
member of the prestigious Order of St. Anne, an educational reformer, a
diplomat, a courtier, and ϐinally a privy councillor. In 1798, after forty
years in Russia, he resigned his ofϐices and retired to Dorpat where he
died [5, 120].
4.3.5.1 Relationship Between Physics and
Mathematics
As it can be seen from his biography, Aepinus received a traditional
education in natural philosophy with a mechanicistic approach and in
experimental philosophy. Furthermore, although mathematics was not
his main interest, one cannot deny his competence, which is
documented by many publications on mathematical subjects [86].
Aepinus interest in mathematics was indeed very strong; among the
papers that he mentioned and most probably studied there were the
Géométrie of Descartes and the Arithmetica inϔinitorum of John
Wallis, together with l’Hôpital’s Analyse des inϔiniment petits, papers by
Varignon in the memoirs of the Académie des sciences de Paris, Guido
Grandi’s De inϔinitis inϔinitorum, Fontenelle’s Elemens de la geometrie de
l’inϔini, Newton’s Arithmetica universalis (in the Leyden edition of 1732)
and several minor works. Elsewhere in Aepinus’ s early writings
Euler’s Mechanica was cited, as well as Daniel

Bernoulli’s Hydrodynamica and papers by Maupertuis  and Clairaut on
the solving of certain classes of differential equations.
Some of his ideas on the natural philosophy were developed in the
introductory remarks of his Tentamen. Differently from
Newton, Aepinus did not disdain to speak about hypotheses. He
declared that from the agreement of a hypothesis about the causes of
the registered phenomena one cannot be certain that he had reached
the true cause. And although his theory about electricity (and
magnetism) satisfy the majority of the phenomena: “I proceed more
modestly than conϐidentially, and to put forward my proposition as
probable rather than certain” [4, 5].162
Aepinus supposed that all electric and magnetic phenomena could
be explained by means of some ‘primitive’ forces. He did not maintain
necessary to inquire about their origins, declaring rhetorically that he
left to further discussion of whom are happy to spend their time in
speculations. He made the example of the approach by hypothesis of
mathematicians who are satisϐied when they succeeded to reduce their
problems to the quadrature of the circle, even though it was still an
open problem to be solved. The eminent Newton also, declared
Aepinus, proceeded in this way. He demonstrated how the motion of
the planets and satellites depend on centripetal forces, but he did not
spend time to reach the roots of the forces [4].163
Differently from Newtonians, Aepinus declared that he believed as
an indubitable axiom (pro axiomate enim indubitato) the proposition
asserting that a being cannot act where it is not, and consequently he
denied the possibility of an actionis in distans.
If ever it is proved that the attraction or repulsion does not
depend ultimately on some external pressure or impulse, then I
judge that we are reduced to the point where we are forced to
ascribe the execution and production of movements of that kind,
not to corporeal forces but to spirits or beings with
understanding of the things which act, and I cannot be induced
to believe that this could happen in the world. So the whole of
my opinion amounts to the fact that I consider the attractions
and repulsions I have spoken about as phenomena whose causes
so far lie hidden, but from which other phenomena depend and

are derived. I think that considerable progress can be made in
the analysis of the operations of nature by the scholar who
reduces rather complicated phenomena to their proximate
causes and primitive forces, even though the causes of those
causes have not yet been detected. I trust that this declaration of
my opinion will satisfy the most rigid censor [4].164 (D.19)
Aepinus was thus brought to the introduction of forces apparently
acting at distance not as a result of a his own conception of natural
philosophy, but rather against them, because of the difϐiculty to explain
mechanically many electrical phenomena, especially the behavior of the
Leyden jar, for which Franklin’s hypotheses on the absolute
impermeability of glass to electric ϐluid, was not able to explain some
experimental facts, for instance why the efϐicacy of the apparatus
increased by decreasing the thickness of the glass of the jar.
It is worth reϐlecting that at the beginning of the theory of electricity
—when the only phenomenon, or rather the main one, to be explained
was the attraction by an electriϐied body of small pieces of any material
—to explain this attraction by unexplained forces, would have been
seen as a vicious circle, a return to the explanations of some pedantic
representatives of schools. But at Aepinus’ time the phenomena were
many and complex and the use of a single principle, a force, even if
unexplained, could be seen as a reasonable approach to an unitary
treatment.
Aepinus reiterated his conceptions at the end of the Tentamen, in
the last page of the discussion about the phenomena discovered by
Richmann on the Leyden jar. Here he defended his approach largely
based on mathematics.
Some, who can barely tolerate such things in physics, will
perhaps be displeased that I have mixed in so much
mathematics. But I judge quite differently, and believe that this
brief dissertation on Richmann’s  experiment contributes a great
deal towards proving the truth of my principles of electricity. For
an hypothesis grows greatly in plausibility if it can explain
complicated phenomena, which can only be deduced from it by a
long chain of reasoning [4].165 (D.20)

Aepinus’ theory received poor attention, at the beginning. It is often
said that this was owing to the criticism, and almost unintelligible
account, which Priestley gave of it in his inϐluential summary of the
electricity of the 18th century History and present state of electricity of
1767 [122],166 where he declared the mathematical passages by
Aepinus not worthy to be considered: “He that reads the ϐirst chapter,
as well as many other parts of his elaborate treatise above mentioned,
may save himself a good deal of time and trouble by considering, that
the result of many of his reasonings and mathematical calculations
cannot be depended upon; because he supposes the repulsion or
elasticity of the electric ϐluid to be in proportion to its condensation
[the quantity of electric ϐluid]; which is not true, unless the particles
repel one another in the simple reciprocal ratio of their distances, as Sir
Isaac Newton has demonstrated, in the second book of his Principia”
[171].167 Indeed the criticism of Priestley derived from a
misunderstanding of Aepinus argumentations, as also a
misunderstanding was the attribution to Newton what he said about
the attraction of bodies [122].168
This is only a partial explanation of the poor attention on
Aepinus’ treatise, however. Independently of the bad publicity by
Priestley, the Tentamen itself probably had too much mathematics,
magnetism, Latin, and details for most electricians of the 18th century
—Cavendish excluded. Moreover Euler, for example, thought the
Tentamen relevant on experiments, but weak in theory. The acceptance
of Aepinus’ approach awaited the work of younger men, and for them
its was fundamental.
Aepinus’ approach  was usual neither near the electricians, nor even
among experimental philosophers. The only topics where the use of
mathematics was accepted by all were those that today belongs more
or less to mechanics (hydraulics, acoustics, pneumatics, dynamics, and
so on). Other topics of what today belong to physics such as thermology,
magnetism and electricity where considered not suitable to be
mathematized by experimental philosophers; and even though they
were presented in mathematical style, the proof of the statements,
named usually theorem, were left to experiments and not to
mathematics.

Benjamin Wilson, one of the leading English electricians, reported
the views of his colleagues physicists when he wrote in patronizing
terms to Aepinus that “the introducing of algebra in experimental
philosophy, is very much laid aside with us, as few people understand
it; and those who do, rather cho[o]se to avoid that close kind of
attention: tho’ I make no doubt but I dar[e] say you had a very good
reason for making use of that method” [5].169
A modern by reading Aepinus writings on electricity, including the
Tentamen, is struck not by too much mathematics, to the contrary by
too little of it. Indeed Aepinus used a rigor of a mathematician and all
phenomena are interpreted by mathematical relationships. But he only
(with a few exception) used simply algebraic passages: the expression
of equation of balance among forces. No use is made of Calculus,
because Aepinus did not analyze non-uniform distribution of electricity,
and thus did not need inϐinitesimal element of ordinary matter of
electric ϐluid do be accounted for; differently from what Coulomb will
do some years later.

4.3.5.2 Tentamen Theoriae Electricitatis et
Magnetismi
Aepinus’  Tentamen is one of the most original and important book in the
history of electricity, even though the contribution to the study of electricity
was peripheral to that of magnetisms. It is the ϐirst reasoned, fruitful
exposition of electrical phenomena based on forces whose origin is not
questioned. The treatise appeared in 1759, rushed into print earlier than its
author intended, by the pressing of Petersburg academicians, who were
eager to show the world Aepinus’  achievements; for this reason it
contained many typos, which sometimes made it difϐicult to read.
As the book did not at ϐirst have much inϐluence and had a small
circulation, the Italian electricians did not read it at all or did not read it
attentively until the late 1770s. Beccaria had not seen a copy as late as
1772; Volta  appears to have developed this own views before he came
across it. Few French physicists knew it before 1787. In Germany its
knowledge was also scarce. In England several important electricians knew
the Tentamen, or at least fondled it, during the 1760s, but apart from
Cavendish, they did not understand it. Franklin complimented
Aepinus several times for attempting to apply his principles of electricity to
magnetism, but never recognized the transformation he operated [122].170
The edition of 1759 has a dedication to Count Kiril Razumovskiı̄,  a
preface and an introductory part. Four chapters follow, the ϐirst of them
opens with the general principles he and Franklin assumed. The book ends
with two appendices; the ϐirst discussed a phenomenon of the Leyden jar
discovered by Richmann, the second certain paradoxical magnetic
phenomena.
Aepinus rejected the current notion of electrical atmospheres. Three
forces, according to him, create all the appearances of electricity: a
repulsion among the particles of the electric ϐluid, an attraction among them
and the corpuscles of common matter, and a repulsion among the
corpuscles of the common matter. Although his exposition does not contain
numerical values for the physical magnitudes he introduced, it is
mathematical, with symbols used to indicate the excess or deϐiciency of
ϐluid and the associated forces. A part from the numerical values of the
parameters, what is left indeterminate and makes not possible quantitative
predictions, is the exact form of the law of the electric forces. He only

assumed that forces decrease with distance and are proportional to matter
and amount of electric ϐluid. The magnetic theory of the Tentamen operates
on the same principles, except that the magnetic ϐluid can freely penetrate
all substances but iron, in which it is so tightly held that it can neither
increase nor decrease. A piece of iron is thus to the magnetic ϐluid what a
perfect insulator would be to the electric. All magnetic phenomena depend
on the displacement of the magnetic ϐluid within iron. Aepinus’ analysis of
magnetization is exactly analogous to his treatment of electrical induction
(modern term, see below); it is adequate to all problems he considered
except the formation of two magnets by the halving of one. Most notably it
lead him to improve on Canton’s and Michell’s method of preparing artiϐicial
magnets and on the usual disposition of armatures.
4.3.5.3 The Principles of Electricity
At the beginning of Chap. 1 of the Tentamen, Aepinus listed what according
to him are Franklin’s principles of electricity:
There is a certain very subtle, full elastic ϐluid producing all electrical
phenomena, called electric [electricum] for this, whose parts sensibly repel
each other mutually even over rather sensible distances.
The particles of this ϐluid are attracted by the ordinary matter, from
which all actual bodies are made.
There is a great diversity in the way bodies act on the particles of the
electric ϐluid; there are some bodies constituted so that the electric
matter moves very easily in their pores because meets no resistance; other
bodies, on the contrary, are such that electric matter admits a movement
only with difϐiculty. Bodies of the former kind are called non-electric per se;
those of the latter kind, electric per se.
Electrical phenomena are of two kinds. Some originate from the transit
of electric matter from one body which contains a greater amount of this
ϐluid to another which holds less. These produce electric sparks and other
phenomena concerned with the electric light; others occur without the
actual transit of ϐluid, to which the attractions and repulsions which are
exercised by electriϐied bodies must be referred to [4, 5].171
He avoided to add one more principle of Franklin, that according to
which glass is fully impermeable to the passage of electric ϐluid. Indeed,
Aepinus said he was establishing the general foundations of the theory of

electricity and considered superϐluous to mention the impermeability of
glass since it cannot be considered as a peculiar property of glass only; on
this point Aepinus will discuss lengthily in his treatise.
4.3.5.4 The Natural State
A body which is not electrical is called in the natural state; in this state the
amount of electric ϐluid is in the ‘right’ amount, the more the ordinary
matter the more the electric ϐluid.
Aepinus using his principles and the equation of equilibrium was able to
deϐine the natural state and the right amount of electric ϐluid, in a clear way
and to show that it is indeed natural. Let there be a body A containing a
certain quantity of ϐluid, said Aepinus,  whose parts are attracted by the
ordinary matter of A, but which mutually repel each other. It is plainly
obvious that a double action is exercised on a particle of this ϐluid such as B
 clinging around the boundary of the body A. This particle B  will be
attracted by the body A but will be also repelled by the ϐluid enclosed in its
pores. If attraction and repulsion are equal, it is clear that there is no action
on the particle B . But if a supply of ϐluid is enclosed in the body A such that
the repulsion overcomes the attraction, the particle B  will then have to
yield to the former force; it must move quickly away and be separated from
the body A. The same holds for the other particles of the ϐluid; it is thus
clear that a continuous ϐlow of ϐluid must take place from the body A [4,
5].172 Because, continued Aepinus, when in excess the quantity of ϐluid
enclosed in the body A is continuously diminished and as a result the
repulsive force continuously decreased, the ϐlow of ϐluid lasts until the
repulsive force is reduced to equality with the attractive force (which
meanwhile remains unchanged) and at this point all efϐlux must cease.
Today it its known that the dissipation (or acquisition) of electric ϐluid—
actually electrons—from a body having an excess (or defect) of it is much
more complex phenomenon. For instance in the case of air surrounding a
charged conductor, when there is an excess of electricity in it, the air close
to the surface of the conductor becomes ionized in positive and negative
components; the positive components are attracted by the electrons in
excess and neutralized; all is as there is a ϐlux of free electrons but there is
no in fact such a ϐlux. In the case of vacuum the electrons can leave the
conductor as 
 rays, but only under particular conditions.
If ϐinally it is assumed that the attraction exercised on the particle B  is
greater than the repulsion, it is clearly established that the contrary ought

to take place. For in this case particles of ϐluid will enter the body from
every part until, because of the continuously increasing supply of ϐluid, the
repulsion ϐinally increases to the point where it becomes equal to the
attraction, and then all further inϐlux must cease.
It is clear from this that a ϐixed quantity of ϐluid can always be assigned
so that there is neither efϐlux nor inϐlux of ϐluid. But if a change takes place,
ϐluid either escapes if its quantity has been increased, or if this has been
diminished it increases until the equilibrium is restored. It seems that this
ϐixed quantity can be ϐittingly called natural, since a body left to itself always
returns (in the long time) of its own accord to the state where it contains
neither lesser nor a greater quantity of ϐluid than is exactly sufϐicient to
produce an equilibrium between the attracting and repelling forces [4].173
4.3.5.5 Ordinary Matter Repels
Let consider two bodies A and B, close to each other and constituted in
natural state, and examine the action of A on B. It is evident that the electric
ϐluid of A repels that of B, and thus the whole B, with a given force; let it be r.
In turn the ordinary matter of A attracts the electric ϐluid of B, and thus the
whole B, with a force a. Besides these forces there are other forces that acts
on B. First the force A with which the electric ϐluid of A attracts the ordinary
matter of B, second the force x that could act between the ordinary matter
of A and the ordinary matter of B. Because the experience shows that B is at
rest, the following balance hold: 
.
Then Aepinus introduced the equality 
, by asserting that
“while a body is constituted in the natural state it in no way acts on particles
of electric ϐluid outside of the body” [4].174 This assertion according
Aepinus is based on what he has proved in his Sections 7 and 8; where he
had argued that on any element B  of electric ϐluid, in the boundary of a
body A, the resultant of the repulsion r of all the electric ϐluid in A and the
attraction a of all the ordinary matter of A, are such that the equilibrium 
 is veriϐied. Here however he is arguing about a particular element
B —the whole body B indeed—which is outside A.
Aepinus was not bothered by this circumstance and went further. He
assumed (1) that the electric ϐluid is evenly distributed in the body in the
natural state, so that its quantity is proportional to its mass [5].175 Another,
unstated, assumption (2) is that the force between electric ϐluids is
proportional to their quantities and, similarly, forces among ordinary

masses and electric ϐluids and among ordinary masses themselves are
proportional to their respective quantities.
On the basis of the assumptions reported above, by indicating with M, m
and Q, q the masses and electric ϐluid in A and B respectively, Aepinus could
write, for the ϐirst assumption, 
, for the second 
; 
, and thus 
; which gives 
 and consequently 
. That is a, r, A, x are all equal to each other, a part from the sign, and
the particles of matter repel each other with a force equal to that with
which the electric ϐluids repel.
Though Aepinus did not make explicit the dependence of the various
forces on the distance, a part to say that them decrease with the distance, he
made a further step in his analysis. Since, he said, experience shows that A
and B remain at rest independently of their distance, this implies that the
equality between the forces a, r, A, x is maintained, and thus they
necessarily obey the same law with respect to the distance [4].176 There are
however some ambiguities in the deϐinition of the distance; mainly
Aepinus intended the distance between two whole bodies and do not say as
the distance is measured; for instance between the outer surfaces or the
geometrical center. The only way distance has a clear meaning is when it
concerns two points, for instance two particles of matter; but this is not the
case in Aepinus. 
At this point Aepinus made some consideration about his result, in
particular about the ϐinding that the ordinary matter repels, admitting that
the fact should seem to his reader too hard to be accepted:
I do not deny that when it ϐirst came to me right at the beginning of
my thinking about Franklin’s theory of electricity, I was somewhat
horriϐied at it. But after I began to consider that it contain nothing
contrary to the analogy of the operation of nature, I got used to it
[4].177 (D.21)
The reason for which Aepinus was horriϐied is that his ϐindings contradicts
the universal law of gravitation formulated by Newton, according to which
the particles of matter attract in proportion of their masses. However,
according to Aepinus, Newton’s law holds for ordinary matter while his
results only refer to electriϐied matter (sic). Moreover there is not
contradictions at an ontological level as it could appear from the
consideration that matter is endowed at the same time with two forces

opposed in nature, one attractive the other repulsive, because the repulsive
and attractive force are not considered as inherent to matter or essential to
it [4].178
A modern reader, basing on the theory of matter of the early 20th
century, cannot ϐind strange that ordinary matter repel, on the condition
that the ordinary matter is intended what remains after the electric ϐluid
(the electron) is considered apart: that is protons and neutrons, and
protons repel.
4.3.5.6 Forces Between Two Electriϔied Bodies
Assume two bodies A and B whose electric ϐluids in the natural state are
respectively Q and q and that some ϐluid beyond the natural state, 
 and ,
are added in the order. The forces exercised by B on A (and vice versa) are:
1.
Fluid in B attracts the ordinary matter of A by 
, where a is
the force when B is in the natural state.
 
2.
Fluid in B repels ϐluid in A by 
, where r is the force
when A and B are in their natural states.
 
3.
Ordinary matter of B attracts ϐluid in A by 
, where A is
the force when A is in the natural state.
 
4.
Ordinary matter of B repels the ordinary matter of A by R.
 
Thus the force with which B attracts A can be obtained by adding all the
four contributions with the due sign. Considering that 
[4],179 the relation is obtained where negative values means repulsion:

If 
 the two bodies repel, if, on the contrary, 
 the two bodies
attract. When either 
 or 
 the two bodies remain at rest. All goes
as if instead of the lack of electric particles, there were particles of opposite
electricity (as in the two ϐluids theory).
This relation is extremely interesting because explains experimental
results that a naif application of Franklin’s theory cannot justify.
Franklin and the followers of one electric ϐluid theory, were not able to
furnish a satisfactory explanation of the well known experimental results
that two negatively charged body repel. Indeed there is no need that the
lack of the electric repelling particle of the electric ϐluid could give raise to a
repulsion. Some qualitative physical reasons were assumed, but none of
them was considered as satisfactory by all. The previous relation obtained
by a strict application of Franklin’s rules and equilibrium equations, shows
that the repulsion of negatively charged bodies depends on the balance of
forces at play.
Besides this satisfactory explanation, the previous relation seems to
indicate a ϐlaw in Franklin’s theory. The relation suggests the paradoxical
result, contradicted by the common experience: When a not electriϐied body
(
 or 
) is close to an electriϐied body it is not attracted by the
electriϐied body. Aepinus insisted that this result is necessary when
accepting Franklin hypotheses: “It is a most certain consequence of our
theory that any body constituted in the natural state is neither attracted nor
repelled by any body whether positively or negatively electriϐied” [4, 5].180
How is then possible to reconcile theory and experience? The only way
left is to assume that a not electriϐied body when located near an electriϐied
body becomes electriϐied in turn. Indeed the ϐluid of the electriϐied body A
(with an excess 
 of electricity; see Fig. 4.18) repels the part of the non
electriϐied body B close to A, ab, by displacing them to the other side of B,
bc, and thus B is divided in two parts with equal and contrary excess of ϐluid
. If A is electriϐied positively 
 is positive, otherwise it is negative. The
attraction of B by A is easily explained. The ‘excess’ of ϐluid 
 of A attracts
the ϐluid 
 in B with a force r and repels the ϐluid 
 by a force 
. Because
 is farther than 
 and thus 
, the total force between and B results
in an attraction.

A modern recognizes in the explanation furnished by Aepinus the
electrostatic induction, one of the most important phenomenon of the
whole electrostatics; a phenomenon (if not the name) that in the second
half of the 18th century time was well known. To prove without any doubt
that his explanation was correct, Aepinus proposed however an interesting
experiment.
Place a metal rod AB, said Aepinus,  about a foot long on glass supports
CD, EF of Fig. 4.19, and on the end A place a metal piece GL about an inch
and a half long ϐitted in the middle with a little hook M to which has been
attached a well-dried silk thread HM. Then take the electriϐicatory glass
cylinder IK, and, after it has been electriϐied by rubbing, move it to the end A
of the rod, to a distance of about an inch and hold it there motionless. Lift
the metal piece GL by means of the silk thread HM and place it on the glass
support NO. If the body GL is examined with an electroscope it will be found
to be electric and indeed negatively so. In the second experiment, let
everything happen in the fashion described, and move the glass tube IK
once more to the end A, with a body gl placed on the end B of the rod. If
everything is done as in the preceding experiment, the body gl placed on the
support NO will again be electric, but contrary to before, it will have a
positive electricity [4].181
Fig. 4.18 The electrostatic induction
Fig. 4.19 Experimental veriϐication of electrostatic induction.

Redrawn from [4], Table I, Fig. 23
4.3.5.7 Interior and Exterior Electric Fluid in the
Leyden Jar
Franklin theory of electricity, used in a consistent way by Aepinus by means
of equilibrium equation, is shown to lead to results that contradict some of
Franklin assumptions. For instance, according to the theory of Franklin, the
interior and exterior face of a Leyden jar are equally electriϐied.
Aepinus showed that it is not exactly the case. To prove the fact, instead of
referring to a Leyden jar, he considered a simple plane systems, which
behaves similarly to the jar. Let consider, as in Fig. 4.20a a glass plate AB
covered on both sides by two equal metal plates IK and CD; both the plates
have the same normal amount Q of the electric ϐluid.
Fig. 4.20 A simpliϐied version of Leyden jar; a simple condenser.
a Original drawing redrawn from [4], Table I, Fig. 8; b A modern drawing
Let the plate IK be connected with the earth, while the plate CD
electriϐied with the help of a chain that brings to it electricity. Let 
 be the
excess of electricity communicated to the metal plate CD. The particles of
the electric ϐluid that are on the exterior surface H of the plate IK
(Fig. 4.20b) are repelled with a force given by 
 by the electric ϐluid of
the whole plate CD, and will be attracted by a force equal to 
, where 
is the electric ϐluid that has ϐlowed from the plate IK toward the earth. So
that the total ϐlux, tending to expel these particles is given by:

An equilibrium is reached when this force is equal to zero, that is for 
. Because the force 
 is less than the force r, being the ϐluid 
farther away from the particles in the layer H, it is 
; that is the two
plates contain a different amount of electric ϐluid, and CD is more electriϐied
than IK. After the equilibrium has been reached, the force acting on the
particles of the layer G of the plate CD, given by:
which for 
, that is at equilibrium, furnishes182:
This force increases continuously as 
, that is the electricity of CD,
increases, and eventually becomes so great that the air surrounding CD
cannot any longer offer resistance to avoid the dissipation of it and the
electric ϐluid escape and the accumulation of the electric ϐluid reached its
maximum value [4].183 To note that Franklin assumed that the equilibrium
was reached when all the electric matter of the glass has been driven from
its outer surface [122].184
4.3.5.8 Attraction When Both Bodies Possess
Either Positive or Negative Electricity
One of Franklin’s principle says that elementary electrical parts repels. It is
the same for bodies which contains both an excess of electric ϐluid? Indeed
in such a situation besides forces among electrical particles, always
repulsive, there are also attractive forces due to the interaction between
electrical and common matter, so the question is in principle left open.
Aepinus probably knew from a work of the Eulers [87],185 or from some
experiments—though he did not refer about any of the two circumstances
—that bodies with the same electricity can attract, and wished to prove that
this result is in agreement with his theory

Consider bodies A and B of Fig. 4.21, both positively electriϐied whose
natural quantities of electricity are 2q and 2Q and the excess of the electric
ϐluid 
 and 
 respectively. When these bodies are put close to each other,
the ϐluid in the parts NIOK and CDGH, which are the nearest, is repelled
toward LNOM and GEFH of the amounts 
 and 
 respectively.
The amount of exceeding ϐluid in the two bodies is resumed below:
The forces that the four parts of the bodies A and B exchange are
proportional to the amount of electric ϐluid e, f, a, b (see above) contained in
them and inversely proportional to the normal quantities Q, q. They are
given in the following:
where 
 are the forces the various parts of A and B would
exchange, as indicated in Fig. 4.21b.
By adding all the contributions, the force A and B exchange is:
It is evident that the values of e, f, a, b depend on the intensity of the
repelling force among the particles of the electric ϐluid, which in turn
depend on the distance among A and B and on the excess of the ϐluid 
 and 
.
It is possible to show, on qualitative basis by considering a reasoning
similar to that which proves the attraction between an electrical and a
neutral body, see Sect. 4.3.5.6, that two bodies positively electriϐied
sufϐiciently distant from each other repel, yet if they are put closer by an
external force, they begin to attract. Indeed as the bodies are rather distant
from one another, the repelling force on the ϐluid contained in the other is
quite weak, so the quantities 
 and 
 are small enough, so that a and e are

both positive—of course f and b are always positive—and A and B repel. But
when 
 and 
 increase because the distance between them is decreased
the two quantities a and e, or at least one of them, may become negative,
and the force between the bodies changes its sign and they attract.
Fig. 4.21 Forces between two charged bodies.
a Original drawing redrawn from [4], Table I, Fig. 22; b Arrangement of electricity and forces
Aepinus underlined that his result seems paradoxical but it is a strict
consequence of Franklin’s view about electricity: “These phenomena would
then contain enormous paradoxes were not their source and their friendly
agreement with the fundamental laws of nature clear from our own theory.
At the same time there is not a little probability in our theory, for when it is
assumed, these paradoxical phenomena agree so aptly with the
fundamental laws of nature; and I doubt very much whether this could as
happily be the case with any of the other hypotheses developed to date and
alien to the analogy of the other operations of nature” [4, 5].186
It is not difϐicult for Aepinus to reach a similar conclusion when the two
bodies are negatively electric. More complicate is the analysis of the case
when one of the body is negatively electric while the other is positively
electric. In such a case it is impossible to reach any conclusion unless
resource to experience is made “no satisfactory reply can be given to this
question until we understand the function (functio) according to which
electrical repulsion is exerted” [4].187 All depends on the way the repelling
force varies with distance. Aepinus considered the two possibilities shown
in Fig. 4.22a, b. Only when the forces varies as in Fig. 4.23b is it possible that
bodies oppositely electriϐied repel. But “if we consult experience, there can

hardly be any doubt remaining that the often-mentioned graph of
repulsions ought never to have a point of inϐlection” [4].188
Because some doubts would remain from these apparently paradoxical
result; Aepinus suggested a simple experimental test, referred below in full.
Fig. 4.22 The function of repulsive forces versus the distance among the two bodies A and B.
Redrawn in simpliϐied form from [4], a Table I, Fig. 24; b Table II, Fig. 25
Fig. 4.23 Attraction between bodies with the same kind of electricity,
redrawn from [4], Table II, Fig. 26
Suspend a small globe of cork, B, about the size of a pea, from a silk
thread AB as shown in Fig. 4.23. Below the pendulum AB, place a metal
cylinder E about an inch in diameter on a glass supports FG, KL, and arrange
the supports and the pendulum AB so that when the latter is vertical the
globe B does not quite touch the cylinder E. To the globe B tie the silk thread
bcd and pass it over the little hook c. Fix to the cylinder E an iron wire HI
ϐive or six feet long, properly supported on bodies electric per se. Electrify
the globe B in the normal manner with the help of the glass tube and
afterward, by moving the tube to the end I of the iron wire, make the

cylinder E electric too with the same kind if electricity. It will then be
observed that the globe B is repelled and the pendulum is raised to the
position Ab. Then pull the thread bcd and force the globe B closer to the
cylinder E, and after it has approached to a distance of 2, 3 or 4 lines, it will
suddenly be observed that the repulsion has changed to an attraction, and
the pendulum comes to the vertical position AB; if it is disturbed a little
from this position by pulling the thread bed forward a half or whole line, it
spontaneously returns again to its previous position. This experiment
succeeds as well if a sulphur cylinder is substituted for glass [4, 5].189
Thus Aepinus can conclude: It is known among scholars dealing with
electricity, the rules of differently electriϐied bodies attract one another and
if possessing the same kind of electricity repel one another, then known as
Dufay rules. The ϐirst rule, can be accepted; but the second, as it is usually
promulgated (pronunciati), must be considered not completely true. Indeed
if both bodies have the same electricity, they can at times repel one another,
at other times have no action on one another, and at other times attract one
another. “Thus one can generally admit the converse of the rule [bodies with
the same kind of electricity repel] as true, that is, if two bodies repel one
another, then the quantity of electric ϐluid in both bodies at the same time is
either greater than or less than the natural. For it is easily established that
only in this case can bodies mutually repel one another, since in other cases,
as I have sufϐiciently shown already, they always attract each other and
never repel” [4, 5].190
In general it can be said that from a theoretical point of view any
possibility is open regarding the attraction or repulsion of two electriϐied
bodies, they can attract, repel or remain at rest independently of their
content of electricity. All depends on the balance of forces. Of course
experience shows some particular occurrences, but all of them can be
explained or predicted by the theory.
4.3.5.9 Air Condenser
Differently from Franklin, Aepinus found that the behavior of the Leyden jar
could be reached even with matter different from glass, air in particular. The
apparatus he considered was the one illustrated in Fig. 4.20 where the layer
ABEF of glass has been replaced by air to form what is now called an air
condenser. This system was presented already in 1756 at the end of
Aepinus’ memoir on the piezoelectric properties of tourmaline, Mémoire
concernant quelques nouvelles experience électriques remarquables [2]. In his
experiments, he suspended two surfaces covered with metal, so that they

were parallel and the distance from one to the other in all their points was
from one inch to 1 1/2 (
), without neither mediately nor
immediately contact. Electric ϐluid (positive electricity) was driven from an
electriϐied globe on one of these surfaces, the other was connected by
means of a chain, to the ϐloor so that the electrical matter, that was driven
out by repulsion, ϐlowed and the surface connected to the ϐloor was able to
acquire negative electricity. While these things were going on, said
Aepinus, he felt a strong shock, quite similar to that which is commonly
produced by means of glass. This experience would not succeed with small
surfaces and its effect comes far more sensitive when the surfaces used
were large. The ones he used, each had 7 1/2 square feet (corresponding to
a large square of 
 side) and they were of wood covered with these
sheets of tin that are applied to mirror glasses [2].191
By examining the matter more deeply, Aepinus said, that impermeability
was involved in the essential property that makes bodies electric per se; it is
by virtue of this property that in these bodies the movement of electric ϐluid
is allowed only with difϐiculty through their pores. And it is quite strange
that the celebrated Franklin, who admirably expounded the nature of
bodies electric per se, did not perceive that the immediate consequence of
the essential property of such bodies is that property which he named
impermeability [4].192 A property possessed also by air, even though to a
less degree than glass.
4.3.6 The Italian School
While the discovery of the properties of the Leyden jar opened up new
horizons for electrical research in France, Germany and England, in Italy,
only after the circulation of the experiences and discoveries of Benjamin
Franklin, systematic researches started on electrical phenomena. In truth,
starting from the second half of the 18th century, Italian scholars had
cultivated the study of natural and artiϐicial electrical phenomena. In 1746,
a small historical treatise was published anonymously: Dell’elettricismo:
ossia delle forze elettriche de’ corpi [180], which is commonly attributed to
the physician Eusebio Sguario (ϐl. 1750), written from a Newtonian
perspective. Sguario, separating the physical electricity from the medical
one, opened the way for Beccaria and Galvani to go all the way. Some studies
were made in Bologna, where a lightning rod was installed in the university
tower, following the example of Franklin (1755), then removed because of

population believing it attracted lightning and thus dangerous. Scipione
Maffei (1675–1755) from Verona published the Della formazione dei fulmini
[145], where he showed to know the most important experiences in Europe
on electrical phenomena, including the experience of water electriϐication;
he also described his own experiences with various electrical machines.
These experiences, as well as those presumably conducted in Turin by
Francesco Antonio Garro, can be framed in a predominantly educational and
informative perspective.
However the news of the electric experiments conducted in Europe
carried out in the laboratory fueled in many Italian physicians around
1745–1750, the opinion—sustained by experiments often carried out with
not entirely correct methodologies—that the electric ϐluid could have
beneϐicial effects on health and could therefore be used for therapeutic
purposes. In Turin the medical pathologist Giovambattista Bianchi (1681–
1761), in Venice Gianfrancesco Pivati (1689–1764) and in Bologna Giovanni
Giuseppe Veratti (1707–1793), a member of the Accademia delle scienze
dell’Istituto di Bologna, carried out a certain number of experiments and
electrical applications on patients which attributed beneϐicial effects,
resulting in healing according to their testimonies, gouty or sciatic
rheumatic forms. The news of these electrical experiments and their
beneϐicial effects on the human organism were made known to the public by
letters or through the spread of printed works. They aroused the curiosity
of Nollet who decided to come to Italy. This had a positive effect on the
knowledge of electricity in Italy, as Nollet with his discussions certainly
contributed to spreading new concepts.
Nollet in particular was impressed by Laura Bassi, wife of Veratti, who
he met in Bologna. He dedicated to her one of his Lettres sur l’electricité. The
letter to Madame Laura Bassi of the “Academie de l’Institut de Bologne”
focused on some curious applications of electricity. According to Nollet,
these applications could be further improved [185]. Laura Bassi has been
almost totally ignored by historians of electricity, what is quite unjust
considering that she presented no less than seven dissertations on
electricity to the academia of Bologna, a number surpassed only by her
husband’s. She accepted the version of the single ϐluid theory proposed by
Beccaria and in 1771 presented to the academia of Bologna the paper,
unfortunately now lost, Sopra l’elettricità vindice, a strong point of Beccaria
[54].
Studies on electricity should be signaled in the south Italy also. Some
works were published in Naples. In 1747 the Tentamena eletrice of Georg

Matthias Bose (1710–1761) was translated into Italian and a new edition of
the Dell’elettricismo of Sguario was issued. Finally the work of Giovanni
Windler Tentamina de causa electricitatis quibus brevis historia de nonnullis
cuctoribus qui hanc praecipue excoluerunt materiam, premissa est. In 1748,
one ϐinds the work of Niccoló Bammacaro  Tentamen de vi electrica ejusque
phaenomenis in quo aeris cum corporibus universi aequilibrium proponitur.
In 1750, the ϐirst edition of Scienza della natura by Giovanni Maria della
Torre was published. This work was used as a manual in the teaching of
experimental physics using the Newtonian approach. Although a treatise on
physics, electricity was abundantly discussed. In 1761, Nollet’s Lettres sur
l’électricité was translated, most likely by Maria Angela Ardinghelli. After
the 1760s no work on electricity was published in Naples [177].
However it was only with Beccaria, who had begun to experiment with
his lightning rod possibly before Franklin,  that electricity in Italy passed
from living room, newspapers and gazettes subject, to a research topic
within a few years. In the following I report the contribution of some Italian
scholars who met a good international acknowledgment: Giambattista
Beccaria, Gianfrancesco Cigna, Carlo Battista Barletti, Ruggero Giuseppe
Boscovich. Before however a short mention to Frisi is due. There are no
references instead in this book to the two greatest Italian electricity
scholars of the 18th century, Alessandro Volta (1745–1827) and Luigi
Galvani (1737–1798). The choice is motivated by the fact that the lines of
research carried out by them ϐit better in the 19th century than in the 18th
one.
Paolo Frisi, (1728–1784), Italian mathematician, astronomer, and
physicist is best known for his work in hydraulics. Frisi was a member of
the Barnabite religious order, a professor at the university of Pisa and the
Scuole palatine at Milan and a member of most of the major scientiϐic
societies of his time. He was held in such esteem by his contemporaries that
plans for nearly all the major hydraulic works constructed in northern Italy
during his adult life were ϐirst showed to him for inspection.
In electricity his major work was the De causa electricitatis dissertatio
which he presented at the Petersburg prize competition for 1755 of the
academy of science of Petersburg [99]. The winner of the prize was Johann
Albrecht Euler and Frisi classiϐied as second. According to Pietro
Verri (1728–1797), Frisi’s friend and the editor of the famous newspaper Il
caffé, the judges would have preferred Frisi but refused him the prize
because he had written his name on his essay [191].193 In any case Frisi’s
work was quite interesting. The reason that it has not found space here is

because Frisi, as the Eulers, pursued an approach to electricity of Cartesian
mould, that revealed sterile. Both Frisi and the Eulers applied mathematics
to electricity, but it was more to show their ability in the ϐield than to treat
seriously electricity [122].194 Another Frisi’s contribution to electricity was
the Dei conduttori elettrici published in 1781 [100], a short pamphlet
devoted mainly to the problem of the defense against lightnings.
4.3.7 Giambattista Beccaria
Giambattista Beccaria (1716–1781), born in Mondovı̀, Piedmont, entered
the order of Scolopi in Frascati as a novice and changed his baptismal name
Francesco Ludovico into Giambattista. The concrete approach of the Scolopi
schools had predisposed them to a rapid adoption of new scientiϐic and
philosophical trends, an aspect which was signiϐicant for the formation of
Beccaria. His early knowledge concerned Galilean science and Leibniz’s
monadology, learned through Wolff. The subsequent reading of Antonio
Genovesi and perhaps of Voltaire opened the mind of Beccaria to the
knowledge of Locke and Newton. An itinerary not unlike that of other
savants of the time.
After a teaching career started in 1737, eventually, in 1748, he was
offered the chair of experimental physics at the university of Turin,
previously held by Francesco Antonio Garro. The appointment also
sanctioned the transition, at the university of Turin, from Cartesian physics
to Newtonianism. An appointment which, moreover, did not occur without
discontent and lacerations. Garro, supported by Giuseppe Roma—from
Toulouse, belonging to the Order of Minims like Garro—tried in every way
to hinder the newcomer. Exponents of a strongly Cartesian Turin tradition,
in this devoted to the address given to their order by Mersenne, Garro and
Roma on the one hand did not want to lose their place and, on the other
hand, they did not intend to resign themselves to the Newtonian physics
brought by Beccaria [164].
Beccaria’s appointment was due to Giuseppe Francesco Morozzo (1704–
1767),  university reformer in collaboration with the leaders of the pious
schools. It was still Morozzo, who had heard from his envoys in Philadelphia
about the recent electrical discoveries developed by Franklin and the
experiences that proved them, to suggest Beccaria to strengthen his
position from now on, distinguishing himself in this promising scientiϐic
branch. Beccaria got to work and in less than a year, in 1753, he produced
his ϐirst important treatise Dell’elettricismo artiϔiciale e naturale [23].

Beccaria had started his career as a professor teaching Galilean physics
imbued with experimentalism and gathered around him a circle of young
people, including Gianfrancesco Cigna (1734–1790), Joseph Louis
Lagrange (1737–1813), Giuseppe Angelo Saluzzo (1734- 1810). He made
Newtonian physics his own, but more in the methods than in the
mathematical approach. There are numerous references to Newton in his
texts. In particular, the idea of giving up the ultimate explanation of the
origin of forces. “From the phenomena of nature to derive two, or three
general principles of motion, and then explain, as the properties and actions
of all bodily things follow from these manifest principles; this would be a
great advancement of Philosophy; though the reason for these principles
was not known yet” [23].195 Beccaria also attributed to Newton the idea of
an electric ϐluid [23].196
Although the research in electrical phenomena was the main affair of the
intellectual life of Beccaria, he left, published and unpublished, many other
writings on various topics: chemistry, meteorology, optics, astronomy,
hydraulics, physiology. He was also entrusted with tasks of a practical
nature, such as the revision of the system of weights and measures of the
Sardinian states, the installation of lightning rods, the determination of a
plant for the distribution of the waters of the Po. The most demanding of
these works was the measure of the length of the meridian of Turin.
4.3.7.1 Treatises on Electricity
Of the many writings of Beccaria about electricity two treatises are
particularly relevant, the Dell’elettricismo artiϔiciale e naturale of 1753 and
the Elettricismo artiϔiciale of 1772.
The Dell’elettricismo artiϔiciale e naturale was the ϐirst important
Beccaria’s work on electricity. It immediately was seen as a masterful work
of synthesis, clariϐication and development. The starting point was the
concept of a single ϐluid and of positive or negative electricity.
Beccaria offered a rich experimental documentation, partly by himself and
partly by others, exposing Franklin’s theories in an organic and fairly
rational way. The form of presentation used by Beccaria was the sparse and
strictly logical one of mathematical texts, even if his language was not
ϐluent. Apart from the logical form, the text did not substantially contain any
technical application neither of geometry and algebra nor of Calculus; as
was then customary for experimental physics texts. This even though
Beccaria was not completely lacking in mathematics as evidenced by his
important work on geodesy, the Gradus taurinensis of 1774 [30].

The treatise, as suggested by the title, is divided into two books; the ϐirst
addresses the problem of artiϐicial electricity, the second the problem of
natural electricity. The ϐirst book, divided into eight chapters and 464
paragraphs, illustrates the concepts and experiences concerning electric
and non-electric bodies and the diffusion of electric steam (Chap. I); the
motion of electriϐied bodies. Sparks and electric breeze (Chap. II); the speed
with which electric steam spreads. Power of the points and electric
atmosphere (Chap. Ill); the electricity of metals and glass (Chap. IV); air
electricity (Chap. V); water electricity (Chap. VI); the electricity of plants
and animals (Chap. VII); electrical phenomena and light and ϐire (Cap. VIII).
These experiences can be conjectured as largely carried out by
Beccaria starting from April 1752, or even earlier, that is from the moment
when he became aware of the works of Benjamin Franklin published in
London in the summer of 1751, or in Dalibard’s French translation in the
following year [173].197 With clear reference to these experiences,
Beccaria claimed however the originality and novelty of his experiments
and in the presentation letter To the readers he wrote: “You will ϐind,
courteous readers, that in this work I did many times mention of the very
famous electrician Beniamino Franklin and I would do it even more often, if
his discoveries were not well known, and if I did not propose to write about
electricity according to what experiences have shown me, but rather
according to a broader understanding of phenomena, of which with a long
and connected series of my own experiences I immediately ascertained
myself” [23].198
The second book of the Dell’elettricismo artiϔiciale e naturale has seven
chapters. The ϐirst three chapters are dedicated to the description of the
experiences with the Franklin rod and to the demonstration of the identities
between atmospheric and artiϐicial electricities, chapters IV, V and VI were
instead an important contribution by Beccaria to the study of the effects of
lightning in air and water. Chap. VII deal with the role of electricity on
various natural phenomena, such as typhoons, earthquakes, waterspouts,
Northern lights, cohesion, gravity, etc.
Galvani had studied Beccaria’s text; it was also the ϐirst and main
resource of the seventeen year old Alessandro Volta. In a Latin poem
datable around 1764, Volta praised Beccaria, as one of the most recent
discoverers of the electrical origin of lightning together with the American
Franklin [10].199 The Paduan Giuseppe Toaldo (1719–1797) was inspired
by Beccaria for his treatise Della maniera di difendere gli ediϔicii dal fulmine
of 1772 (his pamphlet Dei conduttori metallici a preservazione degli ediϔici

dal fulmine of 1774, contributed largely to remove the popular prejudices of
the time against the use of the Franklinian rod). Beccaria also inϐluenced, at
least indirectly, Carlo Battista Barletti (1735–1800) who was in direct
contact with Cigna, Beccaria’s grandson and pupil and played an important
role in the history of electricity in Italy, but not only.
Franklin praised Beccaria as a master of method and saw in him the one
who had systematically reduced the experiences and stances scattered in
his own papers. He used Beccaria’s text to counter Nollet’s opposition to his
theories. An important tribute was that granted by Joseph Priestley who did
not hesitate, in his monumental The history and present state of electricity,
with original experiments—released in the United Kingdom in 1767 but in
Italy known above all in the French translation of 1771—to pay homage to
him “Signior Beccaria, one of the most eminent of all the electricians
abroad” [171].200
The Elettricismo artiϔiciale of 1772, represents an overall recast of
Beccaria’s work on electricity. Franklin had it translated into English in
1776 as A treatise upon artiϔicial electricity [31]. The book was formed by
six chapters. Chapter I concerned the theory of artiϐicial electricity,
especially in deferent or conducting bodies,201 deduced from the circulation
of the electrical ϐire in the ordinary apparatus. Chapter II dealt with the
theory of insulating bodies, with regard to the charging and discharging of
them. Chapter III on pressing electricity (a term proper of Beccaria), or on
electric atmospheres. Chapter IV on vivid electricity; otherwise on electric
sparks. Chapter V on the electric tickling and wind; on the brush and the
star, with interesting references to the medical uses, the subject of study a
few years later of Tiberio Cavallo (1749–1809) in England. Chapter VI, the
last, on electric motions and on the vindicating electricity, one of
fundamental Beccaria’s concept. In the subsequent sections the contents of
Chap. III on the electric atmosphere and of Chap. VI on the vindicating
electricity will be commented with some details.
Beccaria for his experiments, used an apposite electric machine. It
consisted essentially by a rotating glass cylinder which was rubbed by the
hand of a man. The complex was placed on a platform large enough to
contain one or more men. From a theoretical point of view it was made by
an insulator and two deferents. An insulator (the cylinder of glass), that is
rubbed by a deferent (a man) and that goes to ϐind the other deferent (a
hollow tube in metal) with the rubbed part. Such an apparatus will be the
more perfect as its size and exactness taken together, are the greater.

Fig. 4.24 Beccaria’s electrostatic generator.
Redrawn from [29], Fig. 1 of table I
The machine, shown in Fig. 4.24, is described below using
Beccaria words. In TS, between two poles an insulating body is to be ϐitted,
which in the case of the ϐigure is a cylinder of glass. The frame, made of little
wood beams, and boards, ABCDMNOIK, is destined to support, ϐirst the
insulating body TS, then the wheel R, and lastly it must be able to receive in
M, one man who turns the wheel and another man who rubs the cylinder.
The frame of wood and the man who turns the wheel, all communicate with
the man who rubs. All together may be said to belong to the rubbing
deferent body; their whole assemblage in the following is comprehended
under the name machine. Lastly, the hollow tube of brass Y, a cannon, twelve
feet202 long (about 3.5 m), and a foot (about 30 cm) in breadth, which has
one of its ends shaped like a hemisphere and with the other terminating in a
conic point, stands near the equator of the rubbed cylinder, is the other
deferent body, in which the rubbed cylinder is to diffuse the electrical ϐire
which it draws by the effect of the friction—the property of glass is to draw
ϐire from the man that rubs, or from the machine, or through it, from the
ϐloor—This deferent body, of which the form and size may be varied at
pleasure, is, indeed, usually called the prime conductor; however, in the
following will be used the old name, chain [29, 31].203

4.3.7.2 The Electric Atmosphere
The concept of electric atmosphere was used in the ϐirst half of the 18th
century by electricians, Franklin included, to explain many electrical
phenomena. In the following it is presented the classical concept
accepted by Franklin, and then the radical change introduced by
Beccaria.  According to Franklin, when an excess of electric ϐluid with
respect to the normal one is added to a body, it does not enter inside,
but will ϐlow round the surface of the body and forms an electrical
atmosphere. The form of this atmosphere is that of the body it
surrounds. A shape which may be rendered visible in still air by raising
a smoke from dry rosin.
The form of the electrical atmosphere is that of the body it
surrounds because it is attracted by all parts of the surface of the body,
though it cannot enter the substance already saturated. Without this
attraction it would not remain round the body, but dissipate in the air.
The atmosphere of electrical particles surrounding an electriϐied
sphere, is not more disposed to leave it or more easily drawn off from
any one part of the sphere than from another, for symmetry reasons.
But that is not the case with bodies of any other ϐigure.
Fig. 4.25 Electric atmosphere around a pointed body.
Redrawn from [94], Fig. 8 of the tables of ϐigures
Thus let, said Franklin, for instance, a body shaped as A, B, C, D, E, of
Fig. 4.25, be electriϐied, and consider every side as a base on which the
particles rest and by which they are attracted. So the portion of
atmosphere included in the portion of space H, A, B, I, has the line AB,
for its basis. Now if one would draw off this atmosphere with any blunt
smooth body and approach the middle of the side AB, he must come

very near before the force of this smooth body exceeds the force or
power with which AB holds its atmosphere. But the small portion of
atmosphere between I, B, K has less of the surface to be attracted by
(while at the same time there is a mutual repulsion between its
particles), therefore here one can get it with more ease. And the easiest
of all is between L, C, M, where the quantity of atmosphere is largest
and the surface to attract and keep it back the least.
When one has drawn away some of these angular portions of the
ϐluid, another succeeds in its place, from the nature of ϐluidity and the
mutual repulsion of the electric ϐluid; so the atmosphere continues
slowing off at such angle, like a stream, till no more is remaining. On
these accounts we can conclude that electriϐied bodies discharge their
atmospheres upon unelectriϐied bodies more easily and at a greater
distance from their angles and points than from their smooth sides.
Those points will also discharge into the air, when the body has too
great an electrical atmosphere, without bringing any non-electric per se
near, to receive what is thrown off. Indeed the air, though an electric per
se yet has always more or less water and other non-electric per se
matters mixed with it and these attract and receive what it is
discharged [94].204
The concept of electric atmospheres offered a means for Franklin to
explain various phenomena of electricity and the operation of lightning
rods. The greatest difϐiculties probably arose in explaining the more
traditional phenomena of attraction and repulsion. In the case of the
repulsion of two positively charged bodies, when two bodies approach,
their atmospheres interact and the bodies are rejected. The mechanism
remains however vague. Are there acting forces at a distance? Or
contact; but in this last case how can one explain the repulsion for
sensible distances. But, mainly, how to explain the repulsion between
negatively charged bodies, where atmospheres do not exist at all.
Franklin generally accepted Newton’s ideas, but he was not
Newtonian enough to talk about forces at a distance. He accepted
Newton’s ideas, set out in the Queries of the Opticks for short-range
forces, otherwise he could not speak of attraction between electric ϐluid
and matter and repulsion between electric ϐluid and electric ϐluid.
Franklin’s ambiguity in the use of the concept of force is evident not
only in the use of the idea of atmospheres, but also when he wanted to

explain the distribution of the electric ϐluid within bodies. For example
to explain the concept of normal quantity of electricity he started by a
piece of common matter supposed entirely free from electrical matter.
When a single electrical particle is brought nigh, it will be attracted and
enter the body, and take place where the attraction is every way equal.
If more particles enter, they take their places where the balance is
realized between the attraction of the common matter and their own
mutual repulsion [94].205 But this explanation only makes sense if it is
admitted that remote forces exist, otherwise a particle would remain
where it is attracted by the particles of common matter.
Franklin introduced additional hypotheses about the properties of
electric atmospheres to explain Canton’s experiments of 1753, in which
the discovery of electrostatic induction is recognized today. In
particular:
1.
Electric atmospheres, that ϐlow round non-electric bodies,
being brought near each other, do not readily mix and unite
into one atmosphere, but remain separate, and repel each
other.
 
2.
An electric atmosphere not only repels another electric
atmosphere, but will also repel the electric matter contained in
the substance of a body approaching it; and without joining or
mixing with it, force it to other parts of the body that
contained it.
 
3.
Bodies electriϐied negatively, or deprived of their natural
quantity of electricity, repel each other (or at least appear to
do so, by a mutual receding) as well as those electriϐied
positively, or which have electric atmosphere [97].206
 
Beccaria radically changed Franklin’s concept of atmosphere,
transforming it from a static, or geometric, concept into a somehow
dynamic concept. His more mature ideas on the point are expressed in
Chap. III of the Elettricismo artiϔiciale. At that time he probably had read
Aepinus’ Tentamen, as he mentioned it [29]207 and knew Richmann’s
experiments [29].208

Beccaria began to expose his ideas about the electric atmospheres
by asserting that “The electricity of a body A does not substantially
diffuse into the ambient air; that is to say, if a body A be electriϐied by
excess, the ϐire added to it does not mix itself, even at a perceivable
height, into the substance of the air around it, and if the body A be
electriϐied by deϐiciency, the ϐire drawn from it has not been extracted
from the substance of the ambient air” [29, 31].209 This is a position
already expressed by Canton, at least since 1767, as reported by
Priestley in his The history and present state of electricity: “It is now also
Mr. Canton’s opinion, that electric atmospheres are not made of efϐluvia
from excited or electriϐied bodies, but that they are only an alteration of
the state of the electric ϐluid contained in, or belonging to the air
surrounding them, to a certain distance” [171].210
In essence, the vague idea of a cloud of external electric ϐluid,
although adjacent, to the electriϐied body suggested by Franklin, is
denied. Beccaria speciϐied that this is a fact that he was the ϐirst to
verify experimentally. The nature of electric atmosphere must therefore
be explained in a different way, that is:
The electricity of a body A, actuates the ambient air in such a
manner, that by the means of the same it tends to introduce into
the neighboring body B immersed in it, an electricity contrary to
its own. And it is the air thus actuated, which constitutes what is
commonly called the electric atmosphere [29].211 (D.22)
Beccaria used the term actuate, which is not only his but belongs to the
Italian literature of electricity, to indicate that something happens to
the air surrounding an electriϐied body, but it is not clear what. Air is
somehow electriϐied. Probably the idea that could make it clearer is to
think of the air actuated as a force ϐield. But not a ϐield intended as a
place of points where in fact forces were acting, but a Faraday-
hypostatized force ϐield. It is difϐicult to say that this was a concept clear
to Beccaria; but it had a greater heuristic power than that of Franklin. 
Beccaria suggested that his reasoning was connected to a 1755
Franklin’s essay on Canton’s experience of 1753 [97].212 and proposed
a simple experiment to verify his thesis about the ontology of the
electric atmospheres:

I present a most ϐine ϐlaxen thread to the conductor Y and if it be
held at the distance of a foot, or more, from the surface of it, it
will direct itself perpendicularly to it. I then present to this
thread a rubbed stick of sealing-wax, and it ϐlies from the
conductor; I present to it a rubbed stick of glass, it runs again to
it; which is the same as to say, the thread immersed in the
atmosphere of the body or conductor A, which is electriϐied by
excess, becomes itself electriϐied by deϐiciency. I repeat the
experiment by the means, not of the chain, but of the [small]
beams B or E (?) of the Machine; then the thread ϐlies from the
glass, and runs to the sealing-wax; whence it is likewise evident,
that a body immersed in the atmosphere of another body
electriϐied by deϐiciency, will itself become electriϐied by excess
[29].213 (D.23)
The conductor Y, the chain of his electrostatic machine, is charged by
excess, or (+). So according to Beccaria’s hypothesis the linen thread
must be negatively electriϐied, that is (–). The experiment conϐirms the
deduction since the linen thread is rejected by a sealing wax stick that
has a resinous electricity (–), while it is attracted by the glass that has
electricity (+). Vice versa when the linen thread immersed in the
atmosphere of a negatively charged body it becomes (+).
After having introduced the concept of atmosphere and having
carried out other experiments in conϐirmation of his hypothesis,
Beccaria went on to consider the interactions between electric
atmospheres of differently electriϐied bodies. The rules are:
1.
When two bodies, impregnated with homologous electricities,
meet, these electricities, by means of the atmosphere which
they actuate, endeavor reciprocally to destroy each other.
 
2.
When two bodies impregnated with contrary electricities,
meet, these electricities, by means of their intervening
atmospheres, reciprocally increase their intensities [29].214
 
To a modern readers these experimental (?) rules appears nothing
but a trivial consequence of the electrostatic induction, and so they
would have appeared to Aepinus.

Figure 4.26 shows a graphical representation of the electric
atmosphere of spherical or cylindrical charged bodies (E, e mean
excess, D, d defect and N neutrality). In Fig. 4.26-1 it is shown the
atmosphere of a body E positively charged, whose shape is commented
below:
If a body E, be electriϐied by excess [Fig. 4.26-1], ϐirst a set of
small lines springing against the ambient air from all points of
the surface of the said body E (we shall see hereafter that both
the excess and deϐiciency of electriϐied bodies only take place on
their surface) may very well represent both the excessive ϐire of
such body, and the increased tension exerted by the same ϐire
against the natural ϐire of the ambient air; secondly, the ambient
air may likewise be understood as being divided into successive
exceedingly thin strata, and similar small lines may also, being
understood to be applied to the convex surface of all those
strata, express the direction and manner in which the excessive
tension of the ϐire in excess on the surface of that body,
propagates a corresponding tension or vibration in the ϐire
inherent the ambient air. [29].215 (D.24)
The small lines, named in the above quotation, could indicate for a
modern reader, the lines of force of the electric ϐield, which in the
present case are represented by radial lines passing through the center
of the circular body E. In Beccaria’s words they represent the direction
of the tension or vibration propagated into the air. The closed curves
surrounding the body E are perpendicular to the lines of the force ϐield.
For a modern reader they represent equipotential surfaces. The
thickness of the closed curves represent the length of the small lines,
that is the intensity of the electric forces (on this point however
Beccaria was not fully explicit).
In the case of Fig. 4.26-2, there is a body D electriϐied by defect. The
graphical representation of the electric atmosphere is the same; its
description is a little different however. But in this case too there is an
electric atmosphere, which Franklin could not admit because his
atmosphere was identiϐied by the excess electric ϐluid, which is not
present here. One can think in such a situation only of a complex of

small lines, which from all the points of the ambient air enter the body,
and which mark the defect of ϐire, the defect of tension, which will exert
the residual ϐire on the face of the body against the natural ϐire of the
ambient air [29].216
Fig. 4.26 Beccaria’s electric atmospheres.
Redrawn from [29], Figs. 1–7 of the table VIII
More interesting is the case of Fig. 4.26-3, in which a non-electriϐied,
or neutral body N, is presented to the atmosphere of an excess
electriϐied body E (in modern term it represents a typical case of
induction which involves a displacement of the charges of the body N
towards the opposite part with respect to that exposed to the electriϐied
body). In this case the small lines, which from the atmosphere of E
following their direction enter the portion of the surface of N immersed
in the atmosphere, will mark the natural ϐire, which will tend to leave
that portion of the immersed face; and the small lines, which will arise
from the portion of the not immersed face will mark the excess of ϐire
ϐire, which is pushed away from the natural electric ϐluid of the
immersed face [29].217
Figure 4.26-4 illustrates the case in which a neutral body N is
immersed in the atmosphere of a body charged by defect D; a situation
similar to that of Fig. 4.26-3. Figures 4.26-5, 6, 7 show the interactions
of atmospheres of electriϐied bodies by excess and/or by defect.
Let consider in particular the case of Fig. 4.26-5, where E and e are
two bodies electriϐied by excess. The small lines that come out of the
face of the bodies protrude into the cavity of the successive layers of the

adjacent air, marking the excess of tension that results from the excess
of electric ϐire on the faces of the bodies and the excess of tension that
arises from the ϐire of the air. The mutual opposition, to which the small
lines proceeding from one of the body with respect to those proceeding
from the other would indicate the force with which the two electricities
will tend to destroy. These small lines in between the two bodies
decrease as in the ϐigure and the small lines on the external faces of the
bodies and in the air corresponding to them grow, because precisely on
them the excess of ϐire repelled from the inside will accumulate [29].218
Fig. 4.27 Electric ϐield of a dipole.
Redrawn from [179], p. 6
Figure 4.27 shows potential (dashed lines) and force ϐield for two
equally and contrarily electriϐied bodies (a dipole) as shown in a
modern textbook. The dashed lines should be compared with the closed
curves of Fig. 4.26-7. There are similarities, but also difference. In
particular the curves of Fig. 4.26-7 are rareϐied in between the two

electriϐied bodies and compressed externally; the contrary to what
happens in Fig. 4.27.
A very interesting experiment related to the electric atmospheres,
which was carried out using a device today known as Beccaria well, is
worthy to be commented. The experiment shows both that the electric
ϐield (modern meaning) is zero inside a cavity of conductor and that the
electricity is lodged on the surface only. This result predates that found
by Coulomb in 1786 and by Cavendish in the 1770s. This fact, though
well known is scarcely commented in the literature; for instance
Heilbron in his very compressive treatise Electricity in the 17th and
18th centuries of 1979 did not cite Beccaria’s well.
The electric well in object, shown in Fig. 4.28, is made by the vessel,
or can, A of tin, ϐifteen inches (
) high, and six and a half (
) wide; to prevent its losing of electricity, its edge has been
rounded by the means of an iron ring ϐixed to it. The can was insulated
upon a small table T, raised upon a support of glass V, and electriϐied by
touching it with the hook (or with the coated bottom) of a charged
Leyden jar, held by means of an insulated handle.

Fig. 4.28 Beccaria’s well.
Redrawn from [31], Fig. 1 of Table VI
In this well two parts are distinguished; the ϐirst is the lower part,
that is, that part of its cavity which reaches from the bottom to two
third parts of the total altitude of it; the second is the upper part which,
from thence, extends up to the edge of the well.
The electricity inside the well is measured by means of an
electrometer, named scrutator (saggiatore) by Beccaria,  annexed to a
long stick of sealing-wax whose threads were exceedingly ϐine and only
an inch and an half long; to them are fastened two bits of paper in order
to render their motions within the cavity of the well sufϐiciently
conspicuous. To perceive them the better, the bottom of the well was
covered with a round plate of tin blackened cover. To note that because
of this cover the lower part of the well behaves much like a closed
cavity [29].219
The following results were detected:
I
A man [a Beccaria’s assistant] suspended the scrutator in the
middle of the lower cavity of the well, in such a manner that it
did not touch either the bottom or the sides; Beccaria then
touched the well, at one time with the hook, and at another
time with the outside of a Leyden jar; in both cases the
threads remained unmoved.
 
II
The person who held in his hand the threads of the scrutator
now touched the bottom with them, and then the sides of the
lower cavity, and the threads still remained unmoved.
 
III The same person suspended again the scrutator in the middle
of the lower cavity, without touching either the sides or the
bottom of the well. Beccaria then inserted into the well a small
rod of brass, with a ball at its end, and presented it to the
threads of the scrutator, taking care not to touch either the
edge or the sides of the well, and the threads ϐlight to the ball.
The electricity of the well was then destroyed by earthing it
and the person who held the scrutator drew it out of the well.
Then the threads manifested an electricity contrary to that
communicated to the well. That is, if Beccaria had touched the
 

well with the hook, the scrutator ran to the hook; if he
touched the well with the outside of the bottle, the scrutator
ran from the hook.
IV
Beccaria annexed a short and very ϐine hair laterally to the
lower cavity of the well; the scrutator was again suspended
within it and the well electriϐied with the bottle. Seeing that
both the threads of the scrutator and the hair remained
unmoved, Beccaria put a brass rod (see previous test) into the
well and presented it to the threads of the scrutator and when
the latter ran to the rod the hair diverged a little from the well;
if both the hair and the treads of the scrutator happened to be
near each other, they immediately joined [29].220
 
Beccaria ended by noticing that Franklin had already proposed an
experiment of a cork ball, which, hanging by a silk thread and lowered
into a silver can till it touches the bottom of it, draws no electricity from
it [97].221 He also reported, perhaps with an excess of criticism, the
results referred to by Priestley in his History and present state of
electricity of 1767, saying that the author had made several attempts to
analyze the experiment itself, but which had failed [29, 171].222
The idea of electric atmospheres allowed Beccaria to explain the
attraction and repulsion of electriϐied bodies in a much more
satisfactory way than Franklin could have done. The repulsion of two
bodies both charged positively was usually explained by the repulsion
of the excess of the electric ϐluid of the two bodies. This explanation
seemed to work by admitting that the electric atmospheres of the two
bodies come into contact, but it was not very convincing because a
repulsion also occurred for sensible distances. But the repulsion of two
bodies both charged negatively could not be explained by the
mechanism of the traditional atmospheres, because in this case, at least
according to Franklin there are no atmospheres: “Indeed Dr.
Franklin himself ingenuously acknowledges, that he was a long time
puzzled to account for bodies that were negatively electriϐied repelling
one another” [171].223
And even to me, confessed Beccaria, “the same difϐiculty occurred at
ϐirst; but it had not with me, and I think with great reason, the same

weight it must have had with others, because I did not consider the
divergences as being produced either by the excess, or the defect of the
electric ϐire, absolutely considered; but indeed by the inequality
between the ϐire in the bodies, and that in the ambient air rather from
the inequality between the amount of the electric ϐire of the bodies and
the electric ϐire of the ambient air” [29].224
In truth Beccaria in his work of 1772 did not provide an explanation
of the way the actuated air determines attraction or repulsion, limiting
to the concise statement: “The ϐire inherent to the air tends to balance
itself, but without mixing with the moveable ϐire in the deferent bodies
[...] thus two bodies equally electric always will equally diverge,
whether the excessive ϐire of the bodies surpasses the natural ϐire in the
air or the natural ϐire in the air, surpasses the deϐicient ϐire in the
bodies” [29].225 For a detailed explanation of attraction-repulsion he
referred to previous works, possibly to his letters of 1758 to Giacomo
Bartolomeo Beccari [24], to the letter of 1757 to Benjamin Franklin
published in the Philosophical Transactions for the year 1760 [25],
where his idea of atmosphere was not yet deϐined, and to his memoir
De athmosphaera electrica of 1769, still published in the Philosophical
Transactions of 1771 [28].
Beccaria supposed that attraction (or repulsion) was due to an
active role of air. That is, he sustained that attraction (or repulsion)
could not occur in a vacuum, even tough this fact was contradicted by
many experiences known to him; in particular from those conducted by
Boyle. A modern reader, used to consider as natural electric forces in a
vacuum, is puzzled by Beccaria’s credence and is tempted to consider
the fact as a defect in his argumentation. Indeed it is not the case
because the experiences showing attraction and repulsion in a vacuum
were not considered as deϐinitive at the time because the experimental
conditions made not possible to assert with certainty the existence of
an absolute vacuum. And Beccaria was not the only one who supported
this opinion [107].226)
To prove empirically the need of air for the manifestation of electric
forces Beccaria had already proposed an experiment, according to him
deϐinitive, reported in both his letters of 1757 to Franklin and of 1758
to Beccari.  In the words of Beccaria: A slip of gilt paper of about eight
inches long and four lines broad is rolled up, so as to form a little solid

cylinder D, as shown in Fig. 4.29. It is suspended by a silk thread DG
under an opening of an air pump IHK through the top of which the
metal rod BC passes, having at its bottom the metal ball C. A metal rod
LE is ϐixed, armed with a similar ball on the top, to the plate IK. Now the
spheres C and E are in the same plane within the cylinder D and at
equal distances from it. Then ϐixing the chain AB of the electrical
machine to the rod BC and consequently the electrical ϐire being sent
into the rod BC, it is observed: (1) that before the air is removed, the gilt
paper cylinder D is agitated with the most violent vibrations between
the two spheres E and C. (2) That while the air is removed the agitation
is plainly diminished in proportion to the quantity of air removed. (3)
When as much air as possible is removed the cylinder D hardly stirs.
The air is then restored by degrees and the vibrations increase again in
proportion to the restored air, and at length become as violent as
before. Which circumstances when contemplated in particular, and
considered them also together, show that the quantity or greatness of
electrical motions is owing to the air, either entire or in part [25].227
Fig. 4.29 Attraction and repulsion in vacuum and in air.
Redrawn from [25]. Table XII

Beccaria can thus claim:
To conclude, I attach so much value to this one experience, that
for it alone I think that the oldest question of electricity
[attraction and repulsion], considered as the most difϐicult, has
largely dissolved. For if the electric movements diminish in the
thin air and diminish in proportion to its thinning, it follows that
these movements depend on some action of the electric vapor
on the air [24]228 (D.25)
Then the intricate mechanicistic explanation follows of the attraction
and the electrical repulsion of the bodies by means of the movements of
the air, inspired to Cabeo, which do not take into account the idea of
electric atmosphere, however. According to Beccaria, “the attractions of
bodies, unequally electriϐied, are affected by the electric ϐire of the body
in which it is more abundant, ϐlowing out into the other body, through
the intermediate air and even throwing off that. But that repulsions are
caused by the proper ϐire of bodies expanding itself against the aerial
ϐire, or by the aerial expanding itself more strongly against the proper
ϐire; which expansion however, of the ϐire of one body overcoming
another, seems to happen without the mutual mixture of one with the
other” [25].229
4.3.7.3 Vindicating Electricity
In 1755 Jesuit missionaries in Peking sent a report of the strange
results of an experiment closely related to Symmer’s studies. A thin
glass plate was electriϐied positively by friction and placed on the
(glass) cover of a magnetic compass case. The needle of the compass
immediately rose from its pivot and adhered to the underside of the
cover for some time before returning suddenly to its normal position. If
the glass plate was removed, the needle again rose and remained stuck
to the lower face of the cover for a considerable time, but as soon as the
glass plate was brought back, it felt away again. This could be repeated
over and over again.
Aepinus described this experiment, with some others on electrical
induction (modern term), in a paper he read at the St. Petersburg local
academy in 1758, Descriptio ac explicatio novorum quorundam

experimentorum electricorum [3]. Notwithstanding the relevance of the
phenomenon observed, Aepinus made no mention of it in his Tentamen.
In the paper of 1758, published more or less while he was
publishing his masterpiece, the Tentamen, however, Aepinus had given
a complete explanation of the phenomenon. He stated that Peking
experiments were certainly remarkable and it seemed quite
paradoxical that electricity, became almost extinct and after some time,
without further rubbing, could be resuscitated. Nonetheless, he
thought, it could be shown that these effects followed from the
Franklin’s theory of electricity [3].230
Aepinus explanation, translated into a modern language and
simpliϐied, is as follows. The glass cover of the compass box (by
polarization we would say) developed negative electricity above and
positive below under the effect of the positively electriϐied glass plate
(indeed this is a simpliϐication of the phenomenon); the needle rose
under the net force between the positive and negative electricities of
the glass plane and cover. The positive electricity on the lower surface
of the cover slowly leaks off through the needle, that receive positive
electricity, and drops. On removal of the positively electric glass plate
the needle reascends because of the attraction of the net negative
electricity remaining on the cover. It falls again by replacing the glass
plate because the lower surface of the cover, becoming again positively
electric, repels the positively electric needle. This simple explanation
did not satisfy everyone however. Beccaria, in particular, attempted an
alternative account in terms of a peculiar notion that he called
vindicating electricity (elettricità vindice) that is electricity the
vindicator; an explication that however remained at the
phenomenological level.
Beccaria presented is idea of vindicating electricity in the short
treatise Experimenta, atque observationes, quibus electricitas vindex late
constituitur, atque explicatur of 1769 and in more extended form in the
Elettricismo artiϔiciale of 1772 [27, 29]. In the following it is reported as
he introduced the vindicating electricity in the Elettricismo artiϔiciale.
Two insulating bodies, or an insulating and a deferent body contrarily
electriϐied, after joining together remain strongly united; in which they
differ from two deferent bodies, which having in their mutual contact
equalized their respective quantities of ϐire, repel each other in

proportion to the ϐire that remains in both. Moreover, after an
insulating body has joined with another insulating body, or with a
deferent body, they apparently loose their contrary electricities (so far
as these were equal). As soon as one of the bodies is taken from the
other, it recovers its former electricity. “It is this property which could
be expressed by the words, vindicating electricity” [29].231
Beccaria considered the vindicating electricity a principle of
electrostatics, to be added to Franklin’s principles. In a pamphlet
written in Latin in form of letter to Franklin in 1767, he had written: “I
thought they are wrong, who think your theory is invalidated by
Symmer’s experiment; that all those experiments [...] demand a new
principle, which may be joined with yours and which especially agrees
with yours” [26].232
Indeed Beccaria considered his principle much more acceptable
than to admit two different types of electricity as suggested by Symmer.
Here a severe criticism against the two ϐluid theory:
This is the character of a philosophy illusive, and too lazy to
inquire into the causes of things, thus to imagine ϐluids that must
have such motions as cannot take place in bodies. Bodies
differently electriϐied mutually attract each other: Why? Because
they are animated by two ϐluids that mutually attract each other.
Bodies similarly electriϐied mutually repel each other: Why?
Because they are animated by two ϐluids, the particles of each of
which repel each other, and that in a most similar manner. But
that these are by no means the principles and ways of nature, is
manifest from the exact unity of the effects of those supposed
ϐluids, which unity is absolutely repugnant to the supposed
diversity of their natures; from the impossibility of their
separation, on which separation, nevertheless, every one of their
manifestations must depend; lastly, from the manner after which
they should unite again; which would be entirely opposed to all
phenomena [29].233 (D.26)
Most modern reader would not agree with Beccaria. Indeed they do not
consider that of vindicating electricity a very simple idea and not even

correct at a phenomenological level. This was also the opinion of
Alessandro Volta, who did not share Beccaria’s conception [193].
Very interesting is the complex experiment reported ϐirst in the
work Experimenta, atque observationes, quibus electricitas vindex late
constituitur, atque explicatur of 1769, which I will summarize below
with the explanation, more perspicuous, given by Cavallo  [53].
Fig. 4.30 Experiment on vindicating electricity.
Redrawn from: a [27], Fig. 1 of the table of ϐigures; b [53], vol. 2, Fig. 6 of table IV
With reference to Fig. 4.30a, b, let ABab, represents a plate of glass,
coated on both sides with the two metallic coatings, CDcd which are not
stuck to the plate, but only laid upon it (this is what is known as
Franklin square). From the upper coating CD (Fig. 4.30b), three silk
threads proceed, which are united at their top H, by which the coating
may be removed from the plate in an insulated manner and may be
presented to an electrometer in order to measure its electricity. FG is a
glass stand, which insulates and supports the plate. Let the plate ABab
be charged by means of an electrical machine, so that its surface AB
may acquire one kind of electricity, (which may be called K) and the
opposite surface ab may acquire the contrary electricity, (which may be
called L).

Then, if the coating CD is removed from the plate and presented to
an electrometer, it will be found in the posses of the electricity K, that is
of the same kind with that which was communicated to the surface AB
of the glass plate; from whence it is deduced, that the surface AB has
imparted some of its electricity to the coating. Now, this disposition of
the charged plate to give part of its electricity to the coating, is what
Beccaria denominated the negative vindicating electricity.
If the coating be again and again alternately laid upon the plate and
removed, its electricity K will be found to decrease gradually, till after a
number of times (which is greater or less, according as the edges of the
plate insulate more or less exactly), the coating will not appear at all
electriϐied. This state is called the limit of the two contrary electricities;
for if now the above-mentioned operation of coating and un-coating the
plate be continued, the coating will be found possessed of the contrary
electricity, that is the electricity L. This electricity, L, of the coating is
weak on its ϐirst appearance; but it gradually grows stronger and
stronger till a certain degree; then insensibly decreases, and continues
decreasing until the glass plate has entirely lost every sign of electricity.
By this change of electricity in the coating, it is deduced, that the
surface AB of the glass plate changes property; and whereas at ϐirst it
was disposed to part with its electricity, now, (that is beyond the limit
of the two contrary electricities) it seems to vindicate its own property,
that is, to take from the coating some electricity of the same kind with
that of which it was charged: hence this disposition was called by
Beccaria  the positive vindicating electricity [25, 53]234

Fig. 4.31 Experiment on vindicating electricity.
Redrawn from [27], Fig. 2 of table of ϐigures
Figure 4.31 shows graphically what referred to above. FO and Fo
respectively represent the electricity of the upper and lower surfaces of
the glass plate as furnished by an electric machine; in the following
reference is made only to the upper surface, whose curves are
represented with a thicker lines, a specular situation holds for the
lower part represented with lighter lines. Fu is the electricity measured
on the coating CD when it is removed; more generally the curve 
 represents the electricity measured in the various
times on the coating when it is again and again alternately laid upon the
plate and removed. The curve OQLMN represents the electricity
measured when the coating is on the glass plate [25].235 The curve
HYZ&V represents the electricity measured on the upper surface of the
glass plate.

Fig. 4.32 Volta’s electrophore [46]
From M on, A behaves like the shield of an electrophore; that is
when the coating is off the glass plate and the cover are electriϐied,
when the coating is on the whole does not manifest electriϐication. The
electrophore, shown in Fig. 4.32,236 whose invention was announced by
Volta to Priestley in 1775 [193], consisted of a metal dish containing
the dielectric (insulator) cake B, a wooden shield A covered with tin foil
rounded to remove all corners and points, and an insulating handle.
One can charge the electrophore readily by rubbing the dielectric while
grounding the plate, a procedure that became standard. The
functioning of the electrophore is easily explained with the theory of
induction. When the shield is superimposed to the insulator, for
instance positively electriϐied, the face of the shield in contact with the
dielectric becomes charged negatively, the upper face positively, by
induction. By grounding the upper face, for instance by touching it with
one hand, the shield is fully charged with negative electricity. At this
point the shield is detached from the dielectric with the insulating
handle. This gives a certain amount of negative electricity that one can
use at will. Once this electricity is ϐinished, the operation can be

repeated. The process can last for a long time, also depending on the
properties of the matter used for the insulator B. If there were no
dispersions, the shield could furnish negative electricity for an inϐinite
number of times.
4.3.8 Carlo Battista Barletti
Carlo Battista Barletti (1735–1800) only sixteen wore the dress of the
Scolopi, after a school career where more than mathematics he learned
grammar and rhetoric. He ϐirst taught experimental physics in Chiavari
then in Albenga and Savona, ϐinally in Milan from where in 1772 he was
called to the chair of experimental physics of the university of Pavia.
Here he worked alongside men such as the biologist Lazzaro
Spallanzani (1729–1799) and the mathematician Gregorio Fontana
(1735–1803). He owed this call to his valuable works on electricity
dedicated to Carlo Firmian (1716–1782) governor of the Austrian
Lombardy. In 1778 because his poor health, the chair of physics was
split into general and experimental; Barletti was entrusted with that of
general physics, while that of experimental physics was assigned to a
young Alessandro Volta, linked to him by cordial friendship testiϐied by
close and important correspondence.
In 1796 after the French army occupied Pavia, Barletti, with other
professors from the Pavia university including Gregorio
Fontana, Francesco Antonio Alpruni, Lorenzo Mascheroni,  joined the
Cisalpine Republic, established by the French government. Elected for
the municipality of Pavia in June 1797, two months later he left this
position to assume that of commissioner at the central administration
of the Ticino department, without much success in reality. In 1799 the
Austro-Russian army reoccupied Pavia. Barletti was arrested on
charges of collaboration. During one of the interrogations that he
underwent in the following months, he presented a long self-defense in
which, among occasional certiϐicates of loyalty to the Austrian regime,
there was the confession of that inexperience and that moralism, which
were the causes of his political failure as commissioner. He died while
still being detained for the inquest on his political activity.
Barletti became interested in electricity since the early 1770s; he
did so in the way experimental physics was then practiced by most; that
is without any substantial use of mathematics and any attempt to

formulate mathematical laws. In 1771, after an intense laboratory
work, he published Nuove sperienze elettriche secondo la teoria del Sig.
Beniamino Franklin e le produzioni del P. Beccaria (herein after Nuove
sperientie). In 1773–1774 he collaborated with the Encyclopédie
d’Yverdon [134]. In 1776 his Dubbj e pensieri sopra la teoria degli
elettrici fenomeni (herein after Dubbj e pensieri) was issued followed in
1780 by a pamphlet on lightening and medical use of electricity entitled
Analisi d’un nuovo fenomeno del fulmine ed osservazioni sopra gli usi
medici della elettricità [17].
From 1782 to 1794 he published important works in the Memorie
di matematica e ϐisica della società italiana, which consolidated his anti-
Franklin position to which he eventually arrived [18–21]. With the
publication of a treatise on physics, which had the title Fisica
particolare, e generale Barletti proposed the ambitious aim of gathering
the various chapters of physics in an organic context, tracing them back
to Galileo’s method and Newton’s principles. The dedications of the
published volumes all bear the date 1785; instead, the year of printing
of the individual volumes is missing [52, 135].
Barletti, son of his time, claimed the right to be interested also in
literature and mundane things. In a letter of 1782 to Mario
Lorgna, founder of the nascent Italian society of sciences, later called
Accademia dei XL, of which Barletti will be part, after talking about
scientiϐic books, Barletti continued praying Lorgna to send him the
pastoral drama La ϔida ninfa by Scipione Maffei, L’Alceo by Antonio
Ongaro and La Filli di Sciro by Guidubaldo Bonarelli. Then, fearing
objections from the interlocutor, he added: “You will laugh because a
physicist gives a mathematician such gallant commissions and you will
believe that they are for some elegant physiologist. On the other hand, I
tell you frankly that they are for myself [...]. In this century of humanity,
who can not be gallant?” [136].237
4.3.8.1 From Franklin to Symmer 
From 1771 to 1776, in the years from Nuove sperienze elettriche to
Dubbi e pensieri, Barletti changed his opinion on electrical phenomena,
moving from Franklin to Symmer position. In the Physica specimina of
1772, he still stated: “with a general agreement, Franklin in electric

matter should be considered as Newton in the heaven system” [15].238
And a little later, in the same work, he repeated that the double
electricity—vitreous or positive, and resinous or negative—had to be
explained according to Franklin’s hypothesis, as caused respectively by
excess and defect of the electric ϐluid. Eventually in the Dubbj e
pensieriof 1776 the one ϐluid theory was openly repudiated. The
conversion was considered sensational by the world of scholars of
electrical matters and led Barletti to clash with Beccaria, whom he
considered his teacher and to ϐind himself at the center of controversies
that increased his fame anyway.
Nuove Sperientie
The treatise Nuove sperientie of 1771 opens with the presentation of
the electric generating machine used in the various experiments, shown
in Fig. 4.33. The generator is made of a glass disk ϐixed to the wooden
axis EE, which is made to rotate by the handle A. The disk is electriϐied
by rubbing thanks to two leather cushions LL. Barletti added that an
even more effective result could be obtained by rubbing the disc with
the ϐingers of the hand. The electricity generated is collected by the
chain NN, a brass tube, loaded by means of the two PP brass balls that
are close to the disk, without touching it. Barletti did not indicate any
measurements, but from the drawing, assumed to be in scale,
comparing it with the hand, the glass disk seems to have a diameter of
about one meter.
Barletti gave a deϐinition of the electric atmosphere, which although
similar to that of Beccaria, was devoid of any ontological connotation,
“It is said perceivable atmosphere of any electric body that distance, in
which the signs are observable around it, that is the action on the
bodies immersed in it” [14].239 Differently from Beccaria, that saw his
atmosphere represented by actuated air, Barletti referred implicitly to
an action at a distance, in the footprint of Aepinus, even though he was
not cited in the text.

Fig. 4.33 The electric generator used by Barletti, [14], Fig. 1 of the table of ϐigures
This deϐinition of an electric atmosphere allowed him to formulate a
law (of induction) formally similar to that formulated by Beccaria:
An electric body has the power to change the natural amount of
the electric ϐire in bodies immersed in its atmosphere and it
induce in it electricity of opposite nature [14].240 (D.27)
Assertion he proved with simple experiments.
Barletti’s book attracted Priestley’s attention, who recommended it
to Franklin. Franklin in turn said he was interested in checking the
experiments referred to there and in the letter of reply to Priestley of 4
May 1772 he declared: “I intend soon to repeat Barletti’s experiments,
being provided with the requisites and shall let you know the result”
[98].241
Dubbi e pensieri

Barletti’s most important work, however, is normally considered the
short treatise Dubbi e pensieri of 1776 even though not very known
abroad. The work is divided into two letters, the former addressed to
the physicist Felice Fontana (1730–1805), brother of the
mathematician Gregorio Fontana dated 11 February 1776; the latter to
Alessandro Volta dated March 24, 1776. In both the letters Barletti gave
large space and resonance to Aepinus’ work (the Tentamen), very
original for the application of analytical calculation to electrical laws
and ϐilled with original experiences and declared it necessary to
consider again and with less prevention the main experiences that led
him to the Franklin’s theory [16].242 For historical reason the reference
to Aepinus in the letter to Volta is relevant, because the latter had not
known Aepinus until then.
Below it is reported how Barletti explained his change of ideas on
the nature of electricity: It is therefore necessary in this development,
and reciprocal action of electricity on the opposite faces of the Leyden
jar, to recognize two very different ϐluids, one of which is the positive,
the other the negative electricity form. Nor it seems strange this way of
conceiving the charge of the electric jar, to be contrary to Franklin’s
theory; since it is not an effect of instability to debate, nor an incentive
to try things new, but necessary consequence of truth and evidence, “to
which I willingly sacriϐice any my opinion; I speak of that evidence,
which in your experiences shows the existence of two streams of
electricity in the discharge of the Leyden jar, and renders evident the
real and positive efϐiciency of that kind of electricity, which is believed
to be negative by Franklin’s supporters” [16].243
On the basis of his reϐlections Barletti formulated the following
points:
1.
Exciting, or developing electricity, is nothing but than breaking
down the union of the two ϐluids that constitute the ϐixed state
in the different bodies.
 
2. Each body requires a certain quantity of those ϐluids, either
united and ϐixed, or disunited and dissolved. When the two
ϐluids are disunited, there is electricity manifested by the
known electrical signs. However, they naturally tend to come
 

together, and in reason that they return to their original union,
the electricity balances itself and all signs of it vanish.
3.
The nature of the ϐluid already developed, directed by means
of the conductors to an insulating armed face, determines the
nature of the dominant electricity, which is excited by inϐlow in
the insulating layer. The ϐluid, which ϐirst develops and exits
from a rubbed insulating face, determines its species.
 
4.
According to the different state, or way of union of the two
ϐluids in the bodies, which make, or receive rubbing, or other
equivalent action, one or the other of the two ϐluids develops
and then different signs result.
 
5.
If through a conductor they have free continuous access, the
two opposite electricities will balance at any moment. And if
such a conductor joins two ϐluids already developed and
divided, they will reach their natural union with effects
corresponding to their forces and masses; and this is what the
discharge of a Leyden jar does, that is the electric shock.
 
6.
The mutual attraction of the two ϐluids makes the idea of their
effort more clear than the idea of expansive force, that is
elasticity. For this reason, the effort of a developed ϐluid would
always be exercised equally in every part [16].244
 
The need of the existence of two ϐluids, as well as by experiments, is
also suggested by metaphysical reasons. In fact, Barletti wondered:
“Who can conceive of a nothing in the negative face, as he can of the
excess of ϐluid in the positive? [...] But why am I wasting time and words
in such triϐles, while the impotence of nothing is well known, and the
need for true and real opposing and equal forces, so that all their efforts
are reduced, or kept in balance?” [16].245
After having exposed his conceptions on the nature of electricity
Barletti went on to interesting comments on the behavior of bodies
electric per se (that is dielectrics), with a particular reference to Volta’s
electrophore. To explain the complex phenomena exhibited by

electriϐied dielectrics he made reference to the distinction due to
Gianfrancesco Cigna, between Franklinian and Symmerian electricity,
see Sect. 4.3.8.2. Meaning by the former the part of electricity free and
mobile that can be equilibrated easily as in conductors; by the latter the
other electricity much less mobile and difϐicult to equilibrate, found in
electriϐied dielectrics.
To test the complex way the Symmerian electricity behaves, Barletti
recalled an experiment by Aepinus, without a clear speciϐication wether
or not he repeated it himself. Let AB be the glass tube of Fig. 4.34a, ϐixed
horizontally on the edge of a table by the end B, and pushed out by the
remaining length of a few feet. With the electriϐied tube C one
repeatedly touches the end of the tube A. After this, by exploring the
action of electricity along the entire length of the tube AB, one can
recognize positive electricity from A to E for four or ϐive inches, which is
followed by about two inches of negative electricity from E to D; and
after DB the tube resumes positive electricity, although somewhat
weaker, but still quite notable. This experiment, repeated several times,
constantly presented the same phenomena, even when instead of the
glass tube AB, or C, a solid sulfur cylinder was used [16].246
The explanation of this interesting behavior of the body AB, had
been given by Aepinus in his Tentamen with a thought experiment.
With reference to Fig. 4.34b, suppose that the body B, is electric per se
and of considerable length and that a positively electric body A is
moved close to it. The electric ϐluid of B, because of the repulsion of A,
recedes from the end C toward the interior in such a way that it leaves a
part CE negatively electric while the ϐluid propelled from CE crosses
into EF. This ϐluid should stop here for a moderate period of time at
least, since because of the difϐiculty with which it moves through the
pores of the body electric per se it cannot ϐlow swiftly through the
remaining parts of the body. And for this reason, once EF has become
positively electric, it acts like a positively electric body and repels the
electric ϐluid contained in FG. Applying the same reasoning to the part
GH, it is clear that an alternation of positive and negative electricity
follows.247 Of course a similar phenomenon occurs if the body A is
negatively electric.

Fig. 4.34 Alternating electricity.
a Redrawn from [4], Fig. 42 of table II. b Redrawn from [16], Fig. 4 of the table of ϐigures; also
[4], Fig. 43 of table II
Notice that Barletti introduced his experience without any reference
to the care needed to obtain the illustrated result, unlike Aepinus who
pointed out that the experiment at ϐirst had provided results contrary
to the theory and he had to force the experience. This leaves some
doubt as to whether Barletti actually carried out the experiment. One
more reason for this suspect is the value of the measures of the
electriϐied portion of tube Barletti referred to, very close to those
referred to by Aepinus. According to Aepinus, when he moved the
electriϐied body C to the end A and took it away he did not discover in
the tube AB the state he had hoped to induce in it. So he changed the
method of conducting the experiment somewhat. After everything had
been done as just described, he not only moved the electriϐied body C to
the end A of the tube, but he also rubbed this end several times with C.
After the test had been carried out he found that the end AE was
positively electric for a length of one or ϐive inches; beyond this, a part
EF, about two inches long, was sensibly negatively electric, and beyond
this the tube was again positively electric: weakly so, yet signiϐicantly
enough. He repeated this test and had the same success, and similar
things were observed when using a solid cylinder of fused sulphur
instead of either the tube C or the tube AB [4].248
Barletti ended the exposition of Aepinus’ experiment by praising
him:

Although the illustrious Author speaks very quickly on the
results of these experiences of his, it seems to me nevertheless,
that they derive quite naturally from the electric theory, and
thus bring more light into it, than the whole volume. I compare
similar experiences to those traits of a master in drawing, where
the cross-section of a large building is presented, which explains
better at a glance both the parts and the whole, which would not
be understood by turning it several times separately [16].249
(D.28)
Further Writings
After the publication of the Dubbj e pensieri, Barletti continued his
studies on electricity. In his treatise of 1780 on lightening,
Barletti paused to examine the effects caused by a lightning, which had
hit the wind vane of the church of San Siro and San Sepolcro in
Cremona. By examining the margins of the holes caused by lightning he
believed he could deduce that opposite electricities had simultaneously
hit the wind vane from opposite sides; from this he drew conϐirmation
of Symmer’s hypothesis. But his most important contribution was left
to the Memorie di matematica e ϐisica della società italiana already
referred to. This contribution, even though very interesting, had little
circulation in Europe, both for the difϐiculty of language, Italian, and the
poor spreading of the journal where they were published.
The memoirs of 1788 and 1794 [20, 21], were devoted to the
criticism of Franklin’s theory on the Leyden jar, and are partially of
speculative nature. The memoirs of 1782 and 1784, both having the
same title Introduzione a nuovi principj della teoria elettrica dedotti
dall’analisi de’ fenomeni delle elettriche punte, and divided in part I and
part II, referred instead very numerous and accurate experiments on
the power of points [18, 19]. In total the two memoirs count just less
than two hundred pages; a small treatise indeed.
The ϐirst part of the memoir published in 1782 is divided into two
sections; the ϐirst shows a series of experiments, the second entitled
Introduction to the theory of points in the electrical phenomena, refers
theorems and corollaries. They are demonstrated not by a deductive
method starting from the ϐirst principles of electricity, as Aepinus had
done, but, in the tradition of experimental philosophy, they are a

generalization of the experiments reported in the ϐirst section and are
veriϐied with further experiments.
The experiments of the ϐirst section of the memoir tend to measure
the effects of electricity discharged or absorbed by points against a
Franklin square. The measurement was indeed carried out according to
a scarcely reliable criterion—on this point Barletti was very vague—on
the basis of the observation of the electrical signs perceived as
discharges and brightness. The apparatus used to produce electricity is
not described in the memoir; it is only said that it has a glass disk. Most
likely it is the same electric machine used in the Nuove sperienze
elettriche of 1771. The electricity produced by the machine is collected
by a cannon that can extract it from the leather pads that rub the glass
disk, and in this case Barletti speaks of resinous electricity, or from the
glass disk itself, and in this case it is a question of vitreous electricity.
The point was made by a brass wire with a diameter of one line
(nearly 2 mm) and three inches and nine lines long (less than 10 cm),
terminated by a very sharp extremity. The Franklin square was made
up of a glass sheet of Germany of about 17 
 12 in. (nearly 40 
 30
cm), covered with a tin leaf from the two opposite sides. One of the
faces of the square was opposite the point, the other was grounded. The
experiment consisted in measuring the effect of the point when it was
loaded with a ϐixed and constant number of turns of the glass disk of
the electric machine while the distance between the point and the glass
plate changed. In the ϐirst experiment—named by Barletti point of
resinous electricity—carried out with resinous electricity, one started
from close to the glass plate and then moved away, in the second
experiment—named point opposed to the resinous electricity—one
started from a distance and then got closer. The experiments were
repeated considering vitreous electricity. For the sake of space I do not
report the details of the experiments; I just say that they gave different
results—even a lot—depending on whether one started ϐirst from near
or from far and for the two types of electricity.
The second part of the memoir published in 1784 refers to more
complex experiments, carried out with a more powerful electric
machine, endowed with a greater glass disk, so that one turn of it gave
the same effect of ϐifteen turns of the previous machine. In the memoir

were considered points opposed to points and surface opposed to
surfaces. The memoir ended with a severe criticism of Franklin’s
theories, while Franklin himself is treated with much respect. The
criticism should also be seen as an autocriticism to his previous ideas
about the nature of electricity.
Franklin’s ideas became popular, and he became the founder of a
school and the leader of a systematic sect, and it was enough for
all his conjectures, and even his most daring suspicions were
transformed into dogmas by the bigoted Franklinians and
proposed and defended with a language of fanatical persuasion
[...] But in the midst of many deϐinitions, and many statements,
the electric science did not acquire nothing but ample
paraphrases of the ϐirst facts indicated by Franklin, pronounced
with as much conϐidence and persuasion, as it was the
perplexity and the uncertainty of their author.
[...]
It is neither necessary, nor appropriate to associate to the
error the names of the authors, who contributed to propagate it;
especially when their names don’t affect the reality of things;
and all the better when, when they had the naivety to confess to
having erred in deϐining the starting point; is thus hoped, that
with more mature discussion of facts they could recognize their
blunder [19].250 (D.29)
4.3.8.2 Gianfrancesco Cigna
Gianfrancesco (Giovanni Francesco) Cigna (1734–1790), professor of
anatomy at the university of Turin, was Beccaria’s relative, student and
assistant in the early ϐifties, along with Lagrange and Saluzzo. He
combined medical teaching and medical practice with a good success.
To his researches in medicine, physiology and chemistry, he combined
all his life researches in electricity, which although of poor health, he
continued to pursue with tireless activity. He was extremely thorough
and rarely happy with what he got. His works are not very numerous,
but in his drawers at the death a remarkable number of ϐinished but
unpublished works was found.

In 1757 Cigna, Lagrange and Saluzzo, who attended seminars of
Beccaria, had a dispute with the master about the possibility that
combustion and animal life lasted for a long time in a conϐined and
closed space; it seemed to them that this was possible and they drew
from it a refutation of the phlogiston theory, supported by Beccaria. The
thesis of the three young people was erroneous; Cigna himself will later
write a special memoir to deny it, the De causa extinctionis of 1767 [62],
but the disagreement with the master, energetic temperament and not
very tolerant of criticism continued. The conϐlict between Beccaria and
Cigna did not end after the publication of the denial. Only in 1778
Beccaria, seriously ill, asked Cigna for a medical consultation and the
two were paciϐied. In any case the three young people, Cigna, Lagrange
and Saluzzo, continued the experimentation, establishing a private
society which would later become the Accademia reale delle science of
Turin, to which Beccaria never wanted to join. For some more
biographic information on Cigna see [13, 189].
Even though only occasionally Cigna wrote on electricity, he was
noticed abroad, especially by Nollet, who saw him as an allied against
Beccaria, and by Priestley who read and appreciated his presentation of
the two ϐluid theory. This international recognition was surely due to
the great ability of Cigna as an experimenter, but it also depended on
the fact that electricity was then a new and fertile ϐield and the ϐirst
who cultivated it, even though not a specialist in the ϐield, could receive
a good harvest.
Cigna had already included electrical experiments, following
Beccaria’s approach before the contrast, in his doctoral theses of 1757
that he intended to submit for the aggregation to the medical college of
Turin. After a break he continued his studies on electricity and
magnetism and in 1759 published the De motibus electricis with
comparative analysis of the theses of the unique nature of the electric
ϐluid, the most common at the time, and of the one recently proposed
by Symmer, which explained the totality of electric phenomena from
the contrasting action of two opposite ϐluids. The conclusion was that
both theories could adequately explain the experimental appearances,
so that there was no way, with the knowledge currently available, to
carry out an experimentum crucis that conclusively could decide on
their validity. To reach such an apparently agnostic result, Cigna

compared the evidences adduced by each of the two theories, by
classifying them; especially that of Symmer so that Priestley, having
read Cigna’s memoir, considered it a presentation and a development
more important than the original formulation: “They were diversiϐied,
and pursued much farther by Mr. Cigna, of Turin, who has also
explained them upon the principles of Dr. Franklin theory; though he
was of opinion, that no experiments that had yet been made were
decisive in favour of either of the two hypotheses” [171].251
In the following, I will illustrate some experiences carried out by
Cigna in his work De novis quibusdam experimentis electricis [63],
widely commented by Priestley [171].252 One set of experiments
reproduced in a varied form Symmer’s. In one of the experiments,
Cigna insulated a plate of lead and bringing an electriϐied silk ribbon
near it, observed that it was attracted very feebly. Bringing his ϐinger to
the lead, a spark issued out of it, upon which it attracted the ribbon
rigorously; after this lead and silk both together showed no signs of
electricity. Upon the separation of the ribbon, they again both appeared
to be electriϐied and a spark was perceived between the plate of lead
and the ϐinger [63, 171].253
In another experiment, two plates of glass laying upon a smooth
grounded conductor were rubbed in the same manner as the ribbons
had been rubbed, they likewise acquired electricity and adhered ϐirmly
to one another and to the conductor. When they were together, they
showed no signs of electricity. When they were separated from the
conductor and kept together, they showed, on both sides, a vitreous
electricity and the conductor, if it had been insulated, contracted a
resinous electricity. The two plates of glass when separated from each
other, got the two electricities; the upper of the vitreous and stronger,
and the lower of the resinous and weaker [63, 171].254
Priestley gave relevance to a new method invented by Cigna of
charging a Leyden jar. He insulated a smooth plate of lead, and while he
brought an electriϐied body, as a stocking, to it, he took a spark with the
wire of a phial from the opposite side; and removing the stocking, he
took another spark with his ϐinger, or any conductor communicating
with the ground. Bringing the stocking nearer the plate a second time,
he took a second spark, with the wire of the jar, as before; and,
removing it again, he took another, in the same manner, with his ϐinger.

This operation he continued, till the jar was charged; which, in
favorable weather, may be done with very little diminution of the
electricity of the stocking [171].255
Cigna offered further examples, however, and one deserves
attention because it suggested the principle of the electrophore.
Approach a charged ribbon to a lead plate; draw a spark from the lead,
endowing it with an equal dose of electricity of the opposite sign; lay
the ribbon on the plate and all signs vanish. Remove the ribbon, a small
spark passes, ribbon and plate regain their electricities; the plate’s
residue may be drawn off entirely by grounding, but the ribbon’s
cannot. Indeed, it can still charge the metal many times by induction
(modern interpretation); with Cigna Words “It is possible to ϐind an
easy method of multiplying the electricity without rubbing [sicque
modum inveniemus facilem electricitatem absque frictu multiplicandi]”
[63].256
When Cigna read the letter of 1775 in which Volta described the
electrophore to Priestley a device that reproduced results very close to
those illustrated above, he considered himself a victim of plagiarism,
and complained publicly about it. The question was debated and
resolved favorably to him by Beccaria and the physicist Antonio Maria
Vassalli Eandi (1761–1825): “This is the electrophore expressed by our
doctor Cigna in the ribbon and in the insulated lead sheet [...]. The
perpetuity that Mr. D. Alessandro [Volta] has attributed to his
electrophorus is only a greater durability of the electricity impressed in
the resin” [188].257
Cigna made a considerable difference between the electric ϐluid
which gives the shock, and that on which some other phenomena of
coated glass depend. He laid two plates of glass, well dried, one upon
the other, as one piece; the lower of them being coated on the outside;
and, when they were insulated, he alternately rubbed the uppermost
plate with one hand, and took a spark from the coating of the lower
with the other hand, till they were charged; when the coating, and both
the plates adhered ϐirmly together. Giving a coating to the other side,
and making a communication between that and the other coating, the
usual explosion was made. But the plates, though thus discharged, still
cohered; and though, while they were in this state, they showed no
other sign of electricity; yet, when they were separated, they were each

of them found to be possessed of an electricity opposite to that of the
other. If the two plates were separated before they were discharged,
and the coating of each were touched, a spark came from each; and
when put together, they would cohere as before, but were incapacitated
for giving a shock [63, 171].258 He, therefore, compared the electricity
which gives the shock to the electricity of a metal plate; which is lost
with taking one spark and the electricity by which the two plates of
glass cohere. The one (named Franklinian) is dispersed at once, but the
other (named Symmerian) slowly; the one existing, as he supposes, in
the conductors, or upon the surfaces of the electrics, and the other in
the substance itself [63, 171].259

4.3.8.3 Ruggero Giuseppe Boscovich
Ruggero Giuseppe Boscovich (1711–1787) was a polymath;
astronomer, mathematician and physicist, Jesuit, philosopher, diplomat
and poet born in the Venetian Republic of Ragusa. His national
belonging is a source of discussion. He was a Croatian native speaker;
father originally from Herzegovina and mother of Italian ancestry. He
however was educated in Italy and wrote nearly all his papers in Italian
(and Latin of course). From this point of view there is any meaning in
listing him among Italian scholars.
Boscovich  was a typical 18th century example of a cosmopolitan
intellectual: though he studied, lived and worked mainly in Italy, he
spent ten years in France, and stayed in various capitals, including
Warsaw, London, Vienna and Constantinople. He dealt mainly with
mathematics and physics, but he was good in other ϐields also, poetry
included. In his study of the shape of the Earth he used the idea of
minimizing the sum of the absolute values of the deviations. He
introduced a procedure for calculating the orbit of a planet based on
observations of its position and also gave a procedure to determine the
equator of a planet. Also important are his contributions to mechanics
and statics [51]. Nearly all Boscovich works are published in the
Boscovich National Edition directed by Edoardo Proverbio [175].
One of his most famous and lasting work was the Philosophiae
naturalis theoria redacta ad unicam legem virium in natura existentium
(simply the Theoria in the following) of 1758, which was reissued both
in Latin and English in 1763. Boscovich’s treatise can be compared, for
what concerns his approach to the philosophy of nature, to the texts of
mathematical physics of Euler and d’Alembert. In these, as in the
Theoria, there is basically no reference to experiments devised to verify
the proposed theories, as is instead typical of the experimental
philosophy of the period. Empiric knowledge naturally enters, but
essentially as background knowledge.
The work was not immediately an international success, but it was
read in Italy and inϐluenced numerous scholars including Alessandro
Volta [165].260 It was however much appreciated later on and possibly
inϐluenced the conception of matter at the turn of the 20th century

[184]. The Theoria dealt only marginally with electricity, a topic that
was not central to Boscovich but nevertheless attracted his attention.
Boscovich knew about the work of Beccaria and Franklin. Current
studies have found no evidence that Boscovich directly or indirectly
knew the works of Aepinus, the Tentamen in particular, which was
published more or less at the same time as the Theoria. Nevertheless, I
will argue that it is to Aepinus that his approach is closer.
In the Theoria Boscovich carried out an operation of consistency on
the concept of force introduced by Newton, in the Principia and in the
Queries of the Opticks. In the Principia, as commented in Chap. 1,
Newton seemed to see force from a phenomenological point of view; it
exists but its causes are unknown and perhaps not even interesting.
The most important example of force was gravity. In the Opticks
Newton thought that at the microscopic level forces of various kinds
could intervene different from gravity, which could be both repulsive
and attractive. Newton seemed to attribute essentiality to these forces
at some time; that is, the forces had an ontological value and not just a
phenomenological status, as Newton himself had tried to credit in the
Principia. Boscovich simpliϐied Newtonian physics by introducing a
single type of force, whose cause was of no interest, showing that with
it one could obtain the expressions of all the forces of nature: gravity,
capillarity, magnetism, elasticity, plasticity, etc.
Boscovich acted as a mathematician who takes metaphysics into his
hands in a situation in which a canonical philosopher does not have
sufϐicient tools to allow him an elaboration. That is, a metaphysics that
serves to give reason to actual experiences. In some way he performed
an operation similar to that carried out by Euler for the notions of
space and force. And he did so perhaps in a more articulated and
convincing way. For what force is concerned Boscovich took a reverse
path with respect to Euler. For Euler force was indeed a primitive
concept, but its existence, its cause, was justiϐied by the impenetrability
of bodies. For Boscovich it was the impenetrability of bodies which
depended on forces, given as existing in themselves, which prevent the
interpenetration of the bodies because as they approach to each other,
an increasingly large repulsive force intervenes.
Boscovich’s idea of force and matter is well described in the
summary he gave at the beginning of his Theoria. According to him

matter consists of points that are perfectly simple, indivisible, of no
extent, separated from one another. Each of these points p has a
property of inertia and in addition a mutual active force depending on
the distance between p and another point q in such a way that, if the
distance is given, both the magnitude and the direction of the force are
given. If the distance is diminished indeϐinitely, the force is repulsive,
whilst if the distance is increased, the repulsive force will be
diminished, vanish, be changed to an attractive force that ϐirst of all
increases, then decreases, vanishes, is again turned into a repulsive
force, and so on many times over like a sinusoid; until at greater
distances it ϐinally becomes an attractive force that decreases
approximately in the inverse ratio of the squares of the distances
[38].261 Figure 4.35 shows a possible trend of the force-propensity
(acceleration?) between two points.
The change in sign of force was most probably suggested to
Boscovich by Newton’s Query 31 of the Opticks, well known to him:
“And as in algebra, when afϐirmative quantities vanish and cease, there
negative ones begin; so in mechanics, where attraction ceases, there a
repulsive virtue ought to succeed” [161].262 But while in Newton one
could see the possibility that attractive and repulsive forces stem from
different causes, in Boscovich, who is concerned only with effects, this
problem did not exist, and one cannot see but a unique function of
forces varying with distance.
About the nature of force Boscovich was ofϐicially agnostic. Despite
he gave greater importance to the idea of force than Newton did, he
avoided hypostatization and considered force as simply a name to be
given to the fact that there are approaches and departures between
bodies even in the absence of visible causes. He started his presentation
of force by asserting the Newtonian principle of inertia for which an
insulated point admits an inherent propensity to remain in the state of
rest, or of uniform motion in a straight line, in which it is initially set.
But if there is also another point anywhere, there is an inherent
propensity to compound the preceding motion with the motion which
is determined by the interaction of the two points.

Fig. 4.35 A possible function of force-propensity f versus distance r for two points.
Adapted from [38], p. 41
Indeed any two points of matter are subject to a determination to
approach one another at some distances and in an equal degree recede
from one another at other distances. This determination is called force
by Boscovich, which may be repulsive or attractive if the propensity is
to increase or decrease their distances respectively. Force does not
denote the mode of action, but the propensity itself, whatever its origin,
of which the magnitude changes as the distances change. this is in
accordance with a certain deϐinite law, which can be represented
mathematically [38].263
Boscovich spent pages and pages to show that his concepts of force
and matter were able to explain every phenomenon and were fully
satisfactory from a metaphysical point of view. And he tried to show
that his idea of an immaterial point was not so strange as it might
appear at ϐirst sight; indeed it was an essential condition for a complete
coherence of his system.
What will attract the attention of physicists towards the Theoria
was not so much his idea of a point without extension, which remained
hard to accept and which could appear interesting only for a
philosopher or a metaphysician, a concept in which one usually sees the
inϐluence of Leibniz. It was rather the unifying power contained in it. A
single function that describes the trend of force as a function of

distance, although complex and strange, was able to explain all the
phenomena of nature. And the immaterial point was often replaced by a
very small point without creating any embarrassment.
In the following I will not comment on the degree to which
Boscovich succeeded in achieving his unifying purpose, for which
reference can be made to [115]; rather I will brieϐly explain his
conception of matter, which then serves to relate to his ideas on the
nature of electricity. Only a metaphysical argumentation on the nature
of force is reported below to show Boscovich’s way of reasoning.
The objection is frequently brought forward against mutual
forces that they are some sort of mysterious qualities or that
they necessitate action at a distance. This is answered by the
idea of forces outlined in Art. 8, & 9. In addition, I will make just
one remark, namely, that it is quite evident that these forces
exist, that an idea of them can be easily formed, that their
existence is demonstrated by direct reasoning, & that the
manifold results that arise from them are a matter of continual
ocular observation. Moreover these forces are of the following
nature. The idea of a propensity to approach or of a propensity
to recede is easily formed. For everybody knows what approach
means, and what recession is; everybody knows what it means
to be indifferent, & what having a propensity means; & thus the
idea of a propensity to approach, or to recede, is perfectly
distinctly obtained. Direct arguments, that prove the existence of
this kind of propensity, have been given above. Lastly also, the
various motions that arise from forces of this kind, such as when
one body collides with another body, when one part of a solid is
seized & another part follows it, when the particles of gases, & of
springs, repel one another, when heavy bodies descend, these
motions, I say, are of everyday occurrence before our eyes. It is
evident also, at least in a general way, that the form of the curve
represents forces of this kind. In all of these there is nothing
mysterious; on the contrary they all tend to make the law of
forces of this kind perfectly plain [38].264

According to Boscovich,  all the non extended points the matter is made
of, are identical; that is they do not differ from each other. Boscovich
believed that the points cannot touch, and one point interacts with
another by the attractive and repulsive forces according to the law
exempliϐied in Fig. 4.35. Boscovich’s elementary points are different
from the atoms of the Greek philosophers and also from the
contemporary concept of the chemical atoms, simply because
traditional atoms have a size. It so could be wrong to call Boscovich’s
elementary points as Boscovich atoms, as sometimes it occurs. As a
matter of fact Boscovich never called his points atoms. He used the
term atom in his Theoria however, but it was to mean particles
composed of elementary points, which remain together owing to the
mutual forces [38].265
Two or more particles may be situated, in respect of distance and
position so to constitute a particle of ϐirst order. Two or more of these
particles may constitute a particle of the second order, and so on. And
though all the elementary particles of matter are equal to each other,
from their combination and the joint action of the elementary forces,
there must result an inexhaustible variety of mutual actions fully
capable to explain all the phenomena of the material world.
There could be a huge difference amongst different groups of points
which form the different kinds of particles of which bodies are formed.
First difference comes from the number of points that make up the
particle, then the different disposition of points. Indeed by the assembly
of many equal points, it can result particles that act on each other with
forces that may have any trend, that is attractive repulsive and even
changing from one kind to another by varying the distance, and in the
limit particles may be as inert [38].266 The forces of the particles may
be such that one side is able to attract a second particle, while the other
side repels. Indeed, there may be any number of places in the surface of
even a spherical particle, which attract another particle placed at the
same distance from the centre, whilst others repel and still others have
no action at all. For, at these places there may be a greater or less
number of points than in other places, and these may be situated at
different distances from the centre and from one another [38].267
In a few sections Boscovich dealt with electricity, by naming
Franklin and Beccaria: “Further, it is clear that from these principles

there can be derived an explanation of all the chief phenomena in
electricity; the theory of these, discovered by Franklin in America with
truly marvelous sagacity, has been greatly embellished & conϐirmed, &
even further developed at Turin by Fr. Beccaria, a most learned man, in
his excellent work on this subject, published some years ago” [38].268
Boscovich summarized Franklin’s theory without presenting any
substantial criticism, also apparently accepting the idea of electric
atmospheres, what it was not necessary for his theory. It seems as
Boscovich renounced to consider long range forces, necessary to
explain in a simple way the phenomenon of induction and all
experiments connected with it, as Aepinus did.
A concept that Boscovich regained from his idea of ϐire is that of
relative saturation. That is there is a natural amount of electric ϐluid
that can be contained in a body; if it has more or less of this amount the
body shows electric signs.
Thus, of two of these bodies, of which the saturation
corresponding to their natures is not the same, one will be
electric by excess, & the other by defect, with respect to one
another. If these bodies approach one another to within that
distance, for which the particles surrounding the bodies, &
adhering to them like atmospheres, can act upon one another;
then, from the body that is electric by excess this ϐluid will
immediately ϐlow towards the one that is electric by defect, until
equality is reached. During this ϐlow, the substances which
respectively yield & receive the ϐluid will simultaneously
approach one another, if they are light enough, or if they are
freely suspended; & if the motion of the concentrated matter is
vigorous, there will be explosions, & sparks, & even lightning,
thunder, & thunderbolts [38].269
Boscovich also commented the experiment of the Leyden jar and
Franklin’s square and remembered Franklin’s principle, for which when
bodies that are naturally electric (in modern term dielectric) have a
very small thickness, such as a thin glass plate, a much greater amount
of the ϐluid can be collected on one of the surfaces and at the same time

from the other surface exactly opposite to it there can be withdrawn an
equal amount of the ϐluid.
Below Boscovich explanation, nearly verbatim follows: When the
plate is thin, there can be a repulsion, exerted by the particles of the
ϐluid situated on one of the surfaces, acting on particles situated near
the other surface. Still, it may be that this is not sufϐicient to overcome
the attraction by which the particles (of common matter) adhere to
those that are next to them. But, if this is assisted on the one side by the
attraction of a conducting body moving towards it, the repulsive force
can overcome the attraction. Now, when this is the case, part of the ϐluid
will ϐlow off from the surface and enter the new body that has been
brought close to it. And since part of the repulsive force ceases owing to
the removal of this part of the ϐluid, there will adhere to the nearer
surface a greater amount of the electric ϐluid brought to it by the water
or the gold; until, however, communication being restored by means of
a series of bodies that are merely electric by communication, the ϐlow of
the ϐluid from one surface to the other will be unhindered. Moreover,
this explanation is conϐirmed by the fact that, if the experiment is tried
with a plate that is too thick, it will not succeed [38].270
Boscovich ended his consideration by commenting: “Whether these
things are indeed as stated cannot be determined, unless it can be
shown at the same time that it is impossible for them to be otherwise
[38].271
Boscovich continued to be interested in electricity even after the
publication of the Theoria. He discussed the subject with Nollet during
his stay in Paris, between 1759 and 1760. He also discussed about it
with English electricians in his long stay in London, where he arrived in
1760 from Paris. In London he met Benjamin Wilson (1721–1788) and
Edward Delaval (1729–1814). At the end of 1760 he also related to
John Michell (1724?-1793), who showed him a series of experiments
carried out with artiϐicial magnets [174].272 But mainly he met
Benjamin Franklin,  who already knew Boscovich by name, having more
or less direct knowledge of Sopra il turbine che la notte tra gli xi e xii
giugno del 1749 danneggió una gran parte di Roma published by
Boscovich in 1749 [37]. The ϐirst meeting with Franklin took place in
the 1760s. The two met again, much later, in Paris in the 1770s
[174].273

After the meetings of London with the British electricians,
Boscovich continued in his interests on electrical phenomena. In 1764,
he interacted with Giambattista Beccaria for the installation of a
protection system for the spire of the Milan cathedral from the action of
lightning [50]. In 1767 he wrote a letter to Giovan Stefano Conti (1756–
1768) in which he reported on the latest experiences on electricity at
his knowledge [39].274 In the letter he commented on the results of
Beccaria in particular the account of “an experiment [of] the Jesuits of
Peking [...]. They electriϐied a glass placed it on a compass, that is on the
glass of it: the magnetized needle raised with his tip, and attached itself
to the glass, but after a while it felt back, repulsed with greater force
than the one, which gravity only exercises, and detaching [...] there are
also the phenomena of Vimmer’s [Symmer’s] socks, and even more
varied [...] but truly the good P. Beccaria does not have the gift of
clarity”
Then Boscovich concluded: “You need a tome to follow the theory,
and give behind a thousand varied cases, and a thousand effects [...].
The book [Elettricismo artiϔiciale] will come, but I don’t know when [...].
This subject is now more than a science; but in all the experiments I
have seen or heard, the same general laws hold true” [39].275
4.3.9 Charles Augustin Coulomb
Charles Augustin Coulomb (1736–1806), one of the major ϐigures in the
history of physics and engineering, during his youth attended lectures
at the Collège Mazarin and the Collège de France in Paris. Here he
received a good classical grounding in language, literature, philosophy
and the best available teaching in mathematics, astronomy, chemistry
and botany. Then Coulomb moved to Montpellier where joined the
Société des sciences of Montpellier as an adjoint member in 1757 and
read several scientiϐic papers. At this stage his interests were mainly in
mathematics and astronomy as testiϐied by several papers on these
topics he read at the Societé.
He came back to Paris in the autumn of 1758, seeking the tutoring
necessary to enter the EƵcole du genie at Mézières, at the time the
foremost technical school of Europe, and found it in Charles EƵtienne
Louis Camus (1699–1768). After some months of study he passed the

entrance examination. At about this time he formed lasting friendships
with Jean Charles de Borda (1733–1799) and Charles Bossut (1730–
1814), his teacher of mathematics; he also attended Nollet’s physics
course.  This comprised general notions of matter and gravity,
mechanics, optics, astronomy, electricity and magnetism.
Coulomb graduated in 1761 with the rank of lieutenant en premier in
the Corps du génie and shortly after, in 1764 he was sent to Martinique
where he remained until 1772.
In 1774 Coulomb began to work on a memoir on magnetic
compasses that subsequently shared the ϐirst prize in the Paris
academy’s competition for 1777 [68]. After 1779, being sent to the
shipyards at Rochefort as a military engineer, Coulomb engaged in a
lengthy series of experiments on friction. In 1781 the result of these
researches won the double ϐirst prize at the Académie des Sciences de
Paris and gained Coulomb election to the academy as associé géomètre
a position that changed in that of associé mécanicien in 1784. The year
1781 marked a decisive break in Coulomb’s life and career.
Permanently stationed in Paris, a member of the Académie, he had
solved his problems for a living. Since then he was able to devote the
major portion of his time to researches in experimental physics.
Coulomb the engineer became the physicist and public servant. He read
twenty-ϐive scientiϐic memoirs at the Académie des sciences de Paris
(and at its successor, the Institute de France) from 1781 to 1806. In
addition to his physics research Coulomb participated in 310
committee reports to the Académie concerning machines, instruments,
canals, engineering and civic projects.
Coulomb devoted much time to public services. His last employment
was as inspector general of public instruction from 1802 until his death
in 1806, in which ofϐice he played a signiϐicant role in supervising the
establishment of the French system of lycées. Two decades of ϐield duty
in the Corps du génie accustomed Coulomb to a modest style of life. The
probate description of his personal belongings accords with this. He
was not a men of letters; his library contained 307 books, 238 of which
were technical volumes issued by the Académie des sciences de Paris.
Coulomb’s major interest was long engineering and mechanics; his
researches in the ϐield included fundamental memoirs on rupture of
beams and masonry piers, soil mechanics, friction theory, and

ergonomics. In these he can be considered one of the greatest engineer
of the 18th century Europe. His most important memoir on engineering
was also his ϐirst, Essai sur une application des règles de maximis et
minimis à quelques problèmes de statique, relatifs à l’architecture of
1773 [67]. One of the purpose of the memoir, was “to determine, as far
as a combination of mathematics and physics will permit [to
understand], the inϐluence of friction and of cohesion in some problems
of statics” [67].276 In the memoir of 1773 there is almost an
embarrassment of riches, for Coulomb proceeded to discuss the theory
of rupture of masonry piers, the design of vaulted arches and the theory
of earth pressure, where he developed a generalized sliding wedge
theory of soil mechanics that remains in use today in basic engineering
practice of soil mechanics [123]. Still in this memoir Coulomb tackled
the problem of the resistance of inϐlexed beams [48].277 The fact that
Coulomb dealt with the problem of friction is most probably due to the
interest that friction has in applications. Friction had always been
ignored by mathematicians and (experimental) physicists and regarded
as a disturbance, to be overlooked in ideal conditions. An important
exception is represented by Guillaume Amontons (1663–1705) with his
De la resistance causée dans les Machines, tant par les frottemens des
parties qui les composent, que par roideur des cordes qu’on y employe, &
la maniere de calculer l’un & l’autre of 1699 [9]. For Coulomb friction
became a fundamental phenomenon to be studied when practical
problems were to be solved.
Another Coulomb’s celebrated study was the Théorie des machines
simples, with which he won the Gran Prix from the Académie des
sciences in 1781 [79]. He investigated both static and dynamic friction
of sliding surfaces. Another subject of much interest to Coulomb was
the question of efϐiciency human work, and in this ϐield (now named
ergonomics) he made one of the most signiϐicant contributions before
the studies of the American Frederick Winslow Taylor (1856–1915), a
century later. His works, started in the 1770s, are summarized in the
Résultats de plusieure expériences destinées à déterminer la quantité
d’action que les hommes peuvent fournir par leur travail journalier,
suivant les différent manières dont ils employent leurs forces of 1799
[78].

However this portion of Coulomb’s work suffered of a relative
neglect and with the exception of his friction studies, most of his
mechanics memoirs were little known until the early 19th century. A
reason was that in formulating methods of approach to fundamental
problems in structural mechanic he introduced advanced mathematics,
in particular the variational calculus, rather than to give numerical
solutions to speciϐic problems as preferred by the 18th century
engineers and physicists. It required that group of Polytechniciens,
teachers and students, in the early nineteenth century to appreciate the
importance of his work in the context of the new engineering
mechanics.
His work in physics was integrally tied to his work in mechanics. In
1784 he presented at the Académie des sciences de Paris the
Recherches theoriques et expérimentales sur la force de torsion et sur
l’élasticité des ϔils de métal [69]. This is now classiϐied as a work in
structural mechanics but in turn it provided him with a means to
investigate quantitatively electricity and magnetism.
Coulomb’s major contributions on electricity and magnetism, a part
from the prize-winning memoir Recherches sur la meilleure maniere de
fabriquer les aiguilles aimantées on magnetic compasses of 1777 [68],
can be be found in the famous series of seven electricity and magnetism
memoirs read at the academy of Paris from 1785 to 1789 [70–75, 77]—
collected also in a single volume [76]—(here the dates are those
appearing in the front cover of the Mémoires of the Académie, printed
in the period 1788–1793) and several magnetism memoirs prepared
after the French Revolution.278
It has been noticed that Coulomb made his ϐirst mention to
electricity in his work on the magnetic compass by suspecting a
possible electrical disturbance in the motion of the magnetic needle.
And rather than to explore the electricity, his researches on the subject
would be motivated also to eliminate electric disturbance in his
compass [84].279 Personally I cannot imagine Coulomb dedicated only
to applications and measurements.
4.3.9.1 Coulomb’s Role in the History of
Electricity: Physics, Metaphysics and

Mathematics
The signiϐicance of Coulomb’s contribution to electricity and the esteem
in which he was held, is amply testiϐied by the adoption of the
Coulomb as the unit of electric charge and the universal reference to
the law of force in electrostatics as Coulomb’s law.
Indeed, almost every modern book of classical electrostatics follows
a physical mathematical approach based on a few principles drawn
from the real world. It is postulated: (1) the existence of electrical
particles of two different types; the former mobile and negatively
charged, the electrons, the latter ϐixed and positively charged, the
protons; (2) they attract or repel each other by obeying the law of
Coulomb. All the properties of electricity, at least in conducting bodies,
induction, capacitance, charge density, etc. are justiϐied theoretically.
Recurse to experiments is needed only to determine the numerical
values of some characteristic constants. It is thus not strange that
Cavendish’s and Aepinus who gave fundamental contributions to
electricity before Coulomb are, today, almost forgotten.
But, as it is so common in history, the lapse of time has idealized
what Coulomb actually did compared with what Coulomb’s name
signiϐies. The actual historical development is hidden in the axiomatic
formulation of modern electrostatics. Coulomb studied a very limited
class of phenomena, especially the distribution of charges on the
surface of conducting bodies of simple form, put into contact with each
other and possibly separated. Even if he could manage very small
charges, a small sphere could equally have a potential of many volts,
while Volta, for instance, was studying minute potential differential.
And he, and his pairs, derived his inspiration more from
Franklin, Canton, Aepinus and Cavendish than from Coulomb.
In any way Coulomb’s memoirs on electricity, notwithstanding their
limits, had a great impact on his contemporaries, much more than those
of Cavendish for instance who presented results not less relevant than
Coulomb’s. Cavendish’s published papers were written in a highly
condensed, austere style, not very easy to be read by experimental
physicists. Moreover they were published on a journal, the
Philosophical Transactions, whose readers, a least for electricity, were
more interested in experiments than in theory. On the contrary,
Coulomb published on the Mémoires de l’Académie des Sciences de

Paris, a journal whose readers appreciated much a mathematical
physical approach. Moreover in Coulomb’s writings, there was a
different rhetoric. Formal arguments were interspersed among
practical details of apparatus, result tables, brief speculative remarks
and comments, which made his memoirs much more pleasant and
simple to read than those of Cavendish. The problems of electricity
were contained in a milieu of much more familiar mechanical ideas.
Indeed one might say that Coulomb brought electricity into the familiar
terrain of mechanics, rather than introducing mechanics, when
necessary, into the domain of electricity [84].280 Coulomb’s memoirs
were generously sprinkled with mathematical calculations and
arguments, but nowhere did he seriously attempt the abstraction that
characterized Cavendish’s argument. He was thus able to convince
many of his contemporaries of the feasibility of a mathematical
approach to electricity.
Coulomb had no difϐiculty to treat with actions at a distance, then
also accepted in France, Descartes’s home. He conceived electricity as
due to corporeal ϐluids and did not stress whether they were of a
continuous nature or made up of particles; in both cases volumes can
be considered small enough to represent elementary particles of
electricity. The particles exchange among each other forces at a
distance, of attraction or repulsion, whose cause was not indicated.
Unlike Aepinus, who considered actions among ϐinite portions of
electric ϐluid, Coulomb  dealt with inϐinitesimal elements in order to
apply Calculus. What allowed him to go beyond Aepinus was however
the fact that he was able to specify the form of the function of the
electric force. Only in this way he could develop effectively his
mathematical approach. His was a great step which would not be
allowed by experiments alone, but strongly suggested by the
application of the new mathematics for the force of gravity, for instance.
According to Coulomb electric forces are exerted through a space
whose nature is not speciϐied. In particular, in no case did
Coulomb refer to an empty space and in no case was its Euclidean
nature questioned. He did not operate at a cosmological level, like
Newton, and his electric bodies are naturally immersed in air. No
reference is given to the interaction among the electrical forces and the
particles that make up air. Of course Coulomb cannot be blamed for not

having understood the complex role that air plays in the transmission
of electricity. At the time there was no widespread agreement on the
role of air. Cavendish conceived, for example, dry air as a non-
conductor, but due to the inevitable presence of humidity, the air could
become a conductor.
Coulomb made extensive use of mathematics in his electrical works;
the simplest situation occurred in the ϐirst two memories of electricity,
aimed to specify the form of the function of force between two
elementary charges. A more complex situation occurred when he came
to deal with the density of electricity on the surface of simple
conducting bodies, spherical, in most cases, and cylindrical. He, like
Cavendish, had a good knowledge of mathematics of the time, in
particular he knew well the latest developments of differential and
integral calculus. But he had to face complex problems, too difϐicult to
deal with even the reϐined tools he mastered; problems that will be
addressed later by Poisson basing on Laplace’s studies on gravitational
problems. As an engineer, however, Coulomb intended to propose an
albeit approximate solution, not so much of calculations but of physical
modeling. His models were brilliant, sometimes even ingenious, but at
the same time they could be coarse and inconsistent.
Coulomb’s law in modern notation has the expression:
with 
 a constant of proportionality depending on the units of
measurement and on the medium surrounding the two electric
elementary charges (positive or negative), 
 and 
, placed at a
distance r. Although the analogy with Newton’s universal gravitation
equation is evident Coulomb never referred to it explicitly. Actually
Coulomb did never formally write an equation similar to that reported
above; he rather used the language of proportions. Moreover he did not
comment the possibility of medium different from air, accounted for by
the constant 
.
Coulomb’s law was proved into two steps; before the dependency
on r was veriϐied experimentally, then the dependence on 
 and 
was someway argued.

Coulomb demonstrated the dependence on the inverse of the
square distance, taking it as a hypothesis and then testing it
experimentally. Cavendish had provided a very elegant and sufϐiciently
rigorous proof in some of his 1770s manuscripts, which however
remained unpublished (did Coulomb know them?). His proof was
however indirect (see Fig. 4.13) and the forces, mechanical magnitudes,
were evaluated only by measuring non-mechanical magnitudes, such as
electric charges. The proof of Coulomb was instead of the direct type
through the measure of a force by means of the torsion balance; a
decidedly more intuitive approach for his contemporary physicists.
There were historical, metaphysical and empirical reasons that
pushed Coulomb toward the hypothesis of the dependence on the
inverse of the square of the distance, the same that had motivated
Newton in his law of universal gravitation. Indeed, before
Coulomb, many other scholars besides Cavendish had suggested the
inverse square law: Michell (1750), Lambert (1758), for instance. In
[105] ten instances are documented, some of which were known to
Coulomb; but probably a careful investigation should ϐind much more
instances. Priestley, by quoting a Franklin’s experiment which showed
that inside an electriϐied cup there is not electric activity, commented:
“May we not infer from this experiment, that the attraction of electricity
is subject to the same laws as that of gravitation; therefore according to
the squares of the distances. Since it is easily demonstrated, that were
the earth in the form of a shell, a body in the inside of it would not be
attracted to one side more than another” [171].281
The problem of precursors is a classic in the history of science; on
this matter it is noteworthy to cite I Bernard Cohen who refers to
Franklin :
Often, once a theory has proved successful, jealous
contemporaries (like later historians) can show how each part
of the theory had already been stated; yet it is to be noted that
such prior statements achieve at this later date a signiϐicance
they never had before. many of the elements of Franklin’s theory
and a number of the new facts he and his Philadelphia friends
discovered could be found in the literature of the 1740s—but
found more easily after Franklin’s work than before it [65].282

Coulomb’s attribution is justiϐied by the fact that he chose the law of
inverse square among many other possibilities that at the time were
considered equally plausible and he was the only one who made a
deϐinitive and motivated choice. Coulomb chose the inverse square law
and ‘proved’ it with very accurate measurements and after him the law
of the inverse square was substantially undisputed in the applications,
even though some doubts about its exactnesses remained. Indeed
nearly a hundred years later when Maxwell was editing Cavendish’s
unpublished papers he found that the direct experimental evidence for
this law was no better than it was one hundred years earlier. Maxwell
himself subjected this law to new experimental test; but it was
Cavendish’s not Coulomb’s methods that he used.
The dependence on 
 and 
 could be proved in principle
experimentally by using the torsion balance, but Coulomb did not do so
and this part of the law was left unproved. He declared that the
dependence was obvious (see below). Indeed this proportionality was
given for granted by Aepinus as well, but most probably the inspiration
came from Newton gravitational law. Not for nothing Coulomb referred
to 
 and 
 as the electric masses.

4.3.9.2 Memoirs on Electricity
What a modern reader ϐirst notices in the memoirs of Coulomb on
electricity is the almost complete absence of references to the theories
of his time on the matter and the almost total absence of quotations,
with a few exceptions. He admired, and cited, Aepinus for his effort to
reduce electricity and magnetism to mathematical analysis and
Musschenbroek for his ability as an experimenter. He cited only once
Franklin [68],283 even though he met him and operated with him. He
was also nearly completely silent about causal explanations, even
though for the schools he attended he might have had a good
knowledge of natural philosophy and perhaps also of metaphysics. But
in his writings on electricity, he avoided entering the ϐield of
philosophy, as instead did the ‘mathematician’ d’Alembert, of only one
generation older than him, long a colleague of his at the Académie, for
general physics and mechanics.
There could be many reasons that may have suggested his approach
to Coulomb. He may not have been thoroughly familiar with the
theories of magnetism and electricity to risk exposing them. Or, more
probably, it may have been that he had decided that these theories were
of little interest and in any case the subject of extensive discussions and
not worth repeating, dedicating the limited space offered by the
magazine to present new results. Of course the debate of ‘savants’ on
the nature of electricity inϐluenced Coulomb’s ideas. But he saw in the
approach advocated by Aepinus the only way to proceed. He accepted
the hypothesis of an electric ϐluid, or rather of two, but instead of going
to hypothesize causal mechanisms he preferred to refer to proximate
causes, that is to attractive and repulsive forces.
Even he was never explicit about the theories he accepted about
electricity, his position is clear and the language he adopted was
different from that of Aepinus who married the hypothesis of a single
ϐluid. Coulomb spoke of two types of electricity, one positive and the
other negative, but never in the sense of excess or defect of the electric
ϐluid as Franklin and Aepinus did. He spoke of electric density (densité
électrique), using the term as electricity per unit of volume or surface;
but sometimes simply as an amount of electricity. He also spoke of

electric masses (masses életriques) to refer to the total amount of
electricity [71];284 but he never used the term electric charge, used
instead by Franklin. 
The First Two Memoirs on Electricity. Experimental Proof of Coulomb’s
Law
Coulomb’s ϐirst two memoirs on electricity ofϐicially had the aim to
evaluate experimentally the mathematical expression of the forces
between two electrically charged spheres versus the distance between
their centers. A very particular problem at ϐirst glance and perhaps
uninteresting. In reality, the spheres, when they are small, lend
themselves very naturally to represent elementary electric masses. So
measuring the forces between two small spheres is equivalent to
measuring the force between two elementary electric masses.
Coulomb declared his true purpose only at the end of the second
memoir, but without giving it particular emphasis.
Before even introducing experiments on electriϐied spheres,
Coulomb presented his apparatus to measure forces: the torsion
balance, one of the most interesting device used by him, exposed in the
ϐinal form in his paper Recherches théoriques & expérimentales sur la
force de torsion, & sur l’élasticité des ϔils de métal of 1784 [69].
Coulomb was not the ϐirst to propose the use of torsion elasticity of
wires to measure torques. John Michell’s is considered as a possible
precursor [132],285 but there are not convincing proof of the fact and
thus Coulomb at the moment should be considered as the inventor of
an effectively working torsion balance [105].286

Fig. 4.36 Coulomb torsion balance. From [70], Fig. 1 of Table XIII

Coulomb’s torsion balance shown in Fig. 4.36, is constructed on a
glass cylinder ABCD, having both diameter and height of 12 in.
(32 cm).287 In the upper part of the cylinder there is a glass plate with
two equal holes m and f having a diameter of 20 lignes (4.5 cm).288 At
the central hole f a vertical tube 24 in. (65 cm) long is cemented. In the
top of this tube it is placed the torsion micrometer op. It contains
several parts, including a circumferential scale divided into degrees, a
knob with scale pointer oi, and a pincer q to hold the torsion wire. The
matter used for the torsion wire used was either silver, copper, or silk.
At the lower extremity of the wire, it is attached a thin metal pincer P,
one ligne (2.2 mm) in diameter, which weighs enough to keep the
torsion wire taut. The pincer held a thin, horizontally suspended needle
of eight inches (21.5 cm). A tiny, gilded, elder wood pith-ball a, about
two lignes (4.5 mm) in diameter, was ϐixed at one end of the straw and a
small, vertical paper plane g at the other. The paper plane served both
as a counterweight and to damp out oscillations. A graduated scale ZOQ,
marked in degrees, was attached around the outside of the large glass
cylinder.
The balance was then employed in the following way. The pointer oi
of the micrometer at the top of the cylinder raising from f is turned
until the horizontal needle ag containing the pith-ball a, is lined up with
the zero on the graduated scale ZOQ, meantime the angle measured by
the micrometer reads zero. Then a thin, insulated rod mt with a second,
identical pith-ball t, mounted at its end was inserted through the hole m
so that it touches the pith-ball a. The balance is now ready for electrical
experiments.
The torsion wire, used in the ϐirst memoir of 1785, was of silver
28 in. long (about 75 cm) such that its mass was of 1/16 of grain
(corresponding to nearly 0.02 mm of diameter, about as thin as a
human hair) and with a lever arm of 4 in. of the needle, a force of only
1/40800 grains289 (
 Newton) sufϐiced to turn the balance
through three degrees, which is according to Coulomb the maximum
precision allowed by his balance, due to environmental disturbance
[70].290 A precision that even today is not easy to pair.
The sensitivity of the balance referred to above was evaluated by
Coulomb not experimentally but rather calculated using the formula

found in the memoir of 1784:
for the torque of the wire, where 
 is the diameter of the wire,291 l its
length, B the angle of rotation and 
 a constant depending on the used
material [69].292
In the ϐirst of his memoirs Coulomb’s declared objective was to
prove the following proposition:
The repulsive force between two small spheres electriϐied with
the same type of electricity is inversely proportional to the
square of the distance between the centers of the two spheres
[70].293 (D.30)
The proposition is assumed as an hypothesis to be veriϐied
experimentally and not as a result of induction from a series of
experiments. Indeed only the result of three experiments, or tests, are
reported, too few for the validity of induction.
In the ϐirst test, Coulomb charged an insulated pin by a Leyden jar
or an electrostatic machine. He next inserted the pin through he hole m
to touch to the two pith-balls a and t. These, having received the same
amount and kind of electricity, separate by a certain distance d.
Coulomb noted the separation in degrees on the lower scale ZOQ. In the
second and third tests the micrometer was rotated so that the distance
between the two pith-balls a and t was forcedly reduced. The results of
the three tests are reported in the Table 4.6 [70],294 with the angles
deϐined in Fig. 4.37a. This ϐigure illustrates the position of the needle
and the two pith-balls a and t. Straight line 
 represents the needle
in the virtual initial position (that is the position which a would have
for the rotation of the micrometer only), 
 it in the ϐinal position; 
is the angle measured in the micrometer, d the angle measured in the

scale ZOQ—or equivalently the distance between the two pit balls—and
x the total angle of torsion of the wire, calculated as 
.
The last row of the table, which is not due to Coulomb but mine,
reports the product of the total torsion angle, proportional to the
torque of the wire (and thus to the force of repulsion) and the square of
the distance between the two pith-balls; if Coulomb’s hypothesis, for
which the electric force is proportional to the inverse square of
distance, is true this product should be the same for all the three
texts.295 Indeed, this is substantially the case: “It results indeed from
these three tests that the repulsive force the two balls electriϐied with
the same kind of electricity follow the inverse ratio of the square of
their distances” [70].296
Two factors must be accounted for in measuring large-angle
separation of the pith-balls. The ϐirst is that the force between the balls
goes not as the arc d in degrees but as the chord (dashed segment ta in
Fig. 4.37a). The second that the arm of the lever, the segment upon
which the pith-ball a acts is not equal to Ca (see Fig. 4.36, right bottom)
but actually this value multiplied by 
. For a pith-ball separation
not very much greater than 30 , however, as in the present case,
Coulomb noted that these two factors tended to cancel and that the
forces can be calculated simply from the torsion separation in degrees.
Table 4.6 Angles of torsion in the test of repelling electriϐied bodies, [70], pp. 575–576
Micrometer setting (
)
0
126
567
Separation of pith-balls (d)
36
18
8.5
Total torsion angle 
36
144
575.5
46656 46656 41580

Fig. 4.37 Positions of the pith-balls and angles of torsion
Coulomb did not comment the discrepancy of the third test; a part
from error of measurements and the leakage of the electricity, one
reason could be due to the large angle of torsion, over a full tour of 360
, and in this case the linear relation between torque and torsion angle
is no longer strictly valid.
Notice that Coulomb believed he had tried his proposition using
only a few measures, which among other things only conϐirmed it in an
approximate way. A modern reader, even a not shrewd one, has the
doubt that Coulomb reported only the measures that best ϐitted the
result and had discarded others. It must be taken into account,
however, that the ϐirst memoir on electricity is only one of a series of
memoirs in which the theme of the experimental determination of the
inverse square law occurs more or less directly. Without these further
memoirs, perhaps Coulomb’s proof could not be considered nothing but
an uncertain statement.
It must be signaled that in the recent past it has been doubted that
Coulomb have reported the actual results he found in the experiment,
because attempt to reproduce them failed. As often occur in the history
of science, as in the case of the experiment of the inclined plane of
Galileo for instance, later researches has shown instead that Coulomb’s
results could possibly be reproduced and that most probably they were

those found by Coulomb [157].297 This suggests that experimental
investigations, carried out by specialists in the Paris academy of
sciences, were carried out under high standards of accuracy.
In the second memoir Coulomb faced the more complex case of
bodies with the opposite kind of elasticity and thus attracting. This time
it was very difϐicult to use the same apparatus employed to measure the
repulsion because the resistance to torsion of balance varies
(approximately) linearly with the torsion angle while the force of
attraction with the inverse of the square of distance (and thus of the
angle of separation) of the two pith-balls. This can determine situations
of unstable equilibrium and it can happen that the pith-balls attract
each other until they come into contact, thwarting the experience.
Coulomb explained the problem with the use of the laws of mechanics.
With reference to Fig. 4.37b the following equilibrium equation can be
written for rotation:
in which the ϐirst member represents the resisting force of the torsion
wire (notice the force and not the torque), being x the total angle of
rotation and n a constant of proportionality. The second member of the
equality concerns the electric active force, where D is what
Coulomb called the product of the electric masses, that is, with
Franklin’s nomenclature, the product of the charges of the two pit balls
[71]298 and 
 represents the distance d between the two pith-
balls.
The previous equation can be rewritten as 
, which
is a function always positive in the interval 
; its values at the
extremity of the interval are zero, and thus D has a positive maximum.
Coulomb found this maximum at 
, which gives 
. If the value of the electric masses and the initial
position 
 are such that 
 no equilibrium is possible and the

two pith-balls get into touch. But even for 
, when 
the equilibrium becomes unstable and the two pith-balls merge [71].299
Coulomb attempted with some caution to use the same procedure of
the ϐirst memory, but soon realized that, because of the instability of the
equilibrium, the operation was too delicate and thus he moved from a
static to a dynamic measurement approach, returning to the method of
time oscillations he had used in his 1777 on the magnetic compass.
Fig. 4.38 Timing oscillating set.
Partially redrawn from [71], Fig. 1 of Table XIV
The dynamic balance, illustrated in Fig. 4.38, consists in a large
globe Gr, made of cardboard covered with a tin stain sheet, centered in
G. A gilded paper disk l is attached to a shellac-thread needle lg
suspended by means of a tin silk tread sc, g is a counterweight to

maintain horizontal the needle. After charging the large globe the small
disk l is grounded so that an electric density of sign different from that
of the globe is inducted in it. Then the suspended needle is set into
motion and the oscillations are measured for different distances rl
between the gilded paper disk and the globe. Coulomb made some
assumptions:
1.
The electricity is uniformly distributed on the surface of the
globe Gr (on this point he will argue in the fourth memoir).
 
2.
The torque of wire sc is small with respect to the force
exchanged between the two electriϐied bodies, thus its
resistance to torsion plays no role.
 
3.
Given the quite large distance Gl, the electric force on l has a
constant value and direction.
 
Because of the ϐirst assumption, and from Newton’s results in the
Principia,300 to which however there is no explicit reference,
Coulomb could assert that “when all the points of a spherical surfaces,
act with an attractive or repulsive force, inversely proportional to the
square of the distances, the force on a point located at a whichever
distance from the sphere, is the same as when all the spherical surface
is concentrated in its center” [71].301 This means that all goes as if on
the paper l acted a force due to the electricity of the sphere located at
the distance Gl. And because of the second and third assumptions all
goes as the needle gl were a normal gravitational pendulum, whose
period of oscillation T is inversely proportional to the square root of the
force 
, playing the role of gravity acceleration, or 
.
In substance if the experimental results would show a relation of
proportionality between T and d, they proved the law of the inverse
square [71];302 indeed if 
 and 
, it immediately follows 
, or equivalently 
. That is force varies as the inverse
of the square of the distance.

Table 4.7 reports the experimental results (only three as in the case
of the ϐirst memoir), which substantially support the assumption.
Table 4.7 Period of oscillation versus distance [71], p. 584
Distance Gl (inches)
9
18 24
Time for 15 oscillations 20 41 60
Predicted results
20 40 54
Coulomb noticed that if one could take into account the lost of the
electricity occurred between the ϐirst and the last experience (four
minutes) the time of the latest oscillation would be a little less than the
reported value and the agreement with the theory would increase.
Although Coulomb ‘proved’ directly by experiment that the electric
force f laws vary inversely as the square of the distance, he never
explicitly demonstrated that they are also proportional to the product
of the respective electric masses. That is, using a modern notation,
Coulomb had only demonstrated that 
, but not that 
, where 
 and 
 are the electric masses.
At the end of the second memoir, he formulated the proposition that
is today known as Coulomb’s law:
The electric action, whether repulsive or attractive of two
electriϐied globes and consequently of two electriϐied molecules,
is in the ratio compounded of the densities of the electric ϐluid of
the two electriϐied molecules and inversely as the square of the
distances [71].303 (D.31)
Without any further comment.
Only in the part of the second memoir, related to magnetism, he was
a little bit more explicit, by declaring that the proportionality with
respect to the electric masses is evident in itself: “The magnetic ϐluid
acts by attraction or repulsion according to the ratio compounded
directly of the density of the ϐluid and inversely of the square of the
distances between its molecules. The ϐirst part of this proposition does
not need to be proved” [71].304

Notice the reference, in the statement (D.31) above quoted by
Coulomb of his law, both to globes and molecules. All Coulomb’s
experiments in the ϐirst two memoirs concerned attraction or repulsion
between (small) globes, or spheres; the conclusion at the end is a law
that is assumed to be valid also for small (elementary) electric masses.
Actually Coulomb statement appears to be contradictory to a
scrutiny. Indeed if Coulomb’s law were valid for molecules it could not
be exactly valid for globes also. This because when two globes are put
close to each other their electric molecules interact, producing a
polarization. Simple calculations shows that in the case of globes
Coulomb’s law needs a corrective factor, less than unity, which is the
lower the greater the ratio between radius of the globes and their
distance [84].305
The validity of Coulomb’s law for elementary particles of electricity
and not only for two spheres transforms the problem from one-
dimensional—force between two spheres in the direction of the two
centers—into a multidimensional one; in fact, multiple forces can act
on an elementary particle and in different directions from neighboring
particles. The parallelogram rule for the composition of forces can be
adopted; in this way it is implicitly assumed that the electricity value of
the individual particles does not change due to the interaction with the
others. This assumption is certainly acceptable when conceiving the
phenomenon of electricity associated with a material ϐluid, whose
electrical characteristics are invariable (law of conservation) and the
electric forces deriving from this ϐluid depend only on its quantity.
Still in his second memoir [71]306 and in the ϐifth [74],307 to be
commented in a more extended way below, Coulomb measured the
force on a charged globe (body) for a given distance from an electriϐied
body C, then touched the globe (body) with an identical uncharged
globe (body). By symmetry, he could take the two globes to divide their
electricity equally. After separation, he could measure the force
between one of the globes and the electriϐied body C and found it has
halved. But Coulomb was not explicit on the point. If he did he would
have suggested a way to give a measure to the electric masses,
assuming an arbitrary unity of measure (that is a given sphere charged
always with the same procedure).

Third, Fourth and Fifth Memoirs: Mathematics and Experiments
In his third memoir, Coulomb examined losses due to leakage of electric
ϐluid, a phenomenon to which he gave great relevance. He used
Calculus, starting from the assumption that electricity loss is
proportional to the electric mass, in the elementary time dt. Which
gives an exponential trend. Coulomb saw leakage as taking place by
direct contact on a molecular level, through electricity-sharing either
with adjacent air molecules or across the small idio-électrique (that is
dielectric) supports holding the electriϐied body. The ϐirst effect was for
him usually the most relevant. Experiments with electricity leakage and
conceptions of material behavior led Coulomb to the theory that in
nature there is probably no perfect idio-électrique; that is, all bodies
have a limit above which they cannot resist the passage of electricity.
Incongruences of Coulomb’s theory of leakage can be read in [22].308
The fourth memory has a more theoretical trend; its purposes are
declared at the beginning:
Here it is proved two main properties of the elastic ϐluid:
The ϐirst: that this ϐluid does not spread over any body by a
chemical afϐinity or by an elective attraction, but that it
distributes itself, between different bodies put in contact, solely
by its repulsive action.
The second: that in conducting bodies, the ϐluid which has
reached a state of stability [emphasis added]309 is spread over
the surface of the body and does not penetrate into the interior.
[73].310 (D.32)
In the following only the second properties is discussed. Its proof is
carried out both with empirical and theoretical approach. This property
at Coulomb’s time was an acquired results; however not a really
convincing proof was presented.
Coulomb needed a more sensible torsion balance to perform his
experiments and was able to obtained one with the sensitivity of
1/60000 of grain for a rotation of an angle of 
, that is more than
forty times more sensitive than the balance used in the ϐirst memoir.
The balance was used as an electrometer with the gilded paper

attached to the needle suspended to the torsion wire electriϐied
permanently. Then the body electriϐied to test, having the same kind of
electricity as the gilded paper, is presented to the electrometer.
The electricity density was measured in the different points of the
electriϐied body by means of a small gilded paper disk (known as
Coulomb proof plane) with a diameter of 1 line 1/2 (
 mm) and 1/18
of lignes (
 mm) of thickness attached to the end of a shellac thread
of 1 ligne (2.2 mm) of diameter (see Fig. 4.36, object n. 4).
Coulomb assumed that the gilded paper put into contact with an
electriϐied body picks up a density of electricity equal to that of the
conductor where it is touched, because of its smallness [73].311
In the experiment described below, Coulomb employed a conductor
made of a solid wooden cylinder 4 in. (11 cm) in diameter pierced with
several shallow holes 4 lignes (1 cm) in diameter and in depth. After
charging the wooden cylinder, Coulomb touched the proof-plane to
points on the surface and then noted the resultant deϐlection of the
electrometer by the proof-plane. If he applied the proof plane to the
bottom of one of the holes in the wooden body and then presented it to
the electrometer he found no signs of electricity. That is, presented to
the outside of the body, the proof-plane indicated electricity there, but
on the inside it indicated no electricity.
Coulomb will return in the sixth memoir to the experimental proof
that electricity in a conductor is only lodged on the surface. Insulate a
conducting body and electriϐied it, said Coulomb, and then form an
envelope cut into two parts, which leaves a little play between it and
the body. Whether this envelope has or not the same ϐigure as the body,
no matter the success of the experiment. With the body placed on an
insulator, and enclosed between the two parts of the envelope, he
connected the envelope to the body by iron sticks. Removing the two
envelopes, he found, by means of the electrometer, that all the
electricity of body went to the envelopes and that the body, either had
preserve nothing, or keep only an imperceptible part [74].312 One
recognizes here, albeit in a different form, the famous experience of
Cavendish left in the drawer [22, 58].313 Did Coulomb see it?
The experimental result about the distribution of electricity in a
conductor is followed by an analytical proof, presented as a theorem:

THEOREM. Whenever a ϐluid, enclosed in a body where it can
move freely, acts by repulsion in all of its elementary parts [...]
and the repulsive action of the ϐluid elements which produce its
elasticity is greater than the inverse of the cube, as, for example,
we have found for electricity, which is as the inverse square of
the distances, then the action of the masses of electric ϐluid
placed at a ϐinite distance from one of the elements of this ϐluid
being not inϐinitely small relative to the elementary action of the
points in contact, all the ϐluid must move to the surface of the
body and there must not remain any at all in its interior [73].314
(D.33)
Coulomb proof, quite simple, consists in a reduction to the absurd. The
hypothesis to be contrasted is: There is some electric ϐluid inside the
body and all the electric particles are at rest. With reference to Fig. 4.39,
let consider a small element of surface dae of an electriϐied body and a
point a on it. From a trace the normal ab to the surface and through the
point b pass a normal plane dbe. Then consider a small element dce
symmetric to dae with respect to de. Now, said Coulomb,  as “the law of
continuity holds”, it is necessary, as dae is made inϐinitely small, that the
ϐluid density at point c either be equal to, or differ only inϐinitesimally
from, the density at point a. Consider now the point b coinciding with
the barycenter of dcea; the forces that the two symmetric parts dae and
dce exert on it are equal and contrary. Because b is in equilibrium, and
the sum of all the forces acting on it must be zero this means that the
force of the ϐluid in the rest of the volume (AFBecd) on b is zero. But as
the electric forces among the electric particles vary proportionally to
the inverse square of the distance, this is not possible—unless the
spatial density of the electricity everywhere inside and on the surface
of the body is zero which is not the case by the ϐirst part of the
hypothesis—a result that Coulomb had proved in a note of the second
memoir [71].315 So the forces of the rest of volume (AFBecd) acting on b
are both zero and non zero, which is absurd. Thus admitting
equilibrium there cannot be electric particle inside the body.

Fig. 4.39 Equilibrium inside a conductor.
Redrawn from [73], p. 76
Coulomb proof is however partially ambiguous. Apart from the
validity of the demonstration referred to in the second memoir, about
whose validity I do not pronounce, regarding the value of forces of the
rest of volume (AFBecd) on b, the proof of Coulomb is valid only if the
particles have all the same nature. But because Coulomb,  as it will be
clear in the sixth memoir, postulated the presence of particles with
opposite electricity the proof does not concern a true body.
Coulomb neglected the fact and assumed the absence of any form of
electricity inside a body [49].
The ϐifth and sixth (1790) memoirs on electricity and magnetism
were devoted to the experimental investigation of the distribution of
electricity among conducting bodies of differing sizes and shapes,
during and after contact. Following the measurement of electricity
distribution, Coulomb attempted to develop analytical justiϐication for
his results using various approximate formulations.
New, much larger balances were constructed for this purpose,
simpler to use and that allowed to measure electricity on bodies
(spheres), relatively large.

Fig. 4.40 Torsion balance for large electriϐied bodies.
Redrawn from [74], Fig. 1 of table VIII
Figure 4.40 shows one of the torsion balance used. Here a
represents the body whose electricity is to be measured while b is the
paper disk previously electriϐied with the same kind electricity of the
body a. Thus the balance works as an electrometer.
The purpose of the ϐifth memoir was to determine in what ratios the
mean value of electricity is shared between two bodies of similar shape
but unequal size and also to determine the density of the electric ϐluid
on their surface. Coulomb employed two experimental methods for this
investigation. To measure the overall electricity ratios, or better the
ratios of mean densities, he used the torsion balance similar to that of
Fig. 4.40; to measure the density of electricity at each point on a body,
he employed the proof plane introduced in his fourth memoir and his
most sensitive balance still of the fourth memoir.

Coulomb conducted his ϐirst set of experiments on spheres with
radii ranging from 1/12 ( 2.2 mm) to 12 in. (32 cm). He placed two
spheres having different diameter in touch one with other, charged and
then separated them. After separation he measured the (mean) value of
electricity on each sphere. Finally, after many experiments, he compiled
a table of ratios of mean densities of electricity on the separated
spheres.
Coulomb deϐined the density of electricity by the equation (his
symbols):
with Q the quantity of electricity and S the surface of the sphere.
This is an explicit deϐinition of a term, density, he had used
ambiguously in the preceding memoirs. The deϐinition is meaningful
even though no value can be assigned to Q. Aepinus had made the same
in his calculations with electric forces. The quantity of electricity was
indeed a well deϐined concept in the ϐluid theories; in principle it is
given simply by the volume of the electric ϐluid. The fact that it was
difϐicult to measure was considered a minor problem, for many cases it
was enough to evaluate the ratio of two quantities of electricity.
Coulomb could indeed evaluate the ratio of the densities of two
spheres characterized by electricity and surface respectively 
 without knowing the absolute values of these quantities,
with the relation [74]316:
He proved that when a very small sphere touches a very large one, or
better when the ratio of the radii is inϐinity—the values actually used by
him were for the smaller sphere a radius 1/12 in. (2.2 mm) and 4 in.
(11 cm) for the larger—its density  after the contact is double than
that of large body D, that is 
. In such a case because the
amount of electricity left in the smaller body after the contact may be

very small, the leakage can nullify reliable measurements so that much
attention should be paid in performing the test [74].317
In a second series of experiments Coulomb examined the electricity
distribution on bodies during contact. Using pairs of globes with
diameters in the ratios 1 : 1, 1 : 2, 1 : 4, Coulomb placed them into
contact, charged them and then measured the electricity density at
various points on their surfaces by using his proof plane. The ϐirst
experience of the series concerns two equal spheres with 8 in. in
diameter, as shown in Fig. 4.41a. After being put into contact and
electriϐied, the density of electricity is measured at different points. It is
found in particular that in the vicinity of the contact zone, within 20 ,
there is no electricity. It grows gradually up to 90 . By measuring
electricity at 180  there are values similar to those recorded at 90 .
For two unequal spheres, the bigger of radius R and the smaller of
radius r, Fig. 4.41b, the density of electricity was found to increase on
the smaller sphere as the ratio of the sphere radii was increased. In the
limit case of an inϐinite ratio of R/r, the ratio between the density  at a
point 180  on the small sphere and the mean density D of the large
sphere becomes four; that is 
 [74].318 In this case the smaller
sphere acted only as a minor perturbation of the ϐield pattern on the
larger one, while the larger sphere had a major effect on the
distribution over the smaller.
Besides experimental results on the distribution of electricity on the
surface of conductors, Coulomb presented a theoretical analysis also.
This reveals his great ingenuity but even his limit, as will be discussed
below.
Before presenting a model for his theoretical analysis,
Coulomb illustrated a new proof that in conductors electricity is
distributed on the surface only. And proposed one more experiment
that had a twofold purpose. On the one hand it should conϐirm that
electricity is logged on the surface, on the other hand it should suggest
that the force between two electriϐied body is proportional to the
amount of electric ϐluid. Place, said Coulomb, on a very dry day, a solid
body (a) in the big torsion balance, and read the position of the needle,
be it 
, If you touch this body, after having electriϐied it, by another
body (b) that has the exact same ϐigure, by bringing back one of the two

bodies near the electrometer it is found that the needle rotate of about 
 as (b) has absorbed a half of the electricity of (a), which should
have been located at the surface because the contact occurred in a very
short time and only through the surface. As a further comment,
Coulomb added, that the electric ϐluid would not have, as the theory
indicates, an inϐinitely thin thickness; but as there is not a perfectly
smooth surface and the air is not fully impenetrable to electricity, the
electric ϐluid is diffused around the body in a layer of some thickness,
thickness which varies with the density of the electric ϐluid and the
state of the air, but which in general is so small, especially in the very
dry days, to be possibly neglected [74].319
Coulomb started his theoretical analysis by studying the
distribution of electricity in the three spheres shown in Fig. 4.42, which
are put into touch and then electriϐied. Let the common electric density
of the two bigger equal spheres be D, and  that of the smaller sphere.
Fig. 4.41 Distribution of electricity on the surface of two sphere in contact
To make easy the analysis, Coulomb assumed that the density of
electricity is uniformly distributed on the surface of the spheres, even
though the experimental tests have clearly shown that this is not the
case because of the mutual interaction of the spheres. As the purpose is
however that to consider only the mean densities, the assumption can
be considered not very strange. Notice that for his reasoning
Coulomb made use of a plane representation of the three dimensional
spheres (Fig. 4.43). This as a matter of fact is correct because the three
spheres are symmetrical with respect to the axis CxC  connecting their
centers, and the density of electricity is the same on the circles cut on
the spheres by planes orthogonal to CxC .

Coulomb imposed the equilibrium of the particle of electricity
located at point b, at the boundary of the sphere A and the sphere 
.
Imposing that the summation of all the forces action on b vanishes gives
[74]:320
Coulomb commented his result as follows: “Although this ϐirst formula
is not based on a rigorous theory, but only slightly approximated, it is
good to see how far it is from the truth, comparing it with experience”
[74].321
A few line below Coulomb however acknowledged that the
agreement with experience is not very good for 
, when the value
of  furnished by the previous relation becomes negative. Indeed
experiment showed at most negligible value of , but never negative.
Coulomb attributed the error of his relation to the interaction of the
electricities of the two larger spheres, not taken into account, so that
near the small sphere their density of electricity is much smaller. He
suggested a reϐined analysis, based always on a very crude model. The
larger spheres are divided into two parts, one of which, the one closest
to the small sphere, has zero electrical density. This time the
calculations shows that  is always positive [74].322
Fig. 4.42 Distribution of the mean density of electricity on three electriϐied spheres.
Redrawn from [74], Fig. 6 of table IX
A more intriguing analysis, whose ingenuity exceeds any
imagination, Coulomb devoted to ϐind the distribution of the electricity

on the surface of two spheres put in to touch and then electriϐied.
Coulomb reasoning is not strict and may be wrong, but it is clever and
fascinating. His is not the reasoning of a professional mathematician,
though his mathematics is updated and quite good; but his physical
models though ingenious are not free from errors. This is typical of
modern theoretical physicists and engineers.
Fig. 4.43 Distribution of density of electricity on the surface of two electriϐied spheres.
Redrawn from [74], Fig. 9 of table IX
Figure 4.43 shows the two spheres of which the distribution of
electricity is looked for. To obtain his purpose Coulomb imposed the
equilibrium at the point m located on the surface of the smaller sphere.
As in the previous analysis it is assumed that the electricity is uniformly
diffused on the surface of the two spheres with density respectively D
(the larger sphere a) and 
 (the smaller 
). A further inϐinitesimal
sphere is imagined located around m having density  and radius dr. To
justify the introduction of this inϐinitesimal sphere Coulomb said that
he surface of conductors can be imagined as covered by inϐinitesimal
spherical electric masses.
According to Coulomb on the electric mass at m act the forces:
1.
The force 
 exerted by the small sphere 
, which acts as
mass point whose electricity is concentrated in the center C
and thus at distance r from m.
 

2.
The force 
 exerted by the inϐinitesimal sphere acting at
distance dr.
 
3.
The force 
 exerted by the sphere a, acting at distance Cm in
the direction Cm.
 
By imposing equal to zero the summation of these three forces in
the direction 
, Coulomb could obtain the expression of  as a
function of D and 
.
Some criticisms on Coulomb approach are needed, in increasing
order of criticality:
1.
An uniform distribution of electricity on the two spheres is
assumed to be even though the purpose is to study
unevenness.
 
2.
By considering the force due to an inϐinitesimal electriϐied
sphere, Coulomb as a matter of fact admitted a force that a
body exerted on itself as an external force; which is not
consistent with the principles of statics.
 
3.
If the equilibrium is imposed in another direction, for instance
in the direction orthogonal to C  
B a different result is
obtained for ; or in other words no equilibrium is possible
for the particle m with the electrical forces alone. Indeed other
forces should be considered that prevent the particle m to
leave the small sphere 
. Today these forces are looked for in
the atoms, at Coulomb day, and by himself, a role could be
attributed to the pressure of air; but here Coulomb did not
mention it.
 
In the case of two equal spheres the analytical results show that for
an angle 
,  is negative; experience gives instead a zero or a
very weak positive value. For points located at 
 or 
 the

agreement with the theory is found quite satisfactory. This conϐirms as
a wrong model can sometimes furnish satisfactory results.
Coulomb analysis was repeated in a much more reϐined way and
with the use of different analytical tools, by Poisson in his memoirs on
electricity published in the Mémoires de la Classe des Sciences
Mathématiques et Physiques de l’Institute Impériale de France for the
year 1811 [169, 170].323 In the ϐirst of them, Mémoire sur la distribution
de l’électricité à la surface des corps conducteurs, by substantially
conϐirming Coulomb’s experiments [169].324 Poisson’s memoirs opened
a research topic not yet closed in the ϐield of mathematical physics .
In the sixth memoir Coulomb continued the study of the surface
distribution of electricity and extended the investigation to groups of
conducting spheres, cylinders, planes and variations of these groupings.
He found for instance that the density of electricity on large numbers
(24) of small spheres (2 in., 5 cm) placed in contact along a line with a
large sphere (8 in., 22 cm), as shown in Fig. 4.44 (Fig. 3) decreases with
the increase of the distance from the large sphere, following an
exponential decay, as shown in Fig. 4.44 (Fig. 4).
Fig. 4.44 Distribution of density on a row of small spheres.
Redrawn from [75], Figs. 3 and 4 of table XXX
Experiments were ϐlanked with theoretical analysis giving
satisfactory results. In the following however I only will discuss the
proposition:
When, for example, a globe of eight inches of diameter is
touched with a small plane [...], it takes at each of these surfaces

an electric density equal to that of the surface of the globe. That
is, this small plane [...] is charged with a quantity of electricity
twice that of the portion of surface of the globe which it touched
[75].325 (D.34)
This proposition, according to Coulomb, is corroborated both by theory
and experiments. An experimental result is the following. Consider an
isolated 8 in. (22 cm) diameter sphere of a conducting material placed
on an insulating support whose amount of electricity is such to rotate
the needle of electrometer by 144 . Put into contact the sphere with an
insulated conducting disk 16 in. in diameter (the thickness is not
speciϐied). As a result, the sphere loses a certain amount of electricity
and when it returns to the electrometer it produces a rotation of the
needle of 47 ; this means that the disk absorbed from the sphere a
quantity of electricity measured by 
, more or less double
than that remained in the sphere. Keeping in mind that the surface of
the sphere 
 
 is one half of the total surface (two
faces) of the disk 
 
, it happens that the electricity
is distributed between the sphere and the plane in proportion to their
total surfaces, or that the electricity density is the same in both
conductors. It must be said that though Coulomb declared he found
similar results for disks of different sizes he did not report results in
details. He stated however that the proposition holds true for a globe
8 in. in diameter and a small plane insulated of 6 lines in diameter.
Anyway Coulomb concluded that, if the sphere is much larger than
the disk, as is the case with the proof plane, the electricity lost by the
sphere is negligible and therefore the density assumed by the proof
plane is the same as the initial density of the sphere. In other words, the
amount of electricity absorbed by the test plane is double that
contained in a portion of an area sphere equal to that of the test plane,
because the proof plane has two faces [75].326
The theoretical proof is carried out with reference to Fig. 4.45.

Fig. 4.45 Density of electricity taken by a small disks.
Redrawn from [75], Fig. 8 of table XXXI
A small plane 
 is located at a small distance ab from a sphere of
center C and radius R, such, said Coulomb, that the layer of air cannot
impede to the electric ϐluid of the sphere to pass to the small disk. The
problem is to ϐind the density of electricity  on 
, measured as usual
with respect to the area of one face only, given the density of electricity
D of the sphere. The result is obtained by imposing the equilibrium of
the point b, located at an inϐinitesimal distance from the plane 
. The
forces to be considered are that of the sphere and that of the plane. The
ϐirst force is given by the expression 
,327 which
because ab is very small reduces to 2D. For the force of the plane
Coulomb  furnished the expression:
where 
 is the radius of the disk 
 and a the distance between b and
the disk 
. Coulomb assumed this expression as known. Indeed he
had already presented it in his ϐifth memoir, even though without any
proof [68]328; however the result is correct, or better in accord with
modern electrostatics. Because a is inϐinitesimal and thus negligible, it
is 
. For the equilibrium between 
 and 
 its is: 
, which

sometimes is referred to as Coulomb theorem, “in perfect accord to the
experimental results” [75].329
The proof, even though ingenious, also in this case leaves something
to be desired in terms of rigor. For instance Coulomb considered the
possibility that the electric ϐluid could overcome a small gap of air (with
a spark?); but at the same time he assumed that the situation was
equivalent to that of a direct contact between the small disk and the
sphere. So even though the calculations are correct, some problems can
be raised for the physical modeling.
The result presented by Coulomb,  corroborated, according to him,
by both analytical and experimental proofs, creates bewilderment in a
modern reader, both because apparently strange and in an evident
contradiction to what Coulomb had afϐirmed in the fourth memoir, were
the proof plane is introduced for the ϐirst time: “I made the proof plane
(le petit plane) of gilded paper touch the surface of the cylinder, as this
plane has only 1/18 of line of thickness; it becomes a part of the surface
of this cylinder and consequently assumes a quantity of electric ϐluid
equal to that contained by a part of the surface equal to that of the
proof plane” [73].330 Coulomb did not comment the contradiction but
Maxwell did; he after noticing that, “some objections have been raised
to Coulomb’s use of the proof plane” [64],331 devoted a full section of
his A treatise on electricity and magnetism of 1783 [64] to the study of
the value of the density assumed by the proof plane when put into
contact with an electriϐied body. He used tools of mathematical physics,
as made by Poisson in his memoirs of 1811, of scalar nature as the
electric potential which allowed a much more reϐined analysis, and
recognized that the density assumed by the proof plane depends on its
shape. In the case of very very tiny circular proof plane the density—
evaluated with one face only—is equal to that of the point of the surface
of the body to be measured. For a circular proof plane with a ratio of
about 10 between the radius and the thickness, like that used by
Coulomb, the density is more than four times that of the electriϐied
body—thus twice of the value suggested by Coulomb [64].332 It must be
said however that the result about density distribution presented by
Coulomb are ratios of density; so what counts is that the density of
electricity absorbed by the proof plane is proportional to the density of

the charged body to be tested; and this is surely valid using always the
same proof plane.
In the following pages, art. 45, Coulomb extended his result to the
case of a conductor having a whatsoever shape [75]333:
The result just found, by experience and theory, for a small plane
put in contact with a globe, is general for all bodies ending in a
whichever convex surface. Actually, whatever the shape of the
body is, experience learns that a small plane put into contact
with these surfaces, always takes, at the moment it is removed
from contact, a quantity of electricity twice that of the affected
area portion. Experience gives the same double ratio again, by
presenting a very small plane to a large electriϐied plane [75].334
(D.35)
Nature of Electricity
Coulomb was stingy of theories about electricity and magnetism. In his
papers published on the memoirs de l’Académie des sciences de Paris,
he dealt the subject in three occasions only. At the end of his sixth
memoir where he confessed his preference for the two ϐluids theory,
even though its validity cannot be decided on experimental basis, in the
introduction of the memory of 1777 on magnetism, where he criticized
the mechanicistic Neocartesian explanations and in the seventh
memoir on electricity and magnetism, entitled Du magnétisme, of 1789,
where he suggested some changes in Aepinus’ s theory [77].335 Below a
summary of Coulomb ideas regarding the nature of electricity only.
Whatever may be the cause of the electricity, said Coulomb, all the
phenomena are explained, in the sense that calculations are in
accordance with experiments, supposing two electric ϐluids (the parts
of the same kind of ϐluid repelling each other in inverse proportion of
the square of the distances and the parts of the different kind of ϐluid
attracting in the same inverse proportion of the square of the
distances). According to this supposition, the two ϐluids in conducting
bodies, always tend to move until that there is equilibrium, that is to
say, until the attractive and repulsive forces are mutually compensating
each other. This is the situation in which all bodies are found in their
natural state. But if, by any operation, a given quantity of one of the two

electric ϐluids is made to pass into an insulated conducting body, it will
electrify, that is to say, it will repel electrical parts of the same nature
and will attract electrical parts of a different nature because of the
superabundant ϐluid with which it is charged. If the electriϐied
conducting body is brought into contact with another insulated
conducting body, it will share with it the electric ϐluid which is
superabundant; but if it is communicated to a non-isolated body, it will
in a moment lose all its electricity, since it will divide it, with the globe
of the earth, whose dimensions relative to it are inϐinite.
Coulomb referred to Aepinus, who had supposed that there was
only one electric ϐluid, the particles of which repel each other and were
attracted by the molecules of the body with the same force as they are
repelled. But to explain the state of the bodies in their natural situation,
as well as the repulsion and attraction, it is necessary to suppose that
the molecules of the bodies repel each other with the same force as
they attract the electric particles. It is easy to feel that the supposition
of Aepinus gives, by means of calculation, the same results as that of the
two ϐluids.
There are for Coulomb two reasons in favor of the two ϐluid theory.
The ϐirst has a metaphysical nature: “however that of the two ϐluids
which has already been proposed by several physicists, because it
seems to me contradictory to admit at the same time inside bodies, an
attractive force in inverse ratio to the square of distances as gravity, and
a repulsive force in the same inverse ratio of the square of distances; a
force that would necessarily be inϐinitely large, relative to the attractive
action from which gravity results” [75].336 The second was drawn from
recent experiments. The supposition of the two ϐluids is indeed in
conformity with all the modern discoveries of chemists and physicists,
who have made us acquainted with different gases, the mixture of
which in certain proportions suddenly and entirely destroys their
electricity; an effect which cannot take place, for Coulomb, without
something equivalent to a repulsion between the parts of the same gas,
which constitutes their elastic state, and to an attraction between the
parts of the different gases, which makes them lose their elasticity all at
once. “As these two explanations [one or two electric ϐluids] have only a
greater or lesser degree of probability, I warn, in order to put the theory
that follows, away from any systematic dispute, that in the supposition

of the two electric ϐluids, I do not have other intention than to present
with the least possible element the results of calculation and
experience, and not to indicate the true causes of electricity” [75].337

D.1
D.2
D.3
D.4
4.4 Quotations
Tous les systemes modernes sur la Lumiere peuvent être reduits
à deux. Car, ou les mouvemens du corps lumineux sont transmis
jusqu’à l’oeil, seulement parce qu’ils se communiquent à la matiere qui
est entre le corps lumineux & nous, de même que les fremissemens
d’un corps sonore ne parviennent jusqu’au tympan de l’oreille, que
parce qu’ils ont excité dans l’air un semblable mouvement; ou
l’agitation du corps lumineux produit en lui une émission, & un
écoulement de corpuscules, qui viennent frapper l’organe de vûë de la
même maniere à peu prés, que les parties invisibles qui se détachent
d’une ϐleur, viennent frapper nôtre odorat. Il n’y a pas de milieu dans
cette alternative, ou le corps lumineux renvoye vers nous des
particules de sa substance, ou il n’en renvoye pas; il faut
necessairement que la Lumiere se repande de l’une de ces deux
manieres, ou avoir recours aux qualitez occulte.
Je crois donc que la matière lumineuse consiste en un soulfre, très
subtil & très agité, & que ce n’est autre chose que le principe actif des
Chimistes, ainsi nommé, parce qu’il agit seul, & qu’il fait agir les autres.
Car des cinq principes de Chimie, il n’y a que le soulfre, qui ait cette
proprieté: parmi les autres quatre, on en, compte un purement passif,
qui est la Terre, laquelle ne fait que servir de receptacle ou de guaı̂ne
aux autres, & trois moyens, qui sont le Sel, l’Eau & le Mercure, lesquels
deviennent capables d’agir lors qu’ils sont joints au soulfre.
Que chaque couleur des corps ne consiste dans la ϐigure & dans
l’arrangement particulier des parties qui le composent, qu’entant qu’ils
sont par là plus propres à rompre & à absorber dans leurs pores la
Lumiere d’une certaine couleur, & à réϐléchir celle d’une autre couleur.
Ainsi le Carmin, par exemple, est fort rouge, parce qu’il ne réϐléchit que
la Lumiere rouge, & que toutes les autres especes de Lumiere se
rompent & se perdent dans ses pores sans se réϐléchir.
Coroll. 39. Donc les différentes vı̂tesses, les différentes degrés de
réfrangibilité, & les différentes couleurs de la lumière, ne sont en elle, &
hors de nous, qu’une seule & même propriété, ou n’expriment que la
gradation des effets dés à une même cause.

D.5
D.6
D.7
D.8
Mais si le corps M est tel, que la matière subtile réϐléchie ait ses
vibrations moins promptes dans certains degrez; que je ne crois pas
qu’on puisse determiner exactement; on aura quelqu’une des couleurs
qu’on appelle primitives; le jaune, le rouge, le bleu, si toutes les parties
du corps M diminuent également les vibrations que cause Ia ϐlamme
dans Ia matière subtile. Et l’on verra toutes les autres couleurs qui se
font par le mélange des primitives, selon que les parties du corps M
diminueront inégalement Ia promptitude des vibrations de la lumiere.
Mais si le corps M est tel que la matière subtile réϐléchie excite
dans l’oeil des vibrations plus ou moins promptes dans certains degrés,
que je ne crois pas qu’on puisse determiner exactement, on aura
quelqu’une des couleurs simples homogènes ou primitives, comme le
rouge, le jaune, le bleu, etc., et l’on aura les antres couleurs composées,
et même la blancheur qui est la plus composée de toutes, selon les
divers melanges des rayons dont les vibrations auront diverses
promptitudes. Je dis que la blancheur est la plus composée de toutes
parce qu’elle est composée de l’assemblage des vibrations différentes
en promptitude, que produit dans la matière subtile chaque partie
differente de la ϐlamme. Comme tout est plein et inϐiniment comprimé,
chaque rayon conserve dans toute sa longueur la meme promptitude
de vibration qu’a la petite partie de la ϐlamme qui le produit. Et parce
que les parties de la ϐlamme ont un mouvement varié, les rayons des
couleurs ont nécessairement des vibrations et font des refractions
différentes. Mais il faudrait voir sur cela les experiences qu’on trouvera
dans l’excellent ouvrage de M. Newton.
Je me ϐigure présentement, que tout cet amas de petits
tourbillons qui remplit les vastes espaces du Monde, est parsemé de
corpuscules très subtils, durs ou solides, laissant entre eux des
intervalles, si vous voulés, mille fois plus longs que le diametre d’un de
ces corpuscules, je n’en determine pas Ia longueur, il sufϐit que je
conçoive très-clairement que chaque ligne droite tirée d’un point à
l’autre, enϐilera une inϐinite de ces petits corpuscules, dont je puis
supposer les intervalles à peu-près égaux, puisque ses corpuscules font
uniformément disperses parmi les petits tourbilons, quoique les
corpuscules eux-mêmes puissent être de differente grandeur.

D.9
D.10
D.11
D.12
D.13
Un corps mis dans un centre d’équilibre forcé, s’il en est déplacé par
quelque cause que ce soit, jusqu’à un petit intervalle dans la direction
des deux ressortes ou forces motrices opposées, il retournera sur ses
pas, & fera des vibrations en temps égaux en forme d’oscillations
tautochrones.
Deinde etiam vidimus pulsum, postquam semel est formatus, in
directum promoveri, siquidem medium suerit uniforme; unde simul
rectitudo radiorum lucis intelligitur. Ipse autem pulsum promotio
oritur ab agitatione particularum medii elastici, ubi pulsus versatur,
quae cum ubique secundum determinatam directionem vergat, pulsui
secundum eandem plagam motum inducit.
Cela s’entend des couleurs pures & hautes, telles que l’arc en
Ciel & le Prisme nous les présentent. Les autres couleurs mêlées ou
basses ne different entr’elles que comme les tons de diverses octaves.
Ainsi au cas qu’un rayon rouge fasse 10000 vibrations dans une
seconde, des rayons qui font 5000, ou 2500, ou 1250, ou 625 vibrations
dans le meme tems, produiront aussi une couleur rouge, mais moins
haute que Ia premiere. Par consequent il y aura plusieurs couleurs
differences de chaque nom, comme on a dans un Clavecin plusieurs
tons qu’on exprime par la même lettre.
Nunc quo pacto conversa ratione idem eveniat, explicemus.
Immota iuxta alteram mensae extremitatem tabella, post eam charta
constituatur quae utriusque lucernae radios excipiat: tum lucernae
ipsae transferantur, dispari tamen a charta intervallo, sic ut geminae
lucernae intercapedo sit dupla eius qua simplex distat lucerna: palam
igitur chartam intuenti geminae lucernae lumen clarius apparere quam
simplicis; utque paria ϐiant ea quae in charta spectantur lumina,
oportere geminam lucernam longius abduci, quia per duplex spatium
minus quam duplex factum fuit luminis decrementum.
Il n’y a en effet qu’à prendre un ϐlambeau, & l’éloigner ou
l’approcher jusqu’à ce qu’il éclaire successivement de la même maniere
que les deux lumières que l’on veut comparer; & si on prend les
quarrez des deux differens éloignemens ces quarrez mis dans un ordre
renversé, exprimeront le rapport des lumieres.
Utique inter hypotheses quas mathematicas vocabo, & eas, quae
physicae sunt, maxima adest differentia. Physicae ita plerumque

D.14
D.15
D.16
D.17
D.18
assumuntur, ut qua in re a vero aberrent haud constet, unde ϐit ut suo
quaeque ordine iterum reiiciantur, prout earum a vero aberratio
successu tantum temporis detegitur. In mathematicis fere semper non
modo constat, quanam in parte a vero recedant, verum & plurimis
casibus in antecessum deϐinire licet aberrationis momentum.
Commune id esse videtur scientiae humanae fatum, ut ea sint ab
intellectu remotiora, quae vel maxime obversantur sensibus. Huius
certe nobis effati praeclare sistit exemplum luminis theoria. Plures
enim eaeque gravissimae in pervestiganda ipsius vi atque natura
occurrunt difϐicultates vix ac ne vix superandae, ut mirum sit, in eadem
re, quae fons est ipse claritatis, tanta adhuc cognitionem nostram
circumfusam esse caligine, tantasque in ipsa luce remanere tenebras.
In omnibus mundi corporibus duae propositae sunt causae, sive
principia ex quibus ipsa corpora producta sunt, materia & forma;
electrica motione a materia magnetica vero a forma praecipua
invalescunt, longeque inter se differunt, dissimilesq; evadunt; cum
altera nobilitata plurimus virtutibus sit, & praepotens; altera obscura,
& minoris potentiae, & carceribus quasi quibusdam plerunq; conclusa
Igitur ex frictione non foedante, efϐluvium non immutatum ab
ardore, sed quod suum est, vnitionem facit cohaerentiam,
apprehensionem, & ad fontem conϐluentiam, [...] Efϐluvia vires
extendunt, quae propria sunt, & peculiaria, & sua, diversa a communi
aere, ab humore genita, motu caloriϐico ab attritu & attenuatione
excitata, tanquae materiales radii quae rerinet & attollunt paleas,
festucas, & ramenta, donec extinguutur, aut evanescunt; quae tum
rursus soluta (corpuscula) a terra ipsa allecta, ad terram delabuntur.
Nimirum vorticem quendam agitatae materiae invisibilis circa
ϐloccum adhaerescere, qui vortex ortus ϐit et transditus a vortice circa
sphaerulam excitato postquam attritu panni incaluerit. Hic ϐlocculi
vortex impedit ac prohibet ipsum admotae sphaerulae adjungi, quia et
ipsa suum habet vorticem. At semel admoto ad ϐloccum digito aliave re,
disturbatur ejus vortex atque abigitur, unde tune non difϐiculter ad
sphaerulam accedit.
Lubet tecum communicare Experimentum aliquod novum, sed
terribile, quod velim ne ipse capias, nec oblato licet mihi toto Galliae
Regno, repetarem impetum expertus, et Dei propitio favore servatus.

D.19
D.20
D.21
Occupabar in detegendis Electricitatis viribus: Tubus ferreus AB ex ϐilis
servicis coeruleis suspendebatur, Globus vitreus celeriter circumactus
fricatusque, ponebatur prope alteram extremitatum A, et suam vim
electricam cum tubo hoc ferreo AB communicabat: Prope alteram
extremitatem B positum erat ϐilum Oeneum CD, libere pendulum; manu
dextra F capiebam globum vitreum D aliquo usque impletum aqua in
quam propondebat ϐilum; manu sinistra E conabarelicere Scintillas
crepitantes quae ex tubo ferreo avolant indiguum; mox manua dextra F
afϐicitur tanta vi ut contremiscat totum corpus, non aliter quam si quio
a fulmine percuritur.
Sique unquam probetur attractionem quandam aut
repulsionem, a pressione externa aut impulsu absolute non pendere,
tum eo reductos nos iudico, ut adstruere cogamur motus eiusmodi, non
a viribus corporeis, sed a spiritibus sine entibus, eorum quae agunt
intelligentibus, peragi atque produci, quod quidem, quod in mundo,
locum habeat, ut credam, induci non possum. Tota itaque mea
sententia eo redit, ut attractiones atque repulsiones de quibus locutus
sum pro phaenomenis habeam, quorum hactenus causae latent, a
quibus vero alia ph[a]enomena pendent ac derivantur. Existimo autem,
non contemnendum facere in analysi operationum naturae progressum
qui phaenomena complicatiora, ad causas sua proximas viresque
primitivas reducit, quamvis causae causarum istarum nondum sint
detectae. Hanc, quam proposui, sententiae meae declarationem, et
rigidissimo censori satisfacturam, conϐido.
Displicebit autem forte quibusdam, quod ad disquisitiones
mathematicas aliquantum prolixiores delapsus hic sim, sunt enim, qui
aegre talia in physicis tolerant. Ast ego quidem aliter iudico ac brevem
hanc dissertationem, experimenti Richmanniani phaenomena ad
causas suas revocantem, ad probandam veritatem principiorum
theoriae elettricae a me evolutorum, plurimum valere existimo. Magna
enim hypothesi physicae accedere verosimilitudo credendas est, si
deprehendatur phaenomenis complicationibus, iis nempe, quae non
nisi per longiorem ratiociniorum seriem ex ipsa deduci possunt, apte
cohaerere.
Sub initium, cum cogitare de electricitatis theoria Frankliniana
inceperam, me ad ipsam quodammodo exhorruisse. Postquam autem

D.22
D.23
D.24
D.25
D.26
considerare cepi, nihil in ipsa contineri, quod analogiae operationum
naturae contrarium esset, facile me ad ipsam assuefeci.
La elettricità d’un corpo A attua sı̀ fattamente l’aria ambiente,
che per mezzo di essa mira ad indurre la elettricità contraria nel corpo
B immerso in essa. Ed è l’aria cosı̀ attuata, che costituisce ció, che
comunemente si chiama atmosfera elettrica.
Presento un pelo di lino al conduttore Y (Tav. I. Figure 1.); alla
distanza di, uno, o più piedi esso si dirige normalmente alla faccia del
conduttore; gli presento a lato un bastone di ceralacca stropicciata, se
ne discosta; gli presento una canna di vetro stropicciata, vola ad essa;
cioè il pelo immerso nell’ atmosfera del corpo elettrizzato per eccesso
diviene elettrico per difetto. Replico lo sperimento rispetto a’ travicelli
B, od E della macchina pneumatica; e il pelo fugge dal vetro, vola alia
ceralacca; onde il corpo immerso nell’ atmosfera del corpo elettrizzato
per difetto diviene elettrizzato per eccesso.
Se un corpo E sia elettrizzato per eccesso primamente un
complesso di lineette, che sporgano contro dell’ aria ambiente da tutti i
punti della faccia di esso corpo E (vedremo nell’ articolo seguente, che
appunto l’eccesso, o difetto di fuoco non s’ induce che nella superϐicie
de’ corpi) potranno segnare e il fuoco eccessivo di esso corpo, e
l’eccesso di tensione, che eserciterà il fuoco stesso contro il fuoco
naturale dell’aria ambiente; in secondo luogo poi si potrà intendere
divisa in successivi picciolissimi strati l’ aria ambiente, e simili lineette
che si applichino alle convessità di tutti essi strati, potranno segnare Ia
direzione, e il modo, con che la eccessiva tensione del fuoco ridondante
sulla faccia del corpo propaga una tensione, o vibrazione
corrispondente nel fuoco inerente nell’ ambiente aria.
In somma io tanto di valore attribuisco a quest’unica esperienza,
che per essa sola penso sciogliersi in gran parte la più antica quistione
dell’Elettricità, e che sino ad ora è stata riputata la più difϐicile.
Imperocché se i movimenti elettrici scemano nell’aria diratada e
scemano a proporzione di esso diradamento, ne segue che tali
movimenti dipendano da alcun’azione del vapor elettrico sull’aria.
Questo è il genio della ϐilosoϐia pigra, e lusinghiera: ϐingere
quantunque ϐluidi, che abbiano in se i movimenti, che non s’intendono
ne’ corpi. I corpi diversamente elettrici si attraggono: perché? Perché

D.27
D.28
D.29
D.30
sono animati da’ due ϐluidi diversi, che ti attraggono. Gli elettrici
similmente si respingono: perché? Perché sono animati dall’uno, o
dall’altro de’ due ϐluidi, le parti di ciascuno de’ quali si respingono
similissimamente. Ma che quello non sta il genio della natura, anche in
questo caso si scorge e dalla esatta unità di tutti gli effetti, che
dovrebbero essi produrre inconciliabile con la natura loro diversa, e
dalla impossibilità della segregazione loro, donde per altro dipende
ogni loro effetto, e dalla maniera, con che si riunirebbero, che
discorderebbe affatto da’ fenomeni.
Un corpo elettrico ha la forza di mutare la naturale dose di fuoco
ne’ corpi immersi nella sua atmosfera e introdurre in essa contraria
elettricità.
Quantunque l’illustre Autore parli con molta rapidità sui
risultati di queste sue sperienze, mi sembra ció non ostante, che indi ne
derivino assai naturalmente, e portino cosi nell’elettrica Teoria
maggior luce, ed espressione, che non gl’interi volumi. Io paragono
simili sperienze a que’ tratti da maestro nel disegno, ove si presenta lo
spaccato d’ un grande ediϐizio preso in tale proϐilo, che ne spiega
meglio in un colpo d’occhio e le divisioni, e l’ insieme, che non si
comprenderebbe con girarlo più volte a parte a parte .
Presero voga le Frankljniane idee, e diventó Franklin Capo
scuola, e duce di sistematica Setta, e tanto bastó perchè tutte le sue
congetture, e per ϐino i suoi più azzardati sospetti venissero dai
Franklinjanj Settarj trasformati in dogmi, e proposti, e difesi con
linguaggio di fanatica persuasione [...] In mezzo peró a tante
deϐinizioni, e tanti stabilimenti. non acquistó l’elettrica scienza, che
ampie parafrasi de’ primi fatti indicati da Franklin, pronunciate con
altrettanta conϐidenza, e persuasione, quanta fu la perplessità, e
l’incertezza del loro Autore. [...] Non è punto necessario, nè opportuno
di associare all’ errore i nomi degli Autori, che hanno contribuito a
propagarlo; massimamente quando i loro nomi non inϐluiscono nella
realtà delle cose; e tanto meglio quando, come ebbero essi l’ingenuità
di confessare di aver errato nel deϐinir la luce di partenza cosı̀ è
sperabile, che con più matura discussione de’ fatti potessero
egualmente riconoscere il loro abbaglio.

D.31
D.32
D.33
D.34
D.35
La force répulsive de deux petits globes électrisés de la même nature
d’électricité, est en raison inverse du carré de la distance du centre des
deux globes.
Que l’action, soit répulsive, soit attractive de deux globes
électrisés, & par conséquent de deux molécules électriques, est en
raison composée des densités du ϐluide électrique des deux molécules
électrisées, & inverse du carré des distances.
Où l’on démontre deux principales propriétés du Fluide
électrique: La première, que ce ϐluide ne se repande dans aucun corps
par une afϐinité chimique ou par une attraction élective, mais qu’il se
partage entre differens corps mis en contact uniquement par son
action répulsive; La seconde, que dans les corps conducteurs le ϐluide
parvenu à l’état de stabilité, est répandu sur la surface du corps, & ne
pénètre pas dans l’intérieur.
Toutes les fois qu’au ϐluide renfermé dans un corps ou il peut se
mouvoir librement, agit par répulsion dans toutes ses parties
élémentaires [...] est plus grande’ que l’inverse du: cube, telle, par
exemple, que nous l’avons trouvé pour l’électricité en raison inverse du
carre des distances pour lors, l’action des masses du ϐluide électrique
placée à une distance ϐinie d’un des élémens de ce ϐluide, n’étant pas
inϐiniment petite relativement à l’action élémentaire des points en
contact, tout le ϐluide doit se porter à la surface du corps, & il ne doit
point en rester dans son intérieur.
Lors’que l’on touche, par exemple, le globe de 8 pouces de
diamètre, avec un petit plan [...] il prend à chacune de ces surfaces une
densité électrique égale à celle delà surface du globe, c’est-à-dire, que
ce petit plan [...] se charge d’une quantité d’électricité double de celle
de la portion de surface du globe qu’il a touchée.
Le résultat que nous venons de trouver par l’expérience&; par la
théorie, pour un petit plan mis en contact avec un globe, est général
pour tous les corps terminés par une surface courbe, convexe d’une
ϐigure quelconque. Quelle que soit en effect la ϐigure du corps,
l’expérience apprend qu’un petit plan mis en contact avec ces surfaces,
prend toujours, au moment qu’on le retire du contact, une quantité
d’électricité double de celle de la portion de surface touchée.

L’expérience donne encore ce même rapport double, en faisant toucher
un plan très petit à un grand plan électriϐié.
Notes
For a modern reader the linearity of forces is simple enough to accept,
since elastic forces for small oscillations can always be approximated by
a linear function.
Bernoulli has less conϐidence in the theory of functions and used a
fairly elaborate reasoning. With reference to Fig. 4.3, consider a particle
subject to two springs arranged on one side and on the other on a
straight line to which the particle belongs. Curves AF and CA represent
the forces exerted on the particle according to its position on the line
MN. When the particle is in P the two forces are in equilibrium, being
equal and opposite with a value PB. If the particle passes in G the two
forces will be GL and GE respectively and there will be an unbalanced
force equal to EL which will tend to return the particle to P, causing
oscillations. Bernoulli says that when the oscillation excursion is small
the surface BEL can be approximated with a triangle; this implies the
linear link between the restoring force El and the displacement PG
[35], p. 18.
Here a modern explanation of the phenomenon described by
Beccaria; for the sake of simplicity in the explanation the role of
polarization of the glass plate is only hinted on. Let the original free
charge on the surface A of the glass plate be Q, that on the coating CD, q;
assume Q and q both positive. FO represents 
. Remove CD: the
effective charge near A drops by q, or Fu, and CD’s potential increases
enough to leak a fraction of its charge, yq say, into the air. Replace CD:
the net charge at A becomes 
. Remove CD once
more, decreasing the effective charge near A by 
; the
coating, having again lost to the air, returns with approximately 
; and (after touching cd) the net charge at A is 
. At QH the charge which CD brings away has
become insensible. This explain the curve OQLMN.

To explain the curve 
 and the positive vindicating
electricity, one has to assume that CD (and cd) is touched (alternately)
when it is assembled, and left when it is stripped; this is not clearly
explained neither by Beccaria nor by Cavallo. Grounding the coating CD,
by touching it, removes the last of its original charge q and endows it
with a negative one (by induction) proportional to QH. Remove CD: A
appears to revindicate positively (IY)—notice that from H on the light
lines HYSZ& being symmetrical to 
 also represents
the positive electricity vindicated by A, see below—with the
withdrawal of the counterbalancing negative coat. Touch the coatings
alternately: CD obtains a larger induced charge than before (say LZ)
because of the depolarization, which lags behind the removal of the
coercing charge; at M, where the maximum revindication occurs at
denudation (M&), the depolarization is complete. Thereafter A shows
no force when covered and gradually loses its power of positive
vindication as the free charge on its surface dissipates [122], p. 409,
footnote 15.
Point b is subject to the following forces, positive sign is from left
to right:
1.
The force exerted by the sphere A, which acts as mass point
whose electricity is concentrated in the center C, and thus at
distance R from b:
.
 
2.
The force exerted by the small sphere 
 acting at distance r:
.
 
3. The force exerted by the sphere a, acting at distance 
:

 
where it is taken into account that the force 
 acting on a point of the
surface is one half of the force 
 acting on a point far from it [22,
75], p. 621; pp. 232–233.
 These forces have the expressions:
In the expression of 
, the last multiplying term is due to evaluate the
component of the force applied by A on m—acting in the direction Cm
—in the direction C  
B.
References
1.
Achinstein P (ed) (1991) Particles and waves. Oxford University Press, Oxford
2.
Aepinus FUT (1756) Mémoire concernant quelques nouvelles experience électriques
remarquables. Histoire de l’Académie Royale des Sciences et Belles Lettres de, Berlin,
pp 105–121
3.
Aepinus FUT (1758–1759) Descriptio ac explicatio novorum quorundam
experimentorum electricorum. Novi Commentarii Academiae Scientiarum Imperialis
Petropolitanae 7:277–302
4.
Aepinus FUT (1759) Tentamen theoriae electricitatis et magnetismi. Academiae

Scientiarum, Saint Petersburg
5.
Aepinus FUT (1979) Aepinus’s essay on the theory of electricity and magnetism.
Introduction by Home RW, translated into English by Connor PJ. Princeton University
Press, Princeton
6.
Aguilon F (1613) Opticorum libri sex philosophis iuxta ac mathematicis utilis. Moreti,
Antwerp
7.
Algarotti F (1737) Il newtonianismo per le dame. Ovvero dialoghi sopra la luce e i
colori. Unknown, Napoli
8.
Allchin D (1994) James Hutton and phlogiston. Ann Sci 5(6):615–635
9.
Amontons G (1699) De la resistance causée dans les machines, tant par les frottemens
des parties qui les composent, que par roideur des cordes qu’on y employe, & la
maniere de calculer l’un & l’autre. Mémoires de l’Académie Royale des Sciences de
Paris, pp 206–222
10.
Arecco D (1747) Da Newton a FrankIin. Giambattista Beccaria e le relazioni
scientiϐiche fra Italia e America nel sec. XVIII. Con una scelta di documenti. Accademia
Urbense, Ovada
11.
Aristotle, (2018) Physica. The internet Classical Archive, Translated into English by
Hardie RP, Gaye RK
12.
Badcock A (1962) Physical optics at the Royal society 1660–1800. British J Hist Sci
1(2):99–116
13.
Baldini U (1981) Giovanni Francesco Cigna. In: Various (ed) Dizionario biograϐico
degli italiani, vol 25, Istituto della Enciclopedia Italiana, Roma
14.
Barletti C (1771) Nuove sperienze elettriche secondo la teoria del Sig. Beniamino
Franklin e le produzioni del P. Beccaria. Galeazzi, Milan
15.
Barletti C (1772) Physica specimina. Joseph Galeatium, Milan
16.
Barletti C (1776) Dubbi e pensieri sopra la teoria degli elettrici fenomeni. Galeazzi,
Milan
17.
Barletti C (1780) Analisi d’un nuovo fenomeno del fulmine ed osservazioni sopra gli
usi medici della elettricità. Bianchi, Pavia
18.
Barletti C (1782) Introduzione a nuovi principj della teoria elettrica dedotti dall’analisi
de’ fenomeni delle elettriche punte. Parte prima. Memorie di Matematica e Fisica della
Società Italiana 1:1–54
19.
Barletti C (1784) Introduzione a nuovi principj della teoria elettrica dedotti dall’analisi
de’ fenomeni delle elettriche punte. Parte seconda. Memorie di Matematica e Fisica
della Società Italiana 2:1–122
20.
Barletti C (1788) Della supposta eguaglianza di contraria elettricità nelle opposte

facce del vetro, o di uno strato resistente per ispiegare la scarica, o scossa della boccia
di Leyden. Memorie di Matematica e Fisica della Società Italiana 4:304–309
21.
Barletti C (1794) Della legge d’immutabile capacità, e necessaria contrarietà di
eccesso, e difetto di elettricità negli opposti lati del vetro, e di altro strato resistente
supposta da Franklin per la spiegazione della carica, e della scarica elettrica nella
boccia leidense. Memorie di Matematica e Fisica della Società Italiana 7:444–461
22.
Bauer E (1949) L’électromagnétisme. Hier et aujourd’hui, Michel, Paris
[zbMATH]
23.
Beccaria GB (1753) Dell’elettricismo artiϐiciale e naturale libri due. Campana, Turin
24.
Beccaria GB (1758) Dell’elettricismo. Lettere di Giambattista Beccaria dirette al
chiarissimo Sig. Giacomo Bartolomeo Beccari. Tipograϐia di Colle Ameno, Colle Ameno
25.
Beccaria GB (1759–1760) Experiments in electricity: in a letter from father Beccaria,
professor of experimental philosophy at Turin, to Benjamin Franklin. Philos Trans R
Soc Lond 51:514–526
26.
Beccaria GB (1767) De electricitate vindice Joannis Baptistae Beccariae ex scholis piis
ad Beniaminum Franklinium virum de re electrica, & meteorologica optime meritum.
Epistola. Fontana, Turin
27.
Beccaria GB (1769) Experimenta, atque observationes, quibus electricitas vindex late
constituitur, atque explicatur. Stamperia Reale, Turin
28.
Beccaria GB (1771) De athmosphaera electrica. Philos Trans R Soc Lond 60:277–301
29.
Beccaria GB (1772) Elettricismo artiϐiciale. Stamperia Reale, Turin
30.
Beccaria GB (1774) Gradus taurinensis. Ex Typograϐia Regia, Turin
31.
Beccaria GB (1776) A treatise upon artiϐicial electricity. Nourse, London
32.
Beer A (1738) Grundiss des Photometrishen Calcüles. Vieweg, Brownschweig
33.
Bernoulli J (1701) Disquisitio catoptrico-dioptrica exhibens reϐlexionis & refractionis
naturam, nova & genuina ratione ex aequilibrii fundamento deductam & stabilitam.
Acta Eruditorum, pp 19–26
34.
Bernoulli J (1732) Meditationes de chordis vibrantibus, cum pondusculis aequali
intervallo a se invicem dissitis, ubi nimirum ex principio virium vivarum quaeritur
numerus vibrationum chordae pro una oscillatione penduli datae longitudinis D.
Commentarii Academiae Scientiarum Imperialis Petropolitanae 3:13–28
35.
Bernoulli J II (1736) Recherches physiques et géométriques sur la question: Comment
se fait la propagation de la lumière. In: Recueil des pièces qui ont remporté les prix de
l’Académie royale des sciences, vol 3. Jombert, Paris, pp 1732–1741
36.
Birch T (1756–1757) History of the Royal society of London (4 vols). Millar, London
37.

Boscovich RG (1749) Sopra il turbine che la notte tra gli XI, e XII giugno del 1749
danneggió una gran parte di Roma. Pagliarini N and M, Rome
38.
Boscovich RG (1922) Theoria philosophiae naturalis redacta ad unicam legem virium
in natura existentium. Latin-English edition, Open Court, London
39.
Boscovich RG (2008) Carteggio con Giovan Stefano Conti (2vols). In: Proverbio E (ed)
Edizione nazionale delle opere e della corrispondenza di Ruggiero Giuseppe
Boscovich. Digital publication, Corrispondenza
40.
Bouguer P (1729) Essai d’optique sur la gradation de la lumiere. Jombert, Paris
41.
Bouguer P (1760) Traité d’optique sur la gradation de la lumiere. Guerin & Delatour,
Paris
42.
Cabeo N (1629) Philosophia magnetica, in qua magnetis natura penitus explicatur, et
omnium quae hoc lapide cernuntur, causae propriae afferuntur: nova etiam praxis
construitur, quae propriam poli elevationem, cum suo meridiano, ubique demonstrat,
multa quoque dicuntur de electricis, & aliis actractionibus, & eorum causis. Kinckium,
Cologne
43.
Cabeo N (1646) In quatuor libros meteorologicorum Aristotelis commentaria (2 vols).
Corbelletti, Rome
44.
Cannon J, Dostrovsky S (1981) The evolution of dynamics: vibration theory from
1687 to 1742. Springer, Dordrecht
[zbMATH]
45.
Canton J (1753) Electrical experiments, with an attempt to account for their several
phaenomena, together with observations on thunder clouds. Philos Trans R Soc Lond
48:350–358
46.
Cantoni G (1878) Elementi di ϐisica, 4th edn. Vallardi, Milan
47.
Cantor G (1983) Optics after Newton. In: Theories of light in Britain and Ireland,
1704–1840. Manchester University Press, Manchester
48.
Capecchi D (2003) Storia della scienza delle costruzioni. Progedit, Bari
49.
Capecchi D (2019) Some incongruences in Coulomb’s memoirs on electricity 1785–
1788. Forthcoming. In: Rossi P (ed) XXXIX Congresso SISFA, Pisa
50.
Capecchi D, Tocci C (2012) Il sentimento di Ruggiero Boscovich sulla Gran Guglia del
Duomo di Milano. Palladio 49:115–128
51.
Capecchi D, Tocci C (2016) Three technical reports of R.G. Boscovich on the statics of
domes. In: Various (ed) Further studies in the history of construction. Proceedings of
the third annual conference of the construction history society. Construction History
Society, Cambridge, pp 251–262
52.
Cappelletti V (1964) Carlo Barletti. In: Various (ed) Dizionario biograϐico degli italiani,
vol 6, Istituto della Enciclopedia Italiana, Roma

53.
Cavallo T (1786) Complete treatise on electricity, 3rd ed, vol 2. Dilly, London
54.
Cavazza M (2009) Laura Bassi and Giuseppe Veratti: an electric couple during the
enlightenment. Contrib Sci 5(1):115–128
55.
Cavendish H (1771) An attempt to explain some of the principal phaenomena of
electricity, by means of an elastic ϐluid. Philos Trans R Soc Lond 61:584–677
56.
Cavendish H (1776) Attempts to imitate the effects of the torpedo. Philos Trans R Soc
Lond 66:196–225
57.
Cavendish H (1798) Experiments to determine the density of the earth. Philos Trans R
Soc Lond 88:469–526
58.
Cavendish H (1879) Experimental determination of the law of electric force. In:
Clerck-Maxwell J (ed) The electrical researches of the honourable Henry Cavendish,
Cass. London, pp 105–113
59.
Cavendish H (1879) Experiments on the charges of bodies. In: Clerck-Maxwell J (ed)
The electrical researches of the honourable Henry Cavendish, Cass. London, pp 114–
143
60.
Chipman RA (1954) Unpublished letter of Stephen Gray on electrical experiments,
1707–1708. Isis 45(1):33–40
61.
Chipman RA (1958) The manuscript letters of Stephen Gray, F.R.S. (1666/7–1736). Isis
49(4):414–433
62.
Cigna G (1760–1761) De causa extintionis ϐlammae et animalium in aere
interclusorum. Miscellanea Philosophico-Mathematica Societatis Privatae Taurinensis
2:168–203
63.
Cigna G (1762–1765) De novis quibusdam experimentis electricis. Miscellanea
Philosophico-Mathematica Societatis Privatae Taurinensis 3:31–72
64.
Clerk-Maxwell J (1873) A treatise on electricity and magnetism, vol 2. Clarendon,
Oxford
[zbMATH]
65.
Cohen IB (1954) Neglected sources for the life of Stephen Gray (1666 or 1667–1736).
Isis 45(1):41–50
66.
Cohen IB (1956) Franklin and Newton. Harvard University Press, Cambridge
67.
Coulomb CA (1776) Essai sur une application des règles de maximis et minimis à
quelques problèmes de statique relatif à l’architecture. Mémoires de mathématique &
de physique, présentés à l’Académie Royale des Sciences par divers savans 7:343–382
68.
Coulomb CA (1780) Recherches sur la meilleure maniere de fabriquer les aiguilles
aimantees. Mémoires de mathématique et de physique présentés à l’Académie Royale
des Sciences, par divers savans 9:167–264
69.

Coulomb CA (1784) Recherches théoriques & expérimentales sur la force de torsion, &
sur l’élasticité des ϐils de métal,&c. Mémoires de l’Académie Royale des Sciences de
Paris, pp 229–269
70.
Coulomb CA (1785) Premier mémoire sur l’électricité et le magnétisme. Construction
et usage d’une balance électrique,&c. Mémoires de l’Académie Royale des Sciences de
Paris, pp 569–577
71.
Coulomb CA (1785) Second mémoire sur l’électricité et le magnétisme. Où l’on
determine suivant quelles lois le ϐluide magnétique ainsi que le ϐluide électrique
agissent,&c. Mémoires de l’Académie Royale des Sciences de Paris, pp 578–611
72.
Coulomb CA (1785) Troisième mémoire sur l’électricité et le magnétisme. De la
quantité d’électricite qu’un corps isolé perd dans un temps donné,&c. Mémoires de
l’Académie Royale des Sciences de Paris, pp 612–638
73.
Coulomb CA (1786) Quatrième mémoire sur l’electricité et le magnétisme. Oú l’on
démontre deux principales propriétés du ϐluide électrique,&c. Mémoires de l’Académie
Royale des Sciences de Paris, pp 67–77
74.
Coulomb CA (1787) Cinquième mémoire sur l’électricité et le magnétisme. Sur la
manière dont le ϐluide électrique se partage entre deux corps conducteurs mis en
contact,&c. Mémoires de l’Académie Royale des Sciences de Paris, pp 421–467
75.
Coulomb CA (1788) Sexième mémoire sur l’électricité et le magnétisme. Suite des
recherches sur la distribution du ϐluide électrique entre plusieurs corps
conducteurs,&c. Mémoires de l’Académie Royale des Sciences de Paris, pp 617–705
76.
Coulomb CA (1789) Mémoires sur l’électricté et le magnétisme. Bachelier, Paris
77.
Coulomb CA (1789b) Septième mémoire sur l’électricité et le magnétisme. Du
magnétisme. In: Coulomb (ed) Extraits des mémoires de l’Académie Royale des
Sciences de Paris, publiés dans le années 1785 à 1789, avec planches et tableaux,
Bachelier, Paris, pp 455–505
78.
Coulomb CA (1799) Résultats de plusieure expériences destinées à déterminer la
quantité d’action que les hommes peuvent fournir par leur travail journalier, suivant
les différent manières dont ils employent leurs forces. Mémoires de l’Institute national
des sciences et arts-Sciences mathématiques et physiques 2:380–428
79.
Coulomb CA (1821) Théorie des machines simples. Bachelier, Paris
80.
Darrigol O (ed) (2012) A history of optics from Greek antiquity to the nineteenth
century. Oxford University Press, Oxford
[zbMATH]
81.
Dello Preite M (1979) L’immagine scientiϐica del mondo di Johann Heinrich Lambert.
Dedalo, Bari
82.
Desaguliers JT (1742) A dissertation concerning electricity. Innys & Longman, London
83.
Descartes R (1724) Les principes de la philosophie. Le Gras, Paris

84.
Devons S (1975) Coulomb electrical measurements, ERIC number ED182150,
https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED182150
85.
Devons S (1975) Henry Cavendish. The law of force of electricity,
https://stwww1.weizmann.ac.il/wp-content/uploads/2016/08/Henry-Cavendish----
the-law-of-Force-of-Electricity.pdf
86.
Dhombre J, Pensivy M (1988) Esprit de rigueur et présentation mathématique au
XVIIIème siècle: le cas d’une démonstration d’Aepinus. Histoira Mathematica 15(1):9–
31
[zbMATH]
87.
Euler AJ (1757) Recherches sur la cause physique de l’elettricité. Mémoires de
l’Académie Royale des Sciences et Belles Lettres de Berlin 13:125–159
88.
Euler L (1739) Tentamen novae theoriae musicae ex certissismis harmoniae principiis
dilucide expositae. Academiae Scientiarum, Saint Petersburg
89.
Euler L (1746) Nova theoria lucis et colorum. Opuscula Varii Argumenti 1:169–244
90.
Euler L (1746) Recherches physiques sur la nature des moindres parties de la matiere.
Opuscula Varii Argumenti 1:287–300
91.
Euler L (1746) Sur la lumiere & le couleurs. Histoire de l’Académie des Sciences et
Belles Lettres de Berlin pp 17–24
92.
Euler L (1754) Essai d’une explication physique des couleurs engendrees sur des
surfaces extremement minces. Mémoires de l’Académie des Sciences et Belles Lettres
de Berlin 8:262–282
93.
Euler L (1770–1774) Lettres à une princesse d’Allemagne sur divers sujets de physique
& de philosophie (3 vols). Steidel & Compagne, Mietau, Leipzig
94.
Franklin B (1751) Experiments and observations on electricity, made at Philadelphia
in America. Cave, London
95.
Franklin B (1752) A letter from Mr. Franklin to Mr. Peter Collinson, F. R. S. concerning
the effects of lightning. Philos Trans R Soc Lond 48:289–291
96.
Franklin B (1758) Des Herrn Benjamin Franklins Esq. Briefe von der Elektricität.
Translated into German by Wilcke JC. Kiesewetter, Leipzig
97.
Franklin B (1769) Experiments and observations on electricity, made at Philadelphia
in America. Henry, London
98.
Franklin B (1836–1840) The works of Benjamin Franklin: containing several political
and historical tracts not included in any former edition and many letters ofϐicial and
private, not hitherto published: with notes and a life of the author, Sparks, J (ed), vol
10. Wittemore and Niles and Hall, Boston
99.
Frisi P (1757) De causa electricitatis. In: Euler A, Frisi P, Laurentii B (eds)
Dissertationes selectae Jo. Alberti Euleri et, Paulli Frisi et Laurentii Béraud, quae ad

imperialem scientiarum petropolitanam Academiam an. 1755 missae sunt, cum
electricitatis caussa & theoria, praemio proposito, quaereretur, Junctinum, Saint
Petersburg, pp 41–131
100. Frisi P (1781) Dei conduttori elettrici. In: Frisi P (ed) Opuscoli ϐilosoϐici, Galeazzi,
Milan, pp 27–48
101. Galilei G (1890–1909) Le opere di Galileo Galilei (National edition), Barbera FA (ed),
vol 20, Florence
102. Geikie A (1905) The founders of geology. Macmillan, London
103. Gilbert W (1600) De magnete, magneticisque corporibus, et de magno magnete tellure;
physiologia nova. Short, London
104. Gilbert W (1893) On the loadstone and magnetic bodies and on the great magnet the
earth. Translated into English by Mottelay PF, Quaritch, London
105. Gillmor CS (1971) Coulomb and the evolution of physics and engineering in
eighteenth-century France. Princeton University Press, Princeton
106. Gillmor CS (1970) Coulomb, Charles. In: Gillispie CC (ed) Complete dictionary of
scientiϐic biography. Scribner, New York
107. Gleig G, Macfarquhar C (1788–1797) Encyclopaedia Britannica, or, a dictionary of
arts, sciences, and miscellaneous literature (18 vols + 2), edited by Gleig and
Macfarquhar
108. Gray JJ, Tilling L (1978) Johann Heinrich Lambert, mathematician and scientist, 1728–
1777. Historia Mathematica 5:13–41
[MathSciNet][zbMATH]
109. Gray S (1721) An account of some new electrical experiments. Philos Trans R Soc
Lond 31(366):104–107
110. Gray S (1731) A letter concerning the electricity of water, from Mr. Stephen Gray to
Cromwell Mortimer, M. D. Secr. R. S. Philos Trans R Soc Lond 37(422):227–230
111. Gray S (1731) A letter from Mr. Stephen Gray to Dr. Mortimer, Secr. R. S. containing a
farther account of his experiments concerning electricity. Philos Trans R Soc Lond
37(423):285–291
112. Gray S (1731) A letter to Cromwell Mortimer, M. D. Secr. R. S. containing several
experiments concerning electricity. Philos Trans R Soc Lond 37(417):18–44
113. Gray S (1731) Two letters from Mr. Stephen Gray, F. R. S. to C. Mortimer, M. D. Secr. R. S.
containing farther accounts of his experiments concerning electricity. Philos Trans R
Soc Lond 37(426):397–407
114.
Gray S (1735) Experiments and observations upon the light that is produced by
communicating electrical attraction to animal or inanimate bodies, together with

some of its most surprising effects; communicated in a letter from Mr. Stephen Gray, F.
R. S. to Cromwell Mortimer, M. D. R. S. Secr. Philos Trans R Soc Lond 39(436):16–24
115. Guzzardi L (2019) Points, distances, determinations: Ruggiero Boscovich’s theory of
natural philosophy. Springer, Dordrecht
116. Hakfoort C (1995) Optics in the age of Euler. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
[zbMATH]
117. Hankins T (1967) The inϐluence of Malebranche on the science of mechanics during
the eighteenth century. J Hist Ideas 28(2):193–210
118. Hawes JL (1968) Newton’s revival of the aether hypothesis and the explanation of
gravitational attraction. Notes Records R Soc Lond 23(3):200–212
[MathSciNet]
119. Hawes JL (1971) Newton’s two electricities. Ann Sci 27(1):95–103
120. Heilbron J (1970) Aepinus, Franz Ulrich Theodosius. In: Gillispie CC (ed) Complete
dictionary of scientiϐic biography. Scribner, New York
121. Heilbron JL (1976) Robert Symmer and the two electricities. Isis 76(1):7–20
122. Heilbron JL (1979) Electricity in the 17th and 18th centuries. University of California
Press, Berkley
123. Heymann J (1972) Coulomb’s memoir on statics: an essay in the history of civil
engineering. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
124. Home R (1988) Leonhard Euler’s ‘anti-Newtonian’ theory of light. Ann Sci 45(5):521–
533
[MathSciNet][zbMATH]
125. Home RW (1982) Newton on electricity and the aether. In: Bechler Z (ed)
Contemporary Newtonian researches. Reidel, Dordrecht, pp 191–214
126. Home RW (1983) Poisson’s memoirs on electricity: academic politics and a new style
in physics. British J Hist Sci 16(3):239–259
[MathSciNet][zbMATH]
127. Hujer K (1952) Father Procopius Divis? - The European Franklin. Isis 43(4):351–357
128. Hutton J (1794) Dissertation upon the philosophy of light, heat, and ϐire. Cadell and
Davis, Edinburgh
129. Hutton J (2019) Mactutor history of mathematics archive. http://www-
history.mcs.st-and.ac.uk/index.html
130. Huygens C (1888–1950) Oeuvres complètes de Christiaan Huygens (22 vols). Nijhoff,
The Hague
131.
James FA (1984) The physical interpretation of the wave theory of light. British J Hist

Sci 17(1):47–60
132. Jammer M (1957) Concepts of force: A study in the foundation of dynamics. Harvard
University Press, Cambridge
133. Krüger JG (1746) Geschichte der Erde in den allerältesten Zeiten. Lüderwald, Halle
134. Laguzzi A (1992) Carlo Barletti e le “Encyclopédies”. Studi Storici 33(4):833–862
135. Laguzzi A (1994) Per una biograϐia di P. Carlo Barletti, ϐisico del ‘700 e patriota
repubblicano. Memorie dell’Accademia Urbense 12
136. Laguzzi A (2012) Carlo Barletti. Epistolario, accademia Urbense.
https://www.archiviostorico.net/libripdf/Barletti_Epistolario.pdf
137. Lambert JH (1760) Photometria, sive, De mensura et gradibus luminis, colorum et
umbrae. Detleffsen, Augsburg
138. Lambert JH (1770) Mémoire sur la part de la photométrique de l’art due peintre.
Histoire de l’Académie Royale des Sciences et Belles Lettres de Berlin, pp 80–108
139. Lambert JH (1779) Pyrometrie oder vom Maasse des Feuers und der Wärme. Haud &
Spener, Berlin
140. Lambert JH (1784) Systême du monde. Duchesne & Durand, Berlin
141. Lambert JH (2001) Photometry, or, on the measure and gradations of light, colors and
shade, Translated into English by DiLaura DL. Illuminating Engineering Society of
North America, New York
142. Le Compasseur G (1742) Traité d’optique. Ou l’on donne la théorie de la lumiere dans
le système Newtonien, avec de nouvelles solutions des principaux problèmes de
dioptrique & de catoptrique. Jombert, Paris
143. Lechalas G (1884) L’oeuvre scientiϐique de Malebranche. Revue Philosophique de la
France et de l’EƵ tranger 18:293–312
144. Mach E (1926) The principles of physical optics. An historical and philosophical
treatment. Translated into English by Anderson JS and Young AFA. Methuen & Co,
London
145. Maffei S (1747) Della formazione de’ fulmini trattato del sig. marchese Scipione Maffei
raccolto da varie sue lettere, in alcune delle quali si tratta anche degli’insetti
rigenerantisi, e de’ pesci di mare su i monti, e più a lungo dell’elettricità. Tumemani,
Verona
146. Maignan E (1648) Perspectiva horaria sive de horographia gnomonica tum theoretica,
tum practica libri quatuor. Rubeus, Rome
147. de Mairan D (1717) Dissertation sur la cause de la lumiere des phosphores et des
noctiluques. Brun, Bordeaux
148.

de Mairan D (1722) Recherches physico-mathématiques sur la réϐlexion des corps.
Mémoires de l’Académie Royale des Sciences de Paris, pp 6–51
149. de Mairan D (1723) Suite des recherches physico-mathématiques sur la réϐlexion des
corps. Mémoires de l’Académie Royale des Sciences de Paris, pp 343–386
150. de Mairan D (1737) Sur la propagation du son dans les differens tons qui le modiϐient.
Mémoires de l’Académie Royale des Sciences de Paris, pp 1–60
151. de Mairan D (1738) Troisiéme partie des recherches physico-mathématiques sur la
réϐlexion des corps. Mémoires de l’Académie Royale des Sciences de Paris, pp 1–64
152. de Mairan D (1740) Quatrieme partie des recherches physico-mathématiques sur la
réϐlexion des corps. Mémoires de l’Académie Royale des Sciences de Paris 1:1–58
153. Malebrache N (1879) De la recherche de la vérité. In: Bouillier MF (ed) 2 vols. Garnier,
Paris
154. Malebranche N (1699) Reϐlexion sur la lumiere et le couleurs, et la generation du feu.
Mémoires de l’Académie Royale des Sciences de Paris, pp 22–35
155. Malebranche N (1958-1967) Correspondance. Actes et documents, 1690–1715. In:
Robinet A, als (eds) Oeuvres complètes de Malebranche (20 vols), vol 19, Vrin, Paris
156. Martin C (2013) Causation in Descartes’ Les météores and late Renaissance
Aristotelian meteorology. In: Garber D, Roux S (eds) The mechanization of natural
philosophy. Springer, Dordrecht, pp 217–236
157. Martinez AA (2006) Replication of Coulomb’s torsion balance experiment. Arch Hist
Exact Sci 60(6):517–563
[MathSciNet][zbMATH]
158. McCormmach R (2004) Speculative truth: Henry Cavendish, natural philosophy, and
the rise of modern theoretical science. Oxford University Press, Oxford
[zbMATH]
159. Mersenne M (1636) Harmonie universelle. Cramoisy, Paris
160. van Musschenbroek P (1746) Observations de Monsieur Musschenbroek lues par
Monsieur de Reamur. Mémoires de l’Académie Royale des Sciences de Paris Procès-
verbaux 65:4–6
161. Newton I (1730) Opticks: or, a treatise of the reϐlections, refractions, inϐlections and
colours. Innys, London
162. Nollet JA (1746) Essai sur l’électricité des corps. Guerin, Paris
163. Nollet JA (1754-1765) Leçons de physique expérimentale (6 vols). Arkstée et Merkus,
Amsterdam & Leipzig
164. Pace A (1970) Giambattista Beccaria. In: Various (ed) Dizionario biograϐico degli
italiani, vol 7, Istituto della Enciclopedia Italiana, Roma

165. Pancaldi G (2003) Volta. Science and culture in the age of enlightenment. Princeton
University Press, Princeton
166. Pastorino C (2020) Alchemy and the electric spirit in Isaac Newton’s general scholium.
In: Ducheyne, Mandelbrote S, Snobelen S (eds) Newton’s general scholium after 300
years, Forthcoming
167. Pedersen KM (2017) The velocity of light and the colour changes of Jupiter’s satellite.
Res Publ Sci Stud 40:1–41
168. Playfair J (1802) Illustrations of the Huttonian theory of earth. Creech et als,
Edinburgh
169. Poisson SD (1811) Mémoire sur la distribution de l’électricité à la surface des corps
conducteurs. Mémoires de la Classe des Sciences Mathématiques et Physiques de
l’Institute Impériale de France 12:Part. I, 1–92
170. Poisson SD (1811) Second mémoire sur la distribution de l’électricité à la surface des
corps conducteurs. Mémoires de la Classe des Sciences Mathématiques et physiques de
l’Institute Impériale de France 12:Part II, 163–274
171. Priestley J (1775) The history and present state of electricity, with original
experiments, Bathurst et al (ed) 4th edn, corrected and enlarged, London
172. Privat-Deschanel A (1876) Elementary treatise on natural philosophy. Appleton, New
York
[zbMATH]
173. Proverbio E (2000) Sulle ricerche elettriche di Giovanbattista Beccaria e sui suoi
rapporti con Ruggiero Giuseppe Boscovich nelle applicazioni dell’elettricismo naturale
e artiϐiciale. In: Congresso XX (ed) Schettino E. SISFA, Naples, pp 231–280
174. Proverbio E (2003) Gli interessi scientiϐici di Ruggiero G. Boscovich per i fenomeni
elettrici e i suoi incontri con Benjamin Franklin ed altri elettricisti inglesi e francesi.
Quaderni di Storia della Fisica 11:3–48
175. Proverbio E (2006–2019) Boscovich National Edition. Edizione nazionale delle opere
e della corrispondenza. http://www.edizionenazionaleboscovich.it/2018
176. Rohault J (1723) System of natural philosophy. Illustrated with Dr. Samuel Clarke’s
notes, vol 2. Knapton, London
177. Schettino E (2000) Franklinists in Naples in the second half of the 18th century. In:
Congresso XX (ed) Schettino E. SISFA, Naples, pp 347–352
178. Scriba C (1973) Lambert, Johann Heinrich. In: Gillispie CC (ed) Complete dictionary of
scientiϐic biography. Scribner, New York
179. Sette D (1967) Lezioni di Fisica. Elettromagnetismo, Veschi, Rome
180. Sguario E (1747) Dell’elettricismo: ossia delle forze elettriche de’ corpi. Di Simone,
Naples, ϐirst edition Venice, 1746

181. Shapiro AE (1973) Kinematic optics. ‘A study of the wave theory of light in the
seventeenth century’. Arch Hist Exact Sci 11(2/3):134–266
182. Sheynin OB (1971) J.H. Lambert’s work on probability. Arch Exact Sci 7(3):244–256
183. Steck M (1970) Bibliographia Lambertiana. Gerstenberg, Hildesheim
[zbMATH]
184. Stoiljkovich D (2014) Contribution of Boscovich’s theory to modern comprehension
of the structure of matter. In: Anderton R, Stoiljkovich D (eds) Roger Boscovich-The
founder of modern science, Lulu, Raleigh, pp 4.1–4.11
185. Talas S (2012) Physics in the eighteenth century: new lectures, entertainment and
wonder. In: Cifarelli L, Simili R (eds) Laura Bassi. Emblema e primato nella scienza del
Settecento, Editrice Compositori, Bologna, pp 177–188
186. Torres Assis AK (2017) I fondamenti sperimentali e storici dell’elettricità. Bollettino
trimestrale dell’Associazione per l’Insegnamento della Fisica 26(2):3–223
187. Truesdell CA (1960) The rational mechanics of ϐlexible or elastic bodies. In: Leonhardi
Euleri Opera omnia (1911-, in progress), 2, vol 1, part 2, Teubneri GB; [then] Fussli
Turici; [then] Birkhäuser, Basel
188. Vassalli-Eandi AM (1783) Memorie istoriche intorno alla vita ed agli studi del padre
Giambatista Beccaria delle scuole pie, professore di ϐisica sperimentale nella R.
Università di Torino. Stamperia Reale, Turin
189. Vassalli-Eandi AM (1821) Memorie istoriche intorno alla vita ed agli studi di
Gianfrancesco Cigna. Memorie della Reale Accademia delle Scienze di Torino 26:XIII–
XXXVI
190. Veil H (2019) Elektrisches Feuer 1746: Ein bizarrer Streit um Wissenschaft und
Oǆ ffentlichkeit in Leipzig. Humanities Online, Frankfurt am Main
191. Verri P (1787) Memorie appartenenti alla vita ed agli studj del signor don Paolo Frisi.
Marelli, Milan
192. Volk O (1980) Johann Heinrich Lambert and the determination of orbits for planets
and comets. Celest Mech 21:237–250
[MathSciNet][zbMATH]
193. Volta A (1775) Articolo di una lettera del signor don Alessandro Volta al signor dottore
Giuseppe Priestley, opere di Alessandro Volta, vol 3. https://echo.mpiwg-
berlin.mpg.de/content/electricity
194. Watson W (1746) A sequel to the experiments and observations tending to illustrate
the nature and properties of electricity. Davis, London
195. Whittaker ET (1910) A history of the theories of aether and electricity, From the ages
of Descartes to the close of the nineteenth century. Longmans, Green Co, New York

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Footnotes
pp. 2–3.
 
p. 47.
 
pp. 631–632.
 
p. 95.
 
pp. IV–V.
 
pp. VII–VIII.
 
pp. VII–XII.
 
p. 4.
 
p. 315.
 
p. 62, p. 323.
 
pp. 55–56.
 
p. 25.
 
p. 42.

14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
 
p. 11.
 
pp. 21–22.
 
p. 22.
 
pp. 47–48.
 
p. 48.
 
p. 4.
 
p. 27.
 
p. 3.
 
Vol. 2, p. 495.
 
Vol. 2, p. 496.
 
p. 24.
 
pp. 24–25.
 
Vol. 1, Livre premiere des movemens, p. 14.

27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
 
p. 12.
 
p. 771–772.
 
Vol. 2, p. 525.
 
Vol. 2, pp. 483–484.
 
Vol. 2, p. 486.
 
p. 6.
 
p. 6.
 
p. 8.
 
p. 9.
 
p. 10.
 
p. 12.
 
p. 12.
 
pp. 11, 26.

40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
 
p. 17.
 
p. 18.
 
p. 15.
 
p. 27.
 
p. 25.
 
p. 35.
 
pp. 77–80.
 
p. 26. A trochoid is the curve described by a point linked to a disk. If the distance of the point is
equal to (lower than) the radius of the disk, the curve is also called (curtate) cycloid and looks like
a sinusoid.
 
p. 135.
 
Corresponding to 300 m/s. The value obtained by Newton was distorted downwards. Later,
Pierre-Simon Laplace saw the ϐlaw and ultimately corrected Newton’s result. He assumed that the
process of sound transmission was not isothermal as Newton had thought, but adiabatic.
Bernoulli suggested his own reasons why the actual speed, then estimated in 1080 pieds
d’Angleterre, was grater than that found by Newton [35], pp. 38–39.
 
p. 46.

51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
 
p. 44.
 
p. 57.
 
p. 529.
 
p.149.
 
p.75.
 
p. 198. Translation adapted from [124].
 
p. 205.
 
p. 192.
 
Following the standard symbols, the speed v of sound according to the modern theories is
given by the relation 
, where  is the mass density of the medium, not to be confused
with the weight density D, and E its modulus of longitudinal elasticity, also known as Young
modulus, which stands for the elastic force. Factor 2 in Euler’s formula derives from the values he
assumed for the acceleration of gravity g: 
.
 
p. 193.
 
pp. 91–97.
 

62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
p. 192.
 
p. 229.
 
p. 208.
 
p. 228.
 
p. 255.
 
pp. 217–218.
 
pp. 219–220.
 
Vol. 1, pp. 106–107, letter 26. See also [92], pp. 234–235.
 
p. 239.
 
p. 9.
 
pp. 237–239.
 
p. 23.
 
p. 113.
 
p. 278.

76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
 
p. 50.
 
p. 378. English translation in [141].
 
p. liv.
 
pp. 6–7.
 
Index capitum. English translation in [141].
 
Preface.
 
Preface. English translation in [141].
 
p. 3.
 
184a.
 
pp. 1–2. English translation in [141].
 
p. 3.
 
Section 46, p. 24. English translation in [141].
 
Section 226, p. 105. English translation in [141].

89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
101
 
Section 58, pp. 29–30.
 
Section 251, p. 117.
 
Section 257, p. 122.
 
Section 269, p. 128.
 
p. 24.
 
p. 250.
 
Section 79, p. 40.
 
pp. xcviii-xcix.
 
pp. clxvi-clxxxiii.
 
pp. 52–53. Translation in [104].
 
pp. 59–60. Translation in [104].
 
p. 183.
 
p. 185.

102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
110
111
112
113
114
 
p. 192.
 
Vol. 3, p. 399.
 
pp. 192–194.
 
p. 194.
 
p. 496.
 
pp. 496–497.
 
pp. 186–187.
 
Vol. 19, p. 615.
 
Vol. 3, pp. 250-251.
 
p. 102.
 
p. 255.
 
p. 432.
 
pp. 52–53.

115
116
117
118
119
120
121
122
123
124
125
126
127
 
pp. 2, 17.
 
p. 260.
 
pp. 71–72.
 
pp. 206–209.
 
p. 424.
 
Preface, pp. 11–12 (not numbered pages); 595, 597.
 
p. 350.
 
Letter of Symmer to Michell, July 10. p.17.
 
p. 10.
 
p. 10.
 
p. 584.
 
p. 585.
 
p. 659.

128
129
130
131
132
133
134
135
136
137
138
139
 
p. 593.
 
pp. 607-608.
 
All the following measurements in cm in the following are approximated.
 
pp. 105–108.
 
p. 140.
 
pp. 111–112. The mathematical proof of this assertion is given at pp. 112–113.
 
Vol. 6, pp. 407–410.
 
p. 416.
 
pp. 104–105.
 
p. 107.
 
p. 106.
 
Reference is to his second experiment referred to in the letter: “If when the feather is come to
the Glass, it be held at about 6 or 8 in. Distance from the side of a wall edge of a Table Arme of a
Chair or the like it will be drawn to it and thence to the Glass together without ceasing it ϐlies to
object at a greater Distance but then does not so often Return” [60], pp. 34–35.

140
141
142
143
144
145
146
147
148
149
150
151
152
 
p. 36. Punctuation added.
 
pp. 18–19.
 
pp. 19–20.
 
p. 42.
 
p. 246.
 
p. 22.
 
p. 24.
 
p. 25.
 
p. 26.
 
pp. 26–27.
 
p. 29.
 
p. 31.
 
pp. 39-40

153
154
155
156
157
158
159
160
161
162
163
164
165
 
p. 42.
 
p. 35.
 
p. 42.
 
pp. 40–42; 53–63.
 
p. 423; 398.
 
p. 40.
 
p. 399.
 
p. 176. English translation in [122].
 
p. 6; critical transcription from [190], pp. 125–126. Translation in [122].
 
Introductory remarks, p. 5, p. 239.
 
Introductory remarks, p. 7.
 
Introductory remarks, pp. 7–8. Translation in [5].
 
pp. 375–376. Translation in [122].

166
167
168
169
170
171
172
173
174
175
176
177
178
 
p. 402.
 
p. 426.
 
p. 402.
 
p. 202.
 
p. 401.
 
pp. 9–10; p. 241.
 
pp. 14–15; p. 244.
 
Section 6, pp. 14–16.
 
Section 29, p. 37.
 
p. 247; see footnote 16.
 
Section 30, p. 38.
 
Section 31, p. 39. Translation in [5].
 
Section 31, pp. 39–40.

179
180
181
182
183
184
185
186
187
188
189
190
191
 
Section 34, p. 46.
 
Section 107, p. 114, p. 304.
 
Section 124, pp. 127–128.
 
This equation has been corrected according the suggestion of [5], p. 269, footnotes 29, 30.
 
Section 45, pp. 54–55.
 
p. 338.
 
p. 144.
 
Section 133, pp. 135–136, 318.
 
Section 138, pp. 139–140,.
 
Section 142, p. 143.
 
Section 144, p. 144; pp. 323–324.
 
Section 147, pp. 146–147, 325.
 
p. 120.

192
193
194
195
196
197
198
199
200
201
202
203
 
Section 76, p. 83.
 
pp. 23–24.
 
p. 395.
 
p. 40.
 
p. 126.
 
p. 252.
 
To the readers, ϐirst rows.
 
p. 14.
 
Vol. 1, p. 194.
 
Deferent (deferente) is the term used by Beccaria for conductors. The English translation of
his treatise replaced everywhere deferent with conductor.
 
Beccaria in one occasion compared his measures, in particular his inch, with a physical
magnitude, which allows to give it a value: “supposing the common height of mercury in the
barometer in Turin to be twenty-seven inches and an half” [29], p. 165. Which gives for the inch
the value of 2.76 cm, greater than the current English value.
 
pp.10–11; p. 11.

204
205
206
207
208
209
210
211
212
213
214
215
216
 
pp. 56–58.
 
pp. 53–54.
 
pp. 155–156.
 
p. 175.
 
p. 175.
 
p. 173; p. 179.
 
p. 244.
 
p. 174. Translation into English in [31].
 
p. 155.
 
p.174. Translation into English in [31].
 
p. 180.
 
p. 181. Translation into English in [31].
 
p. 181.

217
218
219
220
221
222
223
224
225
226
227
228
229
 
p. 181.
 
pp. 182–183.
 
pp. 184–185.
 
p. 185. Translation into English adapted from [31].
 
pp. 325–326.
 
p. 187; pp. 688–689.
 
Vol. 1, p. 434.
 
p. 47.
 
p. 48.
 
Vol. 6., p. 486.
 
pp. 515–516. Translation into English adapted from James Parsons.
 
p. 40.
 
pp. 524–525.

230
231
232
233
234
235
236
237
238
239
240
241
242
 
p. 278.
 
p. 401.
 
p. 1.
 
p. 48. Translation in to English [31].
 
pp. 196–199; 1–3.
 
pp. 1–3.
 
p. 619.
 
p. 53.
 
p. 6.
 
p. 55.
 
p. 58.
 
Vol. 6, p. 343.
 
p. 27.

243
244
245
246
247
248
249
250
251
252
253
254
255
 
p. 27.
 
pp. 28–30.
 
p. 45.
 
p. 61.
 
Section 200, pp. 192–193.
 
Section 202, pp. 194–196.
 
pp. 62–63.
 
pp. 120–121.
 
pp. 247–248.
 
pp. 259–266.
 
p. 43; p. 263.
 
p. 52; p. 263.
 
pp. 270–271.

256
257
258
259
260
261
262
263
264
265
266
267
268
 
p. 51.
 
p. 132.
 
p. 55; p. 272.
 
pp. 55–56, p. 272.
 
pp. 87–88.
 
p. 17.
 
p. 370.
 
p. 39.
 
p. 95.
 
pp. 310–313.
 
pp. 298–301.
 
p. 303.
 
p. 361.

269
270
271
272
273
274
275
276
277
278
279
280
281
 
p. 361.
 
p. 363.
 
p. 363.
 
pp. 12–15.
 
p. 16.
 
vol V/1, pp. 332–334.
 
p. 332–333.
 
p. 343.
 
pp. 80–82.
 
Most of biography information comes from [106].
 
p. 8.
 
p. 27.
 
p. 689.

282
283
284
285
286
287
288
289
290
291
292
293
 
pp. 298-299.
 
p. 258.
 
p. 579.
 
p. 191.
 
pp. 162–165.
 
The measurements are expressed in French inches, equal to about 2.7 cm.
 
A ligne is about 1/12 of an inch, or 2.2 mm.
 
One French grain is about 
, the weight of a mass of 50 mg.
 
p. 574.
 
Coulomb used the symbol D, which is here avoided to not confuse with the product of
electric masses introduced later.
 
p. 247.
 
p. 572. Translation in Gillmor 1971.
 

294
295
296
297
298
299
300
301
302
303
304
305
pp. 572–573.
 
If the electric force is proportional to the inverse square of distance, that is 
, the
product 
 is constant.
 
p. 174.
 
p. 547.
 
p. 579. Coulomb used the symbol D instead of M; it has be changed here not to confuse it with
the diameter of the torsion wire.
 
pp. 579–580.
 
Book 1, section XII, Proposition 71, Theorem 31. Actually, because of the induction between
the globe Gr and the small disk l, the electricity is not exactly uniformly distributed on Gr and
Theorem 31 does not hold exactly [64], vol. 1, p. 43.
 
p. 583.
 
p. 584.
 
p. 611. Translation in [105].
 
p. 593.
 
p. 40.

306
307
308
309
310
311
312
313
314
315
316
317
 
p. 586.
 
pp. 443–444.
 
p. 228.
 
By making explicit that the distribution of electricity was in a stable state, Coulomb avoided
the then almost impossible to solve problem of determining the laws of spatial distribution of
electricity during the process of charging.
 
p. 67. Translation in [105].
 
p. 74.
 
pp. 620–621.
 
pp.105–107; p. 232.
 
pp. 75-76. Translation in [105].
 
pp. 587–588. Coulomb proof is strictly connected to that reported by Cavendish in his paper
of 1771 [55], pp. 586–587. This suggests that even though Coulomb did not cite him he knew
Cavendish’s writings.
 
p. 430.
 
pp. 432–436.

318
319
320
321
322
323
324
325
326
327
328
329
 
p. 457.
 
p. 443–444.
 
p. 445.
 
p. 445.
 
pp. 446–447.
 
The year 1811 is the date attributed to the publication of the Institute; in [126], the true dates
of presentation are referred to.
 
pp. 60, 66, 80.
 
p. 675.
 
pp. 674–675.
 
The origin of factor 2 in the expression of 
 is commented upon in the endnote III.
 
p. 447.
 
pp. 675–676.
 

330
331
332
333
334
335
336
337
p. 74.
 
Vol. 1, p. 277.
 
Vol. 1, p. 281. The expression for the ratio between the density of the proof plane and that of
the electriϐied body is given by 
, with z the thickness and r the radius.
 
pp. 677–678.
 
p. 676.
 
pp. 488–491.
 
p. 672.
 
p. 673.
 

(1)
 
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
D. Capecchi, Epistemology and Natural Philosophy in the 18th Century, History of Mechanism and
Machine Science 39
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-52852-2_5
5. The Emergence of the Science of
Engineering
Danilo Capecchi1  
Ingegneria Strutturale e Geotecnica, Sapienza Università di Roma,
Rome, Italy
 
Danilo Capecchi
Email: danilo.capecchi@uniroma1.it
Abstract
Modern technology historians identify the birth of a new ϐigure in the
18th century, the scientiϐic engineer. His goal was the rationalization of
design and implementation of processes. For this purpose, he used
hypotheses and experimentations, as in the (mathematical) physical
sciences. The need for such a new ϐigure derived from the tumultuous
developments of science (physics and chemistry in particular) of the
18th century, consequence and cause of the economic development.
With its dizzying growth in the 18th century, science revealed the
possibility of applications to areas never thought of before. However,
scientists were dealing with general problems. Their solutions did not
provide for an immediate application. Thus, there was the basic need
for an intermediate operator between the scientist and the ϐinal user.
More precisely, there was a need for a sufϐiciently large body of
qualiϐied engineers. After general considerations on the relationship
between mathematics, natural philosophy, new physics and technology,
the chapter goes on to look for the reasons that led to this process.

5.1 Science, Technology and Engineering
Science and technology are two terms that in the current language
indicate different activities, in the sense that if one asked some people if
a problem pertains to science or otherwise to technology they would
give the same answer in most cases. However, there may be some
dispersion and sometimes the answer would be: I do not know.
If instead one asked what is the difference between science and
technology he would receive an uncertain answer. There are indeed
several standard suggestions, provided by the experts; philosophers of
science and technology, scientists and technologists and even
politicians. Suggestions that in some way have been metabolized by not
educated public and have become commonplaces. A simple answer is
that science is more theoretical, technology more practical. That is
scientists are studying much more and making very complex
experiments in a clean laboratory, perhaps by putting on white coats,
while technologists study less and make more applicative experiments,
perhaps even using blue overalls. In these judgments there are two
motivations. One of epistemological nature, the other of sociological
nature. On the one hand one sees in science a more noble activity
because engaged in disinterested knowledge of nature, of the truth in
itself. On the other hand this activity does not require manual labor.
And thus, according to the mentality rooted in the West since the
ancient world, that of scientists being closer to the activity of the rulers,
that typically do not carry out manual works, is noblest.
The use of a term in historical accounts cannot be the free choice of
a single person, for example of a historian to introduce a category, but it
must be based in some way on common usage taking into account its
history. Almost always there are nuances in the accepted use and the
task of any scholar is to specify the use he himself intends to favor. In
the case of technology, from the Greek 
, there are also linguistic
difϐiculties arising from problems of translation, in particular related to
the difference between technique and technology, that in some
languages are given by the same words [52]. Here this difference is not
stressed and technology is the term used to cover possible difference
between technique and technology. There are in any case some

different acceptations of the term; the main of which are resumed
below in very general way [46, 51]1:
1.
Technology as a set of artifacts or systems of artifacts.
 
2.
Technology as a form of knowledge (for the design,
production, maintenance and use of technological artifacts and
systems).
 
3.
Technology as a range of activities (designing, producing,
maintaining and using artifacts).
 
4.
Technology as an expression of the will of its makers,
designers and producers (volition).
 
In the following the meaning 2 is generally considered.
Technology, in this meaning and according a very diffuse idea, is
basically synonymous with engineering. There are however broader
meanings of technology and engineering, now widespread even among
non-experts. On the one hand, engineering, when deϐined as the activity
of the engineer, is only a part of technology, together with medicine,
agriculture, domestic economy, communication, etc. On the other hand
engineering can be deϐined as the whole process of making, whose
actors are not only engineers or technologists but also contractors and
politicians, and thus engineering contains technology. Below a possible
distinction between science, technology and engineering:
Viewed from their achievements, scientiϐic activity, technological
activity, and engineering activity yield three different kinds of
achievements. Scientiϐic activity results in academic
achievements, or new scientiϐic knowledge, such as new
theories, new scientiϐic principles, new scientiϐic concepts, or
academic dissertations. Technological activity results in
technological achievements, or new technological knowledge,
such as a patent for an invention, “know-how”, or Engineering
activity results in engineering achievements, or material
products and material facilities that mean material wealth, such
as a power station building, a new railway, a new car, or a new

computer. Scientiϐic knowledge belongs to all mankind, while
technological knowledge, such as patents belongs to their
inventors or a certain company. As to engineering achievements
its nature is not knowledge, but material wealth [10].2
In the following I will consider engineering in the more restrict way,
that is as the activity of engineers and as such a subset of technology.
The ϐigure of the engineer is nuanced as always happens when one
wants to search in the past proϐiles, quite well deϐined today but not in
the past. The English term engineer is of the 14th century, with an
etymology that is not completely clear; it would derive from the late
Latin ingenium, or devices.3 Whereas the terms scientists, physicists
were coined by academicians, engineer originated in every day usage. In
the following I will mainly refer to the role of the engineer of the 18th
century, when though the term was common it did not have the same
meaning of today. According to the Encyclopédie:
The job of an engineer requires a lot of study, talent, ability and
genius. The basic sciences of this state are arithmetic, geometry,
mechanics and hydraulics.
An engineer must have some skill in drawing. Physics is
necessary to judge of the nature of the materials used in the
buildings, of the waters, and the different qualities of the air of
the places which one wishes to fortify.
It is very useful for him to have general and particular
knowledge of the civil architecture, for the construction of
military buildings, as barracks, magazines, arsenals, hospitals,
quarters of the staff,&c. whose engineers are usually charged
[26]4 (E.1).
The engineer is thus distinct from craftsman not only because a
designer and not just a performer but also because he has a basic
education that includes elements of mathematics and may be of natural
philosophy. Among engineers, a not too much numerous category if
according to the Encyclopédie in France at the time there were three
hundred of them, there were characters of different education varying

from those who possessed a good education in natural philosophy and
mathematics and those who were little more than craftsmen.
5.1.1 Technology Versus Applied Science
Strict deϐinitions of science and technology, in the sense of expressing
one or two characteristics that constitute necessary and sufϐicient
conditions to characterize them, are hard to come by. Essentialist
(intensive) deϐinitions of science and technology can be proved
questionable, simply because deϐinitions of science and technology are
not shared. An alternative view to an essentialist deϐinition, could be
the adoption of a nominalistic-empirical strategy and see as science and
technology were considered as such by people. But also this strategy
may fail, ϐirst of all because it presupposed at least a weak, or working,
form of (essentialist) deϐinition. Concluding both the two strategies
should be considered [60].5
A common deϐinition, that can be considered either as essentialist
or nominalist, is that technology is applied science. This view is today
generally not yet defended by historians and philosophers of
technology; but it is still the view shared by most people and probably
even by the majority of technologists. A criticism of this view mostly
depends and the meaning of the term applied science. Leaving aside a
precise deϐinition, that will attempted below, here it is suggested that
the equation applied science 
 technology means that that technology
is a quite straightforward application of results obtained by science:
The terms ‘technology’ and ‘applied science’ will be taken here
as synonymous [...]. The method and the theories of science can
be applied either to increasing our knowledge of the external
and the internal reality or to enhancing our welfare and power.
If the goal is purely cognitive, pure science is obtained; if
primarily practical, applied science. Thus, whereas cytology is a
branch of pure science, cancer research is one of applied
research [14].6
However the equation applied science 
 technology is at least
misleading and all considered false. This can be argued in two
conϐlicting views, both of them are defended below as in an exercise of

rhetoric. On the one hand it can be argued that technology is not
exhausted by science; on the another hand it can be argued that the
differences between science and technology are not very great, neither
at a methodological nor at a epistemological level.
5.1.1.1 Difference Between Science and
Technology
As regards the ϐirst type of argument, that is that technology is not
exhausted by science, history shows that technological development
has been largely independent of the development of a formalized
science, carried out by a small group of people largely dedicated to a
contemplative activity and endowed with a good education both in
natural philosophy and in mathematics. There are entire societies, such
as the Roman and Chinese empires, which had a very advanced
technology without, at least apparently, having a substantial formal
theoretical elaboration behind it. In the 18th century, the introduction
of hydraulic and thermal machines are usually mentioned as examples
of science-free technological developments; in the 20th century the
invention of the transistor is also cited as an example. Though it could
be argued that most of these situations belong to the past, when science
was not yet developed, no one can reasonably deny that similar cases
could happen again.
Science, as it is commonly understood (for the past the situation
was more nuanced), tends to develop general theories or theories that
are always valid, but that cannot be connected in a simple way to the
concrete world. The only point of contact on the part of the theories
with reality is the agreement with the experimental results. Technology
is instead rooted in the real world.
To understand the interplay between science and technology some
considerations connected to structural engineering are reported below.
Structural engineering is largely based, or at least it was such until the
middle of the 20th century, on the theory of elasticity. This is a scientiϐic
theory, in particular a physical mathematical one, which draws its
inspiration from an ‘experimental’ law known as Hooke’s law, according
to which, at the macroscopic level, the displacements of the points of all
bodies are proportional to the applied forces, the more approximately

the more the displacements are small. The theory of elasticity in its
traditional form, developed by French mathematicians, including
Augustin Cauchy and Siméon Denis Poisson, is strongly idealized.
Material bodies are assimilated to mathematical continua, without
entering into the merit of their actual microscopic corpuscular
structure. On these continua are deϐined generalized displacements and
forces, known as stresses and strains, introduced with the extensive use
of Calculus. It is assumed that these quantities, stress and strain, which
are in themselves not measurable experimentally, are linked by a
generalized Hooke’s law: stresses are linearly proportional to strains.
We thus arrive at a highly axiomatized theory, which today is referred
to as the mathematical theory of elasticity, which is not based on
experimental data, as in principle it is true for classical mechanics and
optics, but it is rather a hypothetical deductive theory validated by the
experimental conϐirmation. Notice that the theory of elasticity was
inspired not only and perhaps not even mainly by technological needs,
but also by theoretical studies such as those related to the propagation
of light (and sound). According to the wave theories, dominant in the
19th century, light propagates through an elastic medium. And the
theory of elasticity was useful for the study of this propagation.
Augustin-Jean Fresnel (1788–1827) and George Green (1793–
1841)  were mathematicians and physicists that moved in this
direction.
The mathematical theory of elasticity leads to differential equations
connecting the variables of displacement of the points of a given body
to the external forces applied to it. These equations could be solved for
relatively simple bodies and distributions of forces only and therefore
were not useful in the practical calculation of structures (today, thanks
to computers it is possible to solve these equations, albeit numerically,
in every situation).
In order to apply the theory of elasticity to structural calculations,
less general and less rigorous theories began to be developed, which
were initially addressed at the examination of the fundamental
elements of structures, in particular those in steel in vogue in the
construction of industrial buildings and bridges of the 19th century:
beams. The scholars involved in these studies were either
mathematicians or engineers skilled in mathematics, such as those

formed at the EƵcole polytechnique. Among them were Claude Louis
Navier (1785–1836) and Adhémar Jean Claude Barré Saint Venant
(1797–1886) [18]. The beam appeared as a particularly interesting
structural element, because it was relatively simple and the foundation
of almost all steel constructions. The theory of beam was carried out
satisfactorily by Saint Venant. His results, however, were too complex to
be used by a practitioner, even a good one. So many simpliϐications
were introduced by engineers and mathematicians. However, there was
a critical problem to be solved: how could the results obtained for the
single beam be applied to the case of frames, that is assemblies of
beams? From the middle of the 19th century, relatively simple
approaches were developed by scholars commonly classiϐied as
engineers. Among them played a fundamental role Christian Otto
Mohr (1835–1918) and Alberto Castigliano (1847–1884), who
completed the work of their predecessors. Mohr generalized the
principle of virtual works for the calculation of elastic structures;
Castigliano introduced an energy method that required minimizing a
function of a limited number of discrete variables. The two approaches
led to the same solution: an algebraic system of linear equations [18].
The cycle at this point was essentially closed. A very general theory, the
theory of elasticity, developed by mathematicians and physicists,
elegant but useless in itself, was transformed into less and less general
theories, sometimes justiϐied only by the fact that they worked,
developed by skilled engineers.
Although each structure poses problems peculiar to its
requirements and environment, it shares salient features with other
structures similar to it. Thus civil engineering structures are
susceptible to generalization and mathematical representation and
structural analysis was the ϐirst engineering science to mature. In
contrast, machines serve countless complex functions. Their forms and
operations, diverse and specialized to their functions, are less prone to
generalization and theorization. General principles of heat or ϐluid
ϐlows that underlie various types of engines were discovered later and
only with signiϐicant input from engineering practices. Mechanical
engineering has tended to be more empirically oriented, especially in
its early days when the relevant sciences were embryonic. Natural
science was of course relevant, but its contribution was more in the use

of systematic reasoning and controlled experimentation than in speciϐic
theories [6].7
The engineer, as most technologists, has often to solve a problem
more or less deϐined in a given time; that is, he must quickly ϐind a
satisfactory solution at all costs. To carry out his work he draws on his
knowledge that can derive from science commonly said or from the
elaborations provided by engineer-researchers who dealt with
problems similar to his. However, it may happen that such knowledge is
not enough for him; indeed it is usually so. In this situation he can
decide to study the problem and propose new theories, if he has
enough time and culture. Or, and this is the most common situation, he
can resort to experience not interpreted by any theory. This experience
can be codiϐied in speciϐic norms, today very articulated, arranged by
engineering companies. If the engineer does not ϐind indications, he
must recur to his personal experience and common sense (which often
coincide). In the case of structural engineering, the choice is simple. To
design a structure that he did not understand very well, the engineer
can decide to make it ‘very robust’, even if much more expensive.
A scientist is almost never found in the situation of the engineer.
Usually he does not have a time limit or to face a well deϐined problem.
Furthermore he must understand the profound reasons of a
phenomenon and not only suggests gross relations that offer
predictions satisfactory in many cases, but not always. I said ‘almost
never found’, because in modern organizations the scientist also often
has time constraints, on pain of cutting funding for his research, and
this can put him in a situation similar to that of the engineer, leading to
formulate not well corroborated theories.
In the recent past has been proposed a new point of view which
sees a strict link between science and technology, reproducing
somehow the equation applied science 
 technology: the category of
ϔinalized science, carried forward in the 1970s by some German
philosophers and scientists [11, 67]. Finalization is intended as a
process through which goals, external to science, become the guidelines
of the development of the scientiϐic theory itself. Finalized science is
seen as a precise characterization of applied science:

The term ‘applied science’ gives the misleading impression that
goal oriented science simply involves the application of an
existing science, rather than the creation of a new theoretical
development. This in turn feeds the misconception that pure
science is superior to applied science [39].
Agricultural chemistry is a typical example used to illustrate the
concept of ϐinalized science. It illustrates a number of interconnections
between social needs, cognitive patterns in science and strategies for
the institutionalization of science which are relevant to the
development of science and technology. In particular, reϐlection on
agricultural chemistry allows considerations of the interaction
between, the existence of a social problem, the perception of this
problem, the limited ability of science to offer a solution to the problem
at a particular stage of development, the development of experimental
techniques and models, the institutionalization of a variant in science
[39].8
The theory of ϐinalized science assumes natural sciences as
paradigmatic and states that these sciences go through three successive
phases. First, the exploratory phase, which corresponds to Kuhn’s pre-
paradigmatic phase [40]. In this phase, a well structured theory is not
(yet) available and the research methods are mainly empirical either
quantitative or taxonomic rather than theoretical and explanatory.
Next, the paradigmatic phase guided by a general theory that structures
the ϐield of phenomena and directs the way in which it should be
investigated. This corresponds to Kuhn’s normal science, the goal is the
validation of central theoretical ideas. These second-stage
developments can continuously evolve into fully developed or closed
theories. In general two things can be said of a closed theory:
1.
Scientists repeatedly express the conviction that all the
essential work in a certain ϐield has been done.
 
2. Theories whose internal potential for development has been
exhausted retain their paradigmatic signiϐicance in pragmatic
contexts. In particular, they remain the basis for the
development of technologies, where they are regarded as
suitable instruments for dealing with particular classes of
i i
l
ti
A f
l i
h
ti
bl
 

empirical questions. As far as solving such pragmatic problems
is concerned, the improvements represented by their
successors are irrelevant. The orbits of space vehicles are still
calculated using Newtonian, not Einsteinian, mechanics for
instance [11].9
Older theories achieved the status of closed theories. An example of
closed theory is furnished by Clifford Ambrose Truesdell for classical
mechanics:
The word ‘classical’ has two senses in scientiϐic writing; (1)
acknowledged as being of the ϐirst rank or authority, and (2)
known, elementary, and exhausted (“trivial” in the root meaning
of that word). In the twentieth century mechanics based upon
the principles and concepts used up to 1900 acquired the
adjective “classical” in its second and pejorative sense, largely
because of the rise of quantum mechanics and relativity.
“Fundamental” in physics came to mean “concerning extremely
high velocities, extremely small sizes, or both”. Physicists gave
less and less attention to classical mechanics because they
thought nothing more could be learned from it and nothing new
discovered about it, although of course they continued to use it
in the design of the experimental apparatus with which they
claimed to controvert it. At about the same time “applied” in
mathematics came to refer not to the object studied but to the
originality and logical standards of the student, again in a
pejorative sense. Engineers still had to be taught classical
mechanics, because in terms of it they could understand the
machines with which they worked and could devise new
machines for new purposes. Research in mechanics came to be
slanted towards the needs of engineers and to be carried out
largely by university teachers who regarded mathematics as a
scullery-maid, not a goddess or even a mistress. Leading
exponents of applied mechanics were Ludwig Prandtl (1875–
1953) and Geoffrey Ingham Taylor (born 1886) [82].10
According to the theory of ϐinalization the close theories are more or
less complete. However, they can further develop in a third phase, in

which they are oriented towards external objectives and interests
through the development of “special theories” in order to realize
certain application technologies. It is at this point that science is
ϐinalized. Contrary to Kuhn, at this stage the “practical merit” and the
“approval outside the group of specialists” are primary values, and yet
achieving this merit requires the development of truly new theoretical
knowledge [60].11
But also equating ϐinalized science and technology has its own
difϐiculties. Mainly even the knowledge gained in the third stage of
science is only a part of the knowledge required for design, production
and maintenance of technological artifacts or systems.
5.1.1.2 Similarity Between Science and
Technology
To counter the equation applied science 
 technology, one can also
show that science and technology are not so different and that pure
science is not detached from the activities considered typical in
technology and vice versa that technology, at least in its post 18th
century version, does not lack the theoretical elaborations proper of
science. Some philosophers, probably motivated more by a sociological
ideology than by a profound knowledge of science and technology are
sustainers of the equation science is technology; it is for instance the
case of Martin Heidegger and Jürgen Habermass [60].12
One aspect of science that has a technological feeling is
experimentation. A scientiϐic theory refers to quite schematic
situations; when it has to be tested it is usually necessary to introduce
some assumptions which allow the predictions of the theory for the
experiment be carried out. That is, as a matter of fact, in science one is
not confronted with two types of activity (theoretical and
experimental), but with three: the elaboration of the theory, its
development to make possible empirical tests and the design and
performance of experiments [60].13
In science the experimental activity requires usually instrumental
action. A characteristic feature of experimental science is that access to
its objects of study is mediated through instruments and/or other
equipments or devices. In an experiment, it is searched a correlation

among some readings (usually numbers) of instrumentation. Important
necessary conditions for the success of the experiment is its stability
and reproducibility which implies a control of the experimental set and
its environment that should be maintained throughout. Classically
three kinds of interactions are distinguished. The required interactions,
which make the experiment to behave according to its design; the
forbidden interactions, which might disturb the intended experiment
and the neutral interactions, which neither enable nor disturb the
experiment. Like experiments, making technology to work is necessary
that its process be stable and reproducible and the control of the
relevant interactions with the environment constitute a necessary
condition for this goal [60].14
According to Srdjan Lelas, the activity of observing and
experimenting is essentially technological in nature and constitutes an
essential ontological element of science. A theory could not be treated
as a simple contemplative activity of experimental outcomes. A theory
should be rather considered as a condensed set of instructions of how
to build an experimental apparatus, or, better, how to guide the
production of experimental artifacts [43].15 A different view is that of
Bruno Latour; he sees the scientists as builders of facts and the
technologists as builder of artifacts. The problem of the builder of ‘facts’
is the same a that of the builder of ‘artifacts’: how to convince others,
how to control their behavior, how to gather sufϐicient resources in one
place, how to have the claim or the object spread out in time and space
[42].16
In modern times, in many ϐields of research, it is still more
challenging to distinguish between science and technology. Science has
becoming big science and has acquired the format of an industrial
organization, which is typical of technology. Moreover, nano-sciences,
molecular biology, the new frontier of natural sciences, need complex
machineries whose use and construction typically imply technological
aspects. And scientists and technologists, engineers in particular,
generally differ very little in the choice between knowledge and utility.
That between science and technology is a fuzzy distinction with
important overlap, which is larger in complex projects [6].17

5.1.1.3 Epistemology of Technology
Strictly connected with theme of the difference between science and
technology, actually a particular point of view of it, is the debate that
has been going on for some time about whether technology has its own
epistemology, if instead it shares this with science or if the question is
meaningless because technology does not represent a form of
knowledge. The answer is far from being shared. The possibility that
technology has its own epistemology distinct from that of science is
supported by various authors in modalities that are well summarized in
[35]. The following possibilities are discussed:
1.
Is the thesis that science points to truth and technology to
utility true?
 
2.
What is the cognitive value of the theories that express
approximate models of reality. Do they have only an
instrumental character? What relationship is there between
instrumentalism in technology and science?
 
3.
Is the form of knowledge of technology tacit, that is, part of the
knowledge produced by technological practice impossible to
make fully explicit in declarative statements, but only acquired
through personal experience?
 
4.
Finally is it true that technology differs from science because
the former has a descriptive character, the latter a prescriptive
one?
 
In [51] it is suggested a different point of view, by distinguishing
between engineering philosophy of technology and humanities
philosophy of technology. The former addresses the problem in the way
presented in the foregoing list. The latter sees primacy of humanities
over technology and bears on interpreting the meaning of technology
with respect to man. A modern starting point of this view can be routed
in Jean Jaques Rousseau’s  Discourse sur les sciences et les arts of 1750.
Subsequently Romanticism saw modern technology as somehow
obscuring essential elements of life. The same view can be found in

some modern philosophers of the 20th century. The humanities point
of view has implications on the epistemology of technology, but it is not
considered here; the interested reader can ϐind suggestions in [51].
Below only the ϐirst two lines of the previous list will be brieϐly
discussed
The very idea that science aims at truth while technology aims at
use, has its roots in Greek philosophy; for instance in the distinction
made by Aristotle between episteme and techne, a distinction which
has long inϐluenced the epistemology of science and technology in the
western world. Usually episteme is translated as theoretical (pure)
knowledge, whereas techne as art or (experience-based) practical
knowledge. Below as Aristotle deϐined episteme and techne, in the
order, in his Ethica Nichomachea:
Therefore the object of scientiϐic knowledge is of necessity.
Therefore it is eternal; for things that are of necessity in the
unqualiϐied sense are all eternal; and things that are eternal are
ungenerated and imperishable. Again, every science is thought
to be capable of being taught, and its object of being learned.
And all teaching starts from what is already known, as we
maintain in the Analytics also; for it proceeds sometimes
through induction and sometimes by syllogism. Now induction
is the starting-point which knowledge even of the universal
presupposes, while syllogism proceeds from universals. There
are therefore starting-points from which syllogism proceeds,
which are not reached by syllogism; it is therefore by induction
that they are acquired. Scientiϐic knowledge is, then, a state of
capacity to demonstrate, and has the other limiting
characteristics which we specify in the Analytics, for it is when a
man believes in a certain way and the starting-points are known
to him that he has scientiϐic knowledge, since if they are not
better known to him than the conclusion, he will have his
knowledge only incidentally. Let this, then, be taken as our
account of scientiϐic knowledge [4].18
Art [techne] is essentially a reasoned state of capacity to make,
and there is neither any art that is not such a state nor any such

state that is not an art, art is identical with a state of capacity to
make, involving a true course of reasoning [...]
All art is concerned with coming into being, i.e. with
contriving and considering how something may come into being
which is capable of either being or not being, and whose origin
is in the maker and not in the thing made; for art is concerned
neither with things that are, or come into being, by necessity,
nor with things that do so in accordance with nature (since
these have their origin in themselves). Making and acting being
different, art must be a matter of making, not of acting. [...] Art,
then, as has been is a state concerned with making, involving a
true course of reasoning, and lack of art on the contrary is a
state concerned with making, involving a false course of
reasoning; both are concerned with the variable [4].19
In these quotations Aristotle considered episteme and techne as two
different forms of knowledge with distinct objects as their aims.
Episteme refers to eternal objects, ungenerated and imperishable, that
is objects that do not undergo changes. Techne to objects that have
their origin in the maker and are ephemeral, generated, perishable, that
is objects that undergo changes.
In substance in the Ethica Nichomachea Aristotle saw the distinction
between science (episteme) and technology (techne) in the ontology of
the objects the two forms of knowledges aim. In other writings
Aristotle suggested however a different view. The difference between
episteme and techne is seen in the way the cause of a thing is known. In
the Analytica posteriora, Aristotle said that one possesses episteme
when he knows the cause with which the thing is, and that thus cannot
be otherwise [3].20 The example he gave for the case one has episteme
is geometry. In the Metaphysica, Aristotle undermined the possibility of
episteme in the strict sense of the Analytica posteriora: “The minute
accuracy of mathematics is not to be demanded in all cases, but only in
the case of things which have no matter. Hence method is not that of
natural science; for presumably the whole of nature has matter. Hence
we must inquire ϐirst what nature is: for thus we shall also see what
natural science treats of (and whether it belongs to one science or to
more to investigate the causes and the principles of things)” [5].21

Instead of grasping what is eternal and necessary, knowledge can only
grasp what happens for the most part, that is the regularity of nature, to
which there can be exceptions [12].22
Aristotle exempliϐied in his writings the difference between techne
and episteme when he explained the kind of knowledge in medicine.
According to Aristotle this form of knowledge is represented both by
episteme, when it studies health, and techne, when it produces health.
Here it is clear that Aristotle is not using his classiϐication based on
ontology. While he is contrasting techne and episteme, meanwhile he
saw similarity among them. A person who possesses technique is
superior to whom has only experience (empiria), because he uses
universal judgement.
So the person with techne is like the person with episteme; both
can make a universal judgment and both know the cause, which
is not a necessary, universal truth but knowledge of the
regularities of nature, to which there are exceptions. In other
words, scientiϐic and technological knowledge start to overlap
when concerning objects that are considered as stable and
regular but not so much as necessary and universal [12].23
About the assumption that the epistemology of technology has an
instrumental character (line 2 of the previous list), it can be said that
even some scientists and philosophers of science, a minority in truth,
see scientiϐic theories as purely instrumental and do not attribute them
any cognitive value of ‘reality’. But even though one embraces a realistic
view of scientiϐic theories, he must confess that they always present an
instrumental aspect. Indeed the relationship between a scientiϐic
theory and the external world has either a cognitive or an instrumental
nature. The ϐirst case occurs when using the data provided by the
experience to validate the theory; the second when the theory is used
to predict a phenomenon. And from this last point of view the
difference between science and technology seems to be very little.
But a different answer can also be given, showing that even the
instrumental aspect of technology is not so fundamental. It is true that
the technologist, the engineer for instance, has a primary interest in the
use of theories and often rather than trying to understand phenomena

he is content to provide a their description, often a mathematical
relationship. This relationship may be approximate only, even crudely;
in such a case adequate safety coefϐicients are assumed. For example, if
an engineer has to design a cable to support a weight, experiments are
performed on various kinds of cable that could be used for the purpose,
by estimating the average value 
 of the weights that lead them to
failure. For safety reasons, given the dispersion of experimental results
of the breaking tests, and the uncertainties on the value of the weight to
be supported, it is assumed that the cable should be subjected not to
the weight 
 but to a lower value 
, where 
 is the safety
coefϐicient, greater then 1, which can sometimes even reach 2 or 3. But
the engineer-researcher will generally try to reϐine his knowledge of
the phenomenon to be studied, because the only way to be able to
produce an accurate and economic project is to study in depth the
phenomena in order to understand them as the scientist does, so he can
use a unitary safety coefϐicient 
.
Concluding, it can be said that the main difference between science
and technology is that the former considers more relevant the cognitive
moment, the latter the predictive one.
5.1.2 A Historical Perspective
5.1.2.1 Technology as Magic
Technology as a form of knowledge for the production of objects useful
for the mankind is as old of the mankind. Ancient technology was
driven by two engines. One represented by the craftsmen, the mason
masters etc, who carried on their work based on knowledge handed
down from father to son. Knowledge that even when transmitted in
written form or by means of drawings, did not have an organic
character. Another engine was represented by educated men, that could
be either mathematicians (mostly), natural philosophers, physicians,
magicians and alchemists.
The attention of historians of technology has focused so far on
mathematicians and natural philosophers, and, even though to a lesser
extent, on physicians. But an important role was also played by
magicians (and alchemists) at least since the Renaissance, a period in

which the activities of those who today are classiϐied as engineers and
those as magicians overlap.
During the Renaissance the only form of magic allowed by Church
was natural magic, understood as a practice that put into action the
knowledge about what was then considered as nature but avoided any
interventions of demons. Natural magicians could get effects that were
natural but that nature left alone would not have produced or would
have produced with extreme difϐiculty. Pietro Pomponazzi (1462–
1525) drastically limited the meaning of the term natural magic:
natural magic is simply the activity that results in the study of the
occult (in the sense of unknown) virtues of physical entities. Experience
allows one to record the action a body exercises on another body and to
classify individual bodies according to their properties. It is not
possible to explain the “why” of the occult virtues, because they work
according to “a subtle quality that we do not know”, but we know that
alterations follow persitent laws of nature.
Natural magic, although generally devoted to arouse the wonder of
people, had a very little esoteric core, known as artiϐicial or
mathematical magic [32],24 in which there was no reference to hidden
causes and in this case the magicians operated like engineers with the
application of known rules of technology, both of medieval and
Hellenistic tradition. Using optical, hydraulic and mechanical
techniques rather than celestial inϐluences, they created contrivances
that rivaled and outdid the power of nature herself. Cornelius Heinric
Agrippa (1486?-1535) in his De incertitudine et vanitate scientiarum
atque artium declamatio invectiva printed in 1527 and translated into
English in 1676 [1] as The vanity of arts and science, described the role
of mathematical magic as follows:
Of Mathematical Magick.
There are besides these, many other imitators of Nature,
wise inquirers into hidden things, who without the help of
natural Virtues and Efϐicacies, conϐidently undertake, onely by
Mathematical learning, and the help of Celestial inϐluences, to
produce many miraculous Works, as walking and speaking
Bodies; which notwithstanding are not the real Animal: such
was the wooden Dove of Archytas, which ϐlew; the Statues of

Mercury, that talk’d; and the Brazen Head made by Albertus
Magnus, which is said to have spoken. In these things Boetius
excell’d, a man of a large Ingenuity, and manifold Learning; to
whom Cassiodorus writing upon this Subject, Thou, saith he, hast
propounded to thy self to do great things, and to know the most
difϐicult: by thy ingenious skill Metals are heard to roar, Brazen
Diomed sounds a Trumpet, a Brazen Serpent hisses, Birds are
counterfeited, and they that are incapable of a voice of their
own, yet are heard to make a sweet noise: We relate but small
things of thee, that hast so great a power to imitate Heaven. Of
these delusory Sciences may be said that which we read in
Plato’s tenth Book of Laws: Art is given to Mortals, which
enables them to produce certain posterior and succeeding
Inventions, neither pertaking of Truth or Divinity, but certain
Imitations somewhat akin thereto: Wherein Magicians have
adventured to proceed so far, by the help of that ancient [1].25
For their part, the engineers, in addition to carrying out public utility
works, civil and military, also had to take care of entertainments, every
time a ruler entered a city subjected to him, married a child and so on.
For instance, to inspire awe in the spectators Filippo Brunelleschi
(1377–1446) made angels and the same Christ ϐly on a mechanical
mandorla, and many other engineers equipped their inventions with
similar automata, and from this point of view they acted as magicians.
Giovanni Battista Della Porta (1535–1615) among the supporters of
magic was perhaps the one for which magic and technology were
mostly mingled. Della Porta wrote a book on magic, Magia naturalis, in
his early twenties; the text was a huge publishing success in Italy and
abroad and saw a second expanded edition in 1589, after more than
30 years. It was written into Italian and published in 1611 under the
title Magia naturale [22]. If a modern reader looks at the Magia
naturale skipping the preliminary pages in which the essence of magic
is presented in a traditional way, he will soon wonder in what sense the
text of Della Porta could lead to the term magic in the title. Of course
there are chapters devoted to astrology and others to alchemy, topics
that today are regarded with suspicion and associated with

superstition. But the rest of the chapters have a technological character
that gives the solution of more or less interesting practical problems.
In Book XVII (20 books in total) of Magia naturale, optical topics are
considered. Dalla Porta opened the book declaring it of mathematical
nature and asserting that optics is the most important among the mixed
mathematics, emphasizing its practical utility: “But what can be
imagined more ingenious, than to mathematical demonstrations,
imagined by the soul, to which most certain experiences follow?” [22].26
What differentiates the treatment of Della Porta from those of
traditional optics is his focus on strange phenomena that can appear
amazing but actually follow the rules of geometrical optics; this is
typical of magic treatises. Here are some phenomena that Della
Porta explained more or less correctly:
That the face of who looks at appears divided in the middle.
That the face of who looks at appears like that of a donkey, of dog
or pig.
Make that farther letter can be read in the walls.
How to make a mirror that represents only the image you want
[22].27
Magic lost part of his fashion gradually. One of the last book on the
subject by a relevant scholar was Mathematicall magick, or, the wonders
that may be performed by mechanical geometry in two books, see
Fig. 5.1, ϐirst published in 1648 by John Wilkins (1614–1672), one of
the founder of the Royal society of London [83, 87]. In the foreword to
the reader, Wilkins explained the reason of the term magic in the title. It
aimed to allude to “vulgar opinion, which doth commonly attribute all
such strange operations unto the power of Magick” [87].28
Wilkins’ book, which had a prevailing didactic purpose, does not
lack of interesting philosophical suggestions. It is divided into two
books, the former concerning the mechanical powers and entitled
Archimedes, the latter concerning mechanical motions and entitled
Daedalus. Archimedes deals with the six classical machines in the order,
the balance, the lever, the wheel, the pulley, the wedge and the screw; it
looks like to books of the previous century, in particular to the
Mechanicorum liber by Guidobaldo dal Monte (1545–1607). Only in the

ϐinal chapters the term magic ϐinds its reason, but not in the sense of
occult but in that of wonder.
In Chap. 12 Wilkins discussed about the possibility to raise the
earth by a lever, on the footsteps of the famous assertion attributed to
Archimedes.  For the weight of the earth he assumed the ϐigure of 
 pounds, “as Stevinus had calculated” [87].29 By supposing to
raise the earth with a weight of 100 pounds, more or less the weight of
a man, from the law of the lever it results a ratio, between the
displacement of the earth and that of the man pressing the lever, of 
. This means that for what large may be the displacement
imposed by the man the motion of the earth is not perceptible. In the
end in these situations only mathematics can show that the effect is
real: “Therefore though such extreme slowness may seem altogether
impossible to sense and common apprehension, yet this can be no
sufϐicient argument against the reality of it” [87].30
In the second part of the book the sense of wonder is much more
pronounced. This part is devoted to automata, that for him had not the
modern meaning (that is robots or androids), but simply indicated
machines useful for men activity. Some space is given to the human
ϐlight and the wonder it aroused, one of the symbol for the impossible
at the time. This notwithstanding, Wilkins thought it really possible,
even though very difϐicult to realize.

Fig. 5.1 Mathematical magick [87], front cover.
Reproduced with the permission of ETH-Bibliothek Zürich, Alte und Seltene Drucke

Apart from ϐlight, the second part of Mathematical magick speaks of
many wonderful items: the sailing chariot, the submarine navigation,
the perpetual motion; in any case Wilkins’ automata are located at the
borderline of the possible and impossible to arouse a sense of wonder
but not of impossibility. Still, Wilkins’ machines are not just ϐictional
devices, functioning only on the page of a book. The possibility to
actually realize these machines is considered important. In certain
passages, Wilkins inveighed against speculation and against the limited
nature of notional contrivances [83].31
In the 18th century magic was no longer in fashion among the
learned men. It remained diffuse among the common populace, leaving
however its technological contents and maintaining only its exoteric
and mysterious aspect. Here as the Encyclopédie described magic:
But we are gradually recovering from this former attitude and
one can say that the awareness of this so-called natural magic is,
even in the eyes of the multitude, continually retreating. Under
the light of science we are, happily, continuously discovering the
secrets and systems of nature, supported by many sound
experiences which show humanity of what it is capable itself
and without magic . Thus, we see the compass, the telescope, the
microscope and, in our own time, polyps and electricity. In
chemistry and physics, the most beautiful and useful discoveries
will immortalize our era and if Europe were to fall back into the
barbarism from which it has ϐinally emerged, we will seem like
magicians to our barbarous successors [26].32 (E.2)
5.1.2.2 Medicine Between Science and
Technology
Medicine is considered below mostly for its epistemological aspects in
the early modern era, when the problem of ϐinding its epistemological
status was part of the more general problem of Humanism to revaluate
techne over episteme and to be free from the Aristotelian epistemology.
Partly because the humanists favored the active role (though not
manual) over the contemplative; partly because they believed that
science in the Aristotelian sense was not possible and thus supported a

probabilistic approach, in which rhetoric took the place of dialectic and
syllogism. In any case the difference between science and technology, or
art as was called at the time, was maintained and was more or less the
same as considered by Aristotle. 
One of the ϐirst scholar who posed the problem was Francesco
Petrarca (1304–1374) who denounced the unseemly besetting state of
medicine that was seen more as harmful than useful by many. Petrarca
came in about epistemological debate that remained very lively at least
until the 17th century (and still continue today): is medicine a techne
(technology, art) or an episteme (science)? or is it something else
again? The answer of the scholars of the Humanism and Renaissance
was variegated; some dealt with medicine as science, some others as
techne and still others neither of them.
Art, in its widest meaning was any set of coherent rules suited to
direct human activity. In the limit just a list of precepts, but also—and
this was the view of the humanists as as that of Aristotle  himself—
some form of theoretical elaboration. Since I century AD one
distinguished between manual or mechanical arts and liberal arts. The
liberal arts were nine: grammar, rhetoric, logic, arithmetic, geometry,
music, architecture and medicine. The list shows that it was not
respected the division of Aristotle who would have considered some of
them as sciences rather than arts. Later, in the V century AD, the liberal
arts were reduced to seven, eliminating from the previous architecture
and medicine, considered not worthy to be practiced by a free man
because they were, as any technology, too attached to the manual.
It must be said that the discussions on the epistemological status of
medicine was partly a problem of names. There was no doubt that the
physician had knowledge in various ϐields, natural philosophy, anatomy,
mathematics, alchemy etc, which he often helped to develop; and in this
sense the physician was certainly a philosopher, mathematician, and so
on. And if one called medicine everything the physician did, it was clear
that medicine was superimposed to science. But if one considers
medicine in a more restricted sense its relation with science is less
clear. When the physician was beside a sick person, he had in any case
to suggest a therapy. Rarely could he follow the axiomatic approaches of
the disciplines he had studied and helped to develop, he had rather to

make choices that were not always verbally codiϐied. That is he acted as
a technologist.
Medicine, broad and restricted meaning, of the 16th century saw a
strong overlap with the Aristotelian natural philosophy; and if the
physician could agree to consider the activities they practiced,
medicine, as technology, they also saw themselves as learned men. This
was one of the reasons that pushed physicians to treat surgery as a
separate medical activities; this was in fact an activity mostly manual
that would inevitably have led the medicine out of the most prestigious
‘theoretical activities’, such as natural philosophy.
Niccolò Leoniceno (1428–1524), professor of medicine at Ferrara
and humanist, was among the ϐirst to pursue the attempt to separate
medicine from philosophy of nature and to classify it as an art.
Leoniceno supported his argument by referring to the epistemology of
Galen which for him was different from Aristotle’s [17].33
Connected to the problem of classiϐication of medicine as a science
or art there was that of division between theory and practice.
Regardless of the separation of the professions, the contrast between
practical and theoretical medicine had also an epistemological
character, investing the mutual role of experience and theory,
presenting again the ancient diatribe dogmatic/empirical. The
physicians of the humanist tradition gave the major contribution to
bring the problem to the conceptions of Greek physicians like
Hippocrates of Kos (c 460–c 370 BC) and Galen (II century AD),  in
whom this division did not exist. This is for example the position held
by the physician Giovanni Mainardi (1462–1536) who, though not a
direct disciple of Leoniceno, followed him in considering medicine as
an art. Professor at the University of Ferrara, he quoted Galen in his In
primum Artis parvae Galeni librum commentaria of 1536: “In this case
the authority of Galen pushes me, who wherever states that all
medicine is either productive or repairing and never he makes any
division into theoretical and practical” [45].34
Giovanni Battista Da Monte (1498–1551), professor of medicine
ϐirst in Ferrara and then in Padua, considered medicine as a science,
albeit of practical nature and thus distinct from natural philosophy.
Medicine is subalternate to natural philosophy as it considers the
human body—that is the object of study by natural philosophy—

exclusively only from what health is concerned; like mixed mathematics
which are subalternate to mathematics. For him medicine could not be
an art because it had no its own methodology. According to Da Monte,
all the principles of medicine should be directed to the end, that is to
health. In fact the best physicians, as Hippocrates of Kos and Galen,
considered all things in medicine as they were physicians and not
philosophers. In medicine therefore one has to consider everything
with respect to the health, one seeks to preserve, if present, or to
recover if it has been lost [45].35
Da Monte addressed his criticism toward modern empirical
physicians. For him they had only countless recipes to sell but not a real
method. The empirical physicians was deaf and blind; they lent their
care based on their previous observations and did not know the general
rules. They healed only diseases they already knew [45].36
A counter current approach in the Renaissance was that of the
physician Leonardo Fioravanti (1518–1588), an outsider to the
academic environment, who had a decidedly empirical approach and
insistently recalled to address to practices, with the idea that nature is
the teacher of all things. He went so far as to say that even animals had
their own medicine: “This medicine is common in all the people of the
world and a part belongs to the irrational animals, a part to the
peasants, another part to the women and another part to the rational
physicians who posses it by means of the theory. It is the weakest of the
all others and we can never use it, if we did not test it with the
experience, which is what is proper of the peasants” [27].37 Experience,
is thus considered so much the fundamental element of any medical
knowledge that the three quarters of it is owned by any people, while
the fourth part of it, it is that possessed by physicians
To explain the difference between empirical and theoretical
approaches, Fioravanti appealed to the example of the continue fevers.
As science requires the knowledge of the cause of inϐirmity, the
physicians, to be faithful to their status, are required to indicate which
is precisely the cause of such fevers, locating them in the “decay of
blood, which is being corrupted in the veins”. Fioravanti did not deny at
all that conclusion, indeed he inclined to accept it, since it seemed
absolutely ‘likely’. But if it appeared such to him, that was not because
of some syllogism constructed starting from ϐirst principles of physics,

but rather because the experience showed that when blood is taken out
from the veins of feverish people, it is altered and corrupted [45].38
Fioravanti did not give up a theoretical horizon of reference, which
served to reprocess the data of experience and to derive operational
rules or hypotheses to be tested with further experience. That is, he
was a supporter of techne and not only empiria. In the case mentioned
above of continue fevers, for example, after stating that one had to rely
on experience rather than science, he added that, despite everything, he
could still believe in science, which was not very different from the
experience in this case. Because true medicine is nothing else, that the
theory of experience, as well one can see from those who are experts in
this profession. Medicine never had principles from other things than
from experience, because before the virtues of herbs, stones and
animals were discovered one never found anyone who had written
some theory [45].39
The empirical approach proposed by Fioravanti was not shared by
most; it forced physicians to test the actual efϐicacy of their results, that
is to make experiment, or to use an expression of the time, periculum
facere who one could come up with to justify a certain treatment and its
possible failure. This approach, however, posed serious ethical
problems. Not for nothing the medical schools highlighted the other
meaning of the term periculum, that is probable damage, according to
the interpretation of the Hippocratic derivation of the experimentum
periculosum, considered by Galen as a warning to the physicians
because they did not abuse of their power venturing innovative
interventions on their patients. Indeed, those on which he was
operating were human beings and not, as in the case of the carpenter or
locksmith, pieces of wood or metal, that once damaged could be
repaired or otherwise thrown away without special torment: “vita
brevis, ars longa” [29].40

5.1.2.3 The Emergence of the Scientiϔic
Engineer
The relationship of science with engineering has a more complex
history than that of science with medicine. Until the second half of the
20th century, there was no real debate about the epistemology of
engineering among scientists, technicians and philosophers. There was,
especially since the end of the 17th century, a debate on the social role
of science, on whether it should be oriented to pure knowledge or to
the satisfaction of the needs of the human race. A debate must be said
that interested more philosophers than physicists, mathematicians,
chemists, etc., who had always been concerned with ϐinding
applications for their studies. Among the philosophers promoting the
social utility of science there was certainly Francis Bacon, whose
inϐluence was strong in England, ϐlanked by the Puritan ideology that
saw science as a means of improving the welfare of men. This implied,
in some way, more than the involvement of scientists in practical
activities, a greater interest of technicians toward science.
The evolution of economy and society of the modern era was
strongly inϐluenced by three fundamental discoveries: circum-
navigability of the earth, gunpowder, printing. The ability to
circumnavigate the globe was perhaps the most important one, leading
to a boost of the economy of nations. It also entailed the development of
navigation techniques with the use of the compass, the representations
of geographic maps, the improvement of astronomy for navigation
looking at the stars, the crafting of ships, which no doubt provided a
stimulus to the improvement of many applied sciences [70]. The spread
of modern artillery based on the propellant effect of gunpowder was
important, especially for the history of mechanics. This was true
especially since the XVI century, when artillery had become extremely
effective. The development of artillery had as a natural consequence the
development of defensive techniques. This gave birth to bastioned
fortresses, ϐirst appeared in Italy, then a battleground for national and
foreign armies. Perhaps even more than artillery, fortress design led to
the development of methods of construction and a better

understanding of the strength of materials and thus to the afϐirmation
of a new class of technicians.
Alongside the external economic and social thrusts, associated with
these developments, there was an internal thrust due to a cultural
awakening, favored among other things by the schools of the abacus,
which led the most curious and intelligent craftsmen to see their
profession differently. The activity of craftsmen were regulated by rules
imposed by the corporations of arts. The increasing complexity of
military and civil enterprises urged the rulers to assume specialized
qualiϐied technicians with skills in mathematics. The same held for the
public administrations.
Starting from the 15th century stable administrative structures
were created to control engineering activities. Besides the traditional
division of work, between master and apprentice, other levels born.
This led to the birth of a new category of scholars. Though it is difϐicult
to precise the characteristic of this ϐigure, the word engineer is the most
recurrent, associated to a speciϐication: artist-engineer, scientist-
engineer, architect-engineer, administrator-scientist-engineer.
The emergence of the ϐigure of the engineer, seen as a technician in
some way educated in sciences, is a characteristic feature of the 15th
century and the ϐirst half of the 16th [31]; in a period in which the
reduced creativity (real or apparent) of ‘pure’ scientists was
counterbalanced by the great creativity of ‘applied’ scientists. A short
list of engineers from Italy, the nation where the technological
development was relevant, is sufϐicient to give an idea of the dimension
of the phenomenon: Mariano di Jacopo, better known as Taccola, (Siena,
1381–1458), Leon Battista Alberti (Genoa, 1404–1472), Francesco di
Giorgio Martini (Siena, 1439–1501), Leonardo da Vinci (Vinci, 1452–
1519), Vannuccio Biringuccio (Siena, 1480–1539), Francesco de’
Marchi (Bologna, 1504–1576), Giovanni Battista Bellucci (San Marino,
1506–1554), Daniele Barbaro (Venice, 1513–1570).
The ϐirst step in the new era for the development of engineering
was probably the introduction of a design phase of the artifact, clearly
distinct from the execution phase, by means of drawings, which after
the invention of the perspective became more and more
understandable. The role played by what is now considered the science

of the time (natural philosophy and mixed mathematics together with
magic and alchemy) is more difϐicult to evaluate.
In the 16th and 17th centuries, a period little explored by the
historians of engineering, with the development of sciences, or rather
of mixed mathematics, the great engineering works were entrusted to
ϐigures skilled in mathematics and philosophy of nature. Often these
scholars were called as consultants to assist the technicians of the local
structures. And there was a coexistence of technicians who had taken
possession of theoretical tools and theorists who also dealt with
practical problems.
Correspondence of some leading exponents of early modern
science, shows how often they were required to intervene as experts in
the discussion of engineering problems. A particularly signiϐicant
example is that of Simon Stevin (1548–1620), active in various ϐields of
engineering. He worked in the service of the prince Maurice of Orange-
Nassau and was part of various commissions for the realization of
engineering projects. Throughout his life Stevin took care of the
construction of mills and other hydraulic works, obtaining numerous
patents for the invention of mechanical devices. His attempts at
theoretical analysis of complex engineering problems resulted in the
compilation of short treatises dedicated to topics such as, for example,
the prevention of wear in the design of gear wheels. In
Stevin’s unpublished writings there are also detailed attempts to
calculate the efϐiciency of windmills used for water drainage.
Galileo, the prototype of ‘scientist’, gave advices to the Arsenale of
Venice, he built lenses and military compasses, he taught the art of
fortiϐications. He operated as a consultant for the water regulation of
the river Bisenzio for the Grand Duke of Tuscany. Torricelli also,
normally considered a pure mathematician, had a technologic
counterpart as a builder of lens and other scientiϐic instruments. Not
even Newton disdained manual works. It must be said, however, that
for most technicians the inϐluence of science, even the most developed
at the time, mechanics, was moderate and therefore in some way
science and technology moved separately, although some important
interactions occurred.
Things changed in the 18th century due to the economic pressures
that in the second half of the century, especially in England, led to the

industrial revolution. In this century, mechanics, including hydraulics,
acoustics, ϐluid dynamics, was very developed and electricity
thermodynamic and modern chemistry were growing. Specialization in
the sciences was certainly greater than in the previous centuries, but
the ϐigure of the pure theoretician was still rare. Most scholars also
devoted themselves to aspects classiϐiable today as technological, and
in many cases it was difϐicult to say which of the two roles, scientists
and engineer, was prominent.
Toward the end of the 18th century the demand for qualiϐied
technicians became so high that sporadic interest in the application
aspects by physicists and mathematicians was no longer sufϐicient. In
France the government, to satisfy the increasing requests of military
and civil projects, founded the EƵcole royale des ponts et chaussées in
1747, the EƵcole royale du génie de Mézières in 1748 and in 1783 the
EƵcole des mines. In England the new bourgeois classes encouraged the
establishment of associations devoted to practical applications of the
new results of science. Through masonic lodges, coffee house lectures,
dissenting academies, mechanic institute and many private societies,
scientiϐic ideas, in particular Newton’s ones, were disseminated [20].41
In 1771 there was the ϐirst known formal meeting of professional
engineers in England, when seven of the leading engineers of the time
agreed to establish a Society of civil engineers. The leading light of the
new society was John Smeaton commonly referred to as the father of
civil engineering in modern day; the other founding members were
Thomas Yeoman, Robert Mylne, Joseph Nickalls, John Grundy, John
Thompson and James King. In the ϐirst year they were joined by John
Golborne, William Black, Robert Whitworth and Hugh Henshall and
these eleven were known as the original members. The society existed
as a dining club which facilitated intellectual discussions and
communication of ideas and knowledge of different disciplines within
civil engineering. While this was seen as a step forward, the society
maintained an informal status, held a limited number of technical
meetings and comprised a restricted membership policy. The Latin
motto “Omnia in numero, pondere et mensura” was added to the
summons card in 1793.
There were three classes of membership: (i) First class; those who
were actually employed in designing and forming works of different

kinds, in the various departments of engineering; in substance
engineers properly said in modern terms. (ii) Second class; men of
science and gentlemen of fame and fortune (honorary members). (iii)
Third class; various artists, whose professions and employments, were
necessary and useful thereto as well as connected with civil
engineering (honorary members) [37].
Below as the foundation of Society of civil engineers is described in
the preface to the Reports of the late John Smeaton.
In all the polished nations of Europe, this was, and is, a
profession of itself, and by itself. Academies, or some parts of
such institutions, were appropriated to the study of it, and of all
the preparatory science and accomplishments necessary to form
an able artist, whose profession comprehends the variety of
objects on which he is employed; and of which the present work
is an example and a proof.
In this country, however, the formation of such artists has
been left to chance; and persons leaned towards the public call
of employment, in this way, as their natural tum of mind took a
bias. There was no public establishment, except common
schools, for the rudimental knowledge necessary to all arts,
naval, military, mechanical, and others.
Civil Engineers are a self-created set of men, whose
profession owes its origin, not to power or inϐluence, but to the
best of all protection, the encouragement of a great and
powerful nation; a nation become so from the industry and
steadiness of its manufacturing workmen, and their superior
knowledge in practical chemistry, mechanics, natural
philosophy, and other useful accomplishments [...].
The same period. gave rise, also, to an association of some
gentlemen, employed as above mentioned. They often met
accidentally, prior to that union, in the Houses of Parliament,
and in courts of justice, each maintaining the propriety of his
own designs, without knowing much of each other. It was,
however, proposed by one gentleman to Mr. Smeaton, that such a
state of the Profession, then crude and in its infancy, was
improper: and that it would be well, if some sort of occasional

meeting, in a friendly way, was to be held; where they might
shake hands together, and be personally known to one another;
that thus, the sharp edges of their minds might be rubbed off, as
it were, by a closer communication of ideas, nowise naturally
hostile; might promote the true end of the public business upon
which they should happen to meet in the course of their
employment; without jostling one another with rudeness too
common in the unworthy part of the advocates of the law, whose
interest it might be to push them on perhaps too far, in
discussing points in contest [78].42
In France, after the Revolution, a state institution was born with the
declared objective of modernizing the ϐigure of the engineer, radically
modifying the didactic and cultural approach of the pre-existing
engineering schools, such as the EƵcole des ponts et chaussees. An EƵcole
centrale des travaux publics (renamed later École polytechnique) was
then created in 1794, which will become a model for all the schools of
engineering on the Continent, which ofϐicially sanctioned the birth of
what is now called scientiϐic engineer.
A fundamental role on the birth of this school was played by Gaspar
Monge, know today as the father of descriptive geometry and ranked in
a too simplistic way as a mathematician. Monge took as a model the
teaching he carried out at the EƵcole royale du génie de Mézières with
the aim of remodeling the engineering profession. This profession was
badly deϐined at the time; one could only say that the engineer
conceived an artwork and controlled its execution, while the artist or
craftsman executed it. Engineer training traditionally took place in the
ϐield, often handed down from father to son. In the EƵcole royale des
ponts et chaussées the organization of teaching remained similar to
that of the Ancien regime. The mathematics lessons were given by the
most skilled students and the practice was acquired by the engineers
who practiced their profession. In the Mézières school, the theoretical
teaching was instead of a much higher level.
The EƵcole centrale des travaux publics, according to Monge’s idea
had to be completely different and break radically with the old schools
of engineering. From his experience as a professor at Mézières, Monge 
had gained great distrust toward the corps savants of the army and thus

decided that teachers should be professors. According to Monge,  the
school should not only form engineers but also spread the passion for
the exact sciences throughout France. It had to be a school of savants
that had to take into account also the practical applications of acquired
notions. The teaching was organized around magisterial courses, in
which mathematics played the fundamental role, held by specialists of
various sectors, mathematicians, physicists, chemists and engineers;
between them it is enough to quote: Berthollet, Lagrange, 
Laplace, Prony. Monge’s idea clashed with the tumultuous political life
of the time, with him having to abandon the project because his
situation had become critical and called for arrest. The school survived
but Monge’s project was downsized. It ceased to be the encyclopedic
school that he had conceived and simply became a formidable
preliminary school to those of the bodies of engineers. This change was
sanctioned by the law of September 1st 1795, which also decreed the
change of name from EƵcole centrale des travaux publics to EƵcole
polytecnique [7].
Far from being a mere place of learning, the EƵcole polytechnique
was a recruitment and training area where a social type, a culture of the
service of the state with its codes, its practices, was built which made
the School a true state institution. This approach originated the process
of construction and legitimization of a new social elite imposing its
power at the heart of the administrative system which was thus
unveiled. Originally created by the mountain government to train
engineers, an intermediate form of the ‘artist’ and the ‘scientist’ the
School was rapidly changing, in a place of formation of the bureaucratic
elite. By subordinating practical knowledge to theoretical knowledge
(one of the reasons for the traditional criticism of ‘technocrats’), the
aim was to build the progressive empowerment of the social ϐigure of
the ancient state engineer [8].
5.2 Scientists or Technologists?
In the preceding pages, science and technology has been opposed,
without being able to identify a clear difference between the two forms
of knowledge; the debate is still open in current literature. Things
become even more complicated if instead of opposing science and

technology, the actors operating in the two disciplines are opposed,
namely scientists and technologists, understood as human beings. In
this opposition there is often a fundamental misunderstanding in
current discussions. Let consider the engineer for instance; today the
engineer is generally conceived as a professional, like the physician and
the lawyer for example. The need of modern society requires a high
number of engineers dictated by economic development. Instead, the
scientist is conceived as a member of a restricted elite. As far as training
is concerned, it can be said that most of those who work as engineers
have a degree, or it is supposed to have, in engineering. Those who
carry out the activity of scientist have instead a degree in ‘scientiϐic’
disciplines, such as physics, chemistry, biology for example and maybe
have a research doctorate. Most graduate at the faculty of engineering
become engineers, while only a small number of graduates in scientiϐic
disciplines become scientists. Many of them work in industry, public
administration, teaching, or even today, they are unemployed.
When scientists are opposed to engineers, homogeneous categories
should be considered; thus one should not contrast the graduate in
engineering with the graduate in physics, for instance, but rather the
researchers who deal with engineering problems, even if sometimes
they carry out professional activity, with researchers dealing with
physics, which generally only do this. Both of them have often a PhD.
The above is true for today’s world; in the past at least until the end
of the 18th century, the distinction between scientist and engineer was
even more ambiguous; not for nothing the term scientist did not exist
yet and engineer had a rather vague meaning. Still in the 18th century
we often ϐind ourselves faced with characters not easy to classify. For
instance Navier and Coulomb in France, Smeaton and Watt  in England
and Plana and Poleni in Italy, can be classiϐied either as engineers or
scientists. The fact that it was the same person who exercised the two
activities makes it difϐicult to think that these are very different
activities.
The preparation of engineers was different from country to country.
In England, as already mentioned, one moved with private associations.
Engineers had a professionally oriented preparation, in which the study
of mathematics and physics was important but not very profound. In
France, instead, the state was interested in the training of engineers,

who had a strong background in mathematics and other scientiϐic
disciplines.
In the following, for reasons of space, I will dwell only on the English
situation. Here, the industrial revolution began around the middle of
the 18th century and the request of civil engineers—the military ones
were not prepared—capable of designing the increasingly demanding
number of civil and industrial structures, including bridges and new
steam machines, as well as of managing many other aspects connected
with the industry becomes very compelling.
Many skilled English engineers operated in England after the 1750s;
I will refer here to Smeaton and Watt, not so much because they are the
most famous, but because in them one can observe at the higher degree
the interaction between the scientist and the engineer, which however
happens differently than in previous centuries. Now was the engineer
who led the scientist way around and not vice versa, as usually
happened before.
5.2.1 A Civil Engineer: John Smeaton
John Smeaton (1724–1792), one of the foremost British engineers of
the 18th century, also gained a reputation as a man of science. At his
beginning he was encouraged to follow a legal career and after a sound
elementary education, with element of mathematics also, at Leeds
Grammar school he was sent to London for further employment and
training in the courts. An early inclination toward mechanical arts soon
prevailed, however, and he became a maker of scientiϐic instruments, a
pursuit that allowed ample scope for both his scientiϐic interests and
his mechanical ingenuity.
Early in the 1750s Smeaton began experiments that constituted his
chief contribution to science; and during this period he also was busied
with several technical innovations, including a novel pyrometer with
which to study the expansive characteristics of various materials [71].
By the end of the decade it had become evident that engineering works
were more proϐitable than making scientiϐic instruments, thus
Smeaton established himself as a consultant in these ϐields. During the
last thirty-ϐive years of his life he was responsible for many engineering
projects, including bridges, steam engine facilities, power stations run
by wind or water, mill structures and machinery, and river and harbor

improvements. He was a charter member of the ϐirst professional
engineering society, the already named Society of civil engineers (not to
be confused with the later Institution of Civil Engineers), which,
founded in 1771, after his death became known as the Smeatonian
Society.
Though he did not receive a regular education in natural philosophy
and mathematics, Smeaton attended regularly meetings at the Royal
society. Under Charles Cavendish’s proposal he was elected in 1753 a
fellow of the Royal society and not only for his skill in mathematics,
mechanics and natural philosophy, but also for his excellence as an
instrument maker.
In his research on waterwheels Smeaton reopened the vexed
question of the relative efϐiciency of undershot and overshot wheels.
Through experiments on a model wheel he showed that, contrary to
common opinion, overshot wheels are twice as efϐicient as undershot.
Beyond this empirical generalization Smeaton displayed his scientiϐic
bent by speculating on the cause of the greater loss of energy in the
undershot wheel by concluding that it was consumed in turbulence. He
published his paper An experimental enquiry concerning the natural
powers of water and wind to turn mills, and other machines, depending
on a circular motion on the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society in 1759 [72]. Smeaton’s paper was so well received to award
the author with the Copley Medal, the highest honor of the Royal
society. Following this initial success in research on applied mechanics,
Smeaton’s interests drifted toward physics and he devoted two
experimental investigations to the vis viva dispute and the laws of
collision (see below) in 1776 and 1782.
Smeaton considered himself as an independent engineer and began
to call himself (among the ϐirst) a civil engineer. The ϐirst ofϐicial
mention of the term civil engineer appeared in a 1763 London
directory addressed to Smeaton and Thomas Yeoman (1709?-1781). As
a pioneer, Smeaton was self-taught. For his design work he usually
prepared sketches that were elaborated by his draughtsman [38].
Smeaton’s career provides an early example the interaction of
engineering and science. His technical interests inϐluenced the direction
of his scientiϐic research and vice versa; for instance he used the results
of his research in his own waterwheel designs, consistently favoring

breast wheels and overshot wheels and almost never using the
undershot system. There is reason to believe that Smeaton’s work led
other designers to forsake the long-preferred undershot wheel.
Smeaton performed extensive tests on the Newcomen engine,
optimizing its design and signiϐicantly increasing its efϐiciency and was
unquestionably the greatest of Newcomen’s successors [79]. These
studies, however, though very interesting were soon overshadowed by
James Watt’s invention of the separate condenser, and for this little
explored by historians. A minor contribution to observational
astronomy, which shows some skills in mathematics, rounded out
Smeaton’s scientiϐic work [73, 74].
5.2.1.1 Experiments on Mills
With his memoir An experimental enquiry concerning the natural
powers of water and wind to turn mills, and other machines, depending
on a circular motion of 1759, Smeaton opened up a substantially new
perspective for experimentation. Until then, at least in most cases, the
experiments had the role of verifying, or discovering, directly or
indirectly, laws or principles of a general nature, that is valid in every
situation. The experiments could be qualitative or quantitative. Their
motivation was generally dictated by the curiosity of the individual
scholar, even if boosts from technology had their value.
Smeaton carried out experiments on artifacts, on machines, with the
aim of discovering or verifying laws of a particular nature, valid only for
the machine with which he was experimenting or machines similar to
it. Experimentation was necessary because the use of general laws was
too complex for the computation capability of the times to be used and
also because some general laws, for example those of ϐluid dynamics,
were not yet well known; at least in most scientiϐic and technical
environments. There was of course the scholar’s curiosity to discover
new phenomena; but there was mainly the need of the engineer to
improve, and to do it in useful times, the design of his machines which
at the time was based partly on empirical rules and partly on clearly
unreliable theoretical results.
Without any knowledge of the theory of models, which will be
developed only in the 20th century, Smeaton still realized that the
situation for real machines can be very different from that of models

and a thing that does very well in a model, could not answer
satisfactory in large. And indeed, though the utmost circumspection is
used, real working of machines cannot be fully ascertained but only by
making trials with them, when made of their proper size. It is for this
reason, that Smeaton deferred offering his results obtained in 1752–
1753, by using models, till he had an opportunity of putting the
deductions made therefrom in real practice, in a variety of cases, and
for various purposes [72].43
The execution of experiments on models was not new at the time,
for example Desaguliers made intensive use of them in his physics
lessons, but they were very idealized models, only useful to illustrate
the validity of some physical laws. Machine builders and engineers of
the past had also resorted to scale models; but no one before
Smeaton had carried out a rigorous and systematic experimentation,
certainly inϐluenced by the new conceptions of experimental
philosophy, and few had the manual skill to make models with the
accuracy like that of Smeaton for his past as an instrument maker.
Smeaton’s memoir is divided into two parts, one dedicated to water
wheels and the other to windmills. Of the ϐirst part I have already
reported on another occasion, [16]44 and therefore I will limit myself to
a brief summary while I will dedicate a few more words to the second
part. Although he gave very few bibliographical references—only Euler
is cited for the ϐirst part and Parent (misprinted as Parint) and
Maclaurin for the second—Smeaton showed to know well the state of
the art about mills, even if it is unlikely he knew the theoretical works
of hydrodynamics by Euler, the Bernoullis and d’Alembert. 
Water Wheels
In the ϐirst part of the memoir, the one dedicated to water wheels, the
reference is certainly to the work of Parent of 1704 [58]. And from
Parent Smeaton took up the idea of measuring the efϐiciency of
machines by the ratio of useful and available power. Smeaton however
differently from Parent deϐined the power not basing on forces and
speeds, but on more directly measurable quantities, as explained below.
Smeaton deϐined the original power of the water as the product
between the quantity of water released in a given time (from a river for
instance) and the height that water comes down from. The effect of the

machine is the sum of the weight raised by the action of this water and
the weight necessary to overcome the friction, multiplied by the height
the weight will be raised to in a given time; the effect as well the
original power are proportional to power (modern meaning), because
the work in an assigned ϐixed interval of time; the efϐiciency is the ratio
between effect and original power. Smeaton found that, for the
undershot wheels, the maximum may be more than 30% [72],45 nearly
the double than that provided by Parent (15%) [58].46
Fig. 5.2 Examples of undershot wheel (a) and overshot wheel (b)
However, the most interesting part of Smeaton’s memoir concerns
the determination of overshot wheels performance (Fig. 5.2 shows two
typical cases of under and overshot wheels). He found that using the
same wheel with plane blades, the efϐiciency was double that of the
undershot wheels and conϐirmed the results obtained by Antoine
Deparcieux (1703–1768) before him, that the efϐiciency of the wheel
increased by slowing its speed [15].
He explained the phenomenon by considering the particles of water
as non-elastic soft bodies that deform and because of this deformation
some mechanical power is lost: “The effect therefore if overshot wheels,
under the same circumstances of quantity and fall, is at a medium
double to that of the undershot: and, as a consequence thereof that
non-elastic bodies, when acting by their impulse or collision;
communicate only a part of their original power; the other part being
spent in changing their ϐigure in consequence of the stroke” [72].47
Smeaton returned on the problem of the dissipation of mechanical
power as consequence of the change of shape in a paper of 1782, that
will be commented later. The mechanism of dissipation proposed by
Smeaton though fascinating, was forgotten after Joule’s researches that

attributed the lost of mechanical power in the water to the production
of heat because of the turbulent motion.
Thanks to Smeaton, the overshot wheels reached a high efϐiciency
and contrasted the success of new-born steam machines.
However much Mr. Smeaton’s valuable observations may have
been disregarded by authors, they have not been lost to practical
men [...]. [As a result of his experiments] he determined to apply
the water, in all cases, so that it should act more by its weight,
and less by its impulse; and the advantage gained by that
improved construction was found to be fully equal to his
expectation. It was afterwards so generally adopted and
improved upon by himself and by other engineers in this
country, that although undershot water-wheels were, about ϐifty
years ago, the most prevalent, they are now rarely to be met
with; and wherever economy of power is an object, no new ones
are made [63].48
Wind Mills
The second part of Smeaton’s memoir of 1759, dedicated to wind mills,
is generally considered as less interesting than the ϐirst. The judgment,
however, derives from the fact that the ϐirst part is the one that most
inϐluenced the technology of the time. In reality, from a strictly
theoretical point of view, the memoir on windmills is richer and more
original. For example, there are precise references to Antoine
Parent and Colin Maclaurin (see below) who had written on the subject
a few years earlier. The presence of citations is important both because
they reveal the knowledge of recent literature by Smeaton, and because
they suggest that Smeaton’s knowledge of mathematics must have been
good, sufϐicient at least to read works in which modern Calculus was
used. Even if in his memoir Smeaton did not use it.
This part of the memory opens with the presentation of the
model/machine used. According to Smeaton a wind can be obtained in
two ways; either to make the air move toward the machine, or to make
the machine to move against the air. But moving the air against the
machine, in a sufϐicient volume, with steadiness and the required speed,
was not easily put in practice the. And carrying the machine forward in

a right line against the air, would require a larger room than one could
conveniently meet with. What is most practicable, therefore, was, to
carry the axis, whereon the sails were to be ϐixed, progressively round
in the circumference of a large circle, as shown in Fig. 5.3. Smeaton
confessed that the idea of this model was not his and named (Samuel?)
Rose and Ellicott as predecessors. However he perfected the model, for
instance by introducing the pendulum XV to regulate the rhythm with
witch the hand in Z has to pull the rope ZH and consequently maintain a
constant rotation speed. The rotation of the rotor support arm (FG) was
accomplished by the hand (Z) at the left, pulling the cord that turned
the barrel on the shaft (DE). Speed was adjusted so that the support
arm made one tum in the time the pendulum (VX) made two vibrations.
Thus even though the whirling-arm apparatus was not a new idea, in
his customary manner Smeaton improved on others’ work in its
construction.
Fig. 5.3 Model of the wind mill.
Redrawn from [72], after p. 174

Smeaton’s model rotor had a sail-tip radius of 53 cm, a sail length of
46 cm, and a sail breadth of 14 cm. The maximum ‘wind’ speed
developed appears to be about 2.7 m/s; hence, the Reynolds number—
an index to measure turbulence—for these tests was very low, about 25
000. Less then in the ϐield.[69].49 This may have affected his
conclusions quantitatively if not qualitatively.
Experiments Smeaton carried out regarded the evaluation of what
he called the effect measured by the product of the weight p raised by
the wheel multiplied by its turns in a given interval of time (for an
assigned model the number of turns is proportional to the vertical
displacement of the weight p, but more simple to measure). The tests
can be divided into two groups. In the ϐirst the magnitudes to be varied
were the conϐiguration of the sails, the value of the weight to raise and
the duration of the experiment; in the second group the speed of wind
was varied.
Results regarding the ϐirst group of tests are reported in the table
shown in Fig. 5.4. From column 9 of the table (here ‘product’ is for
effect) it can be seen that the optimal angle of the plane of the blades
with respect to the plane perpendicular to the axis of rotation is not 35
 as calculated by Parent [59],50 but much lower, precisely 15
(compare the value of row 1 with that of row 3). Rows 5–19 concern
different shapes of the sails. Here too it is evident how the effects
obtained with sails designed with empirical criteria are superior to
those designed with mechanical theories; for example those suggested
by a Maclaurin’s theorem, which furnished a formula for the angle with
which the plane of the sail must vary along the radius of the blade to
take into account the different speeds of its points [44].51

Fig. 5.4 Results of the experiment for a given wind speed. Table III. [72], p. 144
Very interesting are also the results Smeaton obtained when the
wind speed changes. They are expressed through general propositions
which he referred to as maxims also known as Smeaton’s law [89]. In
particular:
Maxim 3d. The effects of the same sails at a maximum are nearly,
but somewhat less than, as the cubes of the velocity of the wind.
Maxim 8. The effect of sails of similar ϐigure and position, are
as the square of the radius [72].52

In the modern literature on wind mills, besides Smeaton’s law, there
is reference to a Smeaton’s coefϐicient, that is the constant k, that
relates the force f on a plane of surface S acted by a orthogonal wind
moving with speed v (
. Actually Smeaton did not calculate
this coefϐicient, but it could be extracted from his data. The value
obtained is much higher than the value currently used; this
notwithstanding k is still named Smeaton’s coefϐicient.
Smeaton ended his considerations on wind mills with the following
conclusions. In trying all the experiments, the different density of air,
which is found at different times, will cause a difference in the load,
proportional to the difference of speciϐic gravity of air, though its
velocity remains the same. Notice that a variation of speciϐic gravity
may arise not only from a variation of the weight of the whole column
of atmosphere, but also by the difference of temperature of the air
concerned in the experiment, and possibly of other causes; yet the
irregularities that might arise from a difference of speciϐic gravity were
thought to be too small to be perceivable. Moreover, as all the
experiments were tried in the summer season, in the day-time, and
under cover it may be supposed that the principal source of error
would arise from the different weight of the column of the atmosphere
at different times, which seldom varies above 1/15 part of the whole:
“yet as all the principal conclusions are drawn from the medium of a
considerable number, many whereof were made at different times, it is
presumed that they will nearly agree with the truth, and be altogether
sufϐicient for regulating the practical construction of those kind of
machines, for which use they were principally intended” [72].53
Technology of mills and science
If one had to summarize the inϐluence of science on the technology of
water-wheels and wind mills of the XVIII century, not only in
Smeaton but in general, he would be tempted to say that it was modest,
almost negligible as claimed by some historians [33, 63]. The
impression also derives from the perception that the water wheels and
wind mills are simple machines, which have existed since ancient times.
But if one reϐlects on the improvements introduced in the
understanding of their operation, useful in the decision-making phase if

and where to place one and in the efϐiciency of their way of operating,
he cannot but admit that they are not so simple and could not be the
result of a common craftsman.
Indeed there was a fruitful interaction between science and
technology and, though the application to the wheels of the results
coming from rational mechanics based on a high formalization had a
limited impact, on the contrary, less formalized theoretical
considerations, such as those of Parent and de Borda (1733–1799), had
a decisive role, despite their high degree of idealization. Considering
Smeaton’s peers as foreign to science, as was done by historians
asserting the low inϐluence of science on technology, is certainly
debatable and cannot be shared by all, and indeed it was not [55].
Moreover if one also conceded that speciϐic theoretical achievements of
mechanics and ϐluid dynamics were scarcely relevant, he meantime had
to recognize that the methodology of experimental science was
fundamental in the conduct of experiments on mills.
By reading his memoirs, it is clear that Smeaton’s experimental
work was not that of an intelligent craftsman with good dexterity, who
performed experiments more or less casually. Smeaton had a good
knowledge of mechanics and also a remarkable culture of experimental
philosophy. For example, in identifying the magnitudes to measure the
performance of the water wheels he realized that the product of the
weight raised by the height to which it is raised had a precise
mechanical meaning, which he called power, and is not very different
from the modern concept of mechanical energy. Even the idea of
estimating a measure of friction presupposes a basic knowledge of
mechanics; at least a modern concept of force. Smeaton knew that
water falling from a height h acquires a speed v, such that 
. His
embryonic concept of mechanical energy allowed him to afϐirm that the
mechanical efϐiciency of the undershoot wheels is lower than that of the
overshot wheels because a part of the mechanical power is lost in the
undershot wheels during the impact with the wheel blades. Moreover
there was an underlying epistemology that guided him. The laws of
physics are invariant for him and even if the causes of the various
phenomena are not known, their effects can be measured, resulting in
mathematical laws, valid for all cases similar to the one studied. Only

this faith can justify a repetition of the same experience, possibly by
slightly changing the parameters involved.
The consequences of Smeaton’s experiments on hydraulic wheels
were important and made it possible to make some improvements to
the rules of design. Smeaton gave summary suggestions on the number
of blades to use and their shape. However, the acquisition of the fact
that overshot wheels are much more efϐicient than undershot if
appropriate provisions are adopted, was fundamental for the
technology of the time.
Smeaton’s work on wind mills, however imprecise in measurement,
suggested basic insights into the process of wind energy conversion,
and much of it is still valid today. In spite of all Smeaton’s good work in
analyzing performance, the builders of the times who continued with
their established designs and practices, seem to have taken little notice
of it. Of course, some of the labor-saving improvements were made, but
otherwise, there were only minor changes. The steam engine put a
brake on the use of wind power, although the established design of the
windmill did hang on for a long time, continuing to be built in the early
twentieth century.
In the same period, similarly to Smeaton but independently of him,
the mathematician Johann Albrecht Euler (1734–1800), a son of
Leonhard, used father’s theory of ϐluid dynamics for waterwheels and
arrived at conclusions similar to those of Smeaton about the superiority
of the overshot wheels. Johann Euler’s  work won a scientiϐic prize but
was largely ignored by engineers because it was opaque to them and
offered no more practical advice than Smeaton’s empirical results.
However, his mathematical theory was helpful to suggested a more
general type of hydraulic machine and formed a step in the subsequent
development of water turbines of the 19th century [6, 16].54
In the XIX century the interaction between technology of mills and
science was more profound and clear. The development of hydraulic
and wind machines was brought in the frame of applied mechanics,
where theory, the rational mechanics, and practice, experiments in the
laboratory and in the ϐield, were carried out by the same people, the
modern engineers, determining a great improvement in the efϐiciency
of all kind of machines.

These engineers were deeply involved in mathematics and physics
to consider themselves more as scientists than as practitioners; for
instance they addressed their memoirs to the Académie des science or
the Royal society instead of to technological journals. They made great
recourse to experiments, but not so much to verify the general
mechanical theories behind their designs. The experiments had rather
two main scopes. On the one hand to highlight some minor defects of
the machines to be corrected after a theoretical review of the problem;
on the other hand to evaluate numerical values of some correcting
coefϐicients which allowed to pass from theoretical to practical
formulas. This was due not to errors in theory but to simpliϐied
assumptions. For example very often the conservation of living forces—
or work—was assumed and friction was not modeled distinctly; its
effect was taken into account when performing experiments under
various operating conditions and arranging tables of correcting
coefϐicients.
5.2.1.2 Theoretical Works Versus Engineering
In 1776 and 1782 Smeaton wrote two interesting memoirs, both more
or less directly related on the way of measuring the force, that is either
as mv or 
, where naturally m is the mass of a body moving with
speed v. He recognized that his conclusions were in opposition to those
favored by the disciples of Newton, but diplomatically, and correctly
from a modern point of view, speciϐied that both mv and 
 were
useful when properly interpreted. He explicitly said that his two
memoirs took inspiration form his experimental work on mills, which
furnished results in contrast with many theoretical analysis, that of
Parent for the water wheels for instance.
Mechanical Power and Living Force
In his paper An experimental examination of the quantity and proportion
of mechanic power necessary to be employed in giving different degrees
of velocity to heavy bodies from a state of rest of 1776 [75],
Smeaton faced directly the problem of the correct measure of force,
intended as capacity of acting, that is if it should be given by mv

(referred to as old opinion) or by 
 (new opinion). Smeaton cited
some authors that wrote about mills:
Parent, Maclaurin, Belidor, Desaguliers by remembering that for the
latter “the dispute was a dispute about the meaning of words”; in any
case the meaning of words has to be explained [24].55
Smeaton’s memoir was published in a prestigious journal, the
Philosophical Transactions, and thus considered possessing a certain
degree of originality at the time. This originality does not appear very
evident to a modern reader, who is tempted to consider the results
found by Smeaton experimentally as an obvious consequences of the
theorem of the conservation of living forces; a theorem already widely
known and applied—but not proved—for example by Johann
Bernoulli in 1727 [9] and demonstrated satisfactorily at least by
Lagrange in 1763 [41].
The empirical validation of a principle in mechanics is a rather rare
event. Galileo had done this by checking if the speed of a heavy body
increases with the space traveled or the time passed [17].56 If he had
known Calculus, Galileo could have dissolved his doubt theoretically.
Even if Smeaton had had a greater mathematical and/or physical skill
he could have avoided experimentation. However at a time when
Lagrange’s demonstrations were not consolidated and could even be
challenged in some way, showing that the principle of conservation of
the living forces holds and in its most complete form, in which the static
mechanical power is transformed into mechanical kinematic power,
could have had a sense.
At the beginning of memoir Smeaton maintained it useful to clarify
the correct use of the term mechanical power, or simply power [75].57
Less emphasis had the meaning assigned to the effect, which is simply
identiϐied with the speed assumed by bodies under observation. The
experimental set used by Smeaton is illustrated in Fig. 5.5. The weight s
by its fall makes the two masses, K and L, of 3 pounds (1.35 kg) each,
rotate around the axis BN. The rotation is due to the action of the rope
connected to the plate of the scale that wounds on two barrels of
diameter one the double of the other, large in M and small in N; clearly
in the two cases there is a different relationship between the value of
the descent of the weight and the number of turns (one turn of the

smaller barrel gives a descent of 2.525—
6,5 cm—inches while one
turn of the larger barrel gives a double descent ). The rope connected to
the weight s has a ϐixed length; once it has reached the end the weight
comes off and the two masses K and L continue to rotate by inertia, at a
more or less constant speed for a certain number of revolutions, until
the friction brings the whole to rest.
The results of the experiment are reported in Table 5.1. The ϐirst
column shows the value of the weight s in ounces, in the second the
barrel used, the large (M) and the small (N). The third column reports
the distance of the rotating masses from the center of the axis, one
equal to 8.25 in. (
21 cm) (W), the other to 3.92 in. (
10 cm) (H),
more or less one half. The fourth column is relative to the turns the
rope wound on the barrel, the ϐifth the time (t) of the descent of the
weight s in second and the latter column the time (T) for the rotating
masses make 20 turns in their free rotation, still in second. This value is
inversely proportional to the angular velocity of the axis, and, for a
given arrangement of the rotating masses, to their speed.


Fig. 5.5 Machine for experiments on mechanical power. From [75], after p. 460.
Reproduced with the permission of Biblioteca Guido Castel Nuovo, Sapienza University of
Rome
Table 5.1 Table of experiments on mechanical power
 
1
2
3
4
5
6
1 8
M W 5
14.25 29.00
2 8
N W 10 28.25 29.25
3 8
N W 2.5 14.25 58.50
4 32 M W 5
7.00
14.00
5 32 N W 10 14.00 14.75
6 32 N W 2.5 7.00
28.75
7 8
M H
5
7.00
14.75
8 8
N H
10 14.00 15.00
9 8
N H
2.5 7.00
30.25
Table 5.1 allows to evaluate the (average) speed v of descent of the
weight s and the speed V of the rotating masses in their free motion.
Simple calculations shows that v is much less than V and because the
two rotating masses also have a much greater weight than s, this means,
using a modern language, that the potential energy lost by the weight s
in its descent is entirely transformed into the kinetic energy of the
rotating masses; in other words the speed of the weight s may be
neglected and all occurs as if it would move ‘statically’: “It must,
however, be always understood, that the descending body, when acting
as a measure of power, is supposed to descend slowly, like the weight of
a clock or a jack; for, if quickly descending, it is sensibly compounded
with another law, viz. the law of acceleration by gravity” [75].58
The examination of the ϐirst two rows of the table shows how the
same mechanical power (in both the two rows the weight of 8 ounces
descends of 25.25 in.) is capable of producing the same ϐinal effect (that
is speed) in a given body, whether it is applied in a greater (row 2) and
lesser time (row 1). In the third row an half effect is obtained by 1/4 of
the mechanical power (that is for 8 ounces descending only 1/4 of the
former descent):

We may conclude, in this instance that the mechanic power,
employed in producing motion, is as the square of the velocity
produced in the same body [75].59
In rows 4, 5 and 6 experiments as in row 1, 2, 3, are presented, only
quadrupling the weight s, 32 ounces instead of 8. A double effect is
obtaining, thus conϐirming the rule that power varies as the square of
speed. Rows 7, 8, 9 differ from the other because the rotating masses
have an arm of a reduced value (one half, about). The effect is
apparently doubled with respect to rows 1, 2 and 3, as the angular
velocity is double. It is quite interesting to see how Smeaton, who did
not master the law of conservation of mechanical energy, justify the
fact, in an interesting and may be consistent way (this is not however
the point) using the law of Newtonian mechanics.
First, said Smeaton, actually the effect is the same for the cases of
rows 1 and 7 for instance, because the effect is measured by the speed
of the rotating masses and not by the angular speed around the axis BN
and since the circumferences passed by the rotating masses in the case
of row 7 are only one half of the circumferences as those of row 1, the
speed of the masses are the same. This circumstance has a simple
explanation inside the Newtonian mechanics; the time in which the
power acts in the case of row 7 are nearly one half of those of the row 1,
but the impulsive force acting on the rotating masses is double and “an
impulsive power of double the intensity acting for half the time,
produces the same effect in generating motion as an impulsive power of
half the intensity acting for the whole time” [75].60 That for the row 7
the force acting on the rotating masses is double than in the case of row
1 can be established with a statical reasoning. The barrel in row 7 was
the same with the same number of turns as in row 1 and therefore the
shorter arm of the lever by which the impelling power acts is the same,
but the rotating masses, upon which the longer arm of the lever acts
were placed upon only half the length from the center. Thus the
impelling power, due to the ϐirst lever, acts upon the second with double
the intensity, according to the known laws of mechanics.
A modern reader by browsing the table 5.1 is surprise for ϐinding a
quite perfect agreement of the theory he knows and
Smeaton experimental results. Indeed a reϐined theoretical analysis, by

using for instance the theorem of living forces, is quite complex. Besides
the magnitudes considered by Smeaton one could take into account the
weight of the scale, the inertia of the axis and the arm, the kinetic
energy acquired by the weight s, friction. Smeaton was quite conscious
of these problems and furnished some justiϐications for the agreement
between theory and experiment. Friction is reduced to a minimum by
his ability as an instrument maker, the living force of the weight s is
very small. Even the inertia of the axis and the arms is taken in to
account when deciding to locate the masses in their closest position to
the axis at a distance of 3.92 in. instead of 
 inches, with
the following reasoning, more or less verbatim taken from Smeaton:
When the bodies are at the smallest distance from the axis of rotation,
all goes as they were at half the greater distance from axis; for since the
axis itself and the cylindric arms of wood, keep an unvaried distance
from the center of rotation, the bodies themselves must be moved
nearer than half their former distance, in order that, compounded with
the invariable parts, they may be virtually at the half distance. To ϐind
the value of this distance, put in an arm of the same wood, that only
went through the axis, without extending in the opposite direction; the
two bodies, one at a time being at the distance of 8,25 in. and 3.92 in.,
the whole machine was inclined till the body and arm became a kind of
pendulum. It is found that the pendulums vibrate one with the
frequencies in the ration of 
, as it should be with a pendulum of
a half length [75].61
Smeaton ended his memoir with general considerations about the
way of measuring force, or the quantity of motion produced, by stating
that all depends if one takes in to account the time for which the force
acts or the space passed by the force when acting.
This then appears to be the foundation, not only of the disputes
that have arisen, but of the mistakes that have been made, in the
application of the different deϐinitions of quantity of motion, that
while those, that have adhered to the deϐinition of Sir IĘĆĆĈ
NĊĜęĔē, have complained their adversaries in not considering
the time in which effects are produced, they themselves have not

always taken into the account the space that the impelling
power is obliged to travel through in producing the different
degrees of velocity. It seems, therefore, that, without taking in
the collateral circumstances both of time and space the terms,
quantity of motion, momentum and force of bodies in motion are
absolutely indeϐinite; and that they cannot be so easily, distinctly
and fundamentally compared as by having recourse to the
common measure, viz, mechanical power [75].62
Impact of Soft, Elastic and Hard Bodies
The memoir New fundamental experiments upon the collision of bodies
of 1782, concerns the study of the collision between bodies of different
mechanical characteristics. The experimental apparatus consists of two
wood pendulums which contain at their extremities bodies that are
struck when the pendulums after being released meet. One of the
pendulum is at rest in the vertical position, the other is raised and then
left. The idea of using pendulums to study impact is not new, even
Newton had done it and in the Principia he referred of similar
experiences carried out by Edme Mariotte and Christopher Wren
[56].63 The system allows to measure the speed before and after the
impact indirectly by measuring the angle of fall and raising. But
Smeaton’s ability as an instrument maker, makes the approach
particularly interesting. The work is less rich than that of 1776 as
regards the experimental aspects, because the use of experimental
results is not essential. Unlike the work of 1776, Smeaton did not refer
to any other author; nevertheless some considerations of an
epistemological nature and of experimental philosophy reveal a good
knowledge of scientiϐic literature on the subject.
The paper starts with some considerations about the certitude of
scientiϐic knowledge: “It is universally acknowledged, that the ϐirst
simple principles of science cannot be too critically examined, in order
to their being ϐirmly established; more especially those which relate to
the practical and operative parts of mechanics, upon which much of the
active business of mankind depends” [76].64 A similar sentiment was
echoed by Lazare Carnot, more or less in the same period: “Sciences are
as a beautiful river whose course is easy to follow, when it has acquired
a certain regularity; but if one wants to sail to the source one cannot

ϐind it anywhere, because it is far and near; it is diffuse somehow in the
whole earth surface. The same if one wants to sail to the origin of
science, one ϐinds nothing but darkness and vague ideas, vicious circles;
and one loses himself in the primitive ideas” [19].65
Then Smeaton made a correlation between his work of 1776 with
the present one, by asserting that the true doctrine of the collision of
bodies (the object of the paper) hangs as it were upon the same hook as
the doctrine of the gradual generation of motion, where the concept of
mechanical power was fundamental. While there the mechanical power
was deϐined statically as the product of height by weight, here it is
introduced for body in motion and it is substantially the same as living
force, which is assumed as the most meaningful magnitude to study the
collision of bodies. This assumption was considered as arbitrary by the
editor of the abridged Transactions of the Royal Society in a footnote to
Smeaton’s paper [68, 77].66 He was not alone, in a period when the
dispute on the way to measure the force was still heated.
Smeaton recalled that mathematical philosophers investigated
principally three kinds of law of collision: that of bodies perfectly
elastic, of bodies perfectly non-elastic and perfectly soft and of bodies
perfectly non-elastic and perfectly hard. Notice the interesting, at least
for the present book, the category of scholars Smeaton introduced, that
of mathematical philosophers, to which most probably he thought to
belong. It indicates mathematicians who have good training in natural
and experimental philosophy.
For the sake of simplicity in the exposition of his both theoretical
and experimental arguments, Smeaton assumed bodies which are equal
in weight. For bodies perfectly elastic it is universally agreed, said
Smeaton, because proved by experiments that when two of such bodies
strike no motion is lost and hence if an elastic body in motion strikes
another at rest, after the impact the former is reduced at rest and the
latter assumes the speed of the former. Similarly, if two non-elastic
perfectly soft bodies strike, one being at rest, they proceed together
from the point of collision with exactly one half of the speed the moving
body had before the impact.
With respect to the bodies non-elastic and perfectly hard there is no
agreement among philosophers, continued Smeaton. Some maintain
that there are no bodies in nature whereon to try experiments, some

other do not agree and argue that if a non-elastic perfectly hard body
strikes another of the same kind at rest, all happens as in the case of
non-elastic soft bodies; that is the two bodies move together with one
half of the speed of the striking body. However, noticed Smeaton, no
experiment or any “fair deduction of reason” can prove the fact. So the
question is whether it is true or not [76].67
According to Smeaton, solving this question is of relevance not only
for scholars but also for practical men. Even though apparently the
latter should not be worried if some argued about bodies they will
never meet, in practice they may be mislead by reading considerations
about the behavior of non-elastic perfectly hard bodies ϐlanked to those
of non-elastic perfectly soft bodies, which they have much to do with in
their daily practice. Smeaton on this point said that for many years
never had he doubted that non-elastic perfectly hard bodies and non-
elastic perfectly soft bodies had the same behavior, but he changed his
idea after his experiments on mills published in 1759.
Of course in practice there are only bodies of mixed nature. Some
are mainly elastic, but also in part soft; other are mainly soft, but also in
part elastic. So if there not exist perfectly hard non-elastic bodies, can
imperfectly hard non-elastic bodies exist? They can, because as being
imperfectly hard they are soft and being imperfectly elastic they are
soft, so they are imperfectly elastic and imperfectly soft as in practice
are all bodies; and as such are not a particularly interesting category.
For Smeaton this conclusion, however, was not entirely satisfactory
to eliminate the difϐiculty of dealing with perfectly hard bodies. It must
be shown that the idea itself is absurd. Smeaton did this by highlighting
the differences between soft and hard bodies, using the laws of
mechanics, even those not considered by the advocates of the concept
of hard bodies. The difference existing between a soft and a hard
material, is that the former is deformed during the impact the latter is
not. And to deform a body, according to Smeaton, mechanical power
must be spent. To be convinced of the fact Smeaton agued as follows. If
the shape of a body can be changed, without a power, then one might be
able to make a forge hammer work upon a mass of soft iron, without
any other power than that necessary to overcome the resistance of the
parts of the machine to be put in motion: for, as no progressive motion
is given to the mass of iron by the hammer, no power can be expended

that way. And if none is loft to the hammer from changing the shape of
the iron, which is the only effect produced, then the whole power must
reside in the hammer, and it would jump back. again to the place from
which it fell, just in the same manner as if it fell upon a body perfectly
elastic, upon which, if it did fall, the case would really happen. The
power, therefore, to work the hammer would be the same, whether it
fell upon an elastic or non-elastic body: “an idea so very contrary to all
experience, and even apprehension of both. the philosopher and vulgar
artist” [76].68
In the light of modern conceptions of thermodynamics Smeaton’s
suggestion about the loss of power appear as unsatisfactory, because
what is now considered relevant is that during the deformation of a soft
body there is a production of heat, and it is the conversion of living
force into heat that explains the lost of mechanical power while the
deformation is only an indirect index. But this possibly is a not
historically correct criticism and Smeaton’s intuition should be
appreciated. Any way in most cases the change of shape of a body may
be an indicator of the lost of mechanical power during an impact, and
modern design of objects able to resist the impact by absorbing energy
is based in their capacity of deformation.
Smeaton assumed he could prove bona ϔide that one half of the
original power is lost in the impact of soft bodies because of the change
of shape (“as was suggested very strongly by the mills experiments”)
[76];69 on the other hand no change in shape occurs for hard bodies
and so no power is lost. For example let the speed of the impacting
body be 20 and its mass 8 equal to that of the body at rest; then
according the rule deduced from the experiment of 1766 for which the
mechanical power can be measured with living force, the power of the
impacting body is 
. If half of it is lost in the impact
of soft bodies, it will reduce to 1660, to be shared between the
impacted and impacting bodies, that is a mass of 16. This means that
the two bodies will continue their motion with a speed of 
, that is just one half of the original speed. But for non-
elastic perfectly hard bodies no power is lost in the impact, so the
power remains 3200; if the two bodies move together as a body of mass

16, this power correspond to a speed 
. But
this contradicts what for Smeaton is a truth passible of strict
demonstration, “that the velocity of the center of gravity of no system
can be changed by any collision” [76].70
Indeed at the outset of the impact the center of gravity of the two
bodies has a speed equal to one half of the speed of the impacting body
—one body of mass m has speed zero, the other body still of mass m
has ha speed v; the speed of the center of gravity is 
; and thus the speed of the center of gravity is
10. This value remain the same immediately after the impact of two soft
bodies, as both of them move with a speed 10. But the value increases
in the impact between two perfectly hard bodies, as they move with a
common speed of 14.14. Which is absurd.
Smeaton formulated the absurd in a formal way as follows. In the
stroke of inelastic hard bodies they cannot possibly lose any mechanical
power in the stroke; because no other impression is made than the
communication of motion; and yet they must lost a quantity of
mechanic power in the stroke; because, if they do not, their common
center of gravity, as above shown, will acquire an increase of velocity-by
their stroke, upon each other. “In a like manner the idea of a perpetual
motion, perhaps, at ϐirst sight, may not appear to involve a
contradiction in terms;” [76].71 In conclusion: “an elastic hard body
(perfectly so) is a repugnant idea and contains in itself a contradiction”
[76].72
It remains to show that half of the mechanical power is lost in the
collision between two soft bodies. This is done both experimentally and
theoretically, with an analogical reasoning. As for the experimental
demonstration, Smeaton could refer to the experiments available in the
literature, but he preferred to rely on his own experiences. His
experimental results, which are not reported in detail in the article,
conϐirmed those shared by all scholars of his time. In particular, for two
equal soft bodies the speed after the impact of the assembly is one half
the speed of the impacting and therefore one half of the power has been
lost, as shown by simple calculations. As for analogical reasoning,
imagine, said Smeaton, if one could construct a couple of bodies in such

a way that they act as perfectly elastic bodies, but that their springs
should at pleasure be hooked up, retained, or prevented from restoring
themselves, when at their extreme degree of compression. Bodies
under these circumstances observe the laws of collision of non-elastic
soft bodies, then it is proved, that one half of the mechanical power,
residing in the striking bodies, would be lost, because if the springs are
released and the two bodies behave as elastic bodies they will recover a
power equal to that stored [76].73
5.2.2 A Philosophical Engineer. James Watt
James Watt (1736–1819) was born at Greenock, the grandson of
Thomas Watt, a teacher of mathematics, surveying, and navigation. He
was always delicate, and suffered throughout his life from severe
attacks of headache. When thirteen he began to study geometry and at
once showed great interest in the subject. He then went to the Greenock
Grammar school, where he acquired Latin and some Greek. During his
boyhood he was a diligent worker in his father’s shop, so far as regards
the making of models, and gave early evidence of his great manual
dexterity. At the age of seventeen to eighteen he was sent to Glasgow to
live with his mother’s relatives, then to London to improve himself as
an instrument maker. But the atmosphere of London was unsuited for
his delicate health and in less than a year he returned to Greenock to
settle eventually in Glasgow, being then in his twenty-ϐirst year. He then
endeavored to open a shop, as an instrument maker, but was prevented
by the Corporation of Hammermen, on the ground that he had not
served a proper apprenticeship.
Luckily Watt had for his most intimate schoolfellow Andrew
Anderson, whose elder brother, John Anderson (1726–1796) was
professor of natural philosophy at Glasgow University. The head of the
university thus came to Watt’s assistance by appointing him
mathematical instrument maker to the university and by allowing him
to establish a workshop within its precincts by 1757. Watt however
besides preparing instruments for the university also continued his
trade and also was busied in manufacturing musical instruments and
fancy toys. At the university Watt continued to improve himself in
various ways; here he made the acquaintance of many eminent men,

such as Joseph Black (1728–1799), the discoverer of latent heat; Adam
Smith (1723–1790) the famous economist and John Robinson (1739–
1805),  professor of natural philosophy.
In 1764, it occurred the well-known incident of the repair of the
model of a Newcomen ϐire (steam) engine, belonging to the university,
which had never acted properly. It turned out that the model was not
out of repair, in the ordinary sense of the word, for it had lately been
put in order by a celebrated instrument maker in London, Jonathan
Sisson [36].74 It however exhibited a very poor performance; this ϐixed
Watt’s thoughts on the question of the economy of steam and laid the
foundation of his ϐirst and greatest invention: the separate condenser.
Watt prosecuted this invention so far as his limited means would admit,
but nothing on a working scale seems to have been done, until he
entered into an arrangement with John Roebuck,  the founder of the
Carron Works, to take a share in the invention, and an engine was made
at Kinneil, near Linlithgow. But Roebuck fell into difϐiculties and this
engine did not seem to have excited much attention; nor did the
invention develop in the manner that might have been expected.
Meantime, Watt became largely employed in making surveys and
reports, in connection with canals, rivers, and harbors. Among the last
of his engineering works of this character were an improvement of the
harbor of his native place and a provision of water-works for that town.
In 1768 Watt knew Matthew Boulton,  the founder of the Soho
Works, near Birmingham. In 1769 Watt’s invention was patented. In
1772 Roebuck failed, and Boulton offered to take a two-thirds share in
Watt’s engine patent, in lieu of a debt of 1 200 pounds. In 1775, nearly
forty, Watt entered into partnership with Boulton at Soho. It was a
happy partnership. The two men complemented one another ideally.
Watt, the inventor and scientist, knew enough about organization of
work; Boulton, the organizer and entrepreneur, was enough of an
inventor to appreciate Watt’s technical problems. His forthright and
optimistic joviality contrasted with Watt’s quick temper and morose
outlook. The steam engine started to spread. Watt retired from the ϐirm
of Boulton & Watt in 1800, Boulton going out at the same time, leaving
the business to their sons. After his retirement from Soho,
Watt pursued at his residence, Heathϐield Hall, near Birmingham,
various inventions in the workshop which he had ϐitted up there. He

died at Heathϐield, in his eighty-fourth year, and was buried in St.
Mary’s Church at Handsworth [13].
Watt has been the subject of huge amount of papers and books;
many biographies also have been written; of them it is still valid the Life
of James Watt, by James Patrick Muirhead of 1858 [54]. A survey quite
satisfactory of papers and book on Watt can be found in [25, 50].
Watt himself did not publish many writings. For instance he published
only two papers (or better one divided into two parts) on a scientiϐic
journal, the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London,
in 1784 [84, 85]. His ideas are otherwise spread in letters [66]75[65], in
notebooks [65] and in his patents [66].76 Many Watt’s writings, now at
the Birmingham central library, consist of Watt’s personal papers, his
extensive incoming correspondence and bound volumes of retained
copies (made on Watt’s copying-press) of his outgoing letters;
notebooks, journals, personal and business accounts, surveying reports,
memoranda, papers relating to the Act of Parliament of 1775 which
extended his original patent, patent speciϐications and drawings, legal
papers concerning court cases for infringement of his patents, and
other miscellaneous papers. Watt’s extensive correspondence is the
rich core of the archive, documenting all aspects of his life and work
and providing considerable information about his contemporaries. The
overall quality and regularity of the correspondence with scientiϐic and
technological ϐigures is exceptionally high. To give just two examples:
Priestley’s writings about phlogiston, inϐlammable air, the Lunar
Society, and of his losses in the riots. Humphry Davy describes his
galvanic experiments. The archive contains a considerable amount of
juvenilia, apparently carefully preserved by his father, who was
heartbroken by the early death of a favored son [86].

5.2.2.1 A Natural Philosopher and a Chemist
Today it seems strange to assimilate Watt to a chemist. Indeed a part
from being an engineer, he is more easily seen as a physicist, because
his works on heat and steam. Actually heat and steam in the 18th
century were studied mostly by chemists. Heat sometimes referred to
as ϔire and after Lavoisier caloric, was considered as a substance, or an
element. And steam, water and ice, for instance, that today are
considered as different states of a chemical substance, water (H O),
were considered as different substances. Steam derived by water
through a chemical combination with heat; ice from water by a
separation of heat. In any case Watt was busied also with themes today
classiϐied as chemical. One of them was the nature and composition of
water, object of many discussions until the end of the 18th century [88].
Watt was stimulated in this study by a letter he received from
Priestley in 1782, who referred about the conversion of water into
permanent air by ϐirst mixing it with quicklime and then exposing it to
the red heat. In 1784 a mature Watt published two papers, one the
sequel the other, in the Philosophical Transactions [84, 85], about his
‘discovery’ of the composition of water. In this same year and journal
Cavendish published a his own paper on the subject and also Lavoisier
shortly after announced a similar discovery. There was a controversy
about priority, known a water controversy.
Here it is not a question of entering into the merits of the priority of
discovery or even of analyzing in depth the theoretical value of
Watt’s writings. What matters is that Watt attached great importance to
his discovery and demanded that his qualities as a chemist be
appreciated. It should be remembered that we are in a period of study
of gases in which not only the phenomena, but also the nomenclature
was uncertain. The term gas, suggested by the Greek 
, chaos,
introduced by Van Helmont in 1652 [34],77 was not yet widespread and
it was generally spoken of air or airs. In particular for what concerns
the composition of water, Watt used the terms inϔlammable air and
dephlogisticated air. Scholars concerned with the chemistry of airs in
the late 18th century were divided among lumpers and splitters [50].78

Splitters inclined to see new discovered airs with distinct chemical
identities. The lumpers, on the other hand, whilst they recognized there
were various kind of airs still believed in their fundamental unity.
Lavoisier and new chemists were splitters, Watt and Priestley were
lumpers. The common unifying agent of lumpers might be phlogiston
or heat, the variability of airs being due to the amounts of heat or
phlogiston combined with a ‘base’ of some sort. Another example of
lumping devices was the humor, intended as the principle of humidity,
introduced by Jean André de Luc (1727–1817), a friend and
correspondent of Watt.  In such a way the boundary between
permanent air (gas) and vapor (for example steam) was recognized in
the sense that the former would condense differently from the latter,
but they were also lumped together by humor [50].79
In his paper of 1784 Watt began by saying that in 1783 he had
written a letter to Priestley to have news about his experiment, “but
before he had an opportunity of doing him that favor, he found, in the
prosecution of his experiments, that the apparent conversion of water
into air, by exposing it to heat in porous earthen vessels, was not a real
transmutation, but an exchange of the elastic ϐluid for the liquid, in
some manner not yet accounted for” [85].80
Watt then referred about other experiments by Priestley on calces
and metals, and of an experiment mixing together certain proportions
of pure dry dephlogisticated air and of pure dry inϐlammable air in a
strong glass vessel, and then set them on ϐire by means of the electric
spark,“in the fame manner as is done in the inϐlammable air pistol”
[85].81 As the glass grew cold a mist or visible vapor appeared in it,
which was condensed on the glass in form of misture or dew [85].82
Here in a footnote Watt recognized that Cavendish was the ϐirst who
discovered that the combustion of dephlogisticated and inϐlammable
air produced moistures. And also referred to experiments made in Paris
on the subject, by which the essential point seems to be clearly proved,
that the deϐlagration or union of dephlogisticated and inϐlammable air,
by means of ignition, produces a quantity of water equal in weight to
the airs; and that the water, thus produced, appeared, by every test, to
be pure water [85].83
At this point Watt posed the question:

Are we not then authorised to conclude, that water is composed
of dephlogisticated air and phlogiston, deprived of part of their
latent or elementary heat; that dephlogisticated or pure air is
composed of water deprived of its phlogiston, and united
elementary heat and light; and that the latter are contained in it
in a latent state, so as not to be sensible to the thermometer or
to the eye; and if light be only a modiϐication of heat, or a
circumstance attending it, or a component part of the
inϐlammable air, then pure or dephlogisticated air is composed
of water deprived of its phlogiston and united to elementary
heat? [85].84
It is on the basis of this question raised in 1784 that Watt could claim to
be the ϐirst to discover the composition of water.
A modern is tempted to interpreter Watt’s statement as an
indication that inϐlammable air (that is hydrogen) reacted with
dephlogisticated air (that is oxygen) to give water. Actually by reading
the paper, it appears that Watt regarded the different airs and water as
all being products of the union of dephlogisticated air and phlogiston in
different degrees and by different means. This is the key insight that is
missed when Watt’s statement on the composition of water is extracted
and taken in isolation [50].85
Watt declared that for many years he have entertained an opinion,
that “air was a modiϐication of water”, originally founded on the facts
that in most cases, wherein air was actually made, the substances were
known to contain water as one of their constituent parts. This opinion,
said Watt,  arose from a discovery that the latent heat contained in
steam diminished in proportion as the sensible heat (temperature) of
the water, from which it was produced, increased (because of the higher
pressure) or, in other words, “that the latent heat of steam was less
when it was produced under a greater pressure, or in a more dense
state, and greater when it was produced under a less pressure, or in a
less dense state; which led me to conclude, that when a very great
degree of heat was necessary for the production of the steam, the latent
heat would be wholly changed into sensible heat; and that, in such
cases, the steam itself might suffer some remarkable change” [85],86

becoming air. This reasoning is at the basis of what since the 19th
century will be known as Watt’s law, referred to below.
Watt however abandoned this opinion in so far as relates to the
change of water into air, as “I think that may be accounted for on better
principles. In every case, wherein dephlogisticated air has been
produced, substances have been employed, some of whose constituent
parts have a strong attraction for phlogiston, and, as it would appear, a
stronger attraction for that substance than humor has; they should,
therefore, dephlogisticate the water or ϐixed air, and the humor thus set
free should unite to the matter of ϐire and light and become pure air”
[85].87 Thus the conversion of water into air (steam) occurs not by the
action of heat alone but by a process of dephlogistication of the water
to produce the intermediate humor, which then becomes pure air by
uniting with ϐire and light.
Watt returned on the subject with another paper. Here he advised
the reader about precautions to be taken in repeating the experiments:
“I think it necessary to resume the subject, in order to mention some
necessary cautions to those who may chose to repeat the experiments
mentioned there, and to point out some circumstances that may cause
variations in the results” [84].88
As mentioned beforehand there was a controversy about the
priority of the discovery of the composition of water, which saw
Watt claiming his priority over Cavendish and Lavoisier,  and not only
for prestige, but also to accredit his image as a philosopher to spend in
his trials of the 1790 s concerning the patent of the steam engine. The
water controversy concerned one of the central discoveries of modern
science, that water is not an element but rather a compound. The
allocation of priority in this discovery has occupied a number of 20th
century historians. The matter is tied up with the larger issues of the
so-called chemical revolution of the late eighteenth century. A case can
be made for James Watt or Henry Cavendish or Antoine Lavoisier as
having priority in the discovery depending upon precisely what the
discovery is taken to consist of. However, neither the protagonists
themselves in the 1780 s nor modern historians appear as strongly
interested in the affair. In fact, a controversy, known as the second water
controversy, attracted most attention in early Victorian Britain some

ϐifty to seventy years after the actual work of Watt, Cavendish and
Lavoisier.
This second water controversy arose long after Watt’s death. It was
prompted by the secretary of the Académie des sciences de Paris,
François Jean Dominique Arago (1786–1853), who in his Éloge of James
Watt asserted that Priestley was the ϐirst person to prove that air could
be converted into water and that Watt was the ϐirst person to
understand it [2].89 The ϐirst to respond publicly to Arago and denying
strongly his thesis was William Vernon Harcourt (1789–1871) in his
presidential address at the British association for advancement of
science meeting in 1839 [49].90
The water controversy was mainly driven by ideological struggles
about the nature of science and its relation to technological invention
and innovation in British society. More than credit for a particular
discovery was at stake here. The controversy nourished large debates
about the nature of science, about the relationship between science and
technology and economic transformation, about the appropriate
organization of scientiϐic activity, and so on [49].91 Watt and
Cavendish were iconic characters in the Victorian era. Watt essentially
represented a clear link between science and technology unmediated
by an academic scientiϐic elite. Men like Watt combined science and
technology and were seen by many members of the industrial middle
class, but not only, as the hero to be emulated. On the contrary, the
aristocratic Cavendish was a more iconic character for large part of the
scientiϐic community. He represented a person who followed what they
considered the right scientiϐic approach, methodic cautious of highest
quality and mainly riven by curiosity alone [49].92
Two groups of contenders are particularly worth considering. First
the ‘gentlemen of science’-who founded the British association for
advancement of science and who denied Watt the status of a chemical
discoverer-and second the ‘Northern philosophers’ including
Rankine, Tait and William Thomson (Kelvin) who played such a
signiϐiant role in the development of engineering science in the second
half of the nineteenth century. The gentleman of science, such as
Whewell, Harcourt, Herschel and Peacock, were mathematicians, or
astronomers, or exponents of mathematical experimental philosophy,
or even gentleman geologists. They bequeathed strong suspicions

about mixing commercial and scientiϐic objectives. The northern
philosophers had no such reservations. William Thomson personiϐied
the amalgamation of roles as natural philosopher, engineer and
businessman [50].93 While the gentlemen of science tended to treat
theory and practice as distinct though related realms, the Northern
philosophers emphasized their unity. Consider, for example, Rankine’s
introductory lecture, published in 1856 on his accession to the Glasgow
chair: “The subject of which, in this introductory, lecture, I propose to
treat [...] is ęčĊ čĆėĒĔēĞ Ĕċ ęčĊĔėĞ Ćēĉ ĕėĆĈęĎĈĊ Ďē ĒĊĈčĆēĎĈĘ”,
which was published in 1856 [61].94
5.2.2.2 The Steam Engine and the Separate
Condenser
No doubt Watt cannot be considered as the inventor of the steam-
engine. The grand principle of rendering the heat contained in steam
available as a source of moving power may be traced so far back that
we lose the clue altogether in the obscure, or impracticable, or simply
puerile shapes in which the idea was contained. Papin, indeed,
proposed a piston and cylinder in which the vacuum was produced by
steam instead of by the air-pump; but Savery was the ϐirst who
constructed a steam-engine, and applied it to the drainage of mines. His
invention included the two capital properties of steam, its power of
producing a vacuum by condensation and its elastic force at high
temperatures. A few years later the piston-form was introduced or re-
invented by Newcomen and Cawley, as well as the valuable expedient of
producing condensation by a squirt of cold water injected into the
cylinder. In this condition the atmospheric engine remained with slight
improvement for above half a century, doing the work for which it was
invented, the pumping of water out of shafts (the pump being moved by
a chain attached to the end of a horizontal oscillating beam), wherever
economy of fuel was unimportant. Such was the case at coal pits, but in
other mines, usually situated remote from coal, it was of comparatively
little use, on account of the enormous consumption of fuel [28].95
To reconstruct the history of Watt’s contribution to the steam
engine it is necessary to relay on Watt’s account started not earlier than
thirty years after his ϐirst investigation. There are two versions of it;

one given in a footnote of Robinsons’s dissertation, A system of
mechanical philosophy, published in 1822 [66]96 but preceding 1814,
and another referred to by Watt as plain story, in a document prepared
in 1796 as a general answer to the objections that his opponents raised
to the speciϐication of his patents [54].97 There are also accounts by
Black and Robinson [54].98
According to his own narrative, Watt’s attention was ϐirst directed in
the year 1759 to the subject of the steam engines, by the “late Dr
Robinson, then a student in the university of Glasgow and nearly my
own age” [66].99 Watt and Robinson hoped to improve the operation of
the Newcomen engine, then largely used to pump water from coal
mines, whose basic elements are shown in Fig. 5.6; a stove fueled a
boiler B that produced steam at atmospheric pressure. This steam was
released from the bottom into the cylinder C and, aided by the rocker R
that kept initially in equilibrium the pump P placed at the opposite end
of the rocker arm, made the piston to be lifted. As soon as the steam
had ϐilled the cylinder, cold water was led into it through a valve
originating condensation of the steam and a vacuum; soon the piston
fell down because of atmospheric pressure. In this phase, the pump was
operated for lifting water from the mine. At this point the cycle could
start again. Systems of opening and closing of the valves for the entry
and discharge of the steam (and water) were automated through the
motion of the rod of the injection pump synchronized with the motion
of the rocker.
Watt however was soon distracted in supervising his trade as an
engineer. Any way in this period he frequently got in touch with
Black. But in the winter of 1763–1764, being requested to repair the
model of Newcomen’s engine. Watt’s mind was again directed to the
steam engine. At that period, his knowledge on engines was derived
principally from Desaguliers and partly from Belidor  [66].100
Watt “set about repairing it [the Newcomen engine] as a mere
mechanician” and when that was done and it was set to work, he was
surprised to ϐind that its boiler could not supply it with steam, though
apparently large enough (the cylinder of the model being two inches in
diameter, and six inches stroke, and the boiler about nine inches
diameter). By blowing the ϐire it was made to take a few strokes, but
required an enormous quantity of injection water [66].101

Fig. 5.6 Newcomen steam engine
Since the beginning Watt was convinced that the way to improve the
efϐiciency of the engine was to reduce the dissipation of heat.
Watt acted here more as a chemist than as a physicist (a mechanician)
by concentrating more on the consume and production of heat than in
mechanical aspects [25].102 A ϐirst idea shared by Robinson also was to
replace the cylinder of brass with a less conducting material. Indeed the
cylinder of the model being of brass, would conduct heat very well, and
considerable advantage could be gained by making the cylinders of
some substance that would receive and give out heat slowly. Of these,
wood seemed to be the most likely, provided it should prove sufϐiciently
durable. A small engine was therefore constructed with a cylinder six
inches (
 cm) diameter, and twelve inches stroke, made of wood,
soaked in linseed oil, and baked to dryness. With this engine many

experiments were made; but it was soon found that the wooden
cylinder was not likely to prove durable and that the steam condensed
in ϐilling it still exceeded the proportion of that required [66].103
Watt also concentrated by making the boiler performed with as
little fuel as possible.
I had often observed that the best way of heating bodies was to
bring them in Contact with the burning fuel the great distance
from the ϐire to the boyler in ϐire engines seemed in
Consequence to be wrong after many fruitless thoughts on the
subject I saw no boyler so perfect in that Respect as the Common
tea kitchen [emphasis added] (an invention for which we are
beholden to the Chinese) here the fuel is always in Contact with
the sides of the boyler Containing the water the outside may be
of wood with this advantage that very little heat will be able to
penetrate it the Inside of very thin Iron which will Considerably
diminish the Expence and being Constantly Covered with water
it cannot burn [65].104
The reference to the tea kettle in this quotation and old biographies
contributed to spread the myth of Watt and the kettle. According to this
myth (not realistic indeed) Watt would have taken inspiration for his
studies on steam engine by observing the steam coming from a tea
kettle at his aunt Miss Muirhead, when a very young body. The
spreading of this myth and what is at the basis of it are discussed in
[47].
In studying the behavior of the steam in the cylinder of his
Newcomen engine model Watt also found, that all attempts to produce
a better exhaustion of the steam by throwing in more injection water,
caused a disproportionate waste of steam. “On reϐlection, the cause of
this seemed to be the boiling of water in vacuo at low heats, a discovery
lately made by Dr Cullen, and some other philosophers, (below 100 F,
as I was then informed)” [66].105 This is the phenomenon of back
pressure, which implies that, the water injected in the cylinder
produces steam which would, in part, resist the pressure of the
atmosphere with a reduction in efϐiciency.

Discouraged by the apparently inevitable heat loss, Watt gave
temporarily up the Newcomen engine and passed to explore the Savery
one; but he did not obtain better results. Meantime he had made
experiments on which rate his boiler consumed water to produce steam
by measuring also the ratio between the volumes of steam produced by
a given volume of water and this volume. He found that the value
furnished by Desaguliers, 14000 [23],106 too high with respect the
value 1800 he found [66].107
After his attempts in improving Newcomen and Savery engines,
Watt turned back to his activity as a chemist, to study steam, with the
hope of ϐinding some suggestions to solve his practical problems. He
knew from Black the phenomenon now known under the name of
latent heat, that is that when water is at the boiling point it can receive
a great addition of heat without increasing the temperature. But
Watt was troubled, astonished in his words, by the converse, that is by
the fact that the quantity of water to be injected in the cylinder of a
Newcomen engine to cool the steam was much greater than one could
think. To test this suspicion Watt, independently of Black, made his own
experiments.
A glass tube was bent at right angles, one end was inserted
horizontally into the spout of a tea-kettle, and the other part was
immersed perpendicularly in well-water contained in a cylindric
glass vessel, and steam was made to pass through it until it
ceased to be condensed, and the water in the glass vessel was
become nearly boiling hot. The water in the glass vessel was
then found to have gained an addition of about one-sixth part
from the condensed steam. Consequently, water converted into
steam can heat about six times its own weight of well-water to
212 F [the boiling point of water in Fahrenheit degrees], or till
it can condense no more steam. Being struck with this
remarkable fact, and not understanding the reason of it, I
mentioned it to my friend Dr Black,  who then explained to me
his doctrine of latent heat, which he had taught for some time
before this period, (summer 1764,) but having myself been
occupied with the pursuits of business, if I had heard of it, I had
not attended to it, when I thus stumbled upon one of the

material facts by which that beautiful theory is supported
[66].108
In Watt’s account his ϐirst experiment dated 1764; he repeted the
experiences some years later, but now on quantitative basis. In one of
his notebook, under the date 23th February 1781, Watt reported
experiments related to the measurement of latent heat. He measured
the amount (
) of the water contained in the glass vessel, as referred
to in the above quotation and measured its temperature (
) in
Fahrenheit degrees. After some steam has passed from the tea kettle to
the glass vessel he measured the amount (
) of the water, inclusive of
the condensed steam, contained in the glass vessel and the relative
temperature (
). The latent heat L was found by Watt with the
relation:
where 
 is the heat that steam has passed to the water in the
glass vessel; this is divided by the mass of steam 
. The term 
 is the excess of temperature of the water in the vessel with
respect to the boiling point of the water (that is the temperature lost by
the steam in condensing), given by 212 F.109
Table 5.2 Watt’s experiments on latent heat
N
 F
Total heat Latent heat
1.
17500 43 .5 760
89 .5 46 .5
1159 .5
947 .5
2.
17500 44 .5 708.
86.5
42.5
1136.9
924.9
3 . 17500 44.5
899
98.
54.
1149.1
937.1
4
17500 44.5
467.5
73.5
29.5
1175.6
963.6
5
17500 44.5
369.
67.25 23.
1158.
946.

N
 F
Total heat Latent heat
6.
17500 47.5
642.
87
40.
1177.3
965.3
7
17500 49.
588.5
84
5 36.
1155.
943.
8.
17500 47.
675.
87.5
41.
1150.5
938.5
9
17500 45.
680.5
86.5
42.
1166.5
954.5
10. 17500 45.
664.25
8s.s
41.
1165.66
953.66
11
17500 45.
975.5
102
57
5
1134.
922.
Table 5.2 refers the experiments on the latent heat under
atmospheric pressure in different experiments; masses are expressed
in English grains (1 pound is 7000 grains) and temperature in
Fahrenheit degrees. The mean value is 945.3, but Watt considered not
reliable the values of row 1 and 11, which were very different from the
others. By neglecting them, the mean value resulted to be 949.9, “which
I believe is near the truth” [65].110
In the letter that preface A system of mechanical philosophy
Watt resumed the results he had obtained in his preliminary studies:
I had myself made experiments to determine the following facts:
1st
The capacities for heat of iron, copper, and some sorts
of wood, comparatively with water. Similar
experiments had also subsequently been made by Dr
Irvine, on these and other metals
 
2d
The bulk of steam was compared with that of water.  
3d
The quantity of water which could be evaporated is a
certain boiler by a pound of coals.
 
4th
The elasticities of steam at various temperatures
greater than that of boiling water, and an
approximation to the law which it followed at other
temperatures.
 
How much water, in the form of steam, was required

5th
,
,
q
every stroke by a small Newcomen’s engine, with a
wooden cylinder six inches diameter, and twelve
inches long in the stroke.
 
6th
I had measured the quantity of cold water required in
every stroke to condense the steam in that cylinder, so
as to give it a working power of about 7 lb. on the
inch.
 
Here I was at a loss to understand how so much cold water
could be heated so much by so small a quantity in the form of
steam, and applied to Dr Black, and then ϐirst understood what
was called Latent Heat [66].111
In 1765 Watt had a ϐirst inspiration on the way to improve Smeaton’s
engines. On his words “On reϐlecting further, I perceived, that in order
to, make the best use of steam, it was necessary. First, that the cylinder
should be maintained always as hot as the steam which entered it; and,
Secondly, that when the steam was condensed, the water of which it
was composed, and the injection itself, should be cooled down to 100
F, or lower, where that was possible” [66].112 This is one of the ϐirst
statements of Watt’s deϐinition of the perfect engine. This deϐinition was
made more explicit later, in the following quotations:
And laid it as axiom – that to make a perfect steam-
engine[emphasis added] it was necessary that the cylinder should
be always as hot as the steam which entered it; and that the steam
should be cooled down to 100 F [54].113
I have some thoughts of writing a book, the ‘Elements of the
Theory of Steam-engines’, in which, however, shall only give the
enunciation of the perfect engine [emphasis added]. This book
might do me and the scheme good. And would still leave the
world in the dark as to the true construction of the engine.
Something of this kind is necessary, as Smeaton is labouring

hard at the subject; and if I can make no proϐit, I ought not to
lose the honour of my experiments [53].114
A modern reader would be tempted to assimilate Watt’s perfect engine
with Sadi Carnot’s  ideal engine. But this is not a correct comparison.
The perfection of Watt’s engine is based on the avoidance of any loss of
heat; the ideality of Carnot’s engine is based in the optimization of the
use of heat. Though both, Carnot and Watt, assumed heat as a
substance, the former was a physicist and assumed some form of
conservation of energy; the latter was a chemist and had no idea of
thermal energy. In [50], much space has been spent to distance
Watt from thermodynamics (too much may be) and to analyze the
uncritical, Whig, statements of the scientists of the 19th century in their
historical accounts of Watt’s enterprise.
The means of accomplishing a perfect engine did not immediately
present themselves; but early in 1765 it occurred to me, said Watt, that
if a communication were opened between a cylinder containing steam,
and another vessel which was exhausted of air and other ϐluids, the
steam, as an elastic ϐluid, would immediately rush into the empty
vessel, and continue so to do until it had established an equilibrium;
and if that vessel were kept very cool by an injection, or otherwise,
more steam would continue to enter until the whole was condensed.
These is the basic idea of the separate condenser. Of course there were
some practical difϐiculties in implementing the idea, but Watt soon
solved them: “When once the idea of the separate condensation was
started, all these improvements followed as corollaries in quick
succession, so that in the course of one or two days, the invention was
thus far complete in my mind, and I immediately set about an
experiment to verify it practically” [66].115

Fig. 5.7 a Basic version of Watt’s steam engine. b A nearly complete scheme
redrawn from [80], p. 114
Figure 5.7a shows the basic aspects of Watt’s engine whose main
elements were the great boiler w, the cylinder equipped with a steam
jacket (a), the separate condenser h. The steam produced by the boiler
enters the cylinder and lifts the piston (in this phase the valve b is open
and c is closed). As soon as the piston has reached the top of the
cylinder, c opens, b closes and a pump i sucks the steam from the
cylinder. The cylinder goes down because of the atmospheric pressure.
The sucked steam goes to the condenser to return to the liquid state.
The valve b is reopened and the c closed, to begin a new cycle.
Watt initially thought to directly connect the appliances to the piston x,
but then he used the system of Newcomen’s rocker. The rocker also
drives the pump i that sucks the steam from the condenser. Figure 5.7b
shows a more complete scheme.
Watt patented his ideas on separate condenser in 1769, under the
title “A new method of lessening the consumption of steam and fuel in
ϐire engines” [53].116 In 1782 he presented the speciϐications of a new
patent to introduce fundamental improvements to his engine. The title
of the patent was “Speciϐication of patent, March 12th, 1782, for certain
new improvements upon steam or ϐire engines for raising water, and
other mechanical purposes, and certain new pieces of mechanism

applicable to the same” [53].117 In these speciϐications are
comprehended the following improvements:
1.
The use of steam on the expansive principle; together with
various methods or contrivances, (six in number, some of them
comprising various modiϐications), for equalizing the
expansive power.
 
2.
The double-acting engine which basically doubled the power
of the simple machine with the same volume; in which steam
is admitted to press the piston upwards as well as downwards;
the piston being also aided in its ascent as well as in its
descent by a vacuum produced by condensation on the other
side.
 
3.
The double-engine; consisting of two engines, primary and
secondary, of which the steam-vessels and condensers
communicate by pipes and valves, so that they can be worked
either independently or in concert; and make their strokes
either alternately or both together, as may be required.
 
4.
The employment of a toothed rack and sector, instead of
chains which was no longer usable, for guiding the piston-rod
(Watt in 1788 realized a centrifugal regulator valve, the so-
called Watt pendulum, a mechanism that regulated the supply
of steam in order to keep the machine in motion with constant
speed).
 
5.
A rotative engine, or steam-wheel.
 
While from a technological point of view probably the most
important innovation was the introduction of the double acting engine,
from theoretical point of view the most interesting innovation is the
introduction of the expansive principle; and may be Watt would have
agree as he presented this innovation as ϐirst. Watt explained his idea
with reference to Fig. 5.8. The steam entered thorough the opening J
(top right), with a given pressure: “Then I say that the pressure or
elastic power of the said steam on every square inch of the area or

upper side of the piston, will be nearly fourteen pounds [...], and that if
the said power were employed to act upon the piston through the
whole length of its stroke, and to work a pump or pumps, either
immediately by the piston rod beam or great lever, as is usual in steam
engines, it would raise through the whole length of its stroke a column
or columns of water, whose weight should be equal to ten pounds for
each square inch of the area of the piston, besides overcoming all the
frictions and vis inertiae of the water and the parts of the machine or
engine” [53].118

Fig. 5.8 Illustration of the expansive principle.
Redrawn from [53], vol. 3, Plate VIII, Fig. 1
But supposing that the steam from the boiler to be perfectly shut
when the piston has descended to the point K two feet, or one-fourth of
the length of the stroke or motion of the piston, then when the piston
had descended four feet, or one-half of the length of the stroke, the
elastic power of the steam would then be equal to seven pounds on
each square inch of the area of the piston, or one-half of the original

power; and that when the piston had arrived at the point P, the power
of the steam would be one-third of the original power, or four pounds
and two-thirds of a pound on each square inch of the piston’s area
[53].119
More generally the elastic powers, or pressure, of the steam are
represented by the lengths of the horizontal lines or ordinates of the
curve KL of Fig. 5.8, expressed in decimal fractions of the whole original
power. opposite to the said ordinates or horizontal lines. Watt did not
say how he obtained this curve; not experimentally however as a
simple inspection shows that the values volume-pressure respect
exactly the law of Boyle-Mariotte (volume multiplied by pressure is
constant); therefore the curve is theoretical and according to Watt it
has only the purpose to show at large the behavior of steam: “And I also
say, that the sum of all these powers is greater than ϐifty-seven hundred
parts of the original power multiplied by the length of the cylinder;
whereby it appears that only one-fourth of the steam necessary to ϐill
the whole cylinder is employed and that the effect produced is equal to
more than one-half of the effect which would have been produced by
one whole cylinder full of steam, if it had been admitted to enter freely
above the piston during the whole length of its descent” [53].120 In
conclusion, though the total power (the summation of all the powers or
pressure) is halved, the consume of steam is only one fourth, and thus
the efϐiciency of the steam engine is doubled.
Notice that Watt did not explicitly attribute any physical meaning to
the summation of the pressures of the steam, even though a modern
reader would be tempted to read this value as a work, that is the
integral of pressure with respect to volume. The concept of work as
applied to machines was not very diffuse at the time, and even though
the idea of the principle of virtual velocities was well known (and here
concepts comparable with work are used), most probably Watt did not
elaborate it, as Lazare Carnot (1753–1823), a contemporary of
Watt, did with his Essai sur les machines en général published in 1783
[19]. In any way for sure Watt had an embryonic idea of power and
work (modern meaning) and his use of pressure (and volume) to
measure the efϐicacy of the steam machine was partially taken for the
expression of power of water machines, were the effect was measured
by the force impressed to the blames of wheel and their speed [15].

One more improvement Watt introduced in his engine, possibly in
1790 s, was the steam indicator; the precise origin of this invention are
not clear and there are also questions of priority; these aspect
discussed in [50]121 are not relevant here. The indicator of steam is a
device made of a manometer which measures the pressure into the
cylinder of the engine and drives a pen on a paper attached to a
cylinder which is made to rotate proportionally the vertical
displacement of the cylinder. In this way a plot is obtained of pressure
versus volume; now an experimental one differently from that
presented in the speciϐications of 1812 patent, which however was
given for one stroke only.
Even this plot, when limited to a full cycle of the engine, to a modern
reader, suggest that Watt is using the concept of work, as it is well
known that the area of the surface delimited by the close curve
produced by the indicator gives the value of the mechanical work
produced by the steam machine and allows a comparison with the heat
consumed to evaluate the efϐiciency of the engine. To Watt however the
use of the indicator was mainly that of check the correct behavior of the
engine; there is not indeed evidence of a thermodynamic interpretation
in his writings. This notwithstanding the scientists of the 19th century
interpreted the diagram of the indicator as the diagram of energy
[50]122 and made Watt a proto thermodynamic scholar. A question still
debated.
Watt thought about a further important idea to improve the efϐicacy
of his steam engine, but that was not the object of a patent. From his
studies on latent heat Watt knew, by his own experiments and by the
scientiϐic literature of the period, that the latent heat decreased with
the pressure at which the water boils. This is in agreement with
Watt’s law; indeed the temperature for which water boils increases
with the pressure, and thus the latent heat decreases.
That, in proportion as the sensible heat of steam increases, its
latent diminishes, so, in the steam-engine, working with
pressures above 15 lbs. must be more advantageous than below
it; for not only the latent heat is diminished, but the steam is
considerably expanded by the sensible heat, which is easily
added [54].123

This means that a steam engine operating under high pressure is more
efϐicient than an engine operating at the atmospheric pressure as a less
amount of heat, and fuel, is necessary to produce the same amount of
steam because of the lower latent heat. However the technology of time
did not allowed the construction of high pressure engines.
Modern historian has long debated wether or not the scientiϐic
knowledge of physics and chemistry inϐluenced the invention of the
steam engine. This is part of a larger discussion about the inϐluence of
science over technology, especially before the 19th century. Some
comment on this subject has been developed in previous sections; here
I limit to what Watt himself though about this argument.
But this theory [latent heat], though useful in determining the
quantity of injection necessary where the quantity of water
evaporated by the boiler, and used by the cylinder, was known,
and in determining, by the quantity and heat of the hot water
emitted by Newcomen’s engines, the quantity of steam required
to work them, did not lead to the improvements I afterwards
made in the engine [66].124
These improvements proceeded upon the old-established fact, that
steam was condensed by the contact of cold bodies and the later known
one, that water boiled in vacuo at temperature below 100 F, and
consequently that a vacuum could not be obtained unless the cylinder
and its contents were cooled every stroke below that temperature.
Although Dr Black’s theory of latent heat did not suggest my
improvements on the steam-engine, yet the knowledge upon
Various subjects which he was pleased to communicate to me,
and the correct modes of reasoning, and of making experiments
of which he set me the example, certainly conduced very much
to facilitate the progress of my inventions; and I still remember
with respect and gratitude the notice he was pleased to take of
me when I very little merited it, and which continued
throughout his life [66].125
5.2.2.3 A Philosopher

Watt’s image underwent a sensible change after his death. The
scientists of the 19th century (the term scientist can be now used
because introduced in this period), largely underestimated the
scientiϐic contribution by Watt as chemist. Moreover, chemists of the
19th century did not count Watt as one of them; they saw him as an
engineer and the elitist scientists did the same.
However he was considered a very special kind of engineer; he was
characterized as a philosophical engineer—The term was not Watt’s but
used in [48]—because of his deep understanding of natural philosophy.
This is an estimation of Watt by James David Forbes (1809–1868) one
of the founder of the British association for advancement of science
James Watt may be considered as the most distinguished
practical man of science of the last century, or even for a much
longer period. But this is not all. Few men achieve such a
reputation as his without having done more than originate a
great invention for the use and beneϐit of mankind in all ages :
He also taught men to raise the useful arts to a new dignity, to
marry them to genuine, unpretending, and inductive science, to
disparage ignorance and empiricism, and to render the labours
of the workshop subservient to intellectual progress [28].126
Forbes, in the ϐirst chapter of his A review of the progress of
mathematical and physical science in more recent times of 1858 [28],
placed the scientiϐic part of engineering in its due relation to pure
physics and compared the relation between physics and engineering to
that subsisting between mathematics and physics; the one as an
instrument, the other as an end. According to Forbes the masterpieces
of civil engineering: the steam engine, the locomotive engine and the
tubular bridge were only experiments of the powers of nature on a
gigantic scale, and were not to be compassed without inductive skill as
remarkable and as truly philosophic as any effort which the man of
science exerts, save only the origination of great theories, of which one
or two in a hundred years may be considered as a liberal allowance.
That is the activity of engineers consist in the application of science.
The engineer is inferior to pure scientist because the former cannot
create great theories. Forbes continued by asserting that, whilst then

one claims for Watt a place amongst the eminent contributors to the
progress of science in the eighteenth century:
We must reserve a similar one for the Stephensons and the
Brunels of the present: and whilst we are proud of the changes
wrought by the increase of knowledge during the last twenty-
ϐive years on the face of society, we must recollect that these
very changes, and the inventions which have occasioned them,
have stamped perhaps the most characteristic feature its intense
practicalness on the science itself of the same period [28].127
Rankine, like Forbes, presented Watt’s experiments with the model
steam engine as a model of the relations of theory and practice. For
Rankine, who however saw engineering and science more close to each
other than Forbes, Watt became the model of the engineering scientist:
Watt set to work scientiϐically from the ϐirst. He studied the laws
of the pressure of elastic ϐluids, and of the evaporating action of
heat, so far as they were known in his time; he ascertained as
accurately as he could, with the means of experimenting at his
disposal, the expenditure of fuel in evaporating a given quantity
of water, and the relations between the temperature, pressure
and volume of the steam. Then reasoning from the data which he
had thus obtained, he framed a body of principles expressing the
conditions of the efϐicient and economic working of the steam
engine, which are embodied in an invention described by
himself [...], in the speciϐication of his patent of 1769 Miller p.
795 [62].128
So Rankine had Watt moving smoothly from the puzzle of the
Newcomen engine model to experiments, to data, to principles and
thence to speciϐications of the improved engine.
To note that at Watt’s time the role of philosophical engineering was
object of discussion. From this point of view it is interesting to quote a
letter by Robinson, where the latter discussed about the opportunity to
create a doctorate in engineering (sciences).

And this brings another thing in to my head Would not a
description and even a good Model of your Engine be a
becoming present from You to the Museum of the University of
Glasgow. I know that it would be received with great Affection
and Respect. Think of this at your Leisure, as also of a new
doctorate that I am scheming with some hopes of Success, if we
can ϐind a proper Name for it—Doctor of Arts—a Collegium or
Corporation of Scientiϐic Engineers, with three degrees of
Bachelor Master and Doctor—not merely academical honours,
of no more value than the ofϐices of a Mason Lodge, but to have
Civil Consequences. As a Man must have a diploma to entitle him
to a consulting fee, so should an Engineer etc. etc.-I had more to
say-but the Wright has come to close the Box-so farewell [65].129
James Watt engineer was the term Watt used as his identiϐication in the
two scientiϐic papers published in the Philosophical Transactions. The
term was however not fully adequate for the times in England, when
engineer mainly indicated practical men, also involved in trade activity.
Watt was for sure also an engineer in this sense, but not only this.
David Miller, who devoted in-depth researches in the role of Watt as
engineer [48] [50],130 suggests that when Watt, unusually and
deliberately, designated himself engineer in his publications in the
Philosophical Transactions, or elsewhere, did it with a mixture of
deference and deϐiance. He was saying, yes I am an engineer but not a
mere engineer. I am superior to the ‘run of the mill’ engineer because I
am an experimentalist and a philosopher. “This was not an entirely
personal act in the sense that Watt was creating space for the idea of
the philosophical engineer. Yet it was, deeply personal too, going to the
heart of Watt’s sense of identity” [50].131
After the patent of 1769 was extended by Act of parliament in 1775,
and after he in the 1780 s took out a number of patents on the
improvement of the steam engine, Watt was involved with Boulton in a
series of patent trials [48]. Eventually January 1799 the trials ended
with a victory of our ‘heroes’, however only one year before the expiry
of the 1769/1775 patent.
The various patent trials of the 1790 s offer a discussion on the role
of the engineer and of Watt himself. The question was raised: Was the

engineer characterized by extensive hands-on experience, or was it a
combination of such experience with a philosophical understanding? In
presenting the speciϐications for his patent of 1769 on the separate
condenser, Watt decided to relate about ‘principles’ only. By principles
he indented of course not principles of natural philosophy, but simply
the most general idea about his invention. For instance he neither
intended to patent the discovery of the latent heat nor that the fact that
steam condenses when cooled, but only the idea that steam should be
condensed in a separate vessel and not in the cylinder of the engine.
In 1769 William Small, (1734–1775), a Scottish professor of natural
philosophy at the College of William and Mary in Virginia, and Matthew
Boulton wrote to Watt on the speciϐications for the patent of the
separate condenser.
Mr. Boulton and I have considered your paper, and think you
should neither give drawings nor descriptions of any particular
machinery, (if such omissions would be allowed at the ofϐice)
but specify in the clearest manner that you can, that you have
discovered some principles, and thought of new applications of
others, by means of both which joined together, you intend
construct steam engines of much greater powers [...].
As to your principles, we think they should be enunciated (to
use an hard word) as generally as possible, to secure you as
effectually.132
The main idea for presenting only general principles is stressed in the
ϐinal part of the quotation. The speciϐications are in general terms; it
avoids any particular description; it includes no drawings; the purpose
is to avoid piracy being perpetrated by those who would make minor
modiϐications.
This however was not only an expedient to avoid piracy. Watt was
also convinced that the main role of a philosophical engineer is to
produce general ideas which play a similar role of theories in natural
philosophy. He, Small and Boulton, were convinced that any skillful
mechanic may construct the engine with separate condenser, and there
is any oblige to teach any blockhead in the nation to construct masterly

engine [64].133 The philosophical engineer so is justiϐied to patent his
ideas.
5.2.2.4 An Inventor
Watt always gave much importance to his manual skills which he
always exercised giving an imprint of his acumen to the objects
produced. His friend Robinson reported in a his memoir of the way in
which Watt experimented with the construction of an organ in the ϐirst
1760, although he could not distinguish one note from another.
He began by building a very small one for his intimate friend Dr.
Black, which is now in my possession. In doing this, a thousand
things occurred to him which no organ—builder ever dreamed
of—nice indicators of the strength of the blast, regulators of
it,&c.&c. He began to the great one. He then began to study the
philosophical theory of music. Fortunately for me, no book was
at hand but the most reϐined of all, and the only one that can be
said to contain, any theory at all,‘Smith’s Harmonics. Before Mr.
Watt had half ϐinished this organ, he and I were completely
masters of that most reϐined and beautiful theory of the beats of
imperfect consonances [53].134
Another example of Watt’s skill and curiosity is provided by the
construction of a device to facilitate perspective drawings. Still another
example is the construction of a micrometer, or in modern term
something like a tachometer, useful for topographic surveys; they are
described both in [53]135 and [54].
The practical spirit of Watt made possible a civil engineering career
that could guarantee him to keep the family since he had married his
cousin Miss Miller, occurred in 1764. In the last year of 1760 and the
beginning of 1770 he carried out as an engineer the survey of some
canals. But the last and most remarkable of his civil engineering works
was probably that for which he was called on, also in 1773, to perform
for his employers the Commissioners of Police; viz. a survey and
estimate for a navigable canal, to pass through the chain of rivers and

lakes in the wild and remote tract of country between Fort-William and
Inverness [53].136
Watt patented many inventions. Below a list of the speciϐications he
presented for a patent:
1.
January 5th, 1769, for a new method of lessening the
consumption of steam and fuel in ϐire engines.
 
2.
February 14th, 1780, for a new method of copying letters and
other writings expeditiously.
 
3.
October 25th, 1781, for certain new methods of applying the
vibrating or reciprocating motion of steam or ϐire engines, to
produce a continued rotative or circular motion round an axis
or centre, and thereby to give motion to the wheels of mills or
other machines
 
4.
March 12th, 1782, for certain new improvements upon steam
or ϐire engines for raising water, and other mechanical
purposes, and certain new pieces of mechanism applicable to
the same.
 
5.
April 28th, 1784, for certain new improvements upon ϐire and
steam engines, and upon machines worked or moved by the
same.
 
6.
June 14th, 1785, for certain newly improved methods of
constructing furnaces or ϐire-places for heating, boiling, or
evaporating of water and other liquids which are applicable to
steam engines and other purposes; and also for heating,
melting, and smelting of metals and their ores, whereby
greater effects are produced from the fuel, and the smoke is in
a great measure prevented or consumed.
 
Of these patent I will comment only brieϐly some of them, while for
its relevance and the relative shortness I will report in full the ϐirst, that
of 1769, related to the invention of the separate condenser:

SPECIFICATION OF PATENT, JANUARY 5th, 1769, FOR A NEW
METHOD OF LESSENING THE CONSUMPTION OF STEAM AND
FUEL IN FIRE ENGINES.
To all to whom these presents shall come, I, James Watt, of
Glasgow, in Scotland, Merchant, send greeting.
Whereas His Most Excellent Majesty King George the Third,
by his Letters Patent, under the Great Seal of Great Britain,
bearing date the ϐifth day of January, in the ninth year of his said
Majesty’s reign, did give and grant unto me, the said James
Watt, his special licence, full power, sole privilege and authority,
that I, the said James Watt, my executors, administrators, and
assigns, should, and lawfully might, during the term of years
therein expressed, use, exercise, and vend throughout that part
of his Majesty’s Kingdom of Great Britain called England, the
Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, and also
in his Majesty’s Colonies and Plantations abroad, my new
invented “Method of Lessening” the Consumption of Steam and
Fuel in “Fire Engines”, in which said recited Letters Patent is
contained a Proviso, obliging me, the said James Watt, by writing
under my hand and seal, to cause a particular description of the
nature of the said invention to be inrolled in his Majesty’s High
Court of Chancery, within four calendar months after the date of
the said recited Letters Patent, as in and by the said Letters
Patent and the Statute in that behalf made, relation being
thereunto respectively had, may more at large appear.
Now know ye, that in compliance with the said Proviso, and
in pursuance of the said Statute, I, the said James Watt, do
hereby declare that the following is a particular description of
the nature of my said invention and the manner in which the
same is to be performed (that is to say): my Method of lessening
the consumption of steam, and consequently fuel, in ϐire engines,
consists of the following principles:
First, that vessel in which the powers of steam are to be
employed to work the engine, which is called the Cylinder
in common ϐire engines, and which I call the Steam Vessel,
must, during the whole time the engine is at work, be kept
as hot as the steam that enters it; ϐirst, by inclosing it in a

case of wood, or any other materials that transmit heat
slowly; secondly, by surrounding it with steam or other
heated bodies ; and, thirdly, by suffering neither water nor
any other substance colder than the steam to enter or touch
it during that time.
Secondly, in Engines that are to be worked wholly or
partially by condensation of steam, the steam is to be
condensed in vessels distinct from the steam vessels or
cylinders, although occasionally communicating with them:
these vessels I call Condensers; and, whilst the engines are
working, these condensers ought at least to be kept as cold
as the air in the neighbourhod of the engines, by application
of water, or other cold bodies.
Thirdly, whatever air, or other elastic vapour, is not
condensed by the cold of the condenser, and may impede
the working of the engine, is to be drawn out of the steam
vessels or condensers by means of pumps, wrought by the
engines them selves, or otherwise.
Fourthly, I intend in many cases to employ the expansive
force of steam to press on the pistons, or whatever may be
used instead of them, in the same manner as the pressure of
the atmosphere is now employed in common ϐire engines :
in cases where cold water cannot be had in plenty, the
engines may be wrought by this force of steam only, by
discharging the steam into the open air after it has done its
ofϐice.
Fifthly, where motions round an axis are required, I make
the steam vessels in form of hollow rings, or circular
channels, with proper inlets and outlets for the steam,
mounted on horizontal axles, like the wheels of a water-
mill; within them are placed a number of valves, that suffer
any body to go round the channel in one direction only: in
these steam vessels are placed weights, so ϐitted to them as
entirely to ϐill up a part or portion of their channels, yet
rendered capable of moving freely in them by the means
hereinafter mentioned or speciϐied. When the steam is
admitted in these engines, between these weights and the

valves, it acts equally on both, so as to raise the weight to
one side of the wheel, and by the re-action on the valves
successively, to give a circular motion to the wheel, the
valves opening in the direction in which the weights are
pressed, but not in the contrary: as the steam vessel moves
round, it is supplied with steam from the boiler, and that
which has performed its ofϐice may either be discharged by
means of condensers, or into the open air.137
Sixthly, I intend, in some cases, to apply a degree of cold not
capable of reducing the steam.
Lastly, instead of using water to render the piston, or other
parts of the engines, air and steam-tight, I employ oils, wax,
resinous bodies, fat of animals, quicksilver, and other
metals, in their ϐluid state.
In Witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand and seal
this twenty-ϐifth day of April, in the year of our Lord one
thousand seven hundred and sixty-nine.
                                                                 James Watt. 
Sealed and delivered in the presence of
                                                  Coll. Wilkie.
                                                  Geo. Jardine.
                                                  John Roebuck.
Be it remembered, that the said James Watt doth not intend
that anything in the Fourth Article shall be understood to extend
to any engine where the water to be raised enters the steam
vessel itself, or any vessel having an open communication with
it.138
                                                                 James Watt. 
                                      Witnesses. Coll. Wilkie.
                                                Geo. Jardine [53].139
The patent of 1780, for a new method of copying letters and other
writings expeditiously, is particularly interesting to document
Watt’s versatility. The method anticipated the modern concept of
photocopier by making practicable an approach already known. In
substance it consists of superposing to the sheet to be copied a pieces
of thin paper of the same dimension “which contain no size, or glue, or

gummy or mucilaginous matter, or which at least does not contain so
much size or other matter as would make it ϐit for being written upon”
[53].140 This thin paper should be moisten or wet with water, or other
liquid, by means of a sponge or brush, or otherwise. Having moistened
or wet the thin paper, it should be located between two thick unsized
spongy papers, or between two cloths, or other substances capable of
absorbing the superϐluous moisture from the thin paper. Then the
original sheet and the thin paper are pressed together, for example by
means of a rolling press. Some cautions should be taken; ϐirst the
original text should be written with inks that allows to be wet whiteout
danger; secondly the liquor with which to wet the thins paper should
have been prepared with appropriate recipe. In any case the copying
machine worked very well and in the great establishment at Soho, there
was the practice to retain copies of the drawings of all the engines sent
out from that manufactory.
In the patent of 1781, Watt presented ϐive methods to transform the
alternating motion of the piston in to a circular one. The application for
this patent, for new methods of producing a rotative motion from a
reciprocating one in the steam-engine, and thereby giving motion to
mill-work, was rendered necessary on the one hand by the difϐiculties
experienced in working the steam-wheels such as described in the
patent speciϐication of 1769; on the other hand by Mr. Watt having been
unfairly anticipated by Matthew Wasbrough (1753–1781), in patenting
the crank to produce rotatory motion. Five different methods are
enumerated, by any one of which the proposed end might be attained
without the intervention of a crank; all of them admitting, as mentioned
in the speciϐication, of many varieties. The last one, known as sun and
planet gear wheels, was the one most used by Watt, and it is described
below. Notice that though the invention apparently did not required a
deep knowledge of mathematics and kinematics, it required some; or at
least the knowledge on the literature about gears. The way the system
works is made clear from Fig. 5.9. The alternating motion transmitted
by the thread x, is transformed into a rotatory motion through the gear
b (the planet) and a (the sun).

Fig. 5.9 Sun and planet gear system.
Redrawn from [80], Fig. 29, p. 136
The content of the patent of 1782, related to the double action
engine, has already be discussed. The last Watt’s patent dates 1784, and
contains many improvements. According to his biographer Muirhead
“this speciϐication may probably be viewed as second in importance to
none of those prepared by Mr. Watt subsequent to that of the Separate
Condenser in 1769” [53].141 Besides many improvements now of minor
consequence, such balancing of pump-rods, new steam-wheels,
communication of motion from the same engine to two separate
primary axes, and apparatus for opening the regulating valves with
rapidity, it contains various methods of converting a circular or angular
motion into a perpendicular or rectilineal motion—one of those
methods being the well-known and much-admired parallel motion; a
method of working a tilt-hammer for forging iron, making steel,&c, by

steam—and the application of the steam-engine to give motion to
wheel carriages for carrying persons or goods [53].142
Watt was particularly proud of the invention of the parallel motion
that served to rectify the motion along an arc of circle of the extremity
of his rockets beam; the solution with the chain was no longer
practicable for his double action engines the chain; the solution with
the chain was no longer practicable for his double action engines. Here
is what Watt wrote to his son James in 10th November 1808:
The idea originated in this manner. On ϐinding double chains, or
racks and sectors, very inconvenient for communicating the
motion of the piston-rod to the angular motion of the working-
beam, I set to work to try if I could not contrive some means of
performing the same from motions turning upon centres, and
after some time it occurred to me that AB, CD, being two equal
radii revolving on the centres B and C, and connected together
by a rod AD, in moving through arches of certain lengths, the
variations from the straight line would be nearly equal and
opposite, and that the point E would describe a line nearly
straight, and that if for convenience the radius CD was only half
of AB, by moving the point E nearer to D, the same would take
place, and from this the construction, afterwards called the
parallel motion, was derived. Though I am not over anxious after
fame, yet I am more proud of the parallel motion than of any
other” mechanical invention I have ever made [emphasis added]
[54].143
Fig. 5.10 Watt’s drawing of parallel motion,
redrawn from [54], vol. 3, p. 89

In Fig. 5.10, the line CD represents the rocket beam, which rotates
around C in its oscillating motion B is a ϐixed point and AB a thread.
Point E it is know today to describe a lemniscate, but because the small
angular excursion of CD it approximates a straight line.
Actually what is described in Fig. 5.10 is more exactly what is
known as Watt linkage. Indeed the use of the scheme of Fig. 5.10 would
have made the engine machine an awkward shape, with B a long way
from the end of the rocket beam. To avoid this, Watt added the
parallelogram linkage BADGH to form a pantograph as shown in
Fig. 5.11, and this is properly what is known as Watt parallel motion.
This system guarantees that E always lies on a straight line and that the
motion of H, the point to which the piston rod HI is attached, is a
magniϐied version of the motion of E. The addition of the pantograph
made the mechanism shorter and so the building containing the engine
could be smaller. As already noted, the path of E is not a perfect straight
line, but merely an approximation. Watt’s design produced a deviation
of about one part in 4000 from a straight line. Later, in the 19th century,
perfect straight-line linkages were invented, beginning with the
Peaucellier-Lipkin linkage of 1864 [81]; however Watt’s mechanism of
parallel motion in many cases should be preferred because of its
greater simplicity.
Fig. 5.11 Watt’s  improved version of parallel motion
5.3 Quotations

E.1 L’emploi d’ingénieur exige beaucoup d’étude, de talens, de
capacite & de génie. Les sciences fondamentales de cet état
sont l’Arithmétique, la Géométrie, la Méchanique &
l’Hydraulique. Un ingénieur doit avoir quelqu’usage du
dessein. La physique lui est nécessaire pour juger de la
nature des matériaux qu’on emploie dans les bâtimens, de
celle des eaux, & des différentes qualités de l’air des lieux
qu’on veut fortiϐier. Il est très-utile qu’il ait des connoissances
générales & particulieres de l’Architecture civile, pour la
construction des bâtimens militaires, comme casernes,
magazins, arsenaux, h’pitaux, logemens de l’état-major,&c.
dont les ingénieurs sont ordinairement chargés. M. Frézin
recommande aux ingénieurs de s’appliquer à la coupe des
pierres.
 
E.2
Mais nous reprenons insensiblement le dessus, & l’on peut
dire qu’aux yeux mêmes de la multitude, les bornes de cette
prétendue magie naturelle se rétrécissent tous les jours;
parce qu’éclairés du ϐlambeau de la Philosophie, nous faisons
tous les jours d’heureuses découvertes dans les secrets de la
nature, & que de bons systèmes soutenus par une multitude
de belles expériences annoncent àl’humanité dequoi elle
peutêtre capable par elle-même & sans magie. Ainsi la
boussole, les thélescopes, les microscopes,&c. & de nos jours,
les polypes, l’électricité; dans la Chimie, dans la Méchanique
& la Statique, les découvertes les plus belles & les plus utiles,
vont immortaliser notre siecle; & si l’Europe retomboit
jamais dans la barbarie dont elle est enϐin sortie, nous
passerons chez de barbares successeurs pour autant de
magiciens.
 
References
1.
Agrippa HC (1676) The vanity of arts and sciences. Speed, London
2.
Arago FJD (1839) EƵ loge historique de James Watt. Firmin, Paris
3.
Aristotle (2018) Analytica posteriora. The internet Classical Archive, Translated into
English by Mure GRG

4.
Aristotle (2018) Ethica nichomachea. The internet Classical Archive, Translated into
English by Ross WD
5.
Aristotle (2018) Metaphysica. The internet Classical Archive, Translated into English by
Ross WD
6.
Auyang SY (2004) Engineering-An endless frontier. Harvard University Press,
Cambridge
7.
Belhoste B (1989) Les origines de l’EƵ cole polytechnique. Des anciennes écoles
d’ingénieurs àl’EƵ cole centrale des travaux publics. Histoire de l’EƵ ducation 42:13–53
8.
Belhoste B (2003) La formation d’une technocratie. L’EƱ cole polytechnique et ses élèves
de la révolution au second empire, Belin, Paris
9.
Bernoulli J (1727) Theoremata selecta pro conservatione virium vivarum
demonstranda et esperimenta conϐirmanda. In: Bernoulli J (ed) Opera omnia (1742, 4
vol), vol. 3, Bousquet, Lausanne and Geneva, pp. 124–130
10. Bo-cong L (2010) The rise of philosophy of engineering in the East and the West. In:
Van de Poel I, Goldberg DE (eds) Philosophy of engineering. An emerging agenda.
Springer, Dordrecth, pp 31–40
11. Böhme G, van de Daele W, Krohn W (1976) Finalization in science. Soc Sci Inf 15:307–
330
12. Boon M (2011) In defense of engineering sciences: On the epistemological relations
between science and technology. Thechné: Research in Philosophy and Technology
15(1):49–71
13. Bramwell FJ (1885–1900) James W (1736–1819). Dictionary of National Biography
60:51–62
14. Bunge M (1966) Technology as applied science. Technol Cult 7(3):329–347
15. Capecchi D (2013) Over and undershot waterwheels in the 18th century. Science-
technology controversy. Adv Hist Stud 2(3):131–139
16. Capecchi D (2014) The problem of motion of bodies. Springer, Cham
[zbMATH]
17. Capecchi D (2018) The path to post-Galilean epistemology. Springer, Cham
[zbMATH]
18. Capecchi D, Ruta G (2015) Strength of materials and theory of elasticity in 19th century
Italy. Springer, Dordrecht
[zbMATH]
19. Carnot L (1786) Essai sur les machines en général. de Defay, Dijon
20.
Channell DF (2009) The emergence of the engineering sciences: An historical analysis.

In: Meijers A (ed) Philosophy of technology and engineering sciences, vol 9. Elsevier,
Amsterdam, pp 117–154
21. d’Alembert J (1743) Traité de dynamique. David, Paris
22. Della Porta GB (1677) Della magia naturale del sig. Gio. Battista Della Porta linceo
napolitano. Libri 20 (2nd edn). Bulifon, Naples
23. Desaguliers JT (1730) An attempt to solve the phaenomenon of the rise of vapours,
formation of clouds and descent of rain. Philos Trans R Soc Lond 36(407):6–22
24. Desaguliers JT (1734–1744) A course of experimental philosophy (2 vol). Longman et
als, London
25. Donovan A (1975) Philosophical chemistry in the Scottish Enlightement. Edinburgh
University, Edinburgh
26. Encyclopédie (1751–1772) Encyclopédie ou dictionnaire raisonné des sciences, des
arts et des métiers, par une societè de gens de lettres (17 vols). Briasson-David-Le
Breton-Durand, Paris
27. Fioravanti L (1571) Il reggimento della peste. Sessa, Venice
28. Forbes JD (1858) A review of the progress of mathematical and physical science in
more recent times, and particularly between the years 1775 and 1850. Black, Edinburgh
29. Galen (1819–1833) Claudii Galeni opera omnia (20 vol). In: Kühn CG (ed) Ofϐicina
Libraria Cnoclochii, Lipsia
30. Galloway E (1831) History and progress of the steam engine. Kelly, London
31. Gille B (1964) Les ingénieur de la Renaissance. Hermann, Paris
32. Grafton A (2002) Magic and technology in early modern Europe. Smithsonian
Institution Libraries, Washington
33. Hall AR (1961) Engineering and the scientiϐic revolution. Technol Cult 2(4):333–341
34. van Helmont JB (1652) Ortus medicinae id est initia physicae inaudita. Elsevier,
Amsterdam
35. Houkes W (2009) The nature of technological knowledge. In: Meijers A (ed)
Philosophy of technology and engineering sciences, vol 9. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp 309–
350
36. Jones R (1970) The ‘plain story’ of James Watt: the Wilkins lecture 1969. Notes Records
R Soc Lond 2(2):194–220
37. Khattab A (2109) Institution of civil engineers ICE, history of the institution of civil
engineers.
https://www.designingbuildings.co.uk/wiki/Institution_of_Civil_Engineers_ICE
38.

Knowles E (2019) Engineering timelines. John Smeaton edited by Jane Joyce.
http://www.engineering-timelines.com/who/Smeaton_J/smeatonJohn.asp
39. Krohn W, Schäfer W (1983) Agricultural chemistry. The origin and structure of a
ϐinalized science. In: Schäfer W (ed) Finalization in science. The social orientation of
scientiϐic progress. Springer, Dordrecht, pp 17–52
40. Kuhn T (1962) The structure of scientiϐic revolution. The University of Chicago Press,
Chicago
41. Lagrange JL (1763) Recherches sur la libration de la lune. In: Serret JA, [Darboux G]
(1867–1892) (ed) Oeuvres de Lagrange (14 vol), vol 6, Gauthier-Villars, Paris, pp 5–61
42. Latour B (1987) Science in action. How to follow scientists and engineers through
society. Open University Press, Cambridge
43. Lelas S (1993) Science as technology. Br J Philos Sci 44(3):423–442
44. Maclaurin C (1748) An account of Sir Isaac Newton’s philosophical discoveries: In four
books. Murdoch, London
45. Mammola S (2012) La ragione e l’incertezza. Franco Angeli, Milan
46. Meijers A (2009) General introduction. In: Meijers A (ed) Philosophy of technology and
engineering sciences, vol 9. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp 1–22
47. Miller DP (2004) True myths: James Watt’s kettle, his condenser, and his chemistry. Hist
Sci 42:333–360
48. Miller DP (2006) Watt in court: specifying steam engines and classifying engineers in
the patent trials of the 1790s. Hist Technol 27:43–76
49. Miller DP (2016a) Discovering water: James Watt, Henry Cavendish and the nineteenth-
century ‘water controversy’. Routhledge, London
50. Miller DP (2016b) James Watt, chemist: Understanding the origins of the steam age.
University of Pittsburgh, London
51. Mitcham C (1994) Thinking through technology. The path between engineering and
philosophy. The University of Chicago, Chicago
52. Mitcham C, Schatzberg E (2009) Deϐining technology and the engineering sciences. In:
Meijers A (ed) Philosophy of technology and engineering sciences, vol 9. Elsevier,
Amsterdam, pp 27–64
53. Muirhead JP (1854) The origin and progress of the mechanical invention of James Watt
(3 vols). Murray, London
54. Muirhead JP (1858) The life of James Watt. Murray, London
55. Musson A, Robinson E (1969) Science and technology in the industrial revolution.
University Press of Manchester, Manchester

56. Newton I (1726) Philosophia naturalis principia mathematica, 3rd edn. Innys, London
57. Parent A (1700) Elemens de mechanique et de physique. Ou l’on donne
geometriquement les principes du choc & des equilibres entre toutes sortes de corps.
Delaulne, Paris
58. Parent A (1704) Sur la plus grande perfection possible des machines. Mémoires de
l’Académie Royale des Sciences de Paris, pp 323–338
59. Parent A (1713) Analyse de la plus avantageuse disposition de l’axe des moulins à vent
verticaux à l’égard du cours du vent. In: Parent A (ed) Essais et recherches de
mathématique et de physique (2 vol), de Nully, Paris, pp 530–536
60. Radder H (2009) Science, technology and the science-technology relationship. In:
Meijers A (ed) Philosophy of technology and engineering sciences, vol 9. Elsevier,
Amsterdam, pp 65–92
61. Rankine WM (1856) Introductory lecture on the harmony of theory and practice in
mechanics. Grifϐin and company, London
62. Rankine WM (1859) A manual of the steam engine and other prime movers. Grifϐin and
company, London
63. Reynolds TS (1979) Scientiϐic inϐluences on technology: the case of the overshot
waterwheel, 1752–1754. Technol Cult 20(2):270–295
64. Robinson E (1972) James Watt and the law of patents. Technol Cult 13(2):115–139
65. Robinson E, McKie D (1970) Partners in science. Letters of James Watt and Joseph
Black. Harvard University, Cambridge
66. Robinson J (1822) A system of mechanical philosophy (4 vols). Murray, Edinburgh
67. Schäfer W (ed) (1983) Finalization in science. The social orientation of scientiϐic
progress. Springer, Dordrecht
68. Scott WL (1970) The conϐlict between atomism and conservation theory, 1644–1860.
Elsevier, New York
69. Shepherd DG (1990) Historical development of the windmill. Technical Report 4337,
NASA
70. Singer C, Holmyard E, Hall A, Williams TI (1954–1978) A history of technology (5 vol).
Clarendon Press, Oxford
71. Smeaton J (1753) Description of a new pyrometer, with a table of experiments made
therewith. Philos Trans R Soc Lond 48:598–613
72. Smeaton J (1759) An experimental enquiry concerning the natural powers of water and
wind to turn mills, and other machines, depending on a circular motion. Philos Trans R
Soc Lond 51:100–174
73.

Smeaton J (1768) Description of a new method of observing the heavenly bodies out of
the meridian. Philos Trans R Soc Lond 58:170–173
74. Smeaton J (1768b) A discourse concerning the menstrual parallax, arising from the
mutual gravitation of the earth and moon; it’s inϐluence on the observations of the sun
and planets; with a method of observing it. Philos Trans R Soc Lond 58:156–169
75. Smeaton J (1776) An experimental examination of the quantity and proportion of
mechanic power necessary to be employed in giving different degrees of velocity to
heavy bodies from a state of rest. Philos Trans R Soc Lond 66:450–475
76. Smeaton J (1782) New fundamental experiments upon the collision of bodies. Philos
Trans R Soc Lond 72:337–354
77. Smeaton J (1809) New fundamental experiments on the collision of bodies. In: Hutton
C, Shaw G, Pearson R (eds) The Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of
London, from their commencement, in 1665, to the year 1800; abridged, with notes and
biographic illustrations (18vols), vol 15. Baldwin, London, pp 295–305
78. Smeaton J (1812) Reports of the late John Smeaton: made on various occasions, in the
course of his employment as a civil engineer (3 vols). Longmans, London
79. Stewart R (2017) John Smeaton and the ϐire engine: 1765–1785. Int J Hist Eng Technol
87(2):190–225
80. Stuart R (1824) A descriptive history of the steam engine. Knight, John and Lacey,
Henry, London
81. Taimina D (2008) Geometry and motion links mathematics and engineering in
collections of 19th century kinematic models and their digital representation. In:
Symposium on the occasion of the 100th anniversary of ICMI, Rome
82. Truesdell CA (1976) History of classical mechanics. Die Naturwissenschaften 63: Part I
53–62, Part II 119–130
83. VanDyck M, Vermeir K (2014) Varieties of wonder: John Wilkins’ mathematical magic
and the perpetuity of invention. Hist Math 41(4):463–489
[MathSciNet][zbMATH]
84. Watt J (1784) Sequel to the thoughts on the constituent parts of water and
dephlogisticated air. Philos Trans R Soc Lond 74:354–357
85. Watt J (1784) Thoughts on the constituent parts of water and of dephlogisticated air;
with an account of some experiments on that subject. Philos Trans R Soc Lond 74:329–
353
86. Watt J (2109) Industrial revolution: a documentary history. Series three. The papers of
James Watt and his family, Birmingham Central Library.
http://www.ampltd.co.uk/collections_az/IndRev-3-2/description.aspx
87. Wilkins J (1680) Mathematicall magick, or, the wonders that may be performed by
mechanical geometry in two books (2nd edn). Gellibrand, London

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
88. Wisniak J (2004) The nature and composition of water. J Chem Techn 11(May):434–
444
89. Wood DH (1999) Smeaton laws? Wind Eng 23(6):373–375
Footnotes
p. 4.
 
pp. 35–36.
 
In the classical Latin, ingenium means, talent and genius. This is a possible origin for the Italian
ingegnere. For example, Leonardo da Vinci referred to himself as an (ingegnero). In the Middle
Ages, c. 1292, the term was used to indicate devices or machines, from this the English engine. In
the classical Latin device is translated as machina.
 
Article Ingénieur
 
p. 68.
 
p. 329.
 
p. 34.
 
p. 46.
 
pp. 131–132.
 
Part II, pp. 127–128.
 

11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
p. 75.
 
p. 83.
 
p. 72.
 
p. 81.
 
p. 442.
 
p. 131.
 
p. 16.
 
1139b, Book 6, part 3.
 
1140a, Book 6, part 4.
 
71b, Book1, part 2.
 
995a, Book 2, part 3.
 
p. 53.
 
p. 54.
 
p. 11.

25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
 
p. 113.
 
p. 472.
 
pp. 473–476.
 
To the reader.
 
p. 82.
 
p. 116.
 
p. 475.
 
Article: Magie. Translation by Steve Harris
 
p.132.
 
p. 122.
 
p. 139.
 
p. 142, note 17.
 
p. 8v.

38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
 
p. 164.
 
p. 169.
 
Vol. 17/2, p. 353.
 
p. 126.
 
Vol. 1, pp. 5–6.
 
p. 101.
 
pp. 423–428.
 
p. 115.
 
p. 333.
 
p.130.
 
p. 291.
 
p. 29.
 
p. 530. Here Parent referred to [57], pp. 300–302.

51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
 
p. 176.
 
pp. 155, 160.
 
p. 174.
 
p. 36, p. 428..
 
Vol. 2, preface, p, VII. A similar statement can be found in the Discours préliminaire to the
Traitéde dynamique, written by d’Alembert one year before [21], p. XXIII.
 
pp. 286–289.
 
p. 458.
 
pp. 458–459.
 
p. 466.
 
p. 468.
 
pp. 461–462.
 
p. 473.
 
p. 24.

64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
 
p. 338.
 
p. 107.
 
pp. 147–148, p. 299.
 
p. 340.
 
p. 343.
 
p. 343.
 
p. 352.
 
p. 352.
 
p. 352.
 
pp. 345–348.
 
p. 202.
 
Vol. II.
 
Vol. III.

77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
 
“I have called this spirit gas, it being scarcely distinguishable from the Chaos of the ancients” p.
59.
 
p. 86.
 
pp. 86–87.
 
p. 330.
 
p. 330.
 
p. 332.
 
p. 332.
 
p. 332.
 
p. 104.
 
pp. 33.
 
pp. 335–336.
 
p. 354.
 
pp. 80–87.

90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
101
102
 
p. 3.
 
p. 4.
 
pp. 4–5.
 
pp. 62–72.
 
p. 4.
 
p. 68.
 
Vol. 2.
 
pp. 83–91.
 
Chap. 8.
 
Vol. 2, p. 113.
 
Vol. 2, p. 113.
 
Vol. 2, p. 113.
 
p. 256.

103
104
105
106
107
108
109
110
111
112
113
114
115
 
Vol. 2, p. 114.
 
p. 435.
 
Vol. 2, p. 114.
 
p. 16.
 
Vol. 2, p. 115.
 
Vol. 2, p. 116.
 
To justify previous relation see [64], pp. 480–481.
 
p. 472.
 
Vol. 2, pp. VII–VIII.
 
Vol. 2, p. 116.
 
p. 87.
 
Vol. 2, p. 59.
 
Vol. 2, p. 117.

116
117
118
119
120
121
122
123
124
125
126
127
128
 
Vol. 3, p. 10.
 
Vol. 3, p. 55.
 
Vol. 3. p. 62.
 
Vol. 3. p. 62.
 
Vol.3, p. 63.
 
Chapter 6.
 
p. 153.
 
p. 166. Letter to John Roebuck  (1718-1794), 23rd Aug. 1765.
 
Vol. 2, p. VIII.
 
Vol. 2, p. VIII.
 
p. 67.
 
p. 3.
 
p. XXII.

129
130
131
132
133
134
135
136
137
138
139
140
 
p. 273, letter of Robinson to Watt of M ay 3rd 1797.
 
Chapter 3.
 
p. 61.
 
From Watt’s Birmingham central library archive as reported in [64] pp. 119–120.
 
p. 126.
 
Vol. 1, pp. CVIII–CIX.
 
Vol. 1.
 
Vol. 1, p. CXXIV.
 
This device, a rotatory engine, is known as steam-wheels; for its description and comments
see [30], pp. 76–78.
 
This comment was added by Watt, to prevent it being supposed that he had any intention of
claiming the principle of Savery’s engine, in which the water was raised by the elastic force of
steam, but without the intervention of a piston.
 
Vol. 3, pp. 10–15.
 
Vol. 3, p. 30.

141
142
143
 
Vol. 3, p. 88.
 
Vol. 3, p. 88.
 
Vol. 3, p. 89.
 

Index
A
Adams John
Aepinus Ulrich Theodor
Agrippa Cornelius Heinric
Aguilon François
Alberti Leon Battista
Algarotti Francesco
Allamand Jean Nicolas Sébastien
Alpruni Francesco Antonio
Amontons Guillaume
Anderson John
Ango Pierre
Antinori Vincenzio
Arago François Jean Dominique
Archimedes
Ardighelli Maria Angela
Aristotle
B
Bacon Francis
Bacon Roger
Baker Henry
Baliani Giovanni Battista
Balle William
Bammacaro Niccoló
Barbaro Daniele
Barletti Carlo Battista
Barrow Isaac
Bassi Laura
Beccari Giacomo Bartolomeo
Beccaria Giambattista
Becher Joachim
Beckford William
Beeckman Isaac

Beeldsnyder François Gerardzoon
Beer August
Belidor Bernard Forest de
Bellucci Giovanni Battista
Berkeley George
Bernoulli Daniel
Bernoulli Jakob
Bernoulli Johann
Bernoulli Johann II
Berthollet Claude Louis
Bézout EƵtienne
Biancani Giuseppe
Bianchi Giovanbattista
Birch Thomas
Biringuccio Vannuccio
Black Joseph
Black William
Boerhaave Herman
Borda Jean Charles de
Borelli Giovanni Alfonso
Boscovich Ruggero Giuseppe
Bose Georg Matthias
Bossut Charles
Bouguer Pierre
Boulton Matthew
Boyle Robert
Brouncker William
Browning John
Brunelleschi Filippo
Buffon Georges-Louis Leclerc
C
Cabeo Niccoló
Cajori Glorian
Calandrini Jean Louis
Camus Charles EƵtienne Louis
Canton John

Carnot Lazare
Carnot Sadi
Cassini Giovanni Domenico
Cassirer Ernst
Castigliano Alberto
Cauchy Augustin
Cavalieri Bonaventura Francesco
Cavallo Tiberio
Cavendish Charles
Cawley John
Celsius Anders
Chirac Pierre
Cigna Gianfrancesco
Clairaut Alexis
Clark Samuel
Clerk Maxwell James
Cohen Ierome Bernard
Collison Peter
Condillac EƵtienne Bonnot de
Conti Giovan Stefano
Cotes Roger
Coulomb Charles Augustin de
Courtivron Gaspard Le Compasseur de
Crofton Morgan
Cromwell Mortimer
Cromwell Oliver
Cunaeus Andrea
D
D'Alembert Jean Baptiste Le Rond
Dalibard Thomas-François
Dallowe Timoty
Da Monte Giovanni Battista
Darwin Charles
Dati Carlo
Da Vinci Leonardo
Dear Peter

Delaval Edward
D'Eliçagaray Bernard Renau
Della Porta Giovanni Battista
Della Torre Giovanni Maria
Deparcieux Antoine
Desaguliers John Theophilus
Descartes René
Di Giorgio Martini Francesco
Diderot Denise
Dollond John
Dufay Charles François de Cisternay
E
Einstein Albert
Ellicott John
Euler Johann Albrecht
Euler Leonhard
Evelyn John
F
Fabri Honoré
Fahrenheit Gabriel Daniel
Falconieri Ottavio
Favaro Antonio
Fermat Pierre de
Fioravanti Leonardo
Firmian Carlo Gottardo
Flamsteed John
Foncenex Daviet de
Fontana Felice
Fontana Gregorio
Fontenelle Bernard le Bovier de
Forbes David James
Franklin Benjamin
Frederick II of Prussia
Fresnel Augustin-Jean
Frisi Paolo

G
Galen of Pergamon
Galilei Galileo
Galvani Luigi
Garro Francesco Antonio
Gassendi Pierre
Gauss Carl Friedrich
Genovesi Antonio
Gerardini Niccolò
Gilbert Williams
Godfrey John
Godin Louis
Golborne John
Grandi Guido
Gravesande Willem Jacob's
Gray Stephen
Green George
Gregory David
Grimaldi Francesco Maria
Grundy John
Guericke Otto von
H
Habermass Jürgen
Hales Stephen
Hamberger George Edward
Hankins Thomas
Harcourt William Vernon
Harrison John
Hauksbee Francis
Heidegger Martin
Henshall Hug
Hermann Jakob
Herschell William
Hippocrates of Kos
Hobbes Thomas
Hooke Robert

Hôpital Guillaume François Antoine de Sainte Mesme de l'
Huber Jakob Johann
Hume David
Hutton James
Huygens Christiaan
Huygens Constantijn
J
Jacquier François
K
Kant Immanuel
Kästner Abraham
Keill John
Kepler Johann
King James
Kleist Ewald Jürgen Georg von
König Samuel
Koyré Alexandre
Kramer Gabriel
Krüger Johann Gottlob
Kuhn Thomas
L
La Condamine Charles Marie de
Lagrange Giuseppe Lodovico
La Hire Philippe de
Lambert Johann Heinrich
Lane Timothy
Laplace Pierre Simon
Lavoisier Antoine-Laurent
Leibniz Gottfried Wilhelm
Le Monnier Louis Guillaume
Leoniceno Niccolö
Le Seur Thomas
Line Francis
Linnaeus Carl

Locke John
Lomonosov Mikhail
Lorgna Mario
Loria Gino
Luc Jean André de
M
Mach Ernst
Maclaurin Colin
Maffei Scipione
Maignan Emmanuel
Mainardi Giovanni
Mairan Jean Jacques de
Malagotti Lorenzo
Malebranche Nicolas
Malpighi Marcello
Marchi Francesco de'
Mariano di Jacopo
Mariotte Edme
Marsili Alessandro
Mascheroni Lorenzo
Maupertuis Pierre-Louis Moreau de
Maurice of Orange-Nassau
Maurolico Francesco
Mayer Tobias
McMullin Ernan
Medici Ferdinando II de'
Medici Leopoldo de'
Megnie Pierre Bernard
Mersenne Marin
Messier Charles
Michell John
Miles Henry
Mohr Christian Otto
Monge Gaspard
Montanari Geminiano
Moray Robert

More Henry
Morozzo Giuseppe Francesco
Morveau Louis-Bernard Guyton de
Motte Andrew
Mozart Wolfgang Amadeus
Muirhead James Patrick
Mylne Robert
N
Navier Claude Louis
Needham Turbevill
Neile Paul
Newcomen Thomas
Newton Isaac
Nickalls Joseph
Nollet Jean Antoine
O
Oldenburg Henry
Oliva Antonio
P
Pacioli Luca
Papin Denis
Pardies Ignace Gaston
Parent Antoine
Pascal Blaise
Paty Michel
Pearson George
Pemberton Henry
Petrarca Francesco
Pivati Gianfrancesco
Plana Giovanni Antonio Amedeo
Playfair John
Poisson Siméon Denise
Poleni Giovanni
Pomponazzi Pietro

Priestley Joseph
Prony Gaspard Clair François Riche de
Proverbio Edoardo
Ptolemy Claudius
Pythagoras
R
Rameau Jean Philippe
Rankine William John Macquorn
Razumovskiı̄ Kiril
Réaumur René Antoine Ferchault de
Redi Francesco
Rémond Nicolas Franois
Richmann Georg Wilhelm
Rinaldini Carlo
Roberval Gilles Personne de
Robins Benjamin
Robinson John
Roche Robert
Roebuck John
Rohault Jacques
Roma Giuseppe
Rømer Ole
Rossetti Donato
Rousseau Jean Jacques
Rubens Pieter Paul
S
Saint Venant Adhémar Jean Claude Barré
Saluzzo Giuseppe Angelo
Segni Alessandro
Sennert Daniel
Sguario Eusebio
Shaw Peter
Sisson Jonathan
Sloane Hans
Small William

Smeaton John
Smith Adam
Southwell Robert
Spallanzani Lazzaro
Speiser David
Spinoza Baruch
Spratt Thomas
Stahl Georg Ernst
Steensen Niels
Stein Howard
Stevenson John
Stevin Simon
Symmer Robert
T
Tait Peter Guthrie
Taylor Brook
Taylor Eva Germaine Rimington
Taylor Frederick Winslow
Thévenot Jean de
Thompson John
Thomson William
Toaldo Giuseppe
Torricelli Evangelista
Trembley Abraham
Truesdell Clifford Ambrose
V
Van Helmont Jean Baptiste
Van Musschenbroek Pieter
Vapnik Vladimir
Varignon Pierre
Vassalli Eandi Antonio Maria
Venn John
Veratti Giovanni Giuseppe
Verri Pietro
Viviani Vincenzo

Volta Alessandro
Voltaire–Aroue François-Marie
Von Hohenburgon Hans Georg Herwart
W
Waller Richard
Wallis John
Wasbrough Matthew
Watson William
Watt James
Westfall Richard
Wheler Granville
Whewell William
Whiston William
Whitworth Robert
Wilcke Johan Carl
Wilkins John
Wilson Benjamin
Windler Giovanni
Winkler John Henry
Wintler John Henry
Withman Anne
Wolff Christiaan
Wren Christopher
Wren Matthew
Y
Yeoman Thomas
Young Thomas

